4Z'.3 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OK 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gatbercd  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Literatore^ 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


1 


Royal  Octavo.  Cloth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volumo,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
jpocket-book,  the  minister  who  sees  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and.  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
In  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
"writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol.  i.  1.    and    II.    Chronicles,  Isaiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxx. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2.  Ezra,   Nekemiah    and  Jeremiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxii. 

Exodus.  Esther.  Jeremiah,    Vol.    II:   xxiii- 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs.                                    lii. 

Deuteronomy.  The    Psalms,  Vou  I:  i-  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I. 

Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth.  xxvi.  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  II. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  CoL«esiA>T«. 

8t.  Mark.  The>ssalonians. 

8t.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timotht. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timothy,   Titus,  and 

St.  Luke,    Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1,  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatians.  and  Jude. 

Ephesians.  Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament.  $5.00> 
ffend  for  our  oireular  gMng  apeoiol  otfer*. 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL    COMPANY 

IfEV    YORK:   158  Fifth  ATcnuc  CHICACOt  80  Wabaah  Avenue 

TORONTO  LONDON  EDINBURGH 


:^ 


•/ 


MAY  18  1955 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  SimHes,  Emblems,  IHustradom; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
•  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreigpi 
literature,   on  the   Verses  of  the    Bible 


Rbv.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


SAINT  LUKE,  Vol  III 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOK. 

BT.    LUKE. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Ybbs.  1-6.  He  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the  chief  Phaxlsees. — Tht  gapelfor 
the  seventeenth  Sunday  after  Trinity : — I.  Wb  bebb  behou)  cub  Satioub  in  the 
BociAL  oibcle.  Jesus  was  not  a  recluse.  He  had  a  kind  and  aooial  heart.  He  came 
to  instruct,  benefit,  and  redeem  men,  and  He  took  pleasure  in  mingling  with  them. 
With  all  His  holiness,  majesty,  and  glory.  He  was  a  meek  and  social  being,  worthy 
of  all  admiration  and  imitation.  II.  Wb  herb  have  a  bemabkablb  testimony  to 
Chbist's  goodness.  There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  His  iuTitation  to  this  Pharisee's 
house  was  for  no  friendly  purpose.  The  Pharisees,  as  a  class,  hated  Jesus,  and 
were  intent  npon  bringing  Him  into  condemnation;  and  this  man  had  dis- 
tinguished friends  with  him  on  this  occasion,  who  were  no  exception.  This  is 
proven  from  what  occurred  when  they  all  got  together  in  the  house.  Immediately 
in  front  of  Christ,  and  in  a  manner  thrust  upon  His  notice,  was  "  a  certain  man 
that  had  the  dropsy."  How  he  got  there  is  to  be  inferred.  Evidently  he  was 
placed  there  to  tempt  our  Lord  to  commit  Himself.  Yes,  even  their  hard  and  bitter 
hearts  were  so  assured  of  the  Saviour's  goodness,  that  they  felt  warranted  in  build- 
ing on  it  their  plot  to  ruin  Him.  Sabbath  day  as  it  was,  their  convictions  were 
deep  and  positive  that  He  would  not  pass  by  the  opportunity  for  exercising  his 
marvellous  power  to  cure  the  invalid  they  had  stationed  before  Him.  And  that  one 
incidental  fact  speaks  volumes.  It  tells  of  the  constant  stream  of  healing  power 
dispensed  by  the  Saviour  wheresoever  He  went.  As  the  very  cloud  that  would 
cover  the  sun  with  darkness  bears  the  bow  which  the  more  beautifully  reflects  his 
glory,  so  the  very  wrath  and  malignity  of  these  designing  hypocrites  did  the  more 
magnificently  attest  the  gracious  goodness  of  our  Lord.  Nor  did  they  miscalculate. 
Knowing  full  well  the  nature  and  intent  of  the  arrangement,  and  comprehending 
all  the  Ul  use  the  treacherous  watchers  around  Him  meant  to  make  of  it,  He  did 
not  flinch  from  His  wont,  nor  suffer  His  merciful  power  to  be  diverted  or  oon- 
strained.  III.  But  how  basb  the  oowabdice  bboooht  befobb  us  in  the  conduct  or 
THESE  KEN !  To  wish  to  Unseat  and  injure  one  of  whose  goodness  they  were  so 
thoroughly  convinced,  was  in  itself  a  seli-contradictory  wickedness  almost  beyond 
comprehension.  Shame  on  a  zeal  that  attaches  sanctity  to  such  hypocrisy,  or 
honour  to  such  cowardice  1  IV.  Wb  hbbb  behold  the  tbub  spibit  or  thb^  law. 
The  Sabbath  was  not  ordained  for  itself  and  its  own  sake ;  nor  as  a  mere  arbitrary 
act  of  Divine  sovereignty ;  but  for  the  good  of  the  living  beings  concerned  in  its 
observance.    V.  We  likewise  behold  fbom  this  nabbative,  that  an  unchabitablb 

PUNOniilOUSNESB   ABOUT   BELIOIOUS  THINGS,  IS  ATT  TO  HAVE,  AS  ITS   ACCOMPANIMENT,  IT 
hot  ITS  BOOT,  SOME    HtDDBN    SELFISHNESS   AND    BELr-CONSEQUENCE.      It  WaS    UOt   that 

they  so  loved  God's  appointments,  or  that  they  were  so  devoutly  concerned  to  obey 
them ;  but  anxiety  for  a  bludgeon  to  break  the  head  of  Him  whose  pure  teachings 
were  undermining  their  falsehood  and  tyranny.  It  was  not  God,  but  greed ;  not 
righteousness,  but  honour,  place,  and  dominion ;  not  concern  for  Moses  and  the 
prophets,  but  for  themselves  and  their  own  consequence.  On  the  occasion  before 
ns,  there  was  a  marked  concern  about  honours  and  place.  This  was  the  inspira* 
tion  of  their  assumed  sanctity,  and  all  their  superior  orthodoxy  was  only  a  sham 
tor  pride  and  lust  of  power.  And  only  too  apt  is  this  to  be  the  case  in  every  ia> 
▼OL.  m.  1  ,   _. 


t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrr, 

tolerant  and  onoharitable  ado  aboat  the  mere  "  mint,  anise,  and  oommin  "  of  th« 
faith.  YI.  But  tbb  end  of  the  whole  matter  is  also  hebb  shown  ns.  Soch  • 
spirit  has  no  favoar  with  God,  and  has  nothing  good  to  expect.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 
They  watched  Him.  —  What  may  be  learnt  from  watching  Christ : — If  we  watch 
Christ  also,  we  see  how  exalted  piety  instructs  the  worldly-minded.  1.  He  con- 
descends to  accept  in  friendly  spirit  the  invitation  that  appeared  to  be  friendly. 
2.  He  explains  and  defends  the  right  use  of  the  Sabbath.  3.  He  rebukes  pride  by 
inculcating  humility.  4.  He  unfolds  to  those  around  Him  the  nature  of  true 
hamility.  6.  From  humility  as  His  subject,  in  the  presence  of  the  prond,  Ha 
proceeds  to  speak  of  hospitality  in  the  presence  of  the  selfish.  6.  Our  Lord  dis- 
tinguishes between  the  hospitality  of  ostentation,  and  the  hospitality  of  true 
benevolence.  7.  He  deduces  His  instruction  from  passing  events  or  from  sur- 
rounding objects.  8.  Seated  at  the  supper,  He  utters  to  His  host  and  the  guests 
the  parable  of  the  Great  Supper.  {Van  Doren.)  Healing  on  the  Sabbath: — Is  it 
lawful  to  do  anything  but  heal  on  the  Sabbatn  day  7  Certainly  not ;  that  is  the 
purpose  of  the  day ;  it  is  a  day  of  healing.  If,  therefore,  in  the  very  complex 
arrangements  of  our  modern  life,  we  are  trying  to  interfere  with  anything  that  ia 
customary  on  the  Sabbath  day,  we  should  ask  whether  we  are  interfering  with  that 
which  has  a  healing  effect,  or  whether  we  are  interfering  with  that  which  has  an 
injurious  effect ;  because  there  are  many  things  that  in  their  outward  form  are 
"works  "that  nevertheless  in  their  general  effects  are  healing.  (T.  T.  Lynch.) 
The  coming  Sabbath : — We  have  been  thinking  and  speaking  of  a  miracle  done  on 
the  Sabbath.  It  is  evident  that  our  Saviour  had  a  preference  for  the  Sabbath  as  a 
time  for  working  miracles.  How,  then,  is  it  with  respect  to  ourselves — we  who, 
many  of  us,  would  be  glad  to  have  a  miracle  wrought  on  our  behalf,  and  yet  have 
no  right  whatever  to  expect  one?  It  is  just  thus — we  are  waiting  for  the  Sabbath. 
In  other  words,  it  was  intended,  no  doubt,  to  be  taught  us  by  our  Saviour's  prac- 
tice, that  there  is  a  special  time  of  rest  coming,  when  all  the  various  troubles  that 
hamper  and  injure  us  will  be  utterly  removed — our  burdens  unbound ;  our  fevers 
cooled  for  ever ;  our  weakness  changed  to  strength ;  all  our  heaviness  lightened ; 
our  blind  eyes  made  clear ;  our  deaf  ears  unstopped ;  our  feet  filled  with  vigoroaa 
leaping  blood ;  and  all  that  is  within  us  lighted  up  with  joy,  even  as  the  house  waa 
lighted  up,  and  music  and  dancing  sounded  in  it,  when  the  prodigal  came  home. 
There  is  a  Sabbath  coming ;  and  as  Christ  wrought  His  cures  upon  the  Sabbath, 
when  He  was  upon  earth,  we  are  taught  to  look  on  to  a  day  of  cure  that  is  coming 
— that  Sabbath,  namely,  of  rest,  into  which  we  hope  to  enter  hereafter.  It  may 
be  needful  for  our  perfection,  and  the  perfection  of  our  friends,  that  we  should  still 
be  burdened ;  but  we  are  quite  sure  that,  after  the  round  of  the  six  days,  there  will 
come  the  seventh ;  we  are  quite  sure,  when  the  time  of  trial  has  ended,  the  boon  of 
health  will  be  granted.  {Ibid.)  The  dropsy.— Dropsy  a  figure  of  avarice: — 
Dropsy  is  a  disease  which  in  general  attacks  only  those  of  an  advanced  age.  In  a 
similar  manner,  from  indifference  to  God  and  celestial  things,  and  attachment  to 
earthly  goods,  arises  avarice — a  vice  to  which  many  fall  victims,  especially  in 
advanced  years.  I.  Similabitt  between  dbopsy  and  avabice.  1.  In  the  thirst 
occasioned  by  both.  2.  In  the  sufferings  occasioned  by  both.  (1)  Want  of  rest  and 
joy.  (2)  Pains  throughout  the  whole  body.  3.  In  the  dangerous  character  of  the 
respective  diseases.  (1)  Avarice  is  difficult  of  cure.  (2)  Should  the  avaricious 
man  be  converted,  there  is  the  utmost  danger  of  his  relapsing  into  his  former  sins. 
(3)  Avarice  frequently  causes  premature  death.  (4)  Avarice  causes  everlasting 
aeath.  U.  Death  the  delivebeb  fbom  both  diseases.  1.  Death  and  the  grave 
warn  as  to  despise  earthly  goods.  2.  The  judgment  warns  the  avaricious  to 
tremble  on  account  of  their  possessions.  For  they  provoke  God — (1)  By  their 
injustice  and  hard-heartedness,  which  are  often  the  cause  of  sins  crying  to  heaven. 
(2)  By  the  false  confidence  which  they  place  in  their  goods.  3.  Eternity  teaches 
us  to  covet  unfailing  goods.  ( Venedien.)  Grief  aiding  thought : — Here,  then, 
stands  the  man  that  had  the  dropsy.  Does  he  object  to  a  miracle  on  the  Sabbath 
day  ?  It  is  surprising  how  our  own  necessities  give  an  internal  light  to  our  prin- 
ciples. Many  a  thing  that  has  been  wholly  dark  to  a  man,  so  that  he  has  said,  **  I 
cannot  nnderstand  it,"  becomes  translucent  to  him  as  soon  as  God  has  lighted  up  a 
gnat  within  him.  Pat  a  grief  inside  a  thought,  and  it  is  astonishing  how  much 
clearer  the  thought  is.  This  man  had  clear  views  of  the  Sabbath — very  dear  views. 
Th«  dropsy  had  given  him  those  views.    (T.  T.  Lynch.) 

Tas.  7-11.  He  pnt  forth  a  parable  to  those  which  were  bidden. — Chritft  grtaX 


«H4r.  S3V.]  ST.  LUKE.  t 

Uxt'book : — "  When  He  marked  how  they  ..."  The  book  of  daily  life  was  Christ's 
^reat  text-book.  What  every  man  did,  gave  Him  a  subject ;  every  word  He  heard 
started  a  novel  theme.  We  poor  preachers  of  the  nineteenth  century  often  cannot 
find  a  text,  and  say  to  one  another,  "  What  have  you  been  preaching  about  ?  I 
wish  I  could  get  hold  of  another  subject  or  two."  Poor  professional  dunderheads  I 
snd  the  great  book  of  hfe — joy,  sorrow,  tragedy,  comedy — is  open  night  and  day. 
Jesus  Christ  put  forth  a  parabUj  not  after  He  had  been  shutting  Himself  up  for  a 
fortnight,  and  reading  the  classic  literature  of  immemorial  time,  but  "  when  He 
marked  how  they  .  .  ."  Keep  your  eyes  open  if  you  would  preach  well — keep 
your  eyes  open  upon  the  moving  panorama  immediately  in  front  of  you,  omit 
nothing,  see  every  line  and  every  hue,  and  hold  your  ear  open  to  catch  every  tone, 
loud  and  sweet,  low  and  full  of  sighing,  and  all  the  meaning  of  the  masonry  of 
God.  Jesus  Christ  was,  in  this  sense  of  the  term,  pre-eminently  an  extemporaneous 
speaker,  not  an  extemporaneous  thinker.  There  is  no  occasion  for  all  your  elaborate 
preparation  of  words,  if  you  have  an  elaborate  preparation  of  yourself.  Herein 
the  preacher  would  do  well,  not  so  much  to  prepare  his  sermon  as  to  prepare 
himself  —  his  life,  his  manhood,  his  soul.  As  for  the  words,  let  him  rule  over 
them,  call  them  like  servants  to  do  his  behest,  and  order  them  to  express  his 
regal  will.  What  sermons  our  Saviour  would  have  if  He  stood  here  now  1  He 
would  mark  how  that  man  came  in  and  tried  to  occupy  two  seats  all  to  him- 
self— a  cunning  fellow,  a  man  who  has  great  skill  in  spreading  his  coat  out  and 
looking  big,  so  as  to  deceive  a  whole  stafi  of  stewards.  What  a  sermon  He  would 
have  evoked  on  selfishness,  on  want  of  nobleness  and  dignity  of  temper  1  How  the 
Lord  would  have  shown  him  how  to  make  himself  half  the  size,  so  as  to  accom- 
modate some  poor  weak  person  who  had  struggled  miles  to  be  here,  and  is 
obliged  to  stand.  I  have  been  enabled  to  count  the  number  of  pews  from  the 
front  of  the  pulpit  where  the  man  is.  I  paused  there.  My  Lord  —  keener, 
truer — would  have  founded  a  sermon  on  the  iU-behaviour.  He  would  have 
spoken  about  us  all.  He  would  have  known  who  came  here  through  mere  curiosity, 
who  was  thinking  about  finery  and  amusement,  who  was  shopkeeping  even  in  the 
«hnrch,  buying  and  selling  to-morrow  in  advance;  and  upon  every  one  of  us, 
preacher  and  hearers.  He  would  have  founded  a  discourse.  Do  you  wonder  now 
at  His  graphic,  vivid  talk?  Do  you  wonder  now  whence  He  got  His  accent? 
<Jan  you  marvel  any  longer  to  what  He  was  indebted  for  His  emphasis.  His 
clearness.  His  directness  of  speech.  His  practical  exhortation  ?  He  put  forth  a 
parable  when  He  remarked  how  they  did  the  marketing,  dressed  themselves,  trained  or 
mistrained  their  families,  went  to  church  for  evil  puiposes,  spake  hard  words  about 
one  another,  took  the  disenuobUng  instead  of  the  elevating  view  of  their  neigh- 
bours' work  and  conversation.  The  hearers  gave  that  preacher  His  text,  and  what 
they  gave  He  took,  and  uent  back  again  in  fiame  or  in  blessing.  (Joseph  ParkeT,D.D. ) 
Sit  not  down  In  the  highest  room. — Lessons: — 1.  That  Christianity  is  intended 
to  enter  into  our  whole  conduct,  not  only  when  we  are  engaged  in  religious  exer- 
cises, but  even  in  our  social  intercourse  with  our  fellow-creatures.  Nothing,  you 
see,  can  be  a  greater  mistake  than  to  suppose  that  religion  is  to  be  confined  to  the 
church  or  to  the  closet.  It  is  intended  to  regulate  our  thoughts  and  passions,  and 
to  dispose  us  always  to  cherish  those  dispositions  which  are  amiable.  2.  We  infer 
from  this  passage  that  humility  is  a  disposition  essential  to  true  Christianity,  which 
ought  to  be  exercised,  not  only  on  great  occasions,  but  at  all  times  ;  and  that  it 
does  not  consist  merely  in  speeches,  but  includes  actions  done  even  in  the  most 
common  intercourse  of  life.  3.  Nothing  can  be  more  true  than  the  declaration  of 
oar  Saviour  in  the  eleventh  verse:  'Tor  whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be 
abased  ;  and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  In  uttering  this  maxim 
He  addresses  human  feelings.  He  allows  that  all  men  aspire  after  distinction  and 
honour,  but  requires  that  these  should  be  sought  after  by  humility.  For  he  who 
is  not  humble,  but  cherishes  pride  and  vanity,  shall  be  subjected  to  mortification 
snd  disgrace.  On  the  other  hand,  all  are  ready  to  raise  the  humble  man,  and  to 
rejoice  in  his  exaltation.  Even  if  he  should  pass  unnoticed  by  his  fellow-creatures, 
the  exercise  of  humility  will  constantly  improve  him,  and  will  at  length  enable 
him,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  to  attain  the  true  dignity  which  belongs  to  superior 
excellence  :  "  For  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  is  his."  {J.  Tlwmson,  D.D.)  Christ's 
table-talk : — Some  interesting  volumes  have  been  published  under  the  title  of 
"  Table-Talk."  That  of  Luther  is  well  known,  in  which  many  striking  sayings  of 
the  great  reformer  are  preserved,  which  would  otherwise  have  sunk  into  oblivion. 
To  other  works  of  a  biographical  character,  the  above  desiguatic  a  might  have  been 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit» 

appropriately  given,  especially  BoBwell's  "Life  of  Johnson."  W*  need  not  say 
that  its  chief  charm,  the  one  feature  in  which  its  interest  and  value  pre-eminently 
oonsists,  is  not  the  incidents  it  contains,  but  the  conversational  observations  which 
are  recorded.  The  table-talk,  however,  of  Luther  and  Johnson,  instructive  and 
important  as  it  was,  is  not  for  a  moment  to  be  compared  with  that  to  which  we  are 
permitted  to  listen  on  the  present  occabion.  We  have  in  this  chapter,  &b  well  as  in 
many  other  parts  of  the  gospel  narratives,  the  table-talk  of  Christ.  And  while  in 
His  more  public  addresses,  "  never  man  spake  like  this  man,"  the  same  can  be 
said  of  Him  with  equal  truth  concerning  all  He  uttered  in  those  social  gatherings 
to  which,  from  various  motives,  He  was  occasionally  invited.  The  gospel  incul- 
eatei  good  vianners  : — There  are  no  manners  so  refined  and  graceful  as  those  taught 
in  the  gospel,  because  the  gospel  refers  all  to  the  heart.  The  habit  of  "  pushing," 
as  we  expressively  call  it,  whether  in  affairs  of  smaller  or  greater  importance, 
Beema  expressly  discountenanced  by  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  and  something  very 
different  is  taught.  We  who  have  to  bring  up  our  children  to  make  their  way  in 
life,  should  be  careful  how  far  we  stimulate  in  them  the  pushing  instinct.  Do  not 
encourage  them  to  be  loud  and  clamorous  in  asking,  and  to  make  the  interest  of 
"Number  one"  the  point  of  only  or  first  importance,  and  to  thrust  others  aside. 
Doubtless  we  have  much  counter-opiuion  to  meet  on  points  like  these,  but  let  na 
hold  to  it  that  the  manners  which  are  pervaded  by  the  evangelical  spirit  and  temper 
are  the  true  manners,  both  for  the  gentleman  and  the  man  of  the  world.  It  is  said, 
*•  If  we  do  not  look  after  ourselves,  no  one  else  will."  Certainly,  as  our  great  poet 
says,  "  Self-love  is  not  so  vile  a  sin  as  self-neglecting."  But  this  is  not  the  point. 
It  is  a  self-love  indulged  so  far  that  it  becomes  indifferent  to  the  rights  of  others ; 
it  is  the  restless  desire  to  get  out  of  our  proper  place,  and  seize  that  which  belongs 
to  another,  which  is  condemned.  The  world  is  always  glad  of  people  who  are  bent 
upon  doing  their  duty  and  who  keep  their  place,  and  takes  delight  in  putting  down 
those  who  do  not  know  their  place,  and  would  grasp  at  honours  not  their  due. 
Christ's  lesson  is  one  that  comes  home  to  us.  It  is  not  in  the  first  instance  a  lofty 
and  spiritual  lesson,  but  a  hint  for  our  behaviour  in  the  world  of  every  day.  And 
it  is  observable  that  He  appeals  to  two  very  powerful  passions — the  sense  of  shame 
and  the  love  of  honour.  If,  in  effect  He  says,  you  will  persist  in  snatching  at 
honours  or  advantages  to  which  you  are  not  entitled,  you  are  on  your  way  to  be 
ridiculed,  perhaps  to  be  disgraced.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  take  a  low  plaoe, 
lower,  possibly,  than  that  to  which  you  are  entitled,  the  chances  are  all  in  your 
favour.  You  may  be  promoted,  and  your  promotion  will  bring  honour  upon  you. 
An  Oriental  proverb  says,  "  Sit  in  your  place,  and  no  man  can  make  you  rise."  In 
other  words,  at  life's  feast  sit  down  where  all  will  accord  you  room,  where  none  will 
dispute  your  right  to  be — a  place  that  is  lowly,  therefore  not  envied ;  and  there  you 
may  sit  in  peace  and  comfort.  No  man  can  disturb  you  in  a  place  secured  to  you 
by  the  good  will  and  respect  of  your  neighbours.  How  much  better  this  than  to  be 
contending  for  a  position  which  the  spite  of  others  will  not  permit  you  to  enjoy, 
and  from  which,  sooner  or  later,  you  are  likely  to  be  removed.  To  how  lofty  a 
religious  application  is  this  lesson  carried  in  the  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  the 
publican  1  (E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Amongst  the  lowly  : — We  are  aU  the  subjects  of 
love  and  of  truth.  We  should  indeed  be  dishonoured  by  absence  from  the  feast ; 
but  as  present,  we  show  our  fitness  for  honour  by  placing  ourselves  at  the  disposal 
of  our  royal  host.  We  take  the  lowest  room,  and  in  that  bright  presence  not  the 
remotest  comer  is  dark.  Admission  even,  without  promotion,  is  happiness.  But 
Love,  with  his  truth-anointed  eyes,  will  soon  see  at  which  of  the  lesser  tables  we 
are  suited  to  preside ;  among  which  group  of  guests  we  may  best  receive  and  dis- 
pense joy ;  and  in  what  place  and  oflSce  of  the  festival  we  shall  find  our  strength 
most  free  for  generous  exertion.  Possibly,  Love  may  see  that  we  shall  find  it  the 
truest  promotion  to  remain  in  the  lowest  room  and  keep  the  door,  and  make  those 
happy  who,  not  fitted  as  yet  to  occupy  high  places,  were  nevertheless  thought 
worthy  of  admission.  Some  of  the  great  must  always  remain  amongst  the  lowly, 
lest  these  become  neglected  and  desponding,  and  a  lowly  heart  is  needed  for  this 
service.  Perhaps  our  Saviour  was  sitting  in  a  humble  place,  that  the  humbler  part 
of  the  company  might  see  and  hear  Him ;  and  had  declined,  though  with  acknow- 
ledgment, the  courteous  request  of  the  Pharisee  that  He  would  '*  come  up  higher." 
(T.  T.  Lynch.)  Promotion  jwt  to  be  Bought  apart  from,  ability  : — There  is  a  weapon 
much  used  in  the  contests  of  life — the  elbow.  We  elbow  our  way  on  in  the  world. 
And  there  is  another  weapon,  less  regarded,  but  powerful — the  knee.  We  must 
•toop  the  back  to  succeed  in  husbandry ;  and  we  must  bend  the  knee  to  subdue  the 


CHAP,  xrv.}  ST.  LUKE.  8 

evil  power  that  assails  us  from  below,  the  enemy,  whose  strength  is  in  his  pride. 
And  humility  is  not  a  temper  to  be  put  off  on  promotion ;  it  is  our  safeguard  in  the 
sorrows  of  our  early  career,  our  ornament  in  elevation.  At  the  first,  like  a  shield — 
beautiful  as  well  as  protective ;  and  at  the  last,  like  health — safety  as  well  as 
beauty.  If,  then,  you  ask,  Am  I  sure  of  promotion  If  I  take  the  lowest  place  ?  Yes, 
sure,  we  reply,  if  you  take  it  with  a  lowly  heart.  But  many  seek  promotion,  as  if 
it  were — in  a  spiritual,  that  is,  in  a  real,  sense  —possible,  apart  from  true  ability. 
Will  any  one  blame  the  sapling  for  desiring  to  become  an  oak  ?  or  even  the  little 
forget-me-not  for  wishing  to  be  made  the  memorial  of  some  good  man's  friendship  ? 
No ;  nor  will  we  blame  any  man  for  asking  a  field  for  his  strength,  and  an  oppor- 
tunity for  his  talent.  But  many  seek  promotion  with  little  thought  of  service  and 
capacity.  As  if  one  should  come  to  us,  complaining  of  his  lot,  and  we  should  say, 
"  I  need  a  captain  for  one  of  my  ships ;  will  you  take  the  post  ?  "  "  Captain  of  a 
ship,"  he  exclaims,  "  I  never  was  at  sea."  "  Oh,"  but  we  say,  "  there  are  two 
hundred  men  on  board  to  do  your  bidding."  "  Ah,"  but  he  cries,  "  I  could  not  even 
tell  them  what  sails  to  unfurl."  "  But,"  we  add,  "  the  ship  is  going  on  a  lucrative 
voyage  ;  the  captain  will  be  well  remunerated."  "  Ah,"  he  says,  "  I  could  take  the 
money."  And,  indeed,  that  is  what  be  seeks.  Men  may  not  know  how  to  earn  a 
loaf,  still  less  how  to  make  and  to  bake  one  ;  but  they  know  that  they  could  eat  it. 
They  may  know  themselves  unable  to  fulfil  a  high  function,  yet  they  do  not  deem  a 
high  chair  unsuitable  for  them,  because  the  cushion  is  soft  1  True  promotion,  how- 
ever, is  like  that  of  the  captain,  who  is  the  first  man  in  the  rule  of  a  storm,  and  the 
last  man  in  flight  from  a  peril.  No  man  should  wish  for  degrees  of  wealth  and 
praise  unsuited  to  his  inward  attainments.  He  cannot  indeed  be  rich  to  good  ends, 
to  his  own  welfare  or  his  neighbour's,  without  being  wise  and  good.  He  cannot 
honestly  and  safely  receive  the  praise  of  men  unless  he  deserves  their  love. 
Humility  is  then  the  necessary  condition  of  all  true  and  abiding  promotion.  All 
going  forward  that  comes  of  a  vain  heart  comes  to  a  bad  end.  Vanity  raised  us ; 
into  "  vanity  "  we  sink.  We  have  but  stepped  on,  to  be  put  back  again.  Now  we 
begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  room.  Humility  does  not  imply,  but  is  incon- 
sistent with,  baseness  of  spirit.  It  knows  self  as  feeble,  because  it  knows  God  as 
strong.  It  is  the  vision  of  God's  glory  that  gives  us  the  discovery  of  our  own 
poverty ;  we  feel,  but  not  abjectly,  our  dependence  upon  Him.  We  are  utterly  yet 
hopefully  dependent.  It  is  He  who  shall  appoint  to  us  our  places,  we  seeking  first 
to  do  the  duties  next  us  in  the  best  way ;  content  with  a  low  place  because  of  a  good 
work,  wishing  for  a  higher  one  because  of  a  better.  Through  humility  the  lowest 
things  are  well  done ;  and  as  we  rise,  we  shall  need  the  knowledge  that  experience 
of  such  work  will  bring  us,  for  we  shall  need  to  direct,  and  still  occasionally  to  per- 
form, labours  which  once  exclusively  occupied  us.  The  wise  master-builder  is 
acquainted  with  the  humbler  tools  and  meaner  services  his  work  needs,  and  so  can 
both  control  and  encourage  all  the  workmen  he  employs.  Humility  may  fail  to 
secure  earthly  promotion,  and  yet  the  capable  man  will  often  rise  through  it  to 
places  of  serviceable  power  and  pleasant  esteem.  Besults  in  this  world  do  not  at 
once  and  invariably  illustrate  spiritual  laws,  but  they  frequently  do  so.  {ZHd.) 
Take  the  lowest  room : — Most  persons  agree  to  say  that  their  earliest  religious  days 
were  their  happiest  and  best.  May  not  this  be  traced,  in  part  at  least,  to  the  fact 
that,  at  the  beguaning,  we  all  take  "  a  lower  place  "  than  we  do  afterwards  ?  Was 
not  it  that  then  you  were  least  in  your  own  eyes — that  your  feelings  were  more  child- 
like— that  you  had  more  abasing  views  of  the  wickedness  of  your  own  heart  than 
now  ?  Or,  you  say,  "  My  prayers  are  not  efiectual.  I  do  not  get  answers  when  I 
pray,  either  for  myself  or  others;  and,  in  consequence  of  this  discouragement, 
prayer  has  become  lately  a  different  thing  to  me,  a  thing  without  life,  a  thing  with- 
out reality  " — then  I  remind  you.  Those  that  point  their  arrows  high  must  draw 
their  bows  down  low.  You  must  "  go  lower."  Bemember  that  it  was  to  one  who 
felt  herself  "  a  dog "  that  our  Lord  said,  "  O  woman,  great  is  thy  faith;  "  and  then 
gave  her  everything  she  asked — "  Be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt."  Be  sure 
there  is  '•  a  lower  room  "  in  prayer  than  you  have  yet  found.  You  must  discover 
it,  and  go  down  into  it,  or  you  cannot  find  real  peace  of  mind.  Now,  let  us  go  into 
this  matter  a  little  deliberately.  You  use  the  ordinances  of  the  Church  and  the 
private  means  of  grace.  It  is  well.  Do  you  look  for  peace  because  you  do  this  ? 
You  say,  '•  No ;  I  look  for  peace  because  I  trust  in  Christ."  That  is  better.  But 
there  is  "  a  lower  room  "  than  that ;  and  therefore  a  better  way  than  that.  We  get 
forgiveness — and  peace,  the  fruit  of  forgiveness — not  because  we  do  anything,  or 
believe  anything,  or  because  we  are  anything — but  because  God  is  God,  and  becauM 


•  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrv. 

Clirist  is  Christ.  It  is  the  out-flcwing  of  the  free  sovereignty  of  God'a  eternal  graoe, 
which,  by  believing,  v/e  take — and  we,  where  are  we  ? — but  for  that  grace,  in  hell  I 
You  are  to  feel  the  amazing  distance  which  there  is  between  you  and  a  holy  God. 
*'  God,  be  merciful."  That  is  "  the  lowest  room ;  "  and  the  way  homo  is  nearer 
and  quicker — "  I  tell  you  that  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified."  {J. 
Vaughnn,  M.A.)  True  humility: — "Sit  down  in  the  lowest  room."  But  first, 
let  me  guard  my  meaning.  To  say,  "  I  am  not  a  child  of  God,  He  does  not  love 
me,"  this  is  not  to  "  sit  down  in  the  lowest  room."  This  lowers  God's  grace,  but 
it  does  not  lower  you  ;  rather,  it  puts  you  up.  Neither  is  it  to  "  go  down,  and  sit 
in  the  lowest  room  "  to  reason  upon  any  duty;  it  is  above  that — "Who  am  I  that 
I  should  do  such  a  work  as  this?"  Do  you  not  know  that  you  are  one  thing,  and 
the  grace  of  God  that  is  in  you  is  another  thing  ?  Nor  yet  is  it  to  "  take  the  lowest 
room  "  to  be  ignorant  of,  or  to  deny  the  possession  of  talents  which  God  has  givea 
yon.  Still  less  is  it  intended  that  these  words  should  extend  to  heaven,  and  that 
we  should  be  content  with  the  "  lowest  place  "  in  the  "many  mansions."  I  can 
never  for  a  moment  hold  with  those  who  say,  "  Let  me  get  only  within  the  gate  of 
heaven,  and  I  shall  be  satisfied."  Avoiding,  then,  these  misinterpretations,  let  as 
now  consider  what  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  words.  First,  towards  God.  What  is 
"  the  lowest  room  "  towards  God  ?  Now  I  conceive  it  to  be,  to  be  content  simply 
to  take  God  at  His  word,  without  asking  any  questions,  or  raising  any  doubts,  but 
to  accept,  at  His  hand,  all  that  God  graciously  vouchsafes  to  give  you,  the  pardon, 
and  the  peace  ;  to  be  a  receptacle  of  love,  a  vessel  into  which,  of  His  free  mercy, 
He  has  poured,  and  is  pouring  now,  and  will  go  on  to  pour  for  ever,  the  abundance 
of  His  grace.  Next,  it  is  to  be  just  what  God  makes  you,  to  rest  where  He  places 
you,  to  do  what  He  tells  you,  only  because  He  is  everything,  and  you  are  nothing, 
conscious  of  a  weakness  which  can  only  stand  by  leaning,  and  an  ignorance  which 
needs  constant  teaching.  But  now,  how  to  man  ?  This  is  the  point  which  I  wish 
to  view  this  morning  as  practically  as  I  can.  But  unless  the  relationship  is  right 
with  God,  it  is  quite  useless  to  expect  it  will  be  right  with  man.  Then  make  the 
well-balanced  sense  of  what  you  are,  and  what  God  is,  the  inner  sense  of  weakness 
and  strength  which  makes  true  humility,  a  subject  of  express,  special  prayer ;  that 
when  you  pass  into  company,  you  may  be  able  to  know,  by  a  quick  perception, 
what  your  own  proper  part  is — to  speak,  or  to  be  silent  ;  to  take  a  lead,  or  to  go 
into  the  shade.  But  whichever  it  be,  have  prepared  yourself  to  put  self  out  of 
Bight ;  do  not  make  yourself  the  hero  of  what  you  say,  specially  when  you  speak  of 
personal  religion.  Do  not  expect,  or  lay  yourself  out  for  notice,  but  seeks  others' 
preferment.  Anything  approaching  to  argument  would  be  an  occasion  which 
would  especially  call  for  this  self-discipline  of  "  taking  the  lowest  room. "  Be  on 
your  guard,  then,  that  self  does  not  go  up.  Have  a  strong  jealousy  for  the  right,  and 
fight  for  it ;  but  do  not  confound  your  victory  and  the  vindication  of  truth.  If 
there  be  anything  particular  to  be  said,  or  any  work  to  be  done,  and  you  see 
another  willing  to  do  it,  and  who  can  do  it  better  than  you,  stand  by,  and  let  that 
other  speak  or  act.  But  if  there  be  not  such  a  one,  it  will  be  as  true  humility  to 
go  boldly  forward,  and  do  it  yourself.  Only  copy  your  great  Pattern,  and  retire  out 
of  sight  the  moment  it  is  said  or  done.  If  there  be  one  among  those  you  meet 
who  is  less  thought  of  than  the  rest,  show  to  that  one  the  more  kindness  and 
attention.  Do  not  put  yourself  up  into  the  chair  of  judgment  upon  any  man  ;  but 
rather  see  yourself  as  you  are — everybody  is  inferior  in  something,  far  worse  than 
that  man  in  some  things.  If  you  wish  to  do  good  to  any  one,  remember  that  the 
way  is  not  to  treat  him  as  if  you  were  above  him,  but  to  go  down  to  his  level, 
below  his  level,  and  to  speak  to  him  respectfully.  Sympathy  is  power ;  but  there 
is  no  sympathy  where  there  is  self.  If,  brethren,  you  have  failed  in  any  relatioa 
towards  God  or  man,  the  reason  is  mostly  that  you  have  not  yet  gone  "  low  " 
enough.  If  you  have  not  peace — if  you  have  few  or  no  answers  to  prayer — here, 
probably,  is  the  chief  cause.  Therefore  just  try  the  remedy,  "  Go  and  sit  down  in 
the  lower  room."  If  you  are  troubled  with  suggestions  of  infidelity,  the  main 
reason  is  this,  intellect  has  gone  up  too  high.  Tou  are  sitting  as  judge  upon  the 
Bible,  when  you  ought  rather  to  be  the  culprit  at  its  bar.  Be  more  a  little  child, 
handling  the  immensities  of  the  mind  of  the  Eternal.  "  Go  and  sit  down  in  the 
lower  room."  And  if  you  have  not  succeeded  in  your  mission  of  life,  this  is  the 
root ;  if  yon  will  go  and  be  less,  you  will  do  much  more.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Prlsnd,  go  up  higher. — Friend,  go  up  higher : — We  have  been  taught  to  regard  this 
parable  as  a  counsel  of  prudence,  and  of  a  somewbut  worldly  prudence,  rather  thaa 
M  a  counsel  of  perfection.    Some  of  our  best  commentators  so  read  it,  while  the/ 


8BAf.  XIT.]  8T.  LUKJS.  t 

confess  that,  thus  read,  it  enforces  an  artificial  rather  than  a  real  hamility,  that  it 
even  makes  an  affected  humility  the  cloak  of  a  selfish  ambition  which  is  only  too 
real  and  perilous.    What  this  interpretation  really  comes  to  is  this,  that  when  our 
Lord  was  speaking  to  men  who  eagerly  grasped  at  the  best  places,  all  He  had  in 
give  them   was  some  ironio  advice  on  the  best  way  of  securing  that  paltry  end,  iu 
the  hope  that,  if  they  learned  not  to  snatch  at  what  they  desired,  tbey  might  by- 
and-by  come  to  desire  something  higher  and  better.    Is  that  like  Him  ?    Do  yoa 
recognize  His  manner,  His  spirit,  in  it  ?     Can  you  possibly  be  content  with  such  an 
interpretation  of  His  words  ?    I.  Even  if  we  take  the  parable  simply  as  a  couNSEti 
OF  PRUDENCE,  Considering  the  lips  from  which  it  fell,  there  is  surely  much  more  in 
it.     Why  may  we  not  take  it  as  enjoining  a  genuine  and  unaffected  humility ;  as 
teaching  that  the  only  distinction  which  deserves  a  thought  is  that  which  is  freely 
bestowed  on  men  of  a  lowly  and  kindly  spirit  ?    Why  may  we  not  take  it  as  setting 
torth   a  truth  which   experience  abundantly  confirms,  viz.,  that  even  the  most 
worldly  and  selfish  of  men  have  a  sincere  respect  for  the  unworldly  ;  that  the  only 
men  who  they  can  bear  to  see  preferred  before  themselves  are  those  of  a  spirit  so 
gentle  and  sweet  and  unselfish  as  not  to  grasp  at  any  such  preference  or  dis- 
tinction?   II.  But  mat  wk  not  take  it  as  a  counsel  of  peefeotion?    In  the 
Church,  as  well  as  in  the  world,  we  find  men  and  women  of  a  pushing,  forward 
epirit,  a  selfish   and  conceited  temperament,  who  covet  earnestly  the  best  seat 
rather  than  the  best  gift,  and  the  first  place  rather  than  the  prime  virtues ;   who 
never  doubt  that,  let  others  be  where  they  will,  they  are  entitled  to  sit  down  in  the 
highest  room.     And,  curiously  enough,  it  is  the  comparatively  ignorant  who  ate 
most  deeply  convinced  of  their  own  wisdom ;  the  narrow  mind  which  is  most 
sure  that    it    is    always    in    the    right ;    those  who  have   the   least  m  which 
to    trust,   who   trust   in  themselves ;   those  who  are  most  incompetent  to  rule, 
who    are  most  ambitious  of  rule,  most  vexed    and    incensed  if  they  are  not 
suffered  to  rule.     What   they    most   need,    then,    is    to    hear  a  Voice,  whose 
authority  they  cannot  contest,  which   bids    them    take   a   lower  place,  both  in 
the  Church  and  in  their  own  conceit,  than  that  which  on  very  slender  evidence  they 
have  assumed  to  be  their  due.    On  the  other  hand,  happily,  we  find  many  men  and 
women  in  the  Church,  who  are  either  naturally  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  or  who, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  have  so  far  tamed  and  subdued  their  natural  self-will  and 
self-conceit  as  to  show,  by  word  and  deed,  that  they  are  familiar  with  their  own 
weakness,  and  are  on  their  guard  against  it.     And  when  the  Voice  comes  to  them, 
**  Friend,  go  up  higher,  take  a  more  honourable  post,  not  that  you  may  be  better 
seen  or  receive  praise  from  men,  but  that  you  may  serve  them  better,  on  a  larger 
scale,  or  in  a  more  public  way,"  no  one  is  more  unaffectedly  surprised  than  they 
are.     Yet  these  are  precisely  the  men  whom  we  all  delight  to  honour  and  to  see 
honoured.    Because  they  abase  themselves,  we  rejoice  in  their  exaltation.    III. 
Does,  however,  even  this  wholesome  and  pertinent  lesson  on  humility  exhaust  the 
spiritual  meaning  which  we  are  told  this  parable  must  have  ?    By  no  means,  I 
think.     We  may  bead  it  in  a  sense  in  which  even  the  unwelcome  command,  "Go 

DOWN     lower,"    mat    become     WELCOME     TO    US,    AND     MAT    BEALLT     MEAN,     "  CoME    UP 

HIGHER."  How  often  does  our  Lord  compare  the  kingdom  of  heaven — i.e.,  the 
ideal  Church — to  a  feast  to  which  all  are  invited,  and  all  may  come  without  money 
and  without  price  !  And  when  we  listen  to  the  call,  come  into  His  kingdom,  and 
«it  down  at  His  table,  how  often  does  the  first  joy  of  our  salvation  fade  into  dis- 
appointment and  dismay  as  we  perceive  that  His  salvation  is  in  large  measure  a 
salvation  from  ourselves,  that  His  call  is  a  call  to  share  in  His  own  self-sacrificiug 
love,  His  unthanked  toil,  or  even  His  poverty,  shame,  and  affliction !  When  we 
first  apprehend  what  His  call  really  means,  does  it  not  seem  to  us  as  if  it  were 
a  command  to  come  down,  not  only  from  all  that  we  once  took  pleasure  or  pride 
in,  but  also  from  the  very  honours  and  enjoyments  which  we  had  looked  for  in  His 
kingdom  and  service?  Alas,  how  we  misread  His  love !  For  what  can  any  call  to 
the  cross  be,  but  a  call  to  the  thi-one?  (<S.  Coa:,D.D.)  The  outward  place 
reacting  upon  the  inward  spirit : — Does  the  Lord  here  inculcate  a  feigned  humility  ? 
By  no  means:  He  simply  enjoins  that  a  man  should  mortify  his  individual  pride 
and  self-seeking — an  act  of  self -discipline  which  is  in  itself  always  wholesome  and 
beneficial.  If  the  man  deserved  the  lowest  or  a  lower  place,  then  all  was 
right;  he  took  that  to  which  alone  he  was  fairly  entitled.  If  he  took  a 
place  below  what  he  was  entitled  to,  then  he  left  it  to  the  master  of 
the  feast,  the  only  fountain  of  honour,  to  rediess  matters.  Anyhow  he  set  an 
example  of    "minding  not  high  things,"  but  "in  lowliness  of  mind  esteeming 


9  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

others  better  than  himself."  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  in  one  of  any  real  worth, 
the  outward  act  would  react  on  the  inward  spirit.  The  pride  of  spirit  is  fosterad 
by  outward  self-assertion,  and  mortified  by  outward  self-abasement.  {M.  F. 
Sadler.)  Pride  and  humility  before  the  Divine  Prince  : — With  respect  to  tha 
epiritual  meaning  of  the  parable,  we  have  a  remarkable  key  to  it  in  Prov.  xiv.  6,  7. 
The  Lord  must  have  had  this  place  in  His  eye  ;  He  must  have  meant  Himself  by 
the  "prince,"  for  it  was  He  who,  as  the  Wisdom  of  God,  inspired  this  passage. 
All  pride,  all  self-assertion,  all  seeking  of  great  things  takes  place  in  the  presence 
of  a  King,  the  supreme  Fountain  of  Honour,  the  Lord  of  both  worlds,  the  present 
and  the  future.  It  is  very  necessary  for  us  to  remember  this,  for  the  shame  and 
confusion  of  face  which  in  this  parable  is  represented  as  the  lot  of  mortified  pride 
does  not  always  follow  it  in  this  world.  Self-assertion,  self-assumption,  forward- 
ness, and  boasting,  do  not  always  entail  a  disgraceful  fall  upon  the  man  who 
displays  them.  The  meek  do  not  as  yet  "  inherit  the  earth  "  ;  though,  if  we  can 
trust  the  words  of  Christ,  they  assuredly  will.  David  asks,  how  is  it  that  ungodly 
men  "  speak  so  disdainfully,  and  make  such  proud  boastings."  Men  who  are 
ambitious  and  self-seeking  at  times  attain  to  the  height  of  their  ambition,  provided, 
of  course,  that  they  have  other  qualities,  such  as  prudence,  cleverness,  and 
perseverance.  But  a  day  is  coming  when  the  words  of  Christ  with  which  the 
parable  concludes  (ver.  11),  will  be  verified  in  the  case  of  every  man.  He  HimseU 
is  the  "  King  "  before  whom  all  pride  displays  itself,  and  before  whom  it  will  be 
abased.  And  there  is  the  greater  reason  that  He  should  do  so,  for  when  He  had 
the  highest  place  in  the  universe  next  to  the  Eternal  Father,  He  abased  Himself, 
and  took  the  lowest  place,  even  the  place  of  the  cross  of  death,  in  order  that  He 
might  exalt  those  who  have  "followed  the  example  of  His  humility."  The  Judge 
at  that  day  will  remember  and  humble  every  act  of  pride,  just  as  He  wHl 
remember  and  reward  every  act  of  humility.  Does  this  seem  too  much  ?  Not  for 
One  who  numbers  the  hairs  of  our  heads,  and  without  whose  permission  no 
sparrow  falls,  and  who  has  engaged  to  bring  every  idle  word  into  judgment,  and 
make  manifest  the  secrets  of  all  hearts.  Should  it  not,  then,  be  a  matter  of 
prayer  that  God  may  humble  us  here  rather  than  hereafter?  It  may  be  very 
bitter  to  have  our  pride  mortified  now,  but  it  will  be  a  thousandfold  more  bitter  to 
have  it  mortified  before  men  and  angels,  above  all  in  the  presence  of  the  Prince 
whom  our  eyes  have  seen.  {Ibid.)  The  inferior  seat  preferred: — It  is  said 
that  General  Gordon  used  to  sit  in  the  gallery  of  the  church  among  the  poor 
until,  his  fame  becoming  known,  he  was  asked  to  sit  in  the  luxurious  seats 
appointed  for  the  grandees,  but  that  he  preferred  to  keep  the  seat  in  which 
he  had  so  long  sat  unnoticed  and  unknown.  Whosoever  exalteth  himself 
shall  be  abased. — On  the  vice  of  pride : — I.  The  vice  of  pride  is  foolish  fbom 
ITS  VEKT  NATUKE.  We  ought  all  to  be  deterred  from  pride  by  the  fact  that 
the  proud  endeavours  to  deceive  both  others  and  himself  by  pretended  ad- 
vantages ;  and  also  that,  instead  of  gaining  honour  and  favour,  he  usually 
renders  himself  contemptuous  and  odious.  Yet  it  will  help  us  to  a  more  thorough 
conviction  how  utterly  unfounded  and  foolish  pride  is  if  we  meditate — 1.  On 
the  nothingness  of  man.  (1)  In  the  natural  order,  (a)  What  were  we,  say  one 
hundred  years  ago  ?  Nothing  !  No  one  thought  of  us.  No  one  needed  us.  Goi 
called  us  from  nothingness  to  life  because  He  is  good.  (6)  What  are  we  now  ?  We 
are  not  able  to  prolong  our  life  for  one  minute  unless  God  preserves  it ;  we  are 
subject  to  frailty  of  body  and  soul,  (c)  What  are  we  to  be  ere  long?  We  are  to 
pass  like  a  shadow  :  to  die.  (2)  In  the  order  of  grace,  (a)  What  have  we  been  ? 
Born  in  sin;  and  sinners  by  our  own  actions,  (b)  What  are  we  to-day?  Perhaps 
hardened  in  sin,  or  lukewarm.  At  best,  exceedingly  weak,  (c)  What  shall  we  be 
at  last  ?  Dreadful  uncertainty  I  Either  converted,  persevering,  happy  for  ever,  or 
obdurate,  relapsing,  reprobate  for  ever.  Can  we  still  remain  proud,  instead  of 
imploring  in  the  dust  the  Divine  meroy  and  grace  ?  2.  On  the  greatness  of  God. 
II.  The  vice  op  pbide  is  fatal  in  its  consequences.      1.  In  reference  to  God. 

fl)  Apostasy;  (2)  viciousness ;  (3)  obduracy.  2.  In  reference  to  human  society. 
1)  Anarchy,  caused  by  the  undermining  of  the  pillars  of  social  welfare,  fidelity, 
piety,  &c.  (2)  Revolution:  when  haughty  governments  oppress  the  people,  or 
•when  the  insolent  masses  refuse  to  submit  to  order.  (3)  Buin  of  families,  caused 
by  dissensions.  3.  In  reference  to  individuals.  The  proud  man  is  deprived  of — 1. 
Inward  peace,  which  is  never  enjoyed  by  a  soul  enslaved  by  her  own  passions,  and 
at  variance  with  God.  2.  Outward  peace,  since  it  is  continually  clouded  by  real  or 
imaginary  opposition,  affronts,  humiliation,  and  contempt.    3.  The  enjoyment  of 


CHAP.  XIV.]  -Srr,  LUKE,  • 

true  happinees.  Althoagh  the  prond  have  their  triumphs,  jet  they  are  insufficient 
to  satisfy  man's  heart,  which  will  always  crave  for  something  more.  Haman. 
(Repertorium  Oratoris  Sacri.)  Of  humility  : — I.  I  am  to  consideb  what  tbtth 

HOMiLiTT  IS,  AND  WHBBEiN  IT  CONSISTS.  1.  With  regard  to  superiors  in  general, 
true  humility  consists  in  paying  them  cheerfully  and  readily  all  due  honour  and 
respect  in  those  particular  regards  wherein  they  are  our  superiors,  notwithstanding 
anj  other  accidental  disadvantages  on  their  side,  or  advantages  on  ours.  2. 
Towards  oar  equals,  true  humility  consists  in  civil  and  affable,  in  courteous  and 
rnodest  behaviour;  not  in  formal  pretences  of  thinking  very  meanly  and  con- 
temptibly of  ourselves  (for  such  professions  are  often  very  consistent  with  great 
pride),  but  in  patiently  permitting  our  equals  (when  it  shall  so  happen)  to  be 
preferred  before  us,  not  thinking  ourselves  injured  when  others  but  of  equal  merit 
chance  to  be  more  esteemed,  but,  on  the  contrary,  rather  suspecting  that  we  judge 
too  favourably  of  ourselves,  and  therefore  modestly  desiring  that  those  who 
are  reputed  upon  the  level  with  us  may  have  shown  unto  them  rather  a  greater 
respect.  3.  With  regard  to  our  inferiors,  humility  consists  in  assuming  to  our- 
selves no  more  than  the  difference  of  men's  circumstances,  and  the  performance  of 
their  respective  duties,  for  preserving  the  regularity  and  good  order  of'  the  world, 
necessarily  requires.  (1)  There  is  a  spiritual  pride  in  presuming  to  sin,  upon  the 
sense  of  the  virtues  we  are  in  other  respects  endued  with.  This  was  the  case  of 
Uzziah,  king  of  Judah.  (2)  There  is  a  spiritual  pride  of  vainglory  in  affecting  a 
public  appearance  of  such  actions  as  in  themselves  are  good  and  commendable. 
This  was  the  great  fault  of  the  Pharisees  (Mark  xii.  38).  (3)  There  is  a  spiritual 
pride  of  men  confidently  justifying  themselves,  and  being  wholly  iusensible  of  their 
own  failings,  while  they  are  very  censorious  in  judging  and  despising  others.  (4) 
There  is  still  a  further  degree  of  spiritual  pride  in  pretending  to  merit  at  the 
hands  of  God.  (5)  There  is  yet  a  higher  degree  of  this  spiritual  pride  in  pretending 
to  works  of  supererogation.  Lastly.  There  is  a  spiritual  pride  in  seeking  after  and 
being  fond  of  mysterious  and  secret  things,  to  the  neglect  of  our  plain  and  manifest 
duty.  It  remains  that  I  proceed  at  this  time  to  propose  some  arguments  to 
persuade  men  to  the  practice  of  it.  And  first,  the  Scripture  frequently  lays  before 
us  the  natural  ill  consequences  of  pride,  and  the  advantages  arising  from  true 
himiility,  even  in  the  natural  course  and  order  of  things.  Pride  makes  men 
foolish  and  void  of  caution  (Prov.  xi.  2).  It  makes  men  negligent  and  improvi- 
dent of  the  future ;  and  this  often  throws  them  into  sadden  calamities  (Prov.  i.  32). 
It  makes  men  rash  and  peevish,  obstinate  and  insolent ;  and  this  seldom  fails  to 
bring  down  ruin  upon  them  (Prov.  xvi.  18).  It  involves  men  perpetually  in  strifes 
and  contentions;  and  these  always  multiply  sin,  and  are  inconsistent  with  true 
happiness  (Prov.  xvii.  19).  It  makes  men  impatient  of  good  advice  and  instruction, 
and  that  renders  them  incorrigible  in  their  vices  (Prov.  xxvi.  12,  16 ;  xxviii.  26). 
Secondly.  The  next  argument  the  Scripture  makes  use  of,  to  persuade  men  to  the 
practice  of  humiUty,  is  this — tbat  pride,  as  'tis  usually  of  natural  ill  consequence, 
BO  'tis  moreover  particularly  hateful  to  God,  who  represents  Himself  as  taking 
delight  to  bring  down  the  lofty  and  to  exalt  the  humble.  'Tis  the  observation 
of  Eliphaz  in  the  book  of  Job,  chap.  xxii.  29  and  chap,  xxxiii.  14-17).  An 
instance  of  which  is  the  description  of  the  haughtiness  and  the  fall  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar (Dan.  iv.  30),  and  the  instance  of  Pharaoh  (Exod.  v.  2),  and 
that  of  Herod  (Acts  xii.  21).  Another  example  is  that  of  Haman,  in 
the  Book  of  Esther.  Thirdly.  The  third  and  last  motive  the  Scripture 
lays  before  us,  to  recommend  the  practice  of  humility,  is  the  example  of  God 
Himself  and  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  In  a  figurative  manner  of 
speaking,  the  Scripture  does  sometimes  ascribe  humility  to  God,  and  recommends 
His  condescension  as  a  pattern  for  us  to  imitate.  "  The  Lord,  who  dwelleth  on 
high  .  .  .  humbleth  Himself  to  behold  the  things  that  are  in  heaven,  and  in  the 
earth  "  (Psa.  oxiii.  6).  "  Though  the  Lord  be  high,  yet  hath  He  respect  unto  the 
lowly"  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  6).  And  the  same  manner  of  speaking  is  used  by  God 
Himself  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  These  are  the  principal  arguments  the  Scripture  makes 
use  of  to  persuade  men  to  the  practice  of  humility  in  generaL  There  are,  more- 
over, in  particular,  as  many  peculiar  distinct  motives  to  practise  this  duty  as  there 
are  different  circumstances  and  varieties  of  cases  wherein  it  is  to  be  exercised. 
Without  practising  it  towards  superiors,  there  can  be  no  government;  without 
exercising  it  towards  equals,  there  can  be  no  friendship  and  mutual  charity. 
Then,  vrith  regard  to  inferiors ;  besides  the  general  example  of  Christ's  singular 
and  unspeakable  condescension  towards  us  aU,  there  are  proper  argaments  to  deter 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xit. 

B6  from  pride  upon  account  of  every  particular  advantage  we  may  seem  to  have 
over  others,  whether  in  respect  of  our  civil  stations  in  the  world,  or  of  our  natural 
abilities,  or  of  our  religious  improvements.  If  the  advantages  of  our  civil  stations 
in  the  world  tempt  us  to  proud  and  haughty  behaviour,  we  may  do  well  to  consider 
that  argument  of  Job,  chap.  xxxi.  13 :  •'  If  I  did  despise  the  cause  of  my  man- 
servant  or  of  my  maidservant  when  they  contended  with  me,  what  then  shall  I  do 
when  God  riseth  up  ?  "  And  chap,  xxxiv.  19 :  "  He  accepteth  not  the  persons  of 
princes,  nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor ;  for  they  are  all  the  work 
of  His  hands."  Which  same  argument  is  urged  also  by  the  wise  man  :  "  He  that 
oppresseth  the  poor  reproacheth  his  Maker"  (Prov.  xiv.  31).  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.) 
Humility  not  the  way  of  the  world : — The  world's  rule  is  the  exact  opposite  of  this. 
The  world  says,  "  Every  man  for  himself."  The  way  of  the  world  is  to  struggle 
and  strive  for  the  highest  place ;  to  be  a  pushing  man,  and  a  rising  man,  and  a 
man  who  will  stand  stiffly  by  his  rights,  and  give  his  enemy  as  good  as  he  brings, 
and  beat  his  neighbour  out  of  the  market,  and  show  oft  himself  to  the  best  advan- 
tage, and  try  to  make  the  most  of  whatever  wit  or  money  he  has  to  look  well  in 
•world,  that  people  may  look  up  to  him  and  flatter  him  and  obey  him  ;  and  so  the 
world  has  no  objection  to  people's  pretending  to  be  better  than  they  are.  (C 
Kingsley.)  God  the  true  disposer  of  men: — If  God  is  really  the  King  of  the 
earth,  there  can  be  no  use  in  any  one  setting  up  himself.  If  God  is  really  the 
King  of  the  earth,  those  who  set  up  themselves  must  be  certain  to  be  brought 
down  from  their  high  thoughts  and  high  assumptions  sooner  or  later.  For  if  God 
is  really  the  King  of  the  earth.  He  must  be  the  one  to  set  people  up,  and  not  they 
themselves.  There  is  no  blinding  God,  no  hiding  from  God,  no  cheating  God, 
just  as  there  is  no  flattering  God.  He  knows  what  each  and  every  one  of  us  is  fit 
for.  He  knows  what  each  and  every  one  of  us  is  worth ;  and  what  is  more.  He 
knows  what  we  ought  to  know,  that  each  and  every  one  of  us  is  worth  nothing 
without  Him.  Therefore  there  is  no  use  pretending  to  be  better  than  we  are. 
Ibid. )  Pride  cast  down : — Charles  V.  was  so  sure  of  victory  when  he  invaded 
France,  that  he  ordered  his  historians  to  prepare  plenty  of  paper  to  record  his 
exploits.  But  he  lost  his  army  by  famine  and  disease,  and  returned  crestfallen. 
Humility  exalted : — The  day  Sir  Eardley  Wilmot  kissed  his  Majesty's  hands  on 
being  appointed  Chief  Justice,  one  of  his  sons,  a  youth  of  seventeen,  attended  him 
to  his  bedside.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  my  son,  I  will  tell  you  a  secret  worth  your 
knowing  and  remembering.  The  elevation  I  have  met  with  in  life,  particularly  this 
last  instance  of  it,  has  not  been  owing  to  any  superior  merit  or  abilities,  but  to  my 
humility,  to  my  not  having  set  up  myself  above  others,  and  to  an  uniform  endea- 
vour to  pass  through  life  void  of  offence  towards  God  and  man."  Humility  a 
safeguard: — A  French  general,  riding  on  horseback  at  the  head  of  his  troops, 
heard  a  soldier  complain,  "It  is  very  easy  for  the  general  to  command  ua 
forward  while  he  rides  and  we  walk."  Then  the  general  dismounted,  and 
compelled  the  grumbler  to  get  on  the  horse.  Coming  through  a  ravine 
a  bullet  from  a  shai-p-shooter  struck  the  rider,  and  he  fell  dead.  Then 
the  general  said,  "  How  much  safer  it  is  to  walk  than  to  ride  I "  Low- 
liness allied  to  loveliness: — A  humble  saint  looks  most  like  a  citizen  of  heaven. 
He  is  the  most  lovely  professor  who  is  the  most  lowly.  As  incense  smells  the 
sweetest  when  it  is  beaten  the  smallest,  so  saints  look  fairest  when  they  lie  lowest. 
(T.  Seeker.)  Humility  allied  to  modesty: — The  humble  soul  is  like  the  violet, 
which  grows  low,  hangs  the  head  downwards,  and  hides  itself  with  its  own  leaves ; 
and  were  it  not  that  the  fragrant  smell  of  his  many  graces  discovered  him  to  the 
world,  he  would  choose  to  live  and  die  in  secrecy.  (Sunday  Teachers'  Treasury.) 
Humility  the  essence  of  Christianity  : — St.  Augustine  being  asked  "  What  is  the 
first  article  in  the  Christian  religion  ?  "  replied,  "  Humility."  "  And  what  the 
second?"    "Humility."    •' And  what  the  third ? "    "Humility." 

Vers.  12-14.  Call  the  poor. — The  ChurcKs  duty  to  the  poor : — A  recent  advertise- 
ment on  our  city  walls  struck  me  as  singularly  suggestive  ;  it  contained  the  words, 
"God  and  the  poor."  Such  a  conjunction  of  words  is  most  remarkable:  the 
highest  and  the  lowest.  He  who  owns  all  things,  and  they  who  own  nothing  :  it  is 
a  conjunction  of  extremes,  and  though  it  looked  very  extraordinary  on  a  placard,  yet 
if  you  examine  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  the  idea  will  be  discovered  almost 
more  frequently  than  any  other.  I.  The  belation  of  God  to  the  poor.  There  is  a 
ftrange  mingling  of  terror  and  tenderness  in  God's  language  in  relation  to  the 
poor ;  terror  towards  their  oppressors,  tenderness  towards  themselves.    Take  the 


OUT.  xiT.}  ST.  LUKE.  M 

former  (Prov.  xvii.  6  ;  Isa.  x.  2 ;  Jer.  xxii.  13  ;  Amos  v.  11';  &c.).  Such  are  some 
of  the  sentences  of  fire  in  which  God  speaks  of  the  oppressor  of  the  poor.  Wa 
now  turn  from  terror  to  tenderness.  We  shall  hear  how  God  speaks  of  the  poor 
themselves.  The  lips  that  spoke  in  fire  now  quiver  with  messages  set  to  music 
(Isa.  Iviii.  6,  7).  There  is  an  extract  which  I  must  give  from  God's  ancient  legisla- 
tion, and  as  I  read  you  will  be  able  to  say  whether  ever  Act  of  Parliament  was  so 
beautiful  (Deut.  xxiv.  19-21).  And  why  this  beneficial  arrangement?  A  memorial 
act ;  to  keep  the  doers  in  grateful  remembrance  of  God's  mighty  interposition  on 
their  behalf.  When  men  draw  their  gratitude  from  their  memory,  their  hand  will 
he  opened  in  perpetual  benefaction.  II.  The  relation  of  the  pooe  to  the  Chuech. 
"^  Tha  poor  ye  have  always  with  you."  For  what  purpose  ?  As  a  perpetual  appeal 
to  our  deepest  sympathy  ;  as  an  abiding  memorial  of  our  Saviour's  own  condition 
'jfhile  upon  earth  ;  as  an  excitement  to  our  most  practical  gratitude.  The  poor  are 
given  into  the  charge  of  the  Church,  with  the  most  loving  commendation  of  Christ 
their  companion  and  Saviour.  1.  The  poor  require  physical  blessing.  Christ 
helped  man's  bodily  nature.  The  Church  devotes  itself  more  to  the  spirit  than  to 
the  flesh.  This  is  right :  yet  we  are  in  danger  of  forgetting  that  Christianity  has  a 
mission  to  the  body  as  well  as  to  the  soul.  The  body  is  the  entrance  to  the  soul. 
And  is  there  no  reward  ?  Will  the  Lord  who  remembers  the  poor  forget  the  poor's 
benefactor?  Truly  not  I  (Psa.  xli.  1).  2.  The  poor  require  physical  blessing; 
but  still  more  do  they  require  spiritual  blessing.  The  harvest  is  great,  the 
labourers  are  few.  Do  you  inquire  as  to  recompense  ?  It  is  infinite  1  "  They 
cannot  recompense  thee,  but  thou  shalt  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  the 
just."  And  yet  they  can  recompeuse  thee  I  Every  look  of  the  gleaming  eye  is  a 
recompense  1  Every  tone  of  thankfulness  is  a  repayment.  God  is  not  unrighteous 
to  forget  our  work  of  faith.  If  we  do  good  unto  "  one  of  the  least  of  His 
brethren,"  Christ  will  receive  the  good  as  though  offered  to  Himself.  Terrible  is 
the  recompense  of  the  wicked  I  "  Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the 
poor,  he  also  shall  cry  himself,  but  shall  not  be  heard."  Much  is  being  said  about 
Charity.  They  have  carved  her  image  in  marble ;  they  have  enclosed  her  in 
gorgeously  coloured  glass ;  they  have  placed  on  her  lofty  brow  the  wreath  of  immortal 
Amaranth  ;  poesy  has  turned  her  name  into  rhythm,  and  music  has  chanted  her 
praise.  All  this  is  well.  All  this  is  beautiful.  It  is  all  next  to  the  best  thing  ; 
but  still  the  best  thing  is  to  incorporate  charity  in  the  daily  life,  to  breathe  it  as 
our  native  air,  and  to  express  it  in  all  the  actions  of  our  hand.  "  Let  this  mind  be 
in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  go  and  sell  that 
thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven. "  You  will 
then  be  one  with  God !  "  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren,  Hath  not  God  chosen 
the  poor  of  this  world  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  which  He  hath 
promised  to  them  that  love  Him  ?  "  Then  do  not  contemn  the  poor.  "  He  that 
giveth,  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christian  benejleence : — 
1.  The  duty  oi  a  Chbistian  to  do  good  ;  to  lay  himself  out  to  do  good  to  every 
one  within  his  reach.  1.  This  arises  from  the  very  nature  of  the  Christian 
character.  Gratitude  to  Christ  leads  him  to  copy  the  Saviour,  "  who  went  about 
doing  good."  2.  The  duty  of  laying  ourselves  out  to  do  good  arises  from  our 
Christian  calling.  When  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  makes  a  difference  between  sinners 
who  are  living  in  ungodliness  and  walking  after  the  vanity  of  their  minds,  why 
does  He  make  that  difference  7  God  calls  forth  His  people  to  be  witnesses  for 
Him,  in  such  a  manner  that  those  who  are  bhnd  to  His  glory  in  creation,  and 
who  neglect  His  glory  in  revelation,  cannot  refuse  to  acknowledge  it  when  it 
is  evidenced  and  reflected  from  the  people  that  He  has  called  by  His  grace. 
When  God's  people  go  forth  doing  good,  when  they  manifest  self-denial, 
when  they  are  wilUng  to  "  spend  and  be  spent,"  in  order  to  contribute  to  the 
temporal  necessities  or  to  the  spiritual  welfare  of  their  fellow-creatures,  there  is 
something  in  these  actions  which  tells  upon  the  heart  that  is  closed  to  all  other 
means  of  receiving  the  knowledge  of  God's  glory  and  salvation.  II.  The  object 
of  Christian  beneficence.  When  a  Christian  does  good,  or  tries  to  abound  in  any 
good  work,  it  must  not  be  from  (1)  personal  vanity,  (2)  a  desire  of  human 
applause,  (3)  for  worldly  recompense.  His  sole  inducement  must  be  the  love  of 
Chjist ;  his  one  object  the  glory  of  God ;  his  whole  desire  to  advance  the  temporal 
and  spiritual  good  of  mankind.  IH.  The  Chbistian's  Encoubagement  to  lay  himself 
out  to  do  good  unto  all  men,  without  looking  for  anything  again.  "  They  cannot 
recompense  thee;  but,"  &c.  {W.  Cadman,  M.A.)  Christian  feasting — Much 
6f  the  impressiveness  of  oar  Lord  m  a  preacher  arose  from  the  miracles  He 


IJ  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   xit. 

performed  in  confirmation  of  the  divinity  of  His  mission,  and  the  truth  of  His 
doctrine  ;  much  also  from  His  adapting  Himself  to  the  state  and  conditions  of 
His  hearers ;  and  much  also  from  His  deriving  His  instructions  and  encourage- 
ments from  present  objects  and  occurrences,  for  this  always  gives  a  freshness 
to  our  discourse,  and  a  superiority  to  the  artificialness  of  study.  He  sees  a 
eower  going  forth  to  sow,  and  for  the  instruction  of  the  people  is  led  to  deliver 
a  parable  on  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom.  I.  The  occasion  of  the  abdresb. 
'  Then  said  He  also  to  him  that  bade  Him."  Concerning  this  invitation  let 
us  make  four  inquiries.  1.  Who  was  it  that  bade  Him  ?  It  was  one  of  the  chief 
Pharisees,  a  man  of  some  substance  and  respectability,  probably  a  rulsr  of  the 
synagogue,  or  one  of  the  Sanhedrim.  We  never  read  of  any  of  the  Sadducees 
inviting  our  Lord,  nor  do  we  ever  read  of  the  Herodians  inviting  Him.  Though 
the  Pharisees  were  the  bitterest  enemies  of  Christ,  they  had  frequent  interviews 
with  Him.  2.  For  what  was  He  bidden  ?  Some  suppose  that  this  was  a  common 
meal,  but  the  narrative  requires  us  to  view  it  as  an  entertainment,  or  some  kind 
of  festivity.  3.  When  was  He  bidden  ?  We  are  told  that  it  was  on  the  Sabbath 
day.  4.  Why  was  He  bidden  ?  He  was  invited  by  Martha  from  a  principle  of 
duty  and  benevolence,  and  she  and  Mary  hoped  to  derive  some  spiritual  advantage 
from  Him.  I  wish  I  could  think  that  this  Pharisee  invited  our  Lord  under 
the  influence  of  similar  motives.  But  from  whatever  motive  they  were  impelled 
He  went  not  to  eat  and  drink  only.  No,  He  went  about  His  Father's  business, 
this  He  constantly  kept  in  view.  He  knew  what  His  work  required.  He  knew 
that  the  Good  Shepherd  must  seek  after  the  lost  sheep  until  He  find  it.  My 
brethren,  you  must  here  learn  to  distinguish  between  Him  and  yourselves.  He 
had  nothing  inflammable  in  Him.  The  enemy  came  and  found  nothing  in  Him. 
Bnt  you  have  much  remaining  depravity,  and  are  in  danger  from  external 
circumstances ;  you  therefore,  must  watch  and  pray  lest  you  enter  into  temptation ; 
you  are  safe  when  in  the  path  of  duty,  there  God  has  engaged  to  keep  you. 
Let  as  learn  from  the  Saviour's  conduct  to  exercise  good  behaviour,  that  otibers 
may  not  have  occasion  to  speak  evil  of  us  on  account  of  our  religion.  Consider — U. 
What  oub  Saviotib  fobbids.  He  said,  "  When  thou  makest  a  dinner  or  a  supper,  call 
not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  brethren,  neither  thy  kinsmen,  nor  thy  rich  neighbours ; 
lest  they  also  bid  thee  again,  and  a  recompense  be  made  thee."  This  "supper 
or  dinner  "  supposes  something  costly,  for  you  observe  that  in  the  following  verse 
ri  is  called  "  a  feast."  Observe,  it  is  not  absolutely  wrong  to  invite  our  friends, 
or  our  brethren,  or  oar  rich  kinsmen,  or  our  rich  neighbours ;  but  our  Saviour 
looks  at  the  motive  here,  ' '  lest  a  recompense  be  made  thee  " ;  as  much  as  to 
say,  there  is  no  friendship  or  charity  in  all  this.  And  the  apostle  says,  "  Let 
all  things  be  done  with  charity."  You  are  to  show  more  hospitality  than  vanity, 
and  more  charity  than  ostentation,  and  to  be  more  concerned  for  those  who 
want  your  relief.  This  brings  us  to  consider — HL  What  He  enjoins.  "  But  when 
thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  and  the  blind."  Here 
we  see  what  a  variety  of  evils  and  miseries  are  incident  to  the  human  race. 
Here  are  "  the  poor,"  without  the  necessaries  of  life ;  "  the  maimed,"  whose 
hcnds  are  onable  to  perform  their  office;  "the  halt,"  who  are  indebted  to  a 
crutch  to  enable  them  to  walk  at  all;  "the  blind."  Here  we  learn,  also,  the 
proper  objects  of  your  compassion,  and  the  fittest  subjects  of  your  charity. 
It  is  not  necessary  that  you  should  always  have  "  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the 
halt,  and  the  blind"  at  your  table.  You  may  fulfil  the  Saviour's  design  without 
this,  and  do  as  Nehemiah  did,  "  send  portions  to  those  for  whom  nothing  is 
prepared."  IV.  What  oub  Savioue  insobks.  "And  thou  shalt  be  blessed;  for 
they  cannot  recompense  thee :  for  thou  shalt  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection 
of  the  just."  L  The  blessedness:  "Thou  shalt  be  blessed."  Blessed  even 
in  the  act  itself.  Oh,  the  pleasures  of  benevolence !  How  blessed  is  it  even 
in  the  review  I  for  this  blessedness  can  be  continued  and  improved  on  reflection. 
How  superior  in  the  performance  to  sordid  entertainments  1  "  Thou  shalt  be 
blessed" — blessed  by  the  receiver.  Think  of  Job.  He  says,  "When  the 
ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me,  and  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave  witness  to 
m«.  Because  I  delivered  the  poor  that  cried,  and  the  fatherless,  and  him  that 
had  none  to  help  him.  The  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish  came 
upon  me ;  and  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy."  What  do  we  see 
yonder  when  we  enter  Joppa  with  Peter?  "When  he  was  come  they  brought 
him  into  an  upper  chamber :  and  all  the  widows  stood  by  him  weeping, 
and  showing  the  coats  and  garments  which  Dorcas  made  while  she  was  with 


,  xnr.]  ST.  LUKE.  13 

them."  "And  thon  shalt  be  blessed" — blessed  by  the  observers.  Who  doea 
not  observe  ?  And  who  observes  and  does  not  bless  on  such  occasions  ?  Few, 
perhaps  none  of  us,  knew  personally  a  Eeynolds,  a  Thornton,  or  a  Howard,  of 
whom  we  have  read ;  but  in  reading  their  history,  when  we  come  to  their  names 
we  cannot  help  blessing  them,  and  thus  the  words  of  the  Scripture  are  fulfilled, 
"The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed."  "And  thou  shalt  be  blessed."  Above  all, 
blessed  by  God  Himself,  upon  whom  everything  depends,  "  whose  favour  is  life, 
and  whose  loving-kindness  is  better  than  life."  He  blesses  personally  and 
relatively.  He  grants  you  spiritual  and  temporal  blessings.  David  says,  "Let 
them  curse,  but  bless  Thou."  2.  The  certainty  of  this  blessedness — '•  For  they 
cannot  recompense  thee."  This  seems  a  strange  reason,  and  would  tend  to 
check  rather  than  encourage  a  worldly  man.  The  foundation  of  this  reason  is 
this,  that  charity  must  be  recompensed.  If  the  poor  cannot  do  this  themselves, 
some  one  else  must  undertake  it  for  them,  and  therefore  God  Himself  must  become 
answerable ;  and  it  is  much  better  to  have  God  to  recompense  us  than  to  rely 
upon  a  poor  dying  creature.  Paul  therefore,  says,  to  those  who  had  made  a 
collection  to  relieve  him,  and  had  sent  it  by  the  hands  of  Epaphroditus,  "My 
God  shall  supply  all  your  need  according  to  His  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus." 
If,  therefore,  the  thought  ever  occurs  to  your  mind,  "  I  know  not  those  persona 
who  have  relieved  me;  I  shall  never  be  able  to  repay  them,"  so  much  the 
better,  for  then  God  must,  and  if  there  be  any  truth  in  His  word,  if  there 
be  any  love  in  His  heart,  He  will.  3.  The  time  of  this  bestowment — "  For 
thou  shalt  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just."  Not  that  this  will 
be  done  then  exclusively,  for,  as  we  have  already  shown,  there  are  advantages 
attending  charity  now.  But  it  will  be  principally  then,  publicly  then.  The 
apostle  says  to  the  Corinthians,  "  Judge  nothing  before  the  time,  until  the 
Lord  come,  who  both  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and 
will  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  heart ;  and  then  shall  every  man  have 
praise  of  God."  Then  will  it  be  done  perfectly.  It  is  not  wrong  to  look  for 
advantage  in  religion.  But  yon  should  be  upon  your  guard  not  to  entertain  a 
notion  of  meritoriousness  in  any  of  your  doings.  No,  the  reward  is  of  grace, 
not  of  debt.  (W.  Jay.)  ChrisVs  counsel  to  his  host: — Our  Lord  does  not 
here  enjoin  neglecting  and  refraining  from  one's  friends,  kinsfolk,  and  neighbours, 
to  entertain  only  the  poor,  maimed,  halt,  and  blind.  What  He  says  is,  when 
yon  make  a  dinner  or  supper — that  is,  as  He  immediately  explains,  a  feast — let 
it  be,  not  for  those  with  whom  you  are  accustomed  to  associate,  but  rather  for 
the  destitute  and  forlorn  outside  your  circle.  It  is  a  question,  yon  see,  not  at 
all  of  social  fellowship,  but  of  expenditure,  and  of  the  objects  to  which  our  great 
expenditures  should  be  devoted.  When  you  would  lavish  trouble  and  money, 
Bays  Christ,  let  the  lavishing  be,  not  for  your  own  personal  gratification,  not  with 
the  view  of  securing  some  enjoyment  or  obtaining  some  benefit  for  yourself,  but 
for  the  blessing  of  others.  The  point  on  which  the  whole  admonition  turns, 
and  to  which  it  refers,  is  largeness  of  outlay.  This  is  obvious.  Our  Lord  is 
thinking  and  speaking,  not  of  an  ordinary  meal  such  as  might  be  spread  any  day, 
but  of  a  feast,  like  the  "  great  supper  "  of  the  parable  that  follows  :  and  remember 
the  occasion  of  His  words,  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were  uttered.  He 
was  dining  on  the  Sabbath,  in  the  house  of  one  of  the  chief  Pharisees,  who  had 
Him  to  eat  Bread  with  him ;  and  everything  indicates  that  it  was  no  common 
dinner  at  which  He  was  present,  but  an  entertainment  on  a  large  scale,  got  up 
probably  with  much  pains,  and  regardless  of  cost.  Christ  noticed,  we  are  told, 
how  those  who  were  bidden  chose  out  the  chief  rooms ;  nay,  such  were  the 
unseemly  contests  among  the  guests  for  precedence,  and  the  rude  struggling 
for  the  best  places,  which  He  witnessed,  that  when  at  last  the  tumult  had 
subsided,  and  all  were  arranged.  He  could  not  forbear  remarking  on  it  in  tones 
of  rebuke.  Evidently  the  meal  was  a  grand  affair,  a  banquet  numerously  attended 
and  by  many  notable  and  distinguished  persons.  Contemplating,  as  He  sat 
there,  the  profusion,  the  sumptuousness  ;  picturing  what  it  had  cost — the  amount 
of  money,  labour,  and  worry,  and  perhaps  sacrifice,  that  had  been  expended  on  it 
— and  penetrating  that  it  was  all  mainly  for  selfish  ends,  with  the  idea  and  in  the 
hope  of  some  advantage  through  it;  Christ  turns  His  great  mournful  eyes  upon 
the  many  with  the  words  :  "  When  you  would  make  such  another  feast  as  this, 
my  friend,  at  so  much  trouble  and  cost,  instead  of  calling  to  it  your  rich  friends, 
who  are  likely  to  recompense  you  for  it,  you  should  call  to  it  the  destitute  and 
afflicted,  who  are  unable  to  recompense  you,  and  thus  be  blessed  at  the  resurreetioa 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xin 

of  the  just."  The  inner  point  and  spirit  of  which  form  of  words  was  this? 
♦•  Ah !  my  friend,  it  is  a  mistake  to  make  your  great  outlays  of  strength  and 
treasure  with  a  view  to  your  own  gratification  and  aggrandisement,  for  it  is  poor 
recompense  at  the  best,  after  all.  These  great  outlays  should  be  reserved  rather 
to  meet  the  needs  and  ameliorate  the  unfortunate  condition  of  others ;  for  the- 
blessing  of  that,  though  more  ethereal  and  less  palpable,  is  infinitely  more  worth. 
You  should  not  burden  yourself  to  win  ought  of  present  enjoyment  or  acquisition 
for  yourself.  If  you  burden  yourself  at  all,  it  should  be  to  supply  some  want 
or  serve  some  interest  of  the  necessitous  around  you."  And  the  lesson  remains 
for  us.  Let  your  extensive  expenditures,  your  toils  and  worries,  and  hardships 
and  sacrifices,  be  for  those  outside  who  require  ministry,  rather  than  for  yourself. 
"When  it  is  a  question  of  your  own  personal  amusement  or  pleasure,  of  your  own 
worldly  comfort  or  gain,  be  content  to  spend  but  little ;  don't  make  a  fuss,  or 
lie  awake  anxiously,  or  go  out  of  your  way  for  that.  If  you  do  so  at  all,  do  it 
when  the  welfare  of  others  is  concerned,  when  there  are  others  to  be  succoured 
or  saved  by  it ;  reserve  for  such  ends  the  incurring  of  heavy  cost,  the  taking 
on  of  heavy  burdens  of  thought  and  care.  {S.  A.  Tipple).  Christian  entertain- 
mentt : — Jesus  Christ  d'i  not  intend  that  the  rich  should  never  have  communion 
with  one  another,  or  hold  intercourse  with  one  another ;  that  would  be  as  absurd 
as  it  would  be  impracticable.  The  idea  is  that,  having  had  your  own  fellowships 
and  enjoyments,  having  eaten  the  fat  and  drunk  the  sweet,  you  are  to  send  out 
a  portion  to  him  that  hath  none,  and  a  blessing  to  him  who  sits  in  loneliness  and 
sadness  of  heart.  I  had  a  wonderful  dream  some  time  ago — a  singular  dream. 
It  was  about  the  Mansion  House  and  the  Lord  Mayor.  I  saw  the  great  banquet- 
ing hall  filled,  and  I  looked  and  wondered  at  the  people,  for  they  had  such  a 
peculiar  expression  upon  their  countenances.  They  seemed  to  be  closing  their 
eyes,  and  so  they  were.  Alas !  they  were  all  blind  people,  and  all  over  fifty 
years  of  age.  It  was  the  great  Lord  Mayor  of  London  himself  who  had  invited 
aU  the  blind  people  over  that  age  in  London  to  meet  one  another,  and  have 
one  happy  night,  so  far  as  he  could  make  it,  in  the  ancient  banqueting  hall. 
No  loving  cup  was  passed  round,  lest  accidents  should  occur ;  but  many  a  Icviiig^ 
word  was  spoken,  many  a  sigh  full  of  meaning  was  heaved — not  the  sigh  of  misenj, 
but  the  sigh  of  thankfulness.  And  then  a  strange  silence  fell  upon  all  the- 
guests,  and  I  heard  a  voice  from  above  saying  in  the  English  tongue  quite 
distinctly,  "  They  cannot  recompense  thee,  but  thou  shalt  be  recompensed  at  the 
resurrection  of  the  just."  Then  the  banqueting  hall  seemed  to  be  fihed  with 
spectators — glad  witnesses — as  if,  at  last  there  were  upon  the  earth  some  fine 
touch  of  Christian  feeling,  some  recognition  of  the  mystery  of  charity  and 
the  boundlessness  and  condescension  of  Christian  love.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.} 
True  Christian  festivity  : — I.  It  should  be  unselfish.  Not  extended  merely  to 
those  from  whom  we  expect  a  similar  return,  II.  It  should  be  meecittjl.  Extended 
to  those  who  are  generally  neglected.  III.  This  festivity  will  be  eewarded. 
With  the  blessing  of  the  poor  now,  and  the  commendation  of  the  Judge  hereafter. 
{Anon.)  Christian  hospitality  .-—Our  Lord  really  means  that  hospitality  is  first  to 
be  exercised  towards  those  who  need  it,  because  of  their  narrow  means,  and  to  whom 
kindness  of  this  sort  is  more  pleasant,  because  they  receive  such  little  notice  from 
the  world.  These  are  to  be  first  recipients  of  our  hospitality,  and  after  them  our 
friends,  relatives,  and  neighbours,  who  may  be  supposed  to  be  able  to  ask  us  again. 
This,  of  course,  is  directly  contrary  to  the  practice  of  the  world.  Now  I  do  not 
think  that  we  obey  this  injunction  of  the  Lord  by  following  its  spirit  (as  the  saying 
is)  rather  than  its  letter.  It  has  been  said  that  "  the  essence  of  the  beatitude,  as 
distinct  from  its  form,  remains  for  all  who  give  freely,  to  those  who  can  give  them 
no  recompense  in  return,  who  have  nothing  to  offer  but  their  thanks  and  prayers," 
and  that  "  relief,  given  privately,  thoughtfully,  discriminately,  may  be  better 
both  for  the  giver,  as  less  ostentatious,  and  for  the  receiver,  as  tending  to  the 
formation  of  a  higher  character  than  the  open  feast  of  the  Eastern  form  of 
benevolence."  But  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  Lord  is  not  speaking  of  reUef,  i.e.^ 
of  almsgiving,  but  of  hospitality.  It  is  one  thing  to  send  relief  in  a  basket  to 
some  poor  person  from  your  house,  and  quite  another  yourself  to  proffer  to  the 
same  person  food  upon  your  own  table  of  which  you  and  he  jointly  partake.  By 
relief  or  alms  you  almost  of  necessity  constitute  yourself  his  superior ;  by 
hospitality  yon  assume  that  he  is  far  more  on  the  same  level  with  yourself. 
Partaking  of  food  in  common  has,  by  the  absolutely  univflrsal  consent  of  mankind, 
been  esteemed  a  very  different  thing  from  the  mere  gift  of  food.    If  it  be  said  thai 


«RAP.  nv.]  ST.  LVKE.  U 

Buch  hospitality  as  the  Lord  here  reconunends  is  contrary  to  the  nsages  of  even 
Christian  society  amongst  us,  we  answer,  "  Of  course  it  is  "  ;  but,  notwithstanding 
this,  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  Christianity  of  our  Christian  society,  of  which  wa 
have  80  high  an  opinion,  may  be  very  imperfect  indeed,  and  require  reformation,  if 
not  regeneration,  and  that  '♦  the  open  feast  of  the  Eastern  form  of  benevolence  " 
may  be  worthy  of  more  imitation  amongst  ourselves.  Look  at  the  extravagant 
cost  of  some  entertainments — viands  set  before  the  guests  simply  because  they  are 
costly  and  out  of  season — and  consider  that  the  difference  between  a  fair  and 
creditable  entertainment  and  this  extravagance  would  enable  the  giver  to  act  ten 
times  more  frequently  on  the  principle  which  the  Lord  inculcates,  and  for  which 
he  would  be  rewiirded ;  consider  this,  and  the  folly  of  such  waste,  not  to  say  its 
wickedness,  is  manifest.  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  A  model  feast : — I  cannot  think  there 
is  no  connection  with  Divine  things  in  the  counsels  Christ  gave  to  His  host  about 
making  a  feast.  I  think  He  meant  more  than  to  alter  a  custom,  or  change  social 
habits.  What  He  advised  went  deeper,  and  had  a  profounder  intention  than  that. 
He  was  reaching  down  to  the  foundation  of  things  ;  showing  how  God  deals  with 
men,  and  what  are  the  principles,  or  what  is  the  measure  and  scope  of  His 
kingdom.  He  pourtrays  a  model  feast.  And  if  I  mistake  not,  the  portraiture  is  a 
pattern  of  things  in  the  heavens.  A  place  at  the  feast,  I  think  He  means  to  say, 
does  not  depend  upon  social  grade,  position,  or  attainments,  but  upon  the  needs  of 
those  who  are  called.  Necessity,  misery,  helplessness,  were  to  be  the  qualifications 
— poor,  maimed,  halt,  blind.  Friends  and  rich  neighbours  were  not  to  be  left  out ; 
they  might  come  and  share  the  joy  and  blessing — the  joy  of  ministering  and  doing 
good  to  others ;  but  the  sore  and  the  stricken  were  to  be  the  guests  ;  the  invitations 
were  to  be  sent  specially  to  them.  The  ado,  the  preparation,  the  plentifulness, 
and  the  freeness  of  the  feast,  must  be  all  for  them,  to  bless  them,  and  make  them 
glad.  That  is  God's  feast.  That  is  how  God  does.  He  prepares  a  feast  for  man 
— man  the  sinner,  man  the  miserable,  man  the  outcast,  the  hungry,  the  starved, 
the  diseased,  the  dying ;  and  He  throws  it  open,  and  bids  them  all  come,  and  sends 
to  fetch  them  in.  And  when  they  gather,  He  lets  His  rich  friends,  the  angels, 
rejoice  with  Him ;  for  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one 
sinner  that  repenteth."  {W.  Hubbard.)  The  poor  invited  to  a  feast: — When  I 
was  quite  a  little  boy,  there  lived  in  my  father's  house  a  man  whom,  as  I  look 
back,  I,  in  common  with  most  who  knew  him,  cannot  help  regarding  as,  perhaps, 
the  hohest  man  we  were  acquainted  with.  He  lived  a  life  of  singular  devotion  and 
self-denial,  and  seemed  to  walk  constantly  in  the  presence  of  God.  Some  little 
time  ago,  when  m  Liverpool,  I  accidentally  came  across  the  person  in  whose  house  he 
had  lodged  in  the  days  when  he  had  first  devoted  himself  to  God,  when  he  was  quite  a 
young  man,  before  his  connection  with  my  own  beloved  father  was  as  close  as  it 
afterwards  became.  This  good  man,  who  kept  the  house  in  which  this  gentleman 
lodged,  told  me  a  few  anecdotes  about  him,  and,  amongst  others,  I  remember  the 

following :  "  Ah,  Mr.  Aitken  1 "  said  the  man,  "  I  shall  never  forget  Mr.  C *8 

Christmas  dinner."  I  said,  "I  wish  you  would  tell  me  about  it ; "  and  he  replied, 
"  I  will."  "  Christmas  Day  came  near,  and  Mr.  0—  called  up  my  wife,  and  said 
to  her,  *  Now,  I  want  you  to  make  the  very  best  dinner  you  possibly  can ;  I  am 

going  to  give  a  dinner-party.'    ♦  Well,  Mr.  C ,'  she  said,  '  you  have  been  a  long 

time  in  my  house,  and  I  never  heard  yon  talk  of  giving  a  dmner-party  yet ;  but  JC 
will  see  to  it  that  it  is  a  right  good  dinner,  and  there  shall  be  no  mistake  about  it.* 
*  Do  your  best,'  he  said ;  '  1  am  going  to  invite  my  friends,  and  I  want  everything 
to  be  done  properly.'  My  wife  set  to  work  and  got  a  very  good  diimer  indeed. 
Christmas  Day  came.  Towards  evening  we  were  expecting  the  gentlemen  to  turn 
up  who  had  been  invited  by  our  lodger ;  we  did  not  know  who  they  were,  but  we 
made  sure  they  would  be  people  worthy  of  the  occasion.  After  a  time,  there  came 
a  knock  at  the  door.  I  opened  the  door,  and  there  stood  before  me  a  man  clothed 
in  rags.  He  had  evidently  washed  his  face,  and  got  himself  up  a  little  for  the 
oecasion ;  at  the  same  time  he  was  a  beggar,  pure  and  simple.    He  said,  '  Does 

Mr.  C- live  here  ? '    •  Yes,*  I  replied ;  *  he  lodges  here,  but  you  cannot  see  him ; 

he  is  just  going  to  sit  down  to  dinner.'  *But,'  said  the  man,  *I  was  invited  to 
come  here  to  dinner  this  evening.*  Yoo  may  imagine  my  horror  and  astonish- 
ment ;  I  could  scarcely  contain  myself.  *  What  1 '  I  said ;  '  you  invited  to  come 
here  this  evening,  a  man  like  you  ? '  I  had  scarcely  got  tixe  words  out  of  my 
mouth  before  I  saw  another  poor,  miserable  specimen  of  humanity  crawling  round 

the  comer ;  he  was  another  of  Mr.  0 's  guests.    By-and-by,  there  was  a  round 

dozen  of  them,  or  something  like  a  score ;  and  m  they  oame,  the  most  haggard. 


ft  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  nr. 

miserable,  woe-begone  objects  you  could  possibly  oonoeive.  They  went  into  my 
wife's  nice,  smart-looking  dining-room,  with  that  grand  white  cloth,  and  all  tha 
good  things  which  had  been  so  carefully  prepared.  It  almost  took  one's  breath 
away  to  see  them.  But  when  we  saw  the  good  man  himself,  setting  to  work,  hka 
the  Master  of  old  (who  girded  Himself  to  serve  His  disciples) — setting  to  work  to 
make  these  men  happy,  and  help  them  to  spend  a  pleasant  evening,  without 
stiffness  or  formality,  wo  thought,  '  After  all,  he  is  right.  This  is  the  best  sort  of 
dinner-party ; '  and  we  did  not  grudge  the  labour  we  had  bestowed."  Now,  I  have 
told  that  little  anecdote  in  order  to  illustrate  the  fact  that  our  Lord's  teaching  on 
such  subjects  is  eminently  practical,  and  that  when  He  gives  a  suggestion,  you 
may  be  sure  that  it  is  a  very  sensible  and  sound  one.  (W.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.) 
Call  the  poor : — Pococke  informs  us,  that  an  Arab  prince  will  often  dine  before  hia 
door,  and  call  to  all  that  pass,  even  to  beggars,  in  the  name  of  God,  and  they  coma 
and  sit  down  to  table,  and  when  they  have  done  retire  with  the  usual  form  of  returning 
thanks.  It  is  always  customary  among  the  Orientals  to  provide  more  meats  and 
drinks  than  are  necessary  for  the  feast !  and  then,  the  poor  who  pass  by,  or  whom 
the  rumour  of  the  feast  brings  to  the  neighbourhood,  are  caUed  in  to  consume  what 
remains.  This  they  often  do  in  an  outer  room,  to  which  the  dishes  are  removed 
from  the  apartment  in  which  the  invited  guests  have  feasted  ;  or  otherwise,  every 
invited  guest,  when  he  has  done,  withdraws  from  the  table,  and  his  place  is  taken 
by  another  person  of  inferior  rank,  and  so  on,  till  the  poorest  come  and  consume 
the  whole.  The  former  of  these  modes  is,  however,  the  most  common.  {Biblical 
things  not  generally  knawn.)  Feeding  the  hungry  : — It  was  the  custom  of  St. 
Gregory,  when  he  became  pope,  to  entertain  every  evening  at  his  own  table  twelve 
poor  men,  in  remembrance  of  the  nimiber  of  our  Lord's  apostles.  One  night,  aa 
he  Bat  at  supper  with  his  guests,  he  saw,  to  his  surprise,  not  twelve  but  thirteen, 
seated  at  his  table ;  and  he  called  to  his  steward,  and  said  to  him,  "  Did  not  I 
command  thee  to  invite  twelve?  and,  behold!  there  are  thirteen."  And  the 
steward  told  them  over,  and  replied,  "  Holy  father,  there  are  surely  twelve  only." 
And  Gregory  held  his  peace ;  and,  after  the  meal,  he  called  forth  the  unbidden 
guest,  and  asked  him,  "  Who  art  thou  ?  "  And  he  replied,  "  I  am  the  poor  man 
whom  thou  didst  formerly  relieve ;  but  my  name  is  *  The  Wonderful,'  and 
through  Me  thou  shalt  obtain  whatever  thou  shalt  ask  of  God,"  Then  Gregory 
knew  that  he  had  entertained  an  angel ;  or,  according  to  another  version  of  tha 
story,  our  Lord  EQmself."  Christ-like  hospitality: — It  is  said  of  Lord  Chief 
Justice  Hale  that  he  frequently  invited  his  poor  neighbours  to  dinner,  and  made 
them  sit  at  table  with  himself.  If  any  of  them  were  sick,  so  that  they  could  not 
4;ome,  he  would  send  provisions  to  them  from  his  own  table.  He  did  not  confine 
his  bounties  to  the  poor  of  his  own  parish,  but  diffused  supplies  to  the  neighbour- 
ing  parishes  as  occasion  required.  He  always  treated  the  old,  the  needy,  and  the 
sick  with  the  tenderness  and  familiarity  that  became  one  who  considered  they  were 
of  the  same  nature  with  himself,  and  were  reduced  to  no  other  necessities  but 
each  as  he  himself  might  be  brought  to.  Common  beggars  he  considered  in 
another  view.  If  any  of  these  met  him  in  hia  walks,  or  came  to  his  door,  he 
would  ask  each  aa  were  capable  of  working  why  they  went  about  so  idly.  If  they 
answered  it  was  because  ^ey  could  not  get  employment,  he  would  send  them  to 
some  field  to  gather  all  the  stones  in  it,  and  lay  them  in  a  heap,  and  then  pay 
them  liberally  for  their  trouble.  This  being  done,  he  nsed  to  send  his  carts,  and 
caused  the  stones  to  be  carried  to  such  places  of  the  highway  as  needed  repair. 

Ver.  16.  Blessed  Is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  In  the  kingdom  of  God. — Unreal 
words : — There  are  a  great  many  ways  of  turning  a  conversation  when  it  happens  to 
be  suggestive  of  disagreeable  truth,  or  to  convey  advice  which  we  should  prefer  not  to 
take,  or  to  reveal  to  as  points  in  our  character  which  we  should  wish  to  keep 
hidden,  even  from  ourselves.  But  of  all  the  various  devices  resorted  to  for  this 
purpose  the  pious  ejaculation  is  usually  the  most  successful,  as  well  as  by  far  tha 
easiest.  If  it  fail  to  change  the  subject,  it  at  least  causes  an  awkward  pause,  after 
-which  there  is  a  fair  prospect  of  an  altered  tone  in  the  general  talk.  I.  Gla^nob  a> 
THB  soxMK.  The  Saviour  had  been  putting  some  pointed  questions  respecting 
personal  religion  to  His  host  and  fellow-guests.  Feeling  that  things  had  gone  far 
enough  in  their  present  direction,  and  yet  that  by  no  possibility  could  exception  b« 
taken  to  anything  that  had  been  said,  the  guest  introduced  to  our  notice  in  the  text 
attempts  to  dismiss  to  heaven  those  heavenly  things  which  are  not  easily  acclima- 
tised to  earth ;  to  project  into  the  future  those  "  very  excellent  things  "  which  were 


.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  IT 

felt  to  look  best  at  a  distance ;  to  refer  the  whole  subject  to  another  world,  and  to 
change  the  venue,  as  I  believe  lawyers  would  say,  by  a  formal  remark — indispntable 
but  unpractical — "  Blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  God."  II. 
Let  us  see  bow  this  speech  was  uet.  All  unreal  ejaculations  are  evasive,  self- 
deceiving  (Uke  Balaam's),  or  procrastinating;  or  all  three.  The  ejaculation  of  the 
text  was  most  likely  all  three.  It  was  certainly  evasive.  And  the  Saviour  met  it 
by  pointing  out  that  the  blessedness  which  the  speaker,  and  others  like  him, 
professed  to  desire,  was  precisely  that  from  which  they  were  most  ready  to  excuse 
themselves  the  moment  it  was  offered  to  them  ;  that  "  the  kingdom  of  God  "  was 
something  present,  and  not  something  merely  future  ;  that  they  could  enjoy  what 
they  professed  to  regard  as  its  blessings  now  ;  but  that  there  were  many  other 
things  which  for  the  time  being  they  very  decidedly  preferred.    III.  Now  why  did 

Ha  WHO  WOULD  NOT  "  BBEAK  THE  BB0ISED  BEED  OB  QUENCH  THE  SMOKINQ  FLAX  "  THUS 
DISCOUBAGB   THOSE   WHO   WEBE  SAYINO   WHAT   WAS  VERT  GOOD  ?      I  should   Say,  He    did 

not  discourage  otherwise  than  by  suggesting  that  they  should  weigh  the  import  of 
their  words  and  test  their  reality.  "By  thy  words,"  said  our  Saviour,  "thou  shalt 
be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned."  He  did  not  mean,  of 
course,  that  we  shall  be  judged  by  these  alone ;  but  that  they  will  be  taken  into 
account.  And  for  a  moment,  drawing  away  our  thoughts  from  our  bad  words,  let 
US  ask  ourselves  whether  our  good  words  may  not  prove,  after  all,  the  more 
condemning,  and  waft  over  ages  and  ages,  as  the  verdict  of  the  Most  High,  the  echo 
of  His  words  by  Isaiah  long  ago,  "  This  people  honooreth  Me  with  their  lips,  but 
their  heart  is  far  from  Me."     {J.  C.  Coghlan,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16-24.  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper. — ParahU  of  tJte  great 
supper: — I.  The  elaboeatb  pbepaeation.  Indicating  the  treasures  of  Divine 
wisdom,  forethought,  power,  love,  expended  upon  the  work  of  redemption.  II. 
Men's  pbefebenoe  of  otheb  things — not  things  sinful  in  themselves,  but  worldly 
pursuits,  occupations,  pleasures — to  the  rich  provision  of  the  Divine  bounty,  and 
their  consequent  slighting  of  the  Divine  invitation.     HI.  Love  slighted  tubns  to 

INDIGNATION.      IV.    God'S  PURPOSES   ABE   NOT   FBU8TBATED   BY  THE    DI80BEDIENCR   AND 

T7NTHANEFULNESS  OF  MAN.  The  house  is  filled.  If  one  guest  refuses  to  come,  another 
is  brought  in  to  occupy  his  place.  Drop  your  crown,  and  another  man  will  lift  it 
and  place  it  on  his  brow.  (Anon.)  The  gospel  feast : — I.  The  chabactebistics  o» 
TEE  gospel.  1.  Its  readiness.  Nothing  for  man  to  do  but  come.  The  feast  has 
been  preparing  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  2.  The  gospel's  abundance.. 
Grace  enough  in  God's  heart  to  include  all  the  world.  3.  The  condescension  of  the- 
gospel.  No  favouritism.  Absolutely  free.  The  vilest  soul  is  good  enough  to  be 
jjaved.  4.  The  gospel's  urgency.  Not  force,  but  moral  earnestness.  5.  The 
gospel's  triumph.  Christ's  blood  is  not  shed  for  nought.  H.  The  beception  of  thb 
GOSPEL.  1.  The  gospel  finds  no  favourable  reception  from — (1)  The  gospel- 
hardened.  Every  invitation  rejected  does  but  set  more  firmly  in  opposition  a  will 
already  opposed  to  Christ.  The  heart  grows  stubborn  and  indifferent.  (2)  The  proud. 
(3)  The  pre-occupied.  When  Mark  Antony  began  his  famous  speech  with  the 
words,  "  Friends,  Romans,  countrymen,  lend  me  your  ears,"  he  well  knew  that  he 
might  as  well  toss  his  words  to  the  idle  winds  that  swept  over  the  dead  body  of  his 
friend,  as  address  an  audience  who  paid  him  no  attention.  In  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  the  very  fact  that  people  are  interested  in  it,  talking  about  it,  working  for  it, 
heralding  it  far  and  wide,  is  a  guarantee  of  its  effectiveness.  We  must  make  men 
think  about  their  souls.  So  long  as  their  oxen,  or  their  stores,  or  their  wills,  or 
their  ships  are  in  their  minds,  Christ  cannot  get  in.  (4)  The  self-satisfied.  Here 
is  the  trouble  with  many  a  man  of  amiability  and  worth.  He  has  a  pleasant  home» 
friends  he  delights  in,  social  ties,  all  possible  comforts.  He  needs  to  see  that  this 
is  not  enough.  He  ought  to  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  and  at  th» 
gospel  feast  he  might  be  filled.  2.  The  gospel  is  tolerably  certain  to  find  reception 
among — (1)  The  needy.  (2)  The  neglected.  (A.P.Foster.)  The  gospel  supper : — 
I.  That  God  has  made  ample  provision  im  the  gospel  fob  all  oub  spibituai> 
BziQENOiEB.  That  provisiou  is  here  set  forth  under  the  similitude  of  a  great 
sapper.  That  the  gospel  supper  may  be  thus  designated  will  appear  if  we  think  of — 
1.  Its  Author.  It  has  been  provided  by  God  himself.  2.  The  expense  at  which  it 
was  procured.  Almost  incredible  sums  have  been  expended  in  the  getting  up  of 
sumptuous  entertainments.  But  what  were  they  wher  compared  with  the  expense 
incurred  here  f  To  provide  this  banquet,  the  Son  of  God  became  incarnate,  Hved  a 
Uie  of  reproach,  of  poverty,  of  persecution,  and  died  the  accursed  death  of  the 
vox.,  m.  ^ 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

croBS.  3.  The  greatness  and  variety  of  the  blessings  which  are  set  before  ns.  And 
what  tongue  of  man  or  angel  can  describe  them  in  their  ineffable  importance? 
They  include  all  the  treasures  of  grace  here,  and  all  the  inconceivable  treasures  of 
glory  hereafter.'   II.  That  invitations  of  the  most  ENCODBAoiNg  kind  abb  given  cj 

TO  COME  AND  PABTAKE  OF  WHAT  GoD  HAS  GRACIOUSLY  PEOVIDED.      1.    The  characters  tO 

whom  they  were  addressed.  First,  to  the  Jews  only.  Then  to  all  men.  2.  The 
manner  in  which  the  invitations  should  be  applied.  Moral  compulsion.  3.  The 
motives  by  which  they  should  be  enforced.  (1)  That  the  provisions  are  all  duly 
prepared.  "  Come ;  for  all  things  are  now  ready."  The  Saviour  has  been  made 
flesh ;  He  has  finished  the  work  which  was  given  Him  to  do ;  the  sacrifice  He 
offered  has  been  accepted ;  the  Spirit  has  been  poured  out  from  on  high  ;  the  ministry 
of  the  gospel  is  instituted ;  the  sacred  canon  is  complete.  (2)  The  amplitude  of 
the  preparations,  "  And  the  servant  said,  Lord,  it  is  done  as  thou  hast  commanded, 
and  yet  there  is  room."  Although  so  many  have  been  gathered  in,  the  seats  are  not 
all  occupied.  III.  That  the  Divine  pbovisions,  of  which  wb  abb  bo  feeelt  invited 
TO  PABTAKE,  ABK  BY  MANY  SLIGHTED  AND  DESPISED.  The  excuses  offered  are — 1. 
Various.      2.  Frivolous.      3.  Evasive.     IV.   That  those  who  despise  the  pbo- 

VISION  OF  THE  GOSPEL  CANNOT  DO  SO  WITHOUT  INCTJBBING  THE  GBEATEST  GUILT,  AND 
WITHOUT  EXPOSING  THEMSELVES   TO  THE  MOST  AWFUL   DANGEB.       {ExpOtitOTy  OutUmS.) 

The  marriage  f east : — We  know  that,  in  every  department  of  life,  happiness,  health, 
honour,  and  prosperity,  involve  two  essential  elements,  one  of  which  is  a  provision 
for  these  things  in  nature  and  society,  and  the  other  of  which  is  an  appropriation 
of  that  provision  by  those  to  whom  it  is  offered.    And  this  last  is  as  indispensable 
as  the  first.    That  which  makes  the  offer  and  the  provision  of  any  validity  or  use- 
fulness is  the  circumstance  that  there  is  some  one  to  accept  it.    Let  us  look,  for 
one  moment,  at  this.     God  has  made  great  provision  of  the  elements  of  nature. 
Light — oh,  how  abundant !  how  beautiful  1  how  sweet ! — and  all  that  will  accept 
this  boon  of  Ood  shall  have  the  benefit  of  it.    The  blind  cannot.    The  wilfully 
blind  cannot ;  for  although  there  is  light  enough  for  thrice  ten  thousand  times  as 
great  a  population  as  that  which  inhabits  the  globe,  if  a  man  endungeons  him- 
self purposely,  and  shuts  out  the  light  from  the  room  where  he  dwells,  the 
abundance  of  the  provision  and  the  offer  make  no  difference  with  him.    He  loses 
it  and  all  its  blessings.     There  is  heat  enough,  and  there  are  sounds  enough,  for 
the  comfort  and  for  the  solace  of  the  human  soul ;  and  yet,  unless  men  accept 
these  things,  the  mere  fact  that  they  have  been  offered  to  all,  and  that  they  are 
abundant,  will  do  them  no  good.    We  know  that  in  respect  to  those  great  quaUtiea 
of  nature  the  abundance  of  provision  does  not  enforce  acceptance.      The  great 
prime  necessities  of  life,  such  as  food,  raiment,  shelter — God  has  put  the  elementa 
of  these  things  within  our  control,  and  there  is  provision  for  all  the  wants  of  men, 
and  for  the  growing  needs  of  society :  but  if  men  refuse  to  work ;  if  they  refuse  to 
practice  frugality;  if  they  will  not  put  forth  skill,  the  God  of  nature  and  the  God 
of  grace  lets  them  pine,  and  lets  them  starve,  as  much  as  if  there  had  been  no  pro- 
vision.   The  earth  does  not  reveal  its  secrets  except  to  those  that  search  for  them ; 
and  the  rains,  and  the  sun,  and  the  soil,  do  nothing,  except  to  the  seed  that  ia 
hid  in  the  crevices  of  the  ground.    The  summer  is  barren  to  the  sluggard.     There 
is  provision  enough  for  all  the  wants  of  men,  if  they  accept  them  on  the  conditions 
on  which  they  are  proffered ;  but  if  they  do  not  accept  them  on  these  conditions 
the  abundance  does  not  insure  to  their  benefit.    When  men  violate  the  laws  of 
their  being,  however  innocently  or  ignorantly,  they  are  made  to  soffer  the  penalties 
of  those  violated  laws,  and  sickness  and  pain  come  in.    And  when  a  man  is  sick, 
though  all  remedies  are  provided,  and  though  the  most  skilful  physicians  are  called 
to  their  bedside,  these  will  do  no  good  if  he  will  not  accept  the  remedies  that  skill 
has  found  out,  and  that  kindness  is  proffering.    These  facts  ar6  familiar  to  ua. 
They  go  to  illustrate  and  confirm  the  general  statement  that  something  more  is 
required  than  a  provision  and  a  proffer.    Thus  far  I  have  spoken  of  the  physical 
laws  of  nature.    It  may  be  said  that  this  is  not  in  the  moral  realm,  and  that  the 
analogy  is  not  a  fair  one.     Therefore,  I  proceed  to  show  that  in  the  moral  realm 
the  constitution  of  things  is  even  more  marked  than  in  the  physical  realm.    Wa 
know  that  a  man's  happiness  or  misery  in  this  life  depends  upon  the  manner  in 
which  he  exercises  his  faculties.    That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference 
which  way  a  man  uses  the  powers  of  his  mind,  any  more  than  which  way  a  maa 
turns  the  key  when  he  winds  his  watch.     Turning  it  one  way  ruins  it,  and  turning 
it  th«  other  way  expedites  it.     It  makes  a  difference  which  side  of  the  blade  of  a 
knife  you  use  if  you  would  cut  wood.    It  makes  a  difference  which  way  you  work 


«HAP.  nv.]  ST.  LUKE.  19 

a  machine.  One  way  of  working  it  agrees  with  its  nature,  and  the  other  way  of 
working  it  disagrees  with  its  nature.  And  so  it  is  with  a  man's  mind.  It  was 
meant  to  act  in  conformity  with  certain  definite  principles  and  results.  If  it  con- 
forms to  these  there  is  happiness,  and  if  it  does  not  there  is  misery.  We  also  set 
in  human  society — which  is  as  divinely-ordained  as  is  human  liie  itself ;  for  a 
man's  organs  are  no  more  fitted  to  be  put  together  to  make  the  individual  man  than 
individual  men  are  fitted  to  co-operate  together  in  society — ^we  see  in  human  society 
this  same  law  e?olved  with  terrible  certainty  at  large.  If  men  seek  happiness, 
honour,  love,  there  is  abundant  provision  for  them  in  society.  All  things  are 
ready.  They  are  accessible  by  right  conduct.  If  men  neglect  the  provision  for 
happiness,  and  honour,  and  love,  they  will  miss  these  ends,  and  that,  too,  although 
<70d  is  good  and  kind,  although  there  is  a  providence  that  is  supervising  human 
society — a  Providence  that  will  not  suffer  a  sparrow  to  fall  to  the  ground  unnoticed 
— a  Providence  that  knows  that  we  are  in  need  of  raiment,  and  shelter,  and  food, 
and  nourishing  care.  If  men  do  not  accept  voluntarily  the  provision  of  these 
things  which  is  made  in  society,  there  is  no  providence  that  will  rescue  them  from 
the  wretchedness  that  will  ensue  from  disobedience.  The  administration  of  God  is 
full  of  goodness ;  but  goodness  in  the  Divine  administration  is  employed  according 
to  law.  All  philanthropy,  all  humanity,  and  all  sympathy  and  succour,  carried 
down  to  grog-shops  and  to  the  Five  Points,  will  not  assuage  one  pang,  and  will  not 
rescue  one  wretch,  unless  he  is  willing  to  return  and  co-operate,  and  bring  himself 
under  the  influence  of  remedial  law.  Now,  at  this  point  we  reach  again  the  Word 
of  God,  and  are  prepared  to  receive  its  declarations,  with  all  corroborations  and 
presumptive  analogies  in  its  favour.  '  The  feast  of  the  gospel  is  spread.  The  King, 
in  His  great  bounty,  sends  His  servants  forth  to  say  to  all,  "  Come  to  the  marriage 
supper."  To  lay  aside  the  figure,  God  makes  the  proffer  of  forgiveness,  of  amnesty 
for  the  past,  and  of  unbounded  joy  and  happiness  for  the  future.  If  you  acoepii 
the  provision,  which  is  ample  enough  for  every  human  being  on  the  globe,  you  are 
blessed ;  but  if  you  neglect  it,  or  refuse  it,  that  provision,  if  multiplied  a  myriad 
times,  would  be  of  no  more  avail  to  you  than  light  to  the  bhnd,  sound  to  the  deaf, 
or  food  to  the  dead.  It  is  a  provision  that  is  invalid  if  you  fail  to  accept  it.  If  you 
take  it  you  live ;  if  you  reject  it  you  die. '  Although,  then,  the  doctrine  of  the 
Fatherhood  of  God  is  one  of  the  most  blessed  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  and  one  of 
■the  most  animating  to  out  hope,  we  must  not  pervert  it,  and  suppose  that,  because 
God  administers  as  a  universal  Father,  therefore,  all  sorts  of  men,  under  all  sorts 
of  circumstances,  are  perfectly  safe.  I  would  not  take  away  one  single  whit  of  the 
beauty,  or  attractiveness,  or  encouragement  of  the  thought  that  God  loves,  and 
that  everything  that  love  can  do  will  be  done  to  make  men  happy  here,  safe  in 
death,  and  glorious  hereafter ;  but  I  warn  you  not  to  suppose  that  everything  can 
be  done  merely  because  God  loves.  There  are  limitatious  even  in  an  infinite  God. 
(//.  W.  Beecher.)  The  great  supper: — I.  "  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper  " 
— the  movement  originated  with  himself,  in  his  own  miud — his  own  fbeb  bodntt 
— his  own  generosity — his  unsolicited  willingness  to  make  others  partakers  of  his 
rich  enjoyments.  The  man  here  supposed  represents  Almighty  God  Himself ;  and 
the  action  here  ascribed  to  Him  represents  the  preparation  of  Christianity — that 
rich  and  saving  feast  for  a  perishing  world.  It  originated  (if  an  eternal  purpose 
can  properly  be  said  to  have  had  a  beginning)  in  His  own  mind.  His  own  free  love. 
His  own  unsolicited  willingness  to  make  fallen  men  partakers  of  Bis  own  happiness, 
"  that  they  might  be  filled  with  the  fatness  of  His  house — that  they  might  drink  of 
the  river  of  His  pleasures  "  (Psa.  xxxvi.  8).  See,  then,  the  nature  of  the  prepara- 
tion. It  is  the  mode  adopted  by  Divine  wisdom  to  render  it  a  right  thing — a 
righteous  thing — for  a  sovereign  Lawgiver  and  upright  Judge  to  deal  with  convicted 
rebels  as  a  pardoning  father  and  a  sympathizing  friend ;  it  is,  in  the  language  of 
St.  Paul,  that  "  God  may  be  just,  while  He  justifies  the  ungodly  "  (Rom.  iii.  19-26 ; 
V.  6-8).  Behold,  also,  the  extent  of  the  preparation.  It  knows  no  earthly  bounds, 
it  extends  to  heaven  ;  its  value  is  not  to  be  measured  by  earth,  but  is  to  be  found 
in  the  harmonized  perfections  of  God.  II.  Now  look  at  the  invitation  to  it.  He 
said  to  his  servant,  at  the  supper  time,  Go  and  '*  say  to  them  who  were  bidden, 
Come;  for  all  things  are  ready."  This  represents  the  commission  to  preach  the 
gospel.  St.  Paul  was  determined  to  know  nothing  else,  and  preach  nothing  else. 
He  accounted  it  the  most  distinguishing  and  the  most  exalted  of  the  favours 
bestowed  upon  him,  that  he  should  declare  among  the  Gentiles  the  "  unsearchable 
riches  of  Christ " — in  other  words,  the  preparation  of  the  Great  Supper.  And  ha 
exhorted — i.e.,  he  pressed  the  invitation  upon  men — earnestly,  that  they  might 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  WT. 

"  not  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  " ;  and  urgently,  because  the  time  was  short : 
"  Now,"  he  said,  •'  is  the  appointed  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation"  (2  Cor.  vL 
1,  2),     III.  And  now  having  so  spoken  of  the  preparation  and  the  invitation,  our 
next  thome  is  a  painful  one — the  keception  teut  this  invitation  met  with.     The 
force  of  this  portion  of  the  parable  Ues  in  this — that  the  objects  which,  in  their 
effects,  became  destructive,  were  in  themselves  lawful  and  right.     The  contrast  ia 
not  between  sin  and  duty,  but  between  duty  and  duty — between  duty  number  twp 
and  duty  that  ought  always  to  be  number  one.    The  contrast  is  not  between  tht. 
house  of  gambling  and  the  house  of  God — it  is  not  between  intemperance  and  un- 
cleanness  on  the  one  side,  and  prayer  and  praise  on  the  other ;  no,  it  is  not  that 
phase  of  human  guilt  that  is  exhibited;  the  contrast  is  rather  between  the  counting- 
house  and  the  church,  the  shop  and  the  house  of  God,  domestic  enjoyments  and 
secret  prayer.   The  contrast  is  between  the  attractions  which  the  lawful  occupations 
of  this  world  possess  for  the  natural  heart  of  man,  and  the  secret  repugnance  felt 
by  that  heart  to  the  enjoyments  of  God.    IV.  But  the  parable  does  not  end  there; 
the  servants  came  in  and  repeated  this  answer,  and  the  master  was  not  satisfied ; 
then  he  told  the  servants  "  to  go  out  into  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city,  and  to 
bring  in  the  poor  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt  and  the  bUnd."    There  is  an 
intimation  in  this  part  of  the  parable  that  a  power  would  accompany  the  invitation 
such  as  would  not  be  refused — such  as  would  secure  a  company — such  as  would  not 
leave  the  seats  around  the  Master's  table  unoccupied,  but,  on  the  contrary,  that  his 
house  should  be  filled.     Now,  think  of  this  secret  power.    Here,  again,  we  refer  to 
the  persons  and  resources  of  the  Godhead,     Jesus  said,  "  I  will  pray  the  Father, 
and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that  He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever." 
He  shall  present  the  preparation  for  the  supper,  and  He  shall  urge  the  invitation, 
so  as  to  supersede  all  pre-engagements,  and  put  an  end  to  all  excuses.     He  has 
power  to  secure  a  gracious  result  without  the  slightest  interference  with  the  free 
operation  of  the  moral  machine  that  He  has  made.    Nothing  else  can  secure  this ; 
there  is  to  be  no  force,  and  yet  the  result  is  to  be  secured  ;  no  action  constrained, 
and  yet  the  character  totally  altered.    "  Thy  people  ehaU  be  willing  in  the  day 
of  thy  power"  (Psalm  ex.).    The  will  rules  the  man;  and  who  rules  the  will? 
There  is  revelation  of  a  secret  power,  which,  touching  the  will,  secures  all  that 
follows  in  the  man's  life  with  perfect  freedom.    Look  at  a  large  and  compUcated 
machine  under  the  control  of  a  little  fly-wheel;  that  locked,  the  machine  is 
stationary;  that  liberated,  the  machine  goes  on.     See,  the  machine  is  stationary, 
and  ignorant  violence  is  made  use  of  to  make  it  go  on,  but  in  vain — blows  are 
aimed  at  it  to  make  it  go  on,  in  the  wrong  place,  all  in  vain — it  may  be  broken,  but 
it  cannot  by  violence  be  made  to  work— sledge-hammers  are  raised  on  it  in  vain; 
but  see,  a  little  child,  properly  instructed,  with  a  little  finger  frees  the  fly-wheel, 
and  the  whole  machine  goes  forward  in  its  work ;  every  arm,  and  every  lever,  and 
every  wheel  performs  its  appointed  action  duly  and  freely.     It  was  that  touch  that 
did  it — that  touch  is  promised,  of  God,  to  us — in  hope  of  it  we  preach,  without  it  we 
preach  in  vain ;  all  is  sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbal  without  this.    {H.  McNeiU, 
D.D.)      A  great  feast : — I.  With  regard  to  thb  natdbk  op  the  feast.  "  A  certain  man 
made  a  great  supper  and  bade  many."    What,  then,  is  this  feast  which  our  Lord 
has  provided,  and  of  which  He  has  sent  His  servants  to  invite  men  to  come  and 
partake  ?    First,  as  bread  satisfies  hunger,  and  is  necessary  to  sustain  life,  so  Jesus 
Christ  is  that  true  bread  which  cometh  down  from  heaven — the  bread  of  the  soul — 
the  bread  that  alone  can  satisfy  and  sustain  the  spiritual  and  eternal  life  of  man. 
His  flesh  is  given  as  meat,  and  His  blood  as  drink ;  and  this  is  the  feast.    I  cannot 
enlarge  upon  the  particulars  of  this  feast,  but  observe  that  a  feast  is  not  merely 
bread,  it  is  fulness  of  bread ;  it  is  a  rich  provision — there  is  variety  of  provision. 
This  the  gospel  gloriously  attests ;  here  is  everything  that  man  can  want ;   here 
is  not  only  pardon  for  the  guilty,  reconcihation  for  him  that  is  at  enmity  with  God, 
but  all  the  rich  provision  of  grace,  all  the  fulness  and  comfort  of  the  Spirit  of  God ; 
all  the  plenitude  of  His  promises  is  here  ;  there  is  nothing  that  the  soul  can  eat  or 
desire,  in  any  state  or  condition  in  which  it  is  seen,  but  is  to  be  found  here ;  in  the 
gotfpel  feast  there  is  all  that  is  wholesome,  suited  to  its  tastes,  its  appetites,  its 
desires,  its  lofty  capacities,  and  capable  of  fully  and  eternally  satisfying  them. 
Here,  then,  the  children  of  God  see  their  privilege.     The  Saviour  is  an  omniscient- 
Saviour  and  an  omnipresent  Saviour — a  Saviour  present  with  the  Church,  knowing 
every  case,  every  heart,  and  every  want ;  and  He  has  in  Himself  fulness  to  satisfy 
every  longing  desire  or  wish.    II.  We  are  to  consider  the  condition  of  those  who 

WBBB  FIBST  BIDDEN  TO  THIS  FEAST,  AND  FOB  WHOM  IT  WAS  SPBCIAIiLT  FBBPABXD.      I  Bay 


OHAP.  XIT.]  ST.  LUKE.  n 

Epecially  provided ;  for  you  will  recollect  that  these  persons  were  the  children  of  the 
promise — the  heirs  of  the  covenant.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
gospel  among  all  nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem."  So  St.  Paul  says,  "  the  gospel 
is  tne  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth ;  to  the  Jew  lirst." 
The  three  principal  grounds  on  which  men  slight  the  gospel  are  here  referred  to — 
they  are  common,  not  to  the  Jews  only,  but  common  to  the  Gentiles.  The  first 
ground  is  wealth.  The  first  said,  "  I  have  bought  a  piece  of  ground,  and  I  must 
needs  go  and  see  it."  The  disposition  of  mind  by  which  a  man  is  induced  to  seek 
the  increase  of  wealth  is  opposed  to  the  gospel.  This  disposition  is  so  fatal  to 
many  that  it  operates,  as  in  the  case  of  the  parable,  utterly  to  exclude  them  from 
tasting  the  supper.  It  does  not  so  fill  and  choke  up  the  appetite — it  does  not  so 
corrode  the  taste  as  to  prevent  their  enjoying,  as  to  prevent  their  fully  partaking  of 
this  blessing,  but  it  cuts  them  off  altogether — they  cannot  taste  of  this  supper.  Is 
it  not  so  with  your  hearts,  while  you  are  coveting  the  world?  Can  you  enjoy  Christ? 
You  cannot  I  2.  The  second  disposition  of  mind  which  excludes  men  from  tasting 
the  supper  of  the  gospel  grace,  is  that  which  involves  them  in  the  vortex  of  this 
world's  cares.  This  is  figured  in  the  parable  by  the  yoke  of  oxen — "  I  have  bought 
five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  must  needs  go  and  prove  them."  3.  Another  said,  "  I  have 
married  a  wife  " ;  and  therefore  he  was  in  a  greater  strait  than  the  other  two — he 
said  positively,  "  I  cannot  come  I "  This  parable  is  against  those  moral  people — 
those  honest  people — those  people  whose  lives  are  so  irreproachable  and  blameless 
in  everything  except  the  matter  of  their  salvation.  It  applies  to  those  that  are 
comparatively  enlightened,  to  those  that  would  be  shocked  at  gross  immorality,  to 
those  who  woold  not  exhibit  in  their  lives,  on  any  account,  those  vices  which  they 
condemn  in  others  ;  but  sin  sits  enthroned  in  their  heart,  in  the  shape  of  a  secret 
and  subtle  covetousness,  in  a  character  that  absorbs  them  in  their  pleasures,  and 
feteals  and  weans  their  affections  from  God.  And  this  is,  perhaps,  the  most  awful 
case  of  alL  Go  and  preach  the  gospel  to  those  who  have  no  ground  of  justification ; 
and  if  you  can  get  them  to  listen  to  the  gospel,  they  will  fall  down  at  your  feet  and 
confess  their  sin.  Examine,  trace  in  your  hearts  the  working  of  this  worldliness, 
consider  the  objections  that  hold  you  back  from  Christ,  and  you  will  find  that  they 
resolve  themselves  into  the  excuses  of  those  who  were  first  bidden  to  this  feast.  It 
is  the  land  and  the  oxen,  it  is  the  pleasure  of  this  world,  aU  which  perish  in  their 
using,  and  will  leave  you  hungry  and  naked,  and  poor  and  wretched  at  the  bar  of 
Godl  I  come  now  to  speak  of — IIL  Thk  chaeactbb  or  thosk  who  beally  did 
ENTEB  IH  AND  PABTAKB  OF  THIS  SUPPEB.  Tou  wiU  observe  that  those  who  were  thus 
bidden  the  second  time  were  described  by  this  character,  which  marked  the  destitu- 
tion of  man :  "  Bring  in  hither  the  poor  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt  and  the 
blind  " ;  for  this  was  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  Gentile  world.  It  marks  their 
destitution — they  are  poor,  they  are  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world. 
In  the  heathen  countries  they  were  without  Christian  ordinances,  without  Christian 
Sabbaths,  without  Christian  instruction.  The  verse  also  relates  to  those  who 
might  justly  make  excuse  upon  any  ground  than  that  of  the  gospel  invitation ;  who 
might  by  self-abasement  and  humility  of  spirit  say,  "  How  can  it  be  ?  How  can  it 
be  that  the  Prince,  the  King,  and  Lord  of  this  supper  should  send  for  me  ?  Yoo 
must  be  deceiving,  you  must  be  making  game  of  me — you  must  intend  soma 
derision ;  the  invitation  cannot  be  for  me."  "  Go,"  says  the  King,  *•  and  compel 
them  to  come  in ;  go  and  tell  them  how  large  the  offer  is."  (J.  Suteliffe.)  The 
feast  only  for  those  who  can  appreciate  it : — Now  why  is  it  difficult  to  us  to  represent 
to  ourselves  this  nnwillingness  ?  Because  we  always  think  of  the  great  supper 
simply  as  so  much  unmeasured  happiness,  so  much  unmixed  delight.  It  will 
be  happiness,  it  will  be  delight,  bat  only  to  those  who  can  appreciate  it ;  not  to 
the  base,  not  to  the  selfish,  not  to  the  false,  not  to  the  weak,  not  to  the  impure.  It 
will  be  the  highest  happiness  of  which  human  nature  is  capable ;  but  it  can  only  be 
tasted  by  those  who  are  of  kindred  nature  to  Him  who  gives  it.  Those  who  would 
not  come  when  they  were  invited  would  not  have  found  it  a  happiness  if  they  had 
come.  Now  this,  the  very  principle  of  the  parable,  is  just  as  applicable  to  our  daily 
life  as  it  is  to  any  such  critical  moment  as  the  parable  supposes.  We  are  invited 
to  a  spiritual  feast ;  to  a  feast  of  that  happiness  which  is  got  from  perfect  self- 
mastery,  from  peace  with  our  consciences,  from  having  no  cloud  between  us  and 
those  whom  we  love,  from  having  no  cloud  between  us  and  God.  We  know  perfectly 
well  that  this  is  a  very  real  happiness.  We  have  had  foretastes  of  it  now  and  then, 
qoite  enough  to  show  what  it  is  like.  But  this  duty,  which  thus  seems  ever  t« 
porsua  as  and  give  us  no  rest,  it  is  so  exacting,  it  is  bo  dull,  it  is  so  imrewarded  | 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nr, 

what  wonder  that  we  tnm  away  ?  No,  indeed  it  is  not.  There  aie  those  who  find 
it  so ;  those,  namely,  who  refuse  the  invitation,  and  go  to  this  and  to  that ;  and 

then not  in  repentance,  but  in  sullen  acquiescence  ;  not  because  their  hearts  ara 

touched,  but  because  they  fear  consequences,  and  because  they  are  disgusted  with 
the  pleasure  which  they  have  preferred  to  duty — come  back,  like  Balaam,  to  obey 
in  deed  but  not  in  spirit.  Such  men  learn  what  is  meant  by  the  words  "  None  of 
those  men  who  were  bidden  shall  taste  of  My  supper."  To  them  the  supper  is  no 
supper  at  all.  To  them  that  obey  in  an  unloving,  discontented,  sulky  mood  there 
is  indeed  no  happiness  in  obedience.  They  obey,  and  find  no  peace  in  obedience. 
They  deny  themselves  for  the  sake  of  others,  and  instead  of  loving  those  whom  they 
thus  benefit  all  the  more,  they  love  them  all  the  less.  They  conquer  the  outburst 
of  temper,  and  substitute  an  inward  brooding  of  ill-will.  They  resist  temptation, 
and  feel  a  kind  of  resentment  against  Providence  for  having  put  this  hard  task 
upon  them.  They  come,  but  they  do  not  taste  the  supper,  for  they  refused  it.  Buc 
it  is  a  real  pleasure,  a  pleasure  above  all  other  pleasures,  to  those  who  come  heartily 
and  gladly,  who  make  the  needful  sacrifice  with  a  ready  spirit  and  with  a  resolute 
cheerfulness,  forcing  away  from  their  minds  all  gloomy  suggestions  and  all  discon- 
tented feelings,  recognizing  in  the  trifle  which  calls  them  as  sure  a  summons  from 
the  Great  King  as  if  it  had  been  the  royal  messenger  Death ;  seeing  in  each  invita- 
tion to  Christian  effort  a  call,  not  to  pain,  but  to  joy ;  not  to  a  task,  but  to  a  supper; 
not  to  a  loss,  but  to  a  service  in  the  King's  court. '  {Bishop  Temple.)        The  gospel 

feast : I.  A  tspk  or  the  gospel  of  Chkist.     1.  Of  the  nature  of  the  gospel.    A 

supper.  It  is  God's  provision  to  satisfy  the  soul's  hunger.  2.  Of  the  abundance 
of  God's  provision  in  the  gospel.  A  great  supper.  (1)  Every  want  of  the  soul  can 
be  satisfied  by  the  gospel.  (2)  Satisfied  for  ever.  3.  Of  the  freeness  of  the  gospel. 
(1)  In  the  grace  which  provided  it.  (2)  In  the  generousnesa  which  invites  to  it. 
II.  A  TXPB  OF  THB  TREATMENT  THE  GOSPEL  BECEIVE8.  1.  The  term  used  to  expresd 
this  treatment  is  very  noticeable.  Excuse.  Not  positive  refusal,  yet  not  accept- 
ance. 2.  The  excuses  mentioned  are  noticeable.  (1)  Though  often  rendered,  how 
untenable.  Feast  occurring  probably  in  evening,  would  not  have  interfered  with 
land  ipeculator  or  enterprising  farmer ;  and  the  young  husband  could  have  taken 
his  bride  with  him.  (2)  Though  differing  in  their  phases,  how  similar  in  spirit. 
Setting  personal  gratification  above  the  claims  of  God.  III.  A  type  of  the  effect 
OF  THIS  TBEATMBNT  ON  THB  DiviNE  MIND.     1.  The  Divine  resentment  is  here  stated. 

2.  Fresh  orders  are  given.  3.  New  decree  declared.  Lessons :  1.  The  provision 
God  has  made  for  us  in  Christ— how  satisfying  and  abundant.  2.  Excuses  for  pro- 
crastination— how  common — how  dangerous.  3.  When  God  says,  "  None  of  those 
who  were  bidden  shall  taste,"  &c.,  seals  the  doom  of  such.  {D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.) 
On  receiving  the  grace  of  the  gospel : — The  eating  of  bread  mentioned  in  previoua 
verse  imports  the  enjoyment  of  eternal  goods,  both  for  necessity  and  delight,  in 
heaven.  But  our  Lord  here  takes  that  man  off,  and  us  in  him,  from  a  general 
admiration  of  their  happiness  in  heaven,  to  a  particular  application  of  the  means 
conducing  to  that  happiness,  even  the  receiving  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  They  that 
would  eat  bread,  or  enjoy  fellowship  with  God  in  heaven,  must  first  eat  bread,  or 
partake  of  the  gospel-provision  here  on  earth.    I.  The  way  to  bnjoy  thb  btbbnai. 

GOOD   THINGS   IN   THB   KINGDOM   OP   GLOBY,    IS   TO   CLOSE     WITH     THB     SPIRITUAL    GOOD 

THINGS  IN  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GBACE.  1.  "  Eating  bread  "  implies  most  intimate  and 
immediate  union  with  God.    2.  It  denotes  the  abundant  supply  of  all  wants. 

3.  The  full  and  familiar  enjoyment  of  good  company.  4.  Complete  satisfaction  in 
the  fruition  of  all  contents  and  delights.     II.  What  abe  those  spibitoal  good 

THINGS   which   W«  ABB   TO   CLOSE     WITH     IN     THE     KINGDOM   OF   GRACE?      1.   Spiritual 

privileges  provided  for  us  in  the  grace  of  the  gospel  (Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Zech.  xiii.  1). 
Beconciliation,  adoption,  remission,  sanctification,  vocation,  salvation.  Thia 
gospel  provision  is  the  plank  after  the  shipwreck,  or  the  ark  in  the  midst  of 
the  deluge.  No  other  way  of  escaping  destruction  or  obtaining  salvation.  ^  2. 
Spiritual  ordinances  for  the  conveying  of  spiritual  privileges,  and  ensuring 
them.  Preaching.  Sacraments.  3.  Spiritual  graces  for  the  improvement  of 
spiritual  ordinances  (Gal.  v.  22).  These  are  the  clusters  of  grapes  to  make 
UB  in  love  with  the  Holy  Land,  notwithstanding  oppositions.  This  fruit  growi 
nowhere  but  in  Christ's  garden.  The  Vine  which  bears  it  is  Himself.  4.  Spiritual 
duties  for  the  expression  of  spiritual  graces.  Praying;  hearing;  exhorting  on« 
another,  <feo.  III.  flow  abb  we  to  close  with  thkse  spiritual  good  thtnob? 
1.  We  are  to  receive  them  by  faith,  embracing  the  grace  of  the  gospel  (John  i.  12). 
i.  We  are  to  walk  as  we  have  received  Christ  (Coi.  ii.  6) ;  leading  a  holy  life  b/ 


CHAP.  xiT.]  ST.  LUKE.  23 

Tirtue  drawn  from  Him  through  our  anion  with  Him  ;  giving  the  world  a  proof  in 
oar  holy  life  of  the  virtue  in  Christ's  death  for  rectifying  our  crooked  nature.  IV. 
Why  wb  must  close  with  bpiritual  good  things,  if  we  would  enjoy  eternal. 
Because  the  one  is  part  of  the  other.  Saints  in  heaven  and  saints  upon  earth 
make  up  but  one  family.  Grace  is  the  beginning  of  glory ;  some  compare  it  to  the 
golden  chain  in  Homer,  the  top  of  which  was  fastened  to  the  chair  of  Jupiter. 
Grace  will  reach  glory,  and  it  must  precede  glory.  Use  1.  This  informs  us — (1) 
That  it  is  good  for  man  now  to  draw  near  to  God  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  28).  It  tends  to  his 
everlasting  happiness.  (2)  See  their  vanity  who  draw  back  from  God,  or  bid  God 
depart  from  them  when  He  comes  near  them  in  the  means  of  grace  vouchsafed  to 
them  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  27 ;  Job  xxi.  14).     Sin  divides  between  God  and  the  soul.     Use 

2.  Yet  this  doth  not  make,  but  many  may  partake  of  gospel  mercies  in  the  kingdom 
of  grace,  and  yet  never  come  to  glory.  Those  who  have  slighted  their  privileges 
ajid  advantages  will  receive  the  greater  condemnation.  Use  3.  Would  you  come 
into  the  kingdom  of  glory  ?  (1)  Come  into  the  kingdom  of  grace.  (2)  Live  aa 
under  the  laws  of  this  kingdom  of  grace,  (o)  Perform  allegiance  to  God,  yielding 
yourself  to  Him.  (b)  Expect  protection  from  God,  and  draw  nigh  to  Him  (James 
iv.  8).  (c)  Pray  that  the  territories  of  the  kiugdom  of  grace  may  be  enlarged  more 
and  more  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  (d)  Prepare  for  the  translation  of  the  king- 
dom of  grace  into  the  kingdom  of  glory  (1  Cor.  xv.  24,  28).  {John  Crump.) 
Refuxing  the  Divine  call : — The  election  of  the  just,  and  the  reprobation  of  the 
wicked,  are  inscrutable  mysteries.  Yet,  as  much  as  is  necessary  for  as  to  know, 
Jesus  reveals  to  us  in  this  parable,  without  satisfying  vain  curiosity.  I.  On  the 
CALL  extended  TO  MEN.  1.  Nature  of  this  call.  (1)  It  is  Divine.  (2)  It  is  holy. 
(3)  It  is  a  free  call.  (4)  It  is  a  universal  call.  2.  Manner  of  this  call.  (1)  God 
calls  men  outwardly  :  by  teaching  and  preaching,  in  order  to  take  away  the  dark- 
ness of  understanding  caused  by  original  sin.  (2)  God  calls  men  inwardly  :  by  the 
inspiration  of  Divine  grace.  H.  On  the  declinino  of  the  invitation.  1.  Co- 
operation with  the  Divine  call  is  necessary.  2.  Man  often  refuses  to  co-operata 
with  the  Divine  call :  (1)  Because  he  is  attached  to  earthly  things.  (2)  Because 
he  is  enslaved  by  the  vice  of  pride.  (3)  Because  he  is  the  slave  of  his  own  flesh. 
As  the  Jews  lost  all  taste  for  the  manna,  because  they  longed  for  the  flesh-pots  of 
Egypt,  so  all  taste  for  the  sweetness  of  spiritual  joys  is  lost  by  carnal  lust.  III.  On 
befbobation.  Most  awful  is  the  judgment  of  being  excluded  from  Divine  charity 
and  communion ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  most  just.  1.  The  wrath  of  the  king 
against  those  who  were  invited,  but  who  refused  to  come,  was  just.  With  God, 
wrath  is  not  the  eruption  of  passion,  but  the  zeal  of  justice,  directed  against  him 
who,  by  not  accepting  His  loving  invitation,  has  insulted  His  infinite  majesty.  2. 
The  sentence  pronounced  by  the  king  was  just.  (1)  God  does  whatever  is  necessary 
for  our  salvation.  (2)  But  man,  the  sinner,  is  not  willing  to  be  saved  (Matt,  xxiii. 
37).  Man  must  do  what  he  is  able  to  do,  and  pray  for  what  he  is  not  able.  3. 
His  sentence  of  reprobation  is  most  just.  (1)  He  gives  them  up  to  the  desires  of 
their  heart,  as  He  soSered  those  who  were  invited  to  go  after  their  business  (Bom. 
i.  23,  &c.).  (2)  God  invites  others  instead  of  those  who  were  first  invited,  that  His 
house  may  be  filled,  and  that  the  latter  may  be  for  ever  cut  off  from  the  hope  of 
recovering  their  place.  Thus  David  was  elected  instead  of  Saul ;  Matthias  instead 
of  Judas.  (3)  He  condemns  irrevocably  those  who  decline  the  invitation  (Prov.  i. 
24-26).  (Nicolas  de  Dijon.)  The  great  supper : — I.  The  invitation.  1.  The  time 
of  the  invitation.  Evening.  At  the  introduction  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  2. 
The  nature  of  the  invitation — "  Come."      (1)  Free.     (2)  Generous.     (3)  Direct. 

3.  The  persons  by  whom  the  invitations  were  sent — "  His  servants."  Apostles, 
disciples,  &o.  II.  Rejection  df  the  invitation.  1.  The  unanimity  of  their 
refusals.  2.  The  various  reasons  which  they  assigned.  (1)  The  inspection  of 
new-bought  property.  (2)  Engrossing  business.  (3)  Domestic  duties.  HI. 
Fobtheb  invitations  issued.  1.  How  extended  the  commission.  2.  How  bene- 
volent the  arrangement.  3.  How  urgent  the  appeal.  (1)  That  in  the  gospel, 
abundant  provision  is  made  for  the  spiritual  wants  of  mankind.  (2)  That  the 
invitations  of  Divine  mercy  include  all  ranks  and  conditions  of  men.  (3)  That 
these  invitations  are  free  and  full,  and  urgently  and  sincerely  presented  by  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (4)  That  only  self-excluders  will  be  refused  a  place  at  the 
feast  of  salvation.  (5)  That  it  is  the  duty  and  interest  of  all,  immediately  and  grate- 
fully to  obey  the  invitation  and  sit  down  at  the  gracious  banquet.  (J.  Bums,  D.D.) 
The  great  feast,  and  itn  Maker : — I.  The  Maker  of  the  feast.  Cnrist  God-Man, 
or  God  in  Christ,  is  a  bountiful  Benefactor  to  man.     God  in  Christ  is  here  called  a 


24  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [chap.  xw. 

Man — 1.  By  way  of  resemblance  ;  those  properties  of  any  worth  appearing  in  man, 
or  spoken  of  man,  being  more  eminently  in  God  :  as  (1)  Sovereignty  ;  (2)  pity;  (8J 
rationality.  2.  By  way  of  reality.  (1)  In  respect  of  Christ,  by  whom  this  gospel- 
provision  is,  wherein  God  shows  Himself  such  a  Benefactor.  Christ  has  (a)  th« 
blood  of  a  man ;  (b)  the  bowels  of  a  man ;  {c'j  the  familiarity  of  a  man.  (2)  In 
respect  of  man  for  whom  this  gospel-provision  is,  wherein  God  shows  Himself  such 
&  Benefactor.  The  grace  of  the  gospel  is  called  "  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  oor 
Saviour  toward  man."  And  that — (a)  by  way  of  distinction  from  other  creatures 
in  general ;  (b)  by  way  of  opposition  unto  fallen  angels  in  particular.  (3)  In 
respect  of  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  through  whose  hands  this  goppel-provision 
is  distributed.  Uses  :  1.  Observe  the  condescension  of  God.  2.  The  advancement 
of  man.  11.  Thb  feast.  Supper — chief  meal  of  the  day:  intimating  the  abun- 
dance of  the  provision  made  for  the  recovery  of  lost  man.  1.  What  is  this  gospel- 
provision  for  the  good  of  souls  7  It  is  the  only  way  of  man's  salvation  since  the 
Fall,  begun  in  grace,  and  swallowed  up  or  perfected  in  glory.  2.  How  does  the 
provision  appear  to  be  so  plentiful  ?  (1)  Look  at  the  Maker  of  the  feast.  God, 
rich  in  mercy,  great  in  love.  (2)  The  materials.  Christ  Himself.  The  sincere 
milk  of  the  word.  The  promises.  Work  of  grace  in  soal.  Sum  up  all  this  :  here 
is  solidity,  plenty,  variety ;  here  is  for  necessity  and  delight,  for  health  and  mirth. 
'Tis  a  great  supper.  (3)  The  vessels.  Ordinances :  "  golden  vials  full  of  odours," 
(4)  The  guests.  Such  as  are  clothed  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  Kings  and 
priests  unto  God.  (5)  The  attendants.  Ministers  instructed  by  God.  III.  Thb 
PKBSONS  BIDDEN.  1.  Adam  was  invited,  and  with  Him  the  whole  race  of  mankind. 
2.  Noah  was  invited,  and  with  him  the  old  world.  3.  Abraham  was  invited,  and 
with  him  the  whole  nation  of  the  Jews.  4.  Moses  was  invited,  and  with  him  the 
Jews  had  a  fresh  invitation  under  that  pedagogy  of  his  which  was  to  bring  them  to 
Christ.  Uses :  I.  Information.  '  This  shows  us  God's  desire  for  man's  happiness. 
He  not  only  propounds  a  way  for  man  to  be  happy,  but  invites  man  to  accept  of  it. 
How  inexcusable,  then,  is  man  if  he  refuse.  2.  Caution.  (1)  Though  rnen  are 
thus  generally  invited,  yet  other  fallen  creatures  have  not  so  much  as  an  invitation ; 
so  that  there  is  somewhat  of  distinguishing  mercy  in  the  very  invitation  (Heb.  ii. 
16).  (2)  Though  men  are  thus  generally  invited,  yet  they  are  very  hardly 
persuaded  really  to  close  with  the  invitation.  (3)  Though  men  are  thus  generally 
invited,  yet  they  will  not  be  continually  invited.  (4)  Though  men  are  thus  generally 
invited,  yet  they  will  be  as  generally  rejected,  if  they  continue  slighting  God's  invi- 
tation. 3.  Be  exhorted  to  hearken  to  this  call  and  invitation  of  God.  To  move 
you  to  accept :  consider  seriously — (1)  God  communes  with  ns  in  a  way  of 
familiarity  (Isa.  i.  18).  (2)  God  commands  us  in  a  way  of  authority  (1  John  iii. 
23).  (3)  God  beseeches  us  in  a  way  of  entreaty  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  (4)  Upon  refusal, 
God  threatens  us  in  a  way  of  severity  (Prov.  i.  24,  32).  They  who  will  not  feed 
upon  these  gospel  dainties,  "shall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way."  They  that  sow 
the  wind  of  iniquity  shall  reap  the  whirlwind  of  misery.  ^{John  Crump.)  The  gos- 
pel feast : — I.  With  eespect  to  the  invitation.  Although  the  dispensations  of  God 
to  Jew  and  Gentile  may  be  different,  the  declaration  of  the  gospel  is  the  same.  It  ia 
especially  worth  noting  how  perfectly  free  from  all  impossible  conditions,  on  the 
part  of  man,  is  the  gospel  invitation.  H.  Now  look  at  the  way  in  which  this 
INVITATION  WAS  BKCEivED.  "They  all  with  one  consent  began  to  make  excuse.'* 
They  wanted  to  do  something  else  instead.  And  in  this  reply  we  see  a  lesson, 
how,  when  the  passions  of  man  are  set  against  the  truth,  how  additionally  hard 
and  presumptuously  bold  they  make  the  heart.  The  spirit  which  actuated  these 
excuses  was  worldliness — preferring  something  to  God.  And  this  is  strictly  true  of 
every  one  who  has  not  really  closed  with  the  gospel  invitation  now.  IH.  Observe 
again,  that  the  pebsonb  eternally  excluded  fbom  the  oobfel-feabt  are  those 
WHO  HAVs  BEEN  BIDDEN  TO  IT ;  the  invitation  is,  therefore,  real :  God  means  what 
He  says.  ''  It  was  in  all  good  faith  that  the  invitation  was  given,  and  it  is  in  all 
seriousness  that  God  speaks  when  the  invitation  has  been  refused.  I  warn  yoa 
against  making  excuses  to-day,  lest  when  you  would  accept  the  Lord's  graoioas 
invitation,  yon  cannot ;  lest  you  become  too  blind  to  read,  too  lame  to  go  to  the 
house  of  God,  and  too  deaf  to  hear-!-altogether  too  infirm  to  get  any  good.  Now, 
I  repeat  tp  you,  you  know  these  things  are  true ;  you  understand  these  things ;  you 
are  perfectly  weU  aware  that  what  I  say  is  the  exposition  of  the  parable,  and  yoo 
are  perfectly  aware  that  as  long  as  you  neglect  God's  invitation,  you  are  wrong. 
You  cannot  say,  "Lord,  forgive  me,  for  I  know  not  what  I  do."  You  do  know; 
jroor  conscience  speaks  to  you  now :  do  not  harden  it  by  neglect.    1.  I  would,  in 


OHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  ti 

eonclasion,  say,  take  these  four  considerations  home  with  you :  Consider,  first, 
to-night,  dear  brethren,  before  you  lay  yonr  heads  upon  your  pillows,  the  greatnesa 
of  the  Host  that  invites  you.  Consider  His  love,  His  power,  if  you  apply  to  Him, 
to  overcome  every  hindrance,  His  grace  to  give  you  all  needful  strength,  Hia 
mercy,  which  will  embrace  you  in  His  arms,  and  take  you  to  His  heart.  2.  The 
excellence  of  the  feast.  He  sets  before  you  salvation,  pardon,  peace,  eternal  life. 
Are  not  these  things  worth  having  ?  Are  they  not  necessary  to  the  welfare  of  your 
Boul?  Where  can  you  get  them,  but  in  the  way  you  are  called  to  accept  now  ?  3. 
The  blessedness  of  partaking  of  this  gospel-feast.  4.  The  misery  of  refusing 
— of  never  tasting  the  gospel-supper  —  never,  never! — never  knowing  pardon 
of    sin  —  never  knowing    peace  of    conscience,      {J.   W.    Reeve,  M.A.)  The 

great  supper: — I.  The  feabt.  This  is  the  gospel  which  God  has  provided  for 
mankind  and  sinners.  Great  preparations  had  to  be  made  before  it  was  available 
for  men.  The  law  which  we  had  broken  bad  to  be  satisfied  ;  the  penalty  which  we 
had  incurred  had  to  be  endured ;  the  obedience  in  which  we  had  failed  had  to  be 
rendered.  None  of  these  things,  however,  could  be  done  by  man  for  himself. 
Christ  therefore  took  human  nature,  &c.  •  1.  A  feast  in  respect  of  the  excellence  of 
the  provision  which  it  sets  before  us.  Pardon  of  sin,  favour  with  God,  peace  of 
conscience,  renewal  of  the  heart,  access  to  the  throne  of  grace,  the  comforts  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  of  the  Scriptures,  and  a 
well-grounded  hope  of  eternal  lifer  2.  A  feast  in  respect  of  abundance,  for  the 
supply  is  inexhaustible.  3.  A  feast  in  respect  of  fellowship.  The  blessings  of  the 
gospel  are  for  social,  and  not  simply  for  private,  life ;  and  what  circle  of  earthly 
friends  can  be  put  into  comparison  with  that  into  which  we  enter  when  we  seat 
ourselves  at  the  gospel  table?  Communion,  not  only  with  best  and  wisest  of 
earth,  but  with  redeemed  before  throne ;  yea,  fellowship  with  Father,  and  His  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  4.  A  feast  in  respect  of  joy.  The  Giver  of  it  and  the  guests  at  it 
rejoice  together.  II.  The  invited  guests.  The  invitation  to  this  feast  is  given 
to  every  one  in  whose  hearing  the  gospel  is  proclaimed.  A  great  privilege,  also  a 
great  peril.  God's  invitation  is  not  to  be  trifled  with  or  despised.  In  the  court 
language  of  Great  Britain,  when  a  subject  receives  an  invitation  to  the  royal  table, 
it  is  said  that  her  Majesty  ••  commands  "  his  presence  there.  So  the  invitations  of 
the  Eing  of  kings  to  His  gospel  banquet  are  commands,  the  ignoring  of  which 
constitutes  the  most  aggravated  form  of  disobedience.    IIL  The  beception  givew 

BT    THOSE    FIKST    INVITED,    TO    THE    CALL    WHICH    HAD    BEEN    ADDBESSED     TO     THEM. 

Animated  by  one  spirit,  moved  by  one  impulse,  under  the  influence  of  the  same 
disposition,  they  all  began  to  make  excuse.  Each  of  them  considered  some  worldly 
thing  as  of  more  importance  to  him  than  the  enjoyment  of  the  feast ;  and  that  ia 
just  saying,  in  another  way,  that  they  all  treated  the  invitation  as  a  matter  of  no 
momi3nt.  Their  excuses  were  all  pretexts.  >  If  the  heart  is  set  on  anything  else,  it 
cannot  be  given  up  to  Christ ;  and  every  excuse  that  is  offered  for  withholding  it, 
whether  the  excuse  itself  be  true  or  not,  does  not  give  the  real  reason  for 
His  rejection.  That  must  be  sought  in  the  fact  that  the  heart  is  set  on 
something  else  which  it  is  not  willing  to  part  with,  even  for  Him.  It  is  the  old 
story.  "  One  thing  thou  lackest : "  but  that  one  thing  is  everything,  for  it  is  the 
love  of  the  heart.  /  lY.  Those  who  persistently  decline  to  come  to  the  feast 

SHALL  BE  FOB  EVEB  EXCLTIDED  FBOU  ITS  ENJOYMENT.  V.  NOTWITHSTANDINO  THB 
BEJECTION  OF   THIS  INVITATION  BY  MXTLTITUDB8,  God's  HOUSE  SHALL  BE  FILLED  AT  LAST. 

(W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D,)        The  love  of  thia  world  it  a  hindrance  to  salvation: — L 

BeASONS  WHY  THE  LOVE  OF  THIS  WOBLD  IS  A  HINDRANCE  TO  SALVATION.       1.  Ou  aCCOUUt 

of  its  power  over  the  heart.  (1)  It  is  not  attentive  to  the  greatness  of  Divine  grace. 
(2)  It  disregards  the  means  of  this  grace,  through  which  the  sinner  must  be  brought 
to  the  fellowship  of  it.  (3)  It  hardens  the  heart  against  the  repeated  invitations  of 
Ood.  (4)  It  does  despite  to  the  free  grace  of  God,  which  has  at  once  provided 
eveiything  necessary  for  our  salvation,  and  invites  us  to  partake  of  it  without  any 
personal  desert.  2.  On  account  of  its  nature.  (1)  It  is  directed  to  what  is  earthly, 
perishable,  (a)  To  goods  and  pleasures,  (h)  To  honour,  influence,  and  con- 
sideration, (c)  To  ties  and  connections.  (2)  It  prefers  that  to  what  is  heavenly 
and  eternal.  (3)  It  lays  claim,  in  doing  so,  to  a  right  frame  of  mind  (vers.  18,  19), 
considering  itseli  to  have  a  proper  excuse,  and  thus  manifests  its  ingratitude,  levity, 
and  obstinacy.  II.  Proof  that  the  love  of  the  world  is  such  a  hindrance.  1„ 
From  the  consequences  resulting  to  the  despisers.  (1)  They  draw  upon  themselvei 
the  anger  of  God.  (2)  They  forfeit  the  offered  salvation.  2.  From  the  subsequent 
procedure  of  God,  who  still  manifests  His  mercy  and  grace ;  (I)  In  that  He  oon- 


S6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xtt. 

tinoes  to  invite  men  to  the  blessings  of  salvation  ;  (2)  and  even  the  most  wretched 
of  men;  (3)  and  all,  without  exception,  in  the  most  pressing  manner.  {F.  <?. 
Lisco.)  The  gospel  feast: — Though  this  parable  resembles,  in  some  respects, 
that  of  the  marriage  feast  in  the  twenty-second  chapter  of  Matthew,  it  is  a  distinct 
and  independent  parable.  1.  What  those  gospel  blessings  are  to  which  we  are  here 
invited  under  the  comparison  of  a  feast.  We  are  invited,  then,  to  partake  of  the 
blessing  of  knowledge,  saving  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth.  2.  Let  us  observe  what  is  implied  in  coming  to  this  feast.  It  supposes, 
then,  a  desire  and  endeavour  to  obtain  these  blessings,  and  an  actual  acceptance  of 
them  just  as  they  are  offered.  3.  God  employs  His  servants  to  invite  persons  of  all 
descriptions  to  this  feast.  4.  We  are  reminded  by  this  parable  that  multitudes 
reject  the  gospel  invitation  with  vain  excuses.  5.  Once  more,  this  parable  teaches 
that,  however  many  may  have  hitherto  refused  the  invitation,  ministers  are  bound 
to  persevere  in  most  earnest  endeavours  to  bring  in  sinners.  The  office  of 
ministers,  in  this  respect,  is  weighty  and  responsible.  (Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)  God's 
banquet : — From  the  earliest  ages  it  has  been  common  to  speak  of  God's  merciful 
provisions  for  fallen  men  under  the  imagery  of  a  feast.  Thus  Isaiah  sung :  "  In 
this  mountain  shall  the  Lord  of  Hosts  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat 
things,  a  feast  of  wine  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on 
the  lees  well  refined."  And  so  familiar  was  this  conception  to  the  ancient 
Jews,  that  many  of  them  were  led  to  indulge  the  grossest  notions  about  feasting 
and  banqueting  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  Many  of  the  Babbins  took 
it  literally,  and  talked  and  wrote  largely  about  the  blessed  bread  and  plenteous 
wine,  and  delicious  fruits,  and  the  varieties  of  fish,  flesh,  and  fowl,  to  be  enjoyed 
when  once  the  Messiah  should  come.  It  was  to  this  coarse  eating  and  drinking 
that  the  man  referred  whose  exclamation — "  Blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in 
the  kingdom  of  God  " — called  forth  this  significant  parable.  But,  although  thd 
Jews  much  perverted  the  idea,  it  still  was  a  proper  and  expressive  figurative  repre> 
sentation  of  gospel  blessings.  The  Saviour  ffimself  takes  up  the  idea,  approve* 
and  appropriates  it,  and  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  provisions  of  grace  as  a  ^eijrvoi' — 
a  supper — a  feast— a  banquet.  Very  significant  also  is  this  imagery.  1.  A  feast  is 
not  a  thing  of  necessity,  but  of  gratuity.  '  If  a  man  makes  an  entertainment  to 
which  he  invites  his  friends  and  neighbours,  he  does  it  out  of  favour  and  good  feel- 
ing towards  them.  It  is  because  he  takes  an  interest  in  their  happiness,  and  is 
pleased  to  minister  to  their  enjoyment.  And  precisely  of  this  nature  is  the  blessed 
gospel.  2.  Again :  a  banquet  is  furnished  at  the  cost  of  him  who  makes  it.  And 
80  the  gospel  comes  to  men  free  of  expense  to  the  guests.  All  that  it  embraces  is 
proposed  without  money  and  without  price.  3.  A  banquet  also  implies  the  spread- 
ing of  a  table,  plentifully  supplied  with  all  inviting,  wholesome,  and  pleasant 
viands.  It  is  an  occasion  when  the  very  best  things,  and  in  the  greatest  profusion, 
are  set  before  the  guests.  True,  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  meat  and  drink  "  ; 
but  it  is  to  our  inner  life  what  the  most  precious  viands  are  to  the  body.  The  soul 
has  appetites,  and  needs  meat  and  drink  as  well  as  the  physical  man.  It  must  be 
fed,  nourished,  and  refreshed  with  its  appropriate  spiritual  aliment,  or  the  man 
must  starve  and  die,  notwithstanding  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he 
possesseth.  And  this  life-giving  spiritual  food  is  what  God  has  provided  for  as  in 
the  gospel.  4.  A  banquet  is  also  a  social  thing.  It  involves  the  coming  together  of 
multitudes  to  exchange  civilities,  to  form  and  strengthen  fellowships,  and  to  enjoy 
communion  with  each  other,  as  well  as  with  the  maker  of  the  feast.  The  gospel 
embraces  a  holy  fellowship  of  believers  with  believers,  and  of  each  with  God.  It  em- 
braces a  coming  together  of  men  in  common  brotherhood  and  communion  with  each 
other  and  with  the  Master,  as  full  of  sweetness,  cheer,  and  blessedness  as  the  viands 
of  which  they  are  invited  to  partake.  Christianity  is  a  social  religion.  (J.  A.  Seisnt 
D.  D. )  Come  ;  for  all  things  are  now  ready. — The  gospel  invitation : — I.  Thb  feast. 
1.  The  author  of  this  feast.  2.  The  provisions.  (1)  Abundant.  (2)  Various.  (3) 
Suitable.  3.  The  characteristics  of  the  feast.  (1 )  It  is  a  sacrificial  feast.  (2)  It 
is  a  great  and  universal  feast.  (3)  It  is  a  gratuitous  feast.  (4)  It  is  a  heavenly 
feast.  II.  The  invitation — "  Come."  Now  this  implies  distance.  All  men  far 
from  God,  Ac.  Prodigal  1.  To  what  must  they  come  ?  To  the  Word  of  God. 
To  the  preached  gospel  (Rom.  i.  15).  2.  How  must  they  come?  By  repentance. 
Humbly,  believingly,  unreservedly,  immediately.  3.  To  whom  may  this  invitation 
be  addressed?  To  the  young,  middle-aged,  and  to  the  old.  To  the  moralist, 
profligate,  and  backslider.  To  the  rich  and  poor,  the  learned  and  illiterate. 
IlL  Thb  motive  cKGED-*"For  all  things  are   now   ready."     1.  The  Father  ifl 


CBAP.  xiv.]  ST.  LUKE.  27 

ready.  To  embrace  the  repenting  prodigal.  2.  The  Son  is  ready.  To  speak  for- 
giveness and  peace.  3.  The  Spirit  is  ready.  To  regenerate  and  save.  i.  Ministers 
are  ready.  "  And  now  then  as  ambassadors,"  &g.  5.  The  ordinances  are  ready. 
And  you  are  freely  welcome.  6.  The  Church  is  ready.  To  own  you  as  her  sons, 
<fec.  7.  Angels  are  ready.  To  bear  the  tidings  of  your  repentance  to  glory.  ^  (J. 
Burns,  D.D.)  The  gospel  invitation: — The  invitation  to  come  is  in  harmony 
with  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  in  harmony  with  the  character  of  man.  An  invi- 
.  tation  implies  a  happiness.  When  a  calamity  or  a  sorrow  is  before  us,  we  are  not 
invited  to  it — we  are  drawn  hither  by  an  irresistible  power.  But  when  earth  has  a 
joyful  event,  or  one  that  promises  happiness,  invitations  a,re  issued,  because  it  is 
not  conceivable  that  man  would  need  to  be  driven  toward  happiness.  Thus  the 
invitation  harmonizes  with  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  for  it  is  a  happiness.  Whether 
you  contemplate  that  kingdom  as  reaching  through  eternity  with  its  blessedness, 
or  as  filling  earth  with  its  virtue  and  faith  and  hope,  it  is  the  highest  happiness  of 
vhich  we  can  conceive.  It  is,  indeed,  a  feast  of  love,  of  knowledge,  of  virtue  ;  and 
hence  is  a  blessedness  worthy  of  the  word  "  Come."  The  word  is  also  in  harmony 
with  the  character  of  man,  for,  being  a  free  agent,  he  is  not  to  be  forced  towards 
blessedness,  but  only  invited.  I.  Now  this  word  "  come  "  contains  no  deep 
MTSTEBT.  It  is  not  a  tantalizing  request  to  do  what  we  cannot  do.  It  is  not  irony, 
as  though  one  should  say  to  a  blind  man,  "  See  this  rose !  "  or  a  deaf  mind,  "  Oh  I 
please  hear  this  music."  The  Bible  is  the  last  book  in  the  world  to  be  accused  ol 
trifling  with  the  soul,  for  it  is  the  soul  it  loves,  and  for  it  it  prays  and  weeps.  It  is 
not  to  be  inferred  from  this  that  the  heart  can  correct  itself  and  forgive  itself  and 
sanctify  itself;  but  what  is  to  be  inferred  is  that  the  will  is  not  a  mockery,  not  a 
dead  monarch,  but  is  a  king  upon  a  throne,  and  can  commaud  the  soul  to  go  many 
a  path  that  leads  to  God.  You  can  all  start  upon  a  heavenly  road,  for  there  is  not 
a  movement  of  the  heart  toward  God  that  is  not  a  part  of  this  large  "Come." 
Where  the  human  ends  and  the  Divine  begins  no  one  can  tell,  any  more  than  in 
nature  one  can  tell  where  the  rain  and  earth  and  sunshine  cease  to  work  in  the 
Terdure,  and  where  they  are  supplauted  by  the  presence  of  God.  There  is  no  tree 
that  stands  in  the  woods  by  its  own  act.  God  is  there.  So  no  Christian  stands  up 
Btrong  in  his  own  sole  effort.  God's  grace  is  somewhere.  But  yet,  for  all  this,  great 
is  the  power  and  responsibility  of  the  soul.  Nothing  in  religion  can  be  true  that 
renders  void  the  law  of  personal  effort.  II.  But  we  pass  by  this  ' '  coming,"  and  go 
to  the  second  thought — "All  things  are  eeady."  I  shall  not  restrict  myself 
here  to  the  exact  import  of  the  text,  but  shall  accept  o  f  the  words  in  all  their 
breadth  and  application.  1.  Religion  is  ready  for  you.  Having  passed  through 
myriad  shapes — Pagan,  Mosaic,  Grecian,  Boman — religion  seems  to  have  found  in 
the  gospel  of  Christ  a  final  readiness  for  human  use.  Beason  may  learn  to  deny 
all  religion,  science  may  hear  and  then  teach  atheism,  but  when  the  thought  turns 
to  a  positive  religion,  there  is  at  last  one  ready,  the  religion  of  our  Lord ;  it  is 
ready  for  you  and  me.  But  when  we  have  declared  it  ready  as  a  philosophical 
system,  we  have  only  told  half  the  truth,  for  to  this  it  adds  the  readiness  of  an 
cver-hving  Father  and  Saviour  standing  by  each  of  you  as  a  mother,  and  waiting 
to  welcome  you.  2.  Let  us  proceed  now  to  our  second  head :  You  are  ready  for 
this  religion.  I  do  not  mean  that  you  feel  ready,  for  there  are  doubts  and  sins  that 
etand  between  the  soul  and  religion.  The  obstacle  is  not  in  the  world  without,  but 
•within.  But  I  have  said  you  are  ready.  In  what  sense  ?  In  this :  that  your  life 
has  come  to  its  responsible,  intelligent  years.  The  lineaments  of  God — knowledge, 
visdom,  reason,  love,  hope,  hfe — have  all  unfolded,  and  here  we  are  all  to-day, 
moving  in  all  the  spiritual  qualities  of  Deity,  and  yet  are  willingly  in  the  vale  of 
ein.  The  ignorance  of  youth  has  passed  away :  we  are  children  no  more.  Vice 
has  revealed  her  wretchedness,  and  virtue  her  utility  and  beauty,  and  with  intellects 
so  discerning,  and  with  an  expfirience  so  complete,  and  then  clothed  with  the 
attributes  of  God,  we  are  all  marching  to  the  grave,  a  solemn  gateway  between 
action  and  judgment,  between  time  and  eternity.  These  facts  make  me  declare  we 
are  ready  for  that  sentiment  called  religion,  that  makes  man  one  with  God.  I 
confess  that  we  all  are  ready  for  the  gospel  of  Christ — ready  for  its  virtue,  its 
mediation,  its  sunny  hopes.  3.  Society  is  ready  for  you  to  accept  the  gift.  I  hope 
that  old  day  has  wholly  gone  when  men  were  afraid  to  profess  Christianity  lest  an 
outside  world  might  ridicule  the  ' '  new  life."  Little  of  this  fear  is  any  longer  per- 
ceptible. I  imagine  that  the  growth  of  individual  liberty — the  growth  of  the 
consciousness  of  it,  rather — has  silenced  both  the  ridicule  and  the  sensibility  to  it. 
It  is  only  ignorance  and  narrowness  that  ever  ridicule  the  profession  of  religion. 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nr. 

Bat  we  pass  from  this  conscions  readiness  to  that  of  need  and  fact.  Sooietj  is 
toiling  to-day  under  the  awful  ciuamities  of  vice,  slavery,  dishonour,  and  crime,  and 
is  sorrowfully  ready  for  millions  of  wicked  ones  to  read  and  imitate  the  life  of  Jesoa 
Christ.  When  society  was  .ruled  by  brute  force,  as  in  the  days  of  Ceesar  or  Peter 
the  Great,  it  mattered  little  what  might  be  in  the  hearts  of  the  populace,  for,  if  i* 
was  crime,  there  was  a  policeman  for  each  citizen ;  and  if  it  was  sorrow  in  the  heart 
of  woman  or  child  or  slave,  nobody  cared.  But  in  our  day,  when  the  vice  of  the 
heart  breaks  out,  and  there  is  more  reliance  upon  education  than  upon  the  knout 
or  chains,  and  when  the  upper  classes  have  reached  an  education  that  makes 
indifference  to  sorrow  impossible,  in  such  an  age  society  begs  the  Christian 
religion  to  come  to  its  help.  In  the  old  empire  of  Cyrus  there  were,  all  along  the 
highways,  criminals  with  hands  or  feet  cut  off,  or  heads  of  offenders  raised  up,  to 
keep  the  populace  in  constant  fear.  What  that  age  demanded  in  its  heart  was  not 
a  gospel,  but  an  ever-present  police.  It  did  not  know  of  anything  better.  But  our 
land,  based  upon  the  nobleness  and  equality  of  man,  and  springing  up  out  o( 
brotherly  love,  and  every  day  strengthening  this  sentiment  by  education,  silently 
begs  that  its  millions,  high  and  low,  shall  come  unto  Jesus  Christ.  (David  Swing. ) 
The  hinquet : — 1.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  is  ready.  /No  banqueter  ever 
waited  for  his  guests  so  patiently  as  Christ  has  waited  for  us.  2.  Again,  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  ready.  That  Spirit  is  willing  to  come  to-night  at  our  call  and  lead  you  to 
eternal  life  ;  or  neady  to  come  with  the  same  power  with  which  He  unhorsed  Saul 
on  the  Damascus  turnpike,^ and  broke  down  Lydia  in  her  fine  store,  and  lilted  the 
three  thousand  from  midnight  into  midnoon  at  the  Pentecost.  /  With  that  power 
the  Spirit  of  God  this  night  beats  at  the  gate  of  your  soul.  7  Have  you  not  noticed 
what  homely  and  insignificant  instrumentaUty  the  Spirit  of  God  employs  for  man's 
conversion?  There  was  a  man  on  a  Hudson  river-boat  to  whom  a  tract  was 
offered.  With  indignation  he  tore  it  up  and  threw  it  overboard.  But  one  fragment 
lodged  on  his  coat-sleeve ;  and  he  saw  on  it  the  word  "  eternity  "  ;  and  he  found 
no  peace  until  he  was  prepared  for  that  great  future.  Do  you  know  what  passage 
it  was  that  caused  Martin  Luther  to  see  the  truth  ?  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith." 
Do  you  know  there  is  one — just  one — passage  that  brought  Augustine  from  a  life  of 
dissolution  ?  "  Put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  make  no  provision  for  the  flesh 
to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof."  It  was  just  one  passage  that  converted  Hedley  Vicars, 
the  great  soldier,  to  Christ :  *'  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  Do 
you  know  that  the  Holy  Spirit  used  one  passage  of  Scripture  to  save  Jonathan 
Edwards  ?  ♦•  Now,  unto  the  King,  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only  wisa 
God,  our  Saviour,  be  glory."  3.  The  Church  is  ready.  4.  The  angels  of  God  are 
ready.  5.  Your  kindred  in  glory  are  all  ready  for  your  coming.  Some  of  these 
spirits  in  glory  toiled  for  your  redemption.  When  they  came  to  die,  their  chief 
grief  was  that  you  were  not  a  Christian.  They  said :  "  Meet  me  in  heaven  "  ;  bat 
over  their  pillow  hung  the  awful  possibility  that  perhaps  yon  might  not  meet  them. 
{Dr.   Talmage.)         God^t  anxiety  for  man'$  $alvation: — I.  God  is  vkbt  dbobnt 

WITH     UBM    TO    ACCEPT    Of    GOSPBL-PBOVISION     FOB    THB   GOOD   OT  THEIB  SOULS.      He 

Epeaks  once  and  again  (Jer.  vii.  25).  This  truth  will  thus  appear:  1.  By  the 
several  acts  of  God  put  forth  in  gospel-provision  for  man's  salvation.  (1)  He  has 
prepared  the  provision  without  any  desert  or  desire  of  ours  (Titus  iii.  4,  5).  (2) 
The  means  of  grace  are  vouchsafed  to  many  that  do  not  improve  them  (Matt.  zL 
16,  17,  21).  (3)  God  propounds  a  way,  and  offers  help  to  do  as  good,  before  we 
inquire  after  it  (Isa.  Izv.  1).  (4)  God  forbears  His  wrath  when  we  do  not  presently 
close  with  His  mercy.  He  stays,  though  man  lingers.  (5)  God  reproves  where  we 
are  defective,  and  happy  are  the  wounds  of  such  a  friend.  He  who  first  reproves  ia 
unwilling  to  punish.  (6)  God  stops  our  way  when  we  are  running  headlong  to  our 
own  misery  (Hosea  ii.  6).  Many  times  He  keeps  us  short  that  He  may  keep  ua 
humble.  (7)  God  makes  us  consider  our  ways,  and  recollect  our  thoughts,  whither 
our  course  tends  (Haggai  i.  5).  (8)  Notwithstanding  our  obstinacy,  God  persuades 
us  by  a  sweet  and  holy  violence.  He  not  only  stops  our  way,  but  changes  our 
wills.  2.  By  the  manner  of  God's  speaking  to  sinners  in  the  Scriptures.  (1)  By 
way  of  interrogation — "Why  will  ye  die?"  (Ezek.  xviii.  81).  (2)  By  way  of 
lamentation  (Luke  lix-  41,  42).  (3)  By  way  of  protestation  with  the  strongest 
asseveration  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  Uses.  1.  This  informs  us  that  the  destruction  of 
man  is  a  thing  displeasing  to  God.  2.  But  though  God  be  thus  urgent  about  the 
salvation  of  man,  yet  He  is  quick  and  peremptory  in  the  destruction  of  maoT. 
Although  He  seem  to  come  slowly  to  punish  man,  yet  His  hand  will  fall  hearily 
npoo  those  who  abase  Hia  patienoe.    8.  Answer  Goi's  urgency  with  yoa  to  Mcept 


CHAP,  xrv.]  ST.  LUKE.  29 

of  gospel-provision.     (1)  Be  urgent  with  your  own  hearts  to  turn  to  the  Lord  by 
faith ;  and  then  be  as  urgent  to  bless  His  name  for  turning  them.     (2)  Urge  your 
hearts  to  turn  from  all  sin  by  true  repentance.     II.  The  sekvakts  sent  out.     1.  All 
the  prophets.      2.  Pre-eminently,   Christ  Himself.      3.  The  servants  of  Christ. 
in.  The  time  of  sending  the  servants.     Supper-time ;  the  fulness  of  time,  the 
very  nick  of  time  for  man's  redemption.     Now  is  the  accepted  time ;  improve  it. 
IV.  The  manneb  in  which  the  message  is  to  be  delivered.    By  word  of  mouth. 
Uses.    1.  Information.     (1)  The  gift  of  utterance  is  very  requisite  for  a  minister 
(Eph.  vi.  19).     (2)  The  calling  of  the  ministry  is  very  useful  (Titus  i.  2,  3).     2. 
Ministers  should  not  only  preach  with  their  tongues,  but  likewise  with  their  hearts 
feelingly,  and  with  their  lives.     3.  Let  us  be  thankful  to  God  that  the  Word  of 
faith  is  so  nigh  as  in  the  preaching  of  the  Word  (Eom.  x.  6,  7,  8).    Manna  faUs  at 
our  very  doors ;  we  have  but  to  step  out  and  take  it  up.    V.  The  word   of 
invitation — "  Come."     1.  Whither  God  would  have  us  come.     (1)  To  ourselves 
(Luke  XV.  17).     (2)  To  His  people  (Heb.  xii.  22).    (3)  To  Him.     (a)  The  Father 
would  have  us  come  (Jer.  iv.  1).     (6)  The  Son  would  have  us  come  (Matt.  xi.  28). 
(c)  The  Spirit  would  have  us  come  (Rev.  xxii.  17).     He  comes  to  us,  that  we  may 
come  to  Him  to  get  victory  over  our  sin.     2.  By  what  means  we  should  come, 
(1)  By  the  use  of  all  means  of  grace  (Psa.  xcv.  6).     (2)  By  the  exercise  of  the  truth 
of  grace,  and  especially  the  acting  of  faith  (Heb.  xi.  6).    (3)  By  pressing  forward 
towards  the  perfection  of  grace  (Phil.  iii.   12).    3.  In  what  manner  we  should 
come.    (1)  Humbly  (Luke  xv.  19).     (2)  Speedily  (Luke  xix.  6).     (3)  Joyfully,  as 
we  come  to  a  feast.    YI.  The  readiness  of  aui  things.     1.  The  mind  of  Ood, 
concerning  the  salvation  of  all  His  elect,  is  ready  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).    2.  The  work  of 
Christ  for  the  recovery  of  lost  man  is  ready  (Heb.  x.   12).     The  incarnation, 
passion,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  Christ,  are  all  overi     3.  The  remission  of 
sin  upon  the  score  and  account  of  Christ  is  ready  (Neh.  ix.  17  ;  2  Cor.  v.  19).     4. 
The  glorious  inheritance  in  heaven  is  now  ready  (Heb.  ii.  16).    Uses.    1.  For 
information.     Men  has  nothing  to  do  toward  his  own  happiness,  but  to  receive 
what  God  has  prepared,  and  to  walk  as  he  has  received  it.    The  receiving  is  by 
faith.    2.  For  caution.     Though  all  things  be  said  to  be  "  now  ready,"  we  mast 
not  think,  as  if  all  were  but  now  ready :  we  must  know  that  Christ  is  the  Lamb 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  (Bev.  xiii.  8),  so  that  Christ's  blood  in  its 
virtue,  and  God's  acceptation  was  of  force  for  man's  salvation  long  before  He  came 
personally  into  the  world.      Then,  again:   though  all  things    are  said  to   be 
"  now  ready,"  yet  there  is  much  to  be  done  before  all  the  elect  come  to  heaven ; 
many  enemies  of  Christ  must  be  pulled  down,  &o.    3.  Be  exhorted  to  answer 
this  readiness  of  God.    (1)  Be  ready  to  receive  this  grace   of   the  gospel.    (2) 
Be  ready  to  express  this  grace  of  the  gospel,    (a)  In    acts  of  piety   towards 
Him.      (6)   In   acts  of    charity  towards    men.    {John  Crump.)         Tht  invita- 
tion : — Now  we  oome  to  our  Lord's  description  of  what  a  really  religious   Ufe 
is.    He  gives  it  to  as  under  the  figure  of  a  feast.    Let   us  try  and  get  some 
,  lessons  from  this ;  for  when  oar  Lord  employs  a  figure,  we  may  be  sore  He  has  a 
meaning  in  it.    What  are  the  thoughts  connected  with  the  figure  f    In  the  first 
place,  A  FEAST  IB  designed  fob  the  satisfaction  of  oub  natubal  appetites,  is  it  notf 
We  go  to  a  feast,  not  that  we  may  be  hungry,  but  that  we  may  be  fed.    Wherever 
Christ  goes,  the  first  thing  He  proposes  to  do,  my  dear  friends,  is  to  satisfy  the 
wants  of  our  souls.    He  knows  better  than  we  what  those  wants  are,  and  how  in* 
capable  we  are  of  satisfying  them ;  and  you  know  it  too,  if  you  will  but  reflect. 
Is  there  not  in  your  daily  occupations,  and  pleasures,  and  cares  a  certain  secret 
sense  of  something  wanting  ?    When  yoa  succeed  in  life,  do  not  yoa  feel  strangely 
disappointed  with  the  results  of  success  f    How  little  pleased  you  are  with  that 
which  you  thought  might  be  expected  to  give  the  most  exquisite  pleasure !    Oh,  my 
yonng  fiisnds,  bow  straiigs  it  is  that  we  all  fall  into  the  fallacy,  or,  at  any  rate, 
80  many  of  us  do,  of  supposing  that  we  can  make  up  in  quantity  for  that  which  is 
radically  deficient  in  quality.    You  understand  what  I  mean.    Here  is  a  boat-load 
of  shipwrecked  mariners,  tossing  about  on  the  wide  waste  of  waters.     We  will  sup- 
pose that  one  of  them,  burning  with  thirst,  dips  his  fingers  into  the  briny  ocean, 
and  just  puts  two  drops  of  the  water  on  his  tongue ;  does  that  satisfy  him  ?    Not 
a  whit ;  on  the  contrary,  it  increases  his  thirst.     Suppose  the  man  thinks,  '*  What 
I  want  is  increased  quantity ;  two  drops  will  satisfy  no  man's  thirst ;  if  I  can  only 
get  enough  I  shall  surely  be  satisfied."    And  suppose  he  were  to  lean  his  head  over 
the  gunwale  of  the  boat,  and  take  a  deep  draught  of  the  brine,  would  that  satisfy 
him  any  more  than  the  two  drops  ?  Some  time  ago  a  friend  of  mine  was  coming  home 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [OHiP.  nv. 

from  Australia  in  a  ehip  that  took  fire.  Those  on  board  were  saved  in  two  boats,, 
one  a  large  and  the  other  a  email  one.  On  board  the  smaller  boat  was  this  gentle- 
man and  his  wife,  and  into  it  had  been  cast,  in  the  confusion  and  hurry  of  the 
moment,  several  cases  containing  solid  gold  to  the  value  of  many  thousand  pounds 
in  each.  In  the  large  boat  there  was  a  considerable  quantity  of  provisions,  but  in 
the  smaller  boat  there  was  a  very  slender  supply  of  provisions,  but  a  large  amount 
of  gold.  The  men  pulled  away  from  the  burning  ship ;  there  was  a  stiff  breeze 
rising,  and  they  knew  that  in  all  probability  they  should  not  see  each  other  in  the 
morning  dawn  ;  so  just  before  they  separated  for  the  night,  they  began  to  overhaul 
their  provisions.  The  men  on  board  the  smaller  boat  found  that  they  had  only  a 
meagre  supply.  My  friend  remarked  that  he  should  never  forget  the  moment  when 
three  or  four  stalwart  sailors  lifted  up  a  huge  case  of  gold,  held  it  before  the  eyes 
of  the  men  in  the  other  boat,  and  shouted  across  the  water,  "  Ten  thousand  pounds 
for  one  cask  of  bacon  !  "  A  big  price,  was  it  not  ?  The  men  would  not  look  at  it  1 
That  one  cask  of  bacon  was  worth  all  the  gold  in  the  world  to  them.  Why  f 
Hecause  the  meat  was  congruous  to  their  natural  appetite,  and  the  gold  was  not ; 
they  could  feed  themselves  with  the  one,  but  not  with  the  other.  Now,  young 
man,  tbe  world  is  whispering  in  your  ear :  What  you  want  is,  not  to  change  your 
mode  of  satisfying  your  appetite,  but  to  have  a  little  more.  Yon  are  not  very  rich, 
you  cannot  indulge  yourself  in  going  to  the  theatre  every  night  ?  perhaps  you  can 
only  go  once  a  fortnight  or  once  a  month  ;  make  a  little  money ;  get  on  in  life  ;  Bet 
up  in  business  for  yourself,  and  then  you  will  be  able  to  go  every  night  in  the  week 
if  you  like.     2.  Then,  again,  a  feast  is  not  only  an  occasion  for  satisfying  our  wants ; 

IT  IS  ALSO  USDAIiLY  AN  OCCASION  FOR  MERRIMENT,  HILARITY,  ENJOYMENT,  IS  IT  NOT  ?       We 

do  not  go  to  a  feast  to  wear  very  long  faces,  to  look  very  mournful  and  miserable.  It 
is  true,  men  sometimes  do  look  very  grave  at  feasts,  because  they  are  so  unlike  what 
feasts  ought  to  be;  there  is  so  much  form  and  ceremony,  and  so  little  social  enjoy- 
ment in  them.  Everything  is  real  that  God  gives.  Blessed  are  thsy  who  are 
permitted  to  sit  down  at  the  board  which  has  been  spread  by  the  hands  of  Jesus. 
But  you  say,  "  Do  you  really  believe  it  ?  Is  it  true  ?  Do  you  mean  that  it  is  all  a 
lie  that  the  devil  has  been  telling  as — that  if  you  become  a  real  Christian,  you  will 
grow  so  gloomy,  and  look  so  sad,  and  that  life  will  lose  all  its  charm?  Is  that 
really  false  ?  Surely  it  never  can  be."  Why  do  so  many  people  say  this  ?  I  will 
tell  you.  Look  yonder.  There  is  a  man  who  is  a  Christian — at  any  rate,  he  calls 
himself  so  ;  and,  dear  me,  what  a  miserable  sort  of  being  he  is  !  Yes,  with  shame 
and  sorrow  I  admit  it ;  there  we  discover  the  foundation  of  the  devil's  lie.  The 
truth  is,  there  are  so  many  of  us  who  name  the  name  of  Christ,  but  do  not  give  our 
selves  wholly  up  to  God.  There  ars  many  people  who  call  themselves  Christians, 
but  who  give  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  God  to  blaspheme.  There  is  many  a 
Christian,  for  instance,  who  does  not  walk  by  faith,  but  by  unbelief.  Look  at  » 
man  like  Paul ;  there  you  find  one  who  has  committed  himself  to  God's  will.  At 
first  sight  the  man  of  the  world  might  say,  "Well,  he  gets  a  rough  life  of  it.  I 
should  not  like  to  lead  such  a  life,  tossing  about  to  and  fro  over  the  wide  world  like 
a  waif  and  stray  in  human  society,  with  nobody  to  say  a  kind  word  to  him, 
sometimes  shipwrecked,  sometimes  exposed  to  perils  of  robbers,  sometimes 
thrust  outside  the  city.  Dear  me,  I  should  not  like  to  lead  such  a  life ! " 
Would  you  not?  Look  a  little  closer,  my  dear  man.  Look  at  the  man's  face; 
listen  to  some  of  the  openings  of  his  heart.  Amid  all  his  outward  trials,  difficulties^ 
and  persecutions,  he  says  he  is  alwajrs  rejoicing.  Are  you  always  rejoicing  ?  Where 
is  the  worldly  man  in  London  who  is  always  rejoicing  ?  Ah,  who  are  so  happy  as 
real  Christians  ?  Young  man,  when  you  form  your  idea  of  a  Christian,  take  care 
that  you  get  hold  of  the  genuine  article.  Suppose  I  were  to  say,  "  Have  you  ever 
seen  a  rose  ?  "  "  Well,  no,"  you  might  reply ;  "  I  have  heard  a  good  deal  about  thr 
rose,  but  1  have  never  seen  one."  And  suppose  1  were  to  say,  "  I  will  show  you 
one ;  come  along  with  me,"  and  then  were  to  take  you  down  to  one  of  the  purlieus 
of  London,  to  some  miserable,  sodden-looking,  uncultivated  little  garden,  and  show 
yon  s  poor,  half-dead,  struggling  plant,  just  trying  to  put  out  a  few  little  crimson 
leaves,  which  were  already  being  mercilessly  nipped  and  shrivelled  np  by  the 
chemical  compounds  which  make  up  the  air  of  this  city  of  London.  The  thing  is 
already  decaying ;  there  is  no  fragrance  about  it,  no  beauty,  no  perfection  or  sym- 
metry of  form.  Suppose  I  say,  ••  There  is  a  rosel  did  you  ever  see  such  a  beautiful 
thing  in  your  life  7  "  And  suppose  there  was  a  friend  from  the  country  beside  us ; 
would  he  not  say,  "  Don't  call  that  a  rose.  The  man  will  turn  back,  saying,  *  I 
have  Men  a  roie;  bat  I  wouldn't  go  a  couple  of  yards  to  see  another.'     Take  him. 


CHAP,  iiv.]  8T.  LUKE.  %1 

down  to  my  garden  in  the  country,  and  show  him  the  standard  rose-bush  outside 
my  door ;  he  will  remember  that  if  he  has  never  seen  one  before.  Come  with  me, 
my  lad,  and  I  will  show  you  what  a  rose  is  like."  Now,  when  you  form  an  idea 
about  a  Christian,  don't  get  hold  of  some  poor,  blighted  Christian,  shrivelled  up 
by  the  east  wind  of  worldliness ;  don't  get  hold  of  a  Christian  who  tries  to  serve  two 
masters — God  and  the  world  too ;  don't  get  hold  of  a  Christian  who  leads  a  life  of 
chronic  unbelief,  a  sort  of  asthmatic  Christian,  who  cannot  get  his  breath  at  alL 
No,  no ;  get  hold  of  a  Christian  in  good,  sound  health,  who  can  honestly  say,  "To 
me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  Then  compare  his  life  with  your  own; 
and  if  yon  do  not  come  to  the  conclusion  that  that  man  is,  all  round,  a  hundredfold 
happier  than  you  are,  or  ever  can  hope  to  be,  so  long  as  you  remain  a  child  of  the 
world,  then  I  will  say  that  my  gospel  is  no  longer  worth  preaching,  and  the  Word 
of  God  no  longer  worth  trusting.  But  you  will  be  constrained  to  make  the  admis- 
sion. 3.  Again,  what  is  a  feast  1  It  is  a  time  for  feeding  the  body,  a  time  for  enjoy- 
ing ourselves ;  it  is  also  a  timb  for  pleasant  social  intebcoubsb.  I  find  that  a  great 
many  people  are  kept  back  from  Christ,  especially  young  men,  because  they  think 
they  would  have  so  much  to  give  up  in  the  way  of  fnends.  Not  very  long  ago  a  gen- 
tleman said  to  me,  "  One  of  the  things  that  struck  me  most  after  my  conversion  was 
the  effect  on  my  relations  with  other  people.  I  always  passed  for  an  affectionate  hus- 
band, and  loving  father;  but  really,  really,  as  I  looked  at  my  wife  and  my  children, 
it  seemed  as  if  I  loved  them  with  an  entirely  new  affection,  as  though  I  had  never 
really  loved  them  before.  I  loved  them  with  such  a  new  and  mighty  love,  that  it 
just  seemed  as  if  I  had  become  their  father  or  husband  over  again.  But  that  was 
not  all.  When  I  came  into  contact  with  other  Christians,  I  found  out  that  I  got  to 
know  more  of,  and  to  be  really  more  attached  to,  men  whom  I  had  only  known  ten 
days  or  a  fortnight— real  Christians — than  I  was  to  men  whom  I  had  been 
meeting  day  after  day  in  business,  or  social  life,  and  coming  constantly  in 
contact  with,  long,  long  years  before.  I  seemed  to  know  more  of  a  man  in  » 
week  than  I  had  been  able  to  know  of  a  man  of  the  world  in  a  twelvemonth 
before.  So  wonderful  was  the  change  in  my  own  personal  feelings  towards 
others,  that  I  felt  that  the  number  of  my  brothers  was  indefinitely  multiplied." 
My  friends,  it  will  be  so.  Believe  me,  where  the  grace  of  God  gets  into  the  human 
heart  it  maies  us  brothers.  (W.  H.  Aitken.)  Offered  mercy : — Let  us,  then,  con- 
sider the  readiness  of  all  things  as  a  reason  for  coming  to  Christ  now.  And  as  the 
simplest  way  of  doing  this,  let  us  consider  what  it  is  that  hinders  us  from  coming. 
No  external  force ;  you  act  freely  in  refusing  to  come.  What  inward  cause,  then — 
why  do  you  not  come  ?  Alas !  I  need  not  ask  ;  for  in  the  way  of  every  sinner  who 
knows  what  it  is  to  think,  there  always  rises  up  one  barrier  which  effectually  stops 
his  course  till  God  removes  it ;  it  is  guilt — the  paralyzing  and  benumbing  sense  of 
guilt.  The  very  same  thing  that  creates  the  necessity  of  coming,  seems  to  render 
it  impossible.  God  is  a  holy  God,  a  just  God,  and  a  Sovereign.  But,  perhaps, 
your  way  is  not  yet  open ;  your  obstacles  are  not  yet  all  removed.  Whatever  yon 
may  think  of  the  benevolence  of  God,  yon  cannot  lose  sight  of  His  justice.  How- 
ever His  compassion  might  consent.  His  holiness.  His  truth.  His  righteousness, 
still  stop  the  way.  But  now,  perhaps,  you  feel  another  hindrance,  one  of  which 
you  took  but  little  note  before.  Though  God  be  ready  to  forgive  you  for  the  sake 
of  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice,  yon  find  a  hindrance  in  yourself,  in  your  heart,  in  yoor 
very  dispositions  and  affections.  Expiation,  pardon,  renovation,  the  grace  of  the 
Father,  the  merit  of  the  Son,  the  influence  of  the  Spirit,  the  Church  on  earth,  and 
the  Church  in  heaven,  safety  in  life,  peace  in  death,  and  glory  through  eternity,  a 
good  hope  here,  and  an  ineffable  reality  hereafter — all  thmgs,  all  things  are  now 
ready.  Will  you  come  ?  If  not,  you  must  turn  back,  you  must  retrace  your  steps, 
and  take  another  view  of  this  momentous  invitation.  Higher  we  cannot  rise  in  the 
conception  or  the  presentation  of  inducements.  If  you  ro^ist  have  others,  they 
must  be  sought  in  a  lower  region.  The  feast  is  a  figure  for  salvation  or  deliverance 
from  ruin.  To  refuse  it,  therefore,  is  to  choose  destruction.  This  must  be  taken 
into  view,  if  we  would  estimate  the  motives  here  presented.  Such  is  the  brevity  of 
life,  and  such  the  transitory  nature  of  the  offer  of  salvation,  that  even  the  youngest 
who  decides  this  question,  may  be  said  to  decide  it  in  the  prospect  of  death,  and  on 
the  confines  of  eternity.  (c7.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Go$pelinvitationt  ihould  be 
pertonal: — Do  yon  know  why  more  men  do  not  come  to  Christ  ?  It  is  beeaaae  men 
are  not  invited  that  they  do  not  come.  Yon  get  a  general  invitation  from  your 
friend:  *< Come  around  some  time  to  my  house  and  dine  with  me."  Yon  do  not 
go.    Bat  he  says,  *'  Come  around  to-day  at  four  o'olock  and  bring  your  family,  and 


3S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

we'll  dine  together."  And  you  say :  •'  I  don't  know  that  I  have  any  engagement ; 
I  will  come."  "  I  expect  you  at  foar  o'clock."  And  you  go.  The  world  feels  it  is  a 
general  invitation  to  come  around  some  time  and  sit  at  the  gospel  feast,  and  men 
do  not  come  because  they  are  not  specially  invitfid.  It  is  because  you  do  not  tak« 
hold  of  them  and  say,  ' '  My  brother,  come  to  Christ ;  come  now  1  come  now ! " 
How  was  it  that  in  the  days  of  Daniel  Baker,  and  Truman  Osborn,  and  Nettleton, 
80  many  thousands  came  to  Jesus?  Because  those  men  did  nothing  else  but 
invite  them  to  come.  They  spent  their  lifetime  uttering  invitations,  and  they  did 
not  mince  matters  either.  Where  did  Bunyan's  pilgrim  start  from?  Did  he  start 
from  some  easy,  quiet,  cosy  place  t  No ;  if  you  have  read  John  Bunyan's  "  Pil- 
grim's Progress  "  you  will  know  where  he  started  from,  and  that  was  from  the  City 
of  Destruction,  where  every  sinner  starts  from.  Do  you  know  what  Livingstone, 
the  Scotch  minister,  was  preaching  about  in  Scotland  when  three  hundred  souls 
under  one  sermon  came  to  Christ  ?  He  was  preaching  about  the  human  heart  an 
unclean,  and  hard,  and  stony.  Do  you  know  what  George  Whitefield  was  preaching 
about  in  his  first  sermon,  when  fifteen  souls  saw  the  salvation  of  God  ?  It  was  this : 
"Ye  must  be  born  again."  Do  you  know  what  is  the  last  subject  he  ever  preached 
upon?  "Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come."  Oh  I  that  the  Lord  God  would 
oome  into  our  pulpits  and  prayer-meetings,  and  Christian  circles,  and 
bring  us  from  our  fine  rhetoric,  and  profound  metaphysics,  and  our  elegant 
hair-splitting,  to  the  old-fashioned  well  of  gospel  invitation.  {Dr.  Talmage.) 
Attendance  on  Holy  Communion : — I.  In  the  first  place,  then,   what  is  not  pbk- 

8XJMPTI0N   WITH   EEFEEENCB   TO  THB   MATTER  BEFORE   DS  ?      The   iuvitatiou — "  Come, 

for  all  things  are  now  ready,"  may  be  applied  to  that  Holy  Communion  to  which  all 
who  flee  to  Jesus  are  invited.  1.  And  I  would  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  is 
not  presumption  to  be  obedient  to  the  Lord's  command.  Knowledge  ought  to 
induce  obedience.  The  victim  is  slain,  the  sacrifice  is  offered;  Jesus  has  " died, 
the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  os  to  God."  He  who  has  done  all  this 
as  our  Surety  enjoins  this  ordinance  upon  us,  and  tells  us  to  "  do  it  in  remembrance 
of  Him  ?  "  Gratitude  should  induce  obedience.  "  All  things  are  ready."  2.  But, 
secondly,  it  is  not  presumption  to  accept  the  invitation  of  our  heavenly  Xing.  If  we 
are  invited  there  is  no  presumption,  and  there  can  be  no  presumption  in  accepting  the 
invitation.  3.  And  so,  I  observe,  thirdly,  that  it  is  not  presumption  to  come  to  the 
Holy  Communion,  as  all  other  worthy  communicants  do  come.  How  do  those  who  are 
worthy  come  ?  that  is,  those  whom  God  esteems  to  be  worthy  ?  Do  they  come 
because  they  are  holy  ?  that  is,  because  they  are  perfectly  free  from  sin  ?  because 
they  have  no  temptations  around  them,  to  which  sometimes  they  feel  inclined  to 
give  way  ?  No;  it  is  that,  feeling  their  weakness,  they  flee  to  God  for  grace  in  this 
holy  sacrament  of  His  own  appointment.  H.  But  now,  let  us  look  at  the  other 
side  of  the  question,  and  examine  what  is  presumption  in  this  matter  of  which 
WE  ARE  8PEAKINO.  1.  I  auswcr,  then,  to  this  inquiry,  that  it  is  presumption  for 
any  one  to  profess  practically  to  be  wiser  than  God.  This  is  what  those  do,  who 
neglect  Holy  Communion-  2.  But  further,  it  is  presumption,  I  will  allow,  to  attend 
this  holy  ordinance  in  thoughtlessness  and  willing  ignorance.  3.  Then,  thirdly,  it 
is  presumption  to  attend  this  holy  ordinance  while  living  in  wilful  and  acknow- 
ledged sin.  4.  Lastly,  it  would  be  presumption  to  come  to  the  Lord's  table  io  an 
unforgiving  spirit.  (fV.  Cadman,  M.A.)  All  things  are  ready ;  come  : — I.  It  is 
God's  habit  to  hate  aUi  things  beady,  whether  for  His  guests  or  His  creatures. 
Ton  never  find  Him  behindhand  in  anything.  He  has  great  forethought.  1.  God's 
thoughts  go  before  men's  comings.  Grace  is  first,  and  man  at  his  best  follows  its 
footsteps.  2.  This  also  proves  how  welcome  are  those  who  come.  II.  This 
readiness  should  be  an  aroombnt  that  His  saints  should  come  continually  to 
Him  and  find  grace  to  help  in  every  time  of  need.  1.  All  things  are  ready ;  there- 
fore come  to  the  storehouse  of  Divine  promise.  2.  Come  to  the  mercy-seat  in 
prayer ;  all  things  are  ready  there.  3.  Christ  is  always  ready  to  commune 
with  His  people.  4.  For  a  useful  life  in  the  path  of  daily  duty,  ail  things 
are  ready.  5.  For  a  higher  degree  of  holiness  all  things  are  ready.  III.  Thk 
perfect  bbadiness  of  the  feast    of   Divine    mercy   is    evidently    intended 

TO    BE   A  BTRONQ  ARGUMENT   WITH    SINNERS   WHY   THEY   SHOULD  COME  AT  ONCE.      1.  All 

things  are  ready.  2.  All  things  are  ready.  3.  All  things  are  now  ready.  There- 
fore, come  now,  IV.  This  text  disposes  of  a  great  deal  of  talk  about  the 
sinner's  readiness  or  unreadiness.  He  only  needs  to  be  willing.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Form  of  Eastern  invitations: — When  a  person  of  respectable  rank  in  society 
^proposes  to  celebrate  a  feast  in  his  house,  he  forthwith  circulates  his  invitations  to 


CHA».  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE,  S3 

the  friends  he  wishes  to  be  of  the  party,  either  by  card  or  by  a  verbal  message, 
carried  by  a  servant  of  the  house,  or  a  person  hired  for  the  purpose,  and  superbly 
decked,  according  to  the  rank  of  his  employer.  The  following  is  a  specimen  of  the 
form  of  invitation:  "  Such  a  person  [naming  him]  sends  best  compliments  to  such 
another  person  [naming  him  also],  and  begs  to  inform  him  that  as  to-morrow  there 
is  a  little  gaiety  to  take  place  in  his  house,  and  he  wishes  his  friends,  by  their 
presence,  to  grace  and  ornament  with  their  feet  the  house  of  this  poor  individual, 
and  thereby  make  it  a  garden  of  roses,  he  must  positively  come  and  honour  the 
humble  dwelling  with  his  company."  Having  after  this  fashion  gone  to  all  the 
houses,  and  returned  with  assurance  from  the  invited  friends  of  their  intention 
*tO  come  next  day,  a  messenger  is  again  despatched  for  them  at  the  appointed  time, 
to  inform  them  that  all  the  preparations  for  the  banquet  are  completed.  This 
second  invitation  is  included  by  our  Lord,  and  is  very  characteristic  of  Eastern 
manners.  When  Sir  John  Malcolm  was  invited  to  dine  with  the  eldest  son  of  the 
Shah,  the  invitation  was  given  two  days  before,  and  one  of  the  prince's  attendants 
was  despatched  at  the  hour  appointed  for  the  banquet  to  teU  him  that  all  things 
were  ready.  And  Morier  also  informs  us,  that  having  been  engaged  to  dine  with  a 
Persian  Khan,  he  did  not  go  till  his  entertainer  had  sent  to  the  English  ambassador 
and  his  train  to  say  that  supper  waited.  After  the  same  manner,  the  invitations 
to  the  great  supper  described  in  the  parables,  seem  to  have  been  issued  a  consider- 
able time  before  celebration ;  and  as  the  after  invitation  was  sent,  according  to 
Eastern  etiquette,  to  the  guests  invited,  they  must  be  imderstood  as  having 
accepted  the  engagement,  so  that  the  apologies  they  severally  made  were  in- 
admissible, and  could  be  regarded  in  no  other  light  than  as  an  affront  put  upon  the 
generous  entertainer,  and  an  ungrateful  return  for  all  the  splendid  preparation  he 
had  made  for  their  reception.  {Biblical  Things  not  Generally  Known.)  Chinese 
invitation : — Amongst  the  ancient  Chinese  an  invitation  to  an  entertainment  is  not 
supposed  to  bs  ^en  with  sincerity  until  it  has  been  renewed  three  or  four  times 
in  writing.  A  card  is  sent  on  the  evening  before  the  entertainment ;  another  on 
the  morning  of  the  appointed  day ;  and  a  third  when  everything  is  prepared.  The 
invitation  to  this  great  supper  is  supposed  to  have  been  given  when  the  certain  man 
had  resolved  upon  making  it ;  but  it  is  again  repeated  at  supper-time,  when  all 
things  are  ready.  Now,  as  it  does  not  appear  that  the  renewal  of  it  arose  from  the 
refusal  of  the  persons  invited,  of  which  no  hint  is  yet  given,  it  is  clear  that  it  was 
customary  thus  to  send  repeated  messages.  The  practice  is  very  ancient  among 
the  Chinese,  and  no  doubt  it  prevailed  amongst  the  Jews ;  it  certainly  gives  a 
significance  to  the  words  not  otherwise  perceived.  They  all  with  one  consent 
began  to  make  excuse. — The  reasons  why  men  are  not  Christians : — I.  Our  first 
point  relates  to  the  causes  ob  reasons  wht  men  abb  not  Christians,  ob  in  other 

WORDS,  WHY  THEY  WISH  TO  BE  EXCUSED  FROM  BEING   CHRISTIANS — which   is   the   form 

in  which  it  is  presented  in  the  text.  There  is  something  remarkable  in  the  aspect 
which  the  subject  assumes  on  the  first  view  of  it.  Men  ask  to  be  excused,  as  if  it 
were  a  matter  of  favour.  It  is  natural  to  ask,  From  what?  From  a  rich  banquet, 
says  the  parable  from  which  my  text  is  taken.  From  the  hope  of  heaven  through 
Jesus  Christ.  From  loving  God  and  keeping  His  commandments.  From  that 
which  is  fitted  to  make  a  man  more  useful,  respected,  and  beloved  in  life,  re- 
membered with  deeper  affection  when  he  is  dead,  honoured  for  ever  in  heaven.  In 
searching  for  the  causes  or  reasons  why  men  wish  to  be  excused  from  becoming 
Christians,  I  may  be  allowed  to  suggest  that  they  are  often  under  a  strong  tempta- 
tion to  conceal  those  which  are  real,  and  to  suggest  others  which  will  better  answer 
their  immediate  purpose.  My  idea  is,  that  the  real  cause  is  not  always  avowed, 
and  that  men  are  strongly  tempted  to  suggest  others.  The  actual  reason  may  be 
such  as,  on  many  accounts,  a  man  would  have  strong  reluctance  to  have  known. 
The  grand  reason  why  men  are  not  Christians,  as  I  understand  it,  is  the  opposition 
of  the  heart  to  religion;  that  mysterious  opposition  that  can  be  traced  back  through 
aU  hearts,  and  all  generations,  up  to  the  great  apostasy — the  fall  of  Adam.  1.  A 
feeling  that  you  do  not  need  salvation  in  the  way  proposed  in  the  gospel ;  that  yoa 
■do  not  need  to  be  bom  again,  or  pardoned  through  the  merits  of  the  Redeemer. 
The  feeling  is,  that  your  heart  is  by  nature  rather  inclined  to  virtue  than  to  vice, 
to  good  than  to  evil ;  that  the  errors  of  your  life  have  been  comparatively  few, 
vonr  virtues  many.  2.  You  suppose  that  in  your  case  there  is  no  danger  of_  being 
lost — or  not  such  danger  as  to  make  it  a  subject  of  serious  alarm.  The  idea  is 
this,  that  if  the  duties  of  this  life  be  discharged  with  faithfulness,  there  can  be  no 
lerions  ground  of  apprehension  in  regard  to  the  world  to  come.  3.  A  secret 
Toi..  m.  8 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xiY. 

scepticism  about  the  truth  of  Christianity.  The  mind  is  not  settled.  The  belief  ia 
not  firm  that  it  is  a  revelation  from  heaven.  4.  A  fourth  class  are  deterred  by  a 
feeling  that  the  Divine  government  is  unreasonable  and  severe.  In  one  of  His 
parables  the  Saviour  has  taught  us  expressly  that  this  operated  in  preventing  a 
man  from  doing  his  duty,  and  being  prepared  for  His  coming  (Matt.  xxiv.  24,  25). 
6.  A  fifth  class  are  deterred  from  being  Christians  by  hostility  to  some  member 
or  members  of  the  Church.  6.  A  sixth  reason  which  prevents  men  from 
becoming  Christians  is  worldliness — the  desire  of  this  world's  goods,  or  pleasures, 
or  honours.  II.  Our  next  point  is,  to  inqoire  whether  these  bkabons  fob  not 
BBiMO  A  Christian  abs  SATisrAcxoBT.  Satisfactory  to  whom?  you  may  ask.  I 
answer.  To  conscience  and  to  God.  Are  they  such  as  are  sufficient  reasons  for  not 
loving  God  ?  1.  Tou  dare  not  yourselves  urge  them  as  the  real  cause  why  yon  do 
not  attend  to  religion,  and  embrace  the  offers  of  mercy.  They  are  so  little  satis- 
factory to  your  own  minds,  that  when  we  come  to  you  and  urge  you  to  become 
Christians,  we  are  met  with  other  reasons  than  these.  You  resort  to  soma 
difficulty  about  the  doctrine  of  ability,  and  the  decrees  of  God,  some  metaphysical 
subtlety  that  you  know  may  embarrass  as,  but  which  you  think  of  on  no  other 
occasion.  Who  will  dare  to  urge  as  a  reason  for  not  becoming  a  Christian  the  fact 
that  he  is  sensual,  or  proud,  or  worldly-minded,  or  ambitious,  or  covetous,  or  self- 
righteous,  or  that  he  regards  God  as  a  tyrant  ?  2.  These  excuses  will  not  stand 
when  a  man  is  convicted  for  sin.  All,  when  the  hour  comes  in  which  God  designs 
to  bring  them  into  His  kingdom,  confess  that  they  had  no  good  reasons  for  not 
being  His  friends,  and  for  their  having  so  long  refused  to  yield  to  the  claims  of 
God.  3.  The  same  thing  occurs  on  the  bed  of  death.  The  mind  then  is  often 
overwhelmed,  and  under  the  conviction  that  the  excuses  for  not  being  a  Christian 
were  insufficient,  the  sinner  in  horror  dies.  But  I  will  not  dwell  on  that.  I  pass 
to  one  other  consideration.  4.  It  is  this.  These  excuses  will  not  be  admitted  at 
the  bar  of  God.  (A.  Barnes,  D.D.)  Making  excuses: — I.  Au.  excuses  fob 
DISOBEDIENCE  TO  GoD  ABE  VAIN.  1.  One  is,  God  makes  us  sinners,  either  by 
creating  sin  as  a  substantial  property  of  the  soul,  or  by  the  laws  of  propagation, 
just  as  the  other  properties  of  the  mind,  or  as  the  members  of  the  body  are  propa- 
gated. But  can  this  be  so  ?  No.  Sin  is  man's  work.  Sin  is  moral  action — the 
act  or  exercise  of  the  heart.  God  creates  the  man  a  free  moral  agent ;  and  the  man 
makes  himself  a  sinner.  "  0,  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  2.  Again,  it 
is  a  sort  of  standing  excuse  with  some  sinners,  when  urged  to  perform  their  duty,  to 
reply.  We  cannot.  But  what  is  the  nature  of  the  inability?  Their  own  consciousness, 
and  the  Word  of  God,  alike  testify  that  it  is  the  simple  inability  of  disinclination. 
3.  Others  say  there  are  so  many  hypocrites  in  the  world,  that  we  have  our  doubta 
whether,  after  all,  religion  be  a  reality.  But  why  should  there  be  hypocrites,  if 
religion  itself  is  not  a  reality  ?  If  there  were  no  true  bank-notes,  no  bank,  would 
there  be  counterfeits  ?  Do  you  excuse  one  debtor  from  the  payment  of  his  debts, 
because  others  have  paid  you  in  base  coin  ?  There  is  one  principle  which  exhibits 
them  in  all  their  vanity.  God  has  not  revealed  His  law  and  precepts  for  men  to 
alter.  He  knew  all  the  reasons  which  would  or  could  exist  to  impair  the  obligations 
of  each,  to  extenuate  the  guilt  of  transgression ;  and  as  a  righteous  Sovereign,  if 
one  such  reason  could  exist,  would  have  made  the  exception.  But  He  has  not 
made  it.  II.  All  excuses  fob  disobedience  to  the  will  of  God  are  cbiuinal. 
To  make  an  excuse  for  what  we  have  done  is  impenitence,  and  for  not  doing  what 
we  ought  to  do,  is  determined  disobedience.  III.  This  practice  is  most  euinocb. 
The  real  nature  of  disobedience  to  God  cannot  be  altered  by  any  delusive  covering 
we  can  give  it.  To  that  heart  which  "  is  deceitful  above  aU  things,"  self-delusion 
is  an  easy  task.  Nor  is  there  any  form  in  which  it  can  prove  more  certainly  fatal 
than  by  leading  us  to  make  habitual  excuses.  And  who  shall  hope  to  conquer  his 
■ins  who  refuses  to  see  them  ;  who  shall  turn  from  and  escape  the  danger  on  which 
he  shuts  his  eyes  ?  The  sinner  must  take  the  shame  and  guilt  of  sin  to  himself, 
and  clear  his  Maker,  or  nothing  can  be  done  for  him.  Concluding  remarks :  1. 
How  infatuating  is  the  power  of  sin.  2.  How  opposite  is  the  spirit  of  excuses  to 
the  spirit  which  the  gospel  inculcates.  The  one  is  the  spirit  of  treachery  and 
impenitence — the  other,  of  frank,  open  confession,  and  of  devout  contrition.  The 
one  a  spirit  of  determined  perseverance  in  sin,  the  other  a  spirit  of  prompt, 
cheerful  obedience.  The  one  prays,  "  Have  me  excused  " ;  the  other,  "  Search  me, 
O  God  1 "  3.  Let  all  self-excusers  reflect  how  they  must  appear  at  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day.  Should  they  be  permitted  to  offer  these  excuses  at  the  bar  of 
God,  how  will  they  look  7    Tou  plead  your  inability  to  love  God.    Plead  it,  then. 


«Hi*.  xiT.]  8T.  LUKE.  85 

st  the  jndgment-seat  of  CSirist.  Oo  there  and  expose  yoar  ingratitade  and  eninitj, 
by  telling  the  Judge  on  the  throne,  the  Saviour  that  died  for  you — that  you  oould 
not  help  trampling  His  blood  underfoot,  by  not  believing  the  record  of  His  Son. 
riead  the  incessant  occupation  of  your  time — exhibit  then  ita  results — show  your 
bags  of  gold,  your  houses,  your  farms,  your  shops,  and  tell  Him  these  so  occupied 
you,  that  you  had  no  time  for  the  concerns  of  your  soul.  Bring  forward  these  and 
other  apologies.  Will  they  dazzle  the  eye  of  Omniscience — will  they  beguile  the 
Judge  of  the  quick  and  the  dead  ?  You  know  it  will  not.  {N.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Sinful  excuses  :—l.  Some  men  will  say  they  have  no  need  to  come  to  Christ.  This 
arises  from  insensibility,  and  ignorance  of  their  lost  condition.  2.  Others  imagine 
ihey  are  already  come  to  Christ ;  and  the  act  being  performed,  they  have  no  need 
to  repeat  it.  Their  hope  is  too  firmly  fixed  to  be  shaken,  and  their  confidence  too 
deeply  rooted  to  be  overthrown.  Is  there  not  daily  need  of  Christ  ?  Have  there 
been  no  departures  1  and  do  they  not  call  for  a  return  7  Is  faith  to  be  exercised 
but  once f  Why,  then,  are  we  told,  that  "the  just  shall  live  by  his  faith "f  3. 
Pre-engagement  is  another  excuse  which  sinners  make  for  not  coming  to  Christ. 
4.  Some  say  they  have  tried,  but  cannot  come  to  Christ.  5.  Others,  who  are 
deeply  bowed  down  in  spirit,  do  not  so  much  plead  their  inability,  as  their  onfitness 
«nd  onworthiness.  They  do  not  say  they  cannot  come,  but  dare  not  come.  There 
«rs  some  preparations  and  dispositions  necessary,  and  they  are  destitute  of  them. 
Willingness  is  the  only  worthiness  that  Christ  looks  for :  so  that  we  are  to  come  to 
Him  not  with  quaUfications,  but  for  them.  6.  Some  stumble  at  the  austerities  of 
religion,  and  the  dangers  to  which  it  will  expose  them.  They  own  that  it  is 
glorious  in  its  end,  but  complain  that  there  is  something  very  discouraging  in  the 
way.  7.  It  is  the  fear  of  some,  that  if  they  do  come  to  Christ,  they  shaU  either  ba 
rejected,  or  dishonour  Him.  8.  Many  who  do  not  come  to  Christ  now,  purpose  to 
do  so  hereafter.  What  is  hard  to-day  will  be  harder  to-morrow ;  and  it  is  only  tha 
present  hour,  the  present  moment,  that  we  can  call  our  own.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
A  bad  excuse  is  worse  than  none: — I. 'Let  us  try  to  account  fob  the  fact,  the  sad 

VACT,  THAT  HKM  ABB  SO  BEADT  TO  MAKB   EX0DSE8   BATHER   THAN   TO   BBCEIVE   THB  WoBD 

OF  God.  We  account  for  it  in  the  first  place  by  the  fact  that  they  had  no  heart  at 
all  to  accept  the  feast.  Had  they  spoken  the  truth  plainly,  they  would  have  said, 
"  We  do  not  wish  to  come,  nor  do  we  intend  to  do  so."  If  the  real  secret  of  it 
was  that  they  hated  Him  and  despised  His  provisions,  is  it  not  melancholy  that 
they  were  not  honest  enough  to  give  Him  a  "  nay  "  at  once  ?  It  may  be  that  you 
make  this  excuse  to  satisfy  custom. .-  It  is  not  the  custom  of  this  present  age  to  fly 
immediately  in  the  face  of  Christ.  There  are  not  many  men  of  your  acquaintance 
or  mine  who  ostensibly  oppose  religion.  It  may  be  you  make  these  excuses 
because  yovi  have  had  convictions  which  so  haunt  you  at  times  that  you  dare  net 
oppose  Christ  to  His  face.  Satan  is  always  ready  to  help  men  with  excuses.  This 
is  a  trade  of  which  there  is  no  end.  It  certainly  commenced  very  early,  for  aftac 
our  first  parents  had  sinned,  one  of  the  first  occupations  upon  which  they  entered 
was  to  make  themselves  aprons  of  fig-leaves  to  hide  their  nakedness.  If  you  will 
fire  the  gun,  Satan  will  always  keep  you  supplied  with  ammuuition.  II.  We  comj 
to  BECouNT  THESE  EXCUSES.  Many  will  not  come  to  the  great  supper — will  not  be 
Christians  on  the  same  ground  as  those  in  the  parable — they  are  too  busy.  They 
have  a  large  family,  and  it  takes  all  their  time  to  earn  bread  and  cheese  for  thosa 
tittle  mouths.  They  have  a  very  large  business.  Or  else,  if  they  have  no  basiness, 
yet  they  have  so  many  pleasures,  and  these  require  so  much  time — their  butterfly 
visits  during  the  morning  take  up  so  many  hours.  Another  class  say,  "  We  are  too 
bad  to  be  saved.  The  gospel  cries,  'Believe  in  Jesus  Christ  and  live,'  but  it 
«annot  mean  me  ;  I  have  been  too  gross  an  offender."  Then  comes  another  excuse, 
"  Sir,  I  would  trust  Christ  with  my  soul  this  morning,  but  I  do  not  feel  in  a  fit 
state  to  trust  Christ.  I  have  not  that  sense  of  sin  which  I  think  to  be  a  fit  pre- 
paration for  coming  to  Christ."  '  I  think  I  hear  one  say,  "  It  in  too  soon  for  me  to 
4}om3 :  let  me  have  a  little  look  at  the  world  first.  I  am  scarce  fifteen  or  sixteen." 
Others  will  row  in  the  opposite  direction,  pleading,  ••  Alas  I  it  is  too  late."  The 
devil  first  puts  the  clock  back  and  tells  you  it  is  too  soon,  and  when  this  does  not 
serve  his  turn,  he  puts  it  on  and  says,  "  The  hour  is  passed,  the  day  of  grace  is 
over ;  mercy's  gate  is  bolted,  you  can  never  enter  it."  It  is  never  too  late  for  a 
man  to  believe  in  Jesus  while  he  is  out  of  hia  grave. '  Here  comes  another,  "  O  sir, 
I  would  trust  Christ  with  my  soul,  but  it  seems  too  good  to  be  true,  that  God  should 
eave  me  on  the  spot,  this  morning."  My  dear  friend,  dost  thou  measure  God's 
«om  with  thy  buahel  ?    Because   hs  thing  seems  an  amazing  thing  to  thee,  should 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  tc% 

it  therefore  be  amazing  unto  Him  ?  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  cannot  trnat  Christ,  I 
cannot  believe  Him."  It  means,  "  I  will  not."  '  A  man  once  sent  his  servant  to  a 
certain  town  to  fetch  some  goods  ;  and  he  came  back  without  them.  "  Well,  sir, 
why  did  you  not  go  there?  "  "  Well,  when  I  got  to  a  certain  place,  I  came  to  a 
river,  sir,  a  very  deep  river :  I  cannot  swim,  and  I  had  no  boat ;  so  I  could  not  get 
over."  A  good  excuse,  was  it  not  ?  It  looked  so,  but  it  happened  to  be  a  very  bad 
one,  for  the  master  said,  ♦*  Is  there  not  a  ferry  there  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir."  ♦•  Did  you 
ask  the  man  to  take  you  over?"  "No,  sir."  Surely  the  excuse  was  a  mere 
fiction  1  So  there  are  many  things  with  regard  to  our  salvation  which  we  cannot 
do.  Granted,  but  then  there  is  a  ferry  there  1/  There  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  ia 
able  to  do  all  things,  and  you  remember  the  text,  '•  If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know 
how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  Him  ?  "  It  is  true  you  cannot  make 
yourself  a  iiew  heart,  but  did  you  ask  for  a  rew  heart  with  sincerity  and  truth  f 
Did  you  seek  Christ?  If  you  say,  "Yes,  I  did  sincerely  seek  Christ,  and  Christ 
would  not  save  me,"  why  then  you  are  excused  ;  but  there  never  was  a  soul  who 
could  in  truth  say  tbat.  III.  How  foolish  thds  to  make  excuses.  For  first 
remember  with  whom  it  is  you  are  dealing.  You  are  not  making  excuses  before  a 
man  who  may  be  duped  by  them,  but  you  make  these  excuses  before  the  heart- 
searching  God.  Eemember,  again,  what  it  is  you  are  trifling  with.  It  is  your 
own  soul,  the  soul  which  can  never  die.  You  are  trifling  with  a  heaven 
which  you  will  never  see  if  you  keep  on  with  these  excuses.  Eemember, 
again,  that  these  excuses  will  look  very  different  soon.  How  will  you  make 
excuses  when  you  come  to  die,  as  die  you  must?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
recusancy  of  the  guests : — I.  Gospel-peovision,  as  it  is  generally  ofpeeed,  so 
IT  is  generally  refused.  1.  Befused  by  most  of  the  (1)  Kulers  (John  vii.  48; 
1  Cor.  ii.  8) ;  (2)  Learned  men  (Acts  xvii.  18) ;  (3)  Common  people.  2.  In  what  respectn 
this  refusal  is  general.  (1)  In  respect  of  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  mem 
generally  look  upon  as  strange  and  incredible,  and  so  will  not  believe,  but  rather 
scoff  at  it.  (2)  In  respect  of  gospel  discipline,  which  seems  hard,  and  so  men  will 
not  submit  to  it.  (3)  In  respect  of  gospel  professors.  Men  generally  despise  them, 
and  care  not  for  their  company  (John  vii.  49),  3.  Why  this  refusal  is  so  general. 
The  three  grand  enemies  of  man's  salvation  are  opposed  to  the  gospel.  (1)  The 
world,  or  the  powers  of  the  earth  without  us.  (2)  The  flesh,  or  the  power  of  cor- 
rupted nature  within  us.     (3)  The  devil,  or  the  power  of  hell  beneath  us.    Uses. 

1.  Information.  Christ's  flock  is  a  little  flock  (Luke  xii.  32).  Multitude  is  no  true 
note  of  a  Church.  2.  Caution.  (1)  Though  men  generally  refuse  true  happiness, 
yet  men  generally  desire  some  kind  of  happiness  (Psa.  iv.  6).  Their  natural  desire 
is  a  stock  to  graft  the  plant  of  grace  upon.  (2)  Though  men  generally  refuse  the 
gospel,  yet  there  may  be  more  receive  it  than  we  are  aware  of  (Rom.  xi.  3).  (3) 
Though  men  generally  refuse  the  gospel,  yet  many  do  receive  it  (Heb.  ii.  10).  (4) 
Though  the  Jews  generally  refused  the  gospel,  yet  they  shall  generally  receive  it 
(Rom.  xi.  26).  3.  Exhortation.  Do  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil.  II.  Una- 
nimity OB  conspiracy  in  refusal.  1.  The  refusers  of  the  gospel  agree  in  that, 
though  they  may  differ  in  many  respects,  such  as  nation,  religion,  affection,  &e, 

2.  How  they  agree.  This  will  appear — (1)  In  the  design  they  drive  at,  which  is  to 
oppose  the  power  of  godliness.  (2)  In  the  principle  they  act  from  :  natural  light, 
carnal  reason,  which  is  not  only  dim-sighted  about,  but  prejudiced  against,  spiritual 
things.  (3)  In  the  rule  they  walk  by,  which  is  their  own  will,  their  lust  their  law 
^Eph.  ii.  2,  3).  (4)  In  the  way  which  they  take  to  carry  on  their  opposition  to  the 
gospel,  (a)  They  lay  their  heads  together  as  one  in  a  way  of  consultation,  (b) 
They  join  their  hearts  together  in  a  way  of  approbation,  taking  pleasure  in  the  sina 
of  one  another  (Rom.  i.  32).  (c)  Tiiey  strike  their  hands  together  as  one,  in  a  way 
of  confederation  (Psa.  Ixxxiii.  5).  III.  Readiness  to  refuse.  IV.  The  plausibility 
or  hypocrisy  op  the  excuses.  Men  will  have  none  of  Christ,  and  yet  would  put 
it  off  fairly  if  they  could  (Psa.  xxxvi.  2).  1.  What  are  the  excuses  or  pleas  which 
sinners  make  ?  (1)  They  plead  multiplicity  of  worldly  business.  (2)  The  frequency 
and  urgency  of  outward  temptations.  (3)  They  plead  the  society  and  fellowship  ot 
others  in  their  way.  (4)  The  weakness  of  their  nature.  (5)  The  smallness  of  the 
sin.  (6)  Their  good  intentions.  (7)  The  unnecessariness  of  such  strictness  in 
religion.  (8)  The  impossibility  of  fulfilling  God's  law.  (9)  The  inequality  of  God's 
ways.  2.  Why  do  sinners  make  excuse  ?  (1)  It  is  the  nature  of  fallen  man  to  do 
BO  (Gen.  iii.  12,  13).  (2)  Sin  is  so  ugly  that  sinners  will  not  have  it  appear  in  ita 
proper  colours ;  therefore  foul  sins  must  have  fair  names  to  make  them  go  down 


CHAP.  xiT.]  Sr.  LUKE.  31 

the  better.    If  sin  were  to  appear  in  its  cnrsed  nature  and  wretched  effects,  it  would 
BO  frighten  men  that  they  would  take  no  pleasure  in  committing  it.    Uses.    1.  This 
informs  us  of  the  madness  of  wickedness.     2.  Though  sinners  excuse  their  sin,  yet 
their  sin  will  accuse  them.     3.  Do  not  deceive  yourselves  by  vain  excuses  or  false 
reasonings  (James  i.  22).     {John  Crump.)        A  common  sin: — The  making  of  idle 
excuses  is  the  oldest,  as  it  is  the  commonest  of  sins.    It  began  with  Adam  in  Para- 
liise,  and  ever  since  that  time  men  have,  more  or  less,  continued  with  one  consent 
to  make  excuse.     First,  let  us  look  at  some  excuses  which  people  make  for  putting 
off  repentance.    Now  listen  to  the  story  of  one  who  repented  late,  but  in  time. 
During  the  London  Mission,  a  lady,  one  of  the  Church  workers  in  a  certain  parish, 
noticed  a  young  girl  lingering  one  night  by  a  church  door,  where  the  mission  ier- 
vice  was  aoout  to  commence.    She  invited  the  girl  to  enter,  but  she  excused  herself 
on  the  plea  that  she  had  no  Bible.     The  lady  offered  her  own,  and  accompanied 
the  girl  into  churoh,  where  she  was  evidently  much  affected.    On  leaving  the  church, 
the  lady  begged  her  companion  to  accept  the  Bible,  in  which  her  own  name  w»s 
■written,  and  the  girl  passed  out  of  her  sight.    Next  morning  the  lady  visited  a 
hospital,  where  she  was  accustomed  to  read  to  the  patients,  and  a  nurse  informed 
her  that  they  had  a  Bible  bearing  her  name  which  had  been  brought  in  on  the 
previous  night.    The  young  girl,  after  leaving  the  mission  service,  had  been  run 
over,  and  taken  mortally  injured  to  the  hospital,  carrying  the  Bible  with  her.     She 
died  the  same  night,  and  her  dying  words  were  these :  *'  Thank  God  it  was  not 
before  last  night."    Another  common  excuse  for  delaying  repentance  is  this,  "I 
am  no  worse  than  others."    I  was  speaking  lately  to  a  mother  about  the  sin  of  her 
daughter,  and  she  excused  her  on  the  plea  that  she  was  no  worse  than  others  in  a 
higher  position,  and  instanced  a  lady  who  had  sinned  in  the  same  way.     But,  my 
brethren,  surely  sin  is  none  the  less  a  sin  because  it  is  committed  in  the  company 
t)f  others.     Again,  people  excuse  themselves  by  saying,  "It  is  so  hard  to  repent." 
But  it  is  still  harder  to  die  in  our  sins,  and  receive  the  wages  of  sin,  which  is  death. 
It  is  hard  to  give  up  bad  habits,  but  it  is  harder  still  to  be  ruined  by  them.    Now 
let  us  look  at  another  class  of  excuses  which  people  make  for  staying  away  from 
church.    One  of  these  excusers  says,  "Church-going  will  save  no  one,"    That  is 
quite  true.   ""You  may  come  to  church  in  a  wrong  state  of  mind,  or  from  an  un- 
worthy motive,  and  no  good  will  come  out  of  it.    Attendance  at  church  is  a 
means  of  grace,  not  grace  itself.    If  rightly  used  it  is  a  means  of  placing  us  in  the 
way  of  salvation,  and  of  keeping  us  there.    If  you  get  into  a  railway  carriage  at  the 
station,  the  mere  act  of  doing  so  will  not  take  you  to  London,  but  if  you  do  not  first 
get  in,  the  train  cannot  carry  you  there.    Another  self-excuser  says,  "Church- 
going  is  a  mere  form  and  show ;  pure  religion  is  not  outside,  bat  inside  one. "     It 
is  perfectly  true  that  pure  religion  is  inside,  and  not  outside.    But  surely  we  must 
show  outside  what  we  feel  inside.     Suppose  that  your  landlord  were  to  reduce  your 
Tent  20  per  cent,  because  of  the  bad  times,  and  were  to  give  your  children  a 
handsome  present  as  well,  you  would,  I  think,  go  up  to  his  house  to  thank  him, 
and  you  would  not  consider  it  a  mere  show.    You  would  not  leave  him  to  imagine 
the  gratitude  inside  you.    Well,  one  of  the  chief  reasons  why  we  come  to  cLurch 
is  to  thank  God  for  His  goodness,  and  to  openly  declare  "  the  wonders  that  He 
doeth  for  the  children  of  men." '  Another  meets  us  with  the  old,  old  plea,  "  I  was 
not  very  well  on  Sunday."    It  is  a  curious  fact  that  more  people  are  unwell  on 
Sunday  than  on  any  other  day  of  the  week.     They  are  quite  able  to  attend  to 
business  on  Saturday,  and  are  quite  fresh  and  ready  for  work  on  Monday,  but  they 
are  poorly  on  Sunday.  "  I  am  afraid  the  disease  is  one  of  the  will  rather  than  the 
body.    I  will  only  speak  of  one  more  excuse,  as  common  as  it  is  foolish.     "  I  don't 
go  to  church  myself,"  says  a  man,  "but  my  wife  goes."     So  much  the  better  for 
file  wife,  so  much  the  worse  for  the  husband.     Tou  aannot  do  your  duty  by 
deputy,  and  you  cannot  save  your  soul  oy  deputy.    Every  one  of  us  must  answer 
for  himself.    'There  is  an  old  legend  of  a  man  who  never  attended  church,  but 
whose  wife  went  regularly.    Both  died,  and  when  they  came  to  the  gates  of  Para- 
dise the  woman  passed  in.     But  when  the  husband  presented  himself,  the  keeper 
ol  the  gate  said,  "  Your  wife  worshipped  God  for  both  of  you,  now  she  has  gone 
into  Paradise  for  both  of  you,  you  cannot  enter  here."    My  friends,  you  who  have 
been  trying  to  excuse  yourselves  from  doing  what  is  right,  think  on  these  things.' 
[H.  J,  fVilmat  Bujcton,  M.A.)        £xcM»e»  ;-f There  is  scarcely  a  sin  which  we  can 
commit,  tor  which,  to  ourselves  if  not  to  others,  we  cannot  find  some  excuse.  ^  If 
we  have  told  a  direct  falsehood,  we  say  to  ourselves  that  we  were  surprised  into  it : 
we  were  asked  a  question  on  the  sadden ;  and  in  the  hurry,  taken  off  our  guard,  we 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xtr, 

answered  it  one  way  when  we  should  hare  answered  it  another:  it  was  the  fault  of 
the  master  who  asked  such  a  question ;  why  oould  he  not  have  let  it  alone  ?  For 
other  acts  of  sin  there  is  the  excuse  of  temptation  :  we  should  not  have  done  it  but 
for  bad  example,  or  the  suggestion  or  solicitation  of  another ;  it  was  scarcely  our 
act ;  circumstances  caused  it ;  and  so  Providence  itself  is  sometimes  made  to  share 
the  blame  with  us.  So  much  for  sins  of  commission ;  each  has  its  appropriate 
excuse.  And  even  more  is  this  so  with  our  omissions.  We  scarcely  ever  neglect 
a  private  duty  without  making  to  ourselves  some  excuse  for  it.  We  omit  or  post- 
pone our  morning  prayer  ;  which  of  us  does  not  excuse  this  for  the  time,  and  then 
tind  that  the  exouse  extends  itself  indefinitely  to  other  times?  The  Bible  is  left 
unread  one  day  ;  we  have  an  excuse  for  it ;  the  next  day  it  is  still  less  thought  of, 
btiU  more  easily  let  alone.  But  excuses  made  for  these  single  acts  of  neglect  are 
only  examples  of  those  with  which  we  palliate  a  life  of  neglect.  Do  not  make 
e:i:cuse  for  forgetting  God.  Think  of  it  as  a  sin,  a  daily,  hourly  sin.  /  Think  of  it 
too  as  a  loss,  a  daily,  hourly  diminution  or  deprivation  of  happiness.  Think  that, 
if  you  coutinue  thus,  you  are  undone  ;  that  it  is  only  by  turning  to  God  tbat  you 
can  escape.  This,  which  sounds  little,  is  a  great  thing.  Put  away  excuses. 
Attempt  none  to  yourselves ;  attempt  none  to  Qod.  No  man  will  make  an 
excuse  to  himself  for  not  being  happy ;  then  do  not  you.  Excuses  will  never 
cease  till  earth  ceases.  Then  they  will.  Before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ 
no  excuses  wiU  be  heard ;  none  will  be  attempted.  Then,  in  the  words  of 
Scripture,  *'  every  mouth  will  be  stopped."  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Excuses: — If  I 
invite  you  to  my  house:  "My  friend,  on  Tuesday  evening  I  shall  be  at  home, 
amid  my  pictures  you  admire,  with  music  which  yon  love,  gathering  a  circle 
of  gentlemen  whom  you  like;  will  you  make  one  of  us?"  Then,  if  you  do 
not  care  a  straw  for  my  friendship,  had  as  lief  as  not  I  rate  yon  a  boor,  you 
would  probably  return  me  no  answer,  or  tear  up  my  message  in  the  face  of  the 
messenger,  or  say,  "Go  tell  him  I  won't  come — and  that's  all."  But  if  you 
return  me  an  excuse,  you  acknowledge  our  friendship  and  yourself  a  gentleman. 
Perhaps  the  above  is  a  small  class ;  at  any  rate  it  is  not  a  class  to  be  reached 
by  kind  appeals.  Such  persons  do,  indeed,  become  converted,  bat  it  is  through 
some  fear,  by  the  lash,  by  some  shock.  Yon  are,  however,  not  of  that  class; 
you  render  an  excuse.  Observe,  then ;  taking  up  my  former  homely  illus- 
tration, which,  lest  I  offend,  we  will  transpose.  You  invite  me  to  your  pictures, 
music,  board,  entertaining.  I  read,  thinking :  "  This  man  would  do  me  a  favour, 
would  make  me  happy ;  he  is  my  father's  friend  and  mine ;  has  seen  me  in  trouble, 
coming  to  me :  now  sees  me  prospered,  and  would  rejoice  with  me,  going  to  him; 
but  my  feet  are  slippered,  I  am  sitting  at  my  ease,  by  my  own  grate,  with  Motley  or 
Dickens.  I  prefer  home."  Is  this  an  excuse  sufficient,  and  would  our  friendship 
outlive  such  a  truth-telling  ?  No  ;  I  might  lie  :  "  I  am  sick,  exouse  me,  have  an 
imperative  engagement."  These  society  lies  I — and  these  are  good  reasons,  if  real 
reasons.  You  cannot  see  my  heart  to  detect  the  truth  or  falsehood.  Neighbours, 
hear  me,  for  eternity's  sake,  receive  it.  Christ's  word  is:  "  Come,  for  all  things  are  now 
ready."  Your  excuse  must  be  a  sufficient  excuse ;  and  it  must  be  an  honest  excuse, 
for  He  can  see  clean  through  camel's  hair  and  silk,  through  Melton  and  broadcloth, 
to  the  secret  reason  written  on  the  heart.  "  My  business  is  such  that  I  pray  Thee, 
O  Christ,  have  me  excused."  Well,  let  ns  suppose  you  are,  in  this,  sincere.  la 
yours  an  immoral  business  ?  No.  Do  you  transact  it  in  a  dishonest  or  otherwise 
immoral  way  7  No.  What,  then,  do  you  mean  ?  I  mean  this :  Times  are  hard, 
trade  must  be  watched.  "  I  am  well  enough  off  now  :  "  and  this  time  it  is  a  woman 
who  speaks.  Why  should  she  worry  herself  ?  She  has  a  good  husband ;  to  be  sure 
he  is  not  a  Christian,  but  where  is  a  nobler  man  ?  What  lacks  she  yet?  Nothing. 
Good  lady,  may  I  ask,  dare  you  pat  that  in  a  prayer  :  "  O  Lord,  because  I  lack 
nothing,  I  pray  Thee  excuse "  ?  Dare  you  say  in  good  English,  "  Lord,  my 
heart  is  full.  That  husband  I  If  I  was  widowed,  childless,  roofless,  desolate, 
then  I — "?  You  ask  me  if  I  mean  to  hint  that  you  love  these  too  much? 
A  thousand  times  then,  no ;  but  that  you  love  the  Giver  too  little,  yes.  "  I 
pray  Thee  have  me  excused,  because  I  am  good  enough  now ;  I  need  no  oonver- 
sion."  Well,  neighbour,  that  means  something  or  nothing.  TyndaU  calls  me  to  his 
marvellous  evenings  of  experiment  with  light.  It  is  from  the  point  very  far  from 
me  to  profess  a  knowledge  of  grammar,  addition,  subtraction,  as  thorough  as  my 
neighbour.  Can  the  great  phUosopher  teach  me  ought — no  matter  how  much  I 
know  of  algebra  ?  Christ  professes  to  have  come  not  to  recall  the  righteous  but 
linners.     They  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician,  but  the  sick.    And  I  humbl/ 


«Hi».  xiT.]  ST.  LUKE.  St 

urge  upon  you,  the  purest  moral  man  of  this  good  audience,  that  this  call  is  sent 
for  your  ears.    He  invites  you  to  His  heart-feast.     If  now  you  can  truthfully  say  : 
**  Christ,  I  am  good  enough ;  my  soul  is  as  beautiful  as  Tour  soul ;  my  thoughts  ar« 
«B  lofty  as  Tour  thoughts  ;  the  walls  of  my  spirit  are  hung  with  pictures  as  rare  aa 
Tour  own,  and  the  feast  of  my  heart  at  its  own  board  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired,'* 
then  your  excuse  means  something.     Tou  ought  to  be  excused.  Indeed,  you  are  not 
invited.  No,  ninety  and  nine  df  a  hundred  do  not  mean  wbat  they  say  when  declaring 
that  they  are  good  enough,  needing  no  conversion.    It  is  too  bare  conceit.  "  I  could 
not  hold  out ;  have  me  exous=ed."    Friend,  be  honest ;  such  is  not  your  real  reason. 
Ton  are  not  the  man  to  undertake  and  fail ;  or  to  refuse  to  undertake  what  you  really 
desire.  The  truth  is,  you  do  not  desire  to  follow  Christ.  "  I  do  not  believe  in  the  Book." 
Be  honest.     Tou  have  tried  to  disbelieve  ever  since  you  backsUd,  five  years  ago ;  yet 
you  do  believe  in  the  Bible.    The  truth  is,  your  proud  heart  will  not  say  "  Forgive." 
(E,  J.  Haynes.)        Invitation  and  excuse  : — Excuses  are  specified  by  our  Lord,  and 
these  all  relate  to  necessary  and  even  laudable  things.    These  excuses  may  be  taken 
as  in  division  or  in  succession ;  that  is  to  say,  one  man  may  be  supposed  to  make 
one  excuse,  and  another  man  another,  or  you  may  suppose  the  same  man  making 
all  these  excuses  one  after  another.    For  Truth  does  not  make  to  a  man  one  good 
offer,  and  then  no  more ;  but  if  we  are  invited  by  Truth,  we  are  invited  again  and 
again.  Perhaps  it  will  be  most  useful  to  ourselves  to  think  of  these  excuses  as  made 
in  succession.     Thus,  we  are  under  an  engagement  to  give  our  attention  to  things 
just  and  true ;  we  are  under  it  by  virtue  of  our  training,  by  virtue  of  our  own 
voluntary  effort  directed  to  good ;  we  are  under  an  engagement  to  attend  at  the 
banquet  of  Truth.  Well,  now  the  hour  arrives  ;  Truth  wants  us,  and  the  messenger 
comes.     We  are  very  sorry,  but  that  "  piece  of  land  " ; — still  we  consider  ourselves 
onder  the  engagoment ;  we  shall  be  more  fortunate  next  time ;  for,  after  all,  it  is  we  that 
have  to  regret  our  failure.    Another  time,  then,  arrives;  we  are  very  sorry,  but  that 
**  piece  of  land  "  has  engaged  us  so  much,  that  we  have  found  it  necessary  to  obtain 
•everal  "  yoke  of  oxen  "  to  bring  it  into  proper  condition  ;  we  are  very  sorry ;  still 
we  consider  ourselves  under  the  same  engagement,  and  we  hope  to  be  more  fortunate 
the  next  time.     Then  the  messenger  comes  a  third  time :  oar  services  are  indeed 
wanted  now ;  onr  presence  cannot  be  dispensed  with ;  and  now  we  say,  ' '  This  is 
unfortunate.     Our  land  is  in  excellent  condition  ;  indeed  we  have  had  so  much  to 
look  after,  that  we  have  felt  it  necessary  to  take  a  wife,  in  order  that  our  domestic 
affairs  may  be  superintended.     We  have  met  with  an  amiable  person,  possessing  an 
agreeable  fortune,  and  we  have  concluded  a  domestic  and  commercial  arrangement." 
And  now,  perhaps,  Truth  leaves  us,  and  "lets  us  alone."    But  three  times  may 
represent  any  number  of  times,  and  Truth  often  comes  more  than  three  times.  Let, 
then,  Truth  be  supposed  to  come  a  fourth  time.    Well,  now  we  are  all  very  much 
engaged  ;  the  whole  house  is  in  a  flutter  of  delight ;  there  is  a  feast  to  celebrate 
the  birth  of  our  firstborn  1    So,  then.  Truth  comes  a  fifth  time,  just  when  one  of  the 
children  is  sick  of  fever ;  and  we  look  at  Truth  quite  reproachfully,  and  say,  "Too 
would  not  expect  me  to  come  now,  would  you  ?  "    And  once  again  Truth  comes,  for 
the  last  time ;  and  now  the  house  is  in  confusion,  and  there  are  signs  of  distress, 
and  Truth  is  informed  that  we  were  not  content,  though  we  were  prospering  exceed- 
ingly well ;  bat  that,  hearing  of  some  gold-diggings,  we  had  gone  out,  and  whilst  we 
were  io  the  golden  pit,  a  great  piece  of  quartz  rock  had  fallen  and  crushed  our  chest 
right  in,  and  there  was  a  nugget  fonnd  in  the  very  middle  of  our  heart,  and  so  an 
end  of  us !    That  is  a  plain  picture  of  what  happens  again  and  again.     There  are 
all  sorts  of  nuggets — they  need  not  be  made  of  literal  gold — there  are  all  sorts  of 
nuggets  upon  which  a  man  sets  his  heart ;  and  often  the  very  attainment  of  the 
nagget,  when  he  gets  it  right  into  the  centre  of  that  heart,  is  his  utter  destruction. 
For  now  the  world  will  never  get  any  more  benefit  of  him ;  and  Truth  has  visited 
him  for  the  last  time.     (T.  T.  Lynch.)         Butinesa  hindering  religion  : — I  said  one 
day  to  a  respectable  tradesman,  "When  are  you  going  to  begin  to  think  of  eternity 
and  come  to  the  house  of  God  t "    Hia  reply  I  shall  never  forget.    "  I  know,  sir, 
that  I  ought  to  come ;  but  it's  no  use ;  my  mind  is  so  full  of  business,  I  can  think 
of  nothing  else."    {Tfiain  Davidson,  D.D.)        Human  depravity  at  the  bottom  of  all 
exeuiet : — I  was  at  a  conference  held  about  the  state  of  the  people  in  Liverpool.     It 
was  a  large  conference,  with  the  Mayor  in  the  chair.     They  were  conferring  about 
why  it  was  that  so  many  of  the  working  people  particularly  would  not  go  to  church 
or  chapel,  but  would  lie  about  on  Sundays  and  seem  to  have  nothing  but  an  animal 
life.     One  man  after  another  made  a  speech  about  it.    Tou  never  heard  such  a 
■amber  of  reasons  given :  too  hard  work  on  Saturdays — which  seemed  to  me  to  be 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

a  strange  thing ;  or  they  had  no  place  near  them  which  suited  them ;  or  the 
preachers  did  not  preach  well  enough  ;  or  the  sermons  were  too  long ;  or  they  did 
not  like  pews  ;  or  they  did  not  get  the  best  seats  when  they  went  to  church ;  or  pew- 
rents  were  required.  You  never  heard  such  a  number  of  reasons — the  people  that 
did  not  go  to  church  were  not  to  blame,  it  was  always  the  people  about  the  church, 
or  in  the  church,  who  were  to  blame,  till  at  last  an  old  man  got  up  (1  think  from 
his  speech  he  was  a  Scotchman,  and  said,  •'  Mr.  Mayor,  there  is  one  reason  that 
■trikes  me  that  I  have  not  heard  a  word  about  yet " — they  had  spoken  for 
an  hour  and  a  half — "I  think  it  is  the  reason  of  the  whole  thing."  We 
were  all  struck  dumb  to  hear  what  this  was.  "  What  I  have  to  say 
is  that  the  most  of  it  comes  from  human  depravity."  (D.  Froser,  D.D.) 
Distinguish  between  reasons  and  excuses :-i- An  "excuse"  is  an  entirely  different 
thing  from  "a  reason."  "A  reason"  comes  into  the  mind  before  a  conclusion; 
"  an  excuse  "  follows  after.  The  conclusion  rests  upon  the  •'  reason."  Its  only 
wish  is  to  appear  to  rest  upon  the  "excuse."  "A  reason"  is  a  reality;  an 
"excuse"  is,  generally,  an  invention:  or,  at  the  best,  an  "excuse"  is  the  second 
or  inferior  "reason."  It  is  not  the  primary,  actuating  motive.  The  "reason" 
Adam  ate  the  fruit  was  that  he  liked  it ;  the  "  excuse  "  was,  "  She  gave  it  me." 
The  "  reason  "  why  the  man  "  hid  his  talent,"  was,  that  he  was  indifferent  and 
lazy — "  a  wicked  and  slothful  servant "  ;  the  "  excuse  "  was,  "  I  knew  thee — thou 
art  an  austere  man."  The  "  reason"  the  Jews  killed  Christ,  was,  because  they  were 
jealous  of  Him  ;  and  hated  Him  for  His  holiness  and  His  reproofs  ;  the  "excuse  " 
was  that  He  spoke  against  Ctesar,  and  uttered  blasphemy.  The  "  reason  "  why  all 
the  men  who  were  "  bidden  to  the  great  supper"  refused  to  come,  was  that  they 
did  not  care  for  it ;  or  preferred  something  else  ;  the  "  excuses"  were  the  same — o£ 
duty,  and  prior  or  more  important  engagements.  If  you  knew  God — and  what 
those  "  things "  are  "  which  He  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him,"  all 
"  excuses  "  would  be  flung  to  the  winds.  It  would  not  be,  "  Have  me  excused  I  " 
but,  "  I  come  1 "  "I  come  1 "  " Me  first — me  now — me  for  ever  1  Lord,  bid  me — 
Lord,  let  me — Lord,  make  me  come  1  "  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Excuses : — God's 
supper  is  ready,  and  the  call  to  it  is  pressed  with  urgency,  but  people  make  excuses, 
and  do  not  come.  People  have  no  mind  for  salvation.  The  many  have  too  much 
to  do,  too  many  pressing  cares,  too  many  honourable  engagements  pre-occupying 
their  attention,  and  so  cannot  comply  with  the  calls  of  God.  /  Such  useful  citizens, 
Bueh  respectable  men  of  business,  such  thinkers  for  the  comfort  of  their  fellow- 
citizens,  and  for  the  welfare  of  the  State,  are,  forsooth,  not  to  be  expected  to  give  their 
time  and  thoughts  to  piety  and  to  God  I  Of  course,  tJiey  are  to  be  excused  I  But, 
alas  iEor  thee,  deluded  man,  if  with  thy  lands,  or  thy  oxen,  or  thy  "  material 
interests,"  or  even  with  thy  learned  investigations,  though  they  should  be  in 
divinity  itself,  thou  hopest  to  compensate  for  thy  neglect  of  the  calls  and 
invitations  of  thy  Maker  I  But  others  are  so  happy  in  the  objects  of  their  earthly 
affection,  so  blessed  with  things  of  their  own,  that  they  see  no  reason  to  disturb  or 
burden  themselves  with  attention  to  these  sacred  matters.  Why,  the  world  wac 
made  to  be  enjoyed  1  God  would  not  have  created  for  us  all  these  pleasant  things 
if  it  were  not  excusable  in  us  to  make  the  best  of  them  while  we  can  !  Why  should 
we  incommode  our  pleasant  homes  and  joyous  circles  with  religion's  rigid  rules? 
Surely  the  good  Father  in  heaven  does  not  wish  to  make  us  unhappy.  He  will  not 
be  offended  with  what  harms  no  one,  and  yet  is  so  delightful  to  us  1  He  will  excuse 
us  I  'Alas,  they  have  married  themselves  to  earthly  loves,  and  lusts,  and  vanities  ; 
and  so  they  "  cannot  come."  Effeminate  pleasures,  though  mingled  with  pains, 
and  transient  as  the  honeymoon,  are  their  apology  for  letting  go  their  chance  to 
secure  the  eternal  blessedness  of  heaven.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  excuses : — 
"  I  pray  thee,  have  me  excused."  I  do  not  think  you  can  offer  a  worse  prayer  than 
that.  Of  all  the  prayers  that  ever  left  human  lips,  and  of  all  the  desires  that 
ever  formed  themselves  within  human  hearts,  I  think  this  is  the  most  fatal. 
Mast  I  not  go  as  far  aa  to  say  that  such  a  reception  of  the  offer  of  God's  mercy 
constitutes  the  grand  crowning  sin  of  man?  One  might  have  expected  there 
would  have  been  quite  a  demand  for  invitations,  that  everybody  would  have  been 
besieging  the  house  and  asking  the  chamberlain,  or  the  secretary,  or  the  great 
person,  whoever  he  might  be,  "  Can  you  give  us  an  invitation  to  the  feast  ? "  When 
one  of  our  princes  is  married,  only  a  certain  number  of  invitations  are  issued  ;  and 
only  a  certain  number  of  people  oan  be  present  on  the  occasion.  Supposing  the 
tickets  for  such  a  ceremony  could  be  sold,  I  wonder  what  they  would  fetch.  I 
should  not  be  surprised  if  some  gentlemen  in  London  would  be  ready  to  pay  down 


OBAP.  xiT.]  ST.  LUKE.  41 

a  hundred  or  five  hundred  pounds,  juat  for  the  privilege  of  being  present  and  being 
able  to  say,  "  I  saw  Prince  So-and-so  married."  But  the  honour  cannot  be  bought 
for  money ;  you  must  occupy  a  high  social  position  before  you  can  get  such  an 
invitation.  Whoever  heard  of  a  man  in  such  circumstances  making  an  excuse  ? 
Now  about  these  excuses.  I  want  you  to  observe,  my  friends,  how  these  men 
received  the  message.  In  Matthew's  Gospel  we  read  of  some  who  "  entreated  the 
servants  spitefully,  and  slew  them."  And  there  has  been  always  a  class  of  that 
kind — I  mean  to  say,  that  there  is  always  a  certain  number  of  persons  bitterly 
hostile  to  religion.  They  hate  it.  If  they  could,  they  would  kindle  the  fires  of 
Smithfield  again.  There  was  another  class  of  persons  to  whom  the  invitation 
came ;  and  who  are  they  ?  The  man  whom  he  now  addresses  is  a  most  polite  and 
civil  person,  a  perfect  gentleman.  Oh,  dear  me,  no  !  Say  a  rough  word  I  Never 
thought  of  such  a  thing.  "  My  good  sir,  now  I  hope  you  will  understand  that  the 
very  last  thing  I  wish  is,  to  convey  to  the  mind  of  that  admirable  person  who  sent 
you  on  your  errand  anything  like  a  feeling  of  contempt  for  the  kind  invitation 
which  he  has  been  good  enough  to  offer  me.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  the  greatest 
possible  respect  for  him.  I  should  be  very  sorry  indeed  if  anything  I  said  hurt  his 
feelings  in  the  least  degree ;  but  the  real  plain  truth  of  it  is,  that  you  know,  sir,  I 
am  in  a  very  awkward  position.  I  should  be  very  glad  to  go  to  the  feast ;  I  have 
no  doubt  it  is  an  excellent  feast.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  asked  to  go  to  such  a 
place;  at  the  same  time,  it  so  happens  very  unfortunately  that  I  have  got  something 
else  on  hand.  I  have  just  bought  an  estate  over  there ;  I  am  just  going  to  start  to 
see  it.  That  is  the  way  it  was  done — civilly,  respectfully,  I  may  almost  say, 
reverently:  but  it  was  done  all  the  same.  And  that  is  just  the  way  it  is  done  by 
many  still.  When  I  ask  the  question.  How  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  rejected  in  our 
England  in  the  nineteenth  century  ?  I  find  my  answer,  not  merely  in  the  open 
blasphemy,  not  merely  in  the  atheism  and  unbelief.  I  find  the  terrible  answer 
coming  back  to  me,  "  He  is  rejected  by  the  people  who  go  to  church,  who  hear  the 
message  of  salvation  sounded  in  their  ears  from  Sunday  to  Sunday,  who  have  bad 
great  privileges,  and  who  will  tell  you  they  have  great  respect  for  religion. "_  They 
subscribe  to  the  Church  Missionary  Society,  or  to  any  other  society  they  think  will 
do  good.  Now  observe  the  excuses  that  these  men  made  did  not  refer  to  things 
evil  in  themselves.  Then,  observe,  once  again — and  this  seems  to  me  to  be  a  very 
interesting  and  instructive  point — it  was  not,  after  all,  the  pressure  of  necessary 
engagements  that  kept  these  people  back  from  the  feast.  That  is  a  very  remarkable 
thing.  The  man  does  not  say,  '•  I  am  just  on  the  point  of  transacting  a  bargain 
for  a  piece  of  land ;  but  the  deeds  are  waiting  to  be  signed ;  and  I  cannot  sign  the 
deeds  before  I  see  the  piece  of  land."  It  is  not  a  case  of  necessity  of  that  kind. 
Observe  the  lesson.  It  is  not  the  necessary  occupations  of  life  that  keep  men  back 
from  Christ.  What  is  it?  What  did  the  man  want  to  go  and  see  his  land  for  ?  In 
order  that  he  might  gloat  over  his  acquisition.  He  might  look  round  and  round 
and  say,  "Dear  me  1  it  is  a  nice  snag  place  after  all — as  sweet  a  little  house  as  ever 
I  gaw — nicely  situated ;  the  land,  too,  is  the  best  in  the  country  side.  I  have  made 
a  very  good  bargain;  I  think  I  shall  make  myself  very  comfortable  here."  The 
man's  mind  is  given  over  to  the  thing,  and  he  has  no  time  to  accept  the  invitation 
to  the  feast.  So  it  is  with  many  a  man  still.  It  is  true  to  life,  as  God's  Word 
always  is.  There  is  no  harm  in  domestic  happiness  ;  but  how  many  a  man  there 
is  that  allows  the  pleasures  of  his  home  to  take  the  place  that  belongs  to  God ;  tbat 
puts  those  home  comforts  before  his  soul  as  a  kind  of  substitute  for  the  presence 
and  power  of  God  in  his  heart  ?  Whenever  a  man  does  that,  he  turns  the  pure  and 
holy  relationships  of  life  into  the  devil's  own  snare,  and  the  things  which  were  for 
his  peace  become  to  him  an  occasion  of  falling.  So  they  made  their  decision ;  and 
that  decision  was — "I  pray  thee  have  me  excused."  What  I  said  at  the  start  of 
my  sermon,  I  say  again ;  it  is  the  worst  prayer  ever  offered,  and,  like  many  a  bad 
prayer,  my  friends,  it  was  a  prayer  that  was  answered.  And  I  am  persuaded  that 
whenever  men  offer  such  a  prayer,  they  will  get  an  answer.  *'  Yes,  not  one  of  them 
shall  taste  of  My  supper."  So  they  were  excused;  and  by-and-by  the  table  was 
spread,  and  the  guests  were  gathered  together:  and  the  minstrels  tuned  their  harps, 
and  the  song  commenced,  and  the  feast,  and  the  joy,  and  the  pleasure ;  and  the 
King  came  in  to  see  the  guests.  Yes,  and  all  the  while  these  men  were  excused. 
That  man  over  there  is  walking  round  and  round  his  land,  until  at  last  I  think  I  can 
hear  him  saying  to  himself,  "  Well,  after  all,  there  isn't  much  to  be  got  out  of  a  field." 
Ah,  he  is  beginning  to  tire  of  it  already  I  And  the  other  man  feels  it,  too.  After 
ail,  you  cannot  make  a  heaven  out  of  five  yoke  of  oxen.    And  my  eye  follows  th« 


42  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tit. 

man  that  had  tnarried  his  wife — where  is  he  now  f  Look  1  he  and  hia  wife  art 
iiending  over  the  corpse  of  their  firstborn  child ;  and  the  hot,  ecalding  tears  are 
falling.  He  has  found  it  cat  now ;  after  all,  domestic  happiness  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  heaven.  My  brothers,  are  there  any  of  you  that  are  saying  in  yonr 
hearts,  "  I  pray  Thee  have  me  excused "  t  Well,  let  me  ask  you,  what  are  yon 
asking  the  Lord  to  excuse  you  from  ?  "0  Lord,  I  pray  Thee  have  me  excused  from 
being  happy.  I  want  to  go  on  in  my  misery  ;  let  me  alone.  O  Lord  1  I  have  got 
a  great  load  of  nnforgiven  sin  in  my  heart ;  I  don't  want  to  part  with  it  just  yet. 
'I pray  Thee  have  me  excused.'"  My  young  friend  there  went  to  the  meetLag, 
last  night,  at  Exeter  HaU,  and  cast  his  burden  on  his  Saviour.  I  met  him  in  the 
street;  I  scarcely  knew  him.  "Have  you  heard  the  news,  old  fellow?  I  am  a 
new  man."  He  was  evidently  very  happy  ;  I  never  saw  a  man  so  happy. 
Lord,  I  pray  Thee  have  me  excused  from  such  happinesB.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
'  Ready  exeutes  : — I  have  often  wondered  at  the  cleverness  with  which  people  make 
excuses  for  neglecting  heavenly  things.  A  poor  woman  was  explaining  to  me  why 
her  husband  did  not  attend  church.  "  You  see,  poor  working  folks  nowadays  are 
RO  holden  down  and  wearied  out,  that  they  are  glad  to  rest  a  day  in  the  house  when 
Sabbath  comes."  An  unopened  letter  was  lying  on  the  table,  which  she  asked  me 
to  read,  believing  that  it  was  from  her  sick  mother.  It  was  a  notice  to  her  husband 
that  the  football  team,  of  which  he  was  captain,  was  to  meet  on  Saturday  at  3  p.m., 
and  that,  like  a  good  fellow,  he  must  be  forward  in  good  time.  And  that  was  the 
man  for  whom  my  pity  was  asked,  as  being  so  worn  out  with  his  work  that 
he  could  hardly  creep  up  to  the  church  1  Another  woman  admitted  to  me  that  she 
never  read  her  Bible,  but  pleaded  that  she  was  too  busy,  and  had  too  many  cares.  My 
eye  caught  a  great  bundle  of  journals  above  the  clock.  She  confessed  that  these 
were  novels,  on  which  she  spent  twopence  halfpenny  every  Saturday,  and  that  she 
read  them  on  the  Sabbath.  If  you  wish  an  excuse,  the  smallest  thing  will  give  yoo 
stuff  enough  for  the  weaving  of  it.  {J.  Wells. )  ^  Exexues  of  non-communieanU  :— 
I.  First,  then,  it  is  not  uncommon  for  people  to  say,  "  I  do  not  pretend  to  be  a 
scholar,  and  I  do  not  understand  the  meaning  of  this  sacrament."  Can  yon 
really  say  that  yon  have  been  earnest  to  gain  instruction  ?  or  have  yon  not  ratiier 
been  well  satisfied  to  be  ignorant  ?  Let  me  ask  you,  dear  brethren,  if  the  life  of 
your  body  depended  on  your  knowing  how  to  plough,  or  sow,  or  reap,  would  yoo 
not  take  pains  to  learn  ?  Should  you  not  think  yourselves  justly  blamed  if  you 
did  not  ?  II.  I  come  now  to  consider  another  excuse,  which  is  most  commonly 
made,  for  not  attending  this  sacrament — "  I  am  not  fit  to  come."  lU.  Another 
excuse  is,  "  I  am  now  too  much  troubled  with  worldly  cares  ;  I  cannot  attend  as  I 
ought  to  my  soul ;  but  I  hope  the  time  will  come  when  I  shall  be  more  at  liberty." 
IV.  Again,  youth  is  made  an  excuse  for  not  coming  to  the  Lord's  table.  God  says 
in  the  Bible,  "  Those  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me "  (Prov.  viii.  17).  (E. 
Bleneowe,  M.A.)  On  the  Lord's  supper : — The  causes  which  prevent  men  from 
observing  this  ordinance  of  our  religion  are  various.  It  may  be  presumed  that  a 
leading  cause  of  the  neglect  of  this  ordinance  is  a  thoughtlessness  of  its  nature  and 
obligations.  1.  The  pressure  of  the  business  and  cares  of  this  world  is  urged  by 
many  as  a  reason  why  they  neglect  to  receive  this  sacrament.  2.  Further.  A 
eense  of  sinfulness  deters  many  from  approaching  the  table  of  the  Lord.  They  are 
Bo  oppressed  with  the  consciousness  of  having  transgressed  many  commands,  and 
omitted  many  duties,  that  tbey  dare  not  go  to  so  holy  an  ordinance.  3.  There  are 
many  persons,  who  have  a  lively  sense  of  the  holiness  of  this  ordinance,  and  wish 
to  join  in  the  celebration  of  it,  who  are  deterred  by  a  fear  that  they  shall  not  be 
able  afterwards  to  live  up  to  their  obligations.  4.  Another  cause  which  prevents 
men  from  receiving  this  sacrament  is  the  existence  of  anger  and  animosity  in  their 
bosoms — the  consciousness  of  ill-will  between  them  and  some  of  their  fellow-beings. 
5.  It  is  urged  by  some  who  neglect  this  ordinance  that  they  see  many  go  to  the 
Lord's  table  who  seem  not  in  any  respect  to  be  benefited  by  it.  There  are  many 
persons  deterred  from  receiving  this  sacrament  by  a  particular  passage  of  Scrip, 
ture,  which  is  frequently  misunderstood.  I  mean  that  striking  observation  by  St. 
Paul,  that  "  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  damna> 
tion  to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's  body."  There  are  two  causes  from 
which  the  misapplication  of  this  passage  proceeds — from  affixing  a  meaning  to  the 
word  "damnation,"  which  in  the  original  it  does  not  bear,  and  from  indefinite  or 
erroneous  ideas  of  the  unworthiness  which  the  apostle  condemns.  By  damnation 
is  not  here  meant,  as  by  many  is  supposed,  everlaisting  destruction,  but  immediate 
disapprobation,  the  displeasure  of  the  Most  High ;  which  displeasure  is  manifested 


CHAP.  xiv.J  ST.  LUKE.  43 

as  the  apostle  states,  by  visiting  the  unworthy  recipients  with  divers  temporal 
judgments  ;  and  this  too  in  order  to  their  final  salvation  ;  if,  haply,  being 
chastened  ol  the  Lord,  they  may  not  be  condemned  with  the  world.  And, 
accordingly,  the  same  word  which  is  here  rendered  '•  damnation  "  is  rendered 
in  one  of  the  following  verses  of  the  same  chapter,  by  "  condemnation."  Moreover, 
we  should  have  definite  ideas  what  it  is  to  eat  and  drink  unworthily.  The 
Corinthians,  whom  the  apostle  here  addresses,  had  fallen  into  an  irreverent, 
and  in  some  cases  profane,  manner  of  celebrating  the  Lord's  Supper.  They 
brought  their  own  bread  and  wLae ;  they  blended  this  sacred  mystery  with  their 
common  feast ;  the  rich  waited  not  for  the  poor ;  the  poor  were  jealous  of  the  rich. 
(Bishop  Dehon.)  Go  out  quickly  Into  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  dty. — 
Home  tnissiom: — I.  Thb  pabtizs  to  whom  the  sebvant  was  dibbcted  to  make 
xsowN  HIS  benevolent  COMMISSION.  Stripped  of  its  figurative  clothing,  the 
passage  intimates  to  us  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  upon  the  rejection  of  the 
gospel  by  the  Jews.  But  the  compassion  of  the  Lord  was  as  large  as  His 
provision  and  the  creature's  necessity  ;  therefore  the  servant  was  sent  further 
from  home — he  was  to  "go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges,"  to  pick  up  the 
vagrants  and  the  wanderers,  to  address  those  for  whose  condition  no  man  had 
oAred,  and  to  invite  and  urge  them  to  partake  of  the  banquet  of  heavenly  mercy.  The 
parties  to  whom  our  attention  is  to  be  directed  are  presented  to  us  under  a  twofold 
aspect.  They  are  described — First,  by  the  nearness  of  their  residence  to  us.  They 
are  the  miserable  and  the  distressed  in  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city.  Next  to  our 
own  individual  conversion  to  God,  our  attention  is  to  be  directed  to  the  conversion  of 
those  around  us.  But  the  persons  to  whom  this  merciful  attention  is  to  be  directed 
are  described — Secondly,  by  their  miserable  and  destitute  condition.  The  dismal 
description  which  is  given  us  of  these  wretched  beings  in  the  parable  is  borrowed 
from  temporal  things,  and  is  expressed  in  terms  which  convey  a  lively  picture  of 
misery  and  vrretchedness.    U.  The  method  to  be  employed  by  the  sebvant  in 

OBOBB  TO   BBINO   THESE   FEBSONS   TO   THE   BOYAL  BANQUET.     He  WaS  tO  "bring"  them 

in,  and  "compel"  them  to  come.  1.  The  servant  must  "compel"  sinners  by 
setting  before  them  their  guilty  and  perishing  condition.  2.  There  must  be,  in 
connection  with  this,  an  exhibition  of  the  Saviour's  grace.  3.  He  must  "  compel" 
sinners  to  come  in  by  unfolding  the  encouragement  which  is  given  to  comply  with 
the  invitation  and  to  believe  the  gospel.  And  these  encouragements  are  neither 
few  nor  small.  4.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  "compel"  men  by  a  solemn 
testimony  of  the  guilt  and  danger  of  a  refusaL  (J.  E.  Ooode.)  The  kingdom  oj 
God  thrown  open: — L  The  kingdom  of  God  is  opened  amongst  men.  It  is  here 
DOW.  We  have  not  to  go  to  it — it  has  come  to  us.  There  is  nothing  to  wait 
for ;  all  things  are  ready.  The  love,  the  light,  the  pardon,  the  mercy,  the  sonship, 
the  welcome,  the  plenty,  are  all  waiting.  II.  God  invites  all  men  into  His 
kingdom.  The  feast  was  always  intended  for  all.  God's  own  people  were  to 
be  admitted  first,  as  being  members  of  His  household ;  and  they  were  expected 
to  entertain  the  strangers  who  should  afterwards  come  in.  But  when  the  time 
came  they  failed.  So  without  them,  instead  of  through  them,  the  gates  of  the 
kingdom  had  to  be  thrown  open,  and  the  universal  invitation  given.  They  shut 
themselves  out,  but  not,  therefore,  would  God  permit  the  despised  and  perishing 
everywhere  to  remain  uninvited.  The  feast  should  not  therefore  spoil.  The 
abundance  of  the  feast  shows  it  to  be  for  all.  The  freeness  of  it  says  it  is 
for  alL  Those  for  whom  it  is  prepared — the  stricken  and  needy  everywhere — 
show  it  to  be  for  all.  Can  infinite  love  be  restrictive?  Can  infinite  pity  be 
elective  f  UL  The  kingdom  is  not  yet  vulu  We  need  not  be  afraid  of  inviting ; 
and  we  need  not  be  afraid  of  coming.  There  is  room  yet.  Grace  will  endure 
ft  vacuum  as  little  as  nature.  {W.  Hvbbard.)  Personal  labour  for  toula: — 
" How  shall  we  gain  the  masses ? "  "Go  for  them  1 "  was  Moody's  rough  but 
sensible  response.  Let  the  text  be  our  guide.  Scripture,  reason,  history,  and 
experience  corroborate  it.  There  is  a  vast  work  outside  our  ordinary  Church 
connection.  Those  whom  we  daily  meet  in  business,  in  the  neighbourly  inti- 
macies of  life,  or  in  circles  of  pleasure — many  of  them  are  neglecters  of  God 
and  His  worship.  Shall  we  let  them  die?  Our  Christianity  needs  to  be  more 
abundant  in  labour ;  our  prayers  need  feet !  1.  This  work  is  to  be  done  by  you,  or 
the  blood  of  souls  will  be  found  on  your  skirts.  3.  You  have  the  facilities  for 
doing  it.  Let  not  religion  be  the  last  thing  on  your  tongue  in  "  society." 
Bemember,  ;fon  must  give  account  for  your  opportunities.  8.  It  is  inhumanity 
to  neglect  this  work.    4.  It  takes  but  littie  time.    5.  It  is  the  most  successful  kind 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xlf. 

of  work.  It  builds  up  Sunday-school,  prayer-meeting,  Christian  character.  6.  No 
special  talents  are  needed.  Only  a  special  consecration.  The  diversity  of  worka 
fits  to  the  varied  talents  we  have,  as  one  cog-wheel  works  into  another  But  only 
the  gifts  that  are  on  the  altar  can  God  use.  {J.  L.  Peck,  D.D.)  The  power  of 
earnestness  in  converting  souls : — I  once  knew  a  wonderfully  successful  winner  of 
souls.  Few  were  so  blessed.  Yet  he  could  not  speak  six  words  without  stuttering 
and  stammering  painful  to  hear.  Everybody  would  have  said,  "  He'd  better  keep 
still "  ;  but  everybody  would  be  wrong.  The  love  of  Christ  will  bum  up  the  chaff 
of  your  excuses.  The  angel  was  terribly  in  earnest  when  he  laid  hold  of  Lot  and 
brought  him  out  of  Sodom.  If  you  are  thus  roused,  then  your  vigils  of  prayer  and 
hand-to-hand  labour  for  souls  will  prove  the  reality  of  your  Christian  life.  A  gay 
girl  went  to  Troy  to  buy  a  ball-dress,  fell  in  the  way  of  a  newly-converted  com- 
panion, and  came  under  the  power  of  an  endless  life ;  returned  home,  roused  her 
father  out  of  his  formal  piety,  and  then  sought  out  and  led  to  Christ  the  pastor's 
daughter.  These  two  girls  started  a  prayer-meeting,  and  in  ten  days  from  the  time 
that  the  unworn,  now  useless,  ball-dress  was  brought  home,  so  mighty  a  work  of 
grace  had  begun  that  the  pastor  sent  to  Troy  for  help  in  the  new  and  unlooked-for 
burdens  thrown  upon  him.  "  Go  ye  out  into  the  highways.  Compel  them  to  oome 
in ;  for  yet  there  is  room."  (Ibid.)  iThe  gospel  feast  i$  free  to  the  vilest : — 
Christ  has  spread  the  table,  and  our  poverty,  our  imperfections,  our  limping  steps, 
our  blindness  of  spiritual  sight,  are  the  reasons  why  He  would  have  us  come.'  Thu' 
island  of  Molokai,  in  the  Hawaiian  Archipelago,  is  set  apart  for  the  occupancy  ol 
lepers.  These  poor,  filthy  beings  stagger  about  there  in  all  stages  of  disease,  a 
most  pitiful  sight.  Now,  suppose  a  famous  physician  lands  upon  the  island,  and 
sends  out  his  invitations  through  the  community.  He  has  spread  a  table  large 
enough  for  all,  and  on  it  placed  a  variety  of  deUcacies  such  as  none  there  had  ever 
tasted,  which  are  a  aovereign  specific  against  the  prevalent  disorder.  "  Come,"  says 
he,  "  poor  diseased  company,  and  sit  at  my  table  just  as  ^ou  are.  /  This  feast  will 
cure  you.  You  are  incurable  otherwise."  All  Molokai  is  in  commotion.  The 
lepers  gather  in  knots  and  talk  the  matter  over.  "  Oh,"  say  they,  "  what  a  looking 
company  are  we  to  sit  down  at  a  rich  man's  table  1  We  had  better  wait  awhile. 
By  and  by,  perhaps,  we  shall  be  more  presentable,  and  then  we  will  go."  So  they 
send  up  a  delegation  to  the  doctor,  with  their  compliments  and  thanks,  but  beg  to 
be  excused  till  they  are  more  deserving  of  the  honour.  And  so  the  good  man 
sadly  turns  away,  leaving  the  islanders  slowly  to  rot  into  their  graves.  The  passage 
before  us  presents  a  case  precisely  parallel.  /  Christ  invites  a  sin-stricken  world  to 
His  feast.  The  fact  that  we  are  sin-stricken,  unworthy,  lost,  helpless,  and  hope- 
less is  why  He  asks  us  to  come. .^  {A.  P.  Foster.)  Fetch  tliem  in: — Samuel 
Martin  tells  this  beautiful  story  of  a  ragged-school  teacher  who  went  out  into  the 
streets  to  bring  in  neglected  children.  He  found  a  child,  the  very  incarnation  of 
wickedness  and  wretchedness,  and  led  her  to  the  school.  There  she  heard  ex- 
pounded and  applied  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  Shortly  after  the  child  was 
seized  by  fever,  and  the  teacher  visited  her.  In  one  of  his  visits  he  read  this 
parable,  and  when  he  came  to  the  words, "  When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father 
saw  him,  and  had  compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him,"  the 
child  exclaimed,  "Oh  1  that  was  just  like  me!  That's  good;  say  it  again.  'A 
great  way  off  ' ;  what,  ever  so  far  away,  away,  like  me  with  the  devil  ?  That  mnst 
be  far  from  God  and  the  Lamb.  Yes  1  I  was  a  great  way  off.  How  good  t 
How  kind  1  But  I'm  afraid  I  have  been  worse  than  that  bad  son.  Still  I  have  said, 
'  Dear  Jesus,  I  want  to  love  You,  I  want  to  get  away  from  the  devil ;  please  help 
me.'  And  I  think  He  heard  me,  for  I  have  felt  somehow  different  ever  since. 
I  am  not  afraid  now ;  no,  not  one  bit."  When  death  was  so  near  that  it 
was  supposed  all  power  of  utterance  was  gone,  she  aroused  herself,  and  said 
in  a  clear  and  distinct  voice,  evidently  referring  to  destitute  children  allowed 
etill  to  wander  through  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city,  "  Fetch  them 
in  t  Oh  1  be  sure  and  fetch  them  in.  Fetch  them  in,  and  tell  them 
of    Jesus,  tell   them    of    Jesus ;  oh  1    be   sure   and   fetch  them  in."  Yet 

there  Is  room. — Tiie  gospel  feast : — "  Yet  there  is  room."  1.  In  the  merits  of 
Christ's  sacrifice.  2.  In  the  grace  of  God's  Spirit.  8.  In  the  mansions  of 
God's  house.  4.  In  the  love  of  God's  heart.  This  is  best  of  aU.  (J.  Dobie, 
D.D.)  Yet  there  is  roam: — "Grace  no  more  endures  a  vacuum  than  nature," 

says  a  shrewd  commentator  on  this  passage.    The  fact  that  there  is  room  is  the 
very  strongest  invitation ;  those  words  on  God's  lips  are  the  mightiest  appeal.     L 
/''There  is  room  in  the  Saviour's  heart.    Till  that  heart  is  full,  till  the  largest  deaiies 


BBAP.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  45 

of  that  love  are  satisfied,  there  is  not  a  call  only,  there  is  a  claim  on  jon  to  oome. 

2.  There  is  room  in  the  great  Father's  home.  The  Father  is  the  head  of  the  home. 
Take  your  own  fatherhood,  motherhood,  sisterhood,  or  brotherhood,  to  help  you  to 
tinderstand  the  cry  of  that  Father's  heart,  '■'  there  yet  is  room,"  Do  not  misunder- 
stand the  matter.  Love  may  be  outraged  finally.  There  may  come  a  point  where 
even  the  wisest,  most  patient,  most  loving  father  is  bound  to  cut  off  the  son  from 
his  family,  and  extirpate  each  tender  memory  from  his  heart.  But  He  has  not  cut 
you  ofif.    Your  place  still  waits  for  you.     Sin-sick,  wretched  one,  there  yet  is  room. 

3.  There  is  room  among  the  blessed  ones  on  high.  Believe  that  the  whole  spiritual 
world  throbs  in  sympathy  with  the  Father  and  with  Christ.  Saints  and  angels, 
cherubim  and  seraphim,  watch  with  rapt  expectation  the  issues  of  a  work  which 
cost  so  much  sacrihce,  and  expends  so  much  love.  It  is  the  one  theme  on  high  ; 
how  heaven  is  to  be  filled,  filled  with  the  fruits  of  the  Redeemer's  travail  and  the 
trophies  of  His  grace  and  love  (Eev.  vii,  9-12).  {J.  B.  Brotcn,  B.A.)  And  yet 
there  is  room : — I.  For  what  is  thebe  boom  ?  There  is  room  for  the  most  agreeable 
and  delightful  entertainment  and  improvement  of  all  the  faculties  of  a  reasonable 
and  immortal  soul  in  this  life,  and  for  its  eternal  satisfaction,  exaltation,  and 
rapture  in  the  next.  II.  Fob  whom  is  thebe  boom  ?  There  is  room  for  sinners  of 
all  nations,  wherever  the  gospel  comes.  There  is  room  for  sinners  of  all  ranks 
and  degrees,  and  of  all  characters  in  the  moral,  civil,  and  natural  life  ;  for  younger 
and  older  sinners  ;  for  greater  and  lesser  sinners.  There  is  room  for  such  as  might 
be  thought  of  all  others  the  most  unlikely,  the  most  miserable,  the  most  unlovely, 
and  the  most  unworthy,  even  for  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  halt  and  the  blind,  ai 
they  are  represented  in  the  verse  before  our  text.  III.  Whebb  is  there  boom  t 
And  you  may  take  some  account  of  this  in  the  following  particulars.  1.  There  is 
room  in  the  heart  of  God.    2.  There  is  room  in  the  provisions  of  Divine  grace. 

3.  There  is  room  in  the  encouragements  of  the  gospel.  4.  There  is  room  in  God's 
house.  IV.  How  is  it  to  bk  understood  that  yet  thebe  is  boom  ?  1.  There  stUl 
continues  to  be  room.  2.  There  will  not  always  be  room.  I.  By  way  of  en 
couragement.  If  there  is  still  room  for  all  sorts  of  sinners,  you  that  are  y&t 
young,  may  be  assured  with  advantage  that  there  is  room  for  yoa.  II.  By  way  of 
caution  as  to  three  things.  1.  Take  heed  of  every  kind  of  refusal.  2.  Take  heed 
of  attempting  to  come  in  thine  own  strength.  3.  Take  heed  of  expecting  to  be 
entertained  on  account  of  thine  own  worthiness,  because  thou  art  not  so  old  a 
sinner  as  others.  (J.  Guyse,  D.D.)  The  door  of  hope  yet  open: — I.  Whebb 
there  is  room,  viz. — 1.  In  the  mercy  of  God.  2.  In  the  merits  of  Christ.  3.  As 
to  the  efficacy  of  the  Spirit  to  change  the  heart.  4.  In  the  covenant  of  grace.  5. 
In  the  household  of  faith.  6.  In  the  mansions  of  glory.  II.  Fob  whom  there  is 
room.  In  general  for  all  sorts  and  degrees  of  men.  Particularly — 1.  For  the 
meanest  and  most  despicable  in  the  world.    3.  For  the  rich.    3.  For  the  afflicted. 

4.  For  such  as  have  long  stood  out.  5.  For  backsliders.  6.  For  the  chief  sinners. 
Application :  1.  How  justly  may  the  gospel  be  called  a  joyful  sound ;  and  with 
what  thankfulness  should  it  be  heard  and  entertained.  How  joyful  a  sound  would 
it  be  reckoned  by  the  spirits  in  prison,  could  it  be  proclaimed  among  them  with 
truth,  that  the  door  of  hope  was  still  open.  2.  With  what  cheerfulness  should 
gospel-ministers  address  themselves  to  the  work  of  winning  souls  upon  this  ground, 
that  yet  there  is  room :  which  they  may  firmly  conclude  the  wisdom  and  goodness 
of  God  will,  in  the  fittest  season,  fill  up.  8.  Let  none  take  encouragement  from 
hence  to  make  light  of  the  gospel-invitation,  or  delay  to  close  with  it.  Yet  there 
is  room,  but  you  know  not,  as  to  particular  persons,  how  long  or  little  while  it  may 
be  so.  (D.  Wilcox.)  Yet  there  is  room  : — I.  In  the  Church  militant,  yet  there 
is  room.  1.  In  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  preachers  of  the  gospel.  They  wish  well 
to  the  souls  of  their  hearers  (2  Cor.  vi.  11,  12).  2.  In  those  ordinances  that  are 
dispensed  by  the  ministers  of  the  gospel.  Wisdom's  gates  are  wide  enough  to 
receive  all  that  come  (Prov.  viii.  34).  3.  In  the  virtue  of  Christ's  blood,  and  riches 
of  God's  grace,  which  is  held  forth  in  the  ordinances  (Rom.  v.  20,  21).  II.  In  the 
Church  triumphant,  yet  there  is  room.  Many  mansions  (John  xiv.  2).  There  is 
room  enough — 1.  Objectively:  without  us.  God  fully  communicates  Himself  to 
the  saints  above  (1  Cor.  xv.  28).  2.  Subjectively :  within  us.  The  understanding 
widened,  clearly  to  know  God ;  the  will  widened,  fully  to  love  God.  Conclusion — 
1.  This  informs  us,  that  when  any  who  hear  the  gospel  perish,  it  is  not  through 
any  scantiness  of  the  gospel-provision,  but  for  want  of  applying  that  provision. 
This  also  informs  us  that  there  is  more  room  than  company,  more  provision  than 
guests,  at  the  gospel  feast.     Like  a  fountain,  out  of  which  there  is  more  water  runs 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xit^ 

\vaste  than  is  used.  2.  Thongh  yet  there  is  room,  yet  we  know  not  how  long  ther*. 
may  be  any  room  for  us.  We  had  need  therefore  be  careful,  lest  any  should  seem 
to  come  short  of  it  (Heb.  iv.  1).  3.  Then  do  not  perish  in  the  midst  of  such 
plenty  :  turn  not  the  grace  of  God  into  wantonness,  as  some  do  to  their  own  destruc- 
tion ;  do  not  transpose  or  remove  it  from  its  ordinary  end  and  use,  from  gospel 
ends,  80  as  to  cast  oS  obedience  to  the  law  of  God.  {John  Crump.)  Room  at 
God's  feast  for  all : — L  The  provision  which  has  been  prepared  bt  Divine  mercy 
FOR  THE  WELFARE  OF  MANKIND.  1.  Man  is  in  a  State  of  spiritual  want  and  destitu- 
tion. 2.  It  is  on  this  condition  of  man  as  a  sinner,  •'  without  hope  in  the  world," 
that  God  looks  in  mercy,  and  provides  the  abundant  supplies  of  His  grace.  3. 
This  provision  is  made  in  the  gospel  (1)  The  gospel  is  the  means  of  communi- 
cating spiritual  truth.  (2)  Pardon  of  sin.  (3)  All  spiritual  blessings,  and  the  final 
happiness  of  heaven.    IL  The  proclamations  issued  bt  the  Ditinb  command  to 

BBIKO  mankind  to  A  PABTIOXPATION  OF  THE  BLESSINGS  PROVIDED.      Those  pcrsOUS  who 

are  sent  out  by  God  must  make  it  the  object  of  their  anxiety — 1.  To  give  an  accu- 
rate statement  of  the  nature  of  the  gospel  provision  as  it  really  exists.  2.  To 
deliver  the  message  in  the  spirit,  and  to  the  extent  demanded  by  the  spirit  and 
extent  of  the  gospel  itself.  III.  The  amplitude  of  accommodation  bt  which  thb 
PBOTiBiONS  OF  THE  GOSPEL  ABE  DISTINGUISHED — "Yet  there  is  room."  And  front 
whence  does  this  amplitude  arise?  From  the  infinite  merit  of  the  atonement 
of  the  Son  of  God.  1.  What  effect  should  this  produce  on  the  mind  of  a  minister  T 
The  effect  should  be  powerful.  There  is  an  amazing  provision  made,  and  all  people: 
and  all  nations  may  come  and  partake ;  then  am  I  a  minister ;  let  me  place  no 
limits  to  my  invitations  ;  wherever  I  find  men,  let  me  tell  them  how  they  may  be 
saved.  2.  This  view  of  the  subject  ought  to  have  powerful  effects  on  the  minds  of. 
penitents ;  on  those  who  are  sorrowful,  being  convinced  of  sin.  S.  This  view  of 
the  amplitude  of  the  gospel  should  enkindle  our  hopes  for  its  nniversal  propaga- 
tion. (James  Parsons.)  Yet  there  it  room : — 1.  Where  there  is  room.  1.  At  the 
feast  of  the  gospel.  2,  In  the  grave.  3.  In  heaven.  4.  In  hell.  n.  What  ther* 
is  room  for.  1.  Bepentance.  2.  Prayer.  3.  Faith.  4.  Holiness.  IH.  Fob  whou 
there  is  room  yet.  1.  Those  who  have  lost  early  impressions.  3.  Those  who  still 
delay  to  come  to  Christ.  3.  All.  [Mark  Cooper,  M.A.)  Room  enough  in  the 
gospel : — On  one  of  the  hottest  days  of  a  sultry  July,  two  of  us,  weary  and  worn 
from  a  long  and  dusty  tramp  along  the  Portsmouth  road,  reached  at  length  the  top 
of  Hindhead.  Not  a  tree  or  a  shrub  within  hail,  and  the  sun  pouring  down 
remorselessly  a  flood  of  fire,  there  was  no  sign  of  shadow  except  from  a  large  stone 
cross  which  garnished  Hindhead's  snmmit.  That  cross  was  elaborately  adorned 
-with  Latin  inscriptions,  and  in  form  was  accurate  and  classical ;  but  its  shadow 
\Fas  too  narrow  to  furnish  perfect  shade  even  for  one,  mnch  less  for  two.  Tht 
shadow  was  most  refreshing,  but  there  was  not  enough  of  it,  and  one  traveller 
must,  parched  as  he  was,  stand  or  lie  down  beneath  Sol's  blazing  beams,  for  there 
was  no  room  for  him  within  the  cooling  shade.  Thus  may  it  be  with  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  as  set  forth  by  some  ministries.  Jesus  is  eloquently  talked  of,  but  the  freeness 
of  His  grace  and  the  abundant  power  of  His  blood  are  not  enforced ;  or  it  may  be 
Bystematic  theology  is  the  preacher's  idol,  and  Christ  is  narrowed  down  to  the 
creed ;  accuracy  of  doctrine  is  fostered,  but  the  Christ  who  is  set  forth  has  no 
breadth  of  love,  no  vastness  of  shade  for  the  refreshment  of  weary  sinners.  At 
the  same  time  too  many  take  away  the  solid  character  of  the  atonement  altogether, 
and,  while  aiming  at  breadth,  give  us  instead  of  a  granite  cross  a  mere  gauze  with 
no  shade  at  all.  The  true  scriptural  idea  of  the  atonement  is  "  The  shadow  of  a 
great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  The  motto  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  is,  "And  yet  there 
is  room."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Compel  them  to  come  in. — I.  Sinners  natuballt 
ABB  OUT.    n.  It  is  the  great  errand  of  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom  to  bring  them 

IN  that  abb    out.      III.    SiNNBBS  MAT  COHB  IN.      lY.    SiNNEBS   ABB    DESIRED   TO    OOMB 

IN.  Will  ye  then  refuse  ?  V.  Sinnebs  must  comb  in.  Compel  them  to  come  in. 
"VI.  Sinnebs  shall  come  in.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Compel  them  to  come  in : — I. 
First,  I  must  find  tod  out.  Yes,  I  see  you  this  morning,  you  that  are  poor.  I  am 
to  compel  you  to  come  in.  You  are  poor  in  circumstances,  but  this  is  no  barrier 
to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for  God  hath  not  exempted  from  His  grace  the  man  that 
ehivers  in  rags,  and  who  is  destitute  of  bread.  But  especially  I  must  speak  to  yon 
who  are  poor,  spiritually.  You  have  no  faith,  you  have  no  virtue,  yon  have  no 
good  work,  you  have  no  grace,  and  what  is  poverty  worse  still,  you  have  no  hope. 
Ah,  my  Master  has  sent  you  a  gracious  invitation.  And  now  I  see  you  again.  Yow 
tie  not  only  poor,  but  you  are  maimed.     There  was  a  time  when  you  thought  yo» 


CHAJ.  nv.]  8T.  LUKE.  47 

eoold  work  ont  yonr  own  Balvation  without  God's  help,  when  yon  could  perform 
good  works,  attend  to  ceremonies,  and  get  to  heaven  by  yourselves ;  but  now  you 
are  maimed,  the  sword  of  the  law  has  cut  off  yonr  hands,  and  now  yon  can  work 
no  longer.  You  have  lost  all  power  now  to  obey  the  law ;  you  feel  that  when  yon 
would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  you.  You  feel  that  you  are  utterly  undone, 
powerless  in  every  respect  to  do  anything  that  can  be  pleasing  to  God.  There  ia 
yet  another  class.  You  are  halt.  You  are  halting  between  two  opinions.  You  are 
sometimes  seriously  inclined,  and  at  another  time  worldly  gaiety  calls  yon  away. 
And  yet  I  see  another  class — the  blind.  Yes,  you  that  cannot  see  yourselves,  that 
think  yourselves  good  when  you  are  full  of  evil,  that  put  bitter  for  sweet  an<l>  sweet 
for  bitter,  darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness ;  to  you  am  I  sent.  Now,  I 
pause  after  having  described  the  character,  I  pause  to  look  at  the  herculean  labour 
that  lies  before  me.  Well  did  Melanothon  say,  "  Old  Adam  was  too  strong  for 
young  Melancthon."  As  well  might  a  little  child  seek  to  compel  a  Samson,  as  I 
eeek  to  lead  a  sinner  to  the  Gross  of  Christ.  If  God  saith  Do  it,  if  I  attempt  it  in 
faith  it  shall  be  done ;  and  if  with  a  groaning,  struggling,  and  weeping  heart,  I 
so  seek  this  day  to  compel  siimers  to  come  to  Christ,  the  sweet  compulsions  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  shall  go  with  every  word,  and  some  indeed  shall  be  compelled  to 
come  in.  II.  And  now  to  the  work — directly  to  the  work.  Unconverted,  unrecon- 
tiled,  nnregenerate  men  and  women.  I  am  to  compel  you  to  cohs  is.  Permit  me 
first  of  all  to  accost  yon  in  the  highways  of  sin  and  tell  you  over  again  my  errand. 
{C.  H.  Spvrgeon.)  Gospel  eompultion: — 1.  Be  entreated  to  come  in  by  the 
consideration  of  yooi  naturally  miserable  and  perishing  condition.  2.  Be  entreated 
to  come  in  by  the  consideration  that  "all  things  are  ready."  8.  Be  entreated 
to  come  in  by  the  consideration  that  already  many  excellent  and  honour- 
able guests  have  entered.  4.  Be  entreated  to  come  in  to  this  feast  by  the 
consideration  that  "yet  there  is  room."  5.  Be  entreated,  therefore,  finally,  to 
come  in  by  the  consideration  that  if  yon  reject  the  invitation  to  the  feast  of 
gospel  grace  here,  you  shall  be  excluded  from  the  feast  of  heavenly  glory  hereafter. 
{Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)  The  urgent  invitation: — ^I.  The  fbeeness  of  the  gospel. 
"Highways":  every  class  invited.  H.  The  pdlness — "All  things  ready."  IIL 
The  banquet  is  the  pbovisiom  of  love  and  the  expbessiom  or  love.  "  Compel " 
means,  use  strong  persuasion.  No  principle  is  so  urgent  as  love.  It  reasons  with 
the  soul.  IV.  God,  in  sending  out  His  invitations,  backs  them  with  the  authority 
or  Fathebhood.  V.  The  doom  of  those  who  refuse  to  accept.  The  door  is  shut 
as  effectually  through  your  neglect  as  through  your  refusal.  VI.  Pbactical  obser- 
vations. 1.  God  constrains  souls  to  come  to  Him  by  a  great  many  methods. 
Prosperity,  trials,  <&c.  2.  Hunger  ought  to  send  to  that  feast — soul  hunger.  3.  It 
is  the  duty  of  Christ's  people  to  make  the  religion  of  Christ  attractive.  An  invita- 
tion to  a  cold,  cheerless  house,  would  not  win  even  a  beggar.  4.  The  refusal  of 
Christ's  invitation  is  a  terrible  insult  and  injury.  5.  The  time  to  accept  is  very 
bhort.  Come.  The  banquet  waits.  {T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Kind  compulsion : — 
"  Now,"  said  the  great  man  of  the  feast,  "  I  will  not  be  defeated  in  this  matter  ;  I 
have  with  an  honest  purpose  provided  a  banquet,  and  there  are  scores  of  people 
who  would  Uke  to  come  if  they  were  only  invited."  We  must  take  care  how  we 
give  the  invitation.  My  Christian  friends,  I  think  sometimes  we  have  just  gone 
opposite  to  Christ's  command,  and  we  have  compelled  people  to  stay  out.  Some- 
times our  elaborated  instructions  have  been  the  hindrance.  We  graduate  from  our 
theological  seminaries  on  stUts,  and  it  takes  five  or  six  years  before  we  can  come 
down  and  stand  right  beside  the  great  masses  of  the  people,  learning  their  joys, 
sorrows,  victories,  defeats.  We  get  our  heads  so  brimful  of  theological  wisdom 
that  we  have  to  stand  very  straight  lest  they  spill  over.  Now,  what  do  the  great 
masses  of  the  people  care  about  the  technicalities  of  religion  ?  When  a  man  is 
drowning  he  does  not  want  you  to  stand  by  the  dock  and  describe  the  nature  of  the 
water  into  which  he  has  fallen,  and  tell  him  there  are  two  parts  hydrogen  gas  and 
one  of  oxygen  gas,  with  a  common  density  of  thirty-nine  Fahrenheit,  turning  to 
steam  under  a  common  atmospheric  pressure  of  two  hundred  and  twelve.  He  does 
not  want  a  chemical  lecture  on  water,  he  wants  a  rope.  Oh,  my  friends,  the 
paralysis  of  God  on  the  Church,  it  seems  to  me,  in  this  day,  is  metaphysics.  We 
speak  in  an  unknown  tongue  in  our  Sabbath  schools,  and  in  our  religious  assem- 
blages, and  in  our  pulpits,  and  how  can  people  be  saved  unless  they  can  understand 
TIE  ?  Oh,  for  the  simplicity  of  Christ  in  all  our  instructions — the  simplicity.  I 
think  often  in  our  rehgious  instructions  we  compel  the  people  to  stay  out  by  oui 
Church  architecture.     People  come  in  and  they  find  things  angular,  and  cold,  and 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrr, 

Btiff,  and  they  go  away,  never  again  to  come ;  when  the  Church  ought  to  be  a  great 
home-circle,  everybody  having  a  hymn-book,  giving  half  to  the  one  next  him,  every 
one  who  has  a  hand  to  shake  hands,  shaking  hands — the  Church  architecture  and 
the  Church  surroundings  saying  to  the  people,  *'  Come  in  and  be  at  home."  Instead 
of  that,  I  think  all  these  surroundings  often  compel  the  people  to  stay  out.  I  read 
of  a  minister  of  the  gospel  who  was  very  fond  of  climbing  among  the  Swiss  moun- 
tains. One  day  he  was  climbing  among  very  dangerous  places,  and  thought  him- 
self all  alone  when  he  heard  a  voice  beneath  him  say,  "  Father,  look  out  for  the 
safe  path,  I  am  following,"  and  he  looked  back  and  saw  that  he  was  climbing  not 
only  for  himself,  but  climbing  for  his  boy.  Oh,  let  us  be  sure  and  take  tbe 
safe  path  1  Our  children  are  following,  our  partners  in  business  are  following,  our 
neighbours  are  following,  a  great  multitude  stepping  right  on  in  our  steps.  Oh  I  be 
sure  and  take  the  right  path  1  Exhibit  a  Christian  example,  and  so,  by  your  godly 
walk,  compel  the  people  to  come  in.  I  think  there  is  work  also  in  the  way  of 
kindly  admonition.  I  do  not  believe  there  is  a  person  in  this  house  to-day  who,  if 
approached  in  a  kindly  and  brotherly  manner,  would  refuse  to  listen.  If  you  are 
rebuffed,  it  is  because  you  lack  in  tact  and  common-sense.  A  Christian  physician 
who  is  a  friend  of  mine,  one  day  became  very  anxious  about  the  salvation  of 
a  brother  physician,  and  so  he  left  his  ofiSce,  went  down  to  this  man's  office, 
and  said,  "Is  the  doctor  in?"  "No,"  replied  the  young  man  waiting;  "the 
doctor  is  not  in."  "  Well,"  said  the  physician,  "  when  he  comes  in  tell  him  I 
called,  and  give  him  my  Christian  love."  This  worldly  doctor  came  home  after 
a  while,  and  the  message  was  given  to  him,  and  he  said  within  himself,  "  What 
does  he  mean  by  leaving  his  Christian  love  for  me  ?  "  And  he  became  very 
much  awakened  and  stirred  in  spirit,  and  he  said  after  a  while,  "Why,  that 
man  must  mean  my  soul."  And  he  went  into  his  office,  knelt  down,  and  then 
took  his  hat  and  went  out  to  the  office  of  this  Christian  physician,  and  said, 
"What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  and  the  two  doctors  knelt  in  the  office  and 
commended  their  souls  to  God.  All  the  means  used  in  that  case  was  only  the 
voice  of  one  good  man,  saying,  "  Give  my  love  to  the  doctor."  The  voice  of  kindly 
admonition.  Have  yoa  uttered  it  to-day  ?  Compel  them  to  come  in.  I  think  there 
is  a  great  work  also  to  be  done  in  the  way  of  prayer.  If  we  had  faith  enough 
to-day,  we  could  go  before  God  and  ask  for  the  salvation  of  all  the  people 
here  assembled,  and  they  would  all  be  saved,  here  and  now,  without  a  single 
€xception.  At  the  close  of  a  religious  service,  and  when  the  people  had  nearly 
all  left  the  building,  a  pastor  saw  a  little  girl  with  her  head  bowed  on  the  back 
of  the  pew,  and,  passing  down  the  aisle,  he  said  to  himself,  "  The  little  child 
has  fallen  asleep."  So  he  tapped  her  on  the  shoulder  and  said,  "The  service 
is  over."  She  said,  "I  know  it  is  over;  I  am  praying,  sir,  I  am  praying,  sir, 
I  am  praying. "  "  Well,"  said  the  minister,  "  Whatsoever  ye  ask  of  God,  believ- 
ing, ye  will  receive."  She  said,  "  Is  that  in  the  Bible?  "  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  there 
is  a  promise  of  that  kind  in  the  Bible."  "Well,"  she  said,  "  let  me  see  it."  So 
he  turned  over  the  Bible  until  he  came  to  the  promise,  and  she  said,  "  That's  bo,  is 
it?  Now,  O  Lord,  bring  my  father  here  to-night."  While  she  was  praying  her 
father  passed  into  the  door  of  the  church,  and  came  down  by  his  child  and  said, 
"  What  do  you  want  of  me  ?  "  When  that  child  had  begun  to  pray  one  hour  before 
for  her  father,  he  was  three  miles  away ;  but  by  some  strange  impulse  that  he  could 
not  understand,  he  hastened  to  the  church,  and  there  the  twain  knelt,  the  father's 
arm  around  the  child's  neck,  the  child's  arm  around  the  father's  neck,  and  there  he 
entered  on  the  road  to  heaven.  "  Whatsoever  ye  ask  of  God,  believing,  ye  will 
receive."  That  was  an  answer  to  the  child's  prayer.  What  did  she  do  ?  She  com- 
pelled him  to  come  in.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  The  compulsion  of  love : — What  is  the 
sense  of  the  word  "  compel "  ?  It  is  quite  vain  for  us  to  seek  the  sense  of  a  word 
onless  we  have  sense  in  ourselves.  "Compel"!  Did  not  Stephen  compel  those 
to  whom  he  spoke  to  listen  ?  He  could  not  so  far  tame  their  ferocity  that  they 
should  oast  away  the  stones  upon  the  ground,  and  spare  him ;  but  they  could  not 
resist  the  power  of  the  Spirit  with  which  he  spoke.  There  is  always  some  com- 
pulsory force  in  wisdom  and  in  spirit,  and  how  much  is  there  in  love  I  Bat 
observe,  the  guests  first  of  all  invited  were  not  compelled  to  come  in ;  he  sent  hia 
servants  to  say,  "  All  things  are  ready."  "  They  may  be,"  said  these  distinguished 
people,  "  but  we  are  not."  He  did  not  send  his  servants  to  compel  them  to  come 
in;  no,  in  his  anger  he  "  let  them  alone."  "  Compel  them  to  come  in  "  is  spoken 
of  the  outcast — the  necessitous — those  that  are  beyond  the  very  circle  of  the  city, 
and  not  merely  in  its  lowest  places.    "  Compel,"  as  spoken  of  these,  hints  at  once 


CKAT.  nr.]  ST.  LUKE.  49" 

to  UB  that  persuasiveness  and  urgency  are  necessary  to  effect  conversion,  and  also 
ih&t  most  potent  means  of  conversion  will  be  found  stored  up  in  the  gospel  as  we 
go  outwards,  and  try  to  conquer  the  world.  Therefore,  this  word  "  compel "  is  like 
A  promise  given  by  God.  Of  course,  there  is  nothing  here  against  human  liberty. 
It  is  the  happiest  way  of  being  overcome,  to  be  persuaded  that  somebody  loves  us^ 
and  BO  made  to  go,  in  willing  captivity,  to  receive  his  love.  (T.  T.  Lynch.y 
Compel  thevi  to  come  in : — There  are  tbree  ways  of  compelling  men  to  come  in,, 
that  is,  of  bringing  persons  over  to  our  communion,  and  to  our  opinion,  in  matters 
of  religion.  The  first  is,  by  ill  usage  and  persecution,  the  unlawfulness  of  which  I 
propose  to  show.  The  second  is,  by  persuasion,  instruction,  and  conviction.  The- 
third  way  is  of  an  ambiguous  kind,  which  it  seems  difflcult  to  appraise ;  for  it  is 
neither  so  good  as  to  deserve  to  be  cried  up  for  a  virtue,  nor  yet  so  bad  as  to  be' 
condemned  for  a  vice.  It  is  overcoming  men  by  kindness  and  courtesies,  alluring 
and  proselyting  them  by  favours,  honours,  profits,  gifts,  and  rewards.  Now  let  ua 
consider  the  vile  nature  and  the  pernicious  effects  of  persecution.  1.  It  is  not  a 
probable  way  to  make  men  good.  If  we  would  serve  God  in  an  acceptable  manner, 
it  is  requisite  that  we  know  the  will  of  God,  and  that  we  pay  Him  a  cheerful 
obedience.  2,  Persecution  will  probably  make  men  more  wicked  than  they  were, 
whilst  they  lived  in  error  unmolested.  3.  Persecution  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  of 
Christianity.  The  religion  of  our  Saviour  is  a  religion  like  its  Author,  full  o{ 
humanity,  lenity,  and  universal  benevolence.  4.  The  consequence  of  supposing 
persecution  to  be  recommended  by  the  gospel,  is,  that  all  sects  of  Christians  would 
have  the  same  call  to  plague  and  destroy  those  who  differ  from  them.  All  sects  of 
Christians  are  the  true  Church  in  their  own  opinion,  and  would  apply  such  a  com- 
mission to  themselves,  as  their  right,  or  their  duty.  5.  It  is  very  strange  that 
Christians  in  these  latter  ages  can  find  the  doctrine  of  persecution  so  plainly  laid 
down  in  the  New  Testament,  when  the  first  Christians  could  see  no  such  thing 
there.  But  let  us  not  altogether  pass  over  their  more  plausible  arguments.  1.  They 
tell  as  that  it  is  good  to  punish  men  who  are  in  error,  to  make  them  bethink  them- 
selves,  to  pat  them  upon  an  examination  of  facts  and  reasons,  which  else  they 
would  not  have  considered.  2.  Persecutors  frequently  object,  that,  by  permitting 
liberty  of  conscience,  encouragement  is  given  to  scurrility  and  profaneness.  3. 
Persecutors  object  also,  that  by  such  indulgence  heresies  are  propagated  to  the 
eternal  destruction  of  those  who  are  deluded,  and  that  therefore  the  utmost  rigour 
ia  true  Christian  charity,  and,  by  the  punishment  of  a  few,  saves  many  from  ever- 
lasting misery.  4.  Auother  argument  of  which  persecutors  make  great  use,  is  taken 
from  the  laws  which  God  gave  to  the  Jews,  by  which  idolaters  and  false  prophets 
were  to  be  put  to  death ;  and  from  the  practice  of  those  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah 
who  put  these  laws  in  execution.  Divine  wisdom  alone  can  authorize  them,  and 
not  public  wisdom,  as  some  mightily  love  to  call  it,  which  is  too  often  public  folly. 
(J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Against  persecution  for  religion: — I.  Our  Saviour,  in  this 

parable,  compares  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  a  king  making  a  marriage-feast  for  hia 
Bon.  It  is  evident  that  when  our  Lord,  in  the  text,  bids  the  preachers  of  His  gospel 
go  into  the  highways  and  hedges  and  compel  men  to  come  in.  His  meaning  ia  not. 
Compel  them  by  force  of  arms ;  but.  Compel  them  by  irresistible  clearness  of  reason, 
by  strength  of  argument,  and  affectionate  admonition ;  convince,  persuade,  entreat 
them ;  set  before  them  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment,  the  promises  and  the 
threatenings  of  the  Lord ;  prevail  with  them  by  your  own  good  example ;  urge, 
press,  inculcate  upon  them  the  necessity  of  religion  (2  Tim.  iy.  2).  II.  To  show  to 
what  a  wicked  sense  they  have  sometimes  been  perverted  by  men  of  corrupt  and 
ambitious  minds.  Compel  them  to  come  in  :  that  is  (in  their  explication),  compel 
them  by  violence  and  force  of  arms,  by  racks  and  tortures,  bv  dragoons  and  inquisi- 
tiona,  by  fire  and  sword.  As  if  religion,  whose  great  end  is  peace  and  love,  the 
universal  reconciliation  of  men  to  God  and  to  each  other,  could  itself  be  propagated 
by  the  highest  oppressions,  and  most  inhuman  cruelties ;  and  be  made  to  authorize 
and  to  sanctify  such  practices,  the  preventing  whereof  is  indeed  the  very  chief 
design  of  all  religion  both  natural  and  revealed.  But  to  be  more  particular.  1.  It 
ia  originally,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  inconsistent  and  absurd  to  think  that  a 
right  sense  of  religion  can  be  put  into  men's  minds  by  force  of  arms.  For  what  is 
religiou  but  auch  a  persuasion  of  mind  towards  God  aa  produces  obedience  to  His 
eommanda ;  arising  from  a  due  sense  of  Him  in  the  understanding,  a  just  fear  and 
love  of  Him  in  the  affections,  and  a  choice  or  preference  of  virtue  in  the  will  ?  Now 
to  attempt  to  influence  tlie  will  by  force,  is  like  applying  sounds  to  the  eyes  in  order 
to  be  seen,  or  colours  to  the  ears  in  order  to  be  heard.  2.  As  force  i»  inconsistent 
VOL.  m.  4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nv. 

with  the  nature  of  religion  in  general,  so  is  it  much  more  opposite  to  the  spirit  of 
Christianity  in  particular.  3.  As  force  is  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  religion 
in  general,  and  Btill  more  opposite  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity  in  particular ;  so  it 
is  in  Scripture  still  further  made  the  distinguishing  character  of  the  great  apostasy 
foretold  by  Christ  and  His  apostles.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Anxious  constraint  :~~ 
A  young  man,  deeply  concerned  for  the  conversion  of  his  brother,  while  listening  to 
a  discourse  addressed  by  me  to  the  young,  was  strongly  possessed  with  the  idea  that 
if  he  oould  obtain  permission  to  publish  it,  his  brother,  who  was  a  compositor  in  a 
printing-office,  might  be  led  to  read  it  first  for  the  press,  and  afterwards  for  pubUca- 
tion,  and  thereby  the  subject  might  arrest  his  attention,  and  impress  him  with  its 
Vnxih.  and  importance.  The  success  was  even  beyond  his  expectation,  and  he  lived 
to  see  that  brother  united  to  the  Church  of  which  he  himself  was  a  member,  and 
also  employed  in  missionary  labours,  in  which  he  has  now  been  successfully  engaged 
for  many  years.  (J.  Leif child,  D.D.)  Earnestness  in  seeking  to  save  : — Simeon  waa 
once  summoned  to  the  death-bed  of  a  dying  brother.  Entering  the  room,  the  relative 
extended  his  hand,  and  with  emotion  said :  "  I  am  dying,  and  you  never  warned 
me  of  the  state  in  which  I  was,  and  of  the  great  danger  I  was  in  of  neglecting  my 
soul."  "  Nay,  my  brother,"  said  Simeon,  "  but  I  took  every  reasonable  opportunity 
of  bringing  the  subject  of  religion  before  you,  and  frequently  alluded  to  it  in  my 
letters."  "  Yes,"  said  the  dying  man,  '•  but  you  never  came  to  me,  closed  the  door, 
took  me  by  the  collar  of  my  coat,  and  told  me  that  I  was  unconverted,  and  that  if 
I  died  in  that  state  I  should  be  lost;  and  now  I  am  dying,  and,  but  for  God's  grace, 
I  might  have  been  for  ever  undone."  It  is  said  that  Simeon  never  forgot  the  scene. 
{Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines.)  No  provision  made  for  defeat: — It  is  a 
remarkable  thing  in  this  parable,  that  Christ  makes  no  provision  for  defeat.  Ha 
does  not  say  what  we  are  to  do  if  they  refuse  to  come  in.  He  takes  it  for  granted 
that  we  must  overcome  if  we  are  in  earnest.  It  used  to  be  said  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  that  it  was  a  characteristic  of  his  career  that  in  the  orders  which  h* 
issued  to  his  brigadiers  he  never  made  any  provision  for  defeat.  He  said,  "  Ck>  and 
capture  that  hill  from  the  French,"  or,  "  Go  and  drive  the  enemy  from  that  house  " ; 
and  he  never  told  them  what  to  do  if  they  failed.  It  was  their  business  to  do  it, 
and  he  never  made  any  provision  for  defeat;  and  they  did  succeed.  So,  too, 
Christ  makes  no  provision  for  defeat.  He  assumes  that  we  shall  not  fail. 
Cheerful,  audacious.  Christian  work  cannot  fail.  It  was  said  by  a  great 
Latin  historian  of  Alexander  the  Great,  that  the  secret  of  his  marvellous 
victories,  by  which  the  world  was  brought  to  his  feet  was  this :  he  wisely  dared  to 
think  nothmg  of  imaginary  dangers  1  All  sorts  of  reports  reached  him  with  respect 
to  the  difficulties  of  invading  Asia,  and  so  forth,  but  he  pat  them  all  on  one  side. 
Oh,  that  we  may  be  filled  with  the  same  glorious  spirit — that  we  may  think  nothing 
of  imaginary  dangers !  The  devil  is  always  ready  to  exhibit  a  few  ghosts  of  diffi. 
eolties  to  terrify  weak  saints.  Let  us  despise  the  ghosts;  there  is  nothing  in  them. 
We  cannot  fail  if  our  heart  is  full  of  love  to  God,  and  of  sympathy  with  our  fellow 
Christians.  The  only  real  hindrance  to  the  progress  of  the  gospel  is  unbelief,  ia 
the  form  of  downright  selfishness,     (fl.  P.  Hugfies,  M.A.) 

Vers.  25,  26.  If  any  man  come  to  Me,  and  hate  not,  *e. — The  statute-law  of 
discipleship : — I.  The  natube  of  this  mecessabt  qualu'ication  or  a  tbus  dibciplb 
or  Chbibt.  1.  An  esteem  of  Christ  above  all.  2.  The  heart  renounces  its  property 
in  all  things  of  the  world,  in  the  day  of  its  closing  with  Jesus  Christ.  3.  The  soul 
resigns  all  to  the  Lord ;  lays  down  all  at  His  feet,  to  be  disposed  of  as  He  will. 
4.  The  soul  accepts  of  Christ  for,  and  instead  of  the  things  resigned.  5.  The  soul 
is  disposed  to  part  with  them,  when  the  Lord  calls  for  them ;  has  an  habitual 
readiness  to  part  with  them  for  Christ.  6.  There  is  in  the  soul  a  new  power  of 
living,  without  them,  on  Jesus  Christ ;  a  life  which  is  an  absolute  mystery  to  every 
Christless  soul  (John  vi.  57).  We  now  proceed — II.  To  confirm  the  doctrine  of  the 
text,  or  show,  that  no  man  can  be  a  true  disciple  of  Christ,  to  whom  Christ  is  not 
dearer  than  what  is  dearest  to  Him  in  the  world.  For  this  purpose,  consider — 1. 
That  the  soul  cannot  truly  lay  hold  on  Christ,  but  it  must  of  necessity  part  with 
the  world — "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters  "  (Matt.  vi.  24).  2.  It  is  impossible 
that  the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  the  world  (the  persons  and  things  of  the 
world),  can  at  the  same  time  be  predominant  in  tne  heart.  One  of  them  must  of 
necessity  be  uppermost.  S.  That  if  Christ  be  not  dearer  to  us  than  the  world, 
there  is  no  universal  resignation,  which  is  necessary  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  ths 
heart     4.  That  if  Christ  is  not  loved  supremely,  there  is  a  root  wanting,  the  fruit 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  51 

of  which  is  necessary  to  evidence  sincerity.     Because  of  the  deceitfulness  of  your 
heart,  it  will  be  good  to  be  very  distinct  and  particular  in  this  point,  on  which 
«temity  depends.     In  consequence  I  would  advise  you — (1)  To  give  up  with  ail 
your  lasts.     Yoa  have  held  the  grip  long,  let  it  now  go — "  Ephraim  shaU  say, 
"What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  (Hos.  xiv.  8).    (2)  To  lay  down  at  tha 
Lord's  feet  your  nearest  and  dearest  relations,  so  as  that  you  may  never  break  with 
Christ  for  them :  His  favour,  truths,  and  ways,  must  be  dearer  to  you  than  they. 
And  sure  I  am,  if  thou  meetest  with  Christ  at  His  table,  thou  wilt  say,  '•  Hence- 
forth know  we  no  man  after  the  flesh."     (3)  Lay  down  at  the  Lord's  feet  your 
substance  in  the  world,  be  it  great  or  small,  houses  and  lands,  goods,  &c.,  that  Ha 
may  dispose  of  them  as  He  may  see  meet.     (4)  Lay  down  at  the  Lord's  feet  your 
credit  and  esteem  in  the  world.    This  is  often  a  great  idol,  and  goes  betwixt  many 
a  man  and  Christ.     (5)  Lay  down  at  the  Lord's  feet  your  ease  and  liberty  (Acts 
xxi.  13).    (6)  Lay  down  at  Christ's  feet  your  desires.    Your  desires  shall  be  to  your 
spiritual  Husband,  who  shall  clioose   for   you    your  inheritance  (Psa.  xlvii.  4). 
(7)  Lay  down  at  the  Lord's  feet  your  life.    Let  your  bodies  be  given  now  to  the 
Lord,  not  only  for  service,  but  also  for  a  sacrifice,  if  He  requires  it.    I  now  proceed 
— HI.  To  offer  some  reasons  why  Christ  is  dearer  to  His  true  disciples  than  what 
is  dearest  to  them  in  the  world.    Among  other  reasons  the  following  are  mentioned. 
1.  Because  to  every  true  disciple,  sin,  of  all  bitter  things,  is  the  bitterest.    2.  That 
God  is  man's  chief  end;  and  when  He  made  him,  He  made  him  pointing  towards 
Himself  as  His  chief  end  (Eccl.  vii.  29).    3.  That  as  there  unquestionably  is,  so 
they  have  seen,  a  vanity  and  emptiness  in  aU  things  of  the  world,  even  the  thinga 
that  are  dearest  to  them  (Psa.  cxix.  96).    4.  Because  they  find  Christ  of  all  objects 
the  most  suitable  to  them,  and  therefore  He  cannot  but  be  dearer  to  them  than  tha 
dearest  thing  in  the  world.     5.    Because  He  is  their  greatest  benefactor;   His 
unparalleled  benefits  command  their  hearts  to  be  all  His :  He  has  done  for  them 
what  none  other  could  do.    6.  Because  they  are  sensible  that  whatever  they  hava 
in  the  world,  they  have  it  through  and  by  Him.    And  so  they  behold  Him  as  tha 
fountain  of  all  their  mercies.     Thus — {1)   They  have  the  enjoyment  of    their 
blessings  through  Him.    (2)  They  have  the  comfort  of  them  through  Him.     7. 
Because,  if  it  were  not  so,  Christ  would  have  no  Church  in  the  world.    If  im- 
prisoning, banishing,  spoiling  of  goods,  fields  and  scaffolds  reeking  with  the  blood 
of  the  saints,  would  have  deterred  all  persons  from  following  Christ,  there  had  been 
no  Church  in  the  world  this  day.    But  God  will  have  a  Church  in  spite  of  devils 
and  wicked  men.     (T.  Boston,  D.D.)        Christ  worthy  of  our  highest  esteem : — I. 
What  is  inciiUded  in  the  love  hebb  spoken  or.    1.  An  esteem  and  valuation  of 
Christ  above  all  worldly  enjoyments  whatsoever.    2.  A  choosing  Him  before  all 
other  enjoyments.    3.  Love  to  Christ  implies  service  and  obedience  to  Him  ;  the 
same  love  that  when  it  is  between  equals  is  friendship,  when  it  is  from  an  inferior 
to  a  superior  is  obedience.    Love,  of  all  the  affections,  is  the  most  active ;  hence 
by  those  who  express  the  nature  of  things  by  hieroglyphics,  we  have  it  compared 
to  fire,  certainly  for  nothing  more  than  its  activity.     The  same  arms  that  embrace 
a  friend,  will  be  as  ready  to  act  for  Him.    4.  Love  to  Christ  implies  an  acting  for 
Him  in  opposition  to  all  other  things  ;  and  this  is  the  mideoeiving,  infallible  test 
of  a  true  affection.    5.  Love  to  Christ  imports  a  full  acquiescence  in  Him  alone,  even 
in  the  absence  and  want  of  all  other  felicities :  men  can  embrace  Christ  with  riches, 
Christ  with  honour,  Christ  with  interest,  and  abundantly  satisfy  themselves  in  so 
doing ;  though  perhaps  all  the  time  they  put  but  a  cheat  upon  themselves,  thinking 
that  they  follow  Christ,  while  indeed  they  run  only  after  the  loaves.    II.  Thb 

BEA80N8  AND  MOTIVES  THAT  MAT  INDUCE  US  TO  THIS  LOVE.      1.   That  He  is  best  able  tO 

reward  our  love.  2.  That  He  has  shown  the  greatest  love  to  us.  HI.  The  sions, 
UABKS,  AND  CHABACTEBs  WHEBEBY  WE  MAT  DiscEBN  IT.  1.  A  frcqucnt  and  Indeed  a 
continual  thinking  of  Him.  "Where  your  treasure  is,"  says  our  Saviour,  •' there 
will  your  heart  be  also."  That  is,  whatsoever  yoa  love  and  value,  that  will  be  sure 
to  take  up  your  thoughts.  2.  The  second  sign  of  a  sincere  love  to  Christ,  is  a 
willingness  to  leave  the  world,  whensoever  God  shall  think  fit  to  send  Hia 
messenger  of  death  to  summon  us  to  a  nearer  converse  with  Christ.  **  I  desire  to 
be  dissolved,  and  to  be  with  Christ,"  says  St.  Paul.  3.  A  third,  and  indeed  tha 
principal  sign  of  a  sincere  love  to  Christ,  is  a  zeal  for  His  honour,  and  an  im- 
patience to  hear  or  see  any  indignity  offered  Him.  A  person  truly  pious  will 
mourn  for  other  men's  sins,  as  well  as  for  his  own.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  Lovin<f 
Christ  above  all,  the  character  of  His  true  disciples  : — ^I.  Let  us  consider  what  it  is 
so  BB  woKTHY  01  Chbibt.    Aud  thls  we  find  is  very  well  explained  in  the  passage 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiy. 


just  now  referred  to  by  this  expression,  «'  he  cannot  be  My  disciple  " ;  that  is,  h« 
cannot  be  a  sincere  Christian ;  he  may  call  himself  by  that  name.    II.  To  consider 

THE  liOVB  OF  ChEIST  AS  IN  COMPAEISON  WITH,  AND  OPPOSITION  TO  THE  LOVE  OF  FRIENDS, 

and  all  other  worldly  interests.  Such  affections  have  deep  and  firm  foundation  in 
naiire  and  reason.  As  this  maybe  justly  attributed  to  God  as  its  Author,  and  Hia 
■wisdom  and  goodness  shine  in  it,  religion  is  not  intended  to  root  it  out,  or  in  any 
degree  to  weaken  the  bonds  of  humanity.  But  the  immediate  ends  of  these 
natural  relations  are  not  the  highest  ends  of  our  being.  We  are  capable  of  nobler 
pursuits  and  higher  enjoyments  than  the  ease  and  conveniences  of  our  present 
condition.  It  is  the  predominant  affection  which  constitutes  the  character  and 
temper  of  a  man.  The  covetous  is  he  in  whom  the  love  of  wealth  prevails  over 
all  other  inclinations  ;  the  ambitious,  in  whom  the  love  of  honour ;  the  voluptuous, 
in  whom  the  love  of  sensual  pleasures.  Each  of  these  will  sacrifice  every  other 
interest  to  his  idol,  and  every  other  desire,  which  is  even  natural  to  him,  yet  not  so 
Btrcng.  But  to  preserve  an  universal  harmony  in  the  mind  of  man,  and  to  con- 
etitute  a  truly  religious  and  virtuous  character,  the  love  of  God  and  of  goodness 
ought  to  be  predominant.  Other  affections  are  not  to  be  rooted  out,  but  this  must 
be  supreme ;  and  they  gratified  and  indulged  only  by  its  permission,  and  so  far 
as  not  to  be  inconsistent  with  it.  This  is  the  true  meaning  of  my  text.  For  what 
I  would  principally  observe  for  illustrating  this  subject  is,  that  the  love  of  Christ, 
and  the  love  of  God  and  goodness,  is  just  the  same.  And  as  moral  excellence  ia 
the  inseparable  character  of  the  Deity,  so  it  is  absurd  to  pretend  that  we  love 
Him  without  loving  it ;  that  we  love  the  holiest  and  best  of  all  Beings  without 
loving  holiness  and  goodness  itself.  Again,  let  us  consider  that  to  be  worthy  ol 
Christ,  to  be  His  true  disciples,  and  obtain  His  acceptance,  it  is  absolutely  neces. 
sary  that  we  should  adhere  to  Him  inviolably,  that  we  should  hold  fast  the 
profession  of  our  faith  without  wavering,  and  be  stedfast  and  immovable  in  good 
works.  For  they  only  who  endure  to  the  end  shall  be  saved,  and  to  them  alone  who 
remain  faithful  unto  death,  the  crown  of  life  is  promised.  Now,  the  only  possible 
security  of  this  stedfastness,  is  love  to  Christ,  and  to  religion  and  virtue  above  alh 
I  shall  only  add  that  a  stedfast  and  universal  obedience  to  Him  is  imported  in 
our  beinj<  worthy  of  Christ,  or  His  sincere  disciples.  It  remains  now  that  we  make 
some  application  of  this  subject ;  which  may  be  the  better  done,  because  our 
Saviour  Himself  has  gone  before  as  in  applying  it  to  one  of  the  highest  and  most 
difficult  points  in  the  practice  of  religion,  that  is,  to  the  case  of  suffering 
persecution.  For  can  there  be  any  sincere  affection  to  God,  to  our  Saviour,  and  to 
His  cause  of  pure  religion  and  virtue,  if  it  be  not  a  prevailing  affection,  stronger 
than  any  other,  which  opposes  it  in  the  heart  ?  But,  we  may  apply  this  also  to 
other  and  more  ordinary  purposes  in  the  practice  of  religion.  If  the  commanding 
love  of  Christ  be  a  sufficient  defence  against  the  strongest  temptations,  it  may  well 
support  the  mind  against  lesser  ones.  Our  affection  to  our  friends  and  worldly 
interests  may  mislead  us  by  flattery  as  well  as  terror :  and  their  insinuating  smiles 
may  prove  a  snare  as  well  as  their  frowns.  Besides  this,  there  are  other  tempta- 
tions which  derive  their  force  from  the  same  root,  the  love  of  our  intimate  friends ; 
and  are  only  defeated  by  the  same  principle,  a  superior  affection  to  Christ.  There 
is  nothing  more  common  in  the  world  than  for  men's  families  to  be  snares  to  them ; 
while  to  make  a  large,  or  (as  they  pretend)  a  competent  provision  for  them,  they 
violate  their  consciences,  and  sin  against  God,  either  by  direct  injustice,  or,  at 
least,  by  such  immoderate  solicitude  and  incessant  toU  as  is  inconsistent  with 
piety,  leaving  no  room  for  the  exercises  of  it ;  or  by  such  narrowness,  and  with- 
holding more  than  is  meet,  as  is  directly  contrary  to  charity.  But  let  us  remember 
that  this  is  to  render  ourselves  unworthy  of  Oirist,  by  loving  sons  or  daughters,  or 
other  worldly  interests  more  than  Him.  Besides,  distresses  befalling  our  friends, 
their  deaths  and  misfortunes,  which,  considering  the  vicissitude  of  human  affairs,  are 
always  to  be  expected,  and  they  are  to  some  minds,  at  least,  among  the  most  sensibly 
affecting  trials  in  life ;  these  are  to  be  supported  on  the  same  principle.  (/.  A  bemethy, 
M.A.)  Love  for  Chritt  greater  than  love  for  a  sitter : — There  is  a  beautiful  story, 
which  some  of  you  will  probably  know,  as  it  forms  the  groundwork  of  one  of  the  best 
tales  of  modem  times,  and  which  affords  a  noble  example  of  what  I  have  just  been 
saying.  The  daughter  of  a  poor  Scotch  farmer — her  name  was  Helen  Walker — after 
her  father's  death,  supported  her  mother  by  her  unceasing  labour,  and  by  submit- 
ting to  every  privation.  She  had  a  sister,  many  years  younger,  whom  she  brought 
up  and  educated,  and  loved  as  her  own  child.  This  sister,  however,  bronght  great 
grief  and  shame  upon  her.  She  fell  7nto  foul  sin.  She  was  delivered  of  a  child.  The 


CTtAT.  xiT.]  ST.  LUKE.  S3 

child  was  found  dead,    llie  mother  was  tried  for  child-murder.    This  trial  was  a 
terrible  one  for  poor  Helen.    Notwithstanding  her  sister's  sin,  she  could  not  forget 
how  she  had  loved  her  ;  she  could  not  cast  her  out  of  her  heart :  she  longed  that 
her  sister's  life  should  be  spared,  so  that  she  might  have  time  to  repent.    A  fearful 
temptation  assailed  her.    It  seemed  as  though  her  sister's  life  hung  upon  her  word 
— a  single  falsehood  might  save  her.  If  she  would  but  say  that  her  sister  had  made 
any  preparations  for  the  birth  of  the  child,  or  had  ever  mentioned  it  to  her,  her 
sister  would  be  acquitted.  Her  sister  implored  her  ;  her  love  for  her  sister  rent  her 
heart ;  but  Helen  said,  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  swear  to  a  falsehood.     Whatever 
betide,  I  must  speak  tha  truth.     Thus  the  sister  was  condemned  to  death ;  and  the 
thoughtless  looked  upon  Helen  as  hardhearted.    But  she  had  shown  that  she  loved 
God  above  her  sister.  She  now  showed  how  deeply  she  loved  her  sister,  with  a  love 
far  deeper  than  it  would  have  been,  had  she  attempted  to  save  her  life  by  a  lie. 
She  resolved  to  take  up  a  petition  herself  to  the  King,  to  spare  her  sister's  life.  She 
walked  to  London  barefoot,  a  journey  of  above  four  hundred  miles ;  such  a  journey 
in  those  days,  a  hundred  years  ago,  being  far  more  difficult  and  dangerous  than  it 
is  now ;  and  though  she  was  only  a  poor,  helpless  peasant,  such  was  the  energy  and 
boldness  with  which  her  love  inspired  her,  that  she  gained  the  King's  pardon, 
carried  it  back  on  foot,  and  arrived  just  in  time  to  save  her  sister's  life.     I  have 
told  you  this  story,  because  it  is  such  a  beautiful  example  of  the  right  proportion 
between  love  and  duty,  whereby  both  are  greatly  strengthened — of  the  right  pro- 
portion between  our  love  to  God  and  our  love  to  our  earthly  friends.    It  is  an 
example  too,  which  if  we  kept  it  in  mind,  might  often  help  to  admonish  us  of  our 
duty.    For  the  temptation  which  Helen  Walker  resisted  is  a  very  common  one,  and 
comes  across  us  in  a  number  of  shapes.  We  are  often  tempted  to  do  something  that 
is  not  quite  right,  to  say  something  that  is  not  strictly  true,  for  the  advantage,  as 
we  deem  it,  of  those  whom  we  love  ;  and  because  our  love  is  feeble  and  shallow,  and 
shrinks  from  pain  and  sacrifices,  we  yield  to  the  temptation.      Sometimes  the 
temptation  may  be  very  strong.     You,  who  are  fathers,  may  see  your  wives  and 
children  suffering  from  want.    At  such  a  time  evil  thoughts  will  rise  up ;  you  will 
think  you  may  do  anything  to  save  your  wife  and  children  from  starving.     So  you 
may,  and  ought  to  do  everything,  everything  in  your  power,  and  even  beyond  your 
power,  provided  it  be  not  against  the  law  of  God.    Whatever  is,  you  should  shrink 
from,  remembering  our  Lord's  words,  that,  unless  you  love  Him  above  wife  and 
child,  you  cannot  be  worthy  of  Him.     (J.  C.  Hare,  M.A.)      Love  oj  Christ  greater 
than  love  of  relatives : — While  discussmg  this  passage  one  day,  I  noticed  that  a 
beam  of  sunlight  had  fallen  upon  the  mass  of  glowing  coal  in  the  grate,  and  where 
the  sunlight  fell  the  bright  redness  was  turned  into  absolute  blackness.     «'  Ah  I  " 
thought  I,  "  there  is  the  meaning  of  this  passage."     As  the  glowing  coal  appears 
black  beneath  the  far  more  intense  light  of  the  sun,  so  Christ  asks  that  the  light  of 
of  our  love  for  Him  should  be  so  intense  as  to  render  our  earthly  loves  even  as 
hatreds  in  comparison.    In  reality,  although  the  red  coal  appears  black  under  the 
sunhght,  it  is  still  as  hot  as  before,  yea,  hotter  than  before,  because  of  the  added 
heat  from  the  sun ;  so  our  love  for  friends  and  relatives,  though  it  should  appear  as 
hatred  beneath  our  love  for  Christ,  will  not  be  quenched  by  it,  but  added  to,  and 
rendered  deeper  and  purer.     (H.  Stanley.)       Christ  demanding  hatred : — The  word 
"  hate  "  is  a  strong  word,  and  I  believe  that  it  points  both  to  strong  feeling  and 
strong  action.     The  words  "  hate  his  own  life  also "  are  the  key  to  the  whole 
aphorism.  A  disciple  is  to  hate  his  relatives  and  friends  in  the  same  sense  in  which 
he  is  to  hate  himself.   In  what  sense,  then,  can  a  man  hate  himself  ?    He  can  hate 
what  is  mean  and  base  in  himself.     He  can  hate  his  own  selfish  Ufe.    To  cling  to 
life  is  natural ;  to  desire  ease  and  comfort  is  natural ;  to  gratify  the  appetites  is 
natural ;  but  all  this  natural  life,  whenever  it  comes  into  collision  with  the  spiritual 
side  of  our  being,  may  be  even  hated.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  Christian  may,  after 
a  struggle,  prefer  to  remain  true  to  God  and  Christ,  rather  than  gratify  the  selfish 
cravings  of  his  own  natural  life  ;  he  may  positively  hate  these  selfish  cravings 
when  they  are  tempting  him  to  forsake  his  duty.     The  word  may  be  paradoxical ; 
but  is  it  too  strong  t    Have  we  never  felt  disgusted  at  our  own  selfishness  7    Hava 
we  never  experienced  a  strong  revulsion  of  feeling  when  we  have  been  tempted  by 
**  onr  own  life  " — by  our  natural  Uking  for  what  is  agreeable  to  tbat  life — to  shirk 
our  duty,  and  to  do  something  mean  and  base  ?    In  the  old  Greek  drama,  Admetoa 
is  disgusted  with  the  life  which,  in  selfish  cowardice,  be  has  purchased  by  the  Kacri- 
lice  of  his  wife  Alkestis.     And  we  can  well  conceive  that  many  a  Christian  martyr 
may  have  felt  disgusted  with  his  own  life,  when  be  was  tempted  to  preserve  it  at  th« 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Icune.  xiT. 

cost  of  denying  his  Lord.  It  is  thus,  then,  that  a  man  may  hate  himself.  Not  ia 
the  bald,  literal  sense  ;  for  he  still  cares  for  his  own  true  best  life,  and  wishes  that 
to  be  developed  and  strengthened.  But  he  does,  in  a  sense,  hate  himself  when  tha 
self  in  him  rises  in  rebellion  against  God  and  Christ  and  duty.  Now,  in  this  sensa 
also,  a  man  may  hate  hia  relatives  and  friends.  He  may  hate  that  in  them  which 
is  mean  and  base.  He  may  hate  that  in  them  which  seeks  to  drag  him  away  from 
Christ     (r.  C.  Finlayson.) 

Ver.  27.  And  whosoever  doth  not  bear  his  cross,  fta — On  taking  up  tJie  erots  : — 
Christiani  sunt  cruciani,  says  Lather,  Christians  are  cross-bearers.  It  is  in  their 
hearts  to  bear  the  cross,  whatever  it  be,  whensoever  Christ  shall  require  it ;  and 
they  do  actually  bear  it  whenever  they  are  called  to  it.  They  do  not  flinch  from  it, 
nor  decline  it,  nor  turn  from  it,  by  any  indirect  or  unlawful  course.  I.  What  i3 
MEANT  BY  THE  CROSS.  1.  The  cross  includes  loss  and  damage,  the  greatest  losses  as 
well  as  the  least  ;  the  loss  of  all  outward  things,  as  well  as  the  loss  of  any.  When 
Christ  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  He  was  bereaved  of  all,  and  fastened  to  it  naked  -, 
He  had  not  so  much  as  His  garments  left  ;  they  who  brought  Him  to  the  cross 
divided  these  amongst  them.  He  that  is  not  willing  to  part  with  all,  to  foUo*^ 
Christ,  when  he  cannot  fully  and  faithfully  follow  Him  witiiout  quitting  aU,  he  13 
not  worthy  of  Him,  unworthy  the  name  of  a  Christian.  2.  It  speaks  shame  and 
reproach.  It  was  servile  supplicium,  a  base  ignominious  suffering,  to  which  nona 
were  exposed  but  the  vilest  of  men.  It  was  a  suffering  proper  to  slaves  and  fugi- 
tives ;  there  was  not  the  meanest  freeman  amongst  the  Bomans  but  was  above  it. 
Hence  shame  and  the  cross  are  joined  together  (Heb.  xii.  2).  Hence  that  expression, 
"bearing  His  reproach"  (Heb.  xiii.  13),  i.e.,  bearing  the  cross.  No  coming  w 
Christ  but  in  this  posture,  when  the  Lord  calls  to  it.  3.  It  imports  pain  and  torture. 
The  cross  was  a  most  grievous  and  painful  suffering.  Ausonius  calls  it  pcenw. 
extremum,  the  extremity  of  torture.  And  Cicero,  crudelissimum  teterrimumqua 
supplicium,  the  most  cruel  and  horrid  suffering.  When  Ignatius  was  going  to  b(j 
exposed  to  the  fury  of  wild  beasts  for  the  name  of  Christ,  he  cries,  "  Now  I  begin 
to  be  a  disciple."  4.  It  imports  death  itself.  The  cross  was  ultimum  supplicium, 
the  last  thing  that  could  be  suffered.  Cruelty  was  herein  terminated,  and  could  go 
no  further,  at  least  to  the  sense  of  the  sufferer.  It  was  the  worst  kind  of  death.  II. 
What  it  is  to  bear  the  cross.  1.  You  must  make  account  of  it.  Calculate  what 
it  will  cost  you.  2.  A  resolution  to  bear  the  cross,  whatever  it  be,  how  heavy,  or 
grievous,  or  tedious  soever  it  may  prove  ;  a  firm,  and  hearty,  and  settled  resolution 
to  bear  it,  is  a  virtual  bearing  of  it  beforehand  (ver.  33).  3.  You  must  be  alwaya 
ready  for  the  cross,  always  preparing  for  it,  whether  it  seem  near,  or  whether  i*; 
seem  further  off.  One  paraphraseth  the  words  thus,  "  Whosoever  doth  not  coma 
to  Me  with  a  preparation  of  mind  to  suffer  anything  rather  than  part  with  Me,  ho 
is  not  for  My  turn."  This  is  to  bear  the  cross  daily,  as  Christ  requires  (Luke  ix.). 
Though  every  day  do  not  afford  a  cross,  yet  every  day  we  bear  the  cross  by  dail:' 
preparing  for  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  31).  Even  when  the  cross  seems  far  off,  much  mora 
when  it  is  in  view,  you  must  be  preparing  for  it,  if  you  be  Christians  indeed  ;  and 
the  Lord  will  take  your  readiness  to  bear  it  for  a  bearing  of  it,  when  He  sees  good 
to  prevent  it.  4.  It  speaks  actual  undergoing  it  when  it  is  laid  on  us.  But  when 
the  Lord  brings  it  to  us,  we  must  actually  take  it  up.  He  is  no  disciple  for  Christ 
that  will  not  do  it.  III.  The  manner  of  bearing  the  cross.  1.  A  Christian 
endeavours  to  bear  the  cross  patiently.  That  while  the  cross  oppresses  his  outward 
man,  he  may  possess  his  soul  in  patience.  Not  the  patience  of  the  Stoics,  a  sende- 
less  stupidness  ;  nor  the  patience  of  the  heathen,  a  mere  yielding  to  necessity  ;  but; 
a  due  sense  of  the  pressure,  with  a  quiet  submission  to  the  hand  of  God,  whoever 
be  the  instrument,  without  murmuring,  repining,  disquietment,  or  despondency.  2 
He  endeavours  to  bear  it  cheerfully.  That  which  is  bearing  the  cross  here  is  taking 
up  the  cross  (chap,  ix.),  Christ  bore  His  cross  willingly ;  Simon  of  Cyrene  was 
compelled  to  bear  that  cross.  Christ  would  have  us  come  a^ter  Him,  bear  it  as  Ha 
did.  It  should  not  be  a  forced,  but  a  voluntary  act.  3.  He  endeavours  to  bear  it 
fruitfully.  The  cross  is  dry  wood,  and  so  was  Aaron's  rod ;  but  as  that  blossomed. 
80  does  this  bring  forth  fruit,  when  improved  (Heb.  xii.  11).  This  puts  the  followerg 
of  Christ  upon  seeking  the  sweet  fruits  of  peace  and  holiness  in  the  bowels  of 
devouring  calamities ;  to  get  spiritual  gain  and  advantage  by  outward  loss ;  to  grow 
richer  unto  God  by  worldly  impoverishment  ;  to  converse  more  with  Qod  whea 
separated  from  friends  and  relations  ;  to  value  more  the  love  of  Christ  when  they 
•mart  by  the  world's  hatred  ;  to  partake  more  of  hoUness  when  he  partakes  less  of 


•HAP.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  55 

the  ease,  peace,  plenty  of  the  world  ;  to  make  use  of  the  cross  for  the  crucifying  of 
the  flesh  ;  to  make  sin  more  hateful  and  dreadful,  the  conscience  more  tender,  the 
world  less  tempting,  more  contemptible,  grace  more  active  and  lively,  the  word 
more  sweet  and  effectual,  prayer  more  fervent  and  affectionate,  the  appearing  of 
Christ  more  lovely  and  desirable,  the  conversation  more  heavenly.  To  bear  the 
cross  as  a  disciple  of  Christ,  is  to  bring  forth  more  fruit  in  bearing  of  it.  (£>. 
Clarhson,  B.D.)  The  Christian's  cross  : — I.  The  ckoss  is  ordinaiult  the  lot  or 
Chbistians.  Persecution  and  troubles  have  always  attended  the  people  of  God. 
And  the  reasons  of  it  are  evident.  1.  The  malice  of  Satan,  who  knowing  himself 
to  be  cast  off  by  God,  he  hates  God  with  an  implacable  hatred  ;  and  since  the  Lord 
is  above  the  reach  of  his  malice,  he  falls  upon  those  who  are  dearest  to  Him,  the 
people  of  God.  2.  The  enmity  of  the  world.  The  world  would  be  sure  to  cross,  to 
afflict  and  persecute  what  it  hates  ;  and  the  disciples  of  Christ  are  hated  by  the 
world  (John  xv.  19).  Not  only  that  part  of  the  world  which  evidently  lies  in 
wickedness,  but  the  more  refined  part  of  it  which  dresseth  up  itself  in  a  form  of 
godliness.  Those  who  have  no  more  but  the  form,  hate  those  that  have  the  power, 
because  this  is  a  real  reproof  and  conviction  of  the  vanity  and  insufficiency  of  out- 
ward forms,  how  specious  soever  ;  and  that  which  detects  them  is  hated  by  them 
?John  V.  19).  3.  There  is  a  necessity  of  the  cross  upon  a  manifold  account.  (1) 
0  distinguish  true  disciples  from  hypocrites  and  pretenders.  When  Christ  may 
be  professed  and  followed  with  ease,  and  safety,  and  credit,  multitudes  will  follow 
Him,  every  man  will  profess  Him  whose  hearts  are  not  with  Him.  But  when  the 
cross  comes,  that  makes  a  distinction.  (2)  To  try  His  disciples,  that  He  may  have 
an  experiment  of  their  affection  and  faithfulness  to  Him :  "  Who  is  on  my  side  ? 
Who  ?  "  says  Jehu  (2  Kings  ix.  33).  So  says  Christ,  when  He  brings  out  the  cross ; 
let  Me  now  see  who  is  for  Me,  let  Me  see  who  it  is  that  will  bear  the  cross  for  Mq. 
(3)  For  the  advantage  of  grace.  A  Christian  is  not  complete  unless  he  have  on  his 
whole  armour ;  and  it  is  the  cross  puts  us  upon  putting  of  it  on ;  it  would  lie  rust- 
ing by  as,  if  we  were  not  roused  to  the  use  of  it  by  the  frequent  approaches  of  the 
cross.  (4)  To  take  us  off  from  the  world.  The  cross  embitters  the  world  to  us. 
and  confutes  those  vain  conceits  which  make  us  fond  of  it.  The  vizard  falls  off  by 
which  it  had  deluded  us,  and  now  we  may  perceive  what  an  impostor  it  was,  when, 
for  all  its  fair  promises,  we  meet  with  nothing  but  vanity,  and  enmity,  and  vexa* 
tion,  and  hard  usage.  And  will  it  not  seem  lovely  ?  Or  can  we  doat  on  it  any 
longer  J  The  cross  lets  us  not  only  see,  but  feel  what  the  world  is.  (5)  To  tame 
the  fiesh,  and  keep  it  under,  which  otherwise  would  grow  headstrong,  and  bear 
down  all  the  restraints  of  grace,  and  hurry  us  into  carnal  excess — "  Every  branch 
that  beareth  fruit  He  purgeth  it "  (John  xt.  ).  He  lops  off  the  luxuriances  of  natural 
corruption.  And  how  is  this  done  ?  Why,  a  sharp  cross  will  be  effectual  to  do  it, 
when  the  Lord  takes  it  into  His  hand  and  useth  it  for  this  purpose  1  (6)  To  endear 
heaven  to  us.  The  ark  was  more  acceptable  to  Noah's  dove  when  she  found  no 
rest  to  the  soles  of  her  feet  on  the  face  of  the  earth.    II.  A  Christian  cannot 

OBDINABILY  AVOID  THE  CROSS  WITHODT  SINNINO  AGAINST   ChRIST.      HI.    Hb   THAT  WILI. 
ORDINARUiT  BIN    AGAINST   ChRIST  TO   AVOID  THE   CROSS,  CANNOT  BE  A  CHRISTIAN.      This 

being  proved,  it  will  appear  an  evident  truth,  that  he  that  doth  not,  will  not,  bear 
the  cross,  is  not,  cannot  be  a  Christian.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  28-30.  For  which  of  you.  Intending  to  bolld  a  tower. — The  Christian 
builder  : — Our  Lord  on  purpose  mentioned  a  tower  rather  than  any  other  building, 
perhaps  to  signify  that  the  top  of  our  spiritual  building  must  reach  to  heaven,  or 
otherwise  it  will  be  vain  to  build.  A  Christian,  then,  is  a  man  that  builds  a  tower, 
a  noble  building,  not  a  cottage,  and  therefore  should  count  the  cost.  L  What 
SORT  OF  A  TOWER  THE  CHRISTIAN  BmLDS.  1.  A  towcr  is  HO  Small  building,  but  a 
noble  structure ;  and  so  is  the  believer's  spiritual  building.  (1)  Lifinite  wisdom  is 
the  contriver  of  it.  (2)  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  it.  2.  It  is  a 
noble  building,  or  a  famous  tower,  because  the  design  of  it  is  to  preserve  the  soul 
from  all  its  enemies,  and  from  all  dangers  whatsoever,  to  eternal  life.  3.  This  spiritual 
building  may  be  called  a  tower,  because  a  Christian  is  a  soldier,  and  this  building  is 
to  be  his  fortress ;  and  if  he  builds  on  Christ,  or  rightly  upon  the  only  foundation, 
he  need  not  fear  all  the  gnnshot  of  Satan,  sin,  the  flesh,  and  the  world,  though  he 
mast  expect  to  be  battered  severely  by  these  enemies.  4.  It  may  be  called  a  tower, 
because  the  Christian  builds  for  another  world.  He  must  gradually  proceed  until 
he  reaches  heaven.  H.  Why  is  a  Christian  said  to  build  this  tower  7  1.  Because 
he  ia  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  i.e.,  to  build  on  Him,    2.  But  note  that  it  is  God 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cblt.  nr. 

who  finds  all  the  materials.  Ill,  Evert  Christian  should  consider  the  mattkb 
BO  WELL  AS  TO  COUNT  THE  COST.  Why  ?  1.  Bccause  it;  will  be  a  very  costly  building 
to  him.  (1)  He  must  give  up  all  his  cui«ed  sins  and  lusts,  though  as  dear  to  him 
in  times  past  as  a  right  hand  or  eye.  (2)  He  must  expect  it  will  cost  him  the  loss 
of  whatsoever  he  once  accounted  gain.  (3)  He  must  part  with  all  hia  former  com- 
panions, and  expect  they  will  mock  and  deride  him,  and  may  be  his  own  wife  also. 
2.  Because  great  storms  may  rise,  and  floods  come,  and  beat  upon  his  high  tower ; 
and  he  should  count  the  damage  he  may  sustain  in  such  storms.  3.  Because  he  is 
not  able  either  to  begin,  nor  to  build,  or  lay  one  stone  by  his  own  strength ;  and  if 
he  knows  not  this,  or  does  not  utterly  despair  of  any  power  or  ability  of  his  own, 
he  will  never  be  able  to  finish,  and  then  men  '*  will  mock  him,"  &c.  4.  He  must 
account  how  rich,  how  strong,  and  able  he  is  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  He  knows 
that  Christ  is  his  strength,  he  counts  the  cost  aright  ;  and  if  he  depends  wholly, 
constantly,  and  believingly  upon  Jesus  Christ,  he  need  not  fear  but  he  shall  have 
wherewith  to  finish  this  famous  tower,  i.e.,  the  salvation  of  his  precious  bouL 
Application  :  1.  This  reprehends  all  rash  and  inconsiderate  persons,  who,  through 
some  sudden  flash  of  zeal  (which  may  prove  like  a  lava  flood)  set  out  in  a  visible 
profession  of  Christ  and  the  gospel.  2.  This  may  inform  us  of  the  reason  there 
are  so  many  who  grow  cold,  and  soon  falter,  and  fall  off,  or  decline  in  their  zeal 
and  seeming  love  to  Christ,  His  truth,  and  people.  They  counted  not  the  cost — 
what  corruptions  they  must  mortify,  what  temptations  they  must  withstand,  what 
reproaches  they  must  expect  to  meet  with,  what  enemies  they  may  find,  and  what 
relations  they  may  enrage  and  stir  up  against  them.  3.  Let  all  from  hence  be 
exhorted  to  count  the  cost  before  they  begin  to  build,  and  not  expose  themselves  by 
their  inconsiderateness  to  the  reproach  of  men,  either  to  the  grief  of  the  godly,  or 
to  the  contempt  and  scorn  of  the  wicked.  4.  Yet  let  none  from  hence  be  dis- 
couraged, or  decline  closing  with  Christ,  or  with  His  people  ;  for  if  they  are  sincere 
and  gracious  persons,  they  will  understand  that  the  almighty  power  of  God  is 
engaged  to  help  them.  5.  Count  also  all  the  external  charge,  which  a  visible  pro- 
fession of  Christ  may  expose  you  to ;  for  the  interest  of  Christ,  and  the  charge  of 
His  Church,  must  be  borne.  6.  How  great  is  the  work  of  a  Christian.  No  lazy 
life.  7.  Let  all  learn  on  what  foundation  to  build,  and  not  refuse  the  chief  corner- 
stone. Depend  wholly  upon  God  in  Christ.  His  money  pays  for  all.  Yet  you 
shall  not  miscarry  for  want  of  money  to  finish,  if  in  all  your  wants  you 
go  to  Him  by  faith  and  prayer.  (B.  Keach.)  Importance  of  consideration : — 
Nelaton,  the  great  French  surgeon,  once  said  that  if  he  had  four  minutes  in  which 
to  perform  an  operation  on  which  a  life  depended,  he  would  take  one  minute  to 
consider  how  best  to  do  it.  {Baxendale^s  Anecdotes.)  Purposes  should  be  weighed : — 
Before  proceeding  to  any  work,  we  should  weigh  it.  Letters  are  charged 
in  the  post  ofiice  according  to  weight.  I  have  written  and  sealed  a  letter 
containing  several  sheets.  I  desire  that  it  should  pass ;  I  think  it  will ;  but 
I  know  well  that  it  will  not  be  allowed  to  pass  because  I  desire  that  it  should  or 
think  that  it  will.  I  know  well  it  will  be  tested  by  imperial  weights  and  measures. 
Before  I  plunge  it  beyond  my  reach,  I  place  it  on  a  balance  before  me,  not  con- 
structed to  please  my  desire,  but  honestly  adjusted  to  the  legal  standard.  I  weigh 
it  there,  and  check  it  myself  by  the  very  rules  which  government  will  apply.  So 
should  we  weigh  our  purposes  in  the  balance,  before  we  launch  them  forth  in  action. 
{W.  Ainot.)  The  religious  life  exceeds  human  resource : — He  is  not,  in  our  Lord's 
estimation,  the  true  spiritual  builder,  such  as  will  bring  his  work  to  a  successful 
end,  who,  counting  the  cost,  finds  that  he  has  enough,  as  he  supposes  to  finish  the 
building  which  he  has  begun ;  but  the  wise  and  happy  builder  is  he  who  counts  and 
discovers  that  he  has  not  enough,  that  the  work  far  exceeds  any  resources  at  his 
command,  and  who  thereupon  forsakes  all  that  he  has,  ail  vain  imagination  of  a 
spiritual  wealth  of  his  own ;  and  therefore  proceeds  to  build,  not  at  his  own 
charges  at  all,  but  altogether  at  the  charges  of  God,  waiting  upon  Him  day  by  day 
for  new  supplies  of  strength.  {Archbishop  Trench.)  Counting  the  cost : — I.  True 
BELioioN  IS  COSTLY.  A  poor  man  is  suddenly  made  a  prince ;  it  wiU  cost 
him  the  giving  up  of  his  former  manners,  and  will  involve  him  in  new  duties 
and  cares.  A  man  is  set  on  the  road  to  heaven  as  a  pilgrim  :  d»es  he  pay 
anything  to  enter  by  the  wicket-gate  t  I  trow  not :  free  grace  admits  him  to 
the  sacred  way.  But  when  that  man  is  put  on  the  road  to  heaven  it  will  cost 
him  something.  It  will  cost  him  earnestness  to  knock  at  the  wicket-gate,  and 
sweat  wherewith  to  climb  the  Hill  Ditiioulty ;  it  will  cost  him  tears  to  find  his  roli 
again  when  he  has  lost  it  in  the  arbour  of  ease:  it  will  cost  him  great  care  in 


OHAP.  xiy.]  ST.  LUKE.  67 

goiixg  down  the  Valley  of  Humiliation ;  it  will  cost  him  resistance  nnto  blood  wheo 
he  stands  foot  to  foot  with  Apollyon  in  conflict.  What,  then,  is  the  expense  ?  1. 
If  you  would  be  Christ's,  and  have  His  salvation,  you  must  love  Him  beyond  every 
other  person  in  ibis  world.  2.  Self  must  be  hated.  I  must  mortify  the  flesh  with  ita 
affections  and  lusts,  denying  myself  anything  and  everything  which  would  grieve 
the  Saviour,  or  would  prevent  my  realizing  perfect  conformity  to  Him.  3.  If  we 
would  follow  the  Saviour,  we  must  bear  our  cross.  He  who  has  the  smile  of  the 
ungodly,  must  look  for  the  frown  of  Qod.  4.  We  must  follow  Christ,  i.e.,  act  as  He 
wsted.  6.  Unreserved  surrender  of  all  to  Jesas.  If  you  possess  a  farthing  that  is 
yoor  own  and  not  your  master's,  Christ  is  not  your  master.  II.  Wisdom  sTjaoKSTS 
THAT  ws  should  COUNT  THE  COST.  1.  If  you  do  not  count  the  cost,  you  will  not  be 
able  to  carry  out  your  resolves.  It  is  a  great  building,  a  great  war.  Faith  and 
repentance  are  a  life-work.  2.  To  fail  in  this  great  enterprise  will  involve  terrible 
defeat.  Half-hearted  Christians,  half-hearted  rehgious  men,  may  not  be  scoffed  at 
in  the  public  streets  to  their  faces,  but  they  are  common  butts  of  ridicule  behind 
their  backs.  False  professors  are  universally  despised.  Oh  1  if  you  must  be  lost, 
be  lost  as  anything  but  hypocrites.  III.  Cost  whateveb  it  uay,  tbub  religion  is 
WOBTH  THE  COST.  I.  The  present  blessings  of  true  religion  are  worth  all  the  cost. 
2.  What  recompense  comes  for  all  cost  in  the  consolation  afforded  by  true  godliness 
in  the  article  of  death  ?  3.  Christ  asks  you  to  give  up  nothing  that  will  injure  you. 
4v  Christ  does  not  ask  yon  to  do  anything  that  He  has  not  done  Himself. 
{G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Ill-considered  beginnings: — This  parable  stands  in  juxta- 
position with  that  of  the  Great  Supper,  and  is  plainly  designed  to  supplement  its 
lesson,  and  preclude  any  perversion  of  its  meaning.  In  the  one  yoo  have  the 
freedom  of  gospel  privileges,  in  the  other  you  have  the  costliness  of  gospel 
responsibilities.  "Tou  that  are  following  me  so  readily,"  says  the  Saviour, 
"  consider  what  you  do.  As  builders  of  a  spiritual  house,  are  you  incurring  a  new 
and  a  serious  outlay ;  are  you  prepared  to  face  it  7  As  warriors  on  a  spiritual 
campaign,  you  are  challenging  new  and  uncompromising  enemies ;  are  you  able  to 
coufront  them  ?  Far  better  leave  an  undertaking  alone,  than,  after  starting  it, 
have  thereafter  to  abandon  it,  especially  when,  as  in  the  present  case,  it  attracts 
the  observation  of  so  many  watchful  eyes,  and  provokes  the  resentment  of  so 
many  jealous  hearts.  Beware  lest  you  waken  the  world's  hostility  by  your  pre- 
tensions to  strength  when  yon  begin,  and  live  to  incur  its  mockery  by  your  con- 
fession  of  weakness  when  you  desist."  That,  then,  is  the  drift  of  this  passage.  Of 
course,  only  one  side  of  the  truth  is  here  brought  before  us.  It  is  not  only  on 
account  of  the  views  of  outsiders,  their  spitefulness  when  a  man  commences,  and 
their  contempt  when  he  leaves  off,  that  our  Saviour  bids  those  who  would  join  Him 
count  the  cost.  There  are  other  and  worse  consequences  to  be  faced  by  him  who 
begins  and  who  ceases  in  this  matter,  than  the  pointing  of  a  worldling's  finger  or 
the  wagging  of  a  worldling's  tongue,  and  for  these  we  must  look  elsewhere.  But  so 
far  as  it  goes  the  parable  is  both  pertinent  and  pungent,  the  lesson  of  it  plain,  the 
application  unavoidable.  He  that  will  build  a  tower  necessarily  invites  attention, 
provokes  scrutiny,  sets  speculation  astir,  and  these  not  always  of  the  kindest  or 
most  favourable  sort.  Publicly  he  succeeds,  if  success  be  in  store  for  him ;  but 
publicly,  too,  he  must  fail.  Exactly  so  is  it  with  the  assuming  of  a  Christian 
position.  Let  a  man  bear  in  mind  that  for  this,  if  for  no  other  reason,  he  is  wise 
to  think  well  ere  beginning,  remembering  that  the  eye  of  the  world  is  upon  him. 
Not  ouly  is  this  matter  of  a  Christian  profession  and  a  spiritual  life  a  necessarily 
public  undertaking ;  it  is  also  a  very  costly  one.  And  the  higher  the  ideal  we  erect 
for  ourselves,  the  more  important  and  commanding  the  position  w6  assume,  the 
greater  the  outlay  we  must  face.  True,  let  me  remind  you  again,  the  building  of 
the  tower  may  turn  out  in  the  end  the  most  gloriously  profitable  investment  that 
is  open  to  us.  When  the  walls  are  complete,  and  the  headstone  brought  forth  with 
shoutings  of  "grace,  grace  unto  it,"  it  may  prove  a  magnificent  and  an  everlasting 
habitation,  repaying  a  thousandfold,  both  in  shelter  and  in  splendour,  the  dis- 
bursements its  erection  occasioned.  But,  meanwhile,  these  disbursements  may  b« 
trying.  And  let  every  man  weigh  the  solemn  fact,  the  assuming  of  a  Christian 
profession  and  the  maintenance  of  the  Christian  life  may  in  some  oases  involve  a 
serious  price.  Nor  will  any  be  able  to  say  that  the  estimates  for  the  building  of  the 
tower  have  been  kept  in  the  background  by  Scripture ;  they  are  clearly  drawn  up, 
and  faithfully  presented.  And  what  is  the  expenditure  they  specify  7  This  among 
other  things  (let  the  context  testify) :  the  hatred  of  father  and  motlier  and  sisters 
and  brethren,  the  losing  of  one's  own  life,  the  taking  up  of  the  cross,  the  forsakiiig 


68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xit. 

all  a  man  hath.  These  be  strong  words,  but,  brethren,  they  are  Christ's,  and 
there  are  those,  many  and  many  a  one,  who  have  found  them  no  whit  beyond  the 
lacts.  This  brings  me  to  the  third  point  in  the  parable,  for  which  we  are  now  pre- 
j  ared,  namely,  the  consequence  that  too  often  takes  place  from  a  rash  and  111- 
c  )nsidered  beginning.  For  a  time  the  building  proceeds.  He  has  founded  it  in 
accordance  with  God's  appointment,  he  rears  it  in  conformity  with  God's  plan. 
But  there  comes  a  period  when  the  enterprise  gets  costly.  It  touches  him  on  the 
side  of  his  comfort,  touches  him  on  the  side  of  his  pride,  and  the  unaccustomed 
drain  begins.  It  is  first  a  call  on  his  time,  time  he  wanted  to  use  as  he  liked ; 
next  a  wrench  of  affection,  the  severance  of  a  tie  which  was  dear  to  the  flesh,  but 
which  Christian  principle  forbade  ;  next,  the  sudden  disappointing  of  desire — desire 
which  only  a  disciple  of  Christ  would  possibly  have  been  asked  to  deny  himself  ; 
then  an  inroad  on  his  purse.  And  thus  there  comes  a  time  when  in  his  own  heart 
of  hearts  the  ominous  uncertainty  begins,  even  though  shame  for  a  time  makes 
him  persevere.  *•  Have  I  not  gone  too  far  ?  "  he  is  now  beginning  to  ask  of  himself, 
"and  may  not  this  tower  of  mine  bear  curtailing,  without  any  loss  to  the  general 
riesign  ?  God  will  make  allowance  for  my  poverty,  and  the  world  will  be  unaware 
of  the  difference,  or  approve  of  it."  So,  lesser  inconsistencies  creep  in;  lesser 
incompletenesses  make  themselyes  manifest ;  there  is  a  saving  here  and  a  saving 
there.  Already  the  man's  life  has  fallen  below  his  profession  ;  the  execution  of  the 
building  is  not  up  to  the  plan,  and  the  end  of  it  all  throws  its  shadow  before.  We 
all  know  what  that  was.  Alas,  he  had  not  sufficiently  examined  himself ;  he  had 
not  sufficiently  counted  the  cost.  He  did  not  know  all  he  was  doing  when  he 
separated  himself  from  the  world's  companionship,  and  resolved  to  take  up  the 
cross  of  Christ.  Better  never  to  have  asserted  a  superiority  to  the  world  at  aU, 
than,  having  assumed  the  position  by  leaving  it,  thereafter  to  renounce  it  by  going 
back.  When  Pliable  re-entered  the  City  of  Destruction  with  the  mud  of  his 
expedition  bespattering  his  clothes,  and  its  terrors  still  pale  on  his  face,  the  city  was 
moved  round  about  him,  and  we  read  that  some  called  him  foolish  for  going,  and 
others  called  him  wise  for  coming  back.  But  I  can  fancy  that  even  these  did  not 
quite  take  the  erring  one  back  to  their  arms,  nor  forget  the  facts  of  his  escapade, 
and  that  all  the  time  he  went  in  and  out  in  the  midst  of  them  the  consciousness 
never  faded  from  their  hearts,  the  sneer  never  passed  from  their  lips.  And  when 
the  man  who  has  begun  to  build  the  tower  of  a  religious  profession,  and  is  com- 
pelled to  leave  it  unfinished,  slinks  back  to  the  comrades  his  enterprise  has 
offended,  saying,  "Brothers,  I  find  I  have  made  a  mistake  ;  I  am,  after  all,  no  better 
than  yourselves ;  I  will  henceforth  make  amends  for  my  folly  by  dwelling  in  a  house 
and  sitting  at  a  table  like  your  own,"  think  you  that  the  world  will  have  any  sym- 
pathy or  respect  for  him  ?  It  may  applaud  him  to  his  face,  but  behind  his  back 
there  will  ever  be  the  pointed  fiuger  and  the  whispered  scoff :  "  That  man  began  to 
build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish."  For,  oh !  here  is  the  solemn  thought.  The  man 
may  change  his  mind,  but  the  fabric  he  has  reared  remains  notwithstanding,  the 
monument  of  his  pride  and  his  folly  alike,  unhonoured,  untenanted,  and  unfinished. 
There  the  building  stands,  in  the  words  of  seeming  sincerity  the  man  has  spoken, 
in  the  Christian  teaching  he  has  published,  in  the  Christian  schemes  he  has 
launched,  all  which  he  has  long  since  abandoned,  because  he  had  failed  to  lay  his 
account  with  the  difficulties,  had  forgotten  to  count  the  cost.  And  through  all 
time  the  unfinished  fabric  shall  remain,  the  sorrow  of  the  Church  and  the  triumph 
of  the  world,  ay,  and  perhaps  throughout  eternity  too,  as  the  rebuke  of  conscience 
and  the  taunt  of  the  lost.  Hitherto  we  have  moved  only  along  the  strict  lines  of  the 
parable,  and  narrowed  ourselves  to  the  special  thought  that  the  Saviour  was 
enforcing  at  the  time.  But  there  are  several  thoughts  in  connection  with  the 
passage  before  us,  which,  though  not  exactly  in  it,  are  so  closely  akin  to  it  and  eo 
naturally  suggested  by  it,  that  we  cannot  quite  omit  them.  1.  And  first,  are  there 
any  among  us  who  have  been  saying  to  themselves,  "  But  we  have  been  building 
the  tower.  Ours  has  been  a  Christian  profession  ever  since  oar  earliest  years.  And 
really  we  have  had  no  experience  of  the  difficulties  of  which  you  speak.  So  far  as 
we  know,  our  operations  have  wakened  no  one's  envy,  and  provoked  no  one's 
hostility."  And  do  you  think,  therefore,  that  the  statements  already  made  as  to  the 
costliness  of  a  Christian  profession  are  overdrawn  and  exaggerated,  suitable  per- 
haps to  the  times  in  which  the  Saviour  spoke,  but  scarcely  suitable  to  our  own  t 
Bemember,  however,  ye  who  speak  thus,  that  there  is  an  evil  quite  as  ba^d 
as  unfinished  bailding,  and  that  is  unstable  building.  2.  Then,  again,  it 
follows  from  all  this,  that  we  are  to  be    cautious    and   oarefol  in  our  judg- 


»EAP.  XIV.]  fir.  LUKE.  59 

bientB  as  to  those  around  us,  whom  we  might  have  expected  to  build,  but 
who  seem  to  hesitate.  Oi  the  utterly  indifferent,  who  have  never  yet  faced  the 
matter  nor  once  realized  the  claims  of  Christ,  we  do  not,  of  coarse,  speak.  But 
there  are  others  who  have  not  yet  taken  up  A  Christian  position,  not  from  want  of 
thought,  but  rather  because  they  are  thinking  so  deeply.  They,  at  any  rate,  are 
sensible  of  the  cost,  and  are  settling  down  to  count  it.  And  that  is  better  than  the 
conduct  of  the  man  who  complacently  offers  God  a  eervice  that  costs  him 
nothing,  and  perseveres  in  his  presumption,  or  of  the  man  who  rashly  begins 
what  is  costly,  and  then  desists.  3.  But  thirdly,  a  word  in  closing  to  this  very  class, 
— the  backward  and  reluctant.  Brother,  yon  are  counting  the  cost.  You  do  well 
to  count  it.  Christ  here  counsels  you  to  count  it.  And  you  feel,  do  you,  that  it  is 
B  risk  that  yon  cannot  honestly  face  ?  Far  better,  do  you  say,  to  be  a  consistent 
man  of  the  world  than  an  imperfect  professor  of  religion — like  him  who  began  the 
i  ower,  and  was  not  ^ble  to  finish  ?  True,  again ;  but  is  your  state  of  hesitation 
therefore  defensible  ?  Do  you  think  Christ  bids  any  man  sit  down  and  count  the 
cost  of  the  project  only  that  he  may  renounce  it  altogether?  Nay,  verily ;  it  is  only 
that  out  of  a  deep  sense  of  your  weakness  you  may  be  driven  to  ask  the  needed 
strength  from  Himself,  and,  knowing  that  you  have  not  the  wherewithal  to  carry 
on  the  fabric  He  nevertheless  seeks  you  to  rear,  you  may  be  thrown  on  the  helpful- 
ness and  ready  supplies  of  Him  who  giveth  liberally  and  upbraideth  not.  {W. 
Gray.)  Religion: — The  great  fact  which  our  Lord  designs  to  illustrate  is  this — 
that  numbers  embrace  the  gospel  from  reasons  that  are  not  conclusive,  and  when 
stronger  reasons,  as  they  appear  to  them,  arise  in  their  intercourse  with  social  life, 
they  lightly  renounce  a  creed  they  lightly  adopted.  I.  First,  there  are  those  who 
ACCEPT  BELioiON  MEBELY  7B0M  lUPULSE.  They  ate  Constitutionally  the  creatures  of 
impulse.  One  man  is  the  creature  of  feeling ;  another  is  more  the  creature  of 
intellectual  conviction ;  another  is  more  borne  away  or  decided  in  his  course  by 
fact.  The  Scotchman  must  have  strong  arguments ;  the  Irishman  must  have 
eloquent  appeals ;  and  the  Englishman  must  have  hard  matter  of  fact.  Each  nation 
has  its  idiosyncracy ;  each  individual  his  peculiar  temperament.  Men  who  are  the 
creatures  of  strong  and  impetuous  emotion,  subscribe  to  a  creed,  if  I  may  use  the 
expression,  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  and  because  they  feel  profoundly,  they  think 
they  are  convinced,  and  that  the  creed  which  they  adopt  is  demonstrable  and 
necessarily  true.  Now,  I  answer — this  will  not  be  sufficient  to  keep  you  steadfast. 
This  is  commencing  the  "  tower,"  before  you  have  laid  a  fit  foundation ;  this  is 
plunging  into  a  conflict  whilst  you  have  not  the  weapons  that  will  enable  you  to 
conquer.  Feeling  in  religion  is  right ;  but  feeling  must  not  be  all.  An  eloquent 
appeal  may  move  you,  but  it  ought  not  to  decide  you.  II.  In  the  second  place, 
there  is  the  keligion  of  the  cbowd.  Many  men  are  religious  in  a  crowd,  who 
are  most  irreligious  when  alone.  They  like  what  seems  to  be  popular  ;  they  can  be 
Christians  in  the  mass,  but  not  Christians  when  insulated  from  others.  Many  a 
eoldier  is  a  coward  when  alone,  but  he  becomes  a  hero  in  his  rank  and  place  in  the 
battalion.  HI,  There  is  a  third  sort  of  religion — the  beligion  op  mebe  cibcum- 
BTAi^CE.  People  often  accept  the  religion  of  those  they  love,  and  with  whom  they 
associate.  IV.  There  are  others  whose  religion  is  simply  the  beligion  of  tkadition. 
An  outside  robe ;  not  the  inner  life.  V.  There  is  another  religion  which  may  be 
tailed,  thb  beligion  op  sentiment.  This  religion  is  nourished  by  all  the  beautiful 
and  the  romantic.  It  is  the  religion  of  Athens  rather  than  the  religion  of  Jeru- 
sakim — the  religion  of  painters  and  of  poets,  rather  than  the  religion  of  thinkiug 
and  intellectual  minds.  VI.  There  is  another  religion  which  is  equally  false ;  and 
that  is  the  beligion  of  mebe  fobu.  It  regards  the  outer  aspect  of  things ;  not 
the  inner  light.  This  is  not  a  religion  that  will  stand.  VII.  And  in  the  next  place 
let  me  add,  there  is  the  beligion  of  intellect.  If  some  profess  Christianity  from 
sentimental  sympathy  with  its  beautiful  parts,  and  others  profess  Christianity  from 
admiration  of  its  ritual,  or  its  form,  there  are  others  who  profess  Christianity  from 
deep  intellectual  apprehension  of  it ;  and  yet  theirs  is  a  religion  that  will  not  stand. 
Vin.  And,  lastly,  there  is  another  religion  which  will  still  more  surprise  you  when 
I  say  that  it  also  may  be  a  religion  that  will  not  stand — the  beligion  of  con> 
soiBMCE.  It  is  possible  for  conscience  to  be  in  religion,  and  yet  your  heart  not  to  be 
the  subject  of  living  and  experimental  Christianity.  You  will  go  to  the  house  of 
<Tod  because  your  conscience  would  torment  you  U  you  did  not  do  so.  But  is  this 
the  beautiful,  the  blessed,  the  happy  religion  of  Jesus  ?  Such  service  is  slavery ; 
inoh  duties  drudgery ;  and  such  a  religion  is  a  ceaseless  and  perpetual  penance,  and 
fiot "  righteousness  and  peace  in  the  Holy  Ghost."      {J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  On 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  xit, 

taunting  the  cost : — The  cost  attending  thb  Christian  profession.  1.  In  order 
to  be  the  disciples  of  Christ,  there  is  muoh  that  we  must  instantly  renounce.  It  is  a 
profession  of  holiness :  it,  therefore,  demands  the  immediate  renunciation  of  criminal 
and  forbidden  pleasures.  By  His  gospel,  and  by  His  Son,  God  has  "called  us,  not 
to  uncleanness,  but  to  holiness  "  ;  so  that  he  that  despiseth  the  precepts  of  purity, 
despiseth  not  man  but  God.  2.  The  Christian  profession  is  spiritual,  and  therefore 
requires  the  renunciation  of  the  world.  3.  In  order  to  be  a  disciple  it  is  necessary, 
in  the  concerns  of  conscience,  to  renounce  every  authority  but  that  of  Christ.  The 
connection  of  a  Christian  with  the  Saviour  is  not  merely  that  of  a  disciple  with  his 
teacher ;  it  is  the  relation  of  a  subject  to  his  prince.  "  One  is  your  Master,  even 
Christ."  4.  The  cost  of  which  we  are  speaking  relates  to  what  we  are  to  expect.  In 
general,  to  commence  the  profession  of  a  Christian,  is  to  enter  upon  a  formidable 
and  protracted  warfare  ;  it  is  to  engage  in  an  arduous  contest,  in  which  many  dilB- 
cnlties  are  to  be  surmounted,  many  enemies  overcome.  The  path  that  was  trod  by 
the  great  Leader  is  that  which  must  be  pursued  by  all  his  followers.  5.  The  cost 
of  the  Christian  profession  stands  related  to  the  term  and  duration  of  the  engage- 
ment — "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death."    It  is  coeval  with  life.     II.  Why,  wk  sat, 

IS   IT   EXPEDIENT   FOB  TBOSE  WHO  PROPOSE    TO   BECOME    CHRISTIANS    TO    "  COUNT     THB 

COST  "  ?  1.  It  will  obviate  a  sense  of  ridicule  and  of  shame  (see  the  context).  2. 
It  will  render  the  cost  less  formidable  when  it  occurs.  3.  If  it  diminishes  the  number 
of  those  who  make  a  public  and  solemn  profession,  this  will  be  more  than  retrieved 
by  the  superior  character  of  those  who  make  it.  The  Church  will  be  spared  much 
humiliation ;  Satan  and  the  world  deprived  of  many  occasions  of  triumph.  III. 
The  reasons  which  should  determine  oub  adherence  to  Christ,  notwithstan'd- 
INO  THE  COST  WHICH  ATTENDS  IT.  1.  His  absolute  right  to  command  or  claim  our 
attachment.  2.  The  pain  attending  the  sacrifices  necessary  to  the  Christian  pro- 
fession greatly  alleviated  from  a  variety  of  sources.  3.  No  comparison  betwixt  the 
cost  and  the  advantages.      {R.  Hall,  M.A.)  True  heroism :  counting  the  cost  :—' 

The  cost  of  a  Christian  profession,  if  it  be  genuine  and  true.  Alas  !  to  be  called 
Christian,  to  have  the  Christian  name,  to  pass  muster  with  the  world  as  a  Christian, 
is  a  light  and  little  thing  ;  and  as  John  Bunyan  well  paints  in  his  admirable  por- 
traiture of  the  false  as  well  as  the  true  professor ;  •'  There  are  many  By-ends,  who 
like  to  go  with  religion  when  religion  goes  in  silver  slippers,  who  love  to  walk  with 
him  in  the  street,  if  the  sun  shines  and  the  people  applaud  him,  but  such  By-ends 
will  not  pass  muster  in  the  great  day."  They  may  be  esteemed  members  of  the 
visible  Church,  but  the  question  is,  "  Will  they  stand  the  test  in  the  great  day, 
when  the  Lord  comes  to  reckon  with  the  servants?"  If,  indeed,  we  understand  the 
Christian  profession  as  Jesus  portrays  it,  we  cannot  suppose  it  is  a  thing  that  does 
not  require  to  be  weighed  well.  There  is  a  cost,  there  is  a  sacrifice  to  be  counted 
upon,  there  are  difiBculties  and  dangers  to  be  looked  forward  to,  there  is  much  to  be 
borne  up  against  that  will  be  hard  to  bear,  and  on  these  things  we  are  to  decide.  If 
a  man  must  thus  deny  himself  in  order  to  be  a  soldier  of  his  country,  how  much 
more  must  he  deny  himself  to  be  a  soldier  under  the  Captain  of  his  salvation  ?  He 
requires  us  to  renonnce  His  enemies,  who  are  our  foes,  let  us  not  forget,  though  we 
naturally  regard  them  as  our  friends.  Our  sympathies  are  with  them,  and  our 
desires  and  tastes  lead  us  captive  after  them.  A  man  must  make  his  election ;  will 
you  have  Jesus  to  be  your  Redeemer  ?  But  we  must  not  glance  only  at  what  a  man 
must  forego,  but  at  what  he  must  undergo  ;  and  here  is  the  part  of  the  cost  that 
many  shrink  from.  For  instance,  a  young  man  is  entangled  in  the  midst  of  worldly 
connections,  and  he  begins  to  look  more  serious,  and  to  go  to  church,  and  to  read 
his  Bible  regularly,  and  to  find  out  that  he  is  disinclined  to  go  to  the  theatre,  and  to 
scenes  of  rioting  and  revelling,  and  to  join  the  multitude  to  do  evil.  He  knows 
what  will  follow,  but  the  cross  must  be  taken  up.  He  will  be  laughed  at  by  the 
silly  and  ungodly.  And  therefore,  brethren,  tlie/e  is  a  cost ;  a  man  must  undergo 
shame  and  the  cross ;  it  will  not  do  to  dismiss  it,  to  muzzle  it,  to  step  over  it  even  in 
order  to  escape  it,  for,  as  the  Master  tells  us,  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  he 
must  bear  his  cross  "  daily  and  hourly.  If  a  man  counts  the  cost,  he  counts  also 
the  help  and  succour  he  shall  find ;  for  he  knows  his  weakness,  and  he  learns  his 
strength  ;  and  if  he  finds  himself  encompassed  with  danger,  he  will  not  rush  into 
the  temptation,  but  he  will  nestle  beneath  the  Almighty  wings,  and  shelter  beneath 
the  ark  of  safety.  In  the  first  place,  if  a  man  count  the  cost  ot  taking  op  the 
standard,  and  enlisting  in  the  army  of  Christ,  he  has  to  obey  the  simple  claims  of 
Christ  as  one  in  whom  there  is  power  and  authority.  And  then,  brethren,  let  ni 
not  forget  that  ii  the  service  of  Christ  has  its  sorrows,  it  has  its  joys ;  if  it  has  itl 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  et 

Belf-denials,  it  has  its  Belf-indnlgenoes ;  if  here  there  are  thorns  and  briers,  the 
world  above  has  everlasting  flowers,  and  heavenly  violets,  and  sweet-smelling  lilies, 
that  shed  a  fragrance  around  all  and  above  all ;  and  though  the  way  may  be  narrow, 
it  is  a  straight  one ;  it  has  no  pitfalls,  no  traps,  no  bitter  fears,  no  dark  forebodings, 
no  haunting  spirits,  but  it  has  the  "promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which 
is  to  come."  It  saves  a  man  from  a  thousand  snares,  it  shields  him  from  a  thousand 
dark  remorses,  it  guards  him  from  a  thousand  fearful  misgivings,  and  enables  him 
to  look  God  and  man  in  the  face.  Can  the  world,  or  the  service  of  the  world,  do 
that  t  Then,  to  sum  up  all,  if  we  oast  into  the  balance  of  gains  "  life  ever- 
lasting," surely  that  must  make  the  scale  touch  the  ground,  and  the  opposite 
Bcale  strike  the  beam.  "  What  shall  it  proflt  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world, 
and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  Or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  f  " 
"  I  reckon,"  said  one,  who  had  large  experience  of  the  world's  trials,  "  that  the 
Bu^erings  of  the  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
which  shall  be  revealed  in  us."  "For  our  light  afliiction,  which  is  but  for  a 
moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  Can 
language  go  further  ?  And  that  is  not  the  language  of  a  fanatio  or  a  fool,  but  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  teaching  us  through  one  whom  He  had  taught  with  Divine 
wisdom,  that  overcoming  is  heroism.  The  heroism  of  the  Cross — that  is  true 
heroism.  {U.  Stowell,  M.A.)  Holiness:  the  cost: — I.  What  it  costs  to  bk  a 
TBUE  Cbbistian.  1.  It  will  cost  a  man  his  self-righteousness.  He  must  be  content  \ 
to  go  to  heaven  as  a  poor  sinner  saved  only  by  free  grace,  and  owing  all  to  the  merit 
and  righteousness  of  another.  "  Sir,"  said  a  godly  ploughman  to  the  well-known 
James  Hervey,  of  Weston  Favell,  "  it  is  harder  to  deny  proud  self  than  sinful  self. 
But  it  is  absolutely  necessary."  2.  It  will  cost  a  man  his  sins.  No  truce  with  any 
one  of  them.  This  also  sounds  hard.  Our  sins  are  often  as  dear  to  as  as  our 
children :  we  love  them,  hug  them,  cleave  to  them,  and  delight  in  them.  To  part 
with  them  is  as  hard  as  cutting  off  a  right  hand,  or  plucking  out  a  right  eye.  But 
it  must  be  done.  3.  It  will  cost  a  man  his  love  of  ease.  He  must  take  pains  and 
trouble,  if  he  means  to  run  a  successful  race  towards  heaven.  He  must  be  careful 
over  his  time,  his  tongue,  his  temper,  his  thoughts,  his  imagination,  his  motives, 
his  conduct  in  every  relation  of  life.  4.  It  will  cost  a  man  the  favour  of  the  world. 
He  must  count  it  no  strange  thing  to  be  mocked,  ridiculed,  slandered,  persecuted, 
and  even  hated.  IL  Wht  couNTiMa  thb  cost  is  of  such  obeat  iupobtance  to 
uan's  Bonii.  There  are  many  persons  who  are  not  thoughtless  about  religion  :  they 
think  a  good  deal  about  it.  They  are  not  ignorant  of  religion :  they  know  the  out- 
lines of  it  pretty  well.  But  their  great  defect  is  that  they  are  not  "  rooted  and 
grounded  "  in  their  faith.  For  want  of  "  counting  the  cost "  myriads  of  the  children 
of  Israel  perished  miserably  in  the  wilderness  between  Egypt  and  Canaan.  For 
want  of  "  counting  the  cost "  many  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  hearers  went  back 
after  a  time,  and  "walked  no  more  with  Him."  For  want  of  "  counting  the  cost," 
hundreds  of  professed  converts,  under  religious  revivals,  go  back  to  the  world  aftor 
a  time  and  bring  disgrace  on  religion.  They  begin  with  a  sadly  mistaken  notion 
of  what  is  true  Christianity.  They  fancy  it  consists  in  nothing  more  than  a  so-called 
*•  coming  to  Christ,"  and  having  strong  inward  feelings  of  joy  and  peace.  And  so, 
when  they  find  after  a  time  that  there  is  a  cross  to  be  carried,  that  our  hearts  aro 
deceitful,  and  that  there  is  a  busy  devil  always  near  us,  they  cool  down  in  disgust, 
and  return  to  their  old  sins.  And  why  ?  Because  they  had  really  never  known 
what  Bible  Christianity  is.  For  want  of  "  counting  the  cost,"  the  children  of 
religious  parents  often  turn  out  ill,  and  bring  disgrace  on  Christianity.  And 
why?  They  had  never  thoroughly  understood  the  sacrifices  which  Christianity 
entails.  They  had  never  been  taught  to  "count  the  cost."  III.  Hints  which 
MAY  HELP  UBN  TO  COUNT  THB  COST  BioHTLY.  Set  down  honestly  and  fairly  what 
yoQ  will  have  to  give  up  and  go  through  if  yon  become  Christ's  disciple.  Leave 
nothing  out.  But  then  set  down  side  by  side  the  following  sums  which  I  am 
going  to  give  you.  Do  this  fairly  and  correctly,  and  I  am  not  afraid  for  the 
result.  1.  Count  up  and  compare,  for  one  thing,  the  profit  and  the  loss,  if  yoa 
•re  a  true-hearted  and  holy  Christian.  You  may  possibly  lose  something  in  this 
world,  but  yon  will  gain  the  salvation  of  your  immortal  soul.  2.  Count  up  and 
compare,  for  another  thing,  the  praise  and  the  blame,  if  yoa  are  a  true-hearted  I 
and  holy  Christian.  You  may  possibly  be  blamed  by  man,  bat  yoa  will  have  | 
the  praise  of  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  Count 
up  and  compare,  for  another  thing,  the  friends  and  the  enemies,  if  yoa  are  % 
true-hearted  and  holy  Christian.      On  the  one  side  of  you  is  the  enmitj  of  tba 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nT„ 

clevil  and  the  wicked.    On  the  other,  you  have  the  favour  and  friendship  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.      Your  enemies  at  most  can   only  bruise   your   heel.      They 
may  rage  loudly,  and  compass  tea  and  land  to  work  your  ruin  ;  but  they  cannot 
<i.  stroy  you.      Your  Friend  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  them  that  come 
unto  God  by  Him.    4.  Count  up  and   compare,  for  another  thing,  the  life  that 
now  ie  and  the  life  to  come,  if  you  are  a  true-hearted  and  holy  Christian.    The 
time  present,  no  doubt,  is  not  a  time  of  ease.   It  is  a  time  of  watching  and  praying, 
fighting  and  struggling,  believing  and  working.   But  it  is  only  for  a  few  years.   The 
time  future  is  the  season  of  rest  and  refreshiag.      Sin  shall  be  cast  out.      6.  Count 
op  and  compare,  for  another  thing,  the  pleasures  of  sin  and  the  happiness  of  God's 
service,  ii  you  are  a  true-hearted  and  holy  Christian.      The  pleasures  that  the 
worldly  man  gets  by  his  ways  are  hollow,  unreal,  and  unsatisfying.      They  are  like 
the  tire  of  thorns,  flashing  and  crackling  for  a  few  minutes,  and  then  quenched  for 
ever.      The  happiness  that  Christ  gives  to  His  people  is  something  solid,  lasting, 
and  substantial.     It  is  not  dependent  on  health  or  circumstances.      It  never  leave* 
a  man,  even  in  death.      6.  Count  up  and  compare,  for  another  thing,  the  trouble 
that  true  Christianity  entails,  and  the  troubles  that  are  in  store  for  the  wicked 
beyond  the  grave.      Such  sums  as  these,  no  doubt,  are  often  not  done  correctly. 
Kot  a  few,  I  am  well  aware,  are  ever  "  halting  between  two  opinions."    They  oan- 
i.ot  make  np  their  minds  that  it  is  worth  while  to  serve  Christ.      They  cannot  do 
this  great  sum  correctly.      They  cannot  make  the  result  so  clear  as  it  ought  to  be. 
But  what  is  the  secret  of  their  mistakes?     It  is  want  of  faith.      That  faith  which 
made  Noah,  Moses,  and  St.  Paul  do  what  they  did,  that  faith  is  the  great  secret  of 
coming  to  a  right  conclusion  about  our  souls.     That  same  faith  must  be  our  helper 
End  ready -reckoner  when  we  sit  down  to  count  the  cost  of  being  a  true  Christian. 
That  same  faith  is  to  be  had  for  the  asking.      "  He  giveth  more  grace"  (James  iv. 
6).      Armed  with  that  faith  we  shall  set  things  down  at  their  true  value.      Filled 
vith  that  faith  we  sball  neither  add  to  the  cross  nor  subtract  from  the  crown.    Our 
conclusions  will  be  all  correct.   Our  sum  total  will  be  without  error.   (Bishop  Ryle.) 
ihi  the  folly  of  profession  without  forethought : — L  The  entrance  upon,  and  progress 
ill,  a  religious  life,  may,  with  some  considerable  propriety,  be  coMPABEn  to  thh 
BTJiLDiNO  OF  A  TOWKB.     Something  to  be  done  by  us.     Many  graces  to  be  exercised, 
many  temptations  to  be  resisted,  many  enemies  to  be  vanquished,  and  many  duties 
to  be  performed.      The  power  of  rehgion  must  first  be  felt,  then  a  profession  of  it 
made,  and,  last  of  all,  care  taken  to  adorn  the  profession ;  the  whole  of  which  may 
be  compared  to  building  a  tower,  because — 1.  There  must  be  a  foundation  to  support 
the  building.    Christ — the  foundation  of  doctrinal,  experimental,  and  practical 
religion.      2.  It  is  a  work  of  labour  and  difficulty.      Kequires  exertion  of  all  the 
Btrength  we  have,  and  eveiy  day  fresh  supplies  out  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.      3.  A 
gradual  work.      A  tower  reaching  to  heaven.      Patient  continuance  in  well-doing. 
4.  A  visible  work.      The  Christian  is  a  spectacle  to  world,  angels,  and  men.    Hia 
Bufferings  make  him  so ;  his  conduct,  so  different  from  that  of  others,  makes  him 
BO  ;  and  though  the  springs  of  his  life  are  "  hid,"  yet  the  workings  and  effect  of  it 
are  manifest  to  the  world.      Grace  makes  a  visible  change  in  the  temper  and  con- 
versation.    5.  A  durable  work.     True  religion  is  like  a  strong  and  well-built  tower, 
secure  itself,  and  a  security  to  its  builder.     The  foundation  and  materials  of  it  are 
both  lasting.    II.  This  work  chllb  foe  great  caution  and  cieccmspection.    1.  The 
Christian  will  consider  beforehand  the  certain  and  necessary  expense.    (1)  Remorse 
for  past  sin.     (2)  Conflict  with  spiritual  enemies.     (3)  Corruptions  to  be  mortified, 
a.  To  this  he  will  add  the  possible  and  contingent  expense.   Not  only  what  it  mugt, 
bat  what  it  may,  cost  him.  Friends  may  desert  him,  enemies  assail,  and  a  thousand 
obstacles  be  thrown  in  the  way  to  discourage  him.     8.  There  is  another  kind  oi 
expense  which  such   a  one  will   also  take  into  account,  not  only  what  it  will 
•ost  hint,  but  what — if  I  may  be  allowed   to  use  the  expression — it  must  cost 
God,  before  He  can  finish  his  work.      The  Spirit  of  God  must  afford  him  His 
continual  aid,  and  Christ's  strength  most  be  made  perfect  in  bis  weakness.    No 
epiritual  duty  can  be  performed  without  a  Divine  influence.      4.  To  the  labout 
and  expense  he  is  at,  he  will  oppose   the   benefits   and  advantages  hoped  for. 
The  cross  is  the  way  to  the  crown.    6.  Where  this  caution  and  circumspection 
is  neglected,  it  is  an  instance  of  egregious  folly,  and  will  expose   to  universal 
shame  and  contempt.      (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)        Unfinished  work*: — Such  uncom- 
pleted buildings,  open  to  all  the  winds  and  rains  of  heaven,  with  their  naked 
walls,  and  wiUi  all  that  has  been  spent  apon  them  utterly  wasted,  are  called  io 
the  language  of  the  world,  which  often  finds  so  Apt  »  word,  This  man's,  or  thai 


CHAP.  XT?.]  ST.  LUKE.  €8 

man's  Folly ;  arguing  as  they  do  so  utter  a  lack  of  wisdom  and  prevision  on 
their  parts  who  began  them.  Such,  for  example,  is  Charles  the  Fifth's  palaoa 
at  Granada,  the  Kattenburg  at  Cassel.  They  that  would  be  Christ's  disciples  shall 
see  to  it  that  they  present  no  such  Babels  to  the  ready  scorn  of  the  scornful ; 
begixming  as  men  that  would  take  heaven  by  storm,  and  anon  coming  to  an  end  of 
all  their  resources,  of  all  their  zeal,  all  their  patience,  and  leaving  nothing  but  an 
utterly  baffled  purpose,  the  mocking-stock  of  the  world  ;  even  as  those  builders  of 
old  left  nothing  but  a  shapeless  heap  of  bricks  to  tell  of  the  entire  miscalculation 
which  they  had  made.  Making  mention  of  "  a  tower,"  I  cannot  but  think  that  the 
Lord  intended  an  allusion  to  that  great  historic  tower,  the  mightiest  and  most 
signal  failure  and  defeat  which  the  world  has  ever  seen,  that  tower  of  Babel,  which, 
despite  of  its  vainglorious  and  vaunting  begiimiug,  ended  in  the  shame,  confusion, 
and  scattering  of  all  who  undertook  it  (Gen.  xi.  1-9).    {Archbishop  Trench.) 

Vers.  31,  32.  Or  what  king,  going  to  make  war. — Consider  before  you  fight. — L 
First,  then,  thebb  ase  some  hebe  who  abb  not  the  tbiends  of  God,  and  in  this 
case  he  that  is  not  with  Him  is  against  Him.  If  you  could  have  what  you  wish 
there  would  be  no  God.  If  it  were  in  your  power  you  would  never  trouble  yourself 
again  with  thoughts  of  Him.  You  would  like  to  live,  you  say,  as  you  list,  and  I 
know  how  you  would  list  to  live.  It  would  be  anyhow,  rather  than  as  God  com- 
mands. Now,  as  you  are  engaged  in  antagonism  with  Him,  just  think  awhile — Can 
you  expect  to  succeed  ?  Let  me  put  a  few  things  before  you  which  may,  perhaps, 
make  you  think  the  conflict  too  unequal,  and  thus  lead  you  to  abandon  the  thought 
at  once.  Think  of  God's  stupendous  power  !  What  is  there  which  He  cannot  do  ? 
Think,  again,  O  rebellious  man,  you  have  to  deal  not  only  with  almighty,  but  with 
an  ever-encompassing  power.  Think,  again,  how  much  you  are  personally  in  His 
hand !  It  is  well  also  to  remember  the  mighty  army  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  that 
you  live  amidst  the  creatures  of  God,  who  all  are  ready  to  do  His  bidding.  Re- 
member, moreover,  what  is  the  extent  of  God's  wisdom,  and  that  EUs  foolishness  is 
greater  than  your  highest  knowledge.  Yet  there  is  another  matter  I  want  you  to 
recollect,  you  that  are  the  enemies  of  God — that  you  have  a  conscience.  You  have 
not  got  rid  of  it  yet.  It  is  not  put  out ;  and  God  has  ways  of  making  it  to  become 
a  terrible  plague  to  you,  if  you  do  not  accept  it  as  a  friend.  One  other  reflection^ 
for  I  must  not  keep  you  thinking  on  this  point  long — it  is  this.  Bemember  yoa 
must  die,  and  therefore  it  is  a  pity  to  be  at  enmity  with  God.  Here  is  this,  too*,  to 
think  of,  there  is  a  future  state,  so  that  when  you  die  you  have  to  live  again.  I 
should  not  choose  to  enter  upon  the  realm  of  spirits  without  having  God  to  be  my 
fiiend.  Besides,  let  me  say,  you  cannot  hope  to  succeed,  all  experience  is  against 
you ;  there  never  was  one  yet  that,  either  in  this  state  or  the  next,  has  fought  with 
Ood  and  conquered.     H.  And  now  we  turn  the  subject,  so  as  to  look  at  the  second 

CONTEST,  IN  WHICH  I  TBUST   MAN?   ABE  ANXIOUS  TO   BE  ENOAQED.       Some   yOUUg   Spirit 

that  has  been  touched  with  a  sense  of  its  own  condition,  and  somewhat  aroused, 
may  be  saying,  "  I  will  be  God's  enemy  no  longer ;  I  will  be  His  friend."  Bowing 
the  knee,  that  heart  cries,  "  Oh  God,  reconcile  me  unto  Thyself  by  the  death  of  Thy 
dear  Son.  I  throw  down  all  my  weapons ;  I  confess  my  guilt ;  I  plead  for  mercy. 
For  Jesus'  sake  vouchsafe  it  to  me."  "But,"  says  that  soul,  "if  I  am  the  friend 
of  God,  I  must  be  the  foe  of  Satan,  and  from  this  day  I  pledge  myself  to  flght  for 
ever  with  Satan  till  I  get  the  victory,  and  am  free  from  sin."  My  dear  friend,  I 
want  you  to  stop.  I  do  not  wish  you  to  make  peace  with  the  evil  one,  but  I  want 
you  to  consider  what  you  are  at.  There  are  a  few  things  I  would  whisper  in  your 
ear,  and  one  is,  that  sin  is  sweet.  Bemember,  again,  you  may  be  enticed  by  friends 
who  win  be  very  pressing.  You  can  give  up  sin  just  now,  but  yoa  do  not  know  who 
may  be  the  tempter  at  some  future  time.  If  the  shoidd  allure  thee,  who  has 
tempted  so  well  before !  Then  again,  remember,  man,  there  is  habit.  Yoa  say  you 
wiU  all  of  a  sudden  give  op  your  sins  and  flght  Satan.  Do  not  tell  me  that ;  can 
the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  spots?  Again,  yoa  think 
yoa  will  give  ap  sin,  but  ridicule  is  very  unpleasant,  and  when  the  finger 
comes  to  be  pointed  at  you,  and  they  say,  "Ah,  so  you  have  set  up  for 
a  saint,  I  see " ;  when  they  put  it  as  they  only  can  put  it,  in  such  a  sharp, 
catting,  grating  maimer,  can  you  stand  that!  And  yet  farther,  let  me  say 
to  you,  you  that  are  for  going  to  heaven  so  zealonsly — gain,  gain  is  a  very 

Eretty  thing,  a  very  pleasant  aSair.     Who  does  not  like  to  make  money  t    Yon 
now,  if  you  can  be  religious  and  grow  rich  at  the  same  time,  that  will  jast  suit 
come  of  you.     Think  of  this  then,  for  the  trial  will  oome  to  you  in  the  shape  of 


«4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<!«*»•  mt. 

yellow  gold,  and  it  will  be  hard  to  keep  yourself  from  the  glittering  bait  which  the 
god  of  this  world  will  lay  before  you.  I  am  putting  these  things  to  you,  bo  that  you 
may  calculate  whether  you  can  carry  on  the  war  against  the  devil  with  all  these 
fearful  odds  against  you.  If  I  were  a  recruiting-serjeant  I  should  not  do  this.  He 
puts  the  shilling  into  the  country  lad's  hand,  and  the  lad  may  say  fifty  things. 
*'  Oh,  never  mind,"  says  the  gallant  soldier,  "  you  know,  it  is  all  glory,  nothing  but 
glory.  There,  I  will  just  tie  these  ribbons  round  your  hat.  There  are  some  long 
strips  of  glory  to  begin  with,  and  then  all  your  days  it  will  be  just  glory,  glory  for 
ever ;  and  you  will  die  a  general,  and  be  buried  at  Westminster  Abbey,  and  they 
will  play  the  '  Dead  March  in  Saul,'  and  all  that  kind  of  thing."  Now  I  cannot 
thus  deceive  or  try  to  cheat  men  to  enlist  under  the  banner  of  the  Gross.  I  do  not 
desire  to  raise  objections  to  it ;  all  I  want  of  you  is  to  count  the  cost,  lest  you  should 
be  like  unto  liim  who  began  to  build  without  being  able  to  finish.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  Christian  war : — The  doctrine  here  is,  that  a  sinner  who  designs  to  close  with 
Christ,  and  become  His  disciple,  should  first  consult  matters  well,  and  then  take 
courage  and  not  fear  any  enemy,  but  resolutely  pursue  his  great  and  good  design. 

I.  Show  pabticulablt  what  a  poor  sinneb,  who  designs  to  enter  upon  this  wak, 
SHOULD  consult.  1.  He  should  consult  the  charge  of  this  war.  He  who  spares  one 
beloved  lust  will  be  worsted  and  lose  the  field.  2.  He  should  consult  what  great 
hardship  he  must  undergo.  3.  He  should  consult  the  cause  and  absolute  necessity 
of  the  war.  4.  He  should  consult  the  length  or  duration  of  the  war.  5.  He  must 
consider  at  whose  charge  the  war  is  to  be  carried  on  and  maintained.  Christ's 
riches  and  treasures  are  infinite  and  inexhaustible.  6.  He  should  carefully  consider 
the  manner  and  time  when  he  must  enlist,  and  what  armour  he  must  wear  (Heb. 
iii.  13 ;  Eph.  vi.  14-17).  7.  He  must  consider  the  strength,  policy,  wrath,  and 
cruelty  of  Satan  and  other  enemies.  8.  He  must  be  sensible  of  his  own  weakness, 
and  never  engage  in  his  own  name  or  strength.  9.  He  must  consider  the  power 
And  irresistible  strength  of  his  Captain,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  10.  He  must  con- 
eider  the  covenant  of  peace,  the  oath  and  promises  of  God  the  Father  to  Christ  as 
Mediator,  and  in  Him  to  all  believers ;  also,  how  in  that  covenant  all  the  elect  are 
put  into  Christ's  hand,  not  only  to  redeem  them,  to  renew  them,  but  also  to  aid, 
help,  and  assist,  and  to  fight  for  them ;  yea,  and  to  strengthen  and  support  them. 

II.  He  must  consider  the  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  their  Captain.  He  has 
espoused  and  married  them  for  ever.  12.  They  should  also  know  that  all  their 
enemies  are  already  conquered.  13.  They  should  consider  the  honour  of  God,  and 
the  honour,  exaltation,  and  glory  of  their  Captain,  and  prefer  that  above  their  lives. 
While  we  seek  His  glory.  He  will  seek  our  good.  14.  They  should  consider  the 
nature  of  the  crown  for  which  they  fight.     II.  Show  why  sinnebs  should  sit  down 

AMD  CONSmEB  THESE  THINGS  BEFOBB  THBT  EMTEB  INTO  THESB  WABS.       1.    BeoaUSe  mail 

is  naturally  self-confident,  and  thinks  he  can  do  wonderful  things  by  his  own 
strength ;  but  did  he  know  how  weak  he  is,  and  how  deceitful  his  heart  is,  and  all 
the  powers  of  his  soul,  he  would  not  pride  it  so  in  himself,  nor  ever  venture  to  go 
forth  in  his  own  strength  against  one  who  is  so  much  stronger  than  he.  2.  Because 
bH  who  ever  engaged  these  enemies,  not  considering  their  own  weakness,  but  went 
oat  in  their  own  strength,  were  put  to  flight  and  utterly  beaten.  8.  Because  our 
Lord  would  have  none  of  His  soldiers  be  surprised,  either  by  the  power,  wrath, 
malice,  or  subtlety  of  the  enemy.  4.  That  we  may  be  better  prepared  for  the 
worst.  Forewarned,  forearmed.  Application :  1.  This  informs  as  that  the  work 
of  a  Christian  is  no  easy,  but  a  very  hard  and  difficult,  work.  2.  It  may  inform  na 
■what  the  reason  is  that  so  many  professors,  who  seemed  zealous  in  times  of  peace 
end  liberty,  have  deserted  in  an  hour  of  trial  and  persecution.  They  did  not  sit 
down  and  consider  the  strength  of  their  enemies.  3.  It  may  be  of  use  to  all  poor 
aonvinced  sinners  that  purpose  to  follow  Jesus  Christ,  first  of  all  to  ponder  and  well 
weigh  the  nature,  troubles,  and  difficulties  of  a  Christian  life.  4.  It  also  may  tend 
to  convince  us  of  the  great  strength  and  power  of  Satan  and  other  enemies  of  our 
souls,  and  the  need  we  have  to  be  well  armed  and  to  stand  always  upon  our  watch, 
«nd  never  give  way  to  self-confidence.  5.  It  shows  also  the  woeful  condition  of 
mnbelievers,  who  have  not  the  power  of  Christ  to  help  and  assist  them.  {B.  Keach.) 
Unequal  to  the  war  ;— Louis  XII.,  King  of  France,  sent  an  army  into  Italy  to  take 
the  kingdom  of  Naples,  which  had  been  given  to  Louis  XI.  by  King  Een6  of  Pro- 
vence. When  Alfonso,  King  of  Naples,  heard  that  Louis  and  other  enemies  were 
eoming  against  him,  he  looked  round  for  help,  and  actually  begged  the  Sultan  of 
Turkey  to  aia  nim.  Not  getting  assistance  in  this  quarter,  and  having  no  army  fit 
to  oppose  that  of  Louis,  he  made  peace  with  him,  gave  up  Naples,  accepted  the 


HEAP.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  65 

Dnchy  of  Anjon,  and  went  to  live  there.  First  weigh,  then  venture : — Count  Von 
Moltke,  the  great  German  strategist  and  general,  chose  for  his  motto,  '•  Erst  wagen, 
dann  wagen"  (First  weigh,  then  venture),  and  it  is  to  this  he  owes  his  great 
victories  and  successes.  Slow,  cautious,  careful  in  planning,  but  bold,  daring,  even 
seemingly  reckless  in  execution,  the  moment  his  resolve  is  made.  Vows  must  ripen 
\nto  deeds,  decision  mast  go  on  to  performance.    (H.  O.  Mackay.) 

Ver.  33,  He  cannot  be  My  disciple. — Christ  requires  supreme  regard: — I.  Thb 
POSSESSIONS  WHICH  Jesus  Chbist  requibes  ds  to  forsake  in  obdeb  to  oub 
BECOMING  His  disciples.  In  our  text  Jesus  Christ  authoritatively  asserts  the 
absolute  right  and  the  first  claim  to  all  that  we  have  and  to  all  that  we 
are.  Ourselves  and  our  possessions  are  to  be  His.  We  are  to  consider  our- 
selves not  as  proprietors,  but  only  as  stewards.  1.  Christ  requires  us  to 
forsake  the  world  and  the  things  of  the  world.  2.  Christ  requires  ns  to  exercise 
self-denial,  and  to  bear  the  cross  daily.  3.  Jesus  Christ  requires  us  to  forsake 
our  own  relatives,  whenever  they  would  hinder  us  from  following  Him.  4.  Jesus 
Christ  requires  you  to  forsake  even  life  itself  rather  than  renounce  Him  and 
His  cause.  II.  The  iMPOssiBiLiry  of  oub  being  His  disciples  if  we  befusb  to 
COMPLY  with  His  BEQDiBEMENT.  "  He  Cannot  be  My  disciplc. "  The  solemn  and 
authoritative  manner  in  which  this  decision  is  pronounced  ought  very  deeply  to 
affect  our  hearts.  Christ,  you  perceive,  does  not  say  that  such  a  man  is  an  incon- 
sistent disciple,  or  an  ungrateful  disciple,  or  a  half-hearted  disciple  ;  but  He  says 
that  he  is  not  a  disciple  at  all;  nay,  says  He,  '*  he  cannot  be  My  disciple."  He 
may  profess  to  be  a  disciple,  and  he  may  be  acknowledged  as  a  disciple  by  others, 
but  he  is  not  one :  and  though  men  and  angels  should  declare,  "  Behold  a  disciple 
indeed!  "  Christ  would  reply,  **  I  know  him  not  1 "  And  this  decision,  be  it  remem- 
bered, my  brethren,  is  not  mine,  but  Christ's.  HI.  The  means  and  the  motives 
WHICH  Jesus  Chbist  affoeds  to  induce  and  to  enable  us  to  comply  with  His 
bequieembnt.  And  here  I  intend  to  show  that  we  ought  to  forsake  all  for  Christ, 
because  it  is  the  most  reasonable  and  advantageous  duty  that  we  can  discharge.  1. 
We  should  forsake  all  that  we  have  for  Christ,  because  He  commands  us  to  do  so. 
2.  We  should  forsake  all  that  we  have  for  Christ,  because  He  hath  loved  us  and 
given  Himself  for  us.  8.  We  should  forsake  aU  that  we  have  for  Christ,  because 
He  has  promised  to  enable  us  to  do  so  if  we  ask  Him.  4..  We  should  forsake  all  for 
Christ,  because  He  can  give  us  infinitely  more  than  we  can  relinquish  for  His  sake. 
{J.  Alexander.)  An  Indian's  all : — ^An  Indian,  on  being  asked  how  it  was  that  he 
came  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ  so  easily,  at  once  replied,  "  We  are  commanded 
to  forsake  all.  The  white  man  have  to  give  up  his  house ;  but  I  have  no  house. 
The  white  man  have  to  give  up  his  riches  ;  but  I  have  no  riches.  The  white  man 
have  to  give  up  his  farm  ;  but  I  have  no  farm.  Indian  have  nothing  to  give  up  but 
his  blanket,  and  I  throw  off  my  blanket  very  easily."  ^  Yielding  aU  to  Christ: — 
In  America  a  farmer  felt  convinced  that  he  was  not  living  to  Christ  as  he  onght, 
with  that  warm-hearted  earnestness  which  characterises  those  who  are  born  again. 
He  was  a  large  farmer,  and  had  a  great  number  of  stacks  in  his  yard.  He  went 
into  the  centre  one  day,  and  threw  himself  on  his  face,  and  said  he  would  have  it 
oat  with  God.  He  prayed  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  found  forgiveness  through  His 
righteousness.  He  got  up  to  tell  his  wife  and  children.  It  was  Pentecost-like. 
Peter  said,  "Bepent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ 
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  The 
farmer  beheved  it,  and  went  home,  but  he  had  not  reached  the  fence  ere  he  was 
arrested  by  a  voice  which  said  there  was  something  more.  He  stopped,  and  cried 
out,  "  O  Lord,  what  more  ?  is  there  anything  more,  and  I  will  give  it  Thee  ?  "  He 
went  back  to  the  spot  where  he  was  bound  to  Christ,  and  reiterated  again,  "  What 
more,  0  Lord ;  is  there  any  more  I  can  do  ?  "  And  something  told  him  that  he  had 
not  given  up  the  stackyard  to  the  Lord.  He  burst  out,  "Lord.  I  yield ;  take  the 
stack-yard — take  the  horses — take  the  farm  1 "  He  returned  to  his  wife  and 
children.  But  there  was  something  else ;  he  had  a  large  balance  at  the  bank.  He 
bad  been  a  prosperous  man,  and  was  counting  on  the  better  time  when  he  could 
hold  a  palatial  residence  for  himself  and  family.  That  money  was  not  given  to  the 
Lord ;  but  he  cried  out,  "  Take  it.  Lord ;  I  give  it  all  up."  And  instead  of  building 
a  residence  he  built  a  chapel,  and  supported  the  ministers  of  God,  and  went  to  the 
eamp  meeting,  and  gave  his  stack-yard,  farm-houses,  his  wife  and  children,  into 
the  hand  of  the  Lord.     He  used  ihe  money  in  the  bank  judiciously,  and  it  is  a 

voib  m.  fi 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

pleasure  to  him  to  lend  waggons  to  his  poorer  neighbours,  and  plough  their  fielda. 
(Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  Salt  is  good. — Salt  that  it  genuine^  and  salt  that  is  saltless: — 
Among  the  snbstances  that  enter  into  the  composition  of  this  globe  of  earth,  salt  i^ 
a  very  important  one,  being  of  essential  use  in  the  economy  of  the  world,  uxiu 
eminently  conducive  to  the  preservation  of  human  life.  It  may  be  regarded  as  tha 
grand  conservative  principle  of  nature,  whose  office  is  to  keep  this  earth,  tha 
habitation  of  man,  in  a  wholesome  state,  to  check  the  progress  of  decay  and  corrup- 
tion, and  promote  the  health  and  wellbeing  of  the  animal  world.  To  fit  it  for  these 
important  purposes,  the  All- wise  Creator,  who  communicates  to  every  element  its 
peculiar  character,  has  given  it  the  quality  of  being  soluble  in  water,  and  has  thus 
made  it  capable  of  diffusing  itself  over  the  whole  globe,  impregnating  the  various) 
departments  of  nature,  and  penetrating  the  finest  fibres  of  vegetable  and  animal 
substances — a  hidden  agent  that,  by  means  of  the  element  that  holds  it  in  solution, 
conveys  its  salutary  influence  to  every  region  of  creation.  Suspended  in  strong 
infusion  in  the  ocean,  it  preserves  its  immense  reservoirs  from  putrefaction,  and 
makes  them  the  means  of  conveying  health  to  the  shores  they  wash,  and  salubrity 
to  the  atmosphere  that  rises  above  them  ;  while  it  further  serves,  by  increasing  the 
gravity  of  the  waters,  to  aid  in  buoying  up  the  tribes  that  inhabit  and  the  ships 
that  navigate  them.  It  is  largely  deposited  in  the  heart  of  the  earth,  in  rocks  and 
strata.  It  is  also  found  to  enter  into  the  composition  of  plants,  some  of  which 
yield  it  in  large  quantities,  and  even  to  form  an  ingredient  in  the  bodies  of  animals. 
If  this  element  were  withdrawn,  the  great  deep,  we  have  reason  to  think,  would 
become  a  putrid  pool,  the  air  would  conssequently  be  a  pestilential  vapour,  and 
vegetable  and  animal  life  would  quickly  be  extinct.  Now  our  Lord  here  speaks  of 
salt  in  a  figurative  sense,  using  it  as  an  illustration  to  declare  the  excellence  and 
usefulness  of  the  Christian  character,  as  exemplified  in  those  who  maintain  it 
faithfully  and  consistently ;  and  the  loss  of  all  excellence,  the  shipwreck  of  aU 
valuable  attainments  and  of  all  good  hope,  in  those  who  forsake  and  abandon  the 
principles  and  spirit  with  which  they  once  started  on  the  Christian  race.     L  Thhs 

EXCELLENCE   AND   USEFULNESS   OF   THE   CHRISTIAN  CHABACTEB.    The  discipleS  of  Christ 

are  destined  to  the  same  office  in  the  moral  world  that  salt  supplies  in  the  natural 
— namely,  to  check  the  progress  of  corruption,  and  diffuse  ealubrity  and  health  ; 
and  while  they  preserve  their  appropriate  character,  they  fulfil  this  high  destination. 
Sound  in  principle  and  exemplary  in  conduct  themselves,  they  serve  to  arrest  cor- 
ruption in  others ;  savouring  the  things  of  God,  they  communicate  the  same  unction 
to  others ;  active  and  beneficent,  they  extend  a  beneficial  influence  around  them. 
The  faithful  followers  of  Christ  are  like  "  good  salt,"  in  respect  of  those  principles 
of  truth  which  they  embrace  and  maintain.  For  error  corrupts  the  mind,  and, 
insinuating  itself  through  its  faculties,  "  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker,"  and  blend  in 
all  its  communications ;  truth  is  the  healing  salt  that  arrests  its  progress  and 
defeats  the  operation  of  the  poison.  Again,  the  true  disciples  are  hke  good  salt  in 
respect  of  that  temper  of  mind,  and  those  good  and  gracious  affections,  which  they 
cherish  and  manifest.  For  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  when  received  in  faith,  fail 
not  to  renovate  the  heart  and  inspire  it  with  corresponding  dispositions :  they 
necessarily  awaken  an  unfeigned  piety  and  holy  reverence  toward  God,  a  simple, 
chUd-Iike  dependence  on  Christ,  a  genuine  benevolence  toward  men,  a  true  humility^ 
a  spirit  of  sympathy  with  the  afflicted,  a  desire  to  do  good  to  all,  a  disposition  to 
forgive  injuries  and  to  overcome  evil  with  good.  Now  this  temper  of  mind  has  a 
healing  efficacy :  like  salt,  it  is  diffusive,  and  tends  to  preserve  the  atmosphere  of 
life  from  the  putrid  exhalations  of  selfishness,  envy,  and  malevolence ;  it  gives 
also  a  grateful  relish  and  gracious  aspect  to  society,  fostering  and  maintaining  in 
healthful  exercise  the  substantial  blessings  of  mutual  esteem,  friendship,  and 
harmony.  In  a  word,  the  true  disciples  are  like  good  salt  in  respect  of  their  whole 
conduct  in  life ;  which,  while  they  act  in  character,  cannot  fail  to  have  a  beneficial 
infiuenoe,  since  it  both  presents  a  model  to  be  copied,  and  suggests  the  motives  and 
arguments  that  commend  it.  For  their  whole  manner  of  hfe,  if  candidly  inter- 
preted, shows  that  they  are  governed  by  high  and  heavenly  principles — that  they 
are  "  not  of  the  world,  but  of  the  Father."  II.  The  ruined  and  unhappy  con- 
nrriOM  of  those  who  abandon  that  chabacteb.  If  he  who  bears  the  Christian 
name  lose  the  distinctive  qualities  of  his  Christianity — if  he  relinquish  those  prinr 
eiples  of  truth  whidi  he  has  professed — if  he  forsake  the  Christian  temper — ii, 
forgetful  of  heavenly  things,  he  inmierse  himself  in  the  world  and  live  for  himself. 


CHAP.  XIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  61 

lot  gain,  for  pleasure,  and  not  for  Christ — alas  1  "  the  glory  is  departed,"  the 
nsefulnesi  of  his  character  as  a  guide  or  example  is  at  an  end  ;  he  hecomes,  if  not 
a  betrayer,  yet  a  deserter,  worthless  and  contemptible,  fit  only  to  be  "  cast  ont,  and 
trodden  under  foot."  1.  The  salt  loses  its  savour  when  professing  Christians  lose 
their  relish  for  those  Divine  truths  that  peculiarly  distinguish  the  gospel  and  make 
it  what  it  is.  2.  The  salt  loses  its  savour  when  professing  Christians  lose  their 
relish  for  the  duties  of  religion.  3.  The  salt  loses  its  savour  when  professing 
Chrifltians  imbibe  the  love  and  become  conformed  to  the  spirit  of  the  world.  4. 
The  salt  loses  its  savour  when  the  professor  of  religion  falls  into  open  immorality. 
Finally,  the  salt  has  lost  its  savour  when  the  soul  learns  to  vindicate  its  errors 
and  without  shame  to  persist  in  them — when  reproof  is  unwelcome,  when  expostula- 
tion is  offensive,  and  the  man  is  anxious  rather  to  defend  his  character  than  amend 
his  ways — ^when,  deaf  to  admonition  and  rebuke,  he  wilfully  yields  himself  to  the 
snare  of  the  devil,  to  be  "  led  captive  at  his  will."  How  calamitous  such  termina- 
tion of  what  was  hopeful  in  its  beginning  I  {H.  Gray,  D.D.)  Grace  in  crystals : — 
It  would  take  all  time  with  an  infringement  upon  eternity,  for  an  angel  of  God  to 
tell  one-half  the  glories  in  salt-crystal.  So  with  the  grace  of  God  ;  it  is  perfectly 
beautiful.  Solomon  discovered  its  anatomical  qualities  when  he  said, "  It  ia  marrow 
to  the  bones."  I  am  speaking  now  of  a  healthy  religion — not  of  that  morbid 
religion  that  sits  for  three  hours  on  a  gravestone  reading  Hervey's  • '  Meditations 
Among  the  Tombs."  I  speak  of  the  religion  that  Christ  preached.  I  suppose 
when  that  religion  has  conquered  the  world  that  disease  will  be  banished.  But  the 
chief  beauty  of  grace  is  in  the  soul.  It  takes  that  which  was  hard,  and  cold,  and 
repulsive,  and  makes  it  all  over  again.  It  pours  upon  one's  nature  what  David 
calls  "the  beauty  of  holiness."  It  extirpates  everything  that  is  hateful  and  un- 
clean. It  took  John  Bunyan  the  foul-mouthed,  and  made  him  J<ihn  Bunyan  the 
immortal  dreamer.  It  took  John  Newton,  the  infidel  sailor,  and  in  uie  midst  of  the 
hurricane  made  him  cry  out :  "  My  mother's  God,  have  mercy  upon  me  1  "  It 
took  John  Summerfield  from  a  life  of  sin,  and  by  the  hand  of  a  Christian  edged- 
tool  maker,  led  him  mto  the  pulpit  that  burns  still  with  the  hght  of  that  Christian 
eloquence  which  charmed  thousands  to  Jesus  whom  he  once  despised.  Ah !  you 
may  search  all  the  earth  over  for  anything  so  beautiful  or  beautifying  as  the  grace 
of  God.  Go  all  through  the  deep  miue-passages  of  Wielitzka,  and  amid  the  under- 
ground kingdoms  of  salt  in  Hallstadt,  and  show  me  anything  so  exquisite,  so 
transcendentally  beautiful  as  this  grace  of  God  fashioned  and  hung  in  eternal 
crystals.  Again,  grace  is  like  salt,  in  the  fact  that  it  is  a  necessity  of  life.  Man 
*nd  beast  perish  without  salt.  What  are  those  paths  across  the  Western  prairies  ? 
Why,  they  were  made  there  by  deer  and  buffalo  going  to  and  coming  away  from 
the  salt  "  licks."  Chemists  and  physicians,  all  the  world  over,  tell  us  that  salt  is 
a  necessity  of  life.  And  so  with  the  grace  of  God :  you  must  have  it  or  die.  I 
know,  a  great  many  people  speak  of  it  as  a  mere  adornment,  a  sort  of  shoulder- 
strap  adorning  a  soldier,  or  a  light,  frothing  dessert  brought  in  after  the  greatest 
Eart  of  the  banquet  of  life  is  over.  So  far  from  that,  I  declare  the  grace  of  God  to 
i  the  first  and  the  last  necessity.  It  is  a  positive  necessity  for  the  soul.  You  can 
tell  very  easily  what  the  effect  would  be  if  a  person  refused  to  take  salt  into  the 
body.  The  energies  would  fail,  the  lungs  would  struggle  with  the  air,  slow  fevers 
would  crawl  through  the  brain,  the  heart  would  flutter,  and  the  life  would  be  gone. 
That  process  of  death  is  going  on  in  many  a  one  because  they  take  not  the  salt  of 
Divine  grace.  Again,  I  remark,  that  grace  is  like  salt  in  abundance.  God  has 
strewn  salt  in  vast  profusion  all  over  the  continents.  Bussia  seems  built  on  a  salt- 
cellar. There  is  one  region  of  that  country  that  turns  out  ninety  thousand  tons  in 
a  year.  England  and  Bussia  and  Italy  have  inexhaustible  resources  in  this  respect. 
Norway  and  Sweden,  white  with  snow  above,  white  with  salt  beneath.  Austria 
yielding  nine  hundred  thousand  tons  annually.  Nearly  all  the  nations  rich  in  it — 
rock-salt,  spring-salt,  sea-salt.  Christ,  the  Creator  of  the  world,  when  He  uttered 
our  text,  knew  it  would  become  more  and  more  significant  as  the  shafts  were  sunk, 
and  the  springs  were  bored,  and  the  pumps  were  worked,  and  the  crystals  were 
gathered.  So  the  grace  of  God  is  abundant.  It  is  for  all  lands,  for  all  ages,  for  all 
conditions.  It  seems  to  undergird  everything.  Pardon  for  the  worst  sin,  comfort 
for  the  sharpest  suffering,  brightest  light  for  the  thickest  darkness.  Again,  the 
grace  of  God  is  like  salt  in  the  way  we  come  at  it.  The  salt  on  the  surface  ia 
almost  always  impure — that  which  incrusts  the  Bocky  Mountains  and  the  South 
American  pampas  and  in  India ;  but  the  miners  go  down  through  the  shafts  and 
through  the  dark  labyrinths,  and  along  by  galleries  of  rock,  and  with  torches  and 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciUP.  xiT. 

Siokaxes  find  their  way  nnder  the  very  foundations  of  the  earth,  to  where  the  salt 
es  that  makes  up  the  nation's  wealth.     To  get  to  the  best  saline  springs  of  the 
earth  huge  machinery  goes  down,  boring  depth  below  depth,  depth  below  depth, 
tintil  from  under  the  very  roots  of   the  mountains  the  saline  water  supplies  the 
aqueduct.    This  water  is  brought  to  the  surface,  and  is  exposed  in  tanks  to  the  sun 
for  evaporation,  or  it  is  put  in  boilers  mightily  heated,  and  the  water  evaporates, 
and  the  salt  gathers  at  the  bottom  of  the  tank — the  work  is  completed,  and  the 
fortune  is  made.     So  with  the  grace  of  God.    It  is  to  be  profoundly  sought  after. 
With  all  the  concentrated  energies  of  the  body,  mind,  and  soul,  we  must  dig  for  it. 
Superficial  exploration  will  not  turn  it  up.     Then  the  work  of  evaporation  begins ; 
and  as  when  the  saline  waters  are  exposed  to  the  sun  the  vapours  fioat  away,  leaving 
nothing  bat  the  pure  white  salt  at  the  bottom  of  the  tank,  so,  when  the  Christian's 
BOul  is  exposed  to  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  the  vapours  of  pride  and  selfishness 
and  worldliness  float  off,  and  there  is  chiefly  left  beneath,  pure,  white  holiness  of 
heart.     Then,  as  in  the  case  of  the  salt,  the  furnace  is  added.    Blazing  troubles, 
stirred  by  smutted  stokers  of  darkness,  quicken  the  evaporation  of  worldliness  and 
the  orystalhzation  of  grace.     Have  you  not  been  in  enough  trouble  to  have  that 
work  go  on  ?    But,  I  remark  again,  that  the  grace  of  God  is  like  the  salt  in  its  pre- 
servative quality.    You  know  that  salt  absorbs  the  moisture  of  articles  of  food,  and 
infuses  them  with  brine  which  preserves  them  for  a  long  while.     Salt  is  the  great 
anti-putrefactive  of  the  world.  Experimenters,  in  preserving  food,  have  tried  sugar, 
and  smoke,  and  air-tight  jars,  and  everything  else ;  but  as  long  as  the  world  stands, 
Christ's  words  will  be  suggestive,  and  men  will  admit  that,  as  a  great  preservative, 
"  salt  is  good."     But  for  the  grace  of  God  the  earth  would  have  become  a  stale 
carcass  long  before  this.     That  grace  is  the  only  preservative  of  laws,  and  con- 
stitution, and  literatures.    Just  as  soon  as  a  government  loses  this  salt  of  Divine 
grace  it  perishes.    We  want  more  of  the  salt  of  God's  grace  in  our  homes,  in  our 
schools,  in  our  colleges,  in  our  social  hfe,  in  our  Christianity.    And  that  which  has 
it  will  live — that  which  has  it  not  will  die.     I  proclaim  the  tendency  of  everything 
earthly  to  putrefaction  and  death — the  religion  of  Christ  the  a"2y  preservative. 
My  subject  is  one  of  great  congratulation  to  those  who  have  within  their  souls  this 
gospel  antiseptic.  This  salt  will  preserve  them  through  the  temptations  and  sorrowa 
of  life,  and  through  the  ages  of  eternity.  {De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)    The  talt  that  has 
logt  its  savour : — He  that  is  ungodly  would  be  ungodly  still.  And  why  ?  Because  the 
salt  has  lost  its  savour.     The  mischief  is  not  without — it  is  within.     The  wretched 
houses,  the  rent-books,  the  pawn-shops,  are  but  symptoms — are  but  the  efflorescence 
of  a  deep-seated  disease — and  if  we  are  wise,  we  shall  aim  not  at  putting  them  to 
rights,  except  where  grievous  distress  and  impending  ruin  call  for  ready  rescue  ;  but 
we  shall  aim  far  deeper — we  shall  be  ever  musing  on  and  seeking  an  answer  to  the 
question,  *'  Wherewith  shall  it  be  seasoned  ?  "    And  this  is  just  the  question  which 
has  been  occupying  so  many  Christian  hearts,  and  employing  so  many  Christian 
hands,  now  for  some  years  in  this  our  land.    I  called  it  the  most  fearful  and  diffi- 
cult problem  of  our  times  ;  and  every  one  who  has  fairly  grappled  with  it  will  bear 
me' in  saying  so.     No  special  philanthropic  agency  will  so  much  as  touch  the  whole 
matter,  however  widely  and  efficiently  supported.     Each  one  of  these,  alone,  is  but 
opposing  a  feeble  resistance  for  a  time  to  the  vast  and  gathering  mass  as  it  rolls 
and  plunges  downward.     "  Improve  the  dwelhngs  of  these  poor  people."    Yes ;  of 
all  mere  remedial  measures,  doubtless  this  is  the  most  obvious  and  lies  nearest  the 
surface.     But  how  slow  the  progress ;  how  distant  and  almost  hopeless  the  result. 
Then  again:  '•  Improve  their  Sundays. "    By  all  means.     The  general  observance 
of  the  Lord's  day  in  our  land  is  perhaps  the  most  powerful  instrument  and  the 
surest  pledge  for  future  good,  which  we  possess.     But  again.  How  ?    For  here  once 
more  we  are  beset  with  difficulties.    You  will  be  easily  able  to  apply  remarks  of  the 
same  character  to  those  various  other  agencies  which  are  at  work  for  this  most 
salutary  and  beneficent  purpose.     (Dean  Alford.)         Christianity  the  salt  of  the 
earth : — ^A  wealthy,  irreligious,  shrewd  business  man  in  Illinois  was  approached  by 
a  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ  for  a  subscription  towards  building  a  meeting- 
house.   He  cheerfully  put  down  his  name  for  two  hundred  dollars,  and  then 
remarked,  "  I  give  that  as  a  good  business  investment.    I  would  rather  give  two 
hundred  dollars  every  year  than  not  to  have  the  gospel  preached  in  this  community." 
•*  How  is  that  ?  "  he  was  asked.    ♦•  You  do  not  pay  any  heed  to  the  gospel     Why 
are  yon  interested  in  having  it  preached?  "    '•  Oh,"  he  replied,  "I  live  here  with 
my  family,  and  my  property  is  around  here ;  without  the  influence  of  Christianity 
the  condition  of  society  would  soon  become  such  that  neither  property  nor  Ufa 


CHAP.  KIT. J  ST.  LUKE.  69 

•would  be  safe.  I  would  not  be  willing  to  live  in  any  commnnity  where  the  gospel 
was  not  preached  1 "  These  views  of  a  hard-headed  man  of  the  world  are  confirmed 
by  all  experience.  Christianity  is  the  salt  of  the  earth.  Only  the  utterly  abandoned 
would  be  content  to  live  where  its  influence  had  ceased  to  be  felt.  Religion  should 
be  practical  if  it  is  to  be  influential : — William  Smith,  a  Primitive  Methodist  local 
preacher,  had  a  business  letter  shown  to  him  from  a  manufacturer  of  cloth.  The  con- 
cludingparagraph  was  a  rather  high-flown  rhapsody  about  revivals,  and  some  sermon 
that  had  been  to  him  (as  he  said)  *'  wines  on  the  lees."  His  pair  of  eyes  keenly  watched 
the  reader  of  the  letter,  to  whom  he  said,  when  the  reading  was  concluded,  "  What 
do  you  think  of  that?"  Answer:  "I  don't  think  I  should  have  written  the  last 
paragraph."  Besponse :  "  I  should  think  not ;  I  only  wish  the  fellow  would  put 
his  religion  into  his  cloth  instead  of  his  invoices."  Salt : — I.  Look  at  what  is 
HEBE  so  EXPBESsrvELY  SYMBOLIZED.  "  Salt  js  good."  Salt  is  a  necessary  of  life, 
and  it  is  an  essential  element  of  true  altar  service.  There  was  no  real  sacrifice 
without  salt.  1.  It  is  the  symbol  of  the  covenant  of  everlasting  mercy,  but  of  ever- 
lasting mercy  as  the  basis  of  a  sinner's  new  life.  There  is  a  purpose  of  grace.  God 
wills  not  the  death  of  sinners,  but  their  re-union  with  Him  as  the  God  of  hfe.  That 
purpose  does  not  change.  God  pursues  it  in  spite  of  the  infatuation,  the  wilfulness, 
the  ingratitude  of  men  ;  and  "  He  will  have  aU  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth."  "  Salt  is  good."  It  is  the  salt  of  the  great  sacrifice  for 
sin.  •'  It  is  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of  thy  God."  He  receives,  and  pardons,  and 
renews,  and  cleanses  all  who  believe  on  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  No  man  can  be 
saved  but  through  the  Divine  mercy,  and  by  an  action  of  the  Divine  Spirit  on  mind 
and  heart.  2.  Salt  symbolizes  not  only  God's  covenant  of  mercy  with  man,  but 
man's  covenant  with  God.  Salt  was  a  human  offering  on  the  altar,  according  to  a 
Divine  appointment.  It  meant,  on  the  part  of  the  offerer,  the  laying  aside  of 
enmity ;  it  meant  the  submission  of  the  offerer  to  the  terms  of  the  Merciful 
Sovereign ;  it  meant  the  surrender  of  the  will — of  the  life — to  the  Divine  service. 
Salt  symbolizes  human  consecration.  3.  Salt  is  also  the  principle  of  counteractive 
grace.  Antiseptic.  The  new  principles  of  Divine  life  in  the  spirit  arrest  moral 
decay ;  work  against  the  downward,  earthly,  immoral  tendencies  and  temptations 
of  the  heart.  4.  Salt  symbolizes  the  preventive,  corrective,  life-nourishing  power 
of  the  Christian  society  in  the  world.  5.  Salt  is  also  the  principle  of  peace. 
*•  Peace  with  God  "  comes  of  salt  within.  With  surrender  to  Him  reconciliation  is 
effected  ;  and  there  is  now  no  condemnation,  and  no  dread,  and  no  discord — man 
and  God  live  in  harmony  the  perfectest.  II.  The  Savioub's  lesson  conoebnino 
THE  DETEBioEATiON  OF  THE  SALT.  Salt  symbolizcs  God's  coveuant  of  mercy  in  its 
nnchangeableness ;  and  there  can  be  no  deterioration  of  that ;  but  there  may  be  a 
oareless  feeling  concerning  its  excellence,  its  necessity,  and  its  grace.  Salt 
symbolizes  man's  covenant  with  God — the  principle  of  entire  self-surrender;  it 
symbolizes  the  principle  of  counteractive  grace  both  in  the  individual  and  the 
Church  ;  and  it  is  the  principle  of  individual  and  social  peace.  Of  these  our  Lord 
declares — 1.  The  possibility  of  deterioration.  "If  the  salt  have  lost  its  savour." 
Bock  salt  exposed  to  the  atmosphere  becomes  utterly  tasteless  and  insipid  ;  it  comes 
to  lack  all  the  essential  characteristics  of  its  own  nature.  Whatever  the  truth  may 
be  on  the  Divine  side  of  the  great  fact  of  human  redemption,  on  the  human  side  we 
are  obliged  to  admit  the  possibility  of  a  fall  from  grace.  It  is  involved  in  the  very  fact 
that  it  is  a  free  human  spirit  which  is  being  dealt  vnth.  2.  Christ  marks  here  three 
things  as  characteristic  of  men  in  this  state.  (1)  They  are  useless  for  any  good 
purpose  whatever — useless  in  the  Church,  useless  in  the  world.  What  shall  be 
seasoned  with  such  salt  ?  It  is  useless  to  make  anything  grow.  It  is  a  heap  and 
nothing  more — neither  man  nor  beast  can  ever  be  the  better  for  its  existence.  (2) 
Such  characters  are  utterly  contemptible.  They  are  neither  fit  for  the  land  nor  yet 
for  the  dunghiU,  which,  if  it  does  not  grow  itself,  helps  other  things  to  grow.  (3) 
And  last  of  all  they  are  rejected  with  utter  disdain.  "  It  is  henceforth  good  for 
nothing,  bat  to  be  cast  out  and  trodden  under  foot  of  men."  It  must  not  b« 
allowed  even  to  occupy  the  place  of  the  real  thing.  There  can  be  no  itUowuhip 
between  Ule  and  death.    {This  Freaeher'$  Monthly.) 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tv. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Ykbs.   1,  2.    Tills  man  recelveth  sinners,  and  eateth  with   them. —  Christ't 

influence  with  the  ma»ses :  —  The  masses  were  drawn  to  Christ's  teachings. 
I.  Thb  seasons  fob  this  admibation.  1.  All  lack  of  affectation— no  parada 
of  greatness,  no  false  assumption  of  humility.  His  manner  was  what  beauty 
is  to  the  landscape,  what  the  sublime,  majestic  repose  of  the  ocean  is  to  the 
ocean's  greatness.  His  manner  ever  reflected  the  moral  grandeur  of  His 
being.  2.  The  originality  of  His  methods.  3.  The  grandeur  and  claims  of  His 
doctrines.  4.  The  authority  with  which  He  spoke.  5.  The  adaptation  of  style  and 
matter  to  the  people.  6.  His  profound  earnestness.  7.  His  scathing  denunciation 
of  the  hypocrisy  of  the  ruling  sects.  II.  The  effobtb  of  the  scbibes  and  Phabi- 
BEES  TO  UNDO  THIS  iNFiiDENCE.  Not  because  they  loved  men,  but  because  of  caste, 
of  pride,  and  cold-hearted  selfishness.  III.  Ghbist's  mankeb  of  meetino  this 
OPPOSITION.  He  takes  every  opportunity  to  overcome  their  prejudice,  and  enlighten 
their  minds,  seeking  to  impress  upon  them  the  superior  glories  of  the  new  dispen* 
sation.    (W.  E.   McKay.)  Christ  receiving  sinners: — I,  The  desceiption  of 

siNNEBB  Cubist  will  beceite.  1.  Sinners  of  all  ages.  2.  Sinners  of  all  stations. 
3.  Sinners  of  all  degrees.  II.  Into  what  Jescb  beceives  sinnebs.  1.  Into  His 
forgiving  grace  and  favour.  2.  Into  His  family.  3.  Into  His  heaven.  HI.  Thb 
WAT  AND  MANNEB  DJ  WHICH  Cheist  BECEIVES  SINNEBS.  1.  In  the  Way  of  acknow- 
ledgment  and  confession.  2.  In  the  way  of  repentance,  or  turning  from  sin.  3. 
In  the  way  of  humility  and  faith.  Now  as  to  the  manner :  1.  Most  freely.  2. 
Most  tenderly.  3.  Most  readily.  Application :  1.  The  subject  is  one  to  which 
every  believer's  heart  responds.  2.  The  subject  is  full  of  encouragement  to  the 
inquiring  sinner.  3.  The  subject  is  limited  to  the  present  life.  Here  only  He 
receives.    {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  This  man  receiveth  sinners: — These  words  were 

originally  spoken  as  a  reproach  against  our  Lord.  'When  we  repeat  them  it  is  with 
widely  different  feelings.  They  are  to  us  a  message  of  joy — nay,  the  only  true 
grounds  of  joy  and  hope  to  man.  I.  The  febsonb  befbbbed  to.  "  This  man  "  : 
"  sinners."  1.  The  contrast  in  its  most  general  aspect.  They — '•  sinners  " — evil- 
doers, violators  of  God's  law.  He — "  holy ;  separate  from  sinners."  2.  Take  the 
outward  life  of  both.  His — faultless,  beneficent.  Theirs — the  reverse.  3.  Con- 
sider the  spirit  of  His  life,  and  of  theirs.  Perfect  love  and  confidence  in  God ; 
perfect  love  and  devotion  to  the  good  of  man.  They,  governed  by  selfishness  ; 
destitute  of  faith ;  living  under  influence  of  impulse,  passion,  &g.    U.  The  bela- 

TION  EXPBESSED   BETWEEN   THESE   TWO   CLASSES   OF    PEBSONS.        1.    What    should   yoU 

expect?  A  man  is  known  by  his  companions.  Like  seeks  like.  2.  Yet,  Ha 
receiveth  sinners.  (1)  To  mercy  and  pardon.  (2)  To  grace  and  guidance.  (3)  To 
love  and  friendship.  3.  And  all  this  He  does  (1)  freely ;  (2)  readily  ;  (3)  eternally. 
III.  What  is  oub  inteeest  in  this  subject  ?  1.  To  some,  none.  But  why,  and 
how  ?  Are  they  not  sinners  ?  How,  then,  can  they  be  saved  ♦  Is  there  another  who 
can  thus  receive?  2.  Do  yon  fear  to  come?  Why?  Consider  His  words  of  invi- 
tation and  promise.  Consider  His  acts  of  welcome  and  beneficence.  3.  Are  we 
received?  See  that  you  never  abandon  His  protection.  {W.  R.  Clark,  M.A.) 
Christ  receiving  sinners : — I.  Who  it  is  that  beceiveth  sinners  ?  1.  "  This  man." 
That  Christ  was  "  man,"  may  easily  be  shown  from  the  united  and  ample  testimony 
of  Scripture.  Bevelation  makes  no  attempt  to  conceal  this  fact.  It  treats  it  as  a 
matter  that  is  necessary  to  be  known,  and  as  fully  and  readily  to  be  believed,  as 
His  essential  and  eternal  divinity.  Godhead  without  manhood  could  have  effected 
no  atonement  for  the  world's  transgression.  2.  But  "  this  man  "  was  Divine,  He 
was  God  "manifested  in  the  flesh,"  combined  all  the  glory  of  the  Deity  with  all 
the  weakness  of  man — all  the  infirmities  of  the  creature — with  acts  and  attributes 
splendid  and  incomprehensible  1  He  was  frail  as  flesh,  yet  omnipotent  as  God. 
Thus  was  our  nature  infinitely  enriched,  though  sin  had  beggared  it  of  all  worth. 
3.  "  This  man  "  gave  to  the  universe  the  most  amiable,  attractive,  and  stupendous 
manifestation  of  the  Deity  ever  witnessed,  a  *•  manifestation  "  altogether  different 
from  any  which  had  been  previously  afforded.  Here  was  no  throne  of  sapphire, 
no  city  of  pearl,  no  retinue  of  celestials,  no  blaze  of  unapproachable  brightness,  no 
footpath  on  the  firmament,  no  chariot  rolling  "  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,"  and 
studded  with  the  stars  of  the  skies.  The  majestic  symbols  of  the  presence  and 
power  of  the  Infinite  were  kept  back,  and  here  was  man  in  -veakness.  destitution. 


«HAP.  w.]  8T.  LUKE.  n 

reproach,  saffering,  and  death.  "  This  man "  showed  how  low  the  Deity  coaM 
Btoop,  bow  much  the  Deity  could  love,  how  infinitely  the  Deity  could  redeem, 
with  what  frail  and  broken  things  the  Deity  could  rebuild  His  moral  universe.  II. 
How  THIS  MAN  BECEivsTH  siMNEBS.  I.  He  "  received  "  them  universally ;  His  arms 
of  love  are  ready  to  embrace  all.  2.  "  Christ  received  sinners  "  without  upbraiding 
them  on  account  of  their  sins.  S.  Observe  the  dehghtful  and  blessed  certainty 
that  •♦  sinners  "  have  of  being  •♦  received "  by  Him.  IH.  What  does  Ghbist's 
BxcEPTiON  OF  siNNEBs  coMPKEHEND 7  To  what  are  they  received?  The  world 
receives  its  votaries,  but  only  to  oppress  them  with  its  vexations  and  vanities. 
Satan  receives  sinners,  but  oi^y  to  slavery  and  wretchedness.  Doth  Christ  receive 
them  f  It  is — 1.  To  a  state  of  reconciliation  with  Himself ;  He  casts  around  them 
His  Divine  complacency,  makes  and  calls  them  "  His  friends."  2.  Christ "  receives 
sinners  "  into  a  state  of  holiness.  He  sanctifies  all  the  powers  of  the  intellect,  all 
the  affections  of  the  heart,  and  all  the  actions  of  the  life.  3.  Christ  "receives  " 
them  under  the  special  protection  and  guidance  of  His  providence.  They  rest  under 
the  pavilion  of  the  Almighty  Bedeemer,  are  encircled  as  with  a  wall  of  fire,  and 
fenced  round  and  defended  by  the  angels  of  glory.  4.  Christ  "  receives  "  them  into 
the  full  immunities  of  His  kingdom  of  grace.  In  that  kingdom  "  aU  things  are 
theirs."  5.  Christ  "receives  the  sinners  "He  thus  sanctifies  and  blesses  into 
heaven.  This  is  the  last  and  greatest  gift  of  God  in  Christ.  This  will  perfect 
every  holy  principle  and  every  religious  joy.  (S.  Horton.)  Jeaua  receiving 
tinners  : — I.  The  words,  as  they  were  intended,  contain  a  false  and  malicious 
CALUMNY.  "  This  man  receiveth  sinners,  and  eateth  with  them."  The  fact  itself 
was  undeniable :  but  what  interpretation  did  the  Pharisees  wish  to  put  upon  it  ? 
1.  They  meant  to  insinuate  that  the  followers  of  Jesus  consisted  chiefly  of  worth- 
less and  disreputable  characters ;  and  this  was  false.  2.  These  murmurers  meant 
to  insinuate,  further,  that  Jesus  loved  the  company  of  sinners  for  its  own  sake  ;  and 
this  again  was  false.  3.  Or,  perhaps,  they  meant  to  insinuate,  that  those  whom  Ha 
favourably  received  continued  sinners  still ;  and  this  was  as  false  as  the  rest.  U. 
The  same  words  undesignedly  express  a  most  glorious  truth.  They  truly 
describe — 1.  The  persons  on  whose  behalf  the  Son  of  Man  is  interested — "  This 
man  receiveth  sinners."  (1)  None  but  sinners — among  the  race  of  Adam,  at  least 
— have  any  concern  or  part  in  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  The  vilest  of  sinners  are  not  shut 
out  from  partaking  in  that  mercy,  which  is  equally  needful  to  the  most  virtuous. 
(3)  Once  more — sin  still  dwelleth  even  in  those  who  have  partaken  of  the  mercy  of 
Christ ;  yet  doth  He  not  cast  them  oS.  And  why  7  Because  He  is  not  displeased 
to  behold  sin  in  His  followers  ?  God  forbid !  No — but  because  He  delights  to  see 
them  "  fighting  manfully  "  against  it,  and  gradually  overcoming  it  through  the 
power  of  His  grace.  2.  The  regard  which  He  shows  toward  them — He  "  receiveth 
them,  and  eateth  with  them."  (1)  He  receives  them  to  His  own  favour,  and  to  that 
of  His  Father.  (2)  He  receives  them  to  spiritual  communion  with  Himself,  and  with 
His  Father.  (3)  He  receives  them,  finally,  to  His  visible  presence  in  the  kingdom 
of  His  Father.  (cT".  Jowett,  M.A.)  Christ  receiving  tinners  : — I.  The  impious 
CALUMNY  intended.  You  all  kuow  that  the  proverb  has  been  accepted  in  all  ages, 
and  clothed  in  all  languages,  "  A  man  may  be  ever  known  by  his  associates."  Tell 
me  his  friendships,  and  I  will  tell  you  his  nature,  for  according  to  his  companion- 
ships must  be  his  character.  Now  these  Fhari  sees  would  force  home  this  proverb 
upon  the  holy  Saviour.  Could  He  come  forth  from  that  Father's  bosom,  could  He 
have  just  stepped  into  this  naughty  world  out  of  that  world  of  holy  love,  and  not 
be  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners  ? — ay,  the  very  best  Friend  they  ever  had, 
for  He  came  to  seek  and  to  save  the  chief,  as  He  said  most  feelingly  who  had  not 
been  a  publican  and  a  sinner,  but  a  Pharisee  and  a  sinner.  This  shall  be  to  eternity 
His  praise  and  glory.  But  then  it  is  said,  or  it  is  thought,  by  Bome  Pharisees 
and  scribes,  that  such  a  reception  of  the  sinner  is  a  patronage  of  his  sin — that 
Buch  •  gospel  of  free  grace  has  a  perilous  tendency  to  release  man  from  moral 
duty ;  that  if  good  works  do  not  enter  into  the  ground  of  the  sinner's  salvation, 
no  obligation  remains  for  the  performance  of  them  by  the  man — just  as  these 
Pharisees  implied  that  receiving  sinners  was  to  be  a  patron  of  their  sin.  Befute  this 
error  whenever  it  shows  itself,  as  the  Lord  refuted  the  slander  of  the  scribes — by 
the  revealed  mind  of  God.  I  m^an  by  the  pure  word  of  Scripture  ;  on  the  one  hand 
saying,  "Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  according  onto 
His  mercy  He  saved  us  " ;  and  on  the  other  hand  affirming  "  That  faith  ab^nald. 
work  by  love."  IL  The  precious  truth  asserted.  The  eater  never  did  bring 
forth  such  sweetness  as  when  this  testimony  was  extorted  from  wicked  men.    Why 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*,  xw. 


this  revelation  of  the  Father's  will  ?  My  brethren,  the  great  foandation  of  all 
Divine  revelation,  from  the  forfeiture  of  Paradise  downward  through  all  its  pro- 
phecies, and  through  all  its  promises,  the  great  foundation  of  all  revelation  lies  in 
this  httle  fact,  "  God  receives  sinners."  Open  your  Bible,  read  through  the  Scrip- 
ture ;  it  gives  you  the  character  of  God.  Surely  the  errand  of  the  beloved  Son  must 
be  in  harmony  with  that  character.  Listen !  hear  the  declaration  of  your  Father's 
mind  :  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord."  Listen 
to  the  exhortations  of  your  Father's  love  :  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and 
the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts:  and  let  Him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  will 
have  mercy  upon  him  ;  and  to  our  God,  for  He  will  abundantly  pardon."  Listen 
to  the  proclamation  of  His  own  name :  "  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and 
gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for 
thousands,  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression  and  sin."  Hear  His  promise :  "  I 
have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  thy  sins :  return 
unto  Me;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  Hear  His  remonstrance:  "How  shall  I  give  thee 
up,  Ephraim  ?  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel?  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admahf 
how  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  ?  Mine  heart  is  turned  within  Me,  My  repentings 
are  kindled  together.  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  Mine  anger,  I  will  not 
return  to  destroy  Ephraim ;  for  I  am  God,  and  not  man."  Oh  I  declarations, 
expostulations,  proclamations,  promises,  remonstrances,  surely  these  must  have 
their  sign  and  seal  in  Him,  of  whom  it  was  said,  "  See  Him,  and  yon  see  the 
Father"  ;  of  whom  it  could  be  said,  "The  voice  of  those  human  lips  is  the  very 
echo  of  the  voice  of  God."  {J.  P.  Eyre,  M.A.)  The  approachableness  of  Jesus  : — 
I.  First  let  us  prove  the  approachableness  op  Christ,  though  it  really  needs  no 
proof,  for  it  is  a  fact  which  lies  upon  the  surface  of  His  life.  1.  You  may  see  it 
conspicuously  in  His  offices.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  said  to  be  the  Mediator  between 
God  and  man.  Now,  observe,  that  the  office  of  mediator  implies  at  once  that  he 
should  be  approachable.  Another  of  His  offices  is  that  of  priest.  The  priest  was 
the  true  brother  of  the  people,  chosen  from  among  themselves,  at  all  times  to  be 
approached ;  living  in  their  midst,  in  the  very  centre  of  the  camp,  ready  to  make 
intercession  for  the  sinful  and  the  sorrowful.  So  is  it  with  our  Lord.  You  may  be 
separated  from  all  of  human  kind,  justly  and  righteously,  by  your  iniquities,  but 
you  are  not  separated  from  that  great  Friend  of  sinners  who  at  this  very  time  is 
willing  that  publicans  and  sinners  should  draw  near  unto  Him.  As  a  third  office 
let  me  mention  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  our  Saviour ;  but  I  see  not  how  He  can  be  a 
Saviour  unless  He  can  be  approached  by  those  who  need  to  be  saved.  2.  Consider 
a  few  of  His  names  and  titles.  Frequently  Jesus  is  called  the  "Lamb."  I  do  not 
suppose  there  is  any  one  here  who  was  ever  afraid  of  a  lamb ;  that  little  girl 
yonder,  if  she  saw  a  lamb,  would  not  be  frightened.  Every  child  seems  almost 
instinctively  to  long  to  put  its  hand  on  the  head  of  a  lamb.  0  that  you  might 
come  and  put  your  hand  on  the  head  of  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world.  Again, you  find  Him  called  a  Shepherd :  no  one  is  afraid  of 
a  shepherd.  Timid,  foolish,  and  wandering  though  you  may  be,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  Good  Shepherd  to  drive  you  away  from  Him,  but  everything  to  entice  you  to 
come  to  Him.  Then  again.  He  is  called  our  Brother,  and  one  always  feels  that 
he  may  approach  his  brother.  I  have  no  thought  of  trouble  or  distress  which  I 
would  hesitate  to  communicate  to  my  brother,  because  he  is  so  good  and  kind. 
Brethren,  you  can  come  to  the  good  elder  Brother  at  all  hours  ;  and  when  He  blames 
you  for  coming,  let  me  know.  He  is  called,  too,  a  Friend ;  but  He  would  be  a  very 
unfriendly  friend  who  could  not  be  approached  by  those  He  professed  to  love.  If 
my  friend  puts  a  hedge  around  himself,  and  holds  himself  so  very  dignified  that  I 
may  not  speak  with  him,  I  would  rather  be  without  his  friendship  ;  but  if  he  be  a 
genuine  friend,  and  I  stand  at  his  door  knocking,  he  will  say,  "  Come  in,  and  wel- 
come ;  what  can  I  do  for  you  ?  "  Such  a  friend  is  Jesus  Christ  He  is  to  be  met 
with  by  all  needy,  seeking  hearts.  3.  There  is  room  enough  for  enlargement 
here,  but  I  have  no  time  to  say  more,  therefore  I  will  give  you  another  plea, 
Becollect  His  person.  The  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  proclaims  this  tnith 
with  a  trumpet  voice.  I  say  His  person,  because  He  is  man,  born  of  woman,  bone 
of  our  bone,  and  fiesh  of  our  flesh.  4.  If  this  suffice  not,  let  me  here  remind  yoa 
of  the  language  of  Christ.  He  proclaims  His  approachability  in  such  words  as 
these, "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  yoa 
rest."  6.  The  old  proverb  truly  saith  that  "  actions  speak  louder  than  words,'  and 
therefore  let  ns  review  the  general  ways  and  manners  of  the  Redeemer.  Yon  may 
gather  that  He  is  the  most  approachable  of  persons  from  the  actions  of  His  lile. 


CHAP.  TV.]  8T.  LUKE.  73 

He  was  always  very  bnsy,  and  bnsy  about  the  most  important  of  matters,  and  yet 
He  never  shut  the  door  in  the  face  of  any  applicant.  Not  once  was  He  harsh  and 
repulsive.  His  whole  life  proves  the  truth  of  the  prophecy,  "  The  bruised  reed  He 
will  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  He  will  not  quench."  6.  But,  if  you  want  the 
crowning  argument,  look  yonder.  The  man  who  has  lived  a  life  of  service,  at  last 
dies  a  felon's  death  I  The  cross  of  Christ  should  be  the  centre  to  which  all  hearts 
are  drawn,  the  focus  of  desire,  the  pivot  of  hope,  the  anchorage  of  faith.  Surely, 
you  need  not  be  afraid  to  come  to  Him  who  went  to  Calvary  for  siimers.  II.  I  now 
shall  proceed,  with  as  great  brevity  as  I  can  command,  to  ilIiTtbtbate  this  qbbat 
TBUTH.  1.  I  illustrate  it  by  the  way  which  Christ  opens  up  for  sinners  to  Himself. 
The  coming  to  Jesus  which  saves  the  soul  is  a  simple  reliance  on  Him.  2.  Thi>< 
truth  is  further  illustrated  by  the  help  which  He  gives  to  coming  sinners,  in  order 
to  bring  them  near  to  Himself.  He  it  is  who  first  makes  them  coming  sinners.  8. 
I  might  further  illustrate  this  to  the  children  of  God,  by  reminding  you  of  the  way 
in  which  you  now  commune  with  your  Lord.  How  easy  it  is  for  you  to  reach  His 
ear  and  His  heart  1  A  prayer,  a  sigh,  a  tear,  a  groan,  will  admit  you  into  the 
King's  chambers.  4.  The  approachableness  of  Christ  may  also  be  seen  in  the  fact 
of  His  receiving  the  poor  offerings  of  His  people.  5.  The  ordinances  wear  upon 
their  forefront  the  impress  of  an  ever  approachable  Saviour.  Baptism  in  outward 
typesets  forth  our  fellowship  with  BLim  in  His  death,  burial,  and  resurrection- 
what  can  be  nearer  than  this  ?  The  Lord's  supper  in  visible  symbol  invites  ue  to 
eat  His  flesh  and  drink  His  blood :  this  reveals  to  us  most  clearly  how  welcome  sse 
are  to  the  most  intimate  intercourse  with  Jesus.  IH.  In  the  third  place,  we  come 
TO  ENFORCE  THIS  TBUTH ;  or,  as  the  old  Puritans  used  to  say,  improve  it.  1.  The 
first  enforcement  I  give  is  this :  let  those  of  us  who  are  working  for  the  Maeter  iu 
Boul-winning,  try  to  be  be  like  Christ  in  this  matter,  and  not  be,  as  some  are  apt 
to  be,  proud,  stuck-up,  distant,  or  formal.  2.  There  is  this  to  be  said  to  yon  who 
are  unconverted — if  Jesus  Christ  be  so  approachable,  oh  1  how  I  wish,  how  I  wish 
that  you  would  approach  Him.  There  are  no  bolts  upon  His  doors,  no  barred  iron 
gates  to  pass,  no  big  dogs  to  keep  you  back.  If  Christ  be  so  approachable  by  all 
needy  ones,  then  needy  one,  come  and  welcome.  Come  just  now  I  3.  The  last 
word  is — if  Jesus  be  such  a  Saviour  as  we  have  described  Him,  let  saints  and 
sinners  join  to  praise  Him.      (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Open  home  for  all  comers  : — 

I.  Jesus  beceivino  sinnees.  1.  This  was  and  is  a  great  fact — our  Lord  received, 
and  stiU  receiveth  sinners.  A  philosopher  wrote  over  the  door  of  his  academy, 
•'  He  that  is  not  learned,  let  him  not  enter  here  "  ;  but  Jesus  speaketh  by  Wisdom 
in  the  Proverbs,  and  says  "  Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in  hither:  as  for  him 
that  wanteth  understanding,  let  him  eat  of  My  bread,  and  drink  of  the  wine  which 
I  have^mingled  "  (Prov.  ix.  4,  6).  He  receives  sinners  as  His  disciples,  companions, 
friends.  "  This  man  receiveth  sinners  " ;  not,  however,  that  they  may  remain 
sinners,  but  to  pardon  their  sins,  to  justify  their  persons,  to  cleanse  their  hearts  by 
the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  I  want  your  attention  to  another  thought — namely,  the  con- 
sistency of  this  fact.  It  is  a  most  consistent  and  proper  thing  that  this  man  should 
receive  sinners.  If  you  and  I  reflect  awhile  we  shall  remember  that  the  types 
which  were  set  forth  concerning  Christ  all  seem  to  teach  us  that  He  must  receive 
sinners.  One  of  the  earliest  types  of  the  Saviour  was  Noah's  ark,  by  which  a  cer- 
tfin  company  not  only  of  men  but  also  of  the  lowest  animals  were  preserved  from 
perishing  by  water,  and  were  floated  out  of  the  old  world  into  the  new.  Moreover, 
the  Master  has  been  pleased  to  take  to  Himself  one  or  two  titles  which  imply  that 
He  came  to  receive  sinners.  He  takes  the  title  of  Physician,  but  as  He  told  the«e 
very  Pharisees  a  little  while  before,  "  The  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but 
they  that  are  sick."  There  is  no  practice  for  the  physician  in  a  neighbourhood 
where  every  man  is  well.  3.  Observe  the  condescension  of  this  fact.  This  man, 
who  towers  above  all  other  men,  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from 
■inners — this  man  receiveth  sinners.  4.  Notice  the  certainty  of  this  fact.  6.  Do 
observe  the  unquahfied  sense  in  which  the  sentence  is  put,  "  This  man  receiveth 
sinners."  But  how?  What  sort  of  sinners  ?  How  are  they  to  feel  7  How  are  they  to 
come  ?  Not  a  word  is  said  about  their  coming,  or  their  preparation,  but  simply, 
"This  man  receiveth  sinners."  One  man  came  on  his  bed — indeed,  he  did  not 
come,  but  was  brought  by  other  people ;  Jesus  received  him  all  the  same  for  that. 
n.  Now,  I  wanted  to  have  spoken  upon  the  second  head,  but  I  have  not  had 
lufficient  forethought  to  store  up  the  time,  so  we  must  only  say  of  that  just  this : 
that  Jesus  Christ  having  once  received  sinners,  enters  into  the  most  familiar  and 
endearing  intercourse  with  them  that  is  possible.    Hs  fxasts  with  thbk — their 


74  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOH.  [chap,  xf, 

joye  are  His  joys,  their  work  for  God  is  His  work  for  God.  He  feasts  with  them  at 
their  table,  and  they  with  Him  at  His  table  ;  and  He  does  this  wherever  the  table 
JB  spread.  It  may  be  in  a  garret,  or  in  a  cellar ;  in  a  wilderness,  or  on  a  moun- 
tain ;  He  still  eateth  with  them.  This  He  does  now  in  the  ordinances  and  means 
of  grace  by  His  Spirit ;  and  this  He  will  do  in  the  fulness  of  glory,  when  He  takes 
these  sinners  np  to  dwell  with  Him.  (Ibid.)  An  appeal  to  sinners : — Many  a  true 
word  has  been  spoken  in  jest,  and  many  a  true  word  has  been  spoken  in  slander. 
Now  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  wished  to  slander  Christ ;  but  in  bo  doing  they  oat- 
stripped  their  intentions,  and  bestowed  upon  Him  a  title  of  renown,  I.  First, 
then,  THE  DOCTRINE.  The  doctrine  is,  not  that  Christ  receiveth  everybody,  bat 
that  He  "  receiveth  sinners."  Christ  receives  not  the  self-righteous,  not  the  good, 
not  the  whole-hearted,  not  those  who  dream  that  they  do  not  need  a  Saviour,  but 
The  broken  in  spirit,  the  contrite  in  heart — those  who  are  ready  to  confess  that 
they  have  broken  God's  laws,  and  have  merited  His  displeasure.  Now,  let  us 
remark,  thab  there  is  a  very  wise  distinction  on  the  part  of  God,  that  He  hath 
been  pleased  thus  to  choose  and  call  sinners  to  repentance,  and  not  others. 
For  this  reason,  none  but  these  ever  do  come  to  Him.  There  has  never  been  such 
a  miracle  as  a  self-righteous  man  coming  to  Christ  for  mercy  ;  none  but  those  who 
want  a  Saviour  ever  did  come,  and  therefore  it  would  be  useless  for  Him  to  say 
that  He  would  receive  any  but  those  who  most  assuredly  will  come.  And  mark, 
again,  none  but  those  can  come ;  no  man  can  come  to  Christ  until  he  truly  knows 
himself  to  be  a  sinner.  The  self-righteous  man  cannot  come  to  Christ ;  for  what 
is  implied  in  coming  to  Christ  ?  Bepentance,  trust  in  His  mercy,  and  the  denial 
of  all  confidence  in  one's  self.  His  very  self-righteousness  fetters  his  foot,  so  that 
he  cannot  come ;  palsies  his  arm,  so  that  he  cannot  take  hold  of  Christ ;  and 
blinds  his  eye,  so  that  he  cannot  see  the  Saviour.  Tet  another  reason :  if  these 
people,  who  are  not  sinners,  would  come  to  Christ,  Christ  would  get  no  glory  from 
them.  When  the  physician  openeth  his  door  for  those  who  are  sick,  let  me  go 
there  full  of  health  ;  he  can  win  no  honour  from  me,  because  he  cannot  exert  his 
skin  upon  me.  The  benevolent  man  may  distribute  all  his  wealth  to  the  poor ; 
but  let  some  one  go  to  him  who  has  abundance,  and  he  shall  win  no  esteem  from 
him  for  feeding  the  hungry,  or  for  clothing  the  naked,  since  the  applicant  is  neither 
hungry  nor  naked.  A  great  sinner  brings  great  glory  to  Christ  when  he  is  saved, 
n.  Now,  then,  the  bncookaoement.  If  this  Man  receiveth  sinners,  poor  SM-sick 
sinner,  what  a  sweet  word  this  is  for  thee  !  Sure,  then.  He  will  not  rrjftci  thee. 
Come,  let  me  encourage  thee  this  night  to  come  to  my  Master,  to  receive  iiiig  great 
atonement,  and  to  be  clothed  with  all  His  righteousness.  Mark,  tho«se  whom  I 
address  are  the  bona  fide,  real,  actual  sinners,  not  the  complimentarj  sinners,  not 
those  who  say  they  are  sinners  by  way  of  pacifying,  as  they  ;^uppose,  the 
leligionists  of  the  day  ;  but  I  speak  to  those  who  feel  their  lost,  ruined,  hopeless 
condition.  Come,  because  He  has  said  He  will  receive  you.  I  know  your  fears  ; 
we  all  felt  them  once,  when  we  were  coming  to  Christ,  Doth  not  this  suffice 
thee  ?  Then  here  is  another  reason.  I  am  sure  "  this  Man  receiveth  sinners," 
because  He  has  received  many,  many  before  yon.  See,  there  is  Mercy's  door ; 
mark  how  many  have  been  to  it ;  you  can  almost  hear  the  knocks  upon  the  door 
now,  like  echoes  of  the  past.  Yoa  may  remember  how  many  wayworn  travellers 
have  called  there  for  rest,  how  many  famished  souls  have  applied  there  for  bread. 
Go,  knock  at  Mercy's  door,  and  ask  the  porter  this  question,  "  Was  there  ever  one 
applied  to  the  door  that  was  refused  ?  "  I  can  assure  you  of  the  answer :  "  No, 
not  one."  III.  Now  the  last  point  is  an  exhobtation.  If  it  be  true  that  Christ 
came  only  to  save  sinners,  my  beloved  hearers,  labour,  strive,  agonize,  to  get  a 
sense  in  your  souls  of  your  own  sinnership.  {Ibid.)  Christ  receives  all: — In  the 
New  Testament  the  Lord  seems  to  have  selected  some  of  every  kind  and  class  to 
show  that  He  will  receive  all.  1.  He  will  receive  the  rich — Joseph  of  Arimathea. 
2.  The  poor — Lazaras  the  beggar.  8.  The  learned — Dionysius  the  Areopagite, 
4.  Physicians— Luke.  6.  Soldiers — the  Boman  centurion.  6.  Fishermen — th« 
apostles.  7.  Extortioners — Zaccheas.  8.  Tax-gatherers — Matthew.  9.  Thieves 
— the  dying  robber.  10.  Harlots — the  woman  who  was  a  sinner.  11.  Adulterers 
— the  woman  of  Samaria.  12.  Persecutors  and  murderers — Paul.  13  Back- 
sliders— Peter.  14.  Persons  in  trade — Lydia.  15.  Statesmen  and  courtiers— 
the  eunuch  of  Ethiopia.  16.  Families — ^that  at  Bethany.  17.  Whole  multitudes — 
those  on  Day  of  Pentecost.  (Van  Doren.)  Christ^s  treatment  of  sinners : — There 
are  two  classes  of  sins.  There  are  some  sins  by  which  man  ornshes,  wounds, 
xnalevolently  injares  his  brother  man :  those  sins  which  speak  of  a  bad,  tyrannioaL 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  78 

and  selfish  heart.  Christ  met  those  with  denunciation.  There  are  other  sins  by 
•which  a  man  injures  himself.  There  is  a  life  of  reckless  indulgence ;  there  is  a 
career  of  yielding  to  ungovernable  propensities,  which  most  surely  conducts  to 
wretchedness  and  ruin,  but  makes  a  man  an  object  of  compassion  rather  than  of 
condemnation.  The  reception  which  sinners  of  this  class  met  from  Christ  was 
marked  by  strange  and  pitying  mercy.  There  was  no  maudlin  sentiment  on  His 
lips.  He  called  sin  sin,  and  guilt  guilt.  But  yet  there  were  sins  which  His  lips 
scourged,  and  others  over  which,  containing  in  themselves  their  own  scourge,  His 
heart  bled.  That  which  was  melancholy,  and  marred,  and  miserable  in  this  world, 
was  more  congenial  to  the  heart  of  Christ  than  that  which  was  proudly  happy.  It 
was  in  the  midst  of  a  triumph,  and  all  the  pride  of  a  procession,  that  He  paused 
to  weep  over  ruined  Jerusalem.  And  if  we  ask  the  reason  why  the  character  of 
Christ  was  marked  by  this  melancholy  condescension,  it  is  that  He  was  in  the 
midst  of  a  world  of  ruins,  and  there  was  nothing  there  to  gladden,  but  very  much 
to  touch  with  grief.  He  was  here  to  restore  that  which  was  broken  down  and 
crumbling  into  decay.  An  enthusiastic  antiquarian,  standing  amidst  the  frag- 
ments of  an  ancient  temple  surrounded  by  dust  and  moss,  broken  pillar,  and 
defaced  architrave,  with  magnificent  projects  in  his  mind  of  restoring  all  this  to 
former  majesty,  to  draw  out  to  light  from  mere  rubbish  the  ruined  glories,  and 
therefore  stooping  down  amongst  the  dank  ivy  and  the  rank  nettles ;  such  was 
Christ  amidst  the  wreck  of  human  nature.  He  was  striving  to  lift  it  out  of  its 
degradation.  He  was  searching  out  in  revolting  places  that  which  had  fallen 
down,  that  He  might  build  it  up  again  in  fair  proportions  a  holy  temple  to  the 
Lord.  Therefore  He  laboured  among  the  guilty ;  therefore  He  was  the  companion 
of  outcasts ;  therefore  He  spoke  tenderly  and  lovingly  to  those  whom  society 
counted  undone.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M. A.)  Christ's  demeanour  towards  xinners : — 
The  heathen  philosopher  Seneca  made  a  practice  of  dining  with  his  slaves,  and 
whea  challenged  for  an  innovation  so  directly  in  the  teeth  of  all  customary  pro- 
prieties  and  so  offensive  to  the  Boman  mind,  he  defended  himself  by  saying 
that  he  dined  with  some  because  they  were  worthy  of  his  esteem,  and  with  others 
that  they  might  become  so.  The  action  and  its  defence  was  alike  admirable,  and 
read  a  salutary  lesson  to  the  aristocrats  of  Bome.  But  it  was  even  a  greater 
shook  to  the  Pharisees,  and  if  possible  even  more  unaccountable,  that  Jesus  should 
prefer  the  society  of  notorious  sinners  to  their  own  irreproachable  manners  and 
decorous  conversation.  They  could  not  understand  why  a  teacher  of  holy  life, 
instead  of  frowning  upon  the  notoriously  profligate,  should  show  a  preference  for 
their  society.  Our  Lord's  explanation  is  ample  and  thorough.  He  devotes,  there- 
fore, the  three  parables  recorded  in  this  chapter  to  this  purpose.  It  is  perhaps 
worth  remarking  that  on  one  point  He  felt  that  no  explanation  was  required. 
Even  the  Pharisees  did  not  suspect  Him  of  any  sympathy  with  sin.  These  critics 
of  His  conduct  had  not  failed  to  remark  that  in  His  presence  the  daring  profanity 
and  audacious  license  of  wicked  men  were  tamed.  Those  who  so  narrowly 
criticized  our  Lord's  conduct  might  have  seen  its  reasonableness  had  they  been 
able  to  look  at  it  from  another  point  of  view.  With  equal  surprise  they  might 
have  exclaimed  :  "  Sinners  receive  this  Man  and  eat  with  Him."  These  dissolute 
and  lawless  characters  could  themselves  have  explained  the  change.  They  were 
attracted  to  Jesns,  because  together  with  unmistakable  sanctity,  and  even  somehow 
appearing  as  the  chief  feature  of  His  sanctity,  there  was  an  understanding  of  the 
sinner's  position  and  a  hopefulness  about  him  which  threw  a  hitherto  unknown 
spell  over  them.  Separate  from  sinners,  as  they  had  never  before  felt  any  one  to 
be.  He  seemed  to  come  closer  to  their  heart  by  far  than  any  other  had  come.  He 
had  a  heart  open  to  all  their  troubles.  He  saw  them  through  and  through,  and 
yet  showed  no  loathing,  no  scorn,  no  astonishment,  no  perplexity,  no  weariness. 
Instead  of  meeting  them  with  upbraiding  and  showing  them  all  they  had  lost.  He 
gave  them  immediate  entrance  into  His  own  pure,  deep,  efficient  love,  and 
gladdened  their  hearts  with  a  sense  of  what  they  yet  had  in  Him.  Therefore  men 
whose  seared  conscience  felt  no  other  touch,  who  had  a  ready  scoff  for  every  other 
form  of  holiness,  admitted  this  new  power  and  yielded  to  it.  The  contrast 
between  this  new  attitude  of  a  holy  person  towards  the  sinner  and  that  to  which 
men  had  commonly  been  accustomed  has  been  finely  described  in  the  following 
words:  "He  who  thought  most  seriously  of  the  disease  held  it  to  be  curable; 
while  those  who  thought  less  seriously  of  it  pronounced  it  incurable.  Those  who 
loved  their  race  a  little  made  war  to  the  knife  against  its  enemies  and  oppressors ; 
He  who  lov«d  it  lo  maeCi  as  to  die  for  it  made  overtures  of  peace  to  them.    Tb* 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

half-just  judge  punished  the  convicted  criminal ;  the  thoroughly  ju?t  judge  offered 
him  forgiveness.  Perfect  justice  here  appears  to  take  the  very  course  which  would  be 
taken  by  injustice."  It  is  this,  then,  that  calls  for  explanation.  And  it  is  explained 
by  onr  Lord  in  three  parables,  each  of  which  illustrates  the  fact  that  a  more  active 
interest  in  any  possession  is  arroused  by  the  very  circumstance  that  it  is  lost.  I. 
The  first  point,  then,  suggested  by  these  parables  is  that  God  suffers  lobs  or 
BVEBT  6INNEB  THAT  DEPAETB  FEOM  HiM.  This  was  what  the  Pharisees  had  wholly 
left  out  of  account,  that  God  loves  men  and  mourns  over  every  ill  that  befalls 
them.  And  this  is  what  we  find  it  so  hard  to  believe.  II.  Secondly,  these 
parables  suggest  that  the  veby  fact  or  oub  beimo  lost  excites  action  or  s 
BPEciALLT  TENDEB  KIND  TowABD  US.  God  does  not  console  Himself  for  onr  loss 
by  the  fellowship  of  those  who  have  constantly  loved  Him.  He  does  not  call  new 
creatures  into  being,  and  so  fill  up  the  blank  we  have  made  by  straying  from  Him. 
He  is  not  a  Sovereign  who  has  no  personal  knowledge  of  His  subjects,  nor  an 
employer  of  labour  who  can  always  get  a  fresh  hand  to  fill  an  emptied  post :  He  ia 
rather  a  Shepherd  who  knows  His  sheep  one  by  one,  a  Father  who  loves  His 
children  individually.  He  would  rather  restore  the  most  abandoned  sinner  than 
blot  him  from  his  place  to  substitute  an  archangel.  Love  is  personal  and  settles 
upon  individuals.  It  is  not  all  the  same  to  God  if  some  other  person  is  saved 
while  yon  are  not.  These  parables  thus  bring  us  face  to  face  with  the  most 
significant  and  fertile  of  all  realities—  God's  love  for  us.  This  love  encompasses 
you  whether  you  will  or  no.  Love  cannot  remain  indifferent  or  quiescent.  Inter- 
ference of  a  direct  and  special  kind  becomes  necessary.  The  normal  relations 
being  disturbed,  and  man  becoming  helpless  by  the  disturbance,  it  falls  to  God  to 
restore  matters.  A  new  set  of  ideas  and  dealings  are  brought  into  play.  So  long 
as  things  go  smoothly  and  men  by  nature  love  God  and  seek  to  do  His  will,  there 
is  no  anxiety,  no  meeting  of  emergencies  by  unexpected  effort,  hidden  resources, 
costly  sacrifice.  But  when  sin  brings  into  view  all  that  is  tragic,  and  when  utter 
destmction  seems  to  be  man's  appointed  destiny,  there  is  called  into  exercise  the 
deepest  tenderness,  the  utmost  power  of  the  Divine  nature.  Here  where  the 
profonndest  feeling  of  God  is  concerned,  where  His  connection  with  His  own 
children  is  threatened,  Divinity  is  stirred  to  its  utmost.  This  appears,  among 
other  things,  in  the  spontaneity  and  persistence  of  the  search  God  institutes  for 
the  lost.  III.  The  third  point  illustrated  by  these  parables  is  the  exceeding  jot 
CONSEQUENT  ON  THE  BESTOBATiON  Or  THE  BiNNEB.  "  Joy  shall  be  in  hcaven  over 
one  sinner  that  repenteth  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine  just  persons  which  need 
no  repentance."  The  joy  is  greater,  because  the  effort  to  bring  it  about  has  been 
greater,  and  because  for  a  time  the  result  has  been  in  suspense,  so  that  when  the 
end  is  attained  tiiere  is  a  sense  of  clear  gain.  The  joy  of  success  is  proportioned 
to  the  difficulty,  the  doubtfulness  of  attaining  it.  AH  the  hazards  and  sacrifices 
of  the  search  are  repaid  by  the  recovery  of  the  lost.  The  value  of  the  unfallen 
soul  may  intrinsically  be  greater  than  the  value  of  the  redeemed ;  but  the  joy  is 
proportioned,  not  to  the  value  of  the  article,  but  to  the  amount  of  anxiety  that  has 
been  spent  upon  it.  (M.  Dods,  D.D.)  The  devil's  castaway »  received  by  Christ : — 
"  Mr.  Whitfield,"  said  Lady  Huntingdon,  "  these  ladies  have  been  preferring  a  very 
heavy  charge  against  you.  They  say  that  in  your  sermon  last  night  you  made  use 
of  this  expression :  "  So  ready  is  Christ  to  receive  sinners  who  come  to  Him,  that 
He  is  willing  to  receive  the  devil's  castaways.'  "  Mr.  Whitfield  pleaded  guilty  to 
the  charge,  and  told  them  of  the  following  circumstance.  "  A  wretched  woman 
came  to  me  this  morning,  and  said :  '  Sir,  I  was  passing  the  door  of  your  chapel, 
and  hearing  the  voice  of  some  one  preaching,  I  did  what  I  have  never  been  in  the 
habit  of  doing,  I  went  in  1  and  one  of  the  first  things  I  heard  yon  say  was  that 
Jesus  would  receive  vtdllingly  the  devil's  castaways.  Sir,  I  have  been  in  the  town 
for  many  years,  and  am  so  worn  out  in  his  service,  that  I  may  with  truth  be  called 
one  of  the  devil's  castaways.  Do  you  think  that  Jesus  would  receiva  me  ?  '  I," 
said  Mr.  Whitfield,  "assured  her  that  there  was  not  a  doubt  of  it,  if  she  was 
willing  to  go  to  Him."  From  the  sequel  it  appeared  that  this  was  a  case  of  true 
conversion,  and  Lady  Huntingdon  was  assured  that  the  woman  left  a  very  charm- 
ing testimony  behind  her,  that  though  her  sins  had  been  of  a  crimson  hue,  the 
atoning  blood  of  Christ  had  washed  them  white  as  snow.  Publican*  and  sinnert 
drawn  to  Christ;  or^  the  wisdom  of  gentleness  ! — Eigorous  courses  hath  ordinarily 
produced  sad  effects.  Thou  seest  that  those  drops  that  fall  easily  upon  the  eom 
ripen  and  fill  the  ear,  but  the  stormy  showers  that  fall  with  violence  beat  the  stalkt 
down  flat  upon  tiie  earth,  which  being  once  laid,  are  afterwards  kept  down  without 


CHAP.  xv.J  ST.  LUKE.  77 

hope  of  recovery  through  weeds'  embracementa.  Hare  you  never  known  any  that 
have  been  sent  faulty  to  the  jail  who  have  returned  flagitious  and  vile  ?  {N. 
Roger$.)  The  worst  capable  of  much : — White  paper  is  made  of  dunghUl  rag3. 
God  can  bo  work  the  heart  of  the  vilest  wretch  with  beating  and  purifying  as  it 
shall  be  fit  to  write  His  laws  upon.  (^Ibid.)  Murmuring  : — Murmuring  is  a  sin 
betwixt  secret  backbiting  and  open  railing ;  a  smothered  malice  which  can  neither 
utterly  be  concealed,  nor  dare  openly  be  vented.  Eemedies  against  this  evil :  First, 
keep  thy  heart  from  pride,  envy,  passion,  for  from  hence  flows  murmuring,  malignity, 
whispering.     Seldom  do  we  murmur  at  those  below  us,  but  above  us.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  8-7.  What  man  of  you,  having  an  hundred  sheep. — Lost,  sought,  found : — 
The  three  parables  in  this  chapter  fall  into  two  sections,  each  setting  forth  sepa- 
rately one-half  of  a  great  truth,  and  both  in  combination  exhibiting  the  whole.  1. 
The  first  two  parables  illustrate  conversion  on  its  Divine  side.  Christ  had  to  seek 
these  lost  publicans  and  sinners  in  order  to  find  them.  2.  The  third  parable 
illustrates  conversion  on  its  human  side,  and  was  intended  to  imply  that  these 
publicans  and  sinners  would  never  have  been  received  by  Christ  unless  they  had 
sought  Him.  8.  The  three  parables  combined  illustrate  conversion  on  both  its 
Divine  and  human  sides,  and,  consequently,  the  complete  truth:  God  seeking 
man,  and  man  seeking  God ;  and  the  twofold  search  rewarded,  by  God  and  man 
finding  each  other.  I.  Lost.  1.  In  the  first  parable  the  loss  falls  mainly  on  what 
is  lost.  By  sin  (1)  man  loses  himself ;  (2)  man  loses  protection ;  (3)  man  loses 
comfort.  2.  In  the  second  parable  the  loss  is  sustained  exclusively  by  the  owner, 
and  is  considerable.  One  out  of  ten  pieces.  (1)  The  piece  of  silver  was  lost  in  the 
house,  not  in  the  street.  (2)  The  piece  of  silver  was  lost  to  usefulness.  3.  In  the 
third  parable  we  have  a  double  loss.  The  nature  and  extent  of  the  loss  reach  their 
cUmax  here.  Of  two  sons  the  father  loses  one — the  loss  of  one-half  as  against  the 
loss  of  one-tenth  or  one-hundredth.  The  son  has  only  one  father ;  and  losing  him 
he  loses  all.  (1)  Measure  God's  loss,  as  represented  in  this  parable.  Man  is  lost 
to  Him  not  by  death,  but  by  depravity,  which  is  far  worse.  (2)  Consider  man's 
loss.  No  possible  compensation.  The  loss  of  God  is  the  poverty,  the  forsakenness, 
the  degradation,  the  bondage  of  the  soul.  II.  Socoht.  1.  In  the  first  two 
parables  the  seekers  are  Divine.  Let  us  endeavour  to  trace  them.  (1)  The  shep- 
herd represents  (a)  the  self-sacrificing  seeker ;  {b)  the  persevering  seeKer.  (2)  The 
woman  represents  the  careful  and  painutaking  seeker.  How  suggestive  of  the 
minute  and  searching  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit — Christ's  fan  and  Christ's  fire. 
2.  The  seeker  in  the  last  parable  is  htjman,  and  it  is  just  here  that  all  experience, 
and  the  plan  of  salvation  laid  down  in  Scripture,  would  lead  us  to  expect  to 
find  him,  and  exactly  as  here  portrayed.  Now  we  see  where  the  other  parables 
have  been  leading  us,  and  to  understand  that  theur  help  is  imperatively  required. 
For  notice— (1)  Light  dawns  upon  the  prodigal  and  conviction  pierces  his  soul. 
He  passes  through  three  preliminary  states  of  experience  as  a  lost  man.  First, 
danger  and  misery,  when  he  begins  to  be  in  want ;  then  uselessness  and  degrada- 
tion, when  he  is  sent  into  the  fields  to  feed  swine ;  and,  finally,  guilt,  when  he 
says,  "  I  have  sinned."  (2)  Hope  now  arises  within  his  convinced  and  enlightened 
soul.  How  is  this  hope  to  be  accounted  for?  Undoubtedly  on  the  ground  that  the 
person  he  had  sinned  against  was  his  father.  But  the  moment  it  arose  it  would  be 
confronted  by  a  variety  of  opposing  forces.  The  very  thought  of  this  filial  rela- 
tionship would  summon  before  the  memory  the  fact  that  it  had  been  broken  by  an 
unpardonable  outrage  on  a  father's  love.  Conscience,  again,  would  discourage  the 
hope  by  urging  the  necessity  of  a  now  impossible  reparation.  And  reason  would 
finally  tend  to  crush  it  by  representing  the  folly  of  return  now  that  having  had,  and 
having  spent  his  portion,  there  was  nothing  to  return  for.  It  is  well  to  remember 
all  this.  God  is  indeed  our  Father,  and  in  that  fact  lies  the  sinner's  hope  to-day. 
Bat  how  much  there  is  to  hinder  us  from  taking  advantage  of  it  I  "  God  is  my 
Father,  but  I  have  disowned  Him.  He  has  lavished  His  gifts  upon  me,  but  I  have 
wasted  them.  What,  then,  can  I  expect  but  rejection  if  I  return  f  "  And  yet  the 
hope  survives.  The  sinner  still  clings,  and  clings  desperately,  to  the  fact  that  God 
is  hia  Father.  Where  did  he  get  it  from  f  Not  from  Nature,  not  by  intuition,  not 
through  the  deliverances  of  consciousness  or  the  processes  of  deduction.  From  any 
one  or  all  of  these  sources  man  may  get  his  idea  of  God,  but  not  his  idea  of  a 
heavenly  Father.  No  sinner  ever  said  "  My  Father  "  until  Christ  taught  him  to  do 
■o.  One  voice,  and  one  alone,  has  proclaimed  this  relationship,  and  thus  formed 
the  basis  for  the  sinner's  hope — namely.  His  who  said :  "  No  man  oometh  to  the 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xfv 

Father  but  by  Me."  And  to  maintain  this  struggling  hope  against  contending 
forces  is  the  Good  Shepherd's  work.  (3)  The  prodigal  returns — the  last  stage,  and 
the  one  without  which  all  the  others  are  traversed  in  vain.  The  strongest  convic- 
tion o£  our  sinfulness,  the  deepest  remorse  for  it,  and  the  clearest  knowledge  of  th» 
•way  out  of  it  will  avail  nothing  unless  we  arise  and  go  to  our  Father.     III.  Found. 

1.  Notice  the  finding.  The  shepherd  finds  the  sheep,  the  woman  the  piece  ol 
silver,  the  father  and  the  son  each  other.  Christ  has  found  the  sinner  and  dona 
what  He,  as  the  Good  Shepherd,  alone  could  do,  opened  and  revealed  the  way  back 
to  God,  encouraged  the  sinner  to  return,  and  provided  the  basis  of  reconciliation. 
The  Holy  Spirit  has  found  the  sinner  and  done  what  He,  as  the  careful  and  pains- 
taking Seeker,  alone  could  do,  wrought  conviction  and  repentance.  The  sinner 
now  does  what  neither  Christ  nor  the  Holy  Spirit  can  do  for  him,  but,  with  th» 
help  of  both,  finds  the  Father,  to  the  peace  and  joy  of  his  soul.  The  train  of 
evangelical  thought  is  now  complete,  and  this  trinity  of  parables  made  to  illustrate 
the  work  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  in  converting  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way, 

2.  Notice  the  finding  as  it  is  regarded  by  heaven  and  earth.  (1)  The  father  receives 
the  son  with  every  demonstration  of  love  and  joy.  (2)  There  is  joy  in  the  presence 
of  the  angels  of  God.  And  this  joy  is  quite  natural,  for,  first,  the  angels  ar» 
perfectly  pure  and  unselfish  beings,  and  therefore  spontaneously  rejoice  in  th& 
felicity  of  others.  Then,  again,  they  move  eternally  within  that  sphere  the  centre 
of  which  is  the  source  of  blessedness,  and,  therefore,  dehght  to  see  wretched  men 
brought  into  fellowship  with  the  blessed  God.  And,  lastly,  much  of  their  happiness 
consists  in  doing  God's  will.  (3)  All  this,  however,  is  in  marked  contrast  with  the 
conduct  of  the  elder  brother  who  "was  angry  and  would  not  come  in  "  to  join  in. 
the  general  joy.  He  even  repudiated  the  relationship  of  his  brother,  and  con- 
temptuously referred  to  him  in  his  father's  presence  as  "  this  thy  ton."  He 
ventured  to  do  what  the  father  never  did,  threw  the  past  in  his  teeth,  and 
begrudged  the  hospitality  which  the  poor  starveling  received.  Who  is  this  elder 
brother  ?  Without  question  the  Pharisee,  either  Jew  or  Christian.  The  men  who 
stand  aloof  from  their  prodigal  brethren,  and  who  reproduce  in  onr  day  the  old, 
hard,  sectarian,  loveless  spirit,  are  those  who  are  here  condemned.  The  man  wha 
revels  in  his  father's  bounty,  who  plumes  himself  on  his  own  worthiness  of  it,  who 
will  not  share  it,  is  the  elder  brother  and  the  Pharisee.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Lost 
and  found: — I.  The  cibcomstances.  1.  The  scene.  2.  The  classes  that  were 
attracted  by  Jesus  (ver.  1).  3.  The  classes  that  were  not  drawn  to  Jesus  (ver.  2). 
Eeputable  and  scrupulous,  but  fault-finding,  narrow-minded,  and  bigoted.  II.  Thb 
TWO  PARABLES.  1.  Characteristics  common  to  both.  (1)  Lost  souls.  (2)  A 
seeking  Saviour.  (3)  The  great  joy  which  the  recovery  brings  both  to  the  heart  of 
the  Eedeemer,  and  of  all  who  truly  love  Him.  2.  Characteristics  peculiar  to  each. 
Lessons :  1.  Character  is  tested  by  sentiment  and  sympathy.  (1)  The  character 
of  our  Lord  by  His  gracious  sentiments  and  sympathies  for  the  outcast  and  the 
most  depraved.  (2)  The  character  of  the  Pharisees  and  scribes  is  seen  in  their 
fault-finding  at  Jesus  for  His  loving  sympathies  for  those  whom  they  despised. 
2.  The  real  condition  of  mankind  is  revealed  in  these  parables — Lost.  3.  The 
nature  of  Christ's  mission  is  here  shown — To  save.  4.  The  twofold  method  of 
salvation  is  here  seen.  (1)  Christ's  personal  care.  (2)  Christ's  work  through  the 
Church.  5.  The  uuiversal  sympathy  and  gladness  over  the  salvation  of  souls  la 
beautifully  suggested.  6.  How  does  our  character  stand  this  test  ?  (D.  C.  Hughes, 
M.A.)  Lost  and  found: — I.  The  sinneb  lost.  II.  The  sinner  valdsd  aniv 
FiTiBD.  III.  The  binneb  sought.  IV.  The  sinneb  pound  and  hbscued.  V.  Thk 
binnkb  bestobed  and  saved.  VI.  The  sinneb  saved  thb  occasion  op  hbavsnlx 
BEjoiciMo.  Conclusion :  1.  Let  the  restored  and  saved  give  thanks  to  their 
Deliverer.  2.  Let  the  spiritually  lost  accept,  in  penitence  and  faith,  the  tender 
and  proffered  ministrations  of  Christ.  {J.  R.  Thomson,  M.A.)  Third  Sunday 
after  Trinity : — I.  Notice  the  piotubk  these  pabables  pbesent  op  thb  obiginau 
PLAN  and  estate  OP  THE  uNivEBSE.  There  was  once  a  time  when  God  was  pleased 
with  all  that  He  had  made,  and  when  all  His  creatures  were  happy  in  Him.  The 
universe  was  once  one  blessed  flock,  with  the  Lord  as  their  Shepherd,  all  blessed  ia 
those  sequestered  realms  which  knew  no  blight  or  tumult  of  sinful  disorder,  and 
where  everything  was  pervaded  with  innocence,  tranquillity,  and  peace.  A  wilder- 
ness is  not  necessarily  a  desolate  and  empty  place.  Any  wide,  grassy  plain,  hidden 
away  from  the  common  world,  and  ondisturbed  in  its  quiet,  would  satisfy  the 
Scriptural  use  of  the  word.  Such  were  the  favourite  pasture-grounds  of  the 
Orientals,  and  such  was  the  universe  of  holy  beings  ere  sin  had  made  its  disturbing 


cauLP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  79 

inroads  upon  it.  The  starry  plains  were  peopled  only  with  nnfallen  creatures, 
secure,  tranquil,  and  joyous  in  the  smiles  of  their  Maker.  All  rational  beings  were 
but  one  f  ock,  and  their  shepherd  was  God.  And  the  condition  of  man  answered  to 
this  picture.  He  was  as  a  new  piece  of  silver,  bright,  precious,  and  bearing  upon 
him  the  image  and  superscription  of  the  Almighty.  There  was  no  darkness  in  hia 
understanding,  no  perverseness  in  his  heart,  no  fears,  no  regrets,  no  sighs,  no  pains, 
no  dimness.  II.  But  this  beatttifcl  scene  was  soon  succeeded  bt  anothbb. 
A  cloud  arose  upon  the  sweet  morning  of  our  world.  One  of  the  happy  flock  dia- 
(ippeared  from  its  fellowship  with  its  comrades.  It  was  lost ;  wide-wandering  from 
the  Lord,  in  a  world  that  smoked  with  curses  and  wretchedness.     III.  Noticb, 

THEN,    THE     MOVEMENTS   OF    DiVINE    COMPASSION    FOB     THE    BECOVEBT    OF    THE    LOST. 

There  was  but  one  of  a  hundred  gone.  Ninety-and-nine  remained.  But  preoions 
in  the  eye  of  God  is  even  one  soul.  It  is  a  jewel  capable  of  adding  to  the  glory  and 
grandeur  of  heaven.  It  is  a  radiant  and  living  ofishoot  of  Deity,  capacitated  to  live 
and  shine  though  stars  should  languish  and  expire.  Though  abused,  prostituted, 
starved,  and  ruined  by  sin,  it  may  still  be  made  a  part  of  the  immortal  intellect, 
heart  and  life  of  the  universe.  And  its  calamities  are  not  of  such  a  sort  but  that 
infinite  Wisdom  and  Goodness  has  resources  by  which  God  can  be  just,  and  yet 
receive  it  again  into  His  favour,  the  more  interesting  for  ever  because  of  this 
disaster.  A  plan  of  operation  for  its  recovery  has  accordingly  been  instituted. 
And  wonderful  are  the  steps  of  the  heavenly  expedient.  The  Shepherd  Himself 
goes  after  the  lost  sheep.  He  does  not  merely  send  servants  to  find  it.  He  comes 
Himself.  In  this  going  forth  is]  involved  the  incarnation  and  earthly  life  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  His  whole  providence  in  the  Church,  and  through  His  word 
and  sacraments.  Or,  to  use  the  other  figure.  He  lighteth  a  candle  and  personally 
searches  every  dark  comer  that  He  may  come  upon  the  lost  piece  which  cannot 
help  itself.  This  candle  is  the  illuminating  Word,  which  He  causeth  to  shine 
aroand  and  upon  us ;  and  the  sweeping  which  He  does  is  the  stir  of  His  providence 
and  Spirit,  moving  to  touch  the  hearts  of  the  unfortunate  lost.  In  paradise 
already  this  candle  was  lit,  when  God  gave  promise  of  a  coming  Saviour ;  and  all 
through  and  in  His  Church,  in  every  age,  this  sweeping  has  been  going  on,  and 
always  for  the  finding  of  souls,  and  the  bringing  of  them  to  light  and  salvation. 
With  a  thousand  influences  He  phes  men.  He  sends  them  the  Word  of  His  gospel. 
He  stirs  about  their  dark  resting-places.  He  disturbs  their  guilty  repose.  He 
deprives  them  of  their  impure  attachments.  He  makes  them  realize  the  evil  and 
bitterness  of  departing  from  God.  He  takes  hold  upon  them  by  the  powers  of  His 
grace.  He  taketh  up  every  willing  one,  to  strengthen  him  with  His  help,  and  to 
beautify  him  with  the  sanctification  of  His  Spirit.  IV.  Notice  also  the  bebult. 
The  lost  sheep  is  restored.  The  piece  of  silver  is  recovered.  Or,  exchauging  the 
imagery  of  the  parables  for  hteral  terms,  the  sinner  is  completely  changed — re- 
turned from  bis  alienated  and  lost  condition — made  a  true  penitent.  This  is  the 
direct  object  of  all  the  arrangements  and  ministrations  of  grace.  V.  And  whebetbb 
THIS  oocubs  thebe  is  jot.  It  is  the  end  of  gracious  interference  achieved.  It  la 
the  fruit  of  the  travail  of 'the  Saviour's  soul  realized.  It  is  the  aim  of  God's  most 
wonderful  works  accomplished.  And  everything  is  full  of  gladness.  "  There  is  joy 
in  heaven  " ;  and  the  implication  is  that  it  is  joy  throughout  heaven,  from  centre  to 
fliroumference — ^joy  on  the  throne,  and  joy  in  those  who  serve  under  it — joy  in  the 
heart  of  God,  and  among  all  the  hosts  of  God — joy  for  Christ's  sake,  for  the 

Eenitent's  sake,  for  heaven's  sake — joy  that  a  broken  link  has  been  repaired  in  the 
oly  creation  of  God — ^joy  that  another  precious  jewel  has  been  added  to  the  orown 
of  redeeming  love — joy  that  there  is  born  another  teuant  for  the  mansions  of  glory 
— joy  that  another  symtom  has  transpired  of  the  ultimate  recovery  of  all  the  down- 
trodden fields  of  creation  which  sin  has  overrun.  (cT'.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The 
parable  of  the  lost  sheep  : — I.  In  the  first  place,  I  call  attention  to  this  observation : 
IHB  ONE  subject  OF  THOUGHT  to  the  man  who  had  lost  his  sheep.  This  sets  forth 
to  ns  the  one  thought  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Good  Shepherd,  when  He  sees 
a  man  lost  to  holiness  and  happiness  by  wandering  into  sin.  The  shepherd, 
on  looking  over  his  little  flock  of  one  hundred,  can  only  count  ninety-nine. 
This  one  idea  possesses  him :  "  a  sheep  is  lost  1 "  This  agitates  his  mind  more  and 
more — "  a  sheep  is  lost."  It  masters  his  every  faculty.  He  cannot  eat  bread ;  he 
eannot  return  to  bis  home ;  he  cannot  rest  while  one  sheep  is  lost.  To  a  tender 
heart  a  lost  sheep  is  a  painful  subject  of  thought.  It  is  a  sheep,  and  therefore 
utterly  defenceless  now  that  it  has  left  its  defender.  And  a  sheep  is  of  all  creatures 
the  most  senseless,  and  the  most  shiftless.    What  iB  it  which  makes  the  Great 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<m».  XT. 

Shepherd  lay  bo  mach  to  His  heart  the  loss  of  one  of  His  flook  ?  What  is  it  th«t 
makes  Him  agitated  as  He  reflects  upon  that  Bupposition — "  if  He  lose  one  of 
them  "7  1.  I  think  it  is,  first,  because  of  His  property  in  it.  The  parable  does 
not  so  much  speak  of  a  hired  shepherd,  but  of  a  shepherd  proprietor.  "  What  man 
of  you  having  an  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one  of  them."  The  sheep  are  Christ's, 
first,  because  He  chose  them  from  before  the  foundations  of  the  world — "  Ye  have 
not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you."  His,  next,  because  the  Father  gave  them 
to  Him.  How  He  dwells  upon  that  fact  in  His  great  prayer  in  John  xvii. :  "  Thine 
they  were,  and  Thou  gavest  them  Me";  "Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom 
Thou  hast  given  Me,  be  with  Me  where  I  am."  We  are  the  Lord's  own  flock, 
furthermore,  by  His  purchase  of  us ;  He  says,  "  I  lay  down  My  life  for  the  shafip." 
This  thought,  therefore,  presses  upon  Him,  "  One  of  My  sheep  is  lost."  *  2. 
Secondly,  He  has  yet  another  reason  for  this  all-absorbing  thought — namely,  His 
great  compassion  for  His  lost  sheep.  The  wandering  of  a  soul  causes  Jesus  deep 
sorrow ;  He  cannot  bear  the  thought  of  its  perishing.  Such  is  the  love  and  ten- 
derness of  His  heart  that  He  cannot  bear  that  one  of  His  own  should  be  in 
jeopardy.  3.  Moreover,  the  man  in  the  parable  had  a  third  relation  to  the  sheep, 
which  made  him  possessed  with  the  one  thought  of  its  being  lost — he  was  a  shep- 
herd to  it.  It  was  his  own  sheep,  and  he  had  therefore  for  that  very  reason  become 
its  shepherd ;  and  he  says  to  himi^elf,  "  If  I  lose  one  of  them  my  shepherd- work 
will  be  ill-done."  What  dishonour  it  would  be  to  a  shepherd  to  lose  one  of  his 
eheepl  II.  Now  we  come  to  the  second  point,  and  observe  the  onb  object  or 
BBABCH.  This  sheep  lies  on  the  shepherd's  heart,  and  he  must  at  once  set  oat  to 
look  for  it.  1.  Observe  here  that  it  is  a  definite  search.  The  shepherd  goes  after 
the  sheep,  and  after  nothing  else ;  and  he  has  the  one  particular  sheep  in  his 
mind's  eye.  2.  An  all-absorbing  search.  3.  An  active  search.  4.  A  persevering 
search.  III.  Now,  we  must  pass  on  very  briefly  to  notice  a  third  point.  We  have 
had  one  subject  of  thought  and  one  object  of  search ;  now  we  have  onb  bdbdkn  or 
iiOTB.  When  the  seeking  is  ended,  then  the  saving  appears — "  When  he  hath  found 
it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing."  Splendid  action  this !  How  beauti- 
fully the  parable  sets  forth  the  whole  of  salvation.  Some  of  the  old  writers  delight 
to  put  it  thus :  in  His  incarnation  He  came  after  the  lost  sheep ;  in  His  life  He 
continued  to  seek  it ;  in  His  death  He  laid  it  upon  His  shoulders ;  in  His  resurrec« 
tion  He  bore  it  on  its  way,  and  in  His  ascension  He  brought  it  home  rejoicing. 
Our  Lord's  career  is  a  course  of  soul- winning,  a  life  laid  out  for  His  people ;  and  in 
it  yon  may  trace  the  whole  process  of  salvation.  But  now,  see,  the  shepherd  finds 
the  sheep,  and  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders.  1.  It  is  an  uplifting  action,  raising 
the  fallen  one  from  the  earth  whereon  he  hath  strayed.  It  is  as  though  he  took  the 
sheep  just  as  it  was,  without  a  word  of  rebuke,  without  delay  or  hesitancy,  and 
lifted  it  out  of  the  slough  or  the  briars  into  a  place  of  safety.  2.  This  laying  on  the 
shoulders  was  an  appropriating  act.  He  seemed  to  say,  '*  You  are  my  sheep,  and 
therefore  I  lay  yon  on  my  shoulders."  3.  More  condescending  still  is  another  view 
of  this  act :  it  was  a  deed  of  service  to  the  sheep.  The  sheep  is  uppermost,  the 
weight  of  the  sheep  is  upon  the  shepherd.  The  sheep  rides,  the  shepherd  is  the 
burden-bearer.  The  sheep  rests,  the  shepherd  labours.  "  I  am  among  you  as  he 
that  serreth,"  said  our  Lord  long  ago.  4.  It  was  a  rest-giving  act,  very  likely 
needful  to  the  sheep  which  could  go  no  further,  and  was  faint  and  weary.  It  was 
ft  full  rest  to  the  poor  creature  if  it  could  have  understood  it,  to  feel  itself  upon  its 
shepherd's  shoulders,  irresistibly  carried  back  to  safety.  What  a  rest  it  is  to  yoa 
and  to  me  to  know  that  we  are  borne  along  by  the  eternal  power  and  Godhead  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  1  IV.  We  close  by  noticing  one  more  matter,  which  is — tm 
ONB  souBCB  or  JOT.  This  man  who  had  lost  his  sheep  is  filled  with  joy,  but  his 
sheep  is  the  sole  source  of  it.  His  sheep  has  so  taken  up  all  his  thought,  and  so 
commanded  all  his  faculties,  that  as  he  found  all  his  care  centred  upon  it,  so  he 
now  finds  all  his  joy  flowing  from  it.  I  invite  you  to  notice  the  first  mention  of  joy 
we  get  here :  "  When  he  hath  found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing." 
"That  is  a  great  load  for  you,  shepherd!"  Joyfully  he  answers,  "I  am  glad  to 
have  it  on  my  shoulders."  The  mother  does  not  say  when  she  has  found  her  lost 
ehild,  <*  Th's  is  a  heavy  load."  No  ;  she  presses  it  to  her  bosom.  She  does  not 
mind  how  heavy  it  is  ;  it  is  a  dear  burden  to  her.  She  is  rejoiced  to  bear  it  ones 
again.  "  He  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing."  Bemember  that  text,  "  Who 
for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame." 
(G.  II.  Spurgeon.)  Lost  and  found  : — I.  Thb  sinneb's  condition — "Lost."  Ths 
■tray  sheep  and  the  missing  silver  are  the  emblems  of  every  unrenewed  soul.    But 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  aft 

men  refuse  to  lie  under  this  imputation.  In  what  do  we  differ  from  those  whosa 
you  call  Christians  ?  they  ask.  We  are  as  upright,  honest,  and  generous  as  they. 
How  are  we  lost  ?  In  what  did  the  lost  sheep  of  the  parable  differ  from  the  ninety 
and  nine  in  the  fold  ?  Not  in  appearance,  but  in  condition.  It  was  lost  because  it 
had  wandered  away  from  the  shepherd.  The  missing  piece  of  silver  was  coin  ot 
the  realm,  as  well  as  the  nine  safe  in  the  purse ;  but  it  was  lost  because  it  was 
out  of  its  owner's  reach.  Sinners  are  lost,  not  because  they  are  unlike  other  men, 
but  because  they  are  out  of  right  relations  to  God.  II.  Thb  sinneb's  Fbibnd.  The 
fact  that  Ood  makes  any  attempt  to  save  lost  men  proves  that  He  is  the  sinner's 
Friend.  What  has  He  to  gain  by  the  reclamation  of  the  missing  ?  He  is  not  so 
poor  that  our  restoration  will  greatly  enrich  Him.  In  comparison  with  the  infinite 
expanse  of  His  universe,  this  world  is  but  a  bubble  of  foam  on  the  crest  of  an  ocean 
Burge.  He  has  no  lack  of  worshippers  and  servants.  But  these  parables  teach 
that  there  is  still  more  of  Divine  affection  in  this  search  after  the  lost.  IIL  Thb 
sinner's  bbsoub.  God's  plan  of  salvation  is  not  a  failure.  It  cost  largely  to  make 
the  redemption  of  the  soul  possible.  Before  the  shepherd  could  come  within  reach 
of  his  wandering  sheep,  he  must  bruise  and  weary  himself  with  his  rough  travel. 
Before  God  could  lay  the  hand  of  help  and  healing  on  any  man,  the  God-man  must 
be  despised  and  rejected,  scourged,  mocked,  crucified.  But  none  of  these  things 
stop  the  way ;  over  them  all  and  through  them  all  the  compassionate  God  presses 
on  after  His  lost  world  "  until  He  find  it."  IV.  The  sinneb's  bbtobn.  "  Bejoice 
with  me."  "Joy  in  the  presence,"  <feo.  How  happens  it  that  there  is  such  a 
contrast  between  the  indifference  of  earth  and  the  ecstasy  of  heaven  T  We  here  see 
things  as  they  are  in  themselves;  those  yonder  look  at  them  in  their  relations. 
The  conversion  of  a  soul  is  not  an  isolated  matter.  It  inevitably  affects  the  cha- 
racter and  condition  of  multitudes.  {E.  S.  Attwood.)  The  lost  sheep  : — I.  Thb 
LOST  SHEEP — THE  BiNNEB.  1.  Both  act  in  the  same  manner.  2.  Both  share  the 
same  fate.  II.  The  Good  Shepherd — Jesus  Christ.  1.  He  possesses  a  numerous 
flook,  as  Creator  and  as  Bedeemer  of  mankind.  2.  However  numerous  the  flock 
may  be,  He  is  aware  of  every  loss  He  sustains.  (1)  His  solicitude  for  every  one  of 
His  sheep  knows  no  limits.  (2)  Being  omniscient,  He  knows  all  the  dangers  that 
may  befall  the  flock  and  any  of  the  sheep.  3.  He  leaves  the  ninety-nine  in  the 
desert.  (1)  He  does  not  leave  them  through  carelessness,  or  without  protection. 
(2)  Our  Saviour  displayed  a  greater  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  the  sinner,  because 
he  is  in  peril  of  eternal  ruin.  4.  He  goes  after  that  which  was  lost  until  He  finds 
it.  (1)  Christ  goes  after  the  sinner,  warning  and  exhorting  him  by  the  voice  of 
conscience,  by  inspirations,  by  the  kindness  with  which  He  received  sinners  when 
He  dwelt  visibly  among  them,  by  His  whole  hfe,  passion,  and  death.  (2)  Christ 
searches  for  the  lost  sinner,  following  him  over  the  abysses,  through  thorns,  over 
mountains.  He  searches  until  He  finds  him,  or  until  it  has  become  impossible  to 
find  him,  because  he  is  lost,  because  of  final  obduracy.    6.  And  when  He  has  found 

the  sheep,  when  the  sinner  does  not  refuse  to  seize  the  hand  extended  towards  him 

(1)  He  lays  it  upon  His  shoulders,  facilitating  the  beginning  of  conversion  by  impart- 
ing abundant  graces,  so  that  the  sinner  is  rather  carried  than  proceeds  himself.  (2) 
He  carries  the  sheep  home  to  partake  again  of  the  communion  of  saints.  (3)  Ho 
rejoices,  and  makes  His  friends  and  neighbours  rejoice  with  Him.  (Repertorium 
Oratoris  Sacri.)  Parable  of  the  lost  sheep  : — I.  The  endangered  wanderer. 
Man  has  wandered — 1.  From  the  authority  of  God.  2.  From  the  family  of  God! 
8.  In  the  way  of  peril  and  death.  4.  The  sinner  would  wander  endlessly,  but  foi 
the  intervention  of  Divine  grace.  II.  The  kindly  Shepherd.  1.  He  compas- 
sionated man  in  his  fallen  and  ruined  condition.  2.  He  actually  came  to  seek  th( 
wanderer.  3.  When  found  He  restores  him.  IH.  The  joyous  results.  1.  The 
Shepherd  rejoices  in  the  attainment  of  His  gracious  purposes.  2.  Angels  rejoice. 
3.  The  restored  wanderer  rejoices.  4.  All  spiritual  persons  acquainted  with  the 
sinner's  restoration  rejoice.  (J.  Burnt,  D.D.)  The  lost  sheep  brought  home  :—I. 
Thb  binnbb's  natural  condition.  1.  In  want.  2.  In  danger.  3.  Helpless.  II,  The 
'jONDUOT  of  Christ  towards  thb  sinnbb.  1.  He  misses  him.  2.  He  seeks  him.  3. 
He  finds  him.  4.  He  bears  him  home.  III.  Thb  feelinq  with  which  the  Great 
Shbphbbd  or  thb  Church  carries  on  this  blessed  wore.  Not  pity,  compas^sion 
kindness,  nor  yet  love ;  but  joy,  and  joy  overflowing :  joy  so  great  that  the  Divine 
mind  cannot  hold  it,  but  must  call  upon  the  whole  creation  to  come  and  share  its 
abundance.  (<7.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  lost  sheep: — This  is  one  of  those  parables 
which,  by  its  simplicity,  presents  the  full  tenderness  of  the  gospel  message  to  man- 
kind, gatiiered,  as  it  were,  into  a  strong  focus  of  emphasis.  I.  Thb  hioh  bstiuatb 
vol..  m.  6 


8S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xr. 

ENTERTAINED,  ON  THE  PAET  OF  Jehovah,  OF  THE  SOUL  OF  MAN.    In  the  narrative  of 
the  sheep,  the  shepherd  is  represented  as  thinking  with  greater  anxiety  of  the  one 
straying  from  his  flock,  than  of  the  ninety-nine  who  are  safe  under  his  eye.    He 
feels  sure  of  them,  and  quits  them  without  apprehension,  intent  rather  upon  the 
restoration  of  the  one  than  upon  the  preservation  of  the  many.    We  are  not  to 
presume  that  Christ  withdraws  His  care  and  His  regard  from  His  own  people  in 
His  anxiety  to  add  more  to  His  fold.    He  has  never  left  His  true  disciples  comfort- 
less; bat  "the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,"  abides  with  them  alway. 
But  the  Saviour,  when  He  spoke  this  parable,  wanted  to  show  that  His  heart  was 
large  enough  to  love,  and  His  fold  was  wide  enough  to  hold,  both  the  flock  already 
gathered  and  the  sheep  which  had  wandered  away.     H.  Look,  secondly,  at  an 
expansion  of  the  same  idea  in  the  tenberxess  of  the  shepherd  in  bringing  back 
THE  sheep  that  WAS  LOST.    It  was  passing  kind  to  bring  it  back  at  all ;  but  what  a 
depth  of  kindness  is  there  in  the  manner  of  that  bringing  back  1     "  When  he  hath 
found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders."     Oh,  my  friends,  what  touching  tenderness 
is  here  1  a  tenderness  •'  passing  the  love  of  woman."    Have  you  not  often  seen  a 
mother  chase  a  wayward  child,  and  when  she  overtakes  it,  seize  it  with  a  petulant 
clutch,  and  almost  drag  it  back  to  the  door  of  the  cottage,  chiding  and  sometimes 
chastising  it  the  whole  way  ?    But  there  is  no  upbraiding  here.     The  wanderer  haa 
no  excuse.     He  has  been  ungrateful ;  he  has  broken  down  the  fences  which  love 
had  built  for  his  security;  he  has  despised  the  guardianship  which  would  have 
shielded  him,  he  has  been  obdurate  under  the  mildness  which  would  have  gently 
governed  him ;  he  has  quarrelled  with  the  fare  which  sovereign  bounty  had  provided 
him.    But  there  are  none  of  these  things  flung  sternly  in  his  teeth.    There  is  no 
anger  in  the  Shepherd's  eye.    It  is  all  pity.    III.  Now  look  at  thb  greatness  and 
COMPLETENESS  OF  THE  RESTORATION.    "  I  have/ouTid  that  which  was  lost."    " Found" 
and  "lost,"  these  are  the  two  contrasting  words,  and  their  meaning  is  nnspeakable. 
What  a  losing  1    What  a  finding  1     It  is  a  rescue  from  perdition.     Not  a  mere 
human  estimate  of  being  lost,  but  God's  estimate.    And  there  is  a  difference  between 
the  two  ideas  as  vast  and  wide  as  the  difference  between  the  finite  and  the  infinite. 
We  deem  it  no  small  thing  to  lose  the  valuable  purchase  of  years  of  anxiety  and 
toU ;  but  what  must  be  Christ's  estimate  of  His  own  loss,  when  He  feels  that  He 
has  lost  the  purchase  of  His  blood.  His  pleading,  and  His  prayers ;  that  human 
infatuation  has  actually  torn  itself  away  from  the  embrace  of  Calvary ;  and  that 
the  coinage  of  the  Cross — the  wealth  that  poured,  stamped  with  a  Saviour's  crown 
of  thorns,  from  Mercy's  mint — is  cast  aside  for  nought !    And  what  mast  be  the 
sinner's  estimate  of  his  own  perdition,  when  from  its  darkest  depths  he  feels  its 
cruellest  curse,  and  has  only  light  enough  to  see  to  count  the  priceless  sum  at  which 
his  soul  was  bought,  but  which  he  has  contemned,  and  scorned,  and  flung  away ! 
rV.  The  REJOICINGS  which  greet  the  shepherd's  return  WITH  HIS  SHEEP.     His 
heart  is  too  fall  to  keep  the  gladness  to  himself.     There  is  such  ohainless  ecstasy 
thrilling  in  his  soul  that  he  must  have  all  his  friends  about  him  to  help  him  in  his 
triumphant  celebration.     ' '  Bejoice  with  me,  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was 
lost."    What  condescension  is  there  in  this  sympathy!     Oh  could  we  but  gauge  the 
satisfaction  with  which  Jesus  will  look  upon  "  the  travail  of  His  soul,"  then  we 
should  know  something  of  the  depth  of  the  love  with  which  He  loves  as.    Bat  the 
ocean  is  too  wide  for  our  gaze  to  see  the  further  shore,  it  is  too  deep  for  oar  poor 
plummet  to  fathom.    We  cannot  know  the  bitterness  of  the  cup  He  drank  to  the 
foal  dregs ;  we  cannot  feel  the  agony  which  the  sleeping  disciples  might  not  watch, 
when  the  drops  of  blood  were  sweat  npon  the  ground ;  we  cannot  tell  the  galling 
stab  of  nail  and  thorn  and  spear,  nor  lift  the  weight  of  the  rough,  crashing  cross. 
No;  we  cannot  nnderstand  the  huge  encyclopsedia  of  Calvary,  nor  study  to  the 
fall  profundity  of  its  melting  lore  the  lexicon  of  dying  love;  and  so  we  cannot 
measure  out  the  joy  with  which  the  purchase  of  that  death  will  be  received,  and  the 
trophies  of  that  tragedy  be  counted  up.     But  we  shall  be  allowed  to  share  in  it  I 
Not  only  shall  we  be  rejoiced  over,  bat  we  shall  rejoice  over  others.    (A.  Mursell.) 
The  lo»t  theep : — ^Never  forget  that  the  whole  drama  of  Bedemption — the  Incarna- 
tion, the  Ministry,  the  Gross,  the  Resurrection,  the  Ascension — was  all  but  one 
long  search  for  the  lost  sheep,  and  carrying  it  home  rejoicing.    The  whole  race  of 
man  was  the  lost  sheep  until  Christ  found  it.    All  we  like  sheep  bad  gone  astiaj> 

**  All  the  Boals  that  are  were  forfeit  once, 
And  He  who  might  the  vantage  best  have  took, 
Foand  oat  the  remedy." 


4nilF.  XY.]  ST.  LUKE.  8a 

other  eheep  were  His — millions  of  spiritual  creatures  thronging  the  heaven  of 
heavens.  Bat  here  was  this  atom-world,  floating  on  the  infinite  bosom  of  th« 
bright  and  boundless  air,  the  ruined  habitation  of  a  fallen  race.  To  this  poor 
ruined  atom-world  He  came  down  all  these  steps  of  the  infinite  descent.  "Why  ? 
Because  God  is  love.  L  Let  us  aIjIi  be  pitiful.  As  for  sin,  indeed,  we  cannot 
hate  it  too  much.  But  for  the  sinner  we  should  feel  nothing  but  compassion.  11. 
Let  none  despaib.  None  has  sinned  too  deeply  to  be  forgiven.  Come  to  Christ 
with  your  burden.  There  is  heavenly  medicine ;  there  is  lustral  water  at  the 
wicket  gate.  III.  Think  koble  thoughts  of  God.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The 
lost  sheep : — L  There  is,  first,  God's  teaening  oveb  the  sinneb.  Usually,  in  de- 
picting a  lost  sinner,  we  dwell  on  the  miseries  which  he  has  brought  upon  himself,  and 
the  blessings  which  he  himself  has  forfeited.  But  this  and  the  succeeding  parables 
differ  from  the  ordinary  representations  of  the  subject,  in  that  they  set  before  us 
the  loss  which  God  has  sustained  in  the  wandering  and  rebellion  of  His  children. 
This  view  of  the  matter  may  well  give  careless  sinners  food  for  serious  reflection. 
You  are  God's.  By  virtue  of  your  very  creaturehood  you  belong  to  Him.  Your 
hearts,  your  lives,  your  service,  ought  all  to  be  given  to  Him  ;  but  they  are  not, 
and  this  is  no  mere  thing  of  indiflereuce  to  Him.  He  misses  you.  He,  on  whom 
the  universe  hangs,  and  who  might  well  be  excused  if  He  had  no  concern  for  yon, 
misses  your  love.  He  hungers  for  your  affection.  Yea,  He  has  used  means  of  the 
most  costly  character  to  find  you  out,  and  to  bring  you  back.  Why  will  you  con- 
tinue to  disregard  Him  ?  II.  But,  in  the  second  place,  we  have  here  set  before  us 
THE  sikneb's  own  HELPLESSNESS.  He  is  like  a  lost  sheep.  Now,  while,  as  we  have 
seen,  this  means  that  God  has  lost  him,  we  must  not  forget  that,  on  the  other  side 
of  it,  the  analogy  also  bears  that  the  sinner  has  lost  himself.  There  are  few  more 
helpless  creatures  than  a  wandered  sheep.  It  is,  comparatively  speaking,  an  easy 
thing  to  convince  the  sinner  of  his  guilt,  bat  it  is  a  hard  matter  to  get  hun  to  own 
bis  helplessness.  He  will  persist  in  attempting  his  own  deliverance.  He  will  seek 
to  satisfy  God's  law  for  himself,  and  to  find  his  own  way  back  to  happiness.  The 
sheep  will  run  to  the  shepherd  when  he  appears,  and  welcome  him  as  its  helper, 
looking  up  in  dumb  gratitude  into  his  face.  But  the  sinner,  in  this  respect  more 
stupid  even  than  the  sheep,  too  often  runs  from  the  Shepherd  and  will  have  none 
of  His  assistance.  III.  We  have  here,  in  the  third  place,  the  ueans  used  fob  thb 
sinneb's  becovebt.  All  the  way  from  heaven  to  Calvary  Jesus  came  to  seek  lost 
sinners.  He  was  going  after  that  which  was  lost  when  He  sat  by  the  well  of 
Bychar,  and  conversed  with  the  woman  of  Samaria ;  when  He  called  Matthew  in 
His  toll-booth,  and  when  He  summoned  Zaccheus  from  the  branch  of  the  sycamore- 
tree  whereon  he  was  perched.  He  was  going  after  that  which  was  lost  when  He 
iBhed  forth  His  Spirit  upon  Pentecost,  and  inspired  His  servants  to  proclaim  His 
truth  with  power ;  and  He  is  still  going  after  that  which  is  lost  in  the  events  of  His 
providence,  whereby  He  rouses  the  careless  to  reflection ;  in  the  searching  words  of 
His  earnest  ministers,  who  statedly  declare  His  love,  and  speak  home  to  the  hearts  of 
their  fellow-men  ;  and  in  the  strivings  of  His  spirit,  whereby,  often  when  they  can 
give  no  account  of  the  matter,  men's  minds  are  strangely  turned  in  the  direction  of 
salvation.  But  we  must  hasten  on  to  describe  the  finding.  When,  it  may  be 
asked,  is  a  sinner  found  by  Christ?  The  answer  is,  When,  on  his  side,  the  sinner 
finds  Christ.  What  is  seen  in  heaven  is  Christ  laying  His  loving  hand  upon  the 
sinner,  and  the  angels  hear  Him,  saying — '*  I  have  found  that  which  was  lost " ; 
but  what  is  seen  on  earth,  is  the  sinner  laying  his  beheving  hand  on  Christ,  and 
men  hear  him  crying — "  I  have  found  my  Deliverer.  I  will  go  with  Him,  for 
salvation  is  with  Him."  But  these  are  not  two  distinct  things — they  are  involved 
the  one  in  the  other,  so  that  you  oannot  take  the  one  from  the  other  without 
destroying  both.  But  there  is  yet  another  aspect  of  this  finding  which  must  in 
nowise  be  lost  sight  of.  I  mean  the  tenderness  of  the  shepherd.  lY.  Thb  joi; 
uANiFESTED  BT  GoD  ovEB  THB  simmeb's  betubn.  The  home-coming  here  ean 
hardly  be  identical  with  the  finding  of  the  lost  one.  It  mast  rather,  I  think,  be 
onderstood  of  the  introduction  of  the  saved  one  into  heaven,  by  Jesas,  at  the  last. 
Yet  the  joy  over  him  is  not  delayed  till  then,  though  at  that  iroment  it  becomes 
higher  than  before.  Let  me  illustrate.  You  have  lost  your  child,  and  one  of  the 
most  trusted  members  of  your  family  has  set  out  in  search  of  her.  He  is  long 
away,  and  weary  days  and  weeks  yon  wait  for  news.  At  length,  however,  the:  e 
comes  from  the  great  city  a  telegram  from  the  seeker,  saying  that  he  has  found  Ixis 
sister,  and  that  he  is  making  arrangements  for  bringing  her  home  as  soon  aa 
possible.    Of  coarse,  the  mere  receipt  of  this  message  gives  yoa  joy ;  but  when  at 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  XT. 

. — . ..   * 

length  your  loved  one  is  brought  home,  that  joy  is  inten^fied,  ani  you  call 
together  your  friends  to  celebrate  with  you  her  return.  Now,  your  gladness  at  th« 
receipt  of  the  telegram  corresponds  to  the  joy  in  heaven  over  the  sinner's  repen- 
tance, while  your  higher  joy  at  the  home-coming  of  your  child  is  symbolical  of  the 
gladness  which  will  be  caused  by  the  entrance  into  heaven  of  each  new  ransomed 
Bpirit.  Nor  need  we  wonder  at  this  joy.  It  is  over  a  successful  enterprise.  It  ia 
over  the  deliverance  of  another  soul  from  ruin.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The 
Good  Shepherd  in  three  positions : — ^Let  us  behold  our  great  Shepherd — I.  In  thk 
BEABCH.  *•  Until  He  find  it."  1.  No  rejoicing  is  on  His  countenance.  He  ia 
anxious  for  the  lost.  2.  No  hesitation  is  in  His  mind.  Despite  roughness  of  way, 
length  of  time,  or  darkness  of  night.  He  stiU  pursues  His  lost  one.  3.  No  anger  is 
in  His  heart.  The  many  wanderings  of  the  sheep  cost  Him  dear,  but  He  counta 
them  as  nothing,  so  that  He  may  but  find  it.  4.  No  pausing  because  of  weariness. 
Love  makes  Him  forget  Himself,  and  causes  Him  to  renew  His  strength.  6.  No 
giving  up  the  search.  His  varied  non- successes  do  not  compel  Him  to  return 
defeated.  Such  must  our  searches  after  others  be.  We  must  labour  after  each 
Boul  until  we  find  it.  II.  At  thb  capture.  "  When  He  hath  found  it."  Mark 
the  Shepherd  when  the  sheep  is  at  last  within  reach.  1.  Wanderer  held.  How 
firm  the  grip  I  How  hearty  1  How  entire  1  2.  Weight  borne.  No  chiding, 
smiting,  driving ;  but  a  lift,  a  self-loading,  an  easing  of  the  wanderer.  8.  Distance 
travelled.  Every  step  is  for  the  Shepherd.  He  must  tread  painfully  all  that 
length  of  road  over  which  the  sheep  had  wandered  so  wantonly.  The  sheep  ia 
carried  back  with  no  suffering  on  its  own  part.  4.  Shepherd  rejoicing  to  bear  the 
burden.  The  sheep  is  so  dear  that  its  weight  is  a  load  of  love.  The  Shepherd  ia 
BO  good  that  He  finds  joy  in  His  own  toil.  5.  Sheep  rejoicing,  too.  Surely  it  ia 
glad  to  be  found  of  the  Shepherd,  and  so  to  have  its  wanderings  ended,  its  weari- 
ness rested,  its  distance  removed,  its  perfect  restoration  secured.  III.  In  thb 
HOME-BBiNGiNQ.  "When  He  Cometh  home."  1.  Heaven  is  home  to  Christ.  2. 
Jesus  must  carry  us  all  the  way  there.  3.  The  Shepherd's  mission  for  lost  souls  ii 
known  in  glory,  and  watched  with  holy  sympathy :  in  this  all  heavenly  ones  are 
"  his  friends  and  neighbours."  4.  Jesus  loves  others  to  rejoice  with  Him  over  the 
accomplishment  of  His  design.  "  He  called  together  His  friends."  See  how  they 
crowd  around  Him  1  What  a  meeting  1  5.  Kepentance  is  also  regarded  as  our 
being  brought  home  (see  verse  7).  6.  One  sinner  can  make  all  heaven  glad : 
(see  verses  7,  10).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Saving  the  lost : — The  sinner  is  set  forth 
in  the  parable  as  a  silly,  wandering  sheep.  And  it  8ugf?ests  what  is  true — that  sin 
is  not  always  a  matter  of  premeditation.  Sin  is  oftentimes  an  ignorance,  a  mis- 
understanding, a  darkness  of  mind.  A  young  man  does  not  at  eighteen  say,  "  Now 
I  will  waste  my  time  and  squander  my  money,  ruin  my  health,  and  hurt  as  many 
by  my  influence  as  I  can."  That  is  not  the  way  the  thing  is  done.  It  would  not 
be  true  to  so  represent  it,  any  more  than  it  would  have  been  true  for  Christ  to  have 
represented  the  sheep  as  getting  together  in  one  corner  of  the  fold,  and  saying, 
"Now  let  us  get  out  and  run  off  into  the  woods,  and  get  bitten  by  wolves,  and  be 
killed."  Neither  sheep  nor  men  act  in  that  way.  Men  wander  off — they  get  led 
astray — they  get  farther  away  from  virtue  than  they  ever  expected  to  be — they  are 
lost  before  they  know  it.  Looking  at  him  from  one  point  of  view,  the  sinner  is  to 
be  condemned ;  looking  at  him  from  another,  he  is  to  be  pitied.  In  this  latter 
light  it  is  that  the  parable  presents  him  to  us.  My  friends,  let  us  catch  the  spirit 
of  the  Saviour,  as  we  go  in  and  out  among  men.  Men  are  like  ice.  You  can  melt 
them  sooner  by  being  warm  toward  them,  by  centring  the  rays  of  a  great,  earnest, 
glowing  love  upon  them,  than  by  going  at  them  with  hammers  of  threat  and  warn- 
ing, and  trying  to  beat  them  down  and  pulverize  them.  Sandstone  kind  of  men 
can  be  treated  in  that  way ;  but  when  you  hit  a  man  in  that  style  made  of  granite, 
the  hammer  recoils,  to  the  injury  of  the  palm  that  held  it.  June  is  better  than 
December  to  quicken  life  and  growth  in  the  natural  world ;  and  if  you  want  people 
to  blossom  and  get  fruitful  spiritually,  pour  around  them  the  warm,  genial  atmo- 
sphere of  God'a  penetrative  and  stimulative  love.  My  people,  refresh  your 
memories  to-day  with  the  real  object  of  Christ's  incarnation.  He  did  not  come  to 
publish  certain  sublime  truths.  He  did  not  come  to  found  a  Church,  to  build  up  a 
religious  hierarchy,  to  introduce  habits  of  prayer,  and  peculiar  views  of  God  and 
duty.  He  came  absorbed,  rather,  with  one  thought-— devoted  to  one  sublime, 
unselfish  mission.  It  was  to  go  after  His  lost  sheep.  This  yearning,  this  irre- 
pressible desire,  it  was,  which  burned  and  glowed  in  Hia  whole  Ufe,  as  the  pure  fir« 
glows  in  the  diamond.    This  it  was  which  gave  fervour  and  intense  beauty  to  Hia 


our.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  8fi 

life.  Before  Christ  oame,  who  oared  for  the  lost  t  Who  cares  for  the  hieaehing 
bone  in  the  wilderness  ? — it  may  be  the  bone  of  an  ox,  or  a  dog,  or  a  man ;  who 
oares  which  ?  It  is  a  dry  and  lifeless  bone,  and  nothing  more.  It  has  no  connec- 
tion with  our  beating  flesh,  no  relation  with  our  living  thonght.  Who  cares  for 
the  shell  on  the  shore?  The  waves  have  heaved  it  up  from  the  caverns  of  the 
deep,  and  ground  it  into  the  sand :  there  let  it  lie.  What  hunter  cares  for  the 
scattered  feathers  which  some  fierce  hawk  has  torn  from  the  back  and  breast  of  its 
prey  ?  Why  mourn  over  a  bunch  of  soiled  plumage  ?  Had  the  hunter  seen  the 
hawk  pounce  on  it,  he  might,  perchance,  have  shot  the  hawk,  and  spared  the  bird ; 
but  the  bird  is  lost.  Why  look  t  why  mourn  ?  why  care  ?  So  little  man  oared  for 
man  before  Christ  oame.  The  life  of  Christ  was  wonderful,  because  it  was  full  of 
deeds  nobody  else  had  ever  done.  His  very  sympathies  were  a  revelation.  Ask 
Him  as  He  rises  from  His  agonizing  prayer  in  the  garden,  when  a  thicker  darkness 
than  subsequently  draped  the  earth  lies  on  His  soul ;  and  He  says  again,  "  I  came 
to  save  the  lost."  Ask  Him  as  he  sinks  fainting  beneath  the  cross ;  and  amid  His 
panting  are  shaped  the  selfsame  words — "  To  save  the  lost."  Ask  Him  as  He 
hangs  on  the  cross  itself,  about  to  yield  up  the  ghost ;  and  His  quivering  lips  reply, 
"I  oame  to  save  the  lost;  and  here  My  task  is  finished."  We  are  like  vases  of 
rare  tint  and  exquisite  workmanship,  which,  shattered  by  some  violent  stroke,  have 
been  regathered  in  all  their  fragments,  and  so  carefully  rejoined,  and  glued  with 
transparent  cement,  that  no  eye  can  detect  where  were  the  lines  of  rupture.  The 
seeking  love  of  God  found  us  in  fragments,  and  made  ns  over  into  a  perfect  whole. 
If  any  of  you  have  children,  or  friends,  or  relatives,  far  away  from  God,  widely 
wandering  from  the  truth  of  statement  and  life,  I  trust  you  will  not  be  discouraged. 
Hope  and  pray  always.  Die  as  you  have  lived,  hoping  and  praying.  Build  your  hope 
on  the  seeking  love  of  Christ.  Ally  your  life  with  His  in  this  work.  Help  reform 
society ;  help  reform  the  Church,  so  that  people  shall  not  stare  and  look  astonished 
when  a  really  bad  man  or  wicked  woman  is  saved — when  a  soul  that  has  in  very  fact 
been  lost,  and  which  was  found  in  its  sins  as  a  lamb  found  in  some  dark,  stony  gorge, 
nearly  dead  from  exposure  and  wounds,  is  brought  to  the  fold.  {W.  H.  H.  Murray.) 
The  danger  of  the  soul  astray  : — One  soul,  gone  astray,  is  in  greater  danger  than 
the  rest.  It  has  fallen,  first  from  creation,  and  then  from  redemption.  It  has 
fallen  from  its  Divine  acceptance,  both  in  the  first  Adam  and  in  the  second.  It  is 
"  twice  dead."  "The  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first."  "There 
remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin."  "  It  is  impossible  for  those  who  were  once 
enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were  made  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come,  if  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance."  There  is  no 
second  "baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins."  That  one  lost  soul  is  in  the  way 
which  leads  beyond  the  boundaries  of  grace.  Every  day  brings  it  nearer  to  the 
fatal  brink.  Dangers  are  ever  thickening ;  temptation  waxing  mightier ;  sins  are 
hourly  multiplied ;  the  dye  is  daily  blacker ;  life  is  fast  wearing  away,  eternity  fast 
coming  on  ;  therefore  the  Good  Shepherd  speeds  apace  with  a  hasty  step,  to  find 
that  one  sheep  which  is  lost.  (H.  E.  Manning.)  Search  prompted  by  love: — 
Following  the  law  of  love.  He  seems  to  leave  the  faithful,  that  He  may  seek  for 
sinners.  As  there  is  a  fold  in  heaven,  so  there  is  a  fold  on  earth,  a  visible  fold — 
the  Church,  in  which  He  gathers  His  lost  sheep.  There  is,  besides,  within  that 
visible  fold,  another  fold  unseen.  His  own  encircling  Presence,  the  circuit  of  His 
own  watchful  care,  within  which  the  faithful  and  obedient  are  securely  sheltered. 
These  are  they  who  walk  stedfast  in  baptismal  purity.  They  keep  close  to  tbe  eye 
and  to  the  pathway  of  their  Lord,  going  in  and  out  by  the  gates  of  obedience. 
These  are  the  ninety  and  nine  who  keep  close  to  the  feet  of  the  Good  Shepherd. 
For  a  while  He  passes  them  by,  that  He  may  seek  sinners  who,  after  baptism,  fall 
from  grace.  For  many  are  they  who  go  out  of  this  inward  fold.  They  go  out  into 
ways  of  this  world,  the  tangled  masses  of  this  wilderness,  losing  themselves  by 
losing  sight  of  Him ;  and,  by  losing  sight  of  Him,  losing  their  own  souls.  What 
is  this  wilderness  but  sin  ?  Every  several  sin  that  man  commits  is  a  wilderness  to 
that  man's  soul,  whether  it  be  a  sin  of  the  flesh,  as  lust,  gluttony,  excess ;  or  a  sin 
of  the  spirit,  as  inward  impurity,  pride,  anger,  hardness  of  heart,  sloth,  or  false- 
hood— whatever  it  be,  that  sin  is  a  wilderness  in  each  man's  soul,  in  which  he  is 
lost.  For  sin  raises  a  cloud  between  the  soul  and  the  gaze  of  the  Good  Shepherd's 
face.  The  sinner  closes  the  eye  which  guides  him ;  he  loses  the  light  of  that 
•oontenance  which  shone  upon  the  track  of  life.  His  will  breaks  away  from  the 
will  of  oar  Divine  Guide,  by  which  will  he  was  lanctified ;  for  so  long  aa  His  will 


ae  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  it. 

and  oar  will  are  united,  we  are  drawn  by  a  thread  of  gold,  which  leads  as  in  the 
way  of  life  ;  but  when,  by  sin,  we  start  back  and  snap  asunder  that  guiding  olae, 
we  are  straightway  lost,  {Ibid. )  The  sheep  that  was  lost  and  found  : — 1.  Th« 
NATDEALHEss  OF  God's  seabch  FOB  THE  8INNEB.  "  What  man  of  you,"  saith  Christ, 
with  that  touch  of  surprise  that  we  so  often  trace  when  He  found  men  blind  to 
truths  that  seemed  to  Him  clear  as  day,  "  having  a  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one 
of  them,  doth  not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  wilderness  and  go  after  that 
which  is  lost  ?  "  What  else  oould  he  do  ?  What  could  be  more  natural  ?  He 
would  be  certain  to  go  ;  his  duty,  his  thought  of  loss  to  himself,  his  affection  for 
iie  animal  he  had  so  long  taken  care  of,  his  thought  of  all  the  poor  thing  was 
suffering,  all  would  urge  him  forth.  The  inference  followed,  none  could  mistime  it, 
that  God  would  do  the  same  for  His  erring  and  lost  children,  that  He  could  not  do 
otherwise,  that  to  do  otherwise  would  be  unnatural.  A  similar  relation  to  that 
which  the  shepherd  bore  the  sheep,  God  bears  to  men.  Let  one  of  them  lose 
himself,  and  it  would  be  impossible  for  God  to  rest  till  He  found  the  lost  one. 
Duty,  if  I  may  use  the  term,  the  inward,  self-created  imperative,  by  which  God 
must  be  true  to  Himself,  would  urge  Him  forth.  II.  The  pebsevebance  of  God. 
We  are  told  a  great  deal  about  God  being  wearied  out  with  as,  and  so  offended  with 
our  wrongdoing  as  to  give  up  trying  to  make  us  better.  That  is  not  Christ's  doctrine 
about  God.  In  His  mind  He  saw  the  Father  going  after  the  lost  sheep  uuweariedly, 
and  never,  never  resting  till  He  found  it  and  brought  it  home.  Only  when  it  waa 
laid  to  sleep  in  the  fold  could  God's  perseverance  of  love  take  any  rest.  There  ia 
no  pause  in  God's  work  till  He  find  us.  It  is  God  who  will  find  us,  and  not  we 
Him,  and  He  will  never  rest  till  we  are  laid  on  His  strong  shoulder,  and  understand 
His  love,  and  rest  in  His  peace.  No,  not  if  it  takes  half  an  eternity  to  find  us,  will 
He  give  up  the  search.  The  law  of  Gcd  has  made  it  plain  that  He  will  not  find  as 
in  this  comforting  way  till  we  repent,  and  the  greater  part  of  His  search  consists 
in  so  working  on  our  Itves  as  to  make  us  cry  with  the  prodigal,  "  I  will  arise  and 
go  to  my  Father."  And  that  is  severe  and  punishing  work.  III.  The  jot  of  God 
IN  bedemption.  It  is  pleasant,  when  we  think  how  easily  we  get  tried,  to  consider 
this  unwearyingness  of  God,  and  that  however  long  He  persevere.  His  interest 
cannot  be  exhausted  by  pursuit  or  by  success.  Pursuit  is  agreeable  enough  to  us , 
for  as  long  as  a  thing  is  unreached  it  charms,  but  our  dangerous  moment  is  th'j 
moment  of  success.  When  we  have  laid  our  hand  on  the  Qoal,  if  it  be  pleasure, 
we  too  often  give  it  a  languid  assent ;  if  it  be  the  good  of  another,  we  are  too  often 
so  weary  as  not  to  be  interested  any  longer.  That  is  the  weakness  of  our  mortal 
nature.  It  is  nothing  to  be  proud  of,  as  some  think.  It  is  want  of  power,  of 
imagination,  of  capacity.  Were  we  greater  in  heart  and  brain,  victory  of  pleasure, 
success  in  good  would  double  our  joy.  An  infinite  nature  has  infinite  delight  and 
interest.  The  joy  of  God  in  redeeming  the  lost  is,  then,  the  last  truth  the  parable 
teaches.  It  is  frank,  complete,  ungrudging,  unmixed.  (Stopford  A,  Brooke, 
M.A.)  The  sliepherd  misses   one  when  it  has  strayed  from  the  flock: — The 

Redeemer's  knowledge  is  infinite ;  He  looks  not  only  over  the  multitude  generally, 
but  into  each  individual.  When  I  stand  on  a  hillock  at  the  edge  of  a  broad  meadow, 
and  look  across  the  sward,  it  may  be  said  in  a  general  way  that  I  look  on  all  the 
grass  of  that  field  ;  but  the  sun  in  the  sky  looks  on  it  after  another  fashion — shines 
on  every  down-spike  that  protrudes  from  every  blade.  It  is  thus  that  the  Good 
Shepherd  knows  the  fiock.  Knowing  all.  He  misses  any  one  that  wanders.  Ha 
missed  a  world  when  it  fell,  although  His  worlds  lie  scattered  like  grains  of  golden 
dust  on  the  blue  field  of  Heaven — the  open  infinite.  (W,  Amot.)  God 
mindful  of  the  unit: — Next,  much  comfort  may  be  gathered  from  this  poiui; 
in  hand.  Though  the  godly  are  but  few,  yet  (we  see)  God  will  be  neverthelesiH 
mindful  of  them.  If  but  one  sheep  go  astray.  He  will  fetch  it  home ;  if  bat  one 
groat  lost,  He  will  look  it  up ;  if  bat  one  sinner  repents,  there  shall  be  joy  in  heaven 
for  him  ;  if  but  one  prodigal  come  home,  he  shall  be  received.  With  man  it  is 
otherwise  ;  who  will  bestow  gathering  of  one  apple  upon  some  top  bough,  or  send 
a  reaper  into  a  field  for  one  ear  of  wheat  standing  in  some  corner  of  it  ?  Or  what 
husbandman  will  beat  over  his  straw  again  for  one  grain  of  com,  or  winnow  over 
all  his  chaff  for  a  few  grains  of  wheat  ?  But  God  will  not  lose  an  apple,  not  an 
ear,  not  one  kernel ;  He  will  winnow  a  great  heap  for  a  few  grains,  as  He  did  the 
old  world  for  eight  (Gen.  vii.  7 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  20).  And  it  is  no  rare  thing,  but  often 
■een  that  Ood  sends  man}  of  His  servants  to  thresh  or  winnow  in  great  assembUea 
of  chaff,  and  yet  after  divers  years'  pains  and  sore  sweating  labour,  they  get  but 
ooe  grain  of  com.    After  all  their  toU  they  convert  but  one  or  two  souls,  whom 


CHAP.  XT.]  8T.  LUKE.  87 

God  in  His  providence  bath  sent  them,  by  all  their  paina  to  save.  (N.  Rogerg.) 
Christ  seeking  the  lost : — No  place  did  He  leave  unsought  to  find  His  own ;  in  tha 
wilderness  we  see  here  He  seeks  the  sheep  ;  in  the  house,  as  we  read  in  the  next. 
He  seeks  the  groat ;  in  the  world  He  seeks  up  the  prodigal  and  lost  son.  He  goea 
to  Samaria  to  seek  the  woman ;  to  Bethany  to  seek  up  Mary  ;  to  Capernaum  t<i 
seek  the  centurion ;  to  Jericho  to  seek  Zaccheus ;  no  place  that  He  left  unsonght  or 
onsanctifiied.  (Ibid.)  Christ's  tympathy  for  sinners  : — 1.  A  yearning  sympathy. 
2.  An  active  sympathy.  8.  A  tender  sympathy.  4.  A  joyful  sympathy.  (C.  E. 
Walker.)  The  tendency  to  wander: — There  is  in  sin  a  centrifugal  tendency,  and 
the  wanderings  of  this  wanderer  could  be  only  further  and  further  away.  If,  there- 
fore, it  shall  be  found  at  all,  this  can  only  be  by  its  Shepherd's  going  to  seek  it ; 
else,  being  once  lost,  it  is  lost  for  ever.  {Archbishop  Trench.)  No  instinct  to 
return: — The  sinner  is  like  the  strayed  sheep,  the  most  stupid  of  animals.  The 
oat,  the  dog,  the  horse,  when  lost,  find  their  way  home — who  knows  how? — but  the 
eheep  has  no  such  instinct.  {J.  Wells.)  Tact  in  teaching : — How  easily  they  all 
understood  Him  I  But  how  few  Christian  people  there  are  who  understand  how  to 
fasten  the  truths  of  God  and  religion  to  the  souls  of  men.  Truman  Osborne,  one 
of  the  evangelists  who  went  through  this  country  some  years  ago,  had  a  wonderful 
•rt  in  the  right  direction.  He  came  to  my  father's  house  one  day,  and  while  we 
were  all  seated  in  the  room,  he  said,  "  Mr.  Talmage,  are  all  your  ohildreu 
Christians?"  Father  said,  "Yes,  all  but  De  Witt."  Then  Truman  Osborne 
looked  down  into  the  fireplace,  and  began  to  tell  a  story  of  a  storm  that  came  on 
the  mountains,  and  all  the  sheep  were  in  the  fold ;  but  there  was  one  lamb  outside 
that  perished  in  the  storm.  Had  he  looked  me  in  the  eye,  I  should  have  been 
angered  when  he  told  that  story ;  but  he  looked  into  the  fireplace,  and  it  was  so 
pathetically  and  beautifully  done,  that  I  never  found  any  peace  until  I  was  sure  I 
was  inside  the  fold,  where  the  other  sheep  are.  (De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Ood 
seeking  after  men : — The  distinction  between  Christianity  and  all  other  systems  of 
religion  consists  largely  in  this :  that  in  these  others  men  are  found  seeking  after 
Ood,  while  Christianity  is  God  seeking  after  men.  (T.  Arnold,  DJ).)  Seeking  a 
lost  sheep : — One  evening  in  1861,  as  General  Garibaldi  was  going  home,  he  met  a 
Sardinian  shepherd  lamenting  the  loss  of  a  lamb  out  of  his  fiock.  Garibaldi  at 
once  turned  to  his  staff,  and  announced  his  intention  of  scouring  the  mountain  in 
search  of  the  lamb.  A  grand  expedition  was  organized.  Lanterns  were  brought, 
and  old  officers  of  many  a  campaign  started  off  full  of  zeal  to  hunt  the  fugitive. 
But  no  lamb  was  found,  and  the  soldiers  were  ordered  to  tbeir  beds.  The  next 
morning  Garibaldi's  attendant  found  him  in  bed  fast  asleep.  The  attendant  waked 
him.  The  general  rubbed  his  eyes  ;  and  so  did  his  attendant  when  he  saw  the  old 
warrior  take  from  under  the  covering  the  lost  lamb,  and  bid  him  convey  it  to  the 
shepherd.  The  general  had  kept  up  the  search  through  the  night  until  he  had 
found  it.  Even  so  doth  the  Good  Shepherd  go  in  search  of  His  lost  sheep  until 
He  finds  them.  {Sunday  School  Tim£8.)  Tenderness  of  the  Good  Sheplterd  :-^ 
Among  the  hills  of  our  native  land  I  have  met  a  shepherd  far  from  the  flocks  and 
folds,  driving  home  a  lost  sheep — one  which  had  "  gone  astray,"  a  creature  panting 
for  breath,  amazed,  alarmed,  footsore ;  and  when  the  rocks  around  rang  loud  to 
the  baying  of  the  dogs,  I  have  seen  them,  whenever  it  offered  to  turn  from  the  path, 
with  open  mouth  dash  fiercely  at  its  sides,  and  so  hound  it  home.  How  differently 
Jesus  brings  back  His  lost  ones  1  The  lost  sheep  sought  and  found.  He  lifts  it  up 
tenderly,  lays  it  on  His  shoulder,  and  retracing  His  steps,  returns  homeward 
with  joy,  inviting  His  neighbours  to  rejoice  with  Him.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
Seeking  the  lost : — ^A  lady,  while  passing  along  one  of  our  public  streets,  in  pulling 
off  her  glove,  pulled  from  her  finger  a  very  valuable  jewelled  ring,  which,  before 
she  could  secure  it,  rolled  into  the  gutter.  She  stood  hesitatingly  on  the  brink  of 
the  filthy  puddle  for  a  few  moments,  as  if  considering  what  to  do,  when  she  bared 
her  fair  arm,  and  plunging  her  hand  into  the  gutter,  secured  her  treasure.  Ah  1 
there  is  the  treasure  of  the  precious  soul  lost  in  many  a  vile  sink  of  human  poUu* 
lion,  and  to  save  it  we  must  be  willing  to  follow  the  Saviour's  example,  and  to  go 
to  the  vilest  outoasts  with  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation.  From  the  parable  of  tha 
lost  sheep  we  are  impressed  with  the  thought  of  the  Saviour's  deep  personal  interest 
in  every  sinner.  One  sheep  went  astray,  and  this  careful  Shepherd  missed  even 
that  one.  The  sinner,  in  his  wanderings,  is  apt  to  think  that  Christ  does  not 
notice  him ;  that  amid  the  vastness  of  the  affairs  of  the  universe  which  occupy  the 
Divine  mind,  he,  if  not  overlooked,  is  but  little  attended  to.  But  this  is  a  dangerous 
mistake.    There  is  not  a  step  which  the  siimer  can  take  in  his  departuie  from  God 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [cfiAP.  XT. 

which  the  watchful  eye  of  the  Shepherd  does  not  follow ;  and  the  loved  child  is  not 
more  eurely  misBed  from  the  affectionate  family  circle  than  is  every  sinner  who 
departs  from  the  living  God.  (J.  R.  Boyd.)  One  $heep  against  ^'nimty  and 
nine  "  : — A  traveller  describes  a  scene  which  he  once  saw  that  strongly  reminded 
him  of  this  parable :  "  On  the  Aletsch  glacier  I  saw  a  strange,  a  beautiful  sight — 
the  parable  of  our  Lord  reacted  in  the  letter.  One  day  we  were  making  our  way 
with  ice-axe  and  alpenstock  down  the  glacier,  when  we  observed  a  flock  of  sheep 
following  their  shepherd  over  the  intricate  windings  of  the  crevasses,  and  so  passing 
from  the  pastures  on  one  side  of  the  glacier  to  the  pastures  on  the  other.  The 
flock  had  numbered  two  hundred,  all  told.  But  on  the  way  one  sheep  had  got  lost. 
One  of  the  shepherds,  in  his  German  patois,  appealed  to  us  if  we  had  seen  it. 
Fortunately  one  of  the  party  had  a  fleld-glass.  With  its  aid  we  discovered  the  lost 
sheep  far  up,  amid  a  tangle  of  brushwood,  on  the  rocky  mountain  side.  It  was 
beautiful  to  see  how  the  shepherd,  without  a  word,  left  his  hundred  and  ninety-nine 
sheep  on  the  glacier  waste  (knowing  they  would  stand  there  perfectly  still  and  safe), 
and  went  clambering  back  after  the  lost  sheep  until  he  found  it."  In  nearch  of 
stray  sheep: — Uncle  John  Vassar,  the  celebrated  colporteur  of  the  American  Tract 
Society,  who  tramped  the  country  over  from  Illinois  to  Florida,  used  to  describe 
himself  as  the  "Shepherd's  Dog."  He  did  not  claim  to  be  a  shepherd,  for  he  put 
great  power  upon  an  educated  and  ordained  ministry.  He  regarded  himself  only 
as  a  faithful  dog,  hunting  after  the  stray  sheep  of  the  Master's  flock,  and  en- 
deavouring to  bring  into  the  fold  those  Christless  souls  who  were  wandering  over 
the  devil's  commons.  A  young  clergyman  says  that  he  once  overtook  Uncle  John 
Vassar  on  the  road  (in  Duchess  county),  and  made  some  inquiry  as  to  the  residence 
of  a  friend.  Uncle  John  gave  him  the  information,  and  then  promptly  inquired, 
*'  My  young  friend,  are  you  a  Christian?  "  The  ministerial  brother  told  him  that 
he  hoped  he  was.  A  few  words  more  passed,  and  Vassar  pushed  on,  remarking  that 
"he  was  in  a  hurry  to  look  up  some  sheep."  When  the  clergyman  reached  his  friend's 
house,  he  told  them  that  he  had  met  a  crazy  man  on  the  road,  who  was  hunting  after 
sheep.  The  family  laughed  heartily,  and  said,  *•  Why,  that  was  John  Vassar,  our 
Duchess  county  missionary,  and  the  sheep  that  he  is  in  search  of  are  the  Lord's." 
Anxietie*  of  pastoral  care : — St.  Francis,  reflecting  on  a  story  he  heard  of  a  moun. 
taineer  in  the  Alps,  who  had  risked  his  life  to  save  a  sheep,  says,  **  O  God,  if  such 
was  the  earnestness  of  this  shepherd  in  seeking  for  a  mean  animal,  which  had 
probably  been  frozen  on  the  glacier,  how  is  it  that  I  am  so  indifferent  in  seeking  my 
sheep  ?  "  Seeking  the  wanderer : — An  American  bishop,  speaking  of  the  personal 
love  and  earnestness  which  in  Christian  work  prove,  with  God's  blessing,  so  success* 
ful,  related  that  a  youth  belonged  to  a  Bible-class,  but  at  last  the  time  came  when 
he  thought  fit  to  discontinue  his  attendance,  and  to  otherwise  occupy  his  time. 
The  class  assembled,  but  his  place  was  empty,  and  the  leader  looked  for  the  familiar 
face  in  vain.  He  could  not  be  content  to  conduct  the  Bible-reading  as  usual, 
ignorant  as  to  the  condition  and  whereabouts  of  the  missing  one.  "  Friends,"  ha 
said,  "  read,  sing,  and  pray  ;  my  work  is  to  seek  and  find  a  stray  sheep  ;  "  and  he 
started  off  on  the  quest.  **  The  stray  sheep  is  before  you,"  said  the  bishop  to  bis 
hearers.  "  My  teacher  found  me,  and  I  could  not  resist  his  pleading ;  I  could  not 
continue  to  wander  and  stray  whilst  I  was  sought  so  tenderly."  {The  Quiver.) 
Until  he  find  it : — The  Saviour  does  not  go  after  the  wandering  sheep  for  a 
mile  or  so  in  the  wilderness,  and  then,  because  the  way  is  wet  or  weary,  or 
because  the  clouds  of  evening  are  gathering,  say  to  Himself,  "  Well,  I  have 
done  as  much  as  this  ridiculous  and  stupid  sheep  deserves.  There  was  no 
occasion  that  the  sheep  should  wander  away  from  the  fold.  It  is  its  own 
folly.  Let  it  reap  the  fruit  of  its  own  folly.  I  have  done  all  I  can ;  I  will  go 
home  now."  Not  at  all.  He  goes  on  and  on  and  on.  He  does  not  consider  how 
tired  He  is.  He  has  not  done  His  business  until  He  has  found  the  sheep  and 
put  it  on  His  shoulder,  and  brought  it  back  again  rejoicing.  {H.  P.  Hughes,  M.A.) 
Search  for  soul-jewels : — A  jeweller  received  a  very  valuable  diamond  to  be  re-set. 
He  wrapped  it  up  oarefully,  and  laid  it  away;  bnt,  when  it  was  wanted,  it 
could  not  be  found.  Its  loss  would  ruin  the  jeweller.  He  searched  everywhere ; 
day  after  day,  doing  nothing  else  till  he  found  it.  At  last  he  discovered  a  bit  of  the 
paper,  in  which  the  jewel  had  been  wrapped,  among  the  ashes  of  a  fireplace.  He 
then  sifted  all  the  ashes  made  after  reception  of  the  jewel,  and  was  overjoyed  to 
discover  the  lost  treasure  perfectly  uninjured.  What  diligent  search,  then,  should 
be  made  for  lost  but  immortal  soul-jewels  1  Bejoldnr. — Christ's  jcy  %•  saving 
0intters : — L   Chbist's  amxibtt  to  uva  XHa  u>st.     L    He  kscw  tac  atBmea'i 


«KAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE,  99 

present  eondition.  (1)  Destitution.  (2)  Peril.  (3)  Feebleness.  No  strength 
apart  from  Christ.  2.  He  adopts  active  means  for  the  sinner's  recovery.  (1)  Ha 
seeks.  (2)  He  finds.  II.  His  jot  ovbb  thbib  salvation.  1.  This  joy  is  repre- 
sented by  the  shepherd  laying  the  lost  sheep  upon  his  shoulder,  and  carrying  it 
home  rejoicing.  We  know  why  the  shepherd  acts  thus.  The  sheep  is  wearied  and 
distressed  by  its  wanderings.  If  let  loose,  it  might  again  escape  and  wander 
farther  than  ever  from  the  fold.  If  it  were  allowed  to  walk  by  the  shepherd's  side, 
it  might  be  devoured  by  beasts,  who  are  watching  i:r  their  prey  even  in  the  shep> 
herd's  presence.  You  must  all  see  from  this  representation  how  safe  you,  the 
redeemed  of  Christ,  are.  2.  But  Jesus  not  only  rejoices  Himself  in  your  salvation. 
He  also  calls  upon  the  angels  of  heaven  to  participate  in  His  joy.  Application  : 
1.  Warning  to  the  indifferent,  2.  Comfort  to  the  penitent.  {Canon  Clayton.) 
Christian  joy  at  a  sinner'g  conversion  : — About  three  hundred  years  after  the  time 
of  the  apostles,  Caius  Marias  Victorias,  an  old  pagan,  was  converted  from  his 
impiety,  and  brought  over  to  the  Christian  faith ;  and  when  the  people  of  God 
heard  this,  there  was  a  wonderful  rejoicing,  and  shouting,  and  leaping  for  gladness, 
and  psalms  were  sung  in  every  church,  while  the  people  joyously  said  one  to  an- 
other, *'  Caius  Marius  Victorias  is  become  a  Christian  1  Caius  Marius  Victorius  ia 
become  a  Christian  I  "  Dear  reader,  it  may  be  that  yon  are  an  old  offender.  What 
joy  would  be  made  among  the  best  of  people  by  yonr  conversion  I  Some  of  your 
dearest  friends  would  be  ready  to  dance  with  delight ;  and  hundreds,  who  know 
what  a  hardened  rebel  you  have  been,  would  sing  and  shout  for  joy  of  heart,  "  Old 
— —  has  become  a  Christian  ! "  Oh,  that  you  might  be  led  to  cause  this  happiness 
on  earth ;  and  there  is  this  at  the  back  of  it — the  holy  mirth  would  reach  to  tha 
highest  heaven  !  (<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Joy  of  a  community  in  recovering  the  lost  :~— 
The  following  anecdote  was  told  to  Dr.  J.  Todd  by  an  old  hunter  in  the  forests  of 
America :  "  I  had  been  out  all  winter  alone  trapping  for  furs.  It  was  in  March, 
when  I  was  hunting  beaver,  just  as  the  ice  began  to  break  up,  and  on  one  of  the 
farthest,  wildest  lakes  I  ever  visited.  I  calculated  there  could  be  no  human  being 
nearer  than  one  hundred  miles.  I  was  pushing  my  canoe  through  the  loose  ice, 
one  cold  day,  when  just  around  a  point  that  projected  into  the  lake,  I  heard  some- 
thing walking  through  the  ice.  It  made  so  much  noise,  and  stepped  so  regularly, 
that  I  felt  sure  it  must  be  a  moose.  I  got  my  rifle  ready,  and  held  it  cocked  in  one 
band,  while  I  pushed  the  canoe  with  the  other.  Slowly  and  carefully  I  rounded  the 
point,  when,  what  was  my  astonishment  to  see,  not  a  moose,  but  a  man,  wading  in 
the  water — the  ice  water  1  He  had  nothing  on  his  hands  or  feet,  and  his  clothes 
were  torn  almost  from  his  limbs.  He  was  walking,  gesticulating  with  his  hands, 
and  talking  to  himself.  He  seemed  to  be  wasted  to  a  skeleton.  With  great  diffi- 
culty I  got  him  into  my  canoe,  when  I  landed  and  made  up  a  fire,  and  got  him 
some  hot  tea  and  food.  He  had  a  bone  of  some  animal  in  his  bosom,  which  he  had 
gnawed  almost  to  nothing.  He  was  nearly  frozen,  and  quieted  down,  and  soon  fell 
asleep.  I  nursed  him  like  an  infant.  With  great  difficulty,  and  in  a  roundabout 
way,  I  found  out  the  name  of  the  town  from  which  he  came.  Slowly  and  carefully 
I  got  him  along,  around  falls,  and  over  portages,  keeping  a  resolute  watch  on  him, 
lest  he  should  escape  from  me  in  the  forest.  At  length,  after  nearly  a  week's 
travel.  I  reached  the  village  where  I  supposed  he  hved.  I  found  the  whole  com- 
munity under  deep  excitement,  and  more  than  a  hundred  men  were  scattered  in  the 
woods  and  on  the  mountains,  seeking  for  my  crazy  companion,  for  they  had  learned 
that  he  had  wandered  into  the  woods.  It  had  been  agreed  upon  that  if  he  was 
found,  the  bells  should  be  immediately  rung  and  guns  fired ;  and  as  soon  as  I  landed 
a  shout  was  raised,  his  friends  rushed  to  him ;  the  bells  broke  oat  in  loud  notes, 
and  guns  were  fired,  and  their  reports  echoed  again  and  again  in  forest  and  on 
mountain,  till  every  seeker  knew  that  the  lost  one  was  found.  How  many  times  I 
had  to  tell  the  story  over.  I  never  saw  people  so  crazy  with  joy ;  for  the  man  was 
of  the  first  and  best  families,  and  they  hoped  his  insanity  would  be  but  temporary, 
as  I  afterwards  learned  it  was.  How  they  feasted  me,  and  when  I  came  away, 
loaded  my  canoe  with  provisions  and  clothing,  and  eve^hing  for  my  comfort.  It 
was  a  time  and  place  of  wonderful  joy.  They  seemed  to  forget  everything  else, 
and  think  only  of  the  poor  man  whom  I  had  brought  back."  The  old  hunter 
oeased,  and  said :  "  Don't  this  make  yon  think  of  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  Luke, 
where  the  man  who  lost  one  sheep  left  all  the  rest  and  sought  it,  and  brought  it 
home  rejoicing ;  and  of  the  teaching  of  our  Saviour,  that  there  is  joy  in  heaven 
over  one  repenting,  returning  sinner  1 "  "  Oh  yes ;  I  have  often  compared  the  two, 
and  though  I  don't  suppose  they  ring  bells  and  fire  guns  in  that  world,  yet  I  haT* 


90  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xr« 

no  doubt  they  have  sjme  way  of  making  their  joy  kno-wn.**  The  joy  occanoned 
l>y  the  last  sheep  being  found : — I.  A  fact  acknowledged.  1.  It  reminds  us  of  the 
sheep's  relation  to  the  Saviour.  He  has  an  interest  in  it.  "  My  sheep."  His, 
even  before  it  was  found.  2.  It  reminds  us  of  the  sheep's  former  state.  "  Lost." 
(1)  As  to  God.  He  derived  no  service  or  honour  from  it.  (2)  As  to  its  fellow- 
creatures.  They  derived  no  benefit  from  its  prayers,  example,  exertions,  influence. 
{'i)  As  to  itself.  Destitute  of  all  real  peace,  hope,  joy.  U.  The  satisfaction  hebb 
IMPLIED.  This  is  the  Saviour's  own  joy  on  the  occasion.  We  see  this  implied, 
and  necessarily  implied ;  for  how  could  He  call  upon  others  to  rejoice  with  Him, 
unless  He  was  rejoicing  Himself?  How  could  you,  unless  you  were  walking,  invite 
others  to  walk  with  you  ?  But  this  satisfaction  of  the  shepherd  is  not  left  at  an 
tmcertainty.  It  is  here  expressly  affirmed.  1.  The  sheep  was  not  conscious  of  the 
shepherd's  kindness.  No.  When  he  laid  hold  of  it,  it  panted  and  trembled ;  and 
when  he  was  laj  ing  it  on  his  shoulder,  it  struggled,  and  endeavoured  to  free  itself, 
and  as  he  carried  it  off,  it  wondered  what  he  was  going  to  do  with  it.  It  is  the 
same  with  us,  when,  to  use  the  words  of  the  apostle,  we  are  "apprehended  of 
Christ  Jesus."  2.  We  may  view  this  joy  of  the  Saviour  in  contrast  with  the  con- 
vert's own  connections  and  friends.  Some  of  these  may  be  alarmed  and  distressed, 
and  imagine  the  man  is  going  into  distraction,  or  into  despair.  They  know  nothing 
of  "a  wounded  spirit;"  they  are  ignorant  of  the  methods  of  Divine  grace — how 
God  wounds  in  order  to  heal ;  how  He  humbles  in  order  to  exalt ;  how  He  im- 
poverishes in  order  to  enrich  ;  how  He  empties  in  order  to  fill.  Hence  they  often 
send  for  the  physician  when  they  ought  to  send  for  the  divine.  You  remember, 
that  when  Christian  left  the  city  of  destruction  and  was  crossing  the  field,  his 
neighbours  and  friends,  supposing  he  was  deranged  or  disordered,  cried  out,  "  Stop  1 
return !  "  but  he,  putting  his  fingers  in  his  ears,  rushed  forward,  crying,  *•  Life, 
Life  I  Eternal  lile  I  "  3.  We  may  review  this  joy  as  the  restilt  of  success.  How 
delightful  to  the  husbandman  after  months  of  ploughing  and  sowing,  to  go  forth 
and  "  see,  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  and  after  that  the  full  com  in  the  ear  "  :  and 
then,  to  "  reap  with  joy  "  and  carry  home  his  "  sheaves  with  him  "  !  How  pleasing 
to  the  builder,  after  furnishing  the  materials,  to  see  the  edifice  rising  in  lovely  pro- 
portion, till  the  topstone  thereof  is  brought  forth,  with  shoutings  of  "  Grace,  graoe, 
unto  it."  And,  oh,  what  joy  did  the  Saviour  experience  when  *•  He  ascended  to 
His  Father  and  our  Father ;  to  His  God  and  our  God  "  ;  after  saying,  •'  I  have 
finished  the  work  Thou  gavest  me  to  do."  4.  Then  this  joy  may  be  viewed  aa 
indicative  of  His  benevolence.  5.  This  joy  of  His  should  be  the  penitent's 
encouragement.  6.  If  this  joy  be  the  sinner's  hope,  it  shonld  be  the  saint's 
example.  He  was  infinitely  more  than  example,  but  nothing  less.  And  "  he  who 
says  He  abideth  in  him,  ought  himself,  also,  so  to  walk  even  as  He  walked."  If 
you  depend  upon  Him,  you  must  resemble  Him.  III.  The  disposition  hebs 
ENJOINED.  Not  willing  to  enjoy  the  pleasure  alone,  He  calls  on  others  to  share  it. 
(W.  Jay.)  Joy  enhanced  by  partnership: — Every  man  rejoices  twice  when  he 
lias  a  partner  of  his  joy.  A  friend  shares  my  sorrow,  and  makes  it  but  a  moiety ; 
but  he  swells  my  joy,  and  makes  it  double.  For  so  two  channels  divide  the  river, 
and  lessen  it  into  rivulets,  and  make  it  fordable,  and  apt  to  be  drunk  up  by  the  first 
revels  of  the  Syrian  star ;  but  two  torches  do  not  divide,  but  increase  the  flame. 
And  though  my  tears  are  the  sooner  dried  up  when  they  run  on  my  friend's  cheeks 
in  the  furrows  of  compassion,  yet,  when  my  flame  hath  kindled  his  lamp,  we  unite 
the  glories,  and  make  them  radiant,  like  the  golden  candlesticks  that  bum  before 
the  throne  of  God,  because  they  shine  by  numbers,  by  hght,  and  joy.  (if.  W,  Beecher.) 
A  search  that  never  fails : — The  Bev.  J.  B.  Macduff,  D.D.,  tells  of  a  gallant  vessel, 
manned  with  gallant  hearts,  which  went  forth  amid  the  frowning  icebergs  of  the 
northern  seas  to  search  for  a  band  of  missing  explorers.  They  sailed  thither, 
buoyed  with  the  faint  feeble  hope  that  the  objects  of  their  search  might  still  be 
found,  battling  bravely  with  eternal  winter.  They  went  after  the  lost  until  they 
found  them  ;  but,  alas  1  they  found  them  with  the  stiffened  snow  and  ice  as  their 
vnnding-sheets.  They  brought  not  back  the  living,  but  only  some  sad  mementoes 
and  memorials  of  the  dead.  Not  so  is  the  journey,  not  so  the  pursuits  of  the  great 
bnepherd  of  the  sheep.  Those  whom  He  has  marked  for  His  own.  He  will,  without 
fail,  bring  home.  Not  one  can  elude  His  pursuit  nor  evade  His  loving  scrutiny. 
The  lost  found : — One  week  evening  an  old  woman,  very  poor  and  very  lame,  heard 
the  church  bell  ring  for  service.  She  had  never  been  to  church  before,  but  took  it 
into  her  head  to  go  this  once.  The  minister  preached  on  the  parable  of  the  lost 
febeep,  and  his  words  conveyed  real  news,  and  joyful  news  too,  to  the  old  woman. 


roAi,  XT  j  ST.  LUKE.  91 

She  sat  drinking  it  in  as  a  traveller  drinks  at  a  well  in  the  desert,  to  save  his  very 
life.  **  What,"  said  she  to  herself, "  be  I  then  a  sinner  ?  Tes,  surely  I  be.  What, 
be  I  then  just  like  a  lo3t  sheep  ?  Aye,  for  sure,  I  am  just  like  that.  And  be  there 
a  Shepherd  searching  about  for  me  T  Will  He  find  me  ?  Bel  worth  His  while  ? 
A  Saviour  for  a  poor  thing  like  mel  'Tis  wonderful  loving."  These  were  her  self- 
communings  as  she  hobbled  back  on  her  crutches  to  her  dark  cellar.  A  short  time 
afterwards  the  clergyman  received  a  message  that  the  poor  old  woman  was  dying 
and  earnestly  desirous  of  seeing  him.  The  moment  he  made  his  appearance  she 
exclaimed  :  "  That  is  the  man  who  told  me  about  the  lost  sheep.  I  want  to  know 
more  about  it."  So  he  sat  down,  saying,  "  I  will  gladly  tell  you  more  about  it. 
I  will  teU  you  also  about  the  sheep  that  was  found."  "Yes,"  she  exclaimed, 
"  found !  found  1  found ! "  She  did  not  live  long  after  this  interview,  and  she 
passed  away  with  the  same  words  on  her  dying  lips :  •'  Found  I  found  I  found  1 " 
Bescue  of  lost : — Some  years  ago  Southwark  was  divided  into  districts  by  the  visitors 
of  the  Auxiliary  Bible  Society.  One  district  was  found  to  contain  such  a  depraved 
neighbourhood  that  it  was  spoken  >of  as  the  "  Forlorn  Hope ;  "  and  for  some  time 
no  individual  would  engage  to  visit  it.  At  length  three  ladies,  advanced  in  life, 
andertook  the  hopeless  task.  On  entering  one  house  of  the  vilest  description,  they 
fotmd,  in  the  first  room  into  which  they  went,  a  young  female,  of  pleasing  appear- 
ance, mixing  something  in  a  cup,  which  she  put  into  a  closet  when  she  saw  them. 
They  conversed  with  her,  and  asked  if  she  would  accept  a  Testament,  which  she 
gladly  received.  They  found  she  was  the  daughter  of  a  clergyman,  but,  vain  of  her 
personal  attractions,  she  had  been  betrayed  into  that  wretched  course  of  life.  She 
eagerly  listened  to  all  they  said ;  and  finding  her  anxious  to  leave  the  paths  of 
wickedness,  they  procured  her  admission  into  an  asylum,  and  the  event  proved  that 
she  was  indeed  desirous  to  return  to  the  paths  of  virtue.  The  mixture  in  the  cup 
when  these  ladies  entered  the  house  was  poison.  In  a  few  short  hours,  in  all 
human  probability,  she  would  have  departed  to  everlasting  misery.  She  aftei- 
wards  fidled  a  situation  of  comfort,  and  was  enabled  to  look  forward  with 
hope  to  a  blissful  eternity.  Joy  sliall  be  In  beaveo. — On  the  joy  which 
u  in  heaven  at  the   repentance  of  a   sinner: — I.  How  we  are   to  dndebstand 

THB    JOY    THAT    IS    IN    HEAVEN    AT   THE    KEPENTANCE    OF     A    8INNEB.  As    it    refers 

to  God,  it  seems  very  inconsistent  with  the  happiness  and  perfection  of  the 
Divine  nature  to  suppose  Him  really  capable  of  joy,  any  more  than  of  grief,  or 
any  other  passion.  Because  this  would  be  to  imagine  some  new  accession  to  His 
pleasure  and  happiness,  which  being  always  infinite,  can  never  have  anything 
added  to  it.  And,  therefore,  we  are  to  understand  this,  as  it  relates  to  God,  in  the 
same  manner  as  we  do  infinite  other  passages  of  Scripture,  where  human  passions 
are  ascribed  to  Him,  to  be  spoken  by  way  of  condescension  and  after  the  language 
and  manner  of  the  sons  of  men ;  and  to  signify  only  thus  much  to  us,  that  the 
conversion  of  a  sinner  is  a  thing  highly  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God.  As  it 
refers  to  angels  and  other  blessed  spirits,  I  tee  no  inconvenience  why  it  may  not  be 
nnderstood  more  strictly  and  literally ;  that  they  conceive  a  new  joy  at  the  news  of 
a  sinner's  repentance,  and  find  a  fresh  pleasure  and  delight  springing  up  in  their 
minds,  whenever  they  hear  the  joyful  tidings  of  a  sinner  rescued  from  the  slavery 
of  the  devil  and  the  danger  of  eternal  damnation ;  of  a  new  member  added  to  the 
kingdom  of  God,  that  shall  be  a  companion  and  a  sharer  with  them  in  that  blessed- 
ness which  they  enjoy.  II,  Who  are  here  meant  by  the  just  persons  that  need 
NO  bepentance.  Our  Saviour  plainly  designs  those  who,  being  religiously  educated, 
and  brought  up  in  the  fear  of  God,  had  never  broke  out  into  any  extravagant  and 
vicious  course  of  life,  and  so  in  some  sense  had  no  need  of  repentance,  that  is,  of 
changing  the  whole  course  of  their  lives,  as  the  prodigal  son  had.     IH.  With  what 

BEASON  IT  IS  HERE  SAID,  THAT  THERE  IS  "  MORS  JOY  IN  HEAVEN  OVER  ONE  SINNEB 
THAT  REPENTETH,  THAN  CTEB  NINETY  AND  NINE  JUST  PERSONS  WHO  NEED  NO  REPENT- 
ANCE." 1.  That  the  same  thing,  considered  in  several  respects,  may  in  some 
respects  have  the  advantage  of  another  thing,  and  for  those  reasons  be  preferred 
before  it,  and  yet  not  have  the  advantage  of  it  absolutely  and  in  all  respects. 
Moral  comparisons  are  not  to  be  exacted  to  a  mathematical  strictness  and  rigour. 
(1)  The  greater  the  difficulty  of  virtue  is,  so  much  the  greater  is  the  praise  and 
commendation  of  it :  and  not  only  we  ourselves  take  the  more  joy  and  comfort  in 
it,  but  it  is  more  admirable  and  delightful  to  others.  Now,  it  cannot  be  denied  to 
be  much  more  difficult  to  break  off  a  vicious  habit,  than  to  go  on  in  a  good  way 
which  we  have  been  trained  up  in,  and  always  accnstomed  to.  (2)  They  who  are 
reflaimed  from  a  wicked  course  are  often  more  thoroughly  and  zealously  good 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  laskt.  it. 

Bfterwards.  Their  remorse  for  sin  quickens  and  spurs  them  on  in  the  ways  ol 
virtue  and  goodness,  2.  Our  Saviour  does  not  here  compare  repentance  with 
nbsolute  innocence  and  perfect  righteousness,  but  with  the  imperfect  obedience  of 
good  men,  wno  are  guilty  of  many  sins  and  infirmities ;  but  yet,  upon  account  of  the 
general  course  and  tenor  of  their  lives,  are,  by  the  mercy  and  favour  of  the  gospel, 
esteemed  just  and  righteous  persona  ;  and,  for  the  merits  and  perfect  obedience  of 
Christ,  so  accepted  by  God.  3.  This  utterance  of  our  Saviour  is  to  be  understood  as 
spoken  very  much  after  the  manner  of  men,  and  suitably  to  the  nature  of  human 
passions,  and  the  usual  occasion  of  moving  them.  We  are  apt  to  be  exceedingly 
affected  with  the  obtaining  of  what  we  did  not  hope  for,  and  much  more  with  regain- 
ing of  what  we  looked  upon  as  lost  and  desperate.  Concluding  inferences :  1.  The 
blessed  spirits  above  have  some  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  men  here  below.  2.  H 
God  and  the  blessed  spirits  above  rejoice  at  the  conversion  of  a  einner,  so  should 
we  too  :  and  not  fret  and  murmur  as  the  Pharisees  did.  3.  The  consideration  ol 
what  hath  been  said  should  mightily  inflame  our  zeal,  and  quicken  our  industry 
and  diligence  for  the  conversion  of  sinners.  4.  What  an  argument  and  encourage- 
ment is  here  to  repentance,  even  to  the  greatest  of  sinners.  {Archbishop  Tillotson.) 
Angels'  joy  over  penitence  : — Why  should  these  heavenly  beingi  rise  into  such  an 
excitement  ?  What  have  they  to  do  with  our  repentance  down  here  ?  We  look  for 
an  explanation.  I.  We  must  bear  in  mind  thb  intense  stmfatht  which  thxbb 
AMOELS  HAVE  WITH  Jehotah,  WHO  IS  GoD  ovEB  ALL.  They  unocasingly  catch  their 
inspiration  and  impulse  from  His  face,  before  which  they  stand.  If  we  were  to 
draw  a  picture  of  that  shining  host,  we  might  represent  a  throng  which  no  man 
can  number,  with  gaze  all  attracted  one  way  towards  the  throne  from  which 
emanates  the  whole  bliss  and  beauty  of  that  heavenly  estate.  A  gleam  of  gladness 
on  the  ineffable  features  is  reproduced  upon  the  countenances  of  all  in  that 
assemblage,  and  the  quick  response  beams  from  every  eye,  trembles  in  every  voice 
of  eager  utterance,  and  rings  out  joyously  from  every  struck  harp.  Thus  they 
serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple.  Hence,  the  view  which  God  Himself  has 
of  a  repentant  soul  is  immediately  observed  and  transmitted.  And  what  that  view 
is,  is  easily  found  out  (see  John  i.  18).  U.  But  again :  In  order  to  appreciate 
the  full  meaning  of  a  gladness  so  extraordinary  as  this  in  heaven,  we  uust 

REUEMBEB  THAT   THESE  AMOELS   HAVE  ALWATS   MANIFESTED  AM  ABSOBBINO  INTEBEST  IN 

MEN  AS  THB  CBEATUEES  OF  GoD.  They  kuow,  better  than  we  know  ourselves,  we 
bhall  have  to  admit,  what  we  once  were,  and  what  we  now  are,  and  in  the  end  what 
we  may  become  by  the  manifold  grace  of  God.  1.  They  saw  our  race  at  its  beginning, 
before  it  was  defiled  by  sin.  They  sang  together  at  the  creation  (see  Job  xxxviii. 
7).  It  is  needful  for  as  to  struggle  up  to  gain  an  adequate  idea  of  what  perfect 
holiness  is ;  they  know  by  intuition ;  and  they  saw  man  when  the  race  was  as  holy 
as  their  own,  and  they  have  not  forgotten  it.  2.  They  know  what  we  are  now 
better  than  we  know  ourselves.  We  see  as  in  enigma,  darkly ;  they  see  in  the 
sunshine  of  God's  great  love,  out  of  which  they  know  we  have  fallen.  8.  They 
know  what  we  can  become  better  than  we  know  ourselves.  They  understand  the 
essential  grandeur  of  grace  as  a  process  of  renewal  and  restoration.  To  them  a 
soul  is  priceless  because  it  can  hold  a  palm-branch,  it  can  wear  a  crown,  it  can 
sing  a  song  for  the  King.  They  measure  the  supreme  height  into  which  the 
redeemed  are  advanced  when  by  penitence  and  faith  they  are  lifted  into  love.  III. 
Once  more:  In  order  to  understand  this  great  emotion  of  the  angels,  we  kust 

BECOLLECT   THAT  THBT  HAVE   ALWATS  EXHIBITED  AN   BAGKB  IMTEBEST   IN   THB   FDBFOBB 

AND  woBD  OF  Chbist  AS  THE  SoN  OF  GoD.  1.  This  was  a  matter  of  great  difficulty 
to  them  in  the  beginning.  It  is  not  revealed  to  us  that  there  was  any  subject  which 
ever  attracted  their  attention  more  than  this  scheme  of  redemption  by  Jesus. 
That,  we  are  told,  "  the  angels  desire  to  look  into  "  (see  1  Peter  i.  12).  2.  The 
steps  of  the  wonderful  disclosure  were  all  under  their  observation.  They  saw  the 
Saviour  pass  by  through  their  shining  ranks  out  of  heaven  on  His  way  to  the  world. 
They  marked  how  He  laid  aside  His  glory,  and  took  the  form  of  a  servant.  But 
lest  they  should  imagine  they  were  to  despise  Him  in  His  humiliation,  there  came 
then  a  sudden  command  through  heaven:  "Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship 
Him  J"  Then  He  moved  on.  Bethlehem,  Jerusalem,  Capernaum,  Calvary,  ana 
Bethany  succeeded ;  at  last  they  saw  what  it  all  meant.  3.  The  risk  now  must 
have  been  fully  appreciated.  Would  this  plan  succeed  7  At  first  these  angeli 
seem  to  have  indulged  in  one  irrepressible  acclamation  of  supreme  delight ;  they 
Bang  "Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  over  Bethlehem  plains.  But  then  they 
■Attled  back  apon  their  "  looking  into  "  the  rest.     Peering  over  the  battlements  of 


OBAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  OS 

their  celestial  abode,  they  watched  John  the  Baptist  as  he  preaohed  repentance; 
they  saw  how  the  whole  success  or  failure  turned  upon  that.  Would  anybody 
repent  and  oome  back  to  God's  love  in  answer  to  the  invitation  1  Must  Jesus  have 
died  and  pleaded  in  vain  ?  4.  Now  think  of  the  announcement  of  a  sinner  return- 
ing unto  purity.  Imagine  Simon  Peter,  or  Nathauael,  or  Nicodemus,  on  bended 
knees  before  Christ,  the  sinner's  Friend.  Bepentance  had  begun  upon  earth  ;  the 
plan  of  redemption  would  answer !  With  what  abashed  joy  these  angels  must  have 
looked  in  each  other's  faces ;  and  then  in  an  instant  of  delighted  wonderment  they 
would  seek  the  Divine  Countenance  in  the  throne.  Now  let  our  minds  slowly 
receive  two  or  three  reflections:  1.  See  the  value  of  the  conversion  of  just  one  soul. 
"  One  sinner  that  repenteth."  What  is  Zion's  glory  ?  Read  Psalm  Ixxxvii.  5,  6. 
2.  When  angels  are  bo  excited,  how  strange  seems  our  apathy  I  Just  out  of  sight 
is  a  world  all  alive  with  enthusiasm  and  zeal.  3.  Is  it  possible  that  angels  cara 
more  for  sinners'  salvation  than  some  of  the  sinners  seem  to  care  for  themselves  to 
be  saved?  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Joy  in  heaven: — 1.  They  rejoice  because  aa 
heir  of  heaven  has  been  led  to  claim  his  inheritance.  Mark  the  words,  "  Joy  in 
heaven."  Heaven  belongs  to  the  penitent  soul,  and  he  belongs  to  heaven.  For 
heaven  is  the  dwelling-place  of  God  and  the  home  of  His  children.  It  is  our  homa 
by  a  double  title.  Every  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ  who  is  as  the  lost  sheep, 
or  as  the  lost  piece  of  money,  or  as  the  younger  son,  is  one  lost  out  of  the  family 
of  God,  and  when  he  returns,  he  is  one  restored  to  the  place  from  which  he  was 
missing.  2.  And  the  joy  at  his  repentance  flnds  its  reason  in  the  fact,  that  a  man's 
repentance  is  the  removal  of  that  one  obstacle  which  prevents  his  restoration  to  his 
place  in  the  family  of  God.  What  is  that  obstacle  ?  Do  I  need  to  name  it  ?  It  is 
sin.  3.  And  thus  we  are  led  to  notice  another  element  in  those  causes  from  which 
the  joy  of  the  heavenly  ones  proceeds ;  it  is  the  value  of  the  soul  which  is  thus 
emancipated  by  the  mighty  change  which  has  passed  upon  it.  "  The  redemption 
of  the  soul  is  precious."  We  are  in  danger  of  forgetting  the  intrinsic  worth  and 
dignity  of  the  soul  of  man  in  consequence  of  the  loss  which  it  has  sustained  through 
the  FaU  and  by  sin.  (W.  R.  Clark,  M.A.)  Joy  over  penitents : — I.  Who  abb 
THOSE  THAT  NEED  NO  BEPENTANCE  ?  There  are  two  modes  of  solving  this  difficulty, 
BO  as  perfectly  to  harmonize  the  doctrine  of  the  text  with  the  general  system  of 
Divine  truth.  In  the  first  place,  there  are  those  who  have  repented,  and  are  no 
longer  denominated  penitents.  In  the  next  place,  there  is  no  necessity  for  taking 
the  words  in  their  absolute  sense.  Our  Lord  frequently  speaks  in  an  hypothetic^ 
or  supposititious  manner.  II.  Wht  is  thkbe  mobe  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner 
that  repenteth  than  over  ninety-nine  just  persons  that  need  no  repentance? 
Whether  we  can  fully  understand  the  causes  of  their  joy  is  uncertain.  There  may 
be  certain  relations  in  which  they  exist  that  oar  more  limited  nature  cannot  com- 
prehend, and  which  powerfully  aSect  their  minds  with  impressions  of  joy.  We  are 
a  great  deal  more  affected  by  recent  than  by  remote  causes.  Now  it  is  probable 
that  all  beings  have  a  great  similarity  in  this  respect,  and  as  repentance  is  a  thing 
of  recent  occurrence,  as  it  is  the  essential  fact  in  the  history  of  man's  feUcity,  as  it 
is  the  very  gate  to  the  celestial  country,  angels  may  feel  a  peculiar  delight  in  an 
event  so  singular,  and  cormected  with  infinite  results.  Then,  again,  it  is  probable 
that,  like  ourselves,  angels  are  affected  by  contrast ;  and  what  contrast  can  be  more 
striking  than  that  exhibited  by  the  impenitent  and  the  penitent  ?  Lastly,  I  would 
suggest  a  few  hints  which  naturally  arise  out  of  the  subject.  In  the  first  place, 
what  an  infinite  value  is  stamped  upon  this  transformation  of  the  heart — repent- 
ance I  The  penitent  becomes  entitled  to  all  the  benefits  which  are  comprehended 
in  the  enjoyment  of  the  presence  and  blessing  of  God.  Secondly,  we  see  the 
importance  of  the  gospel.  This  is  the  great  instrument  for  producmg  repentance. 
Thirdly,  it  affords  the  most  delighful  encouragement  to  sinners  to  repent.  (12. 
HaU,  M.A.)  Celestial  sympathy : — I.  It  is  possible  fob  us  to  auquemt  thx 
HAPPINESS  OF  heaven.  If  you  would  this  day  repent  and  come  to  God,  the  news  of 
tout  salvation  would  reach  heaven,  and  then,  hark  to  the  shouts  of  the  ransomed  I 
Your  little  child  went  away  from  you  into  the  good  land.  While  she  was  here  yoa 
brought  her  all  kinds  of  beautiful  presents.  Sometimes  you  came  home  at  nighUall 
with  your  pockets  full  of  gifts  for  her,  and  no  sooner  did  you  put  your  night-key 
into  the  latch  than  she  began  at  you,  saying,  "  Father,  what  have  you  brou>iht 
me  f  "  She  is  now  before  tbe  throne  of  God.  Can  you  bring  her  a  gift  to-day  f 
Yon  may.  Coming  to  Christ  and  repenting  of  sin,  the  tidings  will  go  np  to  the 
throne  of  God,  and  your  child  will  hear  of  iL  Oh  1  what  a  gift  for  her  soul  to- 
fUkj.    8be  will  skip  with  new  gladness  on  the  everlasting  hills  when  she  hears  of 


S4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cait.  Xt, 

it.  I  was  at  Sharpsbnrg  dnring  the  war,  and  one  day  I  saw  a  sergeant  dash  part 
on  a  lathered  horse,  the  blood  dripping  from  the  spurs.  I  said :  "  That  sergeant 
most  be  going  on  a  very  important  message — he  must  be  carrying  a  very  important 
dispatch,  or  he  wouldn't  ride  like  that."  Here  are  two  angels  of  God  flitting  through 
the  house,  flitting  toward  the  throne  on  quick  dispatch.  What  is  the  news  7  Carry- 
ing np  the  story  of  souls  repentant  and  forgiven,  carrying  the  news  to  the  throne  oi 
God,  carrying  the  news  to  your  kindred  who  are  for  ever  saved.  Oh  1  '•  there  is  joy 
in  heaven  among  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  And  suppose 
this  whole  audience  should  turn  to  the  Lord  this  morning  ?  Heaven  would  be 
filled  with  doxologies.  I  was  reading  of  a  king  who,  after  gaining  a  great  victory, 
{i&id  to  his  army:  "  Now,  no  shouting ;  let  everything  be  quiet,  no  shouting."  But 
if  this  morning  your  soul  should  come  to  God,  nothing  could  stop  the  shouting  of 
the  armies  of  God  before  the  throne;  for  "there  is  joy  in  heaven  among  the 
angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  II.  Hbavbm  and  eabth  abb  in 
CLOBB  STMPATHT.  People  talk  of  heaven  as  though  it  were  a  great  way  off.  They 
say  it  is  hundreds  of  thousands  of  miles  before  you  reach  the  flrst  star,  and  then 
jon  go  hundreds  of  thousands  of  miles  before  you  get  to  the  second  star,  and  then 
it  is  millions  of  miles  before  yon  reach  heaven.  They  say  heaven  is  the  centre  of 
the  aniverse,  and  we  are  on  the  rim  of  the  universe.  That  is  not  the  idea  of  my 
text.  I  think  the  heart  of  heaven  beats  very  close  to  onr  world.  We  measure 
distances  by  the  time  taken  to  traverse  those  distances.  It  used  to  be  a  long 
distance  to  San  Francisco.  Many  weeks  and  months  were  passed  before  you  could 
reach  that  city.  Now  it  is  seven  days.  It  used  to  be  six  weeks  before  you  could 
voyage  from  here  to  Liverpool.  Now  yon  can  go  that  distance  in  eight  or  nine 
days.  And  so  I  measure  the  distance  between  earth  and  heaven,  and  I  find  it  is 
only  a  flash.  It  is  one  instant  here,  and  another  instant  there.  It  is  very  near 
to-day.  Christ  says  in  one  place  it  is  not  twenty-four  hours'  distance,  when  He 
says  to  the  penitent  thief :  "  This  day,  this  day,  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  Paradise." 
Ob !  how  near  heaven  is  to  earth !  By  oceanic  cable  you  send  a  message.  As  it  ia 
expensive  to  send  the  message,  you  compress  a  great  deal  of  meaning  in  a  few 
words.  Sometimes  in  two  words  you  can  put  vast  meaning.  And  it  seems  to  me 
that  the  angels  of  God  who  carry  news  from  earth  to  heaven  need  to  take  up  this 
morning,  in  regard  to  your  soul,  only  two  words  in  order  to  kindle  with  gladness 
all  the  redeemed  before  the  throne ;  only  two  words :  "  Father  saved,"  *•  mother 
saved,"  "  son  saved,"  "  daughter  saved."  And  ••  there  is  joy  in  heaven  among  the 
angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth. "  III.  The  salvation  or  the  Bovit 
X?  OF  vast  impobtance.  When  the  French  Government  passed  from  Thiers  ta 
MeMahon,  I  do  not  suppose  it  was  reported  in  heaven.  When,  in  the  recent  English 
elections,  the  contest  was  between  Conservatives  and  Liberals,  the  result,  I  do  not 
suppose,  was  reported  in  heaven.  But  there  is  one  item  that  must  go  up — there  is 
one  thing  that  must  be  told.  Let  the  flying  hoofs  of  God's  courier  clash  through 
the  portals,  and  the  news  fly  from  gate  to  temple,  and  from  temple  to  mansion,  and 
from  mansion  to  throne,  that  one  soul  has  been  converted.  Last  summer,  among 
the  White  Mountains,  a  stage  driver  was  very  reckless.  He  had  a  large  company  of 
passengers  and  drove  six  horses.  Coming  along  a  dangerous  place,  the  leaders 
shied  off,  and  the  stage  was  thrown  over  the  rocks.  A  few  men  leaped  out  and 
were  saved,  others  went  down  and  were  bruised,  and  some  were  slain.  When  those 
who  were  saved  got  home,  how  their  friends  must  have  congratulated  them  that 
they  got  off  from  all  that  peril  I  Well !  the  angels  of  God  look  down,  and  see  men 
driving  along  the  edge  of  eternal  disasters,  drawn  by  leaping,  foaming,  uncontroll- 
able perils :  and  when  a  man,  just  before  he  comes  to  the  fatal  capsize,  leaps  off 
and  comes  away  in  safety,  do  you  wonder  that  the  angels  of  God  clap  their  hands 
and  cry :  "  Good  I  Good  1  saved  from  hell  1  Saved  for  heaven !  Saved  for  ever !  " 
The  redemption  of  a  soul  must  be  a  very  wonderful  thing,  or  heaven  would  not 
make  such  a  jubilation  about  it.  It  must  be  a  great  thing,  or  there  would  not  be  so 
much  excitement  in  that  land  where  coronations  are  every -day  occurrences,  and  the 
stones  of  the  field  are  amethysts  and  chrysoprases.  {De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D. )  Jay 
over  the  saved : — We  may  illustrate  this  text  by  an  incident  which  occurred  in  con- 
nection with  the  wreck  of  the  ill-fated  steamer.  Central  America.  A  few  days  aftei 
that  startling  event,  which  sent  hundreds  to  a  watery  grave,  and  plunged  the  nation 
in  grief,  a  pilot  boat  was  seen,  on  a  fair  breezy  morning,  standing  up  the  bay  of  New 
York.  The  very  appearance  of  the  vessel  gave  token  that  she  was  freighted  with 
tidings  of  no  common  interest.  With  every  sail  set,  and  streamers  flying,  sha 
laaped  along  the  waters  as  if  buoyant  with  some  great  joy ;  while  the  glad  win(kt 


e«AP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  «S 

that  swelled  her  cscyas,  and  the  sparkling  waves  that  kissed  her  sides  and  urged 
her  on  her  way,  •eemed  to  laugh  with  conscious  delight.  As  she  drew  nearer,  ara 
unusual  excitement  was  visible  on  her  deck  ;  and  her  captain,  running  out  to  the 
extreme  point  of  the  bowsprit  and  swinging  his  cap,  appeared  to  be  shouting  some- 
thing with  intense  earnestness  and  animation.  At  first  the  distance  prevented  hi8 
being  distinctly  understood.  But  soon,  as  the  vessel  came  farther  into  the  harbour, 
the  words,  "Three  more  saved  I  Three  more  saved! "  reached  the  nearest  listeners. 
They  were  caught  up  by  the  crews  of  the  multitudinous  ships  that  lay  anchored 
around,  and  sailors  sprang  wildly  into  the  rigging  and  shouted,  "  Three  more  saved !  '* 
They  were  heard  on  the  wharves ;  and  the  porter  threw  down  his  load,  and  the 
drayman  stopped  his  noisy  cart,  and  shouted,  "  Three  more  saved."  The  tidings 
ran  along  the  streets;  and  the  news-boys  left  off  crying  the  last  murder,  and 
shouted,  "  Three  more  saved."  Busy  salesmen  dropped  their  goods,  book  keepers 
their  pens,  bankers  their  discounts,  tellers  their  gold,  and  merchants,  hurrying  on 
the  stroke  of  the  last  hour  of  grace  to  pay  their  notes,  paused  in  their  headlong 
haste,  and  shouted,  ••  Three  more  saved  1 "  Louder  and  louder  grew  the  cry — fast 
and  faster  it  spread — along  the  crowded  piers  of  the  Hudson  and  East  River — up 
by  the  graves  of  Trinity,  the  Hotels  of  Broadway,  the  marble  palaces  of  the  Fifth 
Avenue — over  the  heights  of  Brooklyn — across  to  Hoboken  and  Jersey  City — away, 
away,  beyond  tower  and  pinnacle,  beyond  mansion  and  temple,  beyond  suburb  and 
hamlet — till  a  million  hearts  pulsated  with  its  thrill,  and  above  all  the  sounds  of 
the  vast  metropolis,  mightier  than  all,  hushing  all,  rose  the  great  exultant  shouts 
"  Three  more  saved  I  Three  more  saved  I  "  If  cold  and  selfish  men  will  thus  stop 
short  in  the  eager  quest  of  gain  or  of  pleasure,  to  let  the  voice  of  humanity  speak, 
out,  and  to  express  their  joy  that  three  fellow-beings  have  been  rescued  from  the- 
ocean  depths,  shall  we  deem  it  an  incredible  thing  that  the  holy  and  loving  denizens 
of  heaven  should  rejoice  when  a  sinner  repents,  and  is  delivered  from  the  abyss  of 
hell?  (Dr.  Ide.)  Repentance  not  better  than  obedience : — And  in  truth  we  may 
learn,  from  the  working  of  human  affection,  that  the  rejoicing  more  of  the  lost 
sheep  than  of  the  ninety  and  nine,  proves  not  that  the  one  is  more  beloved  than< 
the  rest.  If  one  member  of  his  family  be  in  sickness  or  danger,  does  not  that. 
one  seem  almost  to  engross  the  heart  of  the  parent  ?  Are  not  the  other  members 
comparatively  forgotten,  so  completely,  for  a  while,  are  the  thoughts  absorbed  in  the 
suffering  individual  ?  It  is  not — and  the  fathers  and  mothers  amongst  you  know 
that  it  is  not — that  the  sick  child  is  better  loved  than  those  which  are  in  health. 
It  is  not  that  your  affections  are  more  centred  on  the  son  who  is  far  away  amid 
the  perils  of  the  deep  than  on  those  who  are  sitting  safely  at  your  fireside.  It  is 
only  that  danger  causes  you  to  feel  a  special  interest  for  the  time  in  some  one  of 
your  offspring — an  interest  which  for  the  most  part  ceases  with  the  occasion,  and 
which  would  be  immediately  transferred  to  another  of  the  family,  if  that  other  were 
the  subject  of  the  peril.  Oh,  we  quite  believe  that  the  mother,  gazing  on  the  child 
who  seems  about  to  be  taken  from  her  by  death,  is  conscious  of  a  feeling  of 

Sassionate  attachment  which  does  not  throb  within  her  as  she  looks  on  her  other 
ttle  ones  sleeping  in  their  unbroken  healthfulness.  And  if  disease  be  suddenly 
arrested,  and  the  child  over  whom  she  had  wept  in  her  agony  smile  on  her  again^ 
and  again  charm  her  with  its  prattle,  why  we  are  persuaded  that  she  will  rejoicet 
more  of  that  child  than  of  its  brothers  and  its  sisters,  over  whose  beds  she  has 
never  hung  in  anguish.  Yet  it  is  not  that  the  one  is  dearer  to  her  than  the  others^ 
The  probability  of  losing  the  one,  whilst  the  others  were  safe,  has  caused  a  concen- 
tration of  her  sohcitudes  and  anxieties.  But  her  heart  is  all  the  while  as  thoroughly 
devoted  to  those  who  need  not  the  same  intenseness  of  her  maternal  care ;  and  you 
have  only  to  suppose  the  sickness  from  which  one  child  has  recovered  seizing  on 
another,  and  presently  yon  will  see  her  centring  on  this  other  the  same  eager 
watchfulness;  and  for  a  time  will  there  be  again  the  same  ftpparent  absorption  o£ 
the  affections :  and  if  again  there  be  restoration  to  health,  oh,  again  there  will  be- 
the  manifestations  of  an  exuberant  gladness,  and  the  mother  will  rejoice  more  of 
the  boy  or  the  girl  who  has  been  snatched  back  from  the  grave  than  of  those  mem- 
bers of  her  household  who  have  not  approached  its  confines.  But  not,  we  agaii> 
eay,  because  she  loves  one  child  better  than  the  rest — not  because  the  healthful 
must  become  the  sick  in  order  to  their  being  cherished  and  prized.  Whatever  her 
rapture  on  being  told  "  thy  son  liveth,"  the  mother  would  far  prefer  the  deep  and' 
unruffled  tranquillity  of  a  household  not  visited  by  danger  and  disease.  And  thaa 
also  with  regard  to  moral  peril,  which  brings  the  case  nearer  to  that  of  the  parabl» 
ander  reyiew.    If  one  member  of  a  family  grow  up  ricious  and  dissolate,  wmlst  th* 


S8  TUE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

others  pursue  stedfastly  a  course  of  obedience  and  virtue,  it  is  not  to  be  disputed 
that  the  thoughts  of  the  parents  will  almost  be  engrossed  by  tlieir  profligate  child, 
and  that  the  workings  of  anxious  affection  will  be  more  evident  in  regard  of  this 
prodigal  than  of  the  sons  and  the  daughters  who  have  given  tbem  no  cause  for 
uneasiness.  Is  it  that  they  love  the  reckless  better  than  the  obedient  ?  is  it  that 
they  would  love  the  obedient  better  if  they  were  turned  into  the  reckless  ?  You 
know  that  this  is  no  true  account  of  the  matter.  You  know  that  the  seeing  what 
we  love  in  danger  excites  that  interest  on  its  behalf  which  we  are  scarcely  conscious 
of  whilst  we  see  it  in  security.  The  danger  serves  to  bring  out  the  affection,  and  to 
show  UB  its  depth  ;  but  it  rather  affords  occasion  of  manifestation  than  increases 
the  amount.  And,  beyond  question,  if  the  child  whose  perverseness  and  profligacy 
have  disquieted  the  father  and  the  mother,  causing  them  anxious  days  and  sleep- 
less nights,  turn  from  the  error  of  his  ways,  and  seek  their  forgiveness  and  blessing 
ere  they  die,  there  will  be  excited  such  emotions  in  their  hearts  as  have  never  been 
stirred  by  the  rectitude  and  obedience  of  the  rest  of  their  offspring.  And,  in  like 
manner,  so  far  as  we  may  carry  up  the  illustration  from  the  earthly  to  the  heavenly, 
we  deny  that,  in  representing  God  as  rejoicing  more  over  the  recovered  tribe  than 
over  those  which  never  fell,  we  represent  Him  as  better  pleased  with  repentance 
than  with  uniform  obedience.  We  do  but  ascribe  to  Him  human  emotions,  just  in 
order  to  show  that  there  is  a  tenderness  in  Deity  which  makes  Him  solicitous,  if 
the  word  be  allowable,  for  those  who  have  brought  themselves  into  danger  and 
difficulty,  and  which  renders  their  deliverance  an  object  of  such  mighty  importance 
that,  when  achieved,  it  may  be  said  to  minister  more  to  His  happiness  than  the 
homage  of  the  myriads  who  never  moved  His  displeasure.  And  when,  through  the 
energies  of  redemption,  the  human  race  was  reinstated  in  the  place  whence  it  fell, 
it  was  not  that  God  prefers  the  penitent  to  those  who  never  swerved  from  allegiance, 
and  has  greater  delight  in  men  who  have  sinned  than  in  angels  who  have  always 
obeyed ;  it  was  not  on  these  accounts  that  He  was  more  gladdened,  as  we  suppose 
Him,  by  the  recovery  of  what  had  wandered  than  by  the  steadfastness  of  what 
remained.  It  was  only  because,  where  there  has  been  ground  of  anxiety,  and  a 
beloved  object  has  been  in  peril,  his  restoration  and  safety  open  channels  into 
which,  for  a  while,  the  sympathies  of  the  heart  seem  to  pour  aU  their  fulness — it 
was  only  on  this  account  that.  Divine  things  being  illustrated  by  human,  our 
Creator  might  be  likened  to  a  man  who,  having  found  on  the  mountains  the  one 
sheep  he  had.  lost,  "  rejoiceth  more  of  that  sheep  than  of  the  ninety  and  nine 
which  went  not  astray."  We  judge  from  its  context,  as  given  by  St.  Matthew, 
that  Christ  designed  to  indicate  the  carefulness  of  God  in  reference  to  the 
erring  members  of  the  Church,  which  is  specially  His  flock.  He  is  there 
speaking  of  the  little  ones,  who  are  His  disciples  and  followers;  and  the  truth 
which  He  declares  illustrated  by  the  parable  is,  that  it  is  not  the  will  of  the 
Father  that  "one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish.      (£f.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Either  what  woman  having  ten  pieces  of  silver. — Man  resembled  to 
silver  coin : — 1.  And  that  in  regard  of  matter.  No  metal  except  gold  (which  indeed 
is  most  solid  and  perfectly  concocted  with  sufficient  heat,  so  that  it  never  corrupteth 
by  rust)  is  to  be  compared  with  it.  So  man  is  the  excellentest  of  all  God's 
creatures  except  angels,  and  bat  a  Uttle  inferior  unto  them  (Psa.  viii.  5).  2.  In 
regard  of  lustre.  For  albeit  sUver  in  the  ore  be  base  and  unsightly  to  look  on,  yet 
<5oming  out  of  the  mint  purified  and  fined,  it  is  beautiful.  Thus,  though  man, 
while  he  was  in  the  lump  of  clay,  was  without  beauty  ;  yet  being  formed,  God  put 
upon  him  great  glory  and  majesty  (Psa.  viii.),  so  that  in  beauty  and  fairness  he 
excellea  all  other  visible  creatures,  as  by  those  relics  yet  remaining,  and  to  be 
found  in  sinful  men,  we  may  gather.  As  the  complexion  of  David  (1  Sam.  xvi.  12). 
The  beauty  of  Absalom,  in  whom  there  was  not  a  blemish  from  top  to  toe 
(2  Sam.  xiv.).  The  stature  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  x.)  8.  In  regard  of  stamp.  Money  hath 
some  impress  and  image  on  it,  as  the  Jewish  shekel,  which  on  the  one  side  had 
Aaron's  rod,  and  on  the  other  side  the  pot  of  manna.  So  the  Eomans  had  Caesar's 
image  upon  their  coin,  whereby  they  acknowledged  subjection ;  and  the  coin  which 
Jacob  paid  unto  the  Shechemites  was  stamped  with  a  lamb  (Gen.  xxxiii.  19).  Thus 
had  man  the  image  of  his  Maker,  which  God  stamped  on  him  as  a  mark  of  hit 
possession.  4.  Money  hath  its  stamp  and  form  from  regal  authority  ;  it  must  bo 
refined  and  made  (for  it  makes  not  itself)  by  the  prince's  royalty.  Thu3  man  waa 
the  work  of  God's  hands  (Psa.  c),  and  His  alone  (Job  x.  8).  5,  Silver  hath  a 
good  sound  above  other  metals.    And  hence  it  was  that  tmmpeti  of  silver  wera 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  97 

eommanded  by  the  Lord  to  be  made  (Numb.  x.  1,  2)  for  shrillness  and  clearness. 
Thus  man  above  other  creatures  had  a  tongue  given  him  to  praise  his  Maker  with, 
which  is  therefore  called  the  glory  of  man  (Gen.  xlix.  6 ;  Psa.  xvi.  9).  6.  Silver 
commands  all  things,  and  answers  all  things,  as  speaketh  Solomon  (Eccles.  x.  19). 
There  is  nothing  (whether  holy  or  profane)  but  are  at  the  beck  and  command  of  it. 
Such  a  commanding  power  had  man  by  his  creation  over  all  creatures  (Psa.  viii.  6). 
••  Thou  hast  made  him  to  have  dominion  in  the  works  of  Thy  hands  " ;  such  authority 
God  gave  him  (Gen.  i.  28),  willing  him  to  "rule  over  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  over  the 
fowls  of  heaven,  and  over  every  beast  that  moveth  upon  the  earth."  Silver  is  not 
all  of  a  like  worth  ;  there  are  different  pieces  and  of  different  value.  The  Jews 
had  their  gerah,  and  half  shekel,  and  shekel  (Exod.  xxx.  13),  with  divers  other 
coins  of  silver.  So  all  were  not  of  a  like  degree  in  the  creation,  though  all 
excellent  and  good ;  for  God  observed  order  from  the  beginning.  Amongst  the 
»ngels  some  are  superior,  and  some  inferior;  there  are  degrees  amongst  them 
(Goloss.  i.  16).     {N.  Eogert.)        The  lost  coin: — I.  Look  at  the  thino  lost,  and 

TOO   WILL  FIND    SEVERAL  POINTS  OF  IMPORTANCE   THEREBY   SUGGESTED.        1.   It   WaS   a 

coin.  That  is  to  say,  it  was  not  simply  a  piece  of  a  precious  metal,  but  that  metal 
moulded  and  minted  into  money,  bearing  on  it  the  king's  image  and  superscription, 
and  witnessing  to  his  authority  wherever  it  circulated.  2.  But  the  coin  was  lost, 
and  this  suggests  that  in  sinful  man  the  image  of  his  Maker  has  gone  out  of  sight, 
and  the  great  purpose  of  his  being  has  been  frustrated.  His  intellect  does  not  like 
to  retain  God  in  its  knowledge ;  his  heart  has  estranged  its  love  from  God ;  and  his 
life  is  devoted  to  another  lord  than  his  Creator.  He  is  lost.  3.  Yet  he  is  not 
absolutely  worthless.  The  coin,  though  lost,  has  still  a  value.  If  it  can  be 
recovered,  it  will  be  worth  as  much  as  ever.  4.  But  yet,  again,  this  coin  was  lost 
in  the  house.  The  woman  did  not  let  it  fall  as  she  was  crossing  the  wild  and 
trackless  moor,  neither  did  she  drop  it  into  the  unfathomed  depths  of  ocean.  Had 
she  done  so,  she  would  never  have  thought  of  seeking  for  it ;  she  would  have  given 
it  op  as  irrecoverable.  Now,  this  points  to  the  fact  that  the  soul  of  the  sinner  is 
recoverable.  It  is  capable  of  being  restored  to  its  original  dignity  and  honour.  It 
has  in  it  still  potentialities  as  great  and  glorious  as  those  which  ever  belonged  to 
iL     II.  This  brings  me  to  the  consideration  of  the  seabch,  wherein  we  have  also 

BOMB   things   suggested   WHICH   ARE   PECULIAR  TO   THIS   PARABLE.        Eastcm  hoUSeS, 

unlike  our  own,  are  constructed  in  such  a  way  as  to  keep  out  the  light  and  heat  of 
the  sun  as  much  as  possible.  They  have  few  windows,  and  even  the  few  which 
they  have  are  shaded  with  such  lattice-work  as  tends  to  exclude  rather  than  admit 
the  sunbeam.  Hence  the  rooms  are  generally  dark  ;  and  so,  even  if  the  coin  were 
lost  at  noonday,  the  light  of  a  candle  would  be  required  to  seek  for  it.  Nor  was 
there,  in  Eastern  dwellings,  the  same  scrupulous  cleanliness  that  we  love  to  see  in 
BO  many  homes  around  us.  The  floors  were  often  covered  with  rushes,  which, 
being  changed  only  at  rare  intervals,  collected  a  vast  amount  of  dust  and  filth, 
among  which  a  piece  of  money  might  be  most  readily  lost.  Hence  the  lighting 
of  a  candle  and  the  sweeping  of  the  house  were  the  most  natural  things  to  be  done 
in  such  a  case.  But  whom  does  this  woman  represent  ?  and  what,  spiritually,  are 
we  to  understand  by  the  lighting  of  a  candle  and  the  sweeping  of  the  house  ?  The 
woman,  in  my  judgment,  symbolizes  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  I  look  upon  the  means 
which  she  employed  in  her  search  for  the  lost  coin  as  denoting  the  efforts  made  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  for  the  recovery  of  a  lost  soul.  Now  let  ns  see  what  these  were. 
She  lighted  a  candle,  and  swept  the  house,  and  searched  diligently.  The  light 
most  evidently  represents  the  truth  ;  but  what  are  we  to  make  of  the  sweeping  ? 
Some  would  take  it  to  illustrate  the  purifying  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart. 
But  that  view  cannot  be  maintained,  since  the  purifying  of  the  soul  is  not  a  work 
in  order  to,  but  rather  subsequent  upon,  its  recovery.  I  take  it  rather,  therefore, 
to  represent  that  disturbance  of  settled  opinions  and  practices — that  turning  of  the 
Boal,  as  it  were,  upside  down — which  is  frequently  seen  as  a  forerunner  of  con- 
version ;  that  confusion  and  disorder  occasioned  by  some  providential  dealing  with 
the  man,  such  as  personal  illness,  or  business  difficulties,  or  family  bereavement, 
or  the  like,  and  which  frequently  issues  in  the  coming  of  the  soul  to  Go^i ;  for  here 
also  chaos  often  precedes  the  new  creation.  Truth  introduced  into  the  heart,  and 
providential  disturbances  and  unsettlements  in  order  to  its  introduction — these  are 
the  things  symbolized  by  the  lighting  of  the  candle  and  the  sweeping  of  the  hoase. 
The  truth  which  the  Holy  Spirit  employs  for  the  purpose  of  conversion  is  the  Word 
of  God,  all  of  which  has  been  given  to  men  by  His  own  inspiration;  and  the 
•special  portion  of  that  Word  which  He  uses  for  His  saving  work  is  the  wondroot 
TOL.  in.  7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [onAP.  XT, 

story  of  the  Crosa.    III.  We  oome  now,  in  the  third  place,  to  look  at  thb  jot  oveb 

THB  BECOTEBED  COIN  ;  and  here,  as  before,  we  shall  restriot  ourselves  to  that  which 

is  peculiar  to  this  parable.      In  the  story  of  the  lost  sheep,  while  the  social    . 

character  of  the  joy  is  certainly  referred  to,  the  speciality  in  the  gladness  of  the 

shepherd  over  its  finding  lay  in  the  fact,  to  which  prominence  is  given  in  the 

appended  note  of  interpretation,  that  it  was  greater  than  over  the  ninety  and  nine 

which  had  never  strayed.    Here,  however,  the  peculiarity  is  in  the  sociality  of  the 

joy.    God's  joy,  if  I  may  dare  to  use  the  words,  needs  society  to  make  it  complete ; 

and  the  fact  that  there  are  those  beside  Him  to  whom  He  can  make  known  the 

story  of  each  recovered  soul,  redoubles  His  own  gladness,  and  diffuses  among  them 

His  own  Divine  delight.    Nor  let  it  be  supposed  that  this  is  a  mere  fanciful  idea, 

for  which  there  is  no  foundation  in  Scripture  apart  from  the  teaching  of  this 

parable.     What  says  Paul  ?    "  God  hath  created  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ ;  to  the 

intent  that  now,  unto  the  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places,  might  be 

known  through  the  Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God"  (Eph.  iii.  10).     Now, 

these  words  mean,  if  they  mean  anything  at  all,  that  through  means  of  the  Church, 

God  designed  to  show  to  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places  His  manifold 

wisdom.  In  the  manifestation  of  this  wisdom  God  has  His  highest  work,  and,  in  its 

appreciation  by  spiritual  intelligences,  through  the  Church  of  Christ,  He  has  His 

greatest  joy.      (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)        The  search  of   love: — Type  of    a  soul 

ignorant  of  its  death,  utterly  unconcerned  with  the  thought  of  sin.    Yet  a  coin, 

having  image  and  superscription.  It  may  be  covered  with  dust,  it  may  be  half  defaced 

or  hidden  under  heaps  of  rubbish  ;  but  it  has  not  returned,  and  caunot  return,  into 

the  uncoined  state.   Meet  emblem  of  man's  soul  in  its  lowest  estate.     "  I  am  God's 

coin,"  said  one  of  old ;  "  from  His  treasure-house  I  have  wandered."    And  it  ia 

because  we  are  God's,  that  He  seeks.     I.  God'b  love  lights  a  i.amp  of  bqvelatioh 

IN  THE  WORLD.     Though  you  may  care  little  about  your  lost  soul,  God  cares  for  it 

much.   He  has  lit  His  candle — the  candle  of  Divine  revelation,  and  He  is  throwing 

its  illumination  upon  you.     Hinder  not,  thwart  not,  His  search  for  your  soul. 

Love  herself  might  light  the  candle,  and  yet  the  lost  coin  not  be  found  under  the 

long  accumulation  of  dirt — of  easily-besetting  sins  and  long-indulged  habits.     So 

the  parable  goes  on  to  speak  of  a  sweeping.    II.  The  love  of  God  sweeps  thb 

HOUSE,  WHICH  IS  THE  MAN.    Is  not  this  the  real  meaning  of  that  sickness,  that 

bereavement,    that    disappointment    which    seemed    to   you    so    casual,    or   so 

wanton,  or   so  cruel?     It  was  the  love  of   God  still.      III.   The  seeeino  is 

UNTO   FINDING.      Lovo    wiU    not    stay    till    she    finds.      Help    her.    Kick    not 

against    the    goad.     IV.    Tbbat   the    text   as  a  pbbcbpt.      Light  a  candle, 

sweep  the  house,  and  seek  diligently  till  you  find.      {Dean  Vaughan.)  The 

loit  groat: — I.  The  lost  oboat.     1.  It  is  a  symbol  of  the  human  sonl.^     (1) 

The  soul  seems  to  be  of  little  value,  if  considered  in  its  imperfections,  in  its 

inability  to  perform  supernatural  acts,  and  even  more  so,  if  compared  to  the  holy 

angels,  who  are  purer  than  gold,  brighter  than  diamonds.    (2)  Nevertheless,  the 

groat,  as  a  coin,  has  its  value.    So  is  the  human  soul  of  great  valne,  because  it  is 

created  according  to  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,  redeemed  by  His  precious 

blood,  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     Thus  it  is  raised  to  a  supernatural  state,  and 

enabled  to  merit  the  glory  and  bliss  of  heaven.  2.  How  the  groat,  the  human  soul, 

is  lost.    (1)  By  the  deceitfulness  of  the  devil,  who,  driven  by  envy  and  hatred, 

«ndeavoarB  to  deprive  the  Divine  Master  of  His  coin,  the  coin  of  its  splendour. 

He  buries  the  soul  in  the  mire  of  sin.     (2)  Through  the  fault  of  man.    Whilst  he 

is  nnmindful  of  being  God's  own  property,  undervalues  the  worth  of  his  soul,  keeps 

company  with  thieves,  his  soul  is  lost.    3.  The  consequences  are  most  deplorable. 

(1)  The  lost  soul  is  covered  with  the  filth  of  sin,  from  which  it  can  never  cleanse 

itself  by  its  own  power.     (2)  The  value  of  the  soul  diminishes.     The  merits  of  the 

past  are  lost,  the  power  of  ignorance  and  concupiscence  increases.  (3)  The  coinage 

disappears.  Sin  deforms  the  Divine  image  and  likeness ;  at  its  entrance  grace  leaves 

the  soul ;  and  man  falls  under  the  curse  and  displeasure  of  God.  II.  The  seeking 

wouAM.    1.  This  ••  woman  "  is  the  Church,     2.  The  "  candle  "  is  Christ,  the  light 

of  the  world.     3.  The  •♦  friends  and  neighbours  "  are  the  angels  and  saints.    (W. 

Reischl.)        The  parable  of  the  hit  tilver  : — I.  As  the  silveb  was  precious  to  thh 

WOMAN,  so  ARE  OUR  SOULS  IN  THE  SIGHT  OF  GoD  OUR  Savioub.    We  estimate  a  per 

son's  value  for  a  thing  by  the  price  he  gives,  the  sacrifice  he  makes,  to  obtain  or 

recover  it.    How  dear,  then,  was  man  to  God,  who  loved  him  when  fallen  ;  yea, 

who  so  loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 

tteiieveth  in  Hisi,  should  not  perish,  bat  have  eternal  life.    II.  As  thb  pieue  o* 


«■!»,  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  99 

MONZT  WAS  LOST  TO  THB  WOMAM,  SO  IS  EVERY  ONB  WHO  CONTINUES  IN  SIN  LOST   TO   GOD. 

Ge  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  him.    III.  As 

THB  WOMAN  SEAKCHED  FOB  HEB  LOST   TBEA8URE,  AND   SPARED  NO  PAINS  TO  RECOVER   IT  ; 

SO  DOES  Jesus  Christ  seek  the  soul  that  is  lost  by  sin.     IY.  As  the  woman  calls 

HER  FRIENDS  AND  NEIGHBOURS  TO  REJOICE  WITH  HER,  FOB  THE  LOST  PIECE  FOUND  ;  SO 
IS  THERE  JOT  IN  HEAVEN,  IN  THB  PRESENCE  OF  THB  ANGELS    OF    GoD,  OVEB  ONE  BEPENT- 

iNO  8INNEB.  For  this  joy,  Jesus  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame.  Thus  Ha 
sees  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  is  satisfied.  And  His  joy  is  shared  hy  the 
Angels  that  surround  His  throne.  1.  Let  this  parable,  then,  rebuke  self-righteous- 
ness ;  let  it  teach  humility.  2.  Again — let  this  parable  suggest  the  most  powerful 
motive  to  instant  repentance.  For  what  motive  is  there,  like  Christ's  enduring  and 
seeking  love?  {E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  Man's  fall  GocTs  loss  : — This  parable  pictures 
Ood  as  the  Bedeemer  of  man  in  tnree  different  modes  or  attitudes — shall  I  say  of 
feeling  ?  I.  The  first  division  of  the  picture  represents  God  as  contemplating  as 
A  loss  to  Himself  the  state  of  sin  into  which  man  has  fallen.  No  one  but  God 
could  have  ventured  thus  to  represent  God.  God  mourns  the  fall  of  man  as  a  lost 
treasure,  as  something  in  which  He  delighted,  and  of  which  sin  has  robbed  Him. 
God  has  a  property  of  the  heart  in  man's  welfare.  II.  In  the  second  part  of  the 
picture,  God  is  befresented  as  making  an  effort  for  the  bbootert  of  max  from 
the  sin  and  misebt  into  which  he  has  fallen.  The  fact  of  atonement  is  here  ;  the 
quickening  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  here,  and  the  manifold  ministry  to  man  is 
here ;  by  all  which  God  is  seeking  to  bring  men  to  Himself  and  save  them  from  sin ; 
and  the  more  one  seeks  to  look  at  this,  the  more  one  feels  how  true  it  is  that  the 
inflexible  righteousness  of  God,  that  the  infinite  love  of  God,  is  full  of  a  determina- 
tion not  to  let  His  human  treasure  go  without  an  effort  to  recover  it.  III.  The 
third  point  is  that  God  and  the  good  angels  bejoice  in  heaven  over  the  becovebt 
OF  men.  (A.  Hannay.)  A  -priceless  gem  : — I.  The  homely  stoby.  1.  It  may 
«eem  like  a  little  thing  to  you — this  sixpence  ;  but  what  is  great  to  a  child  is  not 
small  to  the  father  ;  and  that  is  nut  little  to  God  that  is  great  to  any  man.  He 
who  knows  all  about  the  homes,  and  the  hearts  that  beat  in  London  in  such  homes, 
knows  that  sometimes  the  difference  between  sixpence  and  no  sixpence  may  mean 
All  the  difference  between  food  and  no  food,  shelter  and  no  shelter  for  the  night, 
ease  from  pain,  or  no  ease  from  pain.  Oh,  what  magic  that  prosaic  thing,  the 
piece  of  silver,  can  work  1  Look  at  our  Nonconformist  father,  Lawrence.  See  him 
seated  under  a  hedgerow  on  the  morning  of  the  great  Puritan  exodus  in  1662  ;  see 
kim  looking  as  if  fit  to  die,  for  he  thinks  about  his  hungry  and  homeless  little  ones. 
What  is  it  that  suddenly  makes  the  eye  flash,  and  the  face  quiver,  and  the  foot 
spring  ?  Only  the  sight  of  a  lost  piece  of  silver.  He  had  just  found  a  sixpence  in 
the  ditch  before  him,  and  it  fairly  seemed  to  him  as  if  it  had  oome  down  into  that 
ditch  from  the  very  Throne  of  thrones  that  very  moment.  2.  The  central  person 
in  this  story  is  a  woman — not  some  stately  Cleopatra,  not  some  gay  Herodias,  not 
some  grand  lady  with  face  beautiful  as  a  dream,  and  step  graceful  as  a  wave,  who, 
having  possessed  ten  gems  of  rarest  water,  or  ten  pearls  of  great  price,  has  lost  one 
of  them  ;  but  only  a  poor  village  woman,  who,  having  saved  up  for  the  rent,  or  a 
rainy  day,  ten  pieces  of  silver,  has  lost  one.  She  searches ;  fin  is ;  calls  her  neigh- 
bours together  to  rejoice  with  her.  The  event  was  not  enough  to  electrify  a  cabinet 
hut  it  was  enough  to  lighten  her  heart,  and  to  send  a  sensation  all  through  her  little 
world.  II.  The  Divine  ueaniho.  1.  Look  at  the  coin,  and  then  think  of  the  value 
of  the  soul.  Souls  look  through  those  waiting,  gazing  eyes  around  me,  souls  look 
out  from  those  listening  ears,  souls  thrill  along  those  nerves.  Souls  I  Why  will 
ye  cleave  to  the  dust  f  Awake,  know  yourselves,  and  try  to  think  aboat  your  own 
animaginable  value.  3.  Look  at  the  coin  lost,  and  think  of  the  soul  lost  in  the 
house  of  this  world.  Some  years  ago  the  men  working  on  the  Thames  Embankment 
— ^laying  its  foundations — found  a  lost  piece  of  silver,  stamped  with  the  image  of  % 
Roman  Emperor.  Perhaps  that  piece  of  silver  had  been  lost  1,800  years.  My  spirit 
flashes  back  to  that  spot,  and  to  that  moment,  and  I  see  the  scene  just  how  it  all 
happened.  I  see  a  man  coming  down  from  the  green  solitudes  of  Camberwell,  where 
the  Boman  station  is,  coming  down  to  the  edge  of  the  river.  I  see  him  cross  from 
what  we  now  call  the  Surrey  side,  to  what  we  now  call  the  city  side.  I  see  him,  as 
he  stepi  out  of  the  boat,  take  his  purse  out  to  pay  the  ferryman,  and  I  see  the  piece 
of  silver  slip  from  his  fingers  through  the  water,  and  there  it  stuck  in  the  black  slime 
of  the  river.  It  was  for  ages  lost  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  made.  It  might  as 
well  not  have  been  silver.  Now  I  say  there  are  souls  lost  like  that  coin.  8.  look  at 
the  coin  lost,  but  not  knowing  that  it  is  lost,  and  think  of  the  soul  lost  in  this  housA 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  kt. 

and  not  knowing  that  it  is  lost.  The  frivolist.  The  sensualist.  The  formalist.  These 
no  more  know  they  are  lost  than  does  the;  coin  wh«n  it  has  rippled  along  the  floor 
and  slipped  into  a  chink  in  the  darkness  !    But  it  is  a  fact  all  the  same.   Once,  cer- 
tain explorers  on  an  Arctic  expedition  were  working  their  way  through  the  still,  gray 
air  in  the  eternal  silence,  when  they  suddenly  came  upon  an  antique,  spectral-look- 
ing ship  locked  in  blocks  of  ice.  They  boarded  it,  and  one  man  took  his  lantern  and 
ran  down  the  campan  ion -ladder  into  the  state-cabin.    He  held  it  up.    He  found  all 
the  ship's  company  there.  There  sat  the  captain,  with  his  hand  upon  the  log-book; 
and  there  sat  the  mate,  and  there  sat  the  doctor,  and  there  sat  the  others.     "  Cap- 
tain 1  "     There  was  no  stir.     He  cried  again,  "  Captain  !  "    But  there  was  only  tbo 
silence  that  creeps  and  shudders.     "  Captain  I  "    He  held  his  light  up  again  and 
flashed  it  around — and  what  did  that  light  reveal  ?    Dead  hands  !  dead  lips  1  dead 
eyes  ! — dead  men  !     The  cold  that  had  been  strong  enough  to  steel  them  through, 
and  to  freeze  the  life  of  their  blood,  had  been  strong  enough  to  arrest  the  touch  ol 
Decay's  hastening  fingers,  and  to  keep  fixed  in  the  form  and  attitude  of  life  Deatli 
itself,  and  to  keep  it  thus — so  it  was  said— for  nearly  half  a  century.    Oh !  man  do 
but  think  of  what  it  is  of  which  I  am  speaking.    Dead  souls  1  Lost  souls  I    4.  Look 
at  the  search  which  this  woman  is  making  in  the  house,  and  think  of  the  Holy 
Spirit's  part  in  searching  for  the  lost  soul.     There  was  once  heard  in  the  Isle  of 
Wight  a  little  girl  say  to  her  mother,  when  sweeping  the  cottage  floor,  "  Mother, 
mother,  pull  the  blind  down,  the  sunshine  makes  the  room  so  dusty."    And  so  it 
is  that  the  light  in  the  house  of  the  Interpreter  may  seem  to  make  the  room  dusty, 
but  it  seems  to  create  what  it  only  reveals  :  it  makes  us  think  that  we  are  worse 
than  we  are  when  we  are  only  wiser  than  we  were ;  it  make  us  see  ourselves,  see 
our  Saviour,  and  then,  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God."    (C 
Standford,  D.D.)        The  lost  silver  piece  : — I.  First,  the  parable  treats  of  man,  the 
object  of  Divine  mercy,  as  lost.    1.  Notice,  first,  the  treasure  was  lost  in  the  dust. 
The  woman  had  lost  her  piece  of  silver,  and  in  order  to  find  it  she  had  to  sweep  for 
it,  which  proves  that  it  had  fallen  into  a  dusty  place,  fallen  to  the  earth,  where  it 
might  be  hidden  and  concealed  amid  rubbish  and  dirt.    Every  man  of  Adam  bom 
is  as  a  piece  of  silver  lost,  fallen,  dishonoured,  and  some  are  buried  amid  foulness 
and  dust.  Thou  art  lost  by  nature,  and  thou  must  be  found  by  grace,  whoever  thou 
mayst  be.    2.  In  this  parable  that  which  was  lost  was  altogether  ignorant  of  ita 
being  lost.    The  silver  coin  was  not  a  living  thing,  and  therefore  had  no  conscious- 
ness of  its  being  lost  or  sought  after.  The  piece  of  money  lost  was  quite  as  content 
to  be  on  the  floor  or  in  the  dust,  as  it  was  to  be  in  the  purse  of  its  owner  amongst 
its  like.     It  knew  nothing  about  its  being  lost,  and  could  not  know.     And  it  is  just 
so  with  the  sinner  who  is  spiritually  dead  in  sin,  he  is  unconscious  of  his  state,  nor 
can  we  make  him  understand  the  danger  and  terror  of  his  condition.    The  insensi- 
bility of    the  piece   of    money  fairly  pictures  the    ntter  indifference  of    souls 
unquickened  by  Divine  grace.    3.  The  silver  piece  was  lost  but  not  forgotten.    The 
woman  knew  that  she  had  ten  pieces  of  silver  originally  ;  she  counted  them  over 
carefully,  for  they  were  all  her  little  store,  and  she  found  only  nine,  but  she  well 
remembered  that  one  more  was  hers  and  ought  to  be  in  her  hand.    This  is  our 
hope  for  the  Lord's  lost  ones,  they  are  lost  but  not  forgotten,  the  heart  of  the 
Saviour  remembers  them,  and  prays  for  them.  4.  Next,  the  piece  of  silver  was  lost 
but  still  claimed.  Observe  that  the  woman  called  the  money,  "  my  piece  which  was 
lost."    When  she  lost  its  possession  she  did  not  lose  her  right  to  it;  it  did  not 
become  somebody  else's  when  it  slipped  out  of  her  hand  and  fell  upon  the  floor. 
Those  for  whom  Christ  hath  died,  whom  He  hath  peculiarly  redeemed,  are  not 
Satan's  even  when  they  are  dead  in  sin.  They  may  come  under  the  devil's  usurped 
dominion,  but  the  monster  shall  be  chased  from  his  throne.    5.  Further,  observe 
that  the  lost  piece  of  money  was  not  only  remembered  and  claimed,  but  it  was  also 
valued.     In  these  three  parables  the  value  of  the  lost  article  steadily  rises.     Thia 
is  not  very  clear  at  first  sight,  because  it  inay  be  said  that  a  sheep  is  of  more  value 
than  a  piece  of  money  ;  but  notice  that  the  shepherd  only  lost  one  sheep  out  of  • 
hundred,  but  the  woman  lost  one  piece  out  of  ten,  and  the  father  one  eon  out  of 
two.     To  the  Lord  of  love  a  lost  soul  is  very  precious  :  it  is  not  because  of  ita 
intrinsic  value,  but  it  has  a  relative  value  which  God  sets  at  a  high  rate.    6.  The 
piece  of  money  was  lost,  but  it  was  not  lost  hopelessly.     The  woman  had  hopes  of 
recovering  it,  and  therefore  she  did  not  despair,  but  set  to  work  at  once.    I  con- 
gratulate the  Christian  Church  too,  that  her  piece  of  money  has  not  fallen  where 
she  cannot  find  it.    I  rejoice  that  the  fallen  around  us  are  not  past  hope  ;  yea, 
though  they  dwell  in  the  worst  dens  of  London,  though  they  be  thieves  and  harlota. 


flBAi.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  101 

they  are  not  beyond  the  reach  of  mercy.  Up,  0  Church  of  God,  while  possibilities 
of  mercy  remain !  7.  One  other  point  is  worthy  of  notice.  The  piece  of  silver  was 
lost,  but  it  was  lost  in  the  house,  and  the  woman  knew  it  to  be  so.  What  thank- 
fulness there  ought  to  be  in  your  minds  that  you  are  not  lost  as  heathens,  nor  lost 
amid  Eomish  or  Mohammedan  superstition,  but  lost  where  the  gospel  is  faithfully 
and  plainly  preached  to  you  ;  where  you  are  lovingly  told,  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  Christ  Jesus  is  not  condemned.  Lost,  but  lost  where  the  Church's  business  is  to 
look  after  you,  where  it  is  the  Spirit's  work  to  seek  and  to  find  you.  This  is  the  con- 
dition of  the  lost  soul,  depicted  as  a  lost  piece  of  silver.  II.  Secondly,  we  shall  notice 
the  soul  under  another  condition,  we  shall  view  it  as  sought.  By  whom  was  the  piece 
of  silver  sought?  1.  It  was  sought  by  its  owner  personally.  2.  This  seeking  became  a 
matter  of  chief  concern  with  the  woman.  3.  Now  note,  that  the  woman  having  thus 
set  her  heart  to  find  her  money,  she  used  the  most  fit  and  proper  means  to  accom- 
plish her  end.  First,  she  lit  a  candle.  So  doth  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Church. 
But  she  was  not  content  with  her  candle,  she  fetched  her  broom,  she  swept  the 
house.  If  she  could  not  find  the  silver  as  things  were  in  the  house,  she  brought 
the  broom  to  bear  upon  the  accumulated  dust.  Oh,  how  a  Christian  Church,  when 
it  is  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  cleanses  herself  and  purges  all  her  work  1  4.  Care- 
fully note  that  this  seeking  after  the  lost  piece  of  silver  with  fitting  instruments, 
the  broom  and  the  candle,  was  attended  with  no  small  stir.  She  swept  the  house — 
there  was  dust  for  her  eyes  ;  if  any  neighbours  were  in  the  house  there  was  dust 
for  them.  You  cannot  sweep  a  honse  without  causing  some  confusion  and  tem- 
porary discomfort.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  also,  that  in  the  seeking  of  this  piece  of 
silver  the  coin  was  sought  in  a  most  engrossing  manner.  6.  This  woman  sought 
continuously — '•  till  she  found  it. "  III.  The  piece  of  silver  found.  Found  1  1.  In 
the  first  place,  this  was  the  woman's  ultimatum,  and  nothing  short  of  it.  She 
never  stopped  until  the  coin  was  found.  So  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit's  design,  not  that 
the  sinner  should  be  brought  into  a  hopeful  state,  but  that  he  should  be  actually 
saved :  and  this  is  the  Church's  great  concern,  not  that  people  be  made  bearers, 
not  that  they  be  made  orthodox  professors,  but  that  they  be  really  changed  and 
renewed,  regenerated  and  born  again.  2.  The  woman  herself  found  the  piece  of 
money.  It  did  not  turn  up  by  accident,  nor  did  some  neighbour  step  in  and  find  it. 
The  Spirit  of  God  himself  finds  sinners,  and  the  Church  of  God  herself,  as  a  rule,  is 
the  instrument  of  their  recovery.  3.  Now  notice  when  she  had  found  it  what  she  did 
— phe  rejoiced.  The  greater  her  trouble  in  searching,  the  higher  her  joy  in  finding. 
What  joy  there  is  in  the  Church  of  God  when  sinners  are  converted  I  4.  Next,  she 
calls  her  friends  and  neighbours  to  share  her  joy.  I  am  afraid  we  do  not  treat  our 
friends  and  neighbours  with  quite  enough  respect,  or  remember  to  invite  them  to 
our  joys.  Who  are  they?  I  think  the  angels  are  here  meant;  not  only  the  angels 
in  heaven,  but  those  who  are  watching  here  below.  The  angels  are  wherever  the 
saints  are,  beholding  our  orders  and  rejoicing  in  our  joy.  The  joy  is  a  present  joy; 
it  is  a  joy  in  the  house,  in  the  Church  in  her  own  sphere ;  it  is  the  joy  of  her 
neighbours  who  are  round  about  her  here  below.  All  other  joy  seems  swallowed 
up  in  this:  as  every  other  occupation  was  suspended  to  find  the  lost  silver,  so  every 
other  joy  is  hushed  when  the  precious  thing  is  found.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
lc$t  piece  of  money  : — I.  What  befkll  this  woman.  She  had  ten  pieces  of  silver, 
and  of  these  she  lost  one — only  one.  That  lost  piece  is  man's  soul.  We  were  not 
always,  not  once,  not  at  first,  what  we  are  now.  II.  What  this  woman  did  to 
FiKD  the  monet.  She  did  everything  proper  in  the  circumstances.  She  could  not 
have  done  more.  Assuming  that  the  woman  symbolizes  the  Spirit  of  God,  the 
candle  shining  in  her  hand  is  the  Bible,  God's  revealed  Word,  which  He  takes  and 
carries  into  the  recesses  of  the  sinner's  soul,  revealing  its  foulness  and  danger  and 
misery,  and  making  him  feel  his  need  of  a  Saviour.  As  to  the  sweeping,  which 
disturbs  the  house  and  reveals  a  foulness  that,  so  long  as  it  lay  unstirred,  was  per- 
haps never  suspected :  that  may  indicate  the  convictions,  the  alarms,  the  dread 
discoveries,  the  searchings  and  agitations  of  heart,  which  not  unfrequently  accom- 
pany conversion.  It  is  not  till  the  glassy  pool  is  stirred  th^t  the  mud  at  the 
bottom  rises  to  light ;  it  is  when  storms  sweep  the  sea  that  what  it  hides  in  its 
depths  is  thrown  up  on  the  shore ;  it  is  when  brooms  sweep  walls  and  floor  that 
the  sunbeams,  struggling  through  a  cloud  of  dust,  reveal  the  foulness  of  the  house ; 
and  it  is  agitations  and  perturbations  of  the  heart  which  reveal  its  corruption,  and 
are  preludes  to  the  purity  and  peace  that  sooner  or  later  follow  on  conversion. 
III.  The  woman's  jot  at  finding  the  piece  of  silver.  There  is  a  peculiar 
pleasure  felt  in  recovering  what  we  have  lost ;  or  in  having  anything  placed  beyond 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT, 

the  reach  of  danger  which  we  are  afraid  of  losing.  No  boat  making  the  harboax 
over  a  glassy  sea,  its  snowj  canvas  filled  by  the  gentle  breeze,  and  shining  on  tha 
blue  waters  like  a  sea  bird's  wing,  is  watched  with  such  interest,  or,  as  with  sail 
flapping  on  the  mast,  it  grates  on  the  shingle,  is  welcomed  with  such  joy,  as  ono 
which,  leaving  the  wreck  on  the  thundering  reef,  comes  through  the  roaring 
tempest,  boldly  breasts  the  billows,  and  bringing  off  the  half-drowned,  half-dead 
Burvivors,  shoots  within  the  harbour  amid  flowing  tears  and  cheers  that,  bursting 
from  the  happy  crowd,  rise  above  the  rage  and  din  of  elements.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
The  Bible  a  moveable  light : — The  candle  is  a  moveable  light,  carried  by  the  woman 
from  place  to  place.  Wherever  a  lost  piece  of  money  is  to  be  sought,  there  tha 
candle  mast  be  carried  that  the  searching  may  be  thorough.  This  carrying  of  the 
caudle,  first  into  one  place  and  then  into  another,  is  the  Church's  part  iu  seeking 
for  lost  souls.  While  the  whole  truth  for  man's  salvation  is  presented  in  Holy 
Scripture,  and  any  man  who  would  inquire  as  to  the  way  of  life  may  there  find  tha 
light  he  needs  to  guide  him  aright,  men  do  not  readily  search  the  Scriptures  for 
themselves,  that  their  own  souls  may  be  saved.  In  recognition  of  this  neglect, 
illustrated  in  one  way  under  the  image  of  the  wandering  sheep,  in  another  under 
the  image  of  the  lost  piece  of  money,  the  necessity  for  the  active  work  of  seeking  ia 
acknowledged  by  the  Church,  as  it  is  here  taught  by  the  Saviour.  (Calderwood.) 
A  woman's  loss : — You  will  have  noticed  that  whereas  in  the  other  two  parables  of 
"  the  sheep,"  and  "  the  prodigal,"  it  is  "  a  man  "  who  is  represented  as  rejoicing 
over  the  returning  one — here  it  is  "a  woman."  This  may,  indeed,  be  only  to  show 
that  every  kind  of  affection  combines  in  the  joy  over  the  penitent — the  man's 
strength  and  the  woman's  tenderness.  But  there  may  be  more.  At  least,  almost 
all  the  ancient  divines  have  seen  another  sense  in  it.  They  consider  that  under 
the  female  appellation  is  meant  here,  as  in  many  other  places,  the  Church ;  and 
that  the  thought  intended  to  be  conveyed  is  of  the  Church  having  sustained  tha 
loBS,  and  the  Church,  as  a  Church,  seeking  diligently  for  the  lost  one.  And  yet 
not  altogether  the  Church,  as  something  distiuct  and  independent  in  itself — but 
the  Church  as  that  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells — the  Holy  Ghost  acting  through, 
the  means  of  grace  which  constitute  a  Church.  So,  in  the  three  parables,  they 
would  see  the  Trinity  all  combined  in  the  same  feeling  of  love  and  happiness — tha 
Son,  designated  by  the  Shepherd ;  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Church,  by  the  woman ; 
and  the  Father,  by  the  parent  of  the  prodigal.  A  great  thought  and  a  true  one, 
even  though  the  steps  by  which  we  here  arrive  at  it  may  appear  to  some  fanciful. 
Certain  it  is,  that  every  soul  which  is  in  a  condition  to  perish,  is  lost,  not  only  to 
God,  but  to  the  Church.  And  well  were  it  if  the  Church  always  so  regarded  it. 
And  well  if  every  member  of  the  Church  so  felt  it  a  personal  loss  to  himself  that 
any  one  single  soul  should  die,  that  he  could  not  help  but  stir  up  himself,  and  stir 
up  others,  to  seek  that  soul  till  it  was  found.  Would  that  the  Holy  Ghost  were 
going  forth  in  the  one  great  Catholic  Church,  uniting  in  this  feeling  and  in  this 
resolve — that  she  would  give  herself  no  rest  so  long  as  there  was  one  precious  soul 
committed  to  her  care  which  was  lying  undiscovered  and  unredeemed.  For  mark, 
brethren,  the  woman — different  in  this  from  the  shepherd  and  the  prodigal's 
father — seeks  a  thing  which  her  own  folly  and  her  own  carelessness  had  lost. 
First,  she  "  lights  a  candle " — the  well-known  emblem  in  the  Bible  of  three 
things — first,  the  Spirit  of  God  in  a  man's  soul ;  secondly,  the  Word  of  God ; 
thirdly,  the  consistent  lives  of  ministers  and  other  servants  of  God.  And  these 
three  together  make  the  great  detective  force,  and  so  ultimately  the  great  resto- 
rative power  which  God  uses  in  this  world.  0  that  every  Church  had  lighted  their 
candle  I  O  that  our  candles  were  burning  better !  0  that  the  Holy  Ghost — prayed 
for  and  honoured,  cherished  and  magnified  in  His  o^vn  office — were  here  to  be  a 
great  Illuminator  in  the  midst  of  us  !  0  that  every  baptized  person  were  shining 
as  he  ought  to  be,  in  his  daily  walk,  in  good  works,  and  kind  acts,  and  witnesses  of 
God's  truth  in  this  world !  0  think  you,  brethren,  how  then  would  the  dark 
places  of  our  land  begin  to  grow  bright  again  t  How  would  the  whole  house  shine  ! 
How  would  the  poor  lost  ones  be  found  1  So,  with  the  lighted  candle,  the  woman 
went  to  "  sweep  the  house."  It  is  a  great  commotion  and  disturbance  to  "  sweep  " ; 
but  then  it  leads  to  cleanliness  and  order.  So  God's  sweepings  are  severe  things  t 
But  then  it  is  only  to  brush  away  what  had  no  right  to  be  there.  It  is  only  to  dis- 
close precious  things  out  of  the  rubbish.  And  there  are  precious  things  in  our  souls 
so  covered  with  dust  that  they  need  sweeping.  Afflictions  will  come,  and  scatter  to 
the  winds  the  incrnsted  sediment  that  has  been  so  long  thickening  upon  a  man's 
mind.    And  for  the  time,  while  the  sweeping  ia  going  on,  the  confusion  and  th« 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  103 

obscurity  will  seem  only  the  greater.  But  you  will  not  presently  complain — yon 
will  not  regret  the  turmoil — when  the  costly  thing,  that  was  almost  hidden, 
sparkles  again  in  the  hand  of  its  great  Proprietor.  Sweep  oar  house,  Lord,  for  we 
need  it — not  with  the  besom  of  destruction,  though  we  deserve  it — but  sweep 
away,  Lord,  as  thou  knowest  best,  every  •*  refuge  of  lies "  where  our  soul  lies 
buried  I  All  the  parables  agree  in  the  one,  blessed,  crowning  thought — "  till  she 
find  it."  It  is  not  a  light  achievement.  It  was  not  a  day's  work — it  was  not  a 
week's  work — or  a  year's  work — the  recovery  of  that  soul  of  yours.  Many  an 
enterprise  was  begun  and  laid  down  again,  and  never  ended  by  men,  in  that  veiy 
interval  which  elapsed  between  the  time  when  God — ^your  faithful,  untiring  God — 
begun  to  deal  with  your  soul,  and  the  time  when  He  made  yon  go  to  Him. 
{J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Church'$  neglect  of  stmU : — Sometimes,  in  visions  of  a 
moumful  fancy,  I  seem  to  see  this  Mother-Church  of  ours  sitting  within  her 
ancient  and  noble  house,  sitting  as  a  woman  exceeding  fair,  but  very  cold  and  still ; 
and  BO  she  sitteth  with  her  hands  folded  before  her,  as  though  she  said  to  herself, 
"  I  shall  be  a  lady  for  ever ;  I  shall  not  sit  as  a  widow,  neither  shall  I  know  the 
loss  of  children."  And  year  by  year,  century  after  century,  the  dust  falls  and 
gathers,  and  falls  in  the  silence  around  her,  and  all  things  are  covered  as  with  a 
shroud,  and  the  precious  coins  are  lost  to  sight  and  buried  deep  beneath.  And 
then  I  seem  to  see  her  arousing  herself  at  last  from  her  long  waking  dream,  and 
looking  about  with  dismay  for  her  lost  treasures — bestirring  herself  to  find  them, 
sweeping  the  dust  away  here  and  there,  bringing  to  light  with  busy  toil  many  a 
shining  effigy  of  the  great  King.  And  then  I  seem  to  hear  indignant  voices  of 
those  who  clamour  and  storm  against  her  for  disturbing  quiet  things,  and  making 
nnnecessary  agitation,  and  raising  an  unpleasant  dust ;  all  the  rich  people,  and  the 
comfortable  people,  and  the  people  that  are  well  at  ease,  and  all  that  have  no  care 
for  souls — all  are  angry  with  her,  and  cry  out  to  her,  "  Why  can  you  not  sit  still  as 

Jrou  did  before,  and  if  the  dust  falls,  let  it  fall,  and  if  the  coins  of  the  Eing  be  lost, 
et  them  be  lost  ?  only  trouble  us  not,  only  do  not  vex  our  souls  with  all  this  stir 
and  dust."  Once  again  I  seem  to  see  her  that  sometime  sat  as  a  queen  and  was 
not  moved  ;  I  seem  to  see  hn  disconcerted  and  perplexed,  anxious  to  recover  the 
lost,  yet  anxious  not  to  give  offence ;  I  see  her  hesitate  and  quail,  and  lay  aside 
her  search  with  sorrow,  and  sit  down  again,  but  not  at  ease ;  I  see  the  dust  begin 
to  fall  and  settle  again,  and  fall  and  gather  around  her  thicker  and  thicker,  until 
every  shining  coin  be  lost  beneath  the  growing  litter  of  neglect.  Last  of  all,  I  see 
a  day  arise,  black  with  wind  and  rain,  against  that  ancient  house  wherein  the 
woman  sits  ;  I  see  the  tempest  of  God's  anger  loosed  upon  it,  I  see  the  lightning  of 
His  indignation  launched  against  it ;  I  see  her  crushed  and  buried  beneath  the 
wreck,  among  the  silver  pieces  which  she  lost  and  did  not  find.  {R,  Winterbotliam, 
M.A.)  The  Oriental  setting  of  this  parable  : — The  touches  about  lighting  the 
candle  (or  better,  lamp,  or  hght),  sweeping  the  house,  and  seeking  diligently,  and 
calling  the  friends  and  neighbours  together,  are  not  without  some  pertinent  modem 
Oriental  illustrations.  Most  of  the  native  houses  are  without  glass  windows,  and 
are  very  dark  when  shut  up.  Often  the  windows  are  small,  and  sometimes  kept 
shut,  as  a  rule  depending  on  the  door  for  Ught.  They  are  dark  places.  The  floor, 
too,  is  often  earth,  or  perhaps  mortar,  and  very  dirty.  Where  animals  dwell  with 
the  family,  as  is  very  common,  the  dirt  is  such  as  is  best  left  to  the  imagination. 
In  such  cases  the  particulars  mentioned  in  verse  eight  are  by  no  means  superfluous. 
So,  too,  the  calling  of  the  friends  and  neighbours  together.  One  of  the  difficulties 
in  picking  up  the  Arabic  language  among  the  common  people  is  the  paucity  of 
subjects  of  conversation.  Little  is  to  be  heard  except  bargaining  among  the  men, 
and  accounts  of  the  most  ordinary  household  operations  among  the  women — except 
in  the  case  of  some  rather  public  scolds,  whose  voices,  without  a  particle  of  ex- 
aggeration, sounds  to  the  Occidental  like  the  falling  and  rattling  of  boards.  The 
occasion  of  losing  and  finding  a  piece  of  money  would  be  a  piece  of  great  good 
fortune  to  the  gossips,  as  the  writer  has  actually  witnessed.  It  would  be  an  incident 
for  a  nine  days'  talk.  And  such  terrible  busybodies  as  they  are !  Every  one  knows, 
at  least,  all  hia  or  her  neighbours'  business,  and  more  besides,  to  an  extent  not 
readily  defined.  The  woman  wbo  loses  and  finds  a  piece  of  money  would  not  be 
long  in  calliug  her  friends  and  neighbours  together;  nor  would  they  be  slow 
to  come  even  uninvited.  The  babel  of  telling  the  story  and  commenting  and 
congratulating  is  not  to  be  imagined  in  our  land.  The  talk  could  be  heard 
a    long    distance.      (Professor   Isaac  H.    Hall.)  The    ten  pieces  of  silver: — 

In   the   three  parables  recorded  in   this  chapter  there  is  so    evidently  a  pro 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xV. 

gress  and  ascent  of  thought,  they  mount  so  naturally  to  a  climax  in  their 
revelation  of  the  redeeming  love  of  God,  that  if  at,  any  point  we  fail  to 
make  that  progress  out,  if  we  encounter  anything  in  them  which  wears 
the  aspect  of  an  anti-climax,  we  are  checked,  disappointed,  perplexed.  And  yet  in 
the  second  of  these  parables  there  is  at  one  point  an  apparent  retrocession,  where 
all  else  implies  a  forward  and  upward  movement  of  thought.  Every  one  can  see 
how  immense  an  interval  there  is  between  the  one  sheep  lost  out  of  a  hundred,  and 
the  one  son  out  of  two,  and  that  the  younger — and  in  the  Bible  commonly  the 
dearer — of  the  two.  But  where  is  the  connecting  link  ?  How  should  the  lost  piece 
of  money  be  dearer  to  the  careful  housewife  than  the  lost  sheep  to  the  faithful 
shepherd,  who  knows  and  cares  for  every  one  of  his  flock  and  calleth  them  each  by 
his  name  ?  One  out  of  ten  marks  a  great  advance  upon  one  out  of  a  hundred 
indeed  ;  but  would  it  not  be  less  to  lose  even  ten  silver  coins  than  a  single  sheep — 
less  in  value,  less  in  love?  The  answer  to  that  question,  the  solution  of  the 
difficulty,  is  to  be  found  in  an  Eastern  custom,  the  application  of  which  to  the 
parable  before  us  all  commentators  on  it  have,  so  far  as  I  know,  overlooked.  The 
women  of  Bethlehem,  and  of  other  parts  of  the  Holy  Land,  still  wear  a  row  of 
coins  sewn  upon  their  head-dress,  and  pendant  over  their  brows.  And  the  number 
of  the  coins  is  very  commonly  ten,  as  I,  in  common  with  other  travellers,  have 
ascertained  by  counting.  The  custom  reaches  back  far  beyond  the  Christian  era. 
In  all  probability,  therefore,  it  was  not  simply  a  piece  of  silver  which  was  lost  out 
of  her  purse  by  the  woman  of  our  parable,  but  one  of  the  ten  precious  coins  which 
formed  her  most  cherished  ornament ;  and  this  would  be  a  loss  even  more  vividly 
felt  than  that  of  the  shepherd  when  one  out  of  his  flock  of  a  hundred  went  astray. 
So  that  immense  as  is  the  advance  from  both  the  care  of  the  shepherd  for  his 
sheep,  and  of  the  pride  of  the  woman  in  the  burnished  coins  which  gleamed  apon 
her  forehead,  to  the  yearning  and  pitiful  love  of  the  father  for  his  prodigal  and 
self-banished  son,  we  can  nevertheless  find  a  link  between  the  first  and  last  terms 
of  the  climax,  and  trace  an  advance  even  between  the  grief  of  the  shepherd  over 
his  stray  sheep,  and  that  of  the  woman  over  her  lost  coin.  A  piece  of  money  in 
her  purse  might  easily  be  stolen  or  spent;  but  a  coin  from  the  head-dress  could  not 
be  so  much  as  touched  by  any  stranger,  nor  even  taken  from  its  wearer  by  her 
husband  unless  she  cut  it  off  of  her  own  accord  and  placed  it  in  his  hands.  It 
was  safe,  sacred,  dear.  It  was  a  strictly  personal  possession,  and  might  very  well 
be  an  heirloom — like  the  "  silvers  "  of  the  Swiss  women — hallowed  by  many  fond 
and  gracious  memories.  {A.  G.  Weld.)  Broken  harmony  : — If,  as  has  been 
alleged,  the  ten  pieces  of  silver  form  the  bride's  necklace,  and  constitute  a  marriage 
token,  like  our  wedding  ring,  the  work  of  the  whole  is  marred  by  the  destruction  of 
its  unity.  And  thus  we  can  gauge  more  accurately  God's  loss  by  man's  sin.  The 
oneness  of  the  creative  plan  is  broken.  From  those  beings  whom  God  made  for 
the  harmonious  unfolding  of  His  purposes,  for  the  manifestation  of  His  glory,  and 
for  the  beautifying  of  His  universe,  one  order  has  broken  loose  and  impaired  the 
symmetry  and  perfect  working  of  the  whole.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  _  Lost  to  use : — 
Whatever  ornamental  or  symbolical  uses  this  coin  might  serve,  it  was  the  Roman 
denarius,  and  had,  therefore,  a  money  value.  Stamped  with  the  monarch's  image 
and  superscription,  it  was  a  means  of  purchase,  and  was  capable  of  self-multipli- 
cation in  the  way  of  usury.  So,  made  in  the  Divine  likeness,  man  is  the  current 
coin  of  the  Lord's  universe.  He  is  so  constituted  in  mind  and  body  as  to  be  o£  use 
to  God  in  executing  His  sovereign  purposes,  and  iu  multiplying  himself  in  sought 
and  rescued  souls.  No  agency  for  these  ends  is  comparable  to  man,  and  men 
failing  in  this  high  vocation  are  lost.  And  how  many  are  thus  lost  ?  lost  as  utterly 
to  usefulness  as  though  they  themselves,  as  well  as  their  talent,  were  wrapped  in  a 
napkin  and  buried  in  the  earth  1  And  amongst  them  are  many  who  are  painfully 
anxious  about  their  precious  souls,  but  are  lost  because  they  act  as  though  there 
•were  no  precious  sotds  but  their  own.  For  the  solemn  admonition  of  the  Saviour 
holds  good  here :  "  Whosoever  will  seek  to  save  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  whosoever 
shall  lose  his  life  for  My  sake  and  the  gospel's,  the  same  shall  save  it."  {Ihid.) 
Lost  in  the  house  : — What  a  meaning  this  parable  has  for  those  who  are  lost  in  a 
Christian  home,  school,  sanctuary,  and  who,  while  neither  blasphemers,  nor  infidels, 
nor  libertines,  and  while  maintaining  a  nominal  connection  with  God  and  His 
cause,  are  lost  1  Lost  to  duty,  with  all  around  them  conducive  to  consecration; 
lost  to  the  love  of  God,  while  daiiy  loaded  with  Divine  benefits  I  {Ibid.)  Th4 
Spirit's  work  in  the  coul : — He  is  Christ's  fan  and  Christ's  fire.  He  thoroughly 
purges  His  floor  and  throws  a  lurid  light  on  the  sinner's  state.     He  sweeps  away 


our.  XT.]  8T.  LUKE.  105 

the  cobwebs  of  error  by  His  powerful  convictions,  and  pours  the  truth  of  sin  and 
righteousness  and  judgment  into  the  mind.  He  overturns  the  temple  of  fovmalism 
by  the  might  of  His  power  and  lays  bare  the  hollowness  of  those  who  worship  God 
with  their  lips  while  their  hearts  are  far  from  Him.  The  dust  of  self-deception 
flies  as  His  sharp  appeals  to  the  conscience  leave  the  self -deluded  without  excuse. 
Some  dire  affliction  clears  the  souJ  of  its  worldUness,  and  the  lovers  of  pleasure 
more  than  lovers  of  God  are  confronted  with  their  doom.  He  strips  the  sham  of  aU 
his  dissim alation  by  the  manifestation  of  the  stern  realities  of  God  and  of  eternity, 
and  demonstrates  the  futility  of  the  profession  of  religion  without  the  possession 
of  its  power.  Often  His  work  has  to  be  repeated.  Encumbrances  removed  are 
replaced  and  removed  again.  Hunted  from  one  comer  the  sinner  takes  refuge  in 
another,  and  is  still  pursued.  Nor  does  the  Spirit  cease  to  strive  with  man  until 
resistance  becomes  hopeless  obduracy,  and  until  the  final  quenching  of  His  light 
leaves  tlie  sinner  in  outer  darkness.  {Ibid.)  The  utility  of  disturharwe : — And 
as  mere  habit  and  neglect  hide  souls  from  themselves,  and  from  the  just  sympathy 
and  care  of  their  fellows,  God's  Spirit  sends  its  great  disturbing  agencies  into  the 
society,  the  nation,  the  age,  or  into  the  nanower  bounds  of  the  family.  The  besom 
does  not  really  make  the  new  dust ;  but  it  only  brings  the  old  and  long-gathering 
deposit  more,  for  a  time,  into  the  air  and  upon  the  lungs.  The  messengers  of  the 
gospel  are,  for  the  time,  regarded  as  "  turning  the  world  upside  down."  Or  God's 
providences  in  calamities,  and  wars,  and  social  revolutions,  show  men  the  magni- 
tude of  past  hereditary  errors.  The  besom  of  judgment  goes  shaking  society  out 
of  its  torpor  and  equanimity.  It  was  so  in  Luther's  day,  and  in  Calvin's.  It  waa 
BO  in  the  Puritans  of  our  ancestral  Britain,  and  in  their  colonists  who  crossed  to 
this  country.  God,  by  them,  broke  up  many  a  pile  of  quiet  litter ;  and  brushed 
aside  many  a  film  of  long-settled  green  mould,  picturesque  in  its  verdure,  or 
venerable  in  its  grey,  hoar  antiquity,  which  had  gathered  upon  the  national 
conscience.  But  a  Bunyan,  and  a  Milton,  and  a  Baxter,  and  an  Owen,  and  a  Howe 
were  precious  medals  brought  out  by  the  besoming ;  and  constitutional  freedom  and 
national  morality,  and  EngUsh  literature,  and  Christian  piety  were  greatly  enriched 
by  the  agitation.  It  was  so  in  the  revolution  that  made  us  a  nation.  It  was  so  in 
the  agitations  that  went  over  Europe  in  the  train  of  our  first  revolution.  It  was 
BO  in  our  last  great  struggle.  It  has  been  so  in  modern  missions.  Would  you  put 
that  shaking  and  besoming  peremptorily  and  effectually  down  ?  We  hear,  behind 
the  turmoil  and  the  thick  streaming  clouds  of  dust,  as  God's  great  besoms  sweep 
along,  the  words  of  an  august  cry  :  "  I  will  overturn,  and  overturn,  and  overturn 
until  He,  whose  right  it  is  to  reign,  shall  come."  {W.  R.  Williams.)  God's 
search  for  tlie  lost : — God  is  as  incapable  of  being  indifferent  towards  His  lost  man- 
kind, as  is  a  mother  towards  her  lost  child.  Lost  mankind  are  not  only  His  lost, 
but  His  lost  children.  His  piece  of  money  is  money  indeed,  for  originally  it  came 
out  of  the  mine  of  His  eternal  nature.  Heathen  poets.  Christian  apostles,  and 
modern  philosophy  are  agreed  that  mankind  "  are  His  offspring."  And  does  not 
the  Source  of  all  hearts  feel?  And  is  He  not  concerned  for  His  lost?  In  the 
Divinity  of  indifference  I  cannot  beheve.  And  yet  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think 
that,  to  many,  one  great  offence  of  the  gospel  is,  that  it  is  too  gracious,  too  tender 
too  womanly.  They  can  conceive  God  to  have  Almighty  power,  infinite  wisdom 
and  justice,  but  they  cannot  give  Him  credit  for  infinite  affection.  They  know  that 
a  woman  will  light  a  candle  and  go  into  every  hole  and  comer,  stooping  and 
searching,  until  she  find  that  which  she  has  missed ;  but  they  have  no  idea  that 
this  can  be  a  true  parable  of  God's  concern  for  His  lost  children.  They  are  not 
surprised  to  find  a  heart  in  my  Lady  Franklin :  they  are  not  surprised  at  any 
measures  that  she  may  set  on  foot  to  recover  the  lost  one.  They  are  not  sui-prised 
that  the  British  and  American  Governments  should  be  concerned  to  seek,  and  if 
possible,  to  save  Sir  John  and  his  crew.  No  one  said,  they  are  not  worth  the 
expense  and  labour  of  seeking,  because  they  are  few.  Not  far  from  a  million 
pounds  were  sacrificed  in  this  search.  Besides  money,  good  brothers  were  not 
found  backward  to  expose  their  own  lives  to  danger,  in  the  distant  hope  of  finding 
and  relieving  their  missing  brothers.  Have  the  English  Government  and  people 
so  great  a  concern  to  recover  their  lost,  and  has  God  none?  Better  say  that  a  drop 
contains  more  than  the  ocean,  that  a  candle  gives  more  light  than  the  sun,  that 
there  are  higher  virtues  in  a  stream  than  in  its  source,  and  that  the  creature  has 
more  heart  than  God.  Otherwise  confess,  that  the  gospel  is  infinitely  worthy  of 
the  heart  of  God ;  and  never  more  imagine  the  great  Father  to  fijid  rest  under  the 
loss  of  His  human  family,  in  the  consolation :  "  They  are  nothing  compared  witb 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt. 

My  universe,  they  will  never  be  miBsed."  (J.  Puhford.)  Lost  treasure : — In  the 
parable  of  the  lost  coin  the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  is,  that  something  considered 
of  value  had  been  lost.  The  lighting  of  the  candle,  the  sweeping  of  the  house,  the 
diligent  search,  everything  else  being  laid  aside  to  attend  to  this  matter,  all  showed 
that  the  thing  lost  was  regarded  as  quite  important.  So  when  the  soul  of  man 
becomes  lost  through  sin,  the  most  valuable  object  in  the  world  is  lost.  Whether 
we  reflect  upon  the  soul's  vast  power  of  endless  progress ;  its  wonderful  capacity 
of  investigating  the  universe,  from  the  lowest  depthe  of  earth  to  the  highest  star; 
its  ability  to  hold  converse  and  communion  vrith  the  great  God  Himself,  and  there 
to  find  its  highest  delight ;  its  rapidity  of  thought  by  which  it  can  move  through 
the  universe  in  the  tvrinkling  of  an  eye ;  or  the  great  interest  that  has  been 
manifested  in  it  by  all  heaven — we  must  see  its  amazing  value.  The  exceeding 
value  of  man's  soul  is  seen  in  what  Jesus  has  done  for  it.  Men  often  put  forth 
great  efforts  for  very  insignificant  objects.  But  when  we  see  the  Saviour  leave  His 
bright  throne  in  the  heavens,  and  become  a  homeless  wanderer  upon  the  earth,  that 
He  might  save  lost  souls,  we  are  able  to  form  some  estimate  of  the  soul's  value. 
Oh,  yes;  in  Calvary  we  see  how  much  is  lost  when  the  soul  is  lostl  This  is  the 
precious  thing  that  was  lost.  What  a  loss  !  The  loss  of  reputation,  of  wealth,  ol 
health,  of  property,  of  life — all  are  nothing  to  such  •  loss  as  this.  And  such  is 
man's  position  out  of  Christ.     {J.  B.  Boyd.) 

Ver.  10.  Joy  In  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God. — Joy  among  the  angels  over 
repenting  sinners : — I.  The  class  eepkesented  as  being  specially  excited  by  the 
EMOTION  OF  JOY  ovEB  A  sinneb's  bepentance.  "  The  augels  of  God  " — uncorporeal, 
immaculately  holy,  composed  of  various  orders,  active  messengers  of  God  to  men. 
II.  Why  do  the  angels  kejoice  when  a  binnee  bepents  7  1.  Because  true  repent- 
ance culminates  in  that  holiness  of  heart  and  life  which  is  the  chief  glory  of  the 
angels.  2.  Because  the  moral  character  of  a  sinner's  influence  is  for  ever  changed 
by  his  conversion.  3.  By  repentance  and  conversion  a  sinner  escapes  eternal  retri- 
bution for  his  sins,  and  secures  moral  fitness  for  eternal  life.  III.  What  lessons 
DO  WB  LEAKN  FBOM  THESE  EAOTB  ?  1.  That  We  manifest  the  spirit  of  the  angelio 
race  when  we  labour  to  lead  sinners  to  Christ  and  rejoice  over  their  conversion. 
2.  That  the  preaching  with  which  the  angels  sympathize  is  of  that  type  best  cal- 
culated to  bring  sinners  to  repentance.  3.  The  appalling  peril  of  a  sinner  over 
whose  repentance  no  angels  have  rejoiced.  Sin  has  but  one  logical  issue — eternal 
death.  Give  the  angels  a  chance  to  rejoice  to-day  over  your  repentance.  {S.  V. 
Leach,  L.D. )  Heaven's  joy  over  the  repenting  sinner  : — I.  The  tecth  heee  declabed. 
1.  The  joy  mentioned  is  special.  2.  The  joy  is  shared,  originated  by  God  Himself. 
n.  The  cause  of  the  angelic  joy.  1.  A  sinner.  2.  Not  the  sinner  while  engaged 
in  sin.  3.  One  sinner  that  repenteth.  4.  Bepentance  stands  before  us  here 
showing  plainly  two  sides.  (1)  Produced  by  the  grace  of  God.  (2)  A  dehberate 
«ct  on  the  part  of  the  sinner.  It  is  the  confluence  of  these  two  streams  that  issues 
»  true  repentance.  III.  Why  such  gladness  should  be  shown.  1.  When  a 
sinner  repents,  God's  purpose  is  effected.  2.  Christ's  kingdom  is  enlarged.  3.  A 
soul  is  saved.  Conclusion  :  1.  Behold  the  value  of  a  single  soul.  2.  Observe  the 
necessity  of  repentance.  {W.  S.  Bruce,  M.A.)  Angels  and  men : — I.  The  natcbb 
AND  CHABACTEEisTics  OF  ANGELS.  Spiritual  beings  of  high  dignity  and  capacities. 
1 .  Their  might.  They  excel  in  strength.  The  army  of  God.  2.  Their  power. 
Great  mental  endowments.  3.  Their  purity.  IL  Theib  jot  at  the  becoveby  and  coh- 
VEESiON  OF  siNNEES.  1.  It  proceeds  from  their  superior  knowledge  of  what  man's 
place  in  the  intelligent  aniverse  is :  his  Divine  origin,  and  sublime  destiny.  2. 
The  conversion  of  a  sinner  brings  joy  to  the  angelic  hosts,  because  thereby  their 
liege  Lor^  is  honoured.  His  name  exalted.  His  grace  magnified.  His  rule  acknow- 
ledged, and  His  word  found  not  to  have  returned  to  Him  void.  3.  Their  happiness 
is  to  see  happiness,  and  conversion  is  the  first  step  to  a  sinner's  happiness.  III. 
The  duty  devolting  upon  oueselveb,  to  do  that  which  may  augment  both  theib 
JOY  AND  0X7ES.  We  must  engage  in  good  works,  and  endeavour,  each  in  his  own 
vocation  and  ininistry,  to  lead  sinners  to  repentance.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Angel* 
joyful  over  the  repentance  of  a  sinrur : — L  View  the  scene  on  eabth  which  thb 
TEXT  SPEEADS  BEFOBE  US.  What  is  its  nature  ?  To  the  carnal  eye  it  presents 
nothing  that  is  attractive  or  worthy  of  regard.  It  opens  to  our  view,  not  an  indi- 
vidual in  a  state  of  hilarity  and  mirth,  indulging  himself  in  sensual  delights;  bat 
a  poor  weary,  heavy-laden  sinner,  repenting  of  his  transgressions.  1.  Bepentance 
includes  brokenness  of  heart.    2.  Self- abhorrence  enters  into  the  spirit  of  tni« 


eaxp.  XT.]  8T.  LUKE.  107 

repentance.  8.  Godly  sorrow  for  sin  is  an  essential  ingredient  of  evangelical 
repentance.  4.  The  spirit  of  prayer  is  always  associated  with  repentance.  6.  Faith 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  connected  with  scriptural  repentance.  IL  Let  va 
GiiANCE  AT  THB  HEAVENLY  SCENE.  1.  Angcls  are  benevolent  beings ;  partaking  largely 
of  the  moral  qualities  of  the  Deity,  of  the  beneficence  and  compassion  of  His 
nature,  they  feel  interested  and  delighted  in  whatever  promotes  the  welfare  and 
happiness  of  Qod's  intelligent  creatures.  2.  Angels  are  joyful  at  the  repentance  of 
a  sinner,  because  a  splendid  victory  is  achieved.  3.  Angels  are  joyful  at  the  event, 
because  an  immortal  being  is  saved.  4.  There  is  joy  among  the  angels  at  this 
occurrence,  because  God  is  glorified  in  it — each  person  in  the  Trinity.  {Essex 
Remembrancer.)  Angels  rejoice  over  repenting  sinners  : — I  would  employ  this 
subject  in  order — L  To  bemind  Christian  believers  of  certain  duties  which  they 
OWE.  We  learn,  then,  from  the  words  before  us,  that  the  repentance  of  sinners  is, 
to  these  holy  beings,  an  occasion  of  rejoicing ;  and  this  may  be  supposed  to  arise, 
in  the  first  place,  from  the  reverence  and  love  which  they  indulge  for  the  character 
and  authority  of  God.  In  a  kingdom  where  the  sovereign,  ruling  in  equity  and  in 
mercy,  dwells  generally  in  the  affections  of  his  loyal  subjects,  when  rebellion  and 
treason  lay  down  their  arms  and  sue  for  mercy,  the  circumstance  is  surely  hailed 
by  every  loyal  subject  as  a  matter  of  sincere  rejoicing.  2.  The  joy  indulged  by 
angels  over  the  repentance  of  a  sinner,  may  be  considered  as  arising,  secondly,  from 
that  spirit  of  benevolence,  that  love  to  human  nature,  which  forms,  of  course,  one 
principal  feature  in  their  character,  as  it  is  an  attribute  of  that  God,  whom,  in  this 
respect  as  well  as  in  others,  they  must  be  considered  to  resemble.  They,  therefore, 
rejoice  over  the  repentance  of  a  sinner,  because  it  is  the  beginning  of  his  own 
salvation,  and  also,  because  it  is  the  beginning  of  blessedness  which  is  likely  to 
extend,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to  all  around  him.  3.  The  joy  indulged  by 
angels  over  the  repentance  of  a  sinner  may  be  considered  as  arising,  thirdly,  from 
the  interest  they  take  in  the  spread  of  the  Bedeemer's  kingdom.  4.  Another 
reason,  probably,  which  has  sometimes  been  referred  to,  why  angels  rejoice  over  the 
repentance  of  a  sinner  is,  that  they  may  have  been  instrumental,  though  in  a  way 
unknown  to  us,  in  bringing  that  sinner  to  repentance.  For  it  has  been  said,  there 
is  nothing  extravagant  in  supposing  that  He  who  so  frequently  employs,  in  the 
salvation  of  the  souls  of  men,  the  instrumentality  of  human  agents,  should  some- 
times employ,  though  in  a  way  unknown  by  us,  the  instrumentality  of  angels ; 
and  if  so,  we  find  in  this  circumstance  another  reason  why  angels  indulge  the 
joy  referred  to  in  the  text,  over  the  repentance  of  a  sinner.  II.  That  while 
these  words  supply  admonition  and  instruction  to  Christian  believers,  they  abb 

ALSO  DESIONED  AND  FITTED  TO  SUPPLY  ENCOUEAQEUBNT  TO  PENITENTS.  IIL  By  WAY  OF 
ADUONinON  AND  BEPBOOF,   TO  ADDBE8S  A  WOBD   OB  TWO   TO   THE   IMPENITENT  AND   T7N- 

CONTEBTED.  First  of  all  observe  what  a  contrast  there  is  between  the  joy  that 
angels  express  on  the  repentance  of  a  sinner  and  your  unconcern  about  your  own 
repentance.  Once  more  I  would  observe,  still  addressing  myself  to  persons  of  the 
same  description,  if,  according  to  the  declaration  of  my  text,  there  be  "  joy  in  the 
presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,"  then  may  we  not 
suppose  that,  if  there  be  such  a  thing  as  joy  in  hell,  there  is  joy  there  over  every 
one  that  goeth  on  in  his  iniquity  ?  (J.  Crowther.)  The  joy  of  heaven  over  a 
repentant  sinTier : — I.  In  the  first  place,  attend  to  the  event  itself  thus  ex- 
pressed— "  a  sinner  that  repenteth."  In  the  first  part  of  this  statement  we  are  all 
included,  being  all  sinners.  From  the  second  part  we  may  be  excluded,  for  we 
may  not  be  all  penitents.  There  are  also  stupid  unconcerned  sinners,  who  look  no 
farther  than  the  body.  There  are  light-minded,  careless  sinners,  whom  sorrow 
never  clouds,  to  whom  pleasure  in  every  form  is  welcome,  and  into  whose  hearts  no 
seriouB  thought  ever  enters.  And  there  are  worldly-minded  sinners,  who  have  no 
time,  DO  inclination,  and  no  leisure,  for  religion.  There  are  also  procrastinating 
sinners,  who  admit  the  necessity,  but  delay  the  duty,  of  repentance.  Nay,  there 
are  even,  in  some  measure,  convinced  and  awakened  sinners,  whose  convictions 
have  not  terminated  in  conversion.  Like  Cain,  they  complain,  and  they  wander, 
and  they  reckon  somehow,  that  Ood  is  hard,  and  that  they  are  suffering  more  than 
they  can  bear.  Like  Esau,  they  weep,  but  it  is  for  an  earthly  portion,  and  because 
they  succeed  not  according  to  what  they  reckon  due  to  their  talents,  their  skill,  or 
their  industry.  Or,  like  Ahab,  they  may  clothe  themselves  in  sackcloth,  and  sit  in 
ashes,  and  walk  steadily  for  a  season,  but  still  their  hearts  are  not  right  with  God. 
The  repentance  supposed  is  not  a  seeming  but  a  real  repentance,  and  is  in  com- 
plete bknnony  with  the  l*w  and  the  goepeL    The  law  is  honoured  by  the  terrot 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

which  it  produces :  the  gospel  is  honoared  by  the  peace  which  it  maintains.  Oo4 
is  obeyed,  and  the  penitent  himself  praises  God,  and  says,  He  hath  delivered  mint 
eyes  Irom  tears,  my  feet  from  falling,  and  my  soul  from  hell.  II.  Let  us  proceed 
now,  then,  to  meditate  on  the  joytulness  of  the  syxNT  mentioned  in  the  text. 
"  There  is  joy,"  says  our  Lord,  *'  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  on« 
sinner  that  repenteth."  Think,  then,  in  the  first  place,  of  the  high  character,  of 
the  high  rank  of  the  order  of  beings  now  spoken  of  as  rejoicing — Angels,  who 
occupy  a  higher  place  in  the  scale  of  creation  than  men.  2.  In  the  second  place, 
we  may  consider  the  intensity,  the  universality  of  the  feeling  that  is  produced.  It 
might  be  true  to  say  of  the  angels  in  heaveu,  that  they  rejoice,  though  the  joy  waa 
but  slight  or  transient,  although  it  pervaded  only  a  part  of  the  heavenly  host. 
The  idea,  however,  conveyed  to  us  here  is  the  idea,  not  of  a  slight  or  of  a  transient, 
but  of  a  deep  and  of  a  permanent  impression,  and  it  is  the  idea,  moreover,  not  of 
joy  only  among  a  few,  but  of  joy  among  all,  of  but  one  feeling  and  one  expression 
of  feeling,  through  all  the  innumerable  company  of  angels.  3.  Again  we  may 
think,  in  the  third  place,  of  the  season  at  which  suoh  joy  is  stated  as  commencing, 
not  when  the  sinner  enters  heaven,  not  when  his  repentance  issues  in  eternal  life. 
4.  I  have  only  to  state  in  the  last  place  that  each  case  of  conversion  is  supposei 
here  to  be  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  produce  this  joy.  There  is  joy  in  the  presence 
of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  Numbers  are  not  necessary 
in  order  to  convey  to  us  the  idea  of  value  or  importance.  No  doubt  there  was 
great  joy  on  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  and  when  thousands  were  converted,  no  iSoubt 
there  was  great  joy  afterwards,  when  5,000  were  added  to  the  Church ;  no  doubt 
there  was  great  joy  again,  when  a  multitude  of  the  priests  and  of  the  people 
believed  ;  but  still  each  individual  as  marked  in  heaven's  book,  may  be  considered 
as  a  fit  occasion  for  praising  God,  and  as  serving  to  minister  to  the  delight  of 
angels.  Or  we  shall  even  take  it  in  another  light — you  may  suppose  that  one 
soul  converted  may,  in  special  circumstances,  or  at  particular  seasons,  or  because 
of  the  individual  character,  be  of  great  importance,  even  as  the  conversion  of  Paul 
included  within  itself  the  conversion  of  thousands — even  as  Paul  was  a  chosen 
vessel,  and  took  many  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto 
God.  {J.  Geddes,  D.D.)  The  birth  of  a  soul  a  cause  of  joy : — Let  it  admonish 
us  to  beware  that  we  repine  not  at  the  bringing  in  of  any  into  the  state  of  grace. 
Shall  heaven  smile  and  earth  frown  ?  Shall  the  angels  be  glad  and  we  sad  ?  Shall 
we  mock,  scorn,  deride,  yea  persecute  our  brethren  for  no  other  cause  but  this, 
that  they  have  made  heaven  merry  by  their  repentance  and  turning  ?  Wretched 
creature,  cursed  caitiff,  that  dares  thus  do.  Is  there  not  joy  in  the  whole  family 
upon  the  birth  of  a  little  infant  7  Is  not  the  father  glad  that  a  child  is  born 
unto  him,  the  mother  glad  she  is  delivered,  the  servants  glad  that  the  family 
is  enlarged,  the  children  glad  that  their  number  is  increased?  If  any  be  dis- 
contented it  is  some  baseborn,  an  Ishmael — the  son  of  the  bondwoman  not  of 
the  free.  (N,  Rogers,)  Joy  in  heaven  over  repenting  tinners : — I.  Who 
BEjoicB  ?  1.  God  the  Father.  2.  The  Son  of  God.  3.  The  blessed  angels.  11. 
Why  do  thbt  bejoice?  1.  God  the  Father  rejoices  —  (1)  Because  His 
eternal  purposes  of  grace,  and  His  engagements  to  His  Son,  are  then  fulfilled. 
(2)  Because  bringing  sinners  to  repentance  is  His  own  work.  (3)  Because  it^ 
affords  Him  an  opportunity  to  exercise  mercy,  and  show  His  love  to  Christ 
by  pardoning  them  for  His  sake.  (4)  Because  it  gratifies  Him  to  see  them 
escape  from  the  tyranny,  and  from  the  consequences  of  sin.  2.  The  Son 
of  God  rejoices — (1)  Because  He  has  given  them  their  life.  (2)  Because  in 
repenting  they  begin  to  return  His  love,  and  acknowledge  the  wisdom  of  His 
dispensations.  8.  The  angels  rejoice — (1)  Because  God  rejoices.  (2)  Because  it 
is  their  disposition  to  rejoice  in  the  happiness  of  others.  (8)  Because  God  ib 
glorified  and  His  perfections  are  displayed  in  giving  repentance  and  remission  of 
sins.  Inferences :  1.  From  this  subject  we  infer  the  incalculable  worth  of  the 
human  soul.  2.  From  this  subject  we  infer  that  the  consequence  of  dying  in  an 
impenitent  state  will  be  unspeakably  dreadfuL  3.  From  this  subject  we  infer  that 
all  who  repent  will  certainly  persevere  and  be  saved.  Suppose,  for  one  moment, 
that  such  may  fall  and  perish?  Would  God,  would  Christ,  would  angels  then 
rejoice  to  see  sinners  repent  ?  4.  What  an  astonishing  view  does  this  subject  give 
us  of  the  benevolence  of  angels.  Though  they  are  perfectly  happy,  and  though  our 
character  and  conduct  must  to  them  appear  inconceivably  hateful,^  yet  they  forget 
themselves  to  think  of  as ;  they  forget  their  own  happiness  to  rejoice  in  ours.  5. 
From  tbia  subject  we  may  learn  whether  we  are  prepared  for  heaven.    We  presume 


HEAP,  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  lOS 

none  will  deny  that  preparation  for  heaven  implies  something  of  a  heavenly  temper. 
If,  then,  we  are  thus  prepared  we  have  something  of  such  a  temper.  Like  the 
augels,  we  are  pleased  with  God's  sovereignty,  and  rejoice  when  sinners  repent. 
We  desire  and  pray  that  the  kingdom  of  God  may  come  and  His  wiU  be  done  on 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.  (E.  Payson,  D.D.)  Joy  of  the  angels  : — This  assurance, 
coming  from  the  lips  of  Jesus  Himself,  exhibits  Christianity,  both  in  its  spirit  and 
in  its  grandeur.  I.  The  spibit  of  Chbistianitt.  The  fact  which  Jesus  teaches 
here  'S  that  gladness  and  surprise,  that  joy  and  grati&ed  affection,  with  which  love 
welcomes  at  last  its  alienated  but  unsurrendered  objects.  In  one  word,  my  friends, 
our  Saviour,  in  the  passage  before  us,  shows  the  identity  of  the  great  sentiment 
of  love  in  heaven  and  upon  earth,  in  the  depths  of  Divine  love  and  in  the  heart  of 
man.  He  appeals  to  those  affections  which  are  most  profoundly  interwoven  in  our 
being.  He  exhibits  the  spirit  and  power  of  the  gospel  as  not  above  or  foreign  to  the 
dements  of  our  own  consciousness,  but  intimately  allied  to  it.  He  based  this 
appeal  upon  that  which  can  be  demonstrated  from  the  most  familiar  and  common 
experience.  But  let  me  say  further,  under  this  head,  that  by  the  light  of  this 
central  love  and  compassion  we  should  interpret  the  different  parts  as  well  as  the 
grand  whole  of  the  gospel.  All  the  sayings  of  Jesus  Christ  are  to  be  interpreted  in 
harmony  with  that  spirit ;  we  must  take  the  deep  essence  and  substance  of  the 
gospel.  We  are  to  receive  what  grows  out  of  that — what  most  accords  with  its 
general  sentiment.  And  I  say  what  most  accords  with  the  general  sentiment  of 
the  gospel,  with  the  deep  spirit  and  substance  of  the  gospel,  is  this  simple  doctrine, 
that  God  cares  for  the  sinner,  for  the  vilest  and  most  abandoned  sinner  who  is  upon 
earth.  In  a  mother's  heart  there  is  a  love  that  cannot  be  altered  and  exhausted, 
and  that  will  claim  that  abandoned  sinner  when  he  comes  back.  So  in  the  Infinite 
bosom,  and  in  the  bosoms  of  all  heavenly  beings,  their  exists  the  same  love ;  the 
epirit  that  sent  Jesus  Christ  on  earth  is  that  spirit ;  the  purpose  of  Christ's  mission 
is  to  declare  that  spirit.  That  is  the  peculiarity  of  the  gospel  over  and  above 
everything  else.  Precisely  where  man's  faith  falls  and  man's  hope  falters,  is  it 
that  the  gospel  becomes  clear  and  strong.  II.  The  qbandeub  or  CHBiSTiAmTT. 
Consider  its  grandeur  as  illustrated  in  the  announcement  of  Jesus.  The  declara- 
tion in  the  text  reveals  two  things — the  nature  of  man  and  his  spiritual  relations. 
It  exhibits  man  as  a  living  soul,  and  as  a  member  of  the  great  family  of  souls.  It 
etrips  away  all  conventionality  from  him.  Christianity  is  primal  democracy,  lifted 
far  above  anything  that  either  pro  or  con  bears  that  name  in  our  day  as  a  party 
distinction.  It  is  the  great  doctrine  of  man  higher  than  his  conditions,  nobler  than 
any  material  good.  Why  ?  Because  he  is  a  living  soul ;  because  within  him  there 
are  deathless  powers ;  because  he  is  allied  to  God  by  a  nature  that  no  other  being 
on  this  earth  bears,  and  faculties  that  no  other  creature  on  this  footstool 
possesses.  And  this  is  the  source  of  its  great  achievement  in  modern  civiliza- 
tion. Subtile  theorists  ask  what  Christianity  has  done  for  the  progress  of  man. 
Christianity  has  thus  sown  the  seeds  of  all  progress,  laid  the  foundation  of  all 
truth  in  government,  and  of  all  righteousness  in  society.  It  has  been  the  master- 
key  to  all  the  grand  efforts  that  man  has  made  to  be  delivered  from  bondage, 
from  oppression,  from  social  wrong.  It  is  the  soul  of  liberty ;  it  is  the  oriflamme 
that  leads  the  hosts  of  humanity  forward  from  effort  to  effort,  to  higher  and 
higher  social  attainments.  This  is  what  Christianity  has  contributed  to  civilization 
»nd  progress ;  it  is  the  spring  of  all  the  noble  efforts  of  all  time.  I  n  the  next  place, 
it  reveals  the  relations  of  man  to  the  whole  spiritual  universe — his  relationship  to 
all  spiritual  beings.  Christianity  is  the  complement  of  scientiffo  truth  in  the 
epiritual  facts  it  reveals  to  ns ;  and  nothing  is  more  grand  than  man's  relation  to 
spiritual  beings — than  the  fact  that  the  universe  is  fiUed  up  with  blessed  intel- 
ligences. I  do  not  need  to  see  them,  or  hear  them,  to  be  convinced  of  this  fact ;  I 
know  by  surer  sight  than  the  eye,  by  more  certain  hearing  than  the  ear,  that  they 
exist ;  I  know  it  by  my  vitsd  consciousness  of  a  God  and  of  a  heaven.  And 
Christianity  interprets  that  fact.  It  shows  man,  poor,  wretched,  vile  as  he  may  be, 
linked  with  these  innumerable  relations.  And  what  else  does  it  show?  It  shows 
identity  of  nature  in  all  spiritual  things  on  earth  and  in  heaven.  Oh,  if  you  could 
tear  all  the  Bible  in  strips,  but  leave  this  one  saying  of  Christ,  what  mighty  troth 
and  consolation  there  would  be  in  it  1  "  There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner 
that  repenteth."  How  much  that  reveals  to  us — lets  in  upon  as.  Joy  in  heaTen  I 
Then  there  are  beings  in  heaven  capable  of  joy,  just  like  ourselves — beings  in 
sympathy  with  as.  Joy  in  heaven  1  Oh,  forlorn  and  wayward  brother  t  yoo  are 
despised  of  men,  and  scorned,  and  perhaps  feel  that  you  oaght  to  be  *.  yoo  have 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap,  xn 

Binned  vilely  and  grossly;  but  do  yon  Irnow  what  you  are  ?  There  might  be  joy  not. 
only  in  that  earthly  home  that  nestles  among  tbe  hills  where  your  poor  mother  is- 
praying  for  you  to-day,  but  also  great  joy  in  heaven.  What  a  revelation  of  an 
identity  of  nature — of  a  celestial  sympathy !  Moreover,  there  is  not  only  sympathy, 
but  there  is  solicitude  there.  God  is  anxious  for  your  return.  (E.  H.  Chapin, 
D.D.)  Joy  in  heaven  over  a  repentant  nnner : — I.  The  object  oveb  which 
ANGELS  REJOICE.  1.  A  siuuer.  Vile,  apostate,  rebellious  man.  2.  A  sinner  in  a 
particular  state  of  mind.  A  sinner  that  repenteth.  What  is  repentance  ?  It  is  a 
Ftate  of  mind  adapted  to  our  condition :  such  a  disposition  as  is  suited  to 
our  state.  It  is  an  affecting  discovery  of  our  situation,  our  wante,  onr  danger. 
It  is  a  bewailing  of  onr  sad  condition.  With  an  almost  broken  heart  the 
einner  comes  to  the  Saviour's  feet,  crying,  with  emotions  of  heart  never  before 
felt,  with  emotions  which  no  language  can  fully  express — "  O  save  me  I  I 
have  sinned,  I  have  sinned  1  0  save  me,  or  I  perish  1 "  II.  The  oboitndb  or 
THIS  STRANGE  Joy.  1.  We  may  trace  it  to  love.  Love,  when  fixed  on  a  right 
object,  and  exercised  in  a  right  manner,  is  a  source  of  happiness.  It  is  so 
on  earth ;  and  love  makes  heaven  chiefly  what  it  is  as  a  world  of  joy.  2.  Another 
ground  of  this  joy  of  angels  over  a  repenting  sinner  is  their  delight  in  the  Divine 
glory.  8.  They  behold  in  the  repentance  of  a  sinner  the  advancement  of  the  great 
work  of  grace,  and  receive  in  him  a  new  pledge  of  its  final  accomplishment.  III. 
The  probable  reasons  for  which  our  Lord  has  hasb  us  acquainted  with  it. 
1.  It  was  no  doabt  to  vindicate  His  own  conduct  in  calling  and  saving  heinous- 
transgressors.  2.  It  shows  us  that  there  is  something  in  repentance  which  i» 
pleasing  to  God — that  there  is  something  in  repentance  of  an  excellent  character. 
3.  These  things  are  recorded  to  comfort  and  encourage  the  broken  heart.  (<7. 
Bradley,  M. A.)  Bepenting  sinners,  a  source  of  joy  in  heaven: — I.  In  the  first 
place,  then,  we  have  the  spectacle  which  is  here  presented,  a  sinner  repenting. 
Not  the  most  noteworthy  object,  some  of  the  wise  ones  of  this  world  would  be 
tempted  to  say — not  the  most  noteworthy  object  earth  could  present  to  the  eye  of 
God.  There  are  many  fairer  and  brighter  scenes  upon  earth  to  attract  the  regard 
of  her  God  and  King,  Man's  vagrant  gaze  is  always  wandering  hither  and  thither 
in  search  of  some  scene  of  interest,  or  some  form  of  beauty,  on  which  for  a  moment 
it  may  rest ;  but  who  thinks  of  gazing  with  interest  and  hope,  unless  instructed  out 
of  the  goe^el  of  Christ,  upon  one  sinner  that  repenteth?  No;  it  is  the  halls  of 
science,  and  the  temples  of  art,  and  the  statesman's  cabinet,  and  the  battle-field  of 
nations,  which  centre  all  man's  regard.  Wherever  the  battle-cry  of  keenly  con. 
flicting  interest  is  swelling  on  the  ear,  where  brave  words  are  being  spoken,  and 
brave  deeds  being  done,  thither  man's  eye  restlessly  turns.  It  is  the  rising  and  the 
Bettmg  suns  of  empire,  the  waxing  and  the  waning  tide  of  greatness ;  the  rise, 
culmination,  and  decline  of  those  stars  that  lead  man's  social  progress ;  the  chiefs 
and  the  heroes  who  are  set  far  on  in  the  van  of  the  world — these  offer  to  man  the 
theme  of  his  loftiest  contemplations.  And  perhaps  it  is  by  the  cradle  of  social 
reforms — it  is  by  the  birthplace  of  political  revolutions  and  reformations  that  man's 
purest  and  holiest  vigils  are  held.  My  brethren,  I  am  not  here  to  deny  the  interest 
which  may  attach  to  any  of  these  scenes  or  occasions.  There  is  not  one  of  these 
elements,  so  pregnant  with  future  results  to  society,  which  are  at  work  now,  seeth- 
ing and  surging  in  that  great  moral  fermenting  vat  which  we  call  society,  that  the 
angels  do  not  look  upon.  That  great  battle  which  is  being  fought  in  every  age,  and 
perhaps  never  more  earnestly  fought  than  now — the  battle  which  the  ancients,  for 
want  of  a  better  name,  called  the  battle  of  the  Gods  and  Titans — what  we  know  as 
the  battle  of  Chaos  and  Creation,  Anarchy  and  Order,  Might  and  Bight,  Slavery 
and  Liberty — all  these  they  look  upon ;  nothing  of  this  is  hidden  from  their  gaze. 
We  do  rightly  to  take  deep  interest  in  all  these  things,  to  let  our  hearts  be  stirred 
by  them  all.  All  these,  God's  angels  look  upon ;  nothing  is  hidden  from  their 
sight.  But  one  thing  they  see  through  all  these — amidst  all  these  great  interests 
of  society — one  thing  they  see,  which  for  them  has  more  momentous  interest, 
becaude  they  see  that  it  has  more  pregnant  consequences  ;  it  is  the  spectacle  of  one 
sinner  that  repenteth,  one  poor  man,  it  may  be.  All  that  interest,  remember,  is 
concentrated  upon  the  individual.  I  say  there  is  that  man  wrestling  in  the  sweat 
and  agony  of  his  soul  with  his  spiritual  tyrants  and  task-masters,  he  is  bidding  them 
defiance,  he  is  casting  them  forth ;  but  no  trumpet-call  summons  the  world  to  be 
spectator  of  his  conflicts.  There  is  nothing  to  distinguish  his  battle,  so  as  to 
httract  the  eye  of  tbe  man  of  this  world.  No,  it  will  be  in  silence,  silence  that 
sometimes  give*  no  ouivard  indications  of  what  is  passing — silence,  perhaps,  only 


CBiP,  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  Ill 

Ibroben  by  these  pleadings  of  a  broken  and  contrite  spirit,  half  uttered,  half  artica- 
late,  which  God  sees  and  answers  as  prayers — perhaps  it  may  be  thus  that  the 
repentant  sinner  will  carry  on  and  complete  the  work.  Kepentance  is  just  the  first 
stage  and  the  first  sign  of  that  new  life  of  the  Christian,  that  hfe  of  which  the 
Saviour  said,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again  " — that  life  which  cannot  come  into  a 
human  spirit  save  by  the  work  of  God's  living  Spirit  within  man's  heart.  No  man 
can  work  this  transformation  of  himself,  no  man  is  strong  enough  to  wrestle  with 
this  great  monster  of  evil  by  himself.  I  say  repentance  is  just  the  first  stage  ol 
;hat  new  Divine  life  of  which  the  Saviour  spoke,  in  which  a  man,  being  freed  from 
dn,  has  progressively  his  fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  thereof  life  everlasting. 
II.  Direct  your  thoughts  to  the  jottul  watchers  of  the  spectaclb  here  pre- 
sented. The  progress  of  a  soul  through  the  various  stages  of  its  redemption 
excites,  for  the  most  part,  very  little  interest  upon  earth.  It  connects  itself  with 
no  great  human  interests,  and  it  ministers  no  aid  to  purely  human  designs.  But 
how  differently  is  it  regarded  in  heaven  1  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  if  they  like,  may 
mock  at  repentance ;  sophists  and  infidels,  if  they  like,  may  jest  at  the  penitent 
tear,  or  the  pleading  and  struggling  groan  of  a  broken  and  contrite  spirit ;  but  I  say 
to  you,  Christ  says  to  you  by  my  lips — I  am  speaking  His  own  words — that  "  there 
is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  even  one  repenting  sinner." 
Brethren,  we  should  teach  ourselves  to  believe  this.  We  cannot  see  it ;  nature  does 
not  seem  to  care  for  us ;  all  we  look  upon  seems  to  take  little  care  for  us  in  regard 
to  our  spiritual  experience,  but  God  and  His  angels  watch  us  earnestly,  and  no 
sigh  is  breathed  and  no  tear  falls  that  is  not  caught  and  cherished  by  the  spirits 
that  are  before  the  throne.  I  say  this  repentance,  the  soul  turning  away  from  sin 
by  the  power  of  the  grace  of  Christ  which  it  has  received,  awakens  supreme  interest, 
is  a  matter  of  intense  importance  to  all  dwellers  in  the  spiritual  world.  Aye  1  as 
the  sool  thus  rises  from  the  dust  to  adorn  herself  with  the  only  jewels  that  Christ 
cares  for — jewels  of  penitence,  humility,  and  charity — methinks  there  are  God'a 
angels  then  harping  with  their  harps,  prepared  to  celebrate  with  vestal  strains  the 
indissoluble  union  of  a  repenting  and  ransomed  spirit  with  its  Lord.  Those  are 
the  joyful  watchers  of  the  spectacle.  III.  Now,  in  the  third  and  last  place,  in 
bringing  these  remarks  to  a  conclusion,  I  dwell  upon  the  rising  interest  to  which  I 
have  already  averted  more  fully.  Let  us  inquire  what  is  the  secret  of  this 
interest  which  they  find  in  the  spectacle  of  a  repenting  sinner,  and  of  their 
exulting  joys.  Of  course  we  can  only  understand  a  portion  of  this  matter,  and  only 
a  portion  of  that  portion  can  be  brought  within  the  limits  of  a  brief  discourse. 
1.  But,  first,  I  should  say  that  the  angels  of  God  who  look  upon  all  that  is  passing 
upon  earth,  all  the  scenes  of  interest  that  earth  presents — scenes  in  which  we  are 
bound  to  take  an  interest,  in  which  certainly  the  Christian  ought  not  to  be  behind- 
hand in  his  interest  as  compared  with  his  fellow-men — look  upon  a  repenting  sinner 
as  the  directest  and  completest  result  of  Christ's  working  upon  earth,  and,  there< 
fore,  they  abundantly  rejoice.  He  who  was  with  God,  who  was  God,  by  whom  all 
things  were  made,  became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us ;  and  here,  in  a  sinner 
repenting,  you  have  the  directest  result  of  His  Incarnation.  2.  A  second  reason 
is  this.  In  a  sinner  repenting  we  must  remember  there  is  a  rising  up  of 
&  fresh  witness  to  God's  righteousness,  a  fresh  subject  of  God's  kingdom 
in  the  universe,  and,  therefore,  do  the  angels  rejoice.  3.  Lastly,  in  a 
sinner  repenting,  the  angels  see  the  widening  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Bedeemer.  They  see  that  He  sees  increasingly  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and 
is  satisfied,  and,  therefore,  one  thinks  they  rejoice.  He  ia  their  King  as 
well  as  ours ;  their  Master  as  well  as  ours.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Joy 
of  the  angels  over  even  one  repentant  tinner: — How  loving  are  the  angels  to 
men ;  for  they  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth.  There  she  is,  in  that  garret 
where  the  stars  look  between  the  tiles.  There  is  a  mieerable  bed  in  that  room, 
with  but  one  bit  of  covering,  and  she  lieth  there  to  die  1  Poor  creature  !  many 
a  night  she  has  walked  the  streets  in  the  time  of  her  merriment ;  but  now  her 
joys  are  over ;  a  foul  disease,  like  a  demon,  is  devouring  her  heart  I  She 
is  dying  fast,  and  no  one  careth  for  her  soul  I  But  there,  in  that  chamber,  she 
turns  her  face  to  the  wall,  and  she  cries,  "  O  Thou  that  savedst  Magdalene,  save 
me ;  Lord,  I  repent ;  have  mercy  upon  me,  I  beseech  thee."  Did  the  bells  ring 
in  the  street?  Was  the  trumpet  blown?  Ah!  no.  Did  men  rejoice?  Was  there 
a  sound  of  thanksgiving  in  the  midst  of  the  great  congregation?  No;  no  one 
heard  it ;  for  she  died  unseen.  But  stay.  There  was  one  standing  at  her  bedside^ 
who  noted  well  that  tear ;  an  angel,  who  had  come  down  from  heaven  to  watck 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

over  this  stray  sheep,  and  mark  its  return ;  and  no  Booner  was  her  prayer  uttered 
than  he  clapped  his  wings,  and  there  was  seen  flying  up  to  the  pearly  gate* 
a  spirit  like  a  star.  The  heavenly  guards  came  crowding  to  the  gate,  crying, 
"What  news,  0  son  of  fire?"  He  said,  »"Tis  done."  "And  what  is  done?' 
they  said.  "  Why,  she  has  repented."  "  What !  she  who  was  once  a  chief  of 
sinners  ?  has  she  turned  to  Christ  ?  "  "  'Tis  even  so,"  said  he.  And  then  they 
told  it  through  the  streets,  and  the  bells  of  heaven  rang  marriage  peals,  for 
Magdalene  was  saved,  and  she  who  had  been  the  chief  of  sinners  was  turned  unto 
the  living  God.  It  was  in  another  place.  A  poor  neglected  httle  boy  in  ragged 
clothing  had  ran  about  the  streets  for  many  a  day.  Tutored  in  crime,  he  was 
paving  his  path  to  the  gallows ;  but  one  morning  he  passed  by  a  humble  room, 
where  some  men  and  women  were  sitting  together  teachin-g  poor  ragged  children. 
He  stepped  in  there,  a  wild  Bedouin  of  the  streets ;  they  talked  to  him ;  they  told 
him  about  a  soul  and  about  an  eternity — things  he  had  never  heard  before  ;  they 
spoke  of  Jesus,  and  of  good  tidings  of  great  joy  to  this  poor  friendless  lad. 
He  went  another  Sabbath,  and  another ;  his  wild  habits  hanging  about  him,  for 
he  could  not  get  rid  of  them.  At  last  it  happened  that  his  teacher  said  to  him 
one  day,  "Jesus  Christ  receiveth  sinners."  That  little  boy  ran,  but  not  home, 
for  it  was  but  a  mockery  to  call  it  so — where  a  drunken  father  and  a  lascivious 
mother  kept  a  hellish  riot  together.  He  ran,  and  under  some  dry  arch,  or  in 
some  wild  unfrequented  comer,  he  bent  his  little  knees,  and  there  he  cried,  that 
poor  creature  in  his  rags,  "  Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish  " ;  and  the  little  Arab  waa 
on  his  knees — the  little  thief  was  saved  I    He  said — 

"Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul,  let  me  to  Thy  bosom  fly" ; 

and  ap  from  that  old  arch,  from  that  forsaken  hovel,  there  flew  a  spirit,  glad  to  bear 
the  news  to  heaven  that  another  heir  of  glory  was  bom  to  God.  I  might  picture 
many  such  scenes  ;  but  will  each  of  you  try  to  picture  your  own  ?  You  remember 
the  occasion  when  the  Lord  met  with  you.  Ah  i  little  did  you  think  what  a 
commotion  there  was  in  heaven.  If  the  Queen  had  ordered  out  all  her  soldiers, 
the  angels  of  heaven  would  not  have  stopped  to  notice  them ;  if  all  the  princes 
of  earth  had  marched  in  pageant  through  the  streets,  with  all  their  robes,  and 
jewellery,  and  crowns,  and  all  their  regalia,  their  chariots,  and  their  horsemen 
— if  the  pomps  of  ancient  monarchies  had  risen  from  the  tomb — if  all  the  might 
of  Babylon  and  Tyre  and  Greece  had  been  concentrated  into  one  great  parade,  yet 
not  an  angel  would  have  stopped  in  his  course  to  smile  at  those  poor  tawdry  things ; 
but  over  you  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  the  poorest  of  the  poor,  the  most  obscure  and 
unknown— over  you  angelic  wings  were  hovering,  and  concerning  you  it  was  said 
on  earth  and  sung  in  heaven,  "  Hallelujah,  for  a  child  is  bom  to  God  to-day." 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Why  should  angels  r^oice  in  the  success  of  redemption  t — 
To  this  question  we  reply  generally,  that  redemption  is  the  mightiest  display 
of  the  Divine  attributes ;  and  that,  wrapt  as  angels  are  in  admiration  and  adoration 
at  their  Maker,  whatever  sets  forth  His  properties  must  be  to  them  a  fresh  source 
of  praise  and  ecstasy.  Without  doubt  we  must  add  to  this  general  account,  the 
affection  which  they  entertain  towards  men  as  members  of  the  family  of  creation, 
their  consequent  desire  for  their  happiness,  and  their  knowledge  that  happiness 
is  secured  by  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But 
probably  the  joy  in  question  results  mainly  from  the  glory  accruing  to  God, 
or  from  the  manifestation  which  redemption  puts  forth  of  the  attributes  of  Deity. 
And  therefore  we  shall  chiefly  labour  to  show  you  how  the  scheme  of  oar 
salvation  was  a  new  discovery  of  God  to  heavenly  beings,  and  why,  therefore, 
there  should  be  joy  in  the  presence  of  those  beings  whensoever  a  sinner  taket 
hold  of  the  obedience  proffered  in  the  gospel.  Now,  the  wisdom,  the  power, 
and  the  goodness  of  God — under  which  all  His  other  attributes  are  comprehended 
— these  constitute  the  glorious  majesty  of  our  Creator;  and  of  these,  we  are 
bold  to  affirm,  our  redemption  is  the  noblest  manifestation.  If  this  be  once 
proved,  you  will  readily  understand  why  angels  rejoice  over  penitent  sinners. 
Angels  must  be  gladdened  by  every  exhibition  of  the  high  prerogative  of  their 
Maker;  and  if  redemption  be  signally  such  an  exhibition,  then  redemption — 
as  wrought  out  for  all,  or  as  applied  to  individuals — must  signally  ministei  to  their 
joyousness.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  In  the  heavenly  empire : — A  pious  Armenian  calling 
on  Mr.  Hamlyn,  a  missionary  at  Constantinople,  remarked,  that  he  was  astonished 
to  see  how  the  people  were  waking  ap  to  the  trath;  how  even  the  most  cultivated 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  115 

were  seeking  after  it  as  for  hidden  treasure.  "Yes,"  said  he, "  it  is  going  forward ; 
it  will  triumph  ;  but,  alas  !  I  shall  not  live  to  see  it,  alas !  that  I  am  born  an  age 
too  soon."  "  But,"  said  Mr.  Hamlyn,  "  do  you  remember  what  our  Saviour  said, 
'There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth'  ? 
You  may  not  live  to  see  the  truth  triumphant  in  this  empire;  but  should  you, 
by  Divine  grace,  reach  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  be  with  the  angels,  your  joy 
over  your  whole  nation,  repentant  and  redeemed,  will  be  infinitely  greater  than 
it  could  be  on  earth."  He  seemed  astonished  at  this  thought ;  but  after  examining 
the  various  passages  to  which  I  referred  him,  he  yielded  to  the  evidence  with  the 
mo'st  lively  expressions  of  delight.  "  0  fool,  and  slow  of  heart,"  said  he,  '•  to. 
read  the  gospel  so  many  times  without  perceiving  such  a  glorious  truth  I  If  thi» 
be  80,  no  matter  in  what  age  a  Christian  is  born,  nor  when  he  dies."  Tfie  great- 
ness of  repentance: — Eepentanoe  is  a  great  thing,  or  the  angels  of  God  would 
not  rejoice  over  it.  It  is  no  insignificant  matter.  If  we  did  not  understand  it, 
and  all  the  consequences  that  flow  from  it,  and  did  not  quite  perceive  all  the 
reasons  why  angels  rejoice,  yet  we  should  naturally  conclude  that  it  must  be  great 
from  this  fact.  Suppose  we  entered  a  strange  city  and  found  the  bells  ringing 
out  a  merry  peal  from  every  tower,  the  cannon  roaring  out  their  harsh  joy  from 
every  fort,  the  streets  at  night  blazing  with  illuminations,  every  countenance 
cheerful,  the  whole  land  vocal  with  joy,  and  all  keeping  jubilee  together ;  why, 
we  should  say,  "  This  great  and  intelligent  people  would  not  rejoice  thus  over 
a  trifle ;  some  great  thing  must  have  taken  place  " ;  if  we  did  not  know  what 
it  was.  Oh  I  enter  heaven  when  a  sinner  has  repented,  and  find  it  all  jubilee  1 
Must  it  not  be  a  great  thing  that  would  fill  heaTen  thus  with  bliss  ?  The  repen- 
tance  of  a  sinner  does  it.  And  then  mark,  it  is  not  the  conversion  of  a  nation 
like  China,  with  its  three  hundred  millions  of  inhabitants,  nor  India  with  its 
myriads  of  idolaters,  nor  blood-stained  Madagascar,  nor  Tahiti,  nor  New  Zealand : 
not  the  conversion  of  an  empire,  but  the  conversion  of  a  single  soul.  Not  merely 
the  soul  of  some  great  persecutor,  like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  whose  conversion  may 
at  once  change  the  aspect  of  a  country,  and  release  it  from  intolerance  and  murder, 
and  introduce  it  to  liberty  and  joy.  Not  the  conversion  of  a  mighty  monarch, 
who,  once  a  despot,  is  now  become  through  Christianity  the  father  of  his  country. 
Not  the  conversion  of  a  philosopher,  whose  great  name  might  be  supposed  to  add 
celebrity  to  Christianity.  Not  the  conversion  of  a  great  poet,  who  had  prostituted 
his  genius  to  celebrate  vice,  and  now  consecrates  it  to  the  glory  of  God  who  gave 
him  the  intellect.  No,  but  the  conversion  of  "  a  sinner,"  apart  from  all  the 
personal  circnmstances  in  which  that  sinner  might  be  found:  any  sinner ;  the 
inhabitant  of  a  workhouse — the  pauper's  child — or  the  pauper  himself ;  for  it  is 
repentance,  stript  of  all  that  is  adventitious,  all  that  might  otherwise  gather 
around  it.  It  is  the  dropping  of  all  these,  and  it  is  the  bowing  down  of  any 
human  heart  in  the  attitude  of  submission  to  God,  and  in  the  purpose  of  forsaking 
dn :  it  is  that,  which  angels  rejoice  over.    {J.  A.  Jajnes.) 

Vers.  11-S2.  A  certain  man  had  two  iona.  The  prodigal  and  hit  brother:— 
I.  Ood's  tbeatuent  of  the  penitent.  1.  The  alienation  of  the  heart  from  God. 
(1)  Homelessness.  (2)  Worldly  happiness  is  unsatisfying.  Husks  are  not  food. 
(8)  Degradation.  2.  The  period  of  repentance.  (1)  The  first  fact  of  religious 
ei^erience  which  this  parable  suggests  to  ns  is  that  common  truth — men  desert 
the  world  when  the  world  deserts  them.  The  renegade  came  to  himself  when 
there  were  no  more  husks  to  eat.  He  would  have  remained  away  if  he  could  have 
got  them,  but  it  is  written,  "  no  man  gave  unto  him."  And  this  is  the  record 
of  oar  shame.  Invitation  is  not  enough ;  we  must  be  driven  to  God.  And  the 
famine  comes  not  by  chance.  God  sends  the  famine  into  the  soul — the  hunger, 
and  thirst,  and  the  disappointment — to  bring  back  his  erring  child  again.  (2) 
There  is  another  truth  contained  in  this  section  of  the  parable.  After  a  life  of 
wild  sinfulness  religion  is  servitude  at  first,  not  freedom.  Observe,  he  went  back 
to  duty  with  the  feelings  of  a  slave:  "I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy 
son,  make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants."  Any  one  who  has  Hved  in  the 
excitement  of  the  world,  and  then  tried  to  settle  down  at  onoe  to  quiet  duty, 
knows  how  tme  tiiat  is.  To  borrow  a  metaphor  from  Israel's  desert  life,  it  is 
a  tasteless  thing  to  live  on  manna  after  yon  have  been  feasting  npon  quails.  It 
is  a  doll  cold  t&udgery  to  find  pleasure  in  simple  occupation  when  life  has  bem 
a  snccession  of  strong  emotions.  Sonship  it  is  not ;  it  is  slavery.  A  son  obeys  ia 
love,  entering  heartily  into  his  father's  meaning.    A  serrant  oblqrs  iniwhanioHy» 

VOL.  in.  8 


lU  T/IE  BIBLJCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

rising  early  because  he  must ;  doing,  it  may  be,  his  duty  well,  bat  feeling  in  all 
its  force  the  irksomeness  of  the  service.  Sonship  does  not  come  all  at  once. 
3.  The  'reception  which  a  sinner  meets  with  on  his  return  to  God.  The  banquet 
represents  to  us  two  things.  (1)  It  tells  of  the  father's  gladness  on  his  son's 
return.  That  represents  God's  joy  on  the  reformation  of  a  sinner.  (2)  It  tells 
of  a  banquet  and  a  dance  given  to  the  long  lost  son.  That  represents  the  sinner'^ 
gladness  when  he  first  understood  that  God  was  reconciled  to  him  in  Christ. 
There  is  a  strange,  almost  wild,  rapture,  a  strong  gush  of  love  and  happiness  in 
those  days  which  are  called  the  days  of  first  conversion.  When  a  man  who  has 
sinned  much — a  profligate — turns  to  God,  and  it  becomes  first  clear  to  his 
apprehension  that  there  is  love  instead  of  spurning  for  him,  there  is  a  luxury 
of  emotion — a  banquet  of  tumultuous  blessedness  in  the  moment  of  first  love 
to  God,  which  stands  alone  in  life,  nothing  before  and  nothing  after  like  it.  And, 
brethren,  let  us  observe — This  forgiveness  is  a  thing  granted  while  a  man  is 
yet  afar  off.  U.  God's  expostulation  with  a  saint.  The  true  interpretation 
seems  to  be  that  this  elder  brother  represents  a  real  Christian  perplexed  vrith 
God's  mysterious  dealings.  We  have  before  us  the  description  of  one  of  those 
happy  persons  who  have  been  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  their  mother's 
womb,  and  on  the  whole  (with  imperfections  of  course)  remained  God's  servant 
all  his  life.  For  this  is  his  own  account  of  himself,  which  the  father  does  not 
contradict.  "Lol  these  many  years  do  I  serve  thee."  We  observe  then :  The 
objection  made  to  the  reception  of  a  notorious  sinner — "  Thou  never  gavest  me  a 
kid."  Now,  in  this  we  have  a  fact  true  to  Christian  experience.  Joy  seems  to  be 
felt  more  vividly  and  more  exuberantly  by  men  who  have  sinned  much,  than  by 
men  who  have  grown  up  consistently  from  childhood  with  religious  education. 
Bapture  belongs  to  him  whose  sins,  which  are  forgiven,  are  many.  In  the 
perplexity  which  this  fact  occasions,  there  is  a  feeling  which  is  partly  right  and 
partly  wrong.  There  ia  a  surprise  which  is  natural.  There  is  a  resentful  jealousy 
which  is  to  be  rebuked.  And  now  mark  the  father's  answer.  It  does  not 
account  for  this  strange  dealing  by  God's  sovereignty.  It  does  not  cut  the 
knot  of  the  difficulty,  instead  of  untying  it,  by  saying,  God  has  a  right  to  do 
what  He  will.  He  does  not  urge,  God  has  a  right  to  act  on  favouritism  if  Ha 
please.  But  it  assigns  two  reasons.  The  first  reason  is,  "  It  was  meet,  right  that 
we  should  make  merry."  It  is  meet  that  God  should  be  glad  on  the  reclamation 
of  a  sinner.  It  is  meet  that  that  sinner,  looking  down  into  the  dreadful  chasm 
over  which  he  had  been  tottering,  should  feel  a  shudder  of  delight  through  all  his 
frame  on  thinking  of  his  escape.  And  it  is  meet  that  religious  men  should  not 
feel  jealous  of  one  another,  but  freely  and  generously  join  in  thanking  God  that 
others  have  got  happiness,  even  if  they  have  not.  The  spirit  of  religious  exclusive - 
ness,  which  looks  down  contemptuously  instead  of  tenderly  on  worldly  men,  and 
banishes  a  man  for  ever  from  the  circle  of  its  joys  because  he  has  sinned 
notoriously,  is  a  bad  spirit.  Lastly,  the  reason  given  for  this  dealing  is,  "  Son, 
thou  art  always  with  Me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine."  By  which  Christ  seems 
to  tell  us  that  the  disproportion  between  man  and  man  is  much  less  than  we 
suppose.  The  profligate  had  had  one  hour  of  ecstasy — the  other  had  had  a  whole 
life  of  peace.  A  consistent  Christian  may  not  have  rapture;  but  he  has 
that  which  is  much  better  than  rapture :  calmness — God's  serene  and  perpetual 
presence.  And  after  all,  brethren,  that  is  the  best.  (F.  W.  Robertton,^  M.A.) 
A  mirror  of  mercy  : — 1.  First,  then,  in  that  he  is  called  a  young  man,  there  is  noted 
in  him  want  of  knowledge  and  experience  as  the  ground  and  fountain  of  all  hia 
folly,  he  knew  not  as  yet  what  his  father  was  worth  unto  him.  And,  therefore,  he 
is  not  afraid  to  forsake  him.  This  is  to  teach  us  that  none  forsakes  the  Lord,  but 
such  as  do  know  Him  not,  and  understand  not  that  in  so  doing  they  forsake  their 
own  mercy.  As  beasts  that  know  not  the  value  of  pearls  care  not  to  trample  them 
under  their  feet,  or  as  young  children  laugh  at  the  death  of  their  parents,  because 
they  know  not  for  the  present  what  they  lose  thereby,  but  afterwards  remember  it 
with  grief ;  so  blinded  man  without  remorse  runs  away  from  God,  not  knowing 
what  he  lost  by  departing  from  the  Lord,  for  He  is  light,  and  they  go  into  utter  dark* 
ness  that  go  from  Hirg.  He  is  life,  and  they  are  but  dead  who  abide  not  in  fellow- 
ship  with  Him.  One  example  of  this  we  have  in  the  elect  angels ;  they  are  never 
weary  to  behold  His  excellent  Majesty ;  they  find  ever  new  matter  of  joy  in  His  face. 
2.  SeoondlT,  in  this  prodigal  child  is  noted  here,  that  natural  rebellion  which  is  in 
all  men ;  that  they  will  not  submit  themselves  to  the  will  of  God  their  Heavenly 
Father,  bat  will  follow  their  own  wills.    8.    The  third  evil  noted  here  in  this 


CHAP.  ZT.J 


ST.  LUKE.  11* 


prodigal  ie  his  hypocrisy ;  he  calls  him  in  word  father,  but  in  deed  did  not  so 
sccoant  of  him  ;  he  carried  not  toward  him  the  heart  of  a  child  ;  this  is  a  part  ol 
that  poison  wherewith  Satan  hath  infected  our  nature.  Is  there  any  comparison 
between  that  which  thou  givest  the  Lord  and  that  which  thou  gettest  from  Him  ? 
4.  That  he  seeks  a  portion  of  his  father's  goods,  but  not  his  father's  favour  and 
blessing,  represents  to  us  the  earthly  minds  of  naturalists,  who  prefer 
the  gifts  of  God  to  God  Himself.  (Bishop  Cowper.)  The  parable  of  the 
prodigal :—Cs.Tpt&in  Sir  W.  E.  Parry  observes,  "There  is  nothing  even  in 
"the  whole  compass  of  Scripture  more  calculated  to  awaken  contrition  in 
the  hardest  heart  than  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  I  knew  a  convict  in  New 
South  Wales,  in  whom  there  appeared  no  symptoms  of  repentance  in  other  respects, 
but  who  could  never  hear  a  sermon  or  comment  on  this  parable  without  bursting 
into  an  agony  of  tears,  which  I  witnessed  on  several  occasions.  Truly  He  who 
spoke  it  knew  what  was  in  man. "  It  is  the  prince  of  parables,  a  gospel  within  the 
gospel,  a  mirror  of  man,  an  artless  yet  profound  little  drama  of  human  ruin  and 
recovery.  Wonderful,  indeed,  is  its  power  to  touch  the  sensibilities.  "  I  have 
wept  but  once  these  forty  years,"  said  a  veteran  military  officer,  "and  that  was 
-when  I  heard  Jesse  Bushyhead,  the  Cherokee  preacher,  address  his  countrymen 
from  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  the  tears  flowing  faster  than  he  could  wipe 
them  away."  {A.  C.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  parable  of  fatherhood:—!.  Let  us 
FOUiOW  THE  siNNEB  IN  HIS  KBBELLios.  In  this  part  of  the  picture  we  shall 
perceive  that  sin  is  vicious  in  principle,  ruinous  in  operation,  and  ever  multiplying 
its  destructive  issues.  (I)  Sra  is  vicious  in  principle.  1.  What  is  the  unex- 
pressed but  fundamental  axiom  of  all  sin  ?  A  human  being  exists  to  pursue  his  ovm 
gratification,  without  regard  to  the  will  of  God.  That  is  it.  2.  The  younger  son 
acts  out  the  rule  of  life  ascribed  to  him.  For  observe,  the  employment  of  the 
resources  of  existence  for  self-indulgence  he  claims  as  a  right.  "  Father,  give  me 
the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to  me."  3.  Now  definite  plans  for  self-indulgence 
follow.  His  notions  of  life  and  felicity  are  not  a  theory,  but  meant  to  be  a 
practice ;  and  he  does  his  best  to  be  ready  for  it.  4.  Notice,  next,  the  haste  of  sin. 
*'  Not  many  days  after,  the  younger  son  gathered  all  together."  It  might  have 
been  the  most  sublime  and  hallowed  enterprise  in  the  world.  The  rapidity  of  his 
movements  must  not  be  attributed  exclusively  to  the  impetuosity  of  youth,  but  to 
the  precipitancy  of  all  sinful  passion.  5.  Eemark,  finally,  here,  the  presence  of 
God  is  '•  unfriendly  to  sin."  "  And  took  his  journey  into  a  far  country."  Banish- 
ment from  home  would  have  been  accounted  a  great  hardship,  if  it  had  been 
enjoined  as  a  duty.  The  toils  and  perils  of  the  road  would  have  occasioned  no 
little  murmuring,  if  his  hard  travail  had  contemplated  any  other  end^  than  self- 
enjoyment.  He  is  eager  to  swallow  his  indulgences,  and  equally  anzions  to  be 
beyond  his  father's  eye  and  all  the  restraints  of  home.  "  Let  me  alone "  is  the 
impatient  cry  of  sin  to  all  remonstrance.  "  A  far  country  "  is  always  the  coveted 
paradise  of  fools.  (II)  Sin  is  ruinous  in  operation.  "  And  there  wasted  his 
substance  in  riotous  living."  (HI)  Sin  is  ever  multiplyino  its  destbuctivb 
issues.  There  is  no  standing  still  in  good  or  evil.  The  wheels  of  human  progress 
never  rest  on  theur  axles.  1.  Instead  of  attaining  to  happiness,  he  is  overtaken  by 
poverty.  S.  Now  Providence  fights  against  him.  Nature  is  in  the  universal  league 
against  transgression.  3.  He  is  already  feeling  the  pinch  of  wrong-doing.  *•  And 
he  began  to  be  in  want."  The  fruit  of  evil  deeds  is  revealing  its  poison.  He  finds 
himself  in  the  grasp  of  premonitory  pangs.  4.  Observe  next,  that  the  old  principle 
is  to  be  worked  in  new  ways.  "  And  he  went  and  joined  himself  to  a  citizen  of 
that  country."  You  see  that  he  has  not  become  a  citizen  himself.  He  is  still  a 
Btianger.  He  cannot  absolutely  settle  down  out  there.  No.  A  man  cannot  find 
entire  satisfaction  in  a  life  of  self-enjoyment  without  God.  With  nothing  but 
worldly  things  he  cannot  attain  to  rest.  6.  He  now  sinks  to  a  lower  level  of 
degradation.  A  swine-herd  I  6.  Take  notice,  further,  that  the  swine-herd  is 
prepared  to  accept  his  shame.  "  And  he  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with  the 
husks  which  the  swine  did  eat."  Ever  since  he  left  his  father's  house  his  inclina- 
tions have  descended  lower  and  lower.  He  tried  to  fill,  to  satisfy  himself  with 
them,  but  he  could  not.  They  merely  stayed  his  hunger.  There  was  a  bitterness 
in  their  flavour  which  something  in  his  palate  nauseated.  The  pleasure  of  eating 
was  gone.  The  food  of  a  beast  cannot  satisfy  the  soul  of  a  man.  7.  Last  of  all, 
his  schemes  of  fehcity  and  methods  of  relief  are  all  overturned  together.  *'  And 
no  man  gave  unto  him."  It  does  not  mean,  that  no  man  gave  him  swine's  food. 
The  swine-herd  had  the  care  of  the  husks,  and  ate  plenty  of  them,  but  he  coul< 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

not  enjoy  them.  "  No  man  gave  unto  him  "  what  could  satisfy  and  bleas  s  hmnao 
Boul.  Man  is  the  highest  creature  in  the  world ;  but  if  you  seek  your  happiness  or 
your  deliverance  from  misery  at  his  hands,  you  must  end  in  failure.  •'  Citizens  " 
out  in  that  country,  "  far  "  from  God,  could  not  surround  a  prodigal  with  the  good 
which  a  father's  love  at  home  can  alone  supply.  "  No  man  gave  unto  him," 
because  no  man  had  anything  to  give.  II.  Let  us  watch  the  sinner  in  his 
BEPKNTANCE.  There  are  four  elements  of  repentance  here  requiring  analysis.  1. 
Eeflection.  "  And  when  he  came  to  himself,  he  said,  How  many  hired  servants 
of  my  father's  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare  1 "  Sin  creates  a  sort  of  moral 
insanity.  "While  spurred  by  appetite  aud  in  the  race  after  indulgence,  the  mind  is 
actuated  by  a  species  of  frenzy.  "  I  perish  ■«ith  hunger  1  "  There  is  the  memory 
of  a  better  past  in  that  exclamation.  This  same  recalling  of  brighter  hours  bows 
the  spirit  into  the  dust. 

"  This  is  truth  the  poet  sings, 
That  a  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering  happier  things." 

Bygone  years  to  a  sinner,  however  ill  his  beginning,  is  a  glance  up  an  ascending 
incline  towards  sunnier  days.  2.  Kesoltjtion.  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
father."  He  no  sooner  discerns  his  hapless  state,  than  he  determines  to  leave  it. 
You  are  to  imagine  him  prostrate,  brooding  in  indecision  or  despair.  But  he  will 
lie  no  longer  in  inaction.  He  protests,  "  I  will  arise,"  and  he  rises.  3.  Re- 
cognition OF  GUILT.  His  resolution,  while  unenfeebled  by  hesitation,  was  not 
formed  in  insensibility  to  his  evil.  He  sees  most  diatinctly  the  relation  of  sin 
towards  God  and  towards  himself.  (1)  The  relation  of  sin  towards  God.  "  I  have 
sinned  against  heaven."  Evil  insults  the  purity  and  despises  the  love  of  God.  It 
destroys  His  moral  order,  and  spurns  the  felicity  which  He  offers.  (2)  The  relation 
of  sin  towards  himself.  "And  am  no  more  worthy,"  &c.  His  sense  of  ill-desert 
is  real  and  deep,     4.  Eetubn   to   God.     His  was  no  empty  vow.     III.  Let  oa 

BEHOLD    the   SINNEK    IN   HIS    BESTORATION.      1.   NOTICE   God'S    BECOGNITION   OF  THB 

EAKiiiEST  BEGINNINGS  OP  PENITENCE.  "  When  he  was  jet  a  great  way  off,  his  father 
saw  him."  He  had  not  seen  his  father,  but "  his  father  saw  him."  Unconsciously 
to  the  son,  tbe  love  of  the  father  has  been  drawing  him  all  the  way.  If  he  had 
lost  the  image  of  his  father  from  his  memory,  he  would  never  have  attempted  to 
return.  2.  Observe  God's  welcome  to  the  kepenting.  (1)  The  tenderness  of 
God  is  wonderful.  He  "  had  compassion."  Great  reason  had  God  to  be  angry 
with  that  sinful  creature,  with  me,  with  you ;  but  He  "  had  compassion."  (2) 
How  willing  God  is  to  succour  I  "  His  father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion,  and 
ran  "  to  welcome  him.  "  Ban," — willingness  is  too  feeble  an  epithet  to  denote  the 
impulse.  There  is  eagerness  in  "ran."  God  is  hasting  to  save  and  bless.  (3) 
Pray  do  not  overlook  God's  readiness  to  accept  and  pardon  just  as  you  are. 
"  Saw,"  "had  compassion,"  "  ran,"  "and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him."  3. 
Now  turn  to  behold  how  God  lavishes  His  affection  on  the  accepted 
PENITENT.  The  father  is  not  going  to  treat  his  son  as  an  "  hired  servant."  God's 
forgiveness  must  be  God-like.  God's  love  is  always  greater  in  experience  than  iji 
our  most  sanguine  wishes  and  brightest  hopes.  4.  Listen  to  God's  exhortation 
TO  His  universe  to  share  His  jot.  "  Bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill  it ; 
and  let  us  eat  and  be  merry.*'  "  Merry  "  is  an  old  Saxon  word.  Its  meaning  has 
somewhat  narrowed  and  lowered  in  our  later  tongue.  "  Be  merry,"  here,  in  the 
original  is  "  rejoice."  A  feast  betokens  gladness  among  all  nations.  The  occasion 
is  great,  and  great  is  to  be  the  exultation.  "  Let  us  eat  and  rejoice."  The  father 
does  not  ask  his  household  to  be  glad  and  he  himself  remain  only  a  spectator  of 
the  universal  delight.  It  is,  " Let  iw  eat  and  rejoice."  It  is  God's  own  joy  that 
He  would  have  His  creatures  share  and  proclaim.  (Bishop  Alexander.)  The 
prodigal  son: — I.  An  exhibition  of  the  condition  and  the  conduct  of  man  in 
his  natural  and  sinful  state.  1.  Absence  of  gratitude,  or  any  sense  of  obliga- 
tion to  his  father.  2.  Impatience  of  bis  father's  government.  3.  Breaking  away 
from  his  father's  control.  4.  Squandering  his  father's  property  contrary  to  hia 
father's  intention.  6.  But  his  schemes  all  failed  to  make  him  happy.  II.  When 
lotN  begin  to  feel  their  want,  thet  take  erroneous  courses  to  deliver 
THEMSELVES.  One  flies  to  his  worldly  companions ;  another  to  scepticism ;  another 
to  business ;  another  to  pleasure ;  another  to  some  external  reformation  ;  another 
determines  to  read  his  Bible  a  little  more,  and  to  pray  a  little  more — not  meaning 
by  prayer  his  heart  really  coming  back  to  God,  but  the  utterance  of  some  words 
and  going  more  frequently  on  his  knees.     That  is  not  prayer.    Prayer  is  the  child 


CEA».  IV.]  ST.  LUKE,  117 

Doming  back  to  his  Father  ;  prayer  is  the  heart  meeting  God  ;  prayer  is  the  heart 
delighting  in  God,  pouring  out  its  desires  into  the  bosom  of  infinite  Love,  and 
feeling  that  God  is  there.     You  must  get  back  to  God  through  the  mediation,  the 
merit,  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord  our  Kighteousness  and  our  Bedeemor.     All 
other  refuges  will  fail :  all  other  processes  will  fail :  you  may  have  convictions,  and 
then  you  may  do  this,  that,  or  the  other  that  I  have  described ;  still  you  are  in 
want.    Husks,  husks,  husks  are  all  you  have  received  by  staying  away  from  your 
Father's  house.     III.  The   nature   of  repentance  and  submission — the  way  to 
get  home  to  our  Father.    The  young  man  is  said  to  have  com«  ti)  himself :  that 
means  that  he  was  beside  himself  before.     Hence  you  find  that  the  Word  of  God 
denominates  sinners  "fools  "  :  and  because  they  are  practically  so  foolish,  they  would 
rather  remain   undisturbed   in  their  sins  for  a  few  days,  than  go  through  the 
bitterness  of  repentance  and  the  self-denial  of  religion  now,  that  they  may  wear 
an  eternal  crown,  and  live  in  immortal  peace.     There  is  another  proof  of   the 
derangement  of  the  human  heart.    It  is  the  feeling  which  men  have,  that  they 
can   be  happy  away  from   God,  and   that  they  know  more  about  the  secret  of 
happiness  than  the  God  who  made  them.     So  repentance  is  turning  to  our  right 
mind.    Repentance  is  beginning  to  look  at  things  aright — beginning  to  reason,  and 
feel,  and  purpose,  and  act  aright.     The  young  man  determines  to  come  home,  to 
confess  his  sin  without  any  palliation.     The  willingness  to  humble  ourselves,  that 
is  coming  home.    Look  for  a  moment  at  this  young  man,  and  see  how  difficult  it 
was  for  him  to  come  home,  and  how  impossible  it  would  have  been,  if  he  had  not 
humbled    his    pride.     In     the    first    place   he    had   to    go    back    in   his   rags. 
"  There  is  not    a  child   in    the  village  but  will    see  me ;   and  they  will  say, 
That    is    the    young   man   who  went  out    in    such    splendid    style;  and    they 
will    point    the    finger    at    me    and    mock    me":    and  yet    says    he,   "I    will 
arise  and  go."     IV.   God's  reception  of  the  returning  sinner.     {E.  N.  Kirk.) 
The  efficacy  and  joy  of  repentance  : — I.  The  parable.     It  can  stand  the  two  tests 
which  Byron  declared  to  be  decisive  upon  the  merit  of  literary  creations.   It  pleases 
immediately,  and  it  pleases  permanently.    The  rose  needs  no  essay  to  prove  that  it 
is  a  rose.   This  is  fragrant  with  the  breath  of  Christ,  and  coloured  with  the  summer 
of  His  touch.     1.  The  prodigal's  sin.     (1)  In  its  origin  it  is  selfishness.     (2)  In  its 
progress  it  is  dissipation.    (3)  In  its  result,  sin  is  famine  and  degradation  :  in  action, 
the  life  of  the  stye,  which  is  sensuality  ;  in  thought,  the  system  of  the  stye,  which 
is  materialism.     One  of  the  citizens  of  that  country  sends  him  "  into  the  fields  to 
feed  swine."      (4)  But  the  essence  of  his  sin  is  the  miserable  determination  to 
remove  as  far  as  possible  from  his  father's  presence.    2.  The  prodigal's  repentance. 
"  He  came  to  Himself.'      He  had  been  outside  his  true  self  before.     When  a  man 
finds  himself,  he  finds  God.    3.  The  reception  of  the  lost  son.     For  every  step  the 
sinner  takes  towards  God,  God  takes  ten  towards  him.    We  will  not  dwell  upon  the 
particulars  of  that  great  reception.    Enough  to  mention  "  the  first  stole  "  ;  the  ring 
of  honour ;  the  shoes  forbidden  to  slaves ;  the  sacrificial  feast ;  the  father's  voice 
passing  into  the  chant  of  a  wondrous  liturgy ;   and  seen  and  heard  across  the 
darkening  fields  by  the  elder  brother  as  he  unwillingly  faces  homeward  the  long  line 
of  festal  light,  the  symphony  of  instruments,  and  the  choirs  of  dancers.     II. 
Chabaoteristios  of  repentance.     1.  Its  efficacy.    Not  in  the  nature  of  things  ;  not 
inherent  in  it.     The  sinner  is  in  an  awful  land,  where  every  rock  is  literally  a 
"  rock  of  ages  "  ;  where  the  facts  which  some  men  call  spiritual  are  bound  by  a 
fatal  succession  quite  as  much  as  the  facts  which  all  men  call  material ;  where  God 
is  frozen  into  an  icicle,  and  no  tender  touch  of  miracle  can  come  from  His  law- 
stiffened  fingers ;  where  two  and  two  always  make  four,  and  your  sin  always  fiuda 
you  out.    To  remove  this  impotence  and  inefficacy  of  repentance,  Jesus  lived  and 
died.     Bepentance  is  His  indulgence,  fiang  down  from  the  balcony  by  our  great 
High  Priest.    Bepentance  is  His  gift ;  the  efficacy  of  repentance  is  His  secret.     2. 
Its  joy.    (1)  There  are  two  considerations  which  have  always  been  urged  by  masters  . 
of  the  spiritual  life,     (a)  To  judge  the  inner  life  only  by  the  joy  of  which  it  is  con- 
soious  is  a  sort  of  spiritual  epicureanism.    "  The  tears  of  penitents  are  the  wine  of 
angels  " ;  but  they  were  not  intended  to  intoxicate  those  who  shed  them,     (b^  Past 
sin,  even  when  its  guilt  is  pardoned,  has  penal  consequences  upon  the  iimer  life.   It 
continues  in  the  memory  with  its  poisoned  springs  and  in  the  imagination  with  ita 
perilone  snsceptibiUtieB.    (2)  Yet  they  know  not  the  mind  of  Qod  to  whom  penitence 
U  onlj  bitter.   There  are 

*'  Tears  that  sweeter  far 
Than  the  world's  mad  laughter  ar*.** 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  tt. 


There  is  a  triumphant,  a  victorious  delight,  which  leads  the  will  along  the  narrow 
way,  and  will  not  be  gainsaid.  It  is  a  mutilated  Miserere  which  omits  the  verse — 
"  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness,  that  the  bones  which  Thou  hast  broken  may 
rejoice."  By  one  of  those  apparent  contradictions  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the 
Christian  life,  a  perpetual  yearning  after  pardon  is  consistent  with  a  perpetual 
serenity  of  hope.  God  would  mould  His  penitents  that  they  may  combine  sorrow 
with  joy ;  that  they  may  hear  at  once  a  sigh  in  the  depths  of  their  souls,  and  a 
music  far  away.  There  must  be  in  the  renewed  nature  something  of  the  iron  that 
has  been  moulded  in  His  furnace,  and  somethhig  of  the  rose  which  has  been  ex- 
panded in  His  sunshine.  The  life  of  Frederick  the  Great,  by  a  writer  of  transcen- 
dent genius,  contains  incidentally  a  record  of  the  death  of  an  English  general 
defeated  in  Canada.  Twice  only  did  the  unhappy  officer  rouse  himself  out  of  tha 
mortal  stupor  into  which  he  fell  from  a  broken  heart.  Once  he  sighed  heavily — 
'«  Who  would  have  thought  it  ?  "  Many  days  after  he  said  with  more  animation — 
'•  Another  time  we  will  do  better."  And  then  "  the  cataracts  of  soft,  sweet  sleep  " 
rushed  down  upon  the  weary  man.  Do  not  these  two  sentences  give  us  this  view 
of  the  twofold  aspect  of  repentance? — the  first,  the  humiliation  of  the  beaten  soldier 
as  he  comes  to  himself ;  the  second,  his  hope  through  Christ  as  he  catches  the 
music  of  the  march  of  victory,  (Bishop  TViu.  Alexander^  The  pearl  of  parables : — 
I.  We  shall  need  to  group  togetheb  at  the  outset  the  pakticulaks  which  show 

THIS  TOUNQ  man's  ALIENATED   CONDITION  AT  THE    UOMENT  WHEN   THK   8TOBY  GIVES   HIM 

introduction  (see  vers.  11,  12).  1.  He  was  estranged  from  all  love  for  his  father. 
His  affections  had  been  soured  and  turned  before  he  made  this  abrupt  demand.  He 
addressed  his  father  as  to  a  division  of  his  estate  in  a  cool,  technical  way.  2.  He 
was  away  from  his  home  (see  ver.  13).  His  father's  residence  which  he  had  left  is 
pictured  in  the  parable,  with  the  family  life  in  it,  by  two  or  three  strokes  of  a 
master  hand.  Even  the  servants  had  enough  and  to  spare.  Feasts  were  not  un- 
known. Music  and  dancing  were  part  of  the  entertainment.  But  it  is  plain  that 
the  old  father  meant  to  be  master  there ;  and  that  was  precisely  the  condition  of 
life  this  impulsive  youth  resolved  to  escape.  3,  He  had  fallen  into  poverty  (see 
ver.  14).  Removed  from  influences  which  had  hitherto  kept  him  in  check,  he  began 
the  career  of  a  profligate  and  debauchee.  A  little  time  spent  in  this  voluptuous 
folly  sufficed  to  run  through  his  fortune.  4.  At  last  he  sank  to  the  lowest,  and 
became  a  servant.  He  went  and  offered  himself  to  a  master.  The  citizen  of  that 
country  put  him  at  the  very  worst  business  he  had  for  any  menial  to  do.  5.  At  this 
moment  the  young  man  was  actually  hungering  in  the  presence  of  his  beasts  (see 
ver.  16).  So  far  from  having  the  right  to  despise  the  lowly  creatures  of  his  charge, 
the  prodigal  began  the  rather  to  envy  them.  The  picture  must  be  turned  now  to 
show  just  how  it  illustrates  the  condition  of  a  sinner  alienated  from  his  Father  in 
heaven.  His  own  pride  of  heart  lies  at  the  bottom  of  his  departure ;  he  wants  to 
be  master  of  himself.  Gathering  together  all  his  resources  of  time,  talent,  energy 
— all  his  powers  of  mind  and  body — he  rushes  away  into  the  world  of  dissipation 
and  lust.  Now  he  goes  to  the  devil  aiiectly  and  hires  himself  out,  and  Satan 
accepts  him  at  his  own  valuation,  and  puts  him  among  the  swine.     H.  Let  us 

NOW  SEEK  FOR  THE  PARTICULARS  WHICH  DISPLAY  THIS  PEODIOAL'S  ENTIRE  CHANGE  IN 
PURPOSE  AND  FEELING  BY  WHICH    HE  WAS  AT  LAST  LED   BACK  TO  HIS  HOME  IN   PENITENCE 

AND  PEACE  (see  ver.  17).  1.  First  of  all,  he  began  to  think.  •'  I  thought  upon  my  ways, 
and  turned  my  feet  unto  Thy  testimonies. "  The  expression  here  is  as  singular  as  it  ist 
strong — "When  he  came  to  himself."  A  sort  of  madness  was  in  his  heart.  He 
sees  where  he  is,  and  what  he  is,  and  what  he  has  so  long  been  doing.  2.  Then  he 
began  to  remember.  That  is  Scripture  counsel  for  us  in  these  later  times — "  Be- 
member  from  whence  thou  art  fallen."  The  prodigal  recollected  the  kindness  of 
his  home  in  the  days  gone  by.  3.  Then  he  began  to  regret.  His  grief  over  the 
wickedness  of  his  career  is  shown  by  the  softness  and  gentleness  of  his  forms  of 
meditation.  We  discover  no  demonstrations  of  spite.  4.  Then  he  began  to  hate. 
Abruptly,  but  for  ever,  he  throws  up  his  engagement  with  his  cruel  master.  Ha 
renounces  absolutely  all  the  associations  of  his  life  in  this  far  country.  5.  Then  ha 
began  to  resolve  (see  vers.  18,  ly).  So  critical  is  this  as  a  point  in  his  experience, 
that  we  must  analyze  it  step  by  step  to  the  end.  (1)  He  resolved  he  would  arise. 
If  he  was  actually  bent  on  making  a  change,  he  must  be  up  on  the  instant  and  out 
of  this.  Nothing  could  be  gained  by  delay.  (2)  He  resolved  he  would  go  to  hia 
father.  To  whom  else  could  he  go  ?  Drudgery  was  here,  freedom  was  yonder. 
Shame  was  here,  honour  was  yonder.  Slavery  was  here,  duty  was  yonder.  Starving 
was  hete,  plenty  and  to  spare  were  yonder.     (3)  He  resolved  to  speak  to  his  father. 


«HAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  113 

Observe,  in  this  little  speeoh  he  Bays  over  and  over  again  to  himself  there  is  not 
one  word  about  food  or  raiment,  or  future  fortune.  He  is  going  to  get  the  awful 
past  right  before  he  begins  on  anything  else.  He  decides  that  he  will  confess  beford 
he  begins  to  plead ;  what  he  wants  is  pardon.  (4)  He  resolved  to  be  obedient  to 
his  father.  Unworthy  of  Bonship,  he  will  ask  for  a  servant's  place.  Indeed,  now 
he  has  come  to  see  that  the  lowest  position  in  his  father's  house  is  higher  than  the 
highest  he  ever  discovered  in  aU  these  reckless,  wicked  days  since  he  left  it.  Here, 
again,  we  must  pause  to  turn  the  story,  so  as  to  see  in  all  plainness  how  it  illus- 
trates the  process  of  mind  and  behaviour  through  which  a  contrite  sinner  returns 
to  his  Father  in  heaven  in  the  hour  of  his  resolve.  These  steps  are  all  homeward 
steps.  III.  There  remains  for  our  study  now  only  one  more  grouping  of  pai-ticulars 
which  show  this  peodigaIi's  eeception  when  at  the  last  he  abbived  in  his  own 
COUNTRY,  AND  CAME  TO  HIS  FATHER'S  HOUSE.  1.  He  Carried  out  his  purpose  of  arising 
and  going  to  his  father  (see  ver.  20).  It  would  have  done  no  good  just  to  resolve  and 
then  sit  still  there  among  the  swine.  2.  He  carried  out  his  purpose  of  confessing 
his  sin  to  his  father  (see  ver.  21).  Perhaps  he  had  been  fainting  with  hunger ;  but 
hope  would  tell  him  of  comfort  by  and  by.  Perhaps  he  would  meet  a  train  of 
travellers,  who  would  laugh  at  his  sorry  look  and  condition ;  but  he  would  think  o£ 
help  coming  before  long.  Perhaps  his  heart  whoUy  sank  at  the  moment  when  from 
the  last  hill  he  saw  his  home  ;  but  he  would  be  sure  to  fall  back  on  his  sure  faith 
in  his  father's  affection.  3.  He  carried  out  his  purpose  of  full  obedience  of  hia 
father.  To  be  sure,  not  a  word  was  said  about  his  being  a  servant  any  more.  Ha 
was  a  son  now,  and  all  the  old  honour  had  come  with  the  robe  and  the  ring.  But 
the  unspoken  resolve  still  remained  in  his  heart  (see  Heb.  v.  8).  (C.  S.  Bobimon, 
D.D.)  The  prodigal  son : — I.  The  son's  fortune,  and  his  wat  of  spending  ix. 
What,  then,  was  his  fortune  7  Man  is  gifted  with  health,  by  which  he  is  able  to 
enjoy  Ufe — strength,  to  provide  for  its  necessities — faculties  (such  as  common 
sense,  reason,  the  anderetanding),  to  guide  him  to  God  as  his  true  happiness — 
affections,  to  endear  him  to  others,  and  others  to  him.  Appetites  of  various  and 
valuable  sorts.  The  appetite  of  eating  and  drinking,  which  affords  legitimate 
pleasure  and  real  advantage  when  moderately  indulged ;  the  appetite  for  seeing, 
which  opens  a  door  to  much  nsefal  discovery  and  dehght,  which  enables  us  to 
admire  on  every  hand  the  infinite  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  our  Creator  and 
our  God ;  the  appetite  for  hearing,  by  which  Divine  knowledge  gets  admittance  into 
the  soul,  by  wMch  the  agreeable  converse  of  our  friends,  and  the  delightful  strains 
of  heavenly  melody,  may  be  enjoyed  and  indulged  in.  These,  and  many  others, 
are  precious  items  in  the  portion  which  God  bountifully  bestows  upon  His  children. 
They  should  be  enjoyed  at  His  discretion,  according  to  His  command,  and  for  His 
glory.  Not  so,  however,  the  sinner.  Like  the  prodigal,  he  gathers  his  riches,  and 
takes  his  journey  into  a  far  country — that  is  to  say,  he  wanders  far  from  God  and 
heaven.  The  prodigal  becomes  a  worldling ;  he  carries  his  portion  into  the  un- 
regenerate  world,  and  there  wastes  his  substance  in  riotous  living.  His  gifts  are 
debauched  and  misused ;  they  are  all  made  the  servants  of  sin.  Hunger  caters  to 
gluttony ;  thirst  to  drunkenness ;  the  eye  administers  to  lust ;  it  reads  wicked  looks, 
delights  in  wanton  shows,  in  pomp,  and  vanity,  and  folly.  The  ear  drinks  in  blas- 
phemy, irreligion,  and  indecency.  The  heart  is  made  the  residence  of  evil  affec- 
tions ;  the  head  and  understanding,  of  wicked,  ungodly,  infidel  principles.  The 
Bommer  of  life  is  spent  in  bringing  to  maturity  the  seeds  of  evil  which  were  scattered 
in  its  spring — the  autumn,  in  the  neglect  of  what  is  good,  and  in  the  ingathering  of 
what  is  bad,  the  poisoned  fruits  of  a  debauched  manhood.  The  winter  of  life  comea 
on,  and  in  its  train  sharp  disease,  racking  pains — a  bloated,  enfeebled,  disordered 
earcase — a  foolish  head,  an  unregenerate  heart,  a  guilty  conscience.  There  is  now 
no  more  capacity  for  enjoying  pleasure;  the  sight  is  gone,  the  hearing  lost,  the 
appetite  vanished,  the  strength  decayed,  the  health  squandered,  the  affections 
debased,  the  faculties  degraded — the  whole  substance  wasted  in  riotous  living.  XL 
His  dbbtitution  and  bepentancb,  "  And  when  he  had  spent  all  there  began  to  be 
a  mighty  famine  in  that  land."  So  it  is  with  sinners.  They  derive  their  pleasure 
from  sensual  enjoyments — the  indulgences  of  the  flesh ;  but,  when  they  spend  their 
strength,  there  is  an  end  of  these  indulgences.  The  eye  refuses  to  see,  the  ear  to 
hear,  the  members  to  stir,  in  obedience  to  the  miserable  slave  of  sin.  "  And  he 
would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with  the  husks  that  the  swine  did  eat."  It  is  among 
the  miserieB  of  sinners  that  the  appetite  for  wicked  indulgence  increases  as  the 
capacity  for  gratifying  it  decays.  The  longer  the  heart  has  been  exercised  in 
iniyiity,  the  deeper  wiU  be  the  corruption  with  which  it  is  tainted.    "  And  no  man 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xt. 

gave  unto  him."  Be  assured,  pinner,  this  is  a  true  picture  of  the  world.  Whila 
you  can  treat  them — while  you  have  anything  that  tht-y  can  devour,  they  will  praise 
and  flatter  you ;  but,  when  your  substance  is  gone,  you  will  find  it  true  that  no 
man  will  give  unto  you — none  of  your  sinful  companions.  They  have  their  own 
devouring  lusts,  their  filthy  Insts,  to  gratify.  Do  you  think  that  they  will  deny 
themselves  for  your  necessities  ?  "  And  when  ho  came  to  himself  " — mark  the 
expression,  as  though  he  had  been  in  a  fit  of  madness.  It  is  thus  the  sinner  is  here 
spoken  of ;  yea,  and  elsewhere  the  Holy  Ghost  says,  "  Madness  is  in  their  hearts 
while  they  live."  "  I  will  arise,"  Ac.  Here,  then,  were  no  excuses,  no  palliations 
— no  saying  others  were  in  fault,  I  was  led  astray,  I  have  not  been  as  bad  as  some 
— no  promises  of  great  things  for  the  future — no  saying,  I  will  devote  myself  to  thy 
service,  I  will  fight  thy  battles,  I  will  do  wonders  for  thy  cause ;  but  a  simple 
declaration  of  guilt  and  wretchedness :  "  I  have  sinned,  I  am  unworthy ;  I  do  not 
deserve  tbe  character  of  thy  son;  make  me  as  one  of  tby  servants  ;  regard  me  as 
one  of  them."  He  resolves  to  plead,  not  his  merit,  but  his  misery,  and  he  puts  his 
resolve  into  execution.  For — III.  "  He  akose  and  came  to  his  father."  "  He 
arose  and  came"  :  it  is  important  that  you  should  mark  this — he  did  not  rest  con- 
tent with  mere  resolutions  of  repentance.  He  did  not  say,  "  I  will  arise  and 
return,"  and  all  the  while  stay  where  he  was,  desiring  still  to  feed  on  husks.  This 
too  many  do.  "And  while  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,"  &c.  Oh,  the  melting 
tenderness  of  our  God  and  Saviour !  He  watches  the  very  first  movements  towards 
repentance.  {T.  D.  Gregg,  M.A.)  The  reformed  prodigal : — I.  Let  us  inquibe 
WHO  THE  ■soDNGER  SON  IS  INTENDED  TO  EEPRE8ENT.  The  parable  is  addrcssed  to  the 
scribes  and  Pharisees ;  but  there  was  nothing  in  their  character  which  resembled 
what  is  ascribed  to  the  younger  son,  or  that  could  admit  a  comparison  with  him. 
But,  as  we  are  told,  it  was  delivered  in  the  presence  of  publicans  and  siimers, 
who  had  assembled  in  crowds  to  hear  Jesus,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  it  was 
that  class  who  are  portrayed  by  the  younger  son.  The  publicans  and  sinners 
are  never  represented  in  the  Gospels  as  influenced  by  tbe  religious  opinions 
which  prevailed  among  the  Jews,  but  rather  as  led  by  their  feelings;  just  a  a 
the  younger  son  is  exhibited  in  the  parable.  They  are,  however,  drawn  as 
more  easily  instructed,  and  more  susceptible  of  repentance  and  reformation. 
II.  Let  us  next  point  out  what  tjsefdi.  instkcction  we  mat  derive  from  thb 
CONDUCT  of  THE  YOUNGER  BEOTHEB.  1.  We  seo  that  oxtravagance  and  licentious- 
ness are  nsnally  followed  by  want.  Whoever,  then,  practices  these  vices,  cannot 
plead  ignorance  of  their  natural  and  unavoidable  consequences.  Nor  do  evil  effects 
belong  to  these  vices  alone ;  for  every  other  vice  has  its  peculiar  evil  consequences 
which  accompany  its  train,  as  uniformly  as  a  shadow  goes  along  with  a  moving 
substance  when  tbe  sun  shines.  Thns,  even  truth  from  the  mouth  of  a  known 
har  is  usually  received  with  incredulity,  and  always  with  suspicion.  Pride  ie 
incessantly  exposed  to  imaginary  affronts  and  real  mortifications,  which  cause  to 
the  unhappy  victim  many  agonizing  moments.  The  vain  man  is  miserable  when 
he  is  doomed  to  negligence  and  contempt,  instead  of  receiving  the  coveted  and 
expected  praise.  The  gratification  of  revenge,  in  reality,  consists  of  the  pains  of 
the  rack.  2.  As  the  evil  consequences  of  sin  are  thus  so  evident  to  all,  we  ought 
to  be  convinced  that  this  knowledge  was  intended  to  lead  us  to  amendment.  Such, 
indeed,  is  represented  as  the  effect  produced  on  the  young  man  in  the  parable.  His 
sufferings  occasioned  not  only  that  repentance  which  consists  in  strong  feelings, 
but  that  reformation  which  consists  in  a  change  of  conduct.  This  is  exhibited  as 
genuine  and  sincere ;  it  was  speedy,  nor  was  it  partial  but  universal.     III.  Our 

ATTENTION    IS    NEXT   CALLED   TO   THE    ELDER   BROTHER.       We    haVC  COncludcd   that  the 

younger  brother  was  designed  to  represent  the  publicans  and  sinners.  Nor  can  we 
have  any  doubt  that,  under  the  similitude  of  the  elder  brother,  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  are  intended.  It  is  true  the  character  given  of  the  elder  brother  is  good 
— that  he  had  served  his  father  many  years,  and  never  transgressed  his  commands. 
But  we  must  not  overlook  the  circumstance  that  this  favourable  character  is  given 
by  himself,  while  his  conduct  exhibits  an  opposite  picture,  bearing  a  close  resem- 
blance to  the  scribes  and  Pharisees ;  for  they  deemed  themselves  not  only  faultless 
bat  meritorious,  as  they  are  represented  by  the  Pharisee  in  the  parable,  who 
thanked  God  for  his  superiority  to  others,  and  plumed  himself  because  he  fasted 
twice  in  the  week,  and  gave  tithes  of  all  his  possessions.  Like  the  great  body  of 
the  Pharisees,  the  elder  brother  is  selfish  and  indifferent  about  others.  He  is 
angry  at  the  fond  reception  given  to  his  penitent  brother,  envious  of  the  marks 
of  favour  conferred  on  him,  and  mortified  at  the  supposed  preference  to  himself 


OBAP.  XV.]  8T.  LUKE.  121 

hj  his  noble-mmded  father.  Had  he  possessed  any  natural  affection  he  would  hava 
cordially  testified  his  delight  at  the  return  of  his  long-lost  brother.  Had  he  f«lt  aa 
he  ougLt  to  have  done,  he  would  have  learned  that  bis  own  happiness  was  highly 
enhanced ;  for  there  is  no  joy  bo  elevated  and  refined  as  that  which  a  good  man 
feels  at  the  return  of  a  bod,  or  a  brother,  or  a  friend,  to  Ood  and  duty.  IV.  Lastly, 

THE   CONDUCT   OF     THE   FATHEB  IN   THE     PABABLE   IS   EVIDENTLY    INTENDED  TO   BEPBE- 

BENT  THE  GOODNESS  OF  ouB  Almighty  Fathbb.  {J.  Tliomson,  D.D.)  The  prodigal 
son : — L  This  young  man  was  laying  his  life-plans,  and  his  first  idea  was  to  get 
away  from  his  father.  2.  Freedom  from  restraint  leads  to  recklessness.  3.  Beok- 
leseness  leads  to  want.  4.  Want  leads  to  recollection.  5.  BecoUection  leads  to 
repentance.  6.  Repentance  leads  to  reformation.  7.  Eeformation  leads  to 
restoration.  8.  Restoration  leads  to  rejoicing.  9.  Rejoicing  over  the  returning 
prodigal  is  well ;  bat  the  conduct  and  character  of  the  elder  brother  are  im- 
measurably better.  {T.  Kelly.)  The  parable  of  the  prodigal  son : — I.  Self 
WILL  leads  to  pbodiqality.  H.  Pbodigality  leads  to  want.  III.  Want  awakens 
MEMOBY.  IV.  Awakened  memoby  leads  to  bepentance  and  betuen.  {Geo.  Gerrard.'^ 
The  prodigal : — Let  us  reg&rd  it  as  giving  a  picture  of  man — I.  In  the  dignity  of 
his  obioin.  This  young  man  was  the  son  of  a  father  who  could  bestow  on  him  a 
large  fortune,  and  surround  his  life  with  comfort  and  splendour.  He  was  bom 
to  dignity.  The  destitution  and  misery  to  which  he  had  reduced  himself  was  not 
his  natural  heritage.  "We  are  also  His  offspring."  U.  In  his  desibk  fob 
INDEPENDENCE.  All  slns  may  be  regarded  as  the  unfolding  of  this  single  sin  of 
selfishnesd.  Hence  the  necessity  that  we  should  enter  the  Kingdom  of  God,  where 
He  asserts  and  maintains  His  dominion  over  us.  III.  In  the  libebty  allowed 
HIM,  WITH  the  bisk  OF  ITS  ABUSE.  When  a  man  feels  that  the  service  of  God  is 
not  perfect  freedom,  that  he  can  better  himself  in  some  condition  of  his  own  seek- 
ing, God  allows  him  to  make  the  trial.  The  foolish  experiment  discovers  at  length 
to  him  that  he  is  not  really  free  by  throwing  off  his  former  yoke.  He  has  but 
exchanged  it  for  a  far  heavier  one.  1.  We  learn  from  this  that  the  apostasy  of  the 
heart  begins  before  the  apostasy  of  the  life.  2.  Man  abuses  the  liberty  allowed 
him,  and  abandons  himself  to  the  dreadful  possibilities  of  sin.  Liberty  is  indeed 
a  noble  endowment,  yet  it  is  terrible  to  have  the  power  to  ruin  ourselves.  We  can 
guin  nothing  by  contending  with  our  Maker,  IV.  In  the  manneb  of  his  spibitual 
BEcovEBY.  This  rccovery  is  possible.  Such  is  the  glad  sound  of  the  gospel.  Let 
as  trace  the  steps  by  which  the  prodigal  gained  the  favour  he  had  forfeited.  1.  He 
was  made  to  feel  his  utmost  need.  2.  His  reformation  commenced  in  thought. 
8.  He  was  sensible  of  the  honour  he  had  rejected.  4.  He  resolves  to  cast  himself 
upon  the  mercy  of  his  father,  5.  He  frames  the  design  of  his  confession.  Sin  is 
acknowledged  in  its  root — "  before  Thee."  6.  Still  remaining  as  a  son,  he  desired 
to  be  reckoned  a  servant.  V.  In  the  merciful  kindness  with  which  heaven 
FOBorvBS  THE  EVIL  OF  HIS  LIFE.  God  draws  nigh  unto  those  who  draw  nigh  unto 
Him.  When  the  face  is  turned  towards  God,  the  long  journey  is  relieved  by  the 
arrival  of  mercy  before  we  have  trodden  every  weary  step.  1.  The  penitent  is 
raised  to  a  position  of  honour.  2.  There  was  sympathy  awakened  for  him  in  the 
father's  household.  3.  The  joy  was  suited  to  the  time — "  it  was  meet."  But  this 
intensity  of  joy  could  not,  in  the  nature  of  things,  long  continue.  He,  too,  must 
shortly  settle  down  to  the  sober  tasks  of  duty.  The  excitement  of  a  great  crisis 
must  not  be  the  permanent  condition  of  the  soul,  or  her  energies  would  be  con- 
sumed at  too  high  a  rate ;  and,  instead  of  the  glow  of  health,  there  would  be  the 
burning  of  a  fever.  Excessive  joy  must  subside  into  the  patience  of  faith,  and  the 
labour  of  love.  {The  Lay  Preacher.)  The  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  : — I.  The 
PBODiGAL  SON  LEAVF,8  HIS  fatheb's  HOUSE.  1.  Why  did  he  leave?  (1)  Youth  is 
the  time  of  imaginations.  The  prodigal  son  promised  to  himself  a  joyful  life  out 
side  of  his  father's  house.  (2)  Youth  is  desirous  of  sensual  pleasures.  (3)  Youth 
desires  to  be  independent,  and  will  not  obey.  2.  How  did  he  leave  ?  (1)  The 
ungrateful  demand.  (2)  The  going  astray.  II.  The  pbodigal  son  in  a  fobeioh 
coDNTBY.  1.  He  wastes  his  substance.  2.  He  begins  to  be  in  want.  Poverty  is 
the  condition  of  the  soul  that  seeks  happiness  in  the  world.  By  losing  his  GK)d, 
the  sinner  loses  everything.  3,  His  degradation.  He  who  would  not  perform  the 
daily  work  in  the  house  of  his  father,  is  now  obliged  to  labour  as  m  hired  servant. 
4.  He  envies  the  brute  beasts.  III.  His  bbtubn  and  beception.  1.  The  causes 
of  his  return.  (1)  It  was  caused  bv  his  misery.  The  famine  calls  him  back  whom 
satiety  had- led  away.  God  visits  with  grace  him  whom  He  visits  with  affliction. 
(2)  Forsaken  by  all  the  world,  he  returned  to  himself.    The  first  condition  of  con- 


122  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X¥. 

verBion  is  knowledge  of  one's  self,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  condition  of  our  soul. 
(3)  He  saw  the  misery  of  his  condition.  2.  The  steps  he  takes  in  order  to  return. 
(1)  He  makes  a  firm  resolution,  not  deferring  his  return  to  a  later  time,  nor  being 
deterred  by  diflBculties.  (2)  He  still  remembers  the  kindness  of  his  father.  (3)  He 
acknowledges  the  enormity  of  his  sin.  3.  His  reception.  {Repertorium  Oratoris 
Sacri.)  The  prodigal  son: — Look  at  the  prodigal  son — I.  In  his  oeiginal  cir- 
cumstances OF  honour  and  happiness.  Upright.  Innocent.  Happy.  God  his 
Father.  Eden  his  home.  The  earth  his  domain.  Angels  his  companions.  All 
that  Divine  wisdom  and  love  could  provide,  he  poaeessed.  An  ample  portion  was 
his  inheritance.  II.  In  the  arrogance  of  his  presumptuous  claim.  What  did 
he  really  want ?  Where  could  he  be  more  dignified  or  happy?  But  he  seeks  to 
have  his  portion  to  himself.  He  desires  to  do  with  it  as  he  pleases.  He  seeks  to 
throw  off  parental  restraints  and  control.  III.  In  his  dissipated  wanderings. 
1.  This  wandering  is  very  gradual  and  insidious.  2.  Increasingly  rapid.  3. 
Awfully  dangerous.  IV.  In  bis  wretchedness  and  misery.  Profligacy  is  followed 
by  want ;  extravagance  by  misery.  V.  In  his  unalleviated  distress.  {J.  Burns, 
D.D.)  The  prodigaVB  return: — I.  Beason  besdmes  heb  dominion.  II.  The 
besolution  he  adopts.  1.  He  determines  on  an  immediate  return  to  his  forsaken 
home.  2.  He  resolves  freely  to  confess  his  sins.  3.  He  resolves  to  be  content 
with  any  place  in  his  father's  dwelling.  III.  The  course  which  he  promptly 
carries  out.  1.  Immediately  ;  without  delay.  2.  And  he  perseveres  in  his  home- 
ward course.  {Ibid.)  The  sequel: — I.  The  happt  mbetino.  II,  The  hearty 
keception.  III.  The  distinguished  banquet.  IV.  The  cold-hearted  envy  of 
the  eldeb  brother.  Lessons  :  1.  How  generous  and  pure  is  the  benevolence  of 
the  gospel.  It  is  of  God,  and  from  Him,  and  resembles  His  tender  and  infinite 
love.  2.  How  hateful  is  an  envious  self-righteous  spirit.  It  is  the  sprit  of  the  evil 
Dne,  and  therefore  from  beneath.  3.  Happy  they  who  have  repented  of  sin,  and 
who  have  been  received  into  the  Saviour's  family  of  love.  {Ibid.)  The  prodigal 
son: — I.  The  pbodiqal'b  departure.  He  disliked  all  parental  restraint.  He  broke 
the  principle  involved  in  the  "  first  commandment  with  promise."  In  his  father's 
house  vice  was  out  of  place.  He  made  the  world  his  servant,  little  thinking  how 
soon  he  should  be  nnder  its  most  cruel  tyranny.  He  wae  sadly  deceived.  We 
must  never  forget  that  all  wasting  of  our  gifts  is  a  sin.  Man  is  made  for  a  noble 
purpose  ;  his  duties  touch  eternity,  and  are  given  for  use  in  time.  Shall  we,  for 
even  a  moment,  dare  assume  that  it  is  no  concern  of  ours  how  we  employ  onr 
powers?  IL  The  prodigal's  despaib.  His  situation  is  portrayed  by  the  one 
graphic  description  of  Christ :  "  There  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land."  We 
are  pointed  to  the  darkest  word  in  human  history,  precursor  of  the  pestilence  and 
death.  It  tells  of  the  stony  bed  where  the  brook  once  ran.  It  tells  of  the  fmitless 
trees,  with  branches  prematurely  stripped  of  their  foliage.  It  tells  of  the  grass  of 
Bummer  all  bnmed  away.  His  property  was  all  wasted,  and  despair  was  settling 
down  apou  his  soul.  His  life  was  a  failure  in  such  a  land  ;  his  "riotous  living" 
was  beginning  its  curse.  No  want  of  the  human  heart,  good  or  bad,  is  ever  satis* 
tied  here.  Even  the  disciple's  anticipation  is  of  a  time  when  he  shall  awake  in 
Christ's  likeness.  Just  so,  the  nobler  desires  turned  earthward  are  more  insatiate 
still.  Epicure  was  never  satisfied.  The  sustenance  of  vicious  desires  only  awakens 
new  ones.  The  drunkard  drinks  deeper  week  by  week,  his  thirst  deepened  with  every 
draught  of  the  mocking  cup.  The  miser's  lust  burns  fiercer  as  the  gold  in  his  chest 
becomes  heavier.  III.  The  prodigal's  resolution.  We  are  told  of  an  English  soldier, 
wounded  and  faint,  left  by  the  retreating  army  to  die.  Helpless  and  motionless  ha 
lay,  expecting  his  death,  screened  from  the  burning  sun  by  an  overhanging  cliff. 
While  his  strength  was  ebbing  fast  there  alighted  just  before  his  face  a  greedy, 
ravenous  bird,  waiting  for  the  end  to  come.  Thoughts  of  himself  becoming  the  prey 
of  that  loathsome  bird  gave  him  a  new  energy,  and  he  slowly  arose  and  at  last  was 
saved.  In  almost  a  .like  helpless  state  the  prodigal  "  came  to  himself."  Two 
thoughts  convinced  him  of  his  insane  course — the  abjectnessof  his  misery,  perishing 
with  hunger  ;  and  the  remembrance  of  the  joys  in  the  father's  house.  It  was  thus 
the  dissolute  John  Newton  became  himself  again.  But  for  a  like  critical  resolve 
John  Bunyan  would  ever  have  remained  the  same  worthless  profligate  as  in  hif 
youth.  A  moral  coward  may  face  the  cannon's  month,  but  only  a  hero  will  tarn 
from  his  sin.  There  is  a  splendour  in  such  a  moral  conflict.  Caesar's  political  fate 
depended  upon  his  passing  the  Bubicon ;  and  yet  the  same  resolution  is  demanded 
in  the  case  of  every  sinner.  IV.  The  prodigal's  welcome.  Words  are  powerless 
in  declaring  the  richness  of  soch  a  reception.     The  prodigal  loved  ms  fathet 


OEAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  123 

because  his  father  had  first  loved  him.  Day  after  day  the  hired  serrants  had  asked 
in  vain,  When  will  his  love  grow  less?  But  it  never  ceased.  (D.  0.  Hears.) 
The  prodigal  ton : — I.  Thb  spibit  o»  thb  son  at  thk  beoinmiko.  His  underlying 
aim  is  to  lock  out  for  himself.  He  wanted  his  father's  goods,  bat  not  his  presence. 
This  is  the  germ  of  sin — an  independent,  proud,  unloving  spirit  toward  God.  H. 
The  departoee.  Not  many  days  after  he  found  that  he  could  be  independent,  he 
started  off  on  his  journey.  He  who  does  not  pray  and  obey  God,  rapidly  withdraws 
from  Him.  God  is  not  in  his  thoughts,  and  therefore  he  soon  ceases  to  appreciate 
the  character  which  God  loves.  The  true  generosity,  which  is  love  to  men  for  their 
good,  is  lost.  He  loves  men  for  what  they  are  worth  to  please  himself.  Beverence 
is  lost.  The  courage  of  gentleness  is  lost.  Abhorrence  of  wickedness  is  lost.  He 
sees  wit  in  the  rejection  of  Divine  authority,  courage  in  anger,  manliness  in  vice. 
IIL  Tbe  upb  of  uNHAiiLowED  PLEASURE.  He  chose  the  company  that  fitted  his 
spirit.  He  sought  others  for  what  he  could  get  out  of  them ;  they  sought  him  for 
what  they  could  get  out  of  him.  He  had  plenty  of  company  as  long  as  he  had 
substance  to  waste  on  them.  What  he  spent  on  them  was  wasted.  What  they  gave 
him  was  wasted.  The  whole  traffic  was  utter  loss  on  both  sides.  They  had  not 
only  outward  possessions,  but  a  wealth  of  intellect,  affection,  beauty,  genius.  They 
wasted  it  all.  This  the  seeker  for  self  and  not  God  always  does.  He  uses  his 
talents  to  cover  up  his  real  aims  and  passions.  Art  has  been  made  the  handmaid 
of  Sin.  Music  is  called  in  to  adorn  the  hideous  nakedness  of  Vice,  IV.  The  coiiLAPss. 
The  famine  began  when  he  had  used  up  all  he  had.  When  all  is  gone.  Nature 
herself  turns  against  the  prodigal.  The  world  is  a  desert  to  a  sinner  who  has  run 
through  the  gifts  of  God,  and  he  is  absolutely  certain  to  run  them  through  in  a 
little  while.  Alas  for  him  when  his  own  treasures  are  squandered,  and  the  famino 
smites  the  far  country  1  His  one  friend  he  has  cast  off  to  win  the  admiration  of 
ihe  friends  he  had  chosen ;  and  they  have  cast  him  off  as  soon  as  his  goods  are 
gone.  Y.  Tee  new  business.  No  extreme  of  degradation  conld  be  greater  than  this 
to  the  mind  of  the  Jew.  He  became  the  servant  of  a  foreigner,  whom  the  Jew 
despised.  He  tended  swine,  which  were  hateful  to  the  Jew.  He  was  hungry  for 
the  food  which  the  swine  fed  on,  and  couldn't  get  it.  Yet  even  this  degradation  was 
his  own  choice.  VI.  The  awakening.  "He  came  to  himself."  Awakening  to  his 
wretchedness,  he  remembers  one  friend.  Oh,  if  God  were  not  a  friend,  the  prodigal 
would  sink  into  despair  and  hell  when  he  comes  to  himself.  He  sees  now  where  he 
is,  that  he  has  brought  himself  into  this  poverty.  Many  call  God  cruel  after  they 
have  wasted  the  abundance  of  gifts  from  him.  They  have  received  all  they  ask  for, 
have  made  no  acknowledgment,  have  wasted  all,  and  then,  finding  themselves 
wretched,  they  say  that  God  has  done  it.  But  not  so  this  prodigal.  He  said,  "I 
have  sinned."  VII.  The  besolve.  He  is  awakened  to  a  hope  of  pardon  and 
gracious  reception.  But  this  does  not  hinder  the  full  confession  of  his  sin.  He 
accepts  the  deepest  humiliation.  He  seeks  now  not  to  maintain  his  pride,  but  to 
confess  the  truth.  VIII.  The  betubn.  He  acted  at  once.  Honest  repentance 
always  does.  Besolves  postponed  are  lies.  Men  befool  themselves  with  them.  He 
did  not  wait  to  cleanse  himself  and  get  a  more  becoming  dress.  He  was  not  earning 
enough  to  keep  himself  alive,  far  less  could  he  save  enough  to  better  his  appear- 
ance.  Besides,  there  was  nothing  in  the  far  country  which  money  could  buy  that 
would  make  him  in  the  least  degree  presentable  at  home.  The  gay  and  costly  attire 
which  he  wore  when  he  was  spending  his  living  with  harlots  was  as  repulsive  to  his 
father  as  his  rags.  He  was  not  to  become  better  in  order  that  he  might  go  to  his 
father,  but  he  was  to  go  to  his  father  in  order  that  he  might  be  made  better.  Yet  he 
went  back,  not  to  claim  anything.  His  father  had  given  him  once  all  he  had  asked 
for,  and  he  had  taken  it  as  if  it  had  belonged  to  him,  had  wasted  it,  and  ruined 
himself  by  it.  He  went  back  to  make  confession.  IX.  The  meeting.  He  was  yet 
a  great  way  off  when  the  father  saw  him.  Love  is  quicker  than  youth,  loftier  than 
pride,  mightier  than  Satan.  The  love  of  God  is  compassion.  It  suffers  with  the 
penitent.  It  would  even  spare  the  recital  of  the  sad  history.  (A,  E.  Dunning. ) 
The  prodigal  $on: — Six  touching  scenes.  I.  A  sinful  life.  1.  A  yonng  man 
chafing  under  the  restraints  of  home.  This  chafing  arose — (1)  From  a  false  view 
of  true  liberty.  (2)  From  a  false  view  of  true  happiness.  (3)  From  a  false  view  of 
self-guidance.  2.  A  young  man  demanding  his  portion  of  tltie  inheritance.  This 
demand  arose — (1)  From  a  desire  to  be  independent  of  his  father.  (2)  From  a 
desire  to  lay  out  his  life  and  means  according  to  his  own  plan.  3.  The  young  man 
receiving  *'  tbe  portion  which  befell  him."  (1)  The  father  recognized  his  son's  free 
agency.     (2)  The  father  saw  that  his  son's  heart  was  already  estranged  from  him. 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

(3)  The  father  felt  that  the  bitter  experienoeB  of  life  alone,  if  anything,  would 
undeceive  his  self-deluded  and  wilful  son.  II.  Thb  departure  kroii  home.  1.  Tha 
departure  was  not  loug  delayed.  2.  The  young  man  took  all  he  could  claim.  III. 
His  mode  of  life  when  once  released  from  the  restraints  of  home.  1.  His  Ufa 
riotous.  2.  His  substance  wasted.  IV.  The  besolt  op  his  self-elected  life. 
1.  Famine.  2.  Want.  3.  Degrading  service.  4.  Hunger.  V.  The  reaction. 
1.  Situation  realized.  2.  Beflection  commenced.  3.  Decision  resolved  on.  4.  A 
plea  constructed.  5,  Decision  executed.  YL  The  father's  love.  1,  Love's  long 
range  ol  vision.  2.  Love's  teuderness.  3.  Love's  generosity.  4.  Love's  joy. 
Lessons:  1.  The  infinite  contrast — man's  selfishness  and  God's  love.  2.  The 
infinite  folly — man  breaking  away  from  God.  3.  The  infinite  grace — God  embracing, 
forgiving,  and  honouring  the  returning  prodigal.  (D,  C,  Hughes,  M.A.)  The 
prodigal  son: — I.  The  prodigal's  sin.  1.  Discontent.  2.  Departure.  3.  Wilful 
waste.  II.  His  destitution.  1.  Extreme  poverty.  2.  Deep  degradation.  3. 
Woful  want.     III.  His  repentance.     1.  Awakening.     2.  Penitence.    3.  Besolution. 

IV.  His  restoration.     1.  Return.     2.  Confession.      3.  Welcome.     Applications : 

1.  Too  many  imitate  the  prodigal  in  his  sin,  but  not  in  his  repentance.  2.  The 
Father  is  ever  ready  to  meet  and  receive,  with  a  kiss  of  affection,  the  returning 
prodigal.  3.  God  is  exalted  to  have  mercy.  There  is  grace  for  the  chief  of 
sinners.  Whosoever  will,  may  return.  Come  home,  prodigal  1  (L.  O.  Thompson.) 
The  prodigal : — I.   Wilful.      II.  Wandering.      III.  Wasteful.       IV.  Wanting. 

V.  Wretched.  VI.  Walking  home  again.  VII.  Welcome.  (J.  Sanderson,  D.D.) 
The  prodigal's  wandering,  return,  and  reception : — I.  A  sinner's  aversion  and 
alienation  from   God.       1.   A  sinful  state  is  a  state   of   departure  from    God. 

2.  An  extravagant  or  spendthrift.  3.  A  wretched  or  destitute  state.  4.  A 
servile  and  slavish  state.  5.  A  state  of  perpetual  dissatisfaction.  6.  A 
state  of  deadness  or  death.  U.  The  sinner's  return  to  God,  and  the  manner 
thereof.  The  first  demonstration  of  his  return  is — 1.  Consideration  of  his  father's 
kindness.  2.  By  comparison,  he  saw  his  misery.  3.  The  view  he  got  of  the 
superiority  of  his  father's  house.  4.  Determination.  5.  Confession.  6.  Self- 
condemnation.  7.  Humble  submission.  8.  Filial  confidence.  9.  His  obedience. 
III.  The  sinner's  apprehensive  reception.  1.  The  father's  affection  to  his 
returning  child.  2.  Eyes  of  mercy  :  be  saw  him  as  from  a  mountain.  3.  Bowels 
of  mercy :  he  feels  compassion.  4.  Feet  of  mercy :  "  he  ran,"  while  his  son 
••came"  only.  6.  Arms  of  mercy:  ••  he  fell  on  his  neck."  6.  Lips  of  mercy :"  he 
kissed  him."  The  provision  presented.  1.  He  came  in  rags.  •'  He  put  the  best 
robe  upon  him,  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet "  (see  also  Isa.  Ixi.  10). 
2.  He  came  hnngiy.  "  Bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill  it ;  and  let  us  eat,  and 
be  meny  "  (see  also  John  vi.  54).  3.  Great  joy.  "Let  ms  be  merry  "  (see  Luke 
XV.  10) ;  "  Let  them  also  that  love  Thy  name,  be  joyful  in  Thee  (Psa.  v.  11).  4. 
The  conduct  of  the  elder  brother  (25-30)  serves  as  a  reproof  to  the  Pharisees,  who 
were  displeased  at  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  (T.  B.  Baker.)  Parable  of 
the  prodigal  son : — I.  Sinners  regard  God  no  farther  than  to  gain  from  Him  what- 
ever they  can.  II.  Sinners  waste  the  blessings  which  they  receive  from  His  handa^ 
and  reduce  themselves  to  absolute  want.  HI.  AfiQlctions  are  very  often  the  first 
means  of  bringing  them  to  a  sense  of  their  condition.  IV.  When  they  first  acquire 
this  sense  they  usually  betake  themselves  to  false  measures  for  relief.  V.  This 
situation  of  a  sinner  is  eminently  unhappy.  VI.  The  repentance  of  the  gospel  ia 
the  resumption  of  a  right  mind.  Among  the  things  which  the  sinner  realizes, 
when  he  first  comes  to  himself,  are  the  following.  1.  His  own  miserable  condition. 
2.  That  in  the  house  of  his  heavenly  Father  there  is  an  abundance  of  good.  3.  A 
hope  that  this  good  may  be  his.  I  shall  now  proceed  in  the  consideration  of  the 
progress  of  a  siimer  towards  his  final  acceptance  with  God  as  it  is  exhibited  in  the 
text.  With  this  design,  I  observe — I.  True  repentance  is  a  voluntary  exercise  of 
the  mind.  IL  True  repentance  is  a  filial  temper,  disposing  us  to  regard  God  as  our 
parent,  and  ourselves  as  His  children.  IIL  True  repentance  is  followed,  of  course, 
by  a  confession  of  sin.  IV.  A  real  penitent  feels  that  all  his  sins  are  committed 
against  God.  V.  A  real  penitent  is,  of  course,  humble.  VI.  A  real  penitent  brings 
nothing  to  God,  but  his  want,  shame,  and  sorrow.  VII.  A  true  penitent  executea 
his  resolutions  of  obedience.  VIIL  God  is  entirely  disposed  to  receive  the  sincere 
penitent.  IX.  The  richest  provision  is  made  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  sincere 
penitent.  X.  There  is  a  peculiar  joy  in  heaven  over  the  repentance  of  returning 
sinners.  (T.  Dwight,  D.D.)  Bitterness  of  prodigal  sin : — I.  The  prodigal'!  sin. 
Dissatisfaction.    Alienation.    Estrangement.    II.  The  prodigal's  misery.  Sooner  oi 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  125 

later  every  sinner  must  be  taught  that  to  be  estranged  from  God  is  to  be  estranged 
from  happiness.  III.  The  pbodiqal's  repentance  and  keturn,  1.  Sanity  returns. 
2.  Comparison  of  the  present  with  the  past.  3.  Eesolution  to  return.  His  condition 
has  conquered  his  pride.  4.  Confession.  5.  Action.  IV.  The  returning  prodigal's 
KECEPTioN.  1.  The  Father's  advance.  2.  Acknowledgment  of  sin  and  unworthiness. 
8.  Honour  and  dignity.  4.  Festivity  and  rejoicing.  (•/.  R.  Thomson,  M.A.) 
Sin  and  its  consequences: — I.  The  prodigal's  sin.  1.  Alienation  of  affection. 
There  was  the  root  of  his  rebellion.  His  heart  had  wandered  from  its  early  tender- 
ness, and  had  become  warped,  by  yielding  to  a  sinful  lust  of  freedom,  from  its  filial 
love.  From  this  alienated  heart,  in  natural  sequence,  flowed  his  after  disobedience 
and  sin.  With  the  heart  thus  alienated,  you  can  the  more  readily  explain  the 
prodigal's  impatience  of  restraint,  hankering  after  present  licence  of  enjoyment, 
and  departure  from  the  house  of  his  father.  All  these  followed  as  the  natural 
consequences  of  estranged  affection.  A  yoke  that  is  felt  must  always  be  galling ; 
an  enforced  servitude  stirs  up  within  the  man  all  latent  feelings  of  rebellion. 
Hence,  when  the  principle  of  filial  love  was  gone,  the  restraint  of  the  home  became 
irksome,  the  desire  for  independence  grew  into  a  passion,  and  then  followed  the 
project  of  the  journey  into  a  far  country,  and  of  the  uncontrolled  rioting  in  the 
portion  of  goods.  II.  The  consequences  of  sin.  It  were  to  defeat  our  own  purpose 
to  afiBrm  that  there  are  no  pleasures  in  sin.  The  world  would  never  continue  in  its 
ways  if  it  reaped  no  gratification.  There  is,  doubtless,  something  congenial  to  the 
wayward  heart  in  the  objects  of  its  fond  pursuit,  and  there  is  often  thrown  a  blind- 
ing charm  about  the  man,  beneath  whose  spell  unholy  he  fancies  every  Hecate  a 
Ganymede,  and  dallies  with  deformity  which  he  mistakes  for  beauty;  but  our  point 
is  this,  that  in  every  course  of  transgression,  in  every  departure  of  the  human  spirit 
from  God,  there  is  debasement  in  the  process,  and  there  is  ruin  in  the  inevitable 
end.  1.  Homelessness.  2.  Waste  and  degradation.  3.  Abandonment  and  famine . 
(IT.  M.  Punshon,  LL.D.)  The  prodigal  son : — 1.  The  fact  that  we  are  sinners  ia 
no  reason  why  we  should  stay  away  from  our  God.  2.  We  do  not  require  to  work 
eome  good  thing  in  us  before  God  can  love  us.  The  sinner  may  come  to  God  just 
as  he  is,  through  Jesus  Christ.  The  parable  firsts  represents  man  in  his  departure 
from  God.  The  son  was  at  home,  surrounded  with  all  the  comforts  of  home,  and 
secure  in  the  affection  of  his  father ;  but  he  became  dissatisfied,  and  wished  to 
depart  and  be  independent.  How  like  to  man's  conduct  towards  his  God  1  There 
have  been  vast  efforts  of  learning  and  of  metaphysical  skill  put  forth  to  account  for 
the  origin  of  evil,  but  we  will  find  nowhere  a  better  explanation  than  that  furnished 
by  God  Himself :  "  God  made  man  upright,  but  he  hath  sought  out  many  inven- 
tions." When  the  prodigal  had  apostatized  in  heart  from  his  father,  he  then  went 
and  demanded  his  portion  of  goods.  He  is  going  to  set  up  for  himself,  and  demands 
his  rights.  As  has  been  observed,  his  demand  sounds  as  if  he  had  been  consulting 
his  lawyer,  and  was  particularly  anxious  to  put  his  claim  into  strictly  legal  phrase- 
ology. The  father  made  no  opposition,  but  let  him  have  his  portion  of  goods.  He 
saw  that  his  heart  was  gone,  and  why  should  he  retain  his  body  ?  God  has  giveu 
to  ns  a  portion  of  goods.  It  is  those  things  which  men  possess  in  common,  irre- 
spective of  their  character.  When,  however,  man  takes  these  gifts  and  seeks  to 
employ  them  independent  of  God,  and  even  against  God,  he  plunges  into  fearful 
guilt  and  misery.  What  is  meant  by  the  prodigal  son  going  into  a  far  country  ? 
It  is  doubtless  intended  to  represent  the  spiritual  distance  of  the  soul  from  God 
while  in  a  state  of  unbelief.  Our  consciousness  of  sin  makes  as  dread  to  think  of 
God,  and  that  dread  ripens  into  absolute  enmity — "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity 
against  God."  When  in  this  state  of  mind  men  put  all  thought  of  God  as  far  away 
from  them  as  they  can.  As  you  have  seen  a  man  bow  a  disagreeable  visitor  out  of 
his  house,  so  men  put  God  far  from  them,  saying,  •'  Depart  from  us,  we  desire  not 
a  knowledge  of  Thy  ways."  Oh !  into  what  a  far  country  has  the  sinner  wandered 
when  he  has  reached  this  state  1  And  the  longer  he  continues  in  it  the  wider 
becomes  the  distance  between  him  and  God,  till  at  last  he  drifts  into  the  dark  sea 
of  eternal  death.  When  the  prodigal  got  into  the  far  country  we  are  told  that  he 
began  to  be  in  want.  This  was  a  sad  termination  to  his  high  prospects  of  enjoy- 
ment. Doubtless  he  thought  that  if  he  could  only  be  once  independent,  and  get 
away  from  all  parental  control,  his  wants  would  all  be  supphed.  But  now  his 
trouble  is  only  beginning.  He  has  reached  the  far-off  land  of  hope  and  promise, 
where  all  his  desires  were  to  be  gratified,  but  he  finds  instead  that  there  is  a 
•'mighty  famine  in  that  land."  Thus  end  all  men's  attempts  to  be  happy  away 
from  God.    And  the  sooner  we  become  convinced  of  this  the  better,  (hat  we  may 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x». 

no  longer  fill  our  souls  with  disappointment  and  grief,  by  seeking  happiness  where 
it  cannot  possibly  be  found ;  for  except  those  who  have  found  peace  in  Christ,  the 
whole  race  in  the  scramble  after  the  world  may  be  classed  under  two  heads — thos& 
who  have  been  disappointed  with  the  world,  and  those  who  are  going  to  be.  In 
this  state  of  famine  and  distress  the  prodigal  "  joined  himself  to  a  citizen  of  the 
country."  We  would  have  supposed  that  his  sufferings,  his  bitter  disappointments,, 
his  pinching  wants,  would  have  sent  him  home  at  once.  But  no — man's  last 
resource  is  to  go  to  God.  When  he  fails  in  one  worldly  project,  he  turns  tO' 
another;  and  as  each  new  plan  fails  to  give  him  the  satisfaction  he  expected,  he 
concludes  that  the  reason  is  that  he  has  not  yet  got  enough  of  the  world,  and  so 
with  new  vigour  he  takes  a  fresh  start.  Man  thinks  that  his  happiness  is  to  be 
found  tPitTimit,  when  it  is  only  to  be  found  within.  There  can  no  more  be  happi- 
ness in  a  foul  heart,  than  there  can  be  ease  and  comfort  in  a  diseased  body.  Thifr 
last  change  of  the  prodigal,  accordingly,  did  not  mend  his  condition  at  all ;  on  the 
contrary,  it  sank  him  into  a  deeper  degradation.  At  last  the  prodigal  begins  to 
think.  "  He  came  to  himself."  Before  this  he  had  been  acting  like  one  whose 
wild  imagination  has  broken  the  bridle  of  reason,  and  dashes  furiously  on  to 
destruction.  It  was  such  a  display  of  headlong  passion  as  reminds  one  of  "  moody 
madness  laughing  wild  and  severer  woe."  The  expressions  "  self-possessed," 
"  beside  one's  self,"  "  losing  one's  self,"  are  all  very  common  and  significant,  anfl 
Bhadow  forth  the  great  truth  that  man's  nature,  made  by  God  harmonious  and 
united,  has  been  rent  in  two.  His  soul  has  become  a  battle-field  where  two  eter- 
nities  conflict.  Conscience  pulls  one  way — passion  another.  The  symptom  of 
man  coming  to  his  right  mind  is  when  he  begins  to  reflect.  "  In  my  father's  house 
there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  He  thought  of  one  heart  that  once  loved  him 
tenderly,  of  a  loving  home  that  once  sheltered  him,  and  as  he  reflected  upon  the 
past  and  contrasted  it  with  the  present,  his  soul  broke  down  in  contrition,  and  then 
came  the  resolve,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  myfather."  A  great  point  is  gained  when 
the  sinner  is  led  to  think  of  eternal  things.  Whatever  it  may  be  that  leads  to  this, 
whether  it  be  under  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  word  or  the  aflaictions  of  Provi. 
dence,  if  he  is  only  led  to  reflect  upon  his  lost  condition  it  will  surely  do  him  good. 
No  man  can  honestly  and  earnestly  take  up  the  claims  of  God  upon  him  and  hi» 
prospects  for  eternity,  and  look  them  fairly  in  the  face,  without  being  led  to  feel  bis 
need  of  a  Saviour.  Sinners  rush  down  to  destruction  because  they  will  not  con- 
sider. The  prodigal  had  now  come  to  the  resolution  of  going  to  his  father,  but  his 
mind  was  full  of  dark  misconceptions  about  that  father's  character  and  his  feelinge 
towards  him.  He  knew  that  his  father  once  loved  him ;  but  that  he  loved  him 
now,  that  he  had  loved  him  all  along  in  his  wicked  wanderings,  was  something  of 
which  he  could  form  no  conception.  He  knew  that  he  had  wasted  his  all,  and  that 
he  had  therefore  no  price  to  bring  in  his  hand  with  which  to  purchase  his  father's 
love  ;  but  still  he  felt  as  if  something  must  be  done  to  turn  away  the  anger  which 
he  thought  burned  in  his  father's  bosom  against  him.  How  hard  it  is  to  lead  the 
sinner  to  think  of  the  gospel  as  God's  free,  full  welcome  to  him  to  come  just  as  he  is 
and  be  saved  1  Oh  how  little  did  the  prodigal  know  of  the  depth  of  that  love  he 
had  so  long  despised  and  grieved  1  In  the  meantime  the  father  sees  his  long-lost 
Bon,  while  he  is  yet  afar  off.  The  eye  of  affection  is  quick  to  detect  its  object  under 
any  and  every  disguise,  and  love  is  quick  in  its  motions.  He  runs  to  meet  the 
long-lost  one.  Oh,  how  different  is  this  from  what  he  expected !  How  all  his- 
unbelieving  doubts  and  his  misconceptions  of  his  father's  true  character  are  dis- 
pelled by  the  gracious  reception  he  now  receives  1  and  how  vile  his  former  conduct 
now  appears  in  the  light  of  his  fatiier's  love  I  The  very  love  that  gives  him  such  a 
hearty  reception  at  the  same  time  produces  true  repentance  on  account  of  the  past, 
and  plants  in  his  soul  the  principle  of  a  true  obedience  in  the  future.  Sinner,  this 
is  a  picture  of  the  God  with  whom  you  have  to  do.  He  has  followed  you  in  your 
wanderings  with  ten  thousand  proofs  of  His  love,  though  you  have  not  heeded  them. 
And  even  now  He  loves  you  still.  (J.  R.  Boyd.)  A  moving  story  ; — When  in 
England,  on  one  occasion,  I  heard  of  s  city  missionary  in  London  who  always  waa 
in  the  habit  of  reading  this  scriptural  story,  if  at  any  time  he  gained  access  to  the 
roughs  of  the  metropolis — "  A  certain  man  had  two  sons ! "  By  this  interesting 
exordium  their  attention  was  inmaediately  aroused.  On  one  occasion  he  was 
interrupted  by  the  running  remarks  of  an  impulsive  youth,  one  of  the  reckless 
London  thieves,  who  had  evidently  never  heard  the  story  before.  When  he  read 
the  younger  son's  request  "  for  the  portion  of  goods  that  fell  to  him,"  his  astonished 
hearer  interpolated,  "  Cool  that— rather  cool  I "    When  he  came  to  the  story  of  his 


«BAP.  xv.]  ST.  LUKE.  127 

Bubseqnent  degradation  and  want,  •'  Served  him  right,"  was  the  ejacnlation.  But 
■when  he  heard  the  account  of  the  prodigal's  reception  by  his  father,  the  impressed 
and  delighted  listener  exclaimed,  as  the  tears  rolled  down  his  cheeks,  "  Oh,  what  a 
good  old  cove  I  " — and  even  before  the  missionary  had  time  to  explain  the  parable, 
that  "  chief  of  sinners  "  seemed  to  have  applied  it  in  his  own  mind  to  the  forgiving 
mercy  of  God.  At  the  close  of  the  service  he  waited  on  the  missionary,  and  pre- 
ferred to  him  this  strange  request :  ♦*  Will  you  come  and  read  that  ere  account  o' 
the  kind  old  cove  to  some  fellows  I  know,  that  would  get  sunamat  o'  good  from  it 
like  me  ?  "  When  the  missionary  expressed  his  readiness  to  go,  the  only  stipulation 
added  was,  that  "  he  would  bring  no  bobbies  (policemen),  for  the  bobbies  knew 
them  all."  Down  in  a  den  in  the  depths  of  London  that  missionary  read  that 
parable ;  and  of  a  truth  its  Divine  Author  smiled  upon  him  as  he  did  so,  for  he 
recognized  that,  as  of  old,  "  publicans  and  sinners  "  had  drawn  near  "  to  hear  him."^ 
When  Dr.  Chalmers  first  preached  the  annual  missionary  sermon  in  Surrey  Chapel^ 
London,  Bowland  Hill  sat  in  the  front  of  the  gallery,  all  anxiety  and  expectation ; 
for  it  was  he  who  had  spread  his  fame  in  the  metropolis,  and  had  persuaded  the 
immense  array  of  ministers  to  come  together  to  hear  the  celebrated  North-man. 
Similar  was  the  relation  which  subsisted  between  the  thief  and  the  missionary  in 
this  instance,  although  otherwise  the  circumstances  were  very  different.  *'  This  is 
the  gemman  wot  has  come  to  read  us  the  story  of  the  bad  lad  and  the  kind  old  cove 
wot  I  were  telling  ye  off.  It's  a  regular  stunner.  Jim,  assume  the  perpendicular, 
and  give  the  gemman  the  seat "  (for  there  was  only  one  chair,  or  rather  stool,  in 
the  dreary  apartment).  Thus  introduced  and  recommended,  the  missionary  began: 
"  A  certain  man  had  two  sons,"  &e.  As  the  narrative  proceeded,  verse  by  verse,  he 
who  had  raised  the  expectations  of  the  company  so  high,  kept  exclaiming,  "  Did  ye 
e\ier  hear  the  like  o'  that  ?  Bill,  wasn't  I  right  ?  Isn't  it  a  regular  stunner  ?  "  Bui 
when  the  reader  reached  the  account  of  the  embrace  and  the  kiss,  the  marks  of  appro- 
bation from  all  the  auditors,  to  whom  also  it  was  quite  new,  weie  so  loud  that  he- 
was  compelled  to  stop.  "  But  wait  till  ye  hear  what  the  old  fellow  did  for  him !  " 
was  the  last  whetting  exclamation  of  his  patron.  And  when  they  heard  of  the  robe 
and  the  ring,  and  the  rejoicing,  they  all  rejoiced  together ;  for  they  seemed  by  a 
kind  of  Pentecostal  intuition  to  conclude  that  even  so  would  the  God  of  the  Bible 
treat  them.  (F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  The  Fatherland : — Of  all  God's  cords  the 
£nest,  and  perhaps  the  strongest,  is  the  cord  of  love.  Quitting  his  native  chimney, 
amftng  the  canals  and  grassy  fields  of  Holland,  the  stork  pursues  the  retiring 
summer,  and  soon  overtakes  it  in  Nubia  or  Morocco.  There,  quite  unconscious  of 
the  ieiter  beneath  his  wing,  he  revels  on  the  snakes  of  Taurus  or  the  frogs  of  Nile : 
till  at  Inst,  on  a  brilliant  May  morning,  there  is  a  sharp  tug,  and  then  a  long  steady 
pull,  aiiA  high  overhead  float  the  broad  pinions,  and  presently  in  the  streets  of 
Haarleba  the  boys  look  up,  and  shout  their  welcome,  as,  with  eager  haste  and  noisy 
outcry,  (kQ  old  acquaintance  drops  down  upon  the  gable,  and,  drawn  back  to  the  old 
anchorage  by  a  hawser  of  a  thousand  miles,  the  feathery  sails  are  once  more  furled. 
Like  instiiMSt  over  a  generation's  interval  brings  back  the  exile  to  his  Highland  glen. 
It  matters  not  that  in  the  soft  Bermudas  Ufe  is  luxury ;  it  is  of  no  avail  that  in  this 
Canadian  el«iaring  a  rosy  household  has  sprung  up  and  in  proud  affection  clings 
around  him ;  towards  the  haunts  of  his  childhood  there  is  a  strange  deep-hidden 
yearning, wh^h  often  sends  absent  looks  towards  northern  stars,  and  ends  at  last  in 
the  actual  pilgrimage.  And  although  by  the  time  of  his  return  he  finds  that  no 
money  can  bujr  back  the  ancestral  abode ;  although,  as  he  crosses  the  familiar  hill 
and  opens  the  mnny  strath,  strange  solitude  meets  him  ;  although  when  he  comes 
up,  the  hamlet  ^  roofless  and  silent,  and  the  bonny  beild,  the  nest  of  his  boyhood, 
a  ruin ;  although  behind  the  cold  hearth  rank  nettles  wave,  and  from  the  cairn 
covering  the  spot  where  in  the  mornings  of  another  world  he  waked  up  so  cosily, 
young  weasels  p^p  forth ;  although  the  plane  is  cut  down,  or  the  bonrtree,  under 
whose  sabbatic  shadow  his  father  used  at  eventide  to  meditate ;  although  where  the 
vision  dissolves  a  pang  must  remain,  there  is  no  need  that  he  should  go  back,  bleak 
and  smbittered,  as  to  a  disenchanted  world.  This  glut  of  reality  was  wanted  to 
quench  a  long  fever :  but  even  here,  if  his  own  heart  is  true,  he  will  find  that  God'a 
cord  is  not  broken.  Cottages  dissolve  and  family  circles  scatter,  but  piety  and  love 
eannot  perish.  The  cord  is  not  broken ;  it  is  only  the  mooring-post  which  a  friendly 
hand  has  moved  farther  inland,  and  fixed  sure  and  steadfast  within  the  veil;  and 
«s  the  strain  which  used  to  pull  along  the  level  is  now  drawing  upward,  the  home 
irhioh  memory  ased  to  picture  in  the  Highlands,  faith  learns  to  seek  in  heaven.  The 
true  home  of  humanity  is  God — God  trusted,  communed  with,  beloved,  obeyed ;  and, 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.'  [chap.  rr. 


"  Not  in  entire  forgetfnlness, 
And  not  in  utter  nakedness," 

do  we  come  "  from  God,  who  is  our  home,"  but  "  trailing  clouds  of  glory  with  us." 
Alloyed  and  interrupted  by  much  that  is  base  and  wicked,  there  are  in  human 
nature  still  touches  of  tenderness,  gleams  of  good  feeling,  noble  impulses,  momen- 
tary visitations  of  a  natural  piety,  brought  away  from  that  better  time  and  its  blest 
abode,  and  which  may  be  regarded  as  electric  thrills  along  the  line  which  connects 
with  its  Creator  a  fallen  but  redeemed  humanity :  as  so  many  gentle  checks  of  that 
golden  chain  which  will  one  day  bring  back  God's  banished,  and  see  the  world  "  all 
righteous."  The  head  of  the  great  household  is  God,  and  the  earthly  home  He  h 
constituted  so  as  to  be  an  image  of  His  own  paternity.  That  home  is  founded  iu 
love,  and  in  administering  it  love  is  called  forth  every  day — often  a  pitying,  for- 
bearing, forgiving  love — a  love  sometimes  severe  and  frowning,  often  self-denying, 
it  may  chance  self-sacrificing.  As  the  world  now  is — a  ruin,  with  a  remedial 
scheme  in  the  midst  of  it — that  home  is  the  nearest  image  of  the  Church,  and 
should  be  the  most  efficient  fellow-worker  with  it.  "  In  the  family  the  first  man 
himself  would  receive  lessons  on  self-government  such  as  even  the  garden  of  Eden 
did  not  supply,  and  perpetual  occasion  for  its  exercise.  In  what  a  variety  of  ways 
would  he  learn  to  repeat  to  his  children  the  substance  of  the  Divine  prohibition  to 
himself — •  Thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it.'  How  soon  would  he  who  had  had  Paradise 
for  a  home  discover  that  if  he  would  convert  home  into  a  paradise  he  must  guard 
his  offspring  at  this  point,  subordinating  their  lower  propensities  to  their  superior 
powers."  If  presided  over  by  those  who  themselves  fear  God — and  otherwise  no  house 
is  a  home — ^there  will  be  something  sacred  in  its  atmosphere,  and  alike  enforced  by 
affection  and  authority  the  lessons  of  heavenly  wisdom  will  sink  deep  ;  and  with  a 
sufficient  probation  superadded  to  a  careful  protection,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that, 
before  transplantation  into  the  world's  rough  weather,  good  dispositions  may  have 
been  so  far  confirmed  as  only  to  strengthen  by  further  trial.    In  order  to  mak*^ 

Srour  home  the  preparation  for  heaven,  the  first  thing  is  to  strengthen  that  cord  of 
ove  by  which  you  ought  to  hold  your  child,  even  as  our  heavenly  Father  holds  His 
children.  That  love  is  yours  already — an  up-leaping.uplooking  affection,  if  you  donot 
destroy  its  tenderness  by  perpetual  rebuffs,  if  you  do  not  forfeit  reverence  by  being 
yourself  unworthy  of  it.  "Ye  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  wrath";  be 
not  always  scolding,  reproving,  punishing ;  "  but  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Take  advantage  of  their  affection  for  yourself,  and 
use  it  as  the  appointed  medium  for  drawing  them  into  the  love  of  God.  Train  up 
the  child  in  the  way  he  should  go.  If  he  is  not  to  go  in  the  way  of  low  pastime 
and  coarse  indulgence,  point  him  to  higher  joys ;  open  to  him  the  well-spring  of 
knowledge;  try  to  ascertain  and  develop  a  turn  for  some  ennobUng  pursuit,  or 
create  a  taste  for  the  treasures  bequeathed  by  genius.  After  all,  however,  there  is 
another  influence  which  goes  farther  in  creating  the  home.  It  is  mother-love 
'Which  endears  the  fatherland,  and  it  is  to  the  cradle  that  the  fairy-line  is  fastened 
^hich  even  in  the  far  country  holds  so  mysteriously  the  heart  of  the  wanderer. 
"When  Napoleon,  with  his  army  of  invasion,  lay  at  Boulogne,  an  English  sailor  who 
had  been  captured  tried  to  escape  in  a  little  raft  or  skiff  which  he  had  patched 
together  with  bits  of  wood  and  the  bark  of  trees.  Hearing  of  his  attempt,  the  First 
Consul  ordered  him  to  be  brought  into  his  presence,  and  asked  if  he  really  meant 
to  cross  the  channel  in  such  a  crazy  contrivance.  "  Yes,  and  if  you  will  let  ine,  I 
am  still  willing  to  try."  •'  You  must  have  a  sweetheart  whom  you  are  so  anxious 
to  revisit."  "  No,"  said  the  young  man,  "I  only  wish  to  see  my  mother,  who  is 
old  and  infirm."  **  And  you  shall  see  her,"  was  the  reply,  "  and  take  to  her  this 
money  from  me;  for  she  must  be  a  good  mother  who  has  such  an  affectionate  son." 
And  orders  were  given  to  send  the  sailor  with  a  flag  of  truce  on  board  the  first 
British  omiser  which  came  near  enough.  Napoleon  was  always  eager  to  declare 
his  own  obligations  to  his  high-spirited  and  courageous  mother,  the  beautiful 
Letizia  Bamolini  ;  but  the  difficulty  would  be  to  find  any  man  of  mark  who  has 
not  made  the  same  avowal.  {Jamts  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Give  me  the  portion  of 
^oods  that  faJleth  to  ma — Impiety  urging  unjust  demands  : — Here  was — 1.  A  dis- 
regard of  most  sacred  obligations.  This  young  man  was  bound  by  the  most  sacred 
obligations  to  manifest  ever  a  spirit  of  gratitude  to  his  father— ever  practically 
show  that  he  recognized  the  immense  obhgation  under  which  he  was  laid  by  the 
never-ending  kindnesses  of  that  father.  But  instead  thereof,  we  find  rebellion 
•gainst  home  restraints,  and  discontent  with  a  father's  rule  and  with  home 


emir.iy.-]  ST.  LUKE.  125 

blessings.  He  resolved  to  leave  the  weary  monotony  of  home  for  the  variety  and 
pleasure  of  distant  scenes ;  and  not  caring  for  the  injustice  of  the  demand,  he 
■would  plead  for  his  portion  of  the  family  estate.  He  would  be  his  own  master  ;  he 
would  be  free  and  unfettered  ;  he  would  wander  away  as  he  pleased,  and  do  what- 
ever he  listed  ;  and  gathering  np  his  ingratitude,  his  selfishness,  and  his  rebeliioik 
in  one  act  of  shameless  courage,  he  said  to  his  father,  "  Give  me  the  portion  ol 
goods  that  falleth  to  me."  Ask  yourselves  whether  you  do  not  act  thus  with  God. 
Is  it  a  fact  that  you  are  happy  in  the  smiles  of  God,  or  is  it  true  that  you  try  to 
shun  Him  and  His  laws  ?  Is  it  a  fact  that  you  have  placed  yourself  in  His  hands, 
and  are  trusting  to  His  Fatherly  love  to  guide  you  aright ;  or,  is  it  true  that  you 
place  no  sincere  dependence  in  God  to  guide  you,  but  are  trusting  to  yourself — 
your  own  energy  and  wisdom — for  all  you  want  ?  By  these  simple  rules  you  may 
easily  know  your  state;  and  I  pray  you,  as  you  value  your  soul's  interest,  know  the 
truth  at  once.  Here  was — 2.  A  wrong  standard  of  manhood.  He  imagined  that 
whilst  at  home  he  was  in  leading  strings,  was  a  child,  and  would  never  be  a  man. 
To  be  a  man,  he  thought  he  must  break  loose  from  the  trammels  of  home,  and 
walk  out  freed  from  all  restraint.  To  be  a  man,  he  thought  he  must  be  his  own 
master,  and  be  responsible  to  no  one.  To  be  a  man,  he  thought  he  must  command 
his  time  and  his  purse,  and  satisfy  the  inquisitivenesa  of  none.  We  know  he  was 
a  fool,  and  knew  nothing  rightly :  that  he  would  have  been  a  thousand  times  more 
of  a  man  if  he  had  ordered  his  life  by  a  just  and  righteous  law,  if  he  had  respected 
Divine  and  social  obligations,  and  if  he  had  paid  deference  to  the  wisdom  and 
experience  of  those  who  knew  the  world  and  would  have  given  him  sound  and 
wholesome  advice.  Licence  is  not  liberty.  Eioting  is  not  happiness.  Extrava- 
gance, carelessness,  and  sensuality  are  not  manliness.  To  be  a  man,  you  must 
he  a  gentleman ;  and  every  true  gentleman  pays  respect  to  law ;  to  the  laws  of 
social  life  as  well  as  to  the  laws  of  the  State ;  to  the  laws  of  God  as  well  as  to  the 
laws  of  man.  Here  was — 3.  A  manifestation  of  the  most  intense  selfishness.  He  well 
knew  the  grief  and  pain  which  he  caused  his  father.  He  knew  also  the  difference  it 
would  make  to  home  comforts  if  he  took  away  a  share  of  the  family  estate.  But, 
he  cared  not  for  that.  He  would  do  as  he  pleased,  regardless  of  all  others*  claims 
and  feelings.  Selfishness  is  the  most  unfeeling  passion  in  the  human  breast.  This 
is  just  the  spirit  of  the  world.  Its  unceasing  cry  is,  "  Give  me."  No  matter  what 
it  costs ;  no  matter  what  hearts  break ;  no  matter  what  misery  is  caused ;  no 
matter  who  lacks — "  Give  me."  In  the  temple  of  Mammon  from  every  shrine  there 
ascends  the  ceaseless  litany,  not  ••  Grant  me  in  mercy  Thy  favours,"  but  "  Give 
me  my  claims."  From  every  unhumbled  heart  there  ascends  the  constant  petition, 
^arpened  in  the  intensity  of  its  appeal  by  the  very  benevolence  of  God's  character, 
"Give  me."  {W.  O.  Pascoe.)  The  younger  ton  and  hi*  demand: — The  young 
man  brought  before  ns  in  this  story  is  just  the  sort  of  person  whom  the  world 
would  describe  as  a  thoroughly  sensible  fellow.  I  feel  sure  that  such  a  man  in  our 
own  day  would  be  thus  described  by  his  companions.  He  showed  his  sense  just  in 
the  way  in  which  men  of  the  world  show  theirs  now.  Let  us  regard  him  for  a  few 
moments  from  this  point  of  view.  The  first  thing  that  this  sensible  man  does  is 
to  feel  dissatisfied  within  himself  at  the  condition  of  dependence  in  which  he  is 
introduced  to  ua.  The  father  seems  to  have  been  in  conafortable  circumstances — 
perhaps  in  affluence.  The  young  man  has  never  been  begrudged  anything ;  all  hia 
wants  have  been  supplied  as  fast  as  they  have  arisen.  But  then  his  position  was 
one  of  dependence,  and  it  was  that  that  made  things  so  far  from  agreeable.  It  was 
not  his  father's  way  to  bestow  his  wealth  upon  his  children,  so  that  they  might 
possess  an  independent  property,  but  to  supply  their  reasonable  wants  as  fast  as 
they  occurred,  and  it  was  against  this  state  of  things  that  the  young  man's 
will  began  to  rebel.  "Why  should  not  I  be  like  other  fellows?  What  a 
humiliating  thing  it  is  that  I  should  be  treated  like  a  grown  up  child  !  If  I  had 
my  own  fortune  to  do  what  I  liked  with,  I  should  very  soon  be  able  to  Ehow  this 
father  of  mine  what  the  use  of  money  is,  and  how  it  should  be  spent."  The  father 
does  not  refuse :  he  will  not  keep  his  son  in  a  state  of  compulsory  dependence  upon 
him.  'There  and  then  "  he  divides  unto  them  his  living."  Observe,  he  "  divides 
his  living"  between  both  his  sons.  It  does  not  say  that  he  gave  half  to  the  younger 
Bon  and  kept  tiie  other  half  himself,  but  ••  he  divided  unto  Qiem  his  living."  What 
became  of  the  elder  son's  portion  ?  Where  did  he  invest  it  ?  How  did  he  emplo»' 
it  ?  We  find  that  long  years  afterwards  his  elder  son  says,  "  Thou  never  gavest 
me  a  kid  that  I  might  make  merry  with  my  friends."  Ah  !  the  elder  brother  had 
the  wisdom  to  give  back  what  was  his.     No  sooner  was  his  portion  of  goods 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xt. 

assigned  to  him  than  he  put  it  back  again  in  safe  keeping.  I  can  fancy  him  saying 
to  his  father,  "I  do  not  want  my  portion,  I  am  quite  happy,  I  have  all  I  want." 
In  a  moment  of  discontent,  at  a  later  period,  he  allows  himself  to  speak  hardly  oE 
his  father's  treatment,  but  this  eldest  son  understood  his  father  on  the  whole, 
although  for  a  moment  he  might  be  unfaithful  to  the  consciousness  of  the  benefiti 
of  his  position  :  and  so  he  had  the  wisdom  to  give  back  what  his  father  had  given 
to  him.  But  the  younger  son  was  a  far  more  sensible  fellow  than  that.  So  soon 
as  he  gets  his  money,  he  makes  up  his  mind  to  spend  it  according  to  his  own  heart's 
desire.  So  the  second  thing  this  particularly  sensible  young  man  does  is  to  make 
up  his  mind  that  the  restraints  of  home  are  positively  intolerable.  He  cannot  go 
on  in  this  droning  way  any  longer ;  he  must  see  something  of  the  world  ;  life  ia 
hardly  worth  having  under  such  conditions ;  he  must  break  away  from  the 
restraints  of  the  paternal  roof,  turn  his  back  upon  old  associations,  and  go  forth 
and  enjoy  himself  :  he  has  had  enough  of  this  hum-drum,  tedious  life  ;  so,  like  a 
very  sensible  young  man,  he  leaves  his  father's  home,  and  goes  forth  into  a  distant 
land.  I  can  fancy  it  cost  him  something  at  the  moment.  Nobody  ever  goes  to 
hell  without  meeting  with  difficulties  in  the  way.  As  he  looked  into  his  father's 
face  and  saw  the  tear  rising  in  the  old  man's  eye — as  he  took  a  long  last  look  at 
the  dear  old  home  where  he  had  spent  so  many  happy  and  innocent  years,  I  can  fancy 
it  cost  him  something.  A  better  instinct  would  sometimes  assert  itself  within  his 
nature.  "  Have  you  not  been  happy  ?  Those  sunny  hours  of  childhood,  what 
could  have  been  more  pleasant  ?  If  you  have  been  unhappy  it  has  been  your  own 
fault.  Tour  brother  is  a  happy  man  ;  why  should  not  you  have  been  ?  "  But  the 
lower  instinct  prevailed ;  his  downright  good  common-sense  was  stronger  than 
anything  else :  so  that  this  thoroughly  sensible  man  makes  up  his  mind  to  turn 
his  back  upon  his  father's  house,  aud  into  a  distant  land  he  goes.  Now  what  waa 
the  next  step  that  this  "  sensible  fellow  "  took  ?  When  he  had  asserted  his  inde- 
pendence and  had  got  away  from  his  father,  and  the  restraints  of  home,  he  began 
to  enjoy  himself.  Surely  he  showed  his  sense  in  that  I  How  does  he  enjoy  him- 
self? He  "wasted  his  substance  in  riotous  living."  That  does  not  sound  very 
aensible  just  at  first ;  but  there  are  plenty  of  young  men  who  show  their  good  sense 
by  pursuing  the  same  course.  "Oh,"  you  say,  "we  do  not  approve  of  fellows  being 
spendthrifts :  "  yet  you  approve  of  men  spending  something  that  is  far  more 
precious  than  money.  How  have  you  been  spending  your  time  7  What  have  you 
to  show  for  it  ?  How  have  you  been  spending  your  influence?  Every  one  of  you 
might  have  been  using  it  for  eternity,  and  already  there  might  have  been  a  crown 
of  glory  laid  up  as  the  result  of  well-used  influence.  What  has  become  of  it  * 
How  have  you  been  spending  your  money  ?  for  we  may  as  well  speak  of  that  too. 
■Some  of  you  have  been  scattering  it  to  the  winds ;  others  hoarding  it  up  in  the 
bank ;  some,  laying  it  out  in  business  speculations,  and  the  very  gold  which  you 
might  have  so  used  as  to  "  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven  "  has  become 
the  curse  of  your  life.  How  does  it  appear  in  God's  sight?  Wasted  I — that 
substance  of  yours  squandered,  because  it  has  never  been  turned  to  any  really 
good  purpose.  What  was  the  next  thing  that  this  "  sensible  "  young  man  did? 
He  formed  a  great  many  gay  acquaintances.  I  do  not  think  there  is  a  young  man 
in  this  congregation  that  lives  for  the  world,  but  wiU  agree  that  he  was  on  the 
•whole  a  "  sensible  man  "  in  doing  that.  It  is  just  what  you  do.  How  many  a 
young  man  there  is  who  is  kept  back  from  doing  what  he  knows  is  right  because 
ne  has  formed  so  many  acquaintances,  and  is  surrounded  by  the  influence  of  his 
companions.  He  would  like  to  be  different,  but  then  he  cannot  shake  off  their 
influence ;  they  keep  him  spell-bound.  How  sensible  you  are  to  let  those  friends 
of  yours  do  the  very  worst  that  your  worst  enemy  could  desire  to  do  for  you !  Do 
jou  think  that  is  "  sensible  "  ?  What  was  the  next  thing  that  this  "  sensible  " 
young  man  did?  When  his  pleasures  had  all  failed  him,  when  his  roses  had 
oecome  thorns,  then  he  began  to  be  sober,  and  like  many  sober  people,  he  began  to 
look  about  for  employment.  He  finds  it  rather  difficult  to  obtain  any  employment 
that  suits  him,  but  employment  he  must  have.  Oh !  how  like  many  of  our  worldly 
prodigals  1  When  they  have  spent  their  youth  in  following  one  wild  excitement 
after  another — in  poor,  empty,  idle  hilarity  and  futile  mirth — when  manhood 
comes  on  with  all  its  grave  cares,  they  begin  to  occupy  their  minds  with  business. 
The  mighty  famine  has  begun  to  assert  itself ;  the  man  is  beginning  to  find  tha 
emptiness  of  the  pleasures  which  he  has  lived  for ;  he  can  no  longer  enjoy  them ; 
the  capacity  of  enjoyment  is  beginning  to  pass  away  from  him ;  and  now  ha 
planges  into  basineas ;  he  becomes  a  slave  of  daily  routine,  it  may  be  ;  his  mind 


«HAP.  XV.]  8T.  LUKE.  131 

is  taken  np  with  a  thousand  occupations;  he  begins  to  work  hard,  and  all  to  satisfy 
the  moral  hunger  of  his  nature.  He  gives  himself  up  to  money-making,  yet  that 
4oes  not  satisfy,  but  he  thinks  it  will.  He  flies  to  speculation :  that  excites,  but 
does  not  satisfy — he  hopes  it  will.  He  betakes  himself  to  domestic  occupation, 
the  joys  or  the  cares  of  family  life,  and  he  hopes  to  find  satisfaction  there,  yet  ha 
does  not.  Is  not  the  man  a  sensible  being  ?  The  mighty  famine  becomes  more 
and  more  insupportable,  and  the  want  becomes  more  and  more  appalling.  Our 
young  friend  sits  solitary  in  the  field  ;  cannot  you  see  him?  His  clothes  are  torn 
into  rags,  his  eyes  are  sunken  in  their  sockets,  his  cheeks  are  hollow,  his  lips  are 
parched  and  cracked  ;  he  looks  like  the  very  effigy  of  famine  itself.  The  swine  are 
feeding  around  him  ;  he  is  gnawing  at  the  very  husks  which  the  swine  eat.  "  And 
no  man  gave  unto  him."  What,  no  man?  No  man.  Of  all  his  former  friends, 
of  those  who  had  stood  by  him  so  faithfully  as  long  as  he  had  money  to  spend  and 
luxuries  to  offer,  what !  no  man  ?  Not  that  boon  companion,  not  that  friend  who 
only  a  few  weeks  ago  swore  that  he  would  stand  by  him  through  thick  and  thin  ? 
No  man  ?  Nay,  the  last  crust  has  been  devoured.  There  he  sits  famine-stricken, 
flolitary,  the  preying  of  hunger  in  his  body,  far  more  the  prey  of  remorse  in  hia 
«oal  1  There  he  sits.  Poor  "  sensible  "  man  I  That  is  what  his  common-sense 
iias  brought  him  to.  At  this  moment  a  change  takes  place.  Holy  Scripture 
describes  it  as  a  change  from  insanity  to  sanity.  He  ceases  to  be  a  lunatic,  and  ha 
begins  to  be  himself.  "  He  came  to  himself."  It  passes  from  him  like  a  horrible 
dream,  that  strange  delirium  of  the  life  which  he  had  been  leading  since  he  left 
his  father's  home,  with  all  its  transient  circumstances,  its  fleeting  joys,  its  gaudy 
decorations,  the  poor,  empty  bubbles  that  have  broken  in  his  grasp — it  has  all 
passed  from  him  like  a  horrible  dream.  He  starts,  as  from  a  night-mare.  Cannot 
you  see  him  as  he  springs  from  the  ground,  with  a  sudden  light  beaming  upon  his 
<jountenance,  his  face  turned  toward  the  home  of  his  infancy  ?  "  What  a  fool  I 
have  been  I  My  whole  life  has  been  one  great  mistake.  From  beginning  to  end, 
I  have  just  been  adding  error  to  error  as  well  as  sin  to  sin.  I  have  thrown  away 
health,  and  affluence,  and  comfort,  and  respectability,  and  peace  of  mind,  and 
innocency,  and  reputation,  everything  worth  having — I  have  lost  it  all  1  And 
here  I  am,  a  wreck  of  a  man ;  all  real  pleasure  gone  out  of  my  life ;  strickea 
down  by  the  fatal  pestilence  of  sin,  shrivelled  up  by  the  miserable  famine 
which  reigns  within  my  nature.  What  a  fool  I  am  I "  Oh,  happy  they  who 
«ome  to  this  conclusion  before  it  is  too  late!  (W,  M.  Hay  Aitketit  M.A.) 
The  younger  and  elder  tons  ;  or,  differences  of  character  in  the  tame  family : — 
Those  who  belong  to  the  same  family,  and  have  enjoyed  the  same  opportamties, 
often  turn  out  very  differently.  One  proves  a  comfort,  another  a  grief,  to  his 
parents  ;  for  "  a  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father,  but  a  foolish  son  is  the  heaviness 
of  bis  mother."  Grace  runs  not  in  families ;  for,  in  this  respect,  a  house  is  often 
divided.  God  takes  "  one  of  a  city,  and  two  of  a  family,  and  brings  them  to 
Zion."  Jacob  and  Esau  were  twin  brothers ;  yet  Jacob  was  a  man  of  prayer,  and, 
fts  a  prince,  had  power  with  God  and  men,  and  prevailed ;  while  Esau  was  a  pro- 
fane man,  and  sold  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  Some  children  become 
-even  exceedingly  profligate,  while  others  are  quite  steady ;  and  among  those  who 
•re  steady  there  is  much  diversity,  some  being  merely  decent  and  inoffensive,  while 
others  are  eminently  dutiful  and  kind.  So,  in  the  case  supposed  in  this  parable, 
th«  two  sons  are  represented  as  being  of  very  opposite  habits.  {J times  Footer  M..A.) 
Eastern  law  of  inheritance : — There  are  some  who  consider  this  demand  so  strange, 
and  the  father's  compliance  with  it,  abused  as  the  compliance  was  likely  to  be,  so 
<nnch  stranger  still,  that  the  supposition  can  only  appear  natural  when  there  is 
taken  into  view  the  custom  which  prevailed  in  Eastern  countries  of  children 
claiming  their  share  of  their  father's  property  during  his  lifetime,  which,  it 
■appears,  they  were  legally  entitled  to  do,  and  with  which  demand,  of  course, 
the  father  could  not  refuse  to  comply.  The  intention  of  this  law  was  to  protect 
children  against  harsh  usage  from  their  parents ;  but  it  was  certainly  very  liable  to 
•buse.  The  son  might  be  unreasonable  in  his  demand,  "  yet  the  demand  must 
first  be  acceded  to  before  the  matter  could  be  legally  inquired  into ;  and  then,  if  it 
was  found  that  the  father  was  irreproachable  in  his  character,  and  had  given  no 
just  cause  for  the  son  to  separate  from  him,  in  that  case  the  civil  magistrate  fined 
the  son."  Others,  however,  are  of  opinion  that,  though  the  Mosaic  law  provided 
Against  improper  partialities  and  dislikes  on  the  part  of  a  father  when  disposing  of 
hiB  property,  there  is  not  sufficient  ground  for  affirming  that  it  vested  any  such 
right  in  children  during  the  life  of  their  parents  ;  and  they  therefore  look  on  tha 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Icaap.  xf, 

compliance  of  the  fathfr,  here  supposed,  as  an  instance  of  singular  generosity, 
•which  rendered  the  undutiful  departure  and  conduct  of  his  son  peculiarly  base. 
When  the  father  assigned  his  portion  to  the  younger  son,  he,  at  the  same  time, 
assigned  his  portion  to  the  elder,  who,  according  to  the  Jewish  law,  would  receive 
a  double  portion.  The  words  of  the  parable  are,  "  He  divided  unto  them  his  sub- 
stance." In  doing  so  he  may  be  supposed  to  have  reserved  what  was  merely 
sufficient  for  himself.  {Ibid.)  Give  me  my  portion : — "  Give  me  the  portion  of 
goods  that  falleth  to  me."  The  young  man  seems  to  say,  "  My  youth  is  my  own, 
and  all  that  it  brings  within  my  reach.  Why  should  you  fetter  me  with  restraints, 
or  impose  upon  me  an  unfriendly  yoke?  It  is  enjoyment  that  makes  life  worth 
having,  and  self-gratification  means  enjoyment.  Let  me  have  my  liberty,  and  do 
exactly  what  I  please.  Why  have  to  weigh  each  particular  action,  and  turn  away 
from  pleasures  that  attract  me  because  they  are  supposed  to  be  wrong?  Eeligion 
means  giving  up  everything  I  like,  and  submitting  to  things  that  I  don't  like ;  it 
means  all  that  is  tedious  and  irksome.  I  prefer  to  be  my  own.  Give  me  my  portion 
of  goods — the  surmy  hours  of  youth  ;  they  are  mine,  and  I  will  do  with  them  as  I 
please."  "  Give  me  my  portion  of  goods,"  says  that  child  of  fashion.  "  Youth  and 
beauty,  and  attractive  manners,  and  wit  and  popularity,  and  the  faculty  of  winning 
admiration  and  even  affection — they  are  all  alike  mine,  and  I  intend  to  get  all  I 
can  oat  of  them.  Why  shouldn't  I  ?  If  I  were  to  listen  to  the  claims  of  religion, 
I  should  have  to  stop  and  think  before  I  allowed  myself  to  enjoy  anything ;  and 
conscience  might  be  troublesome,  and  I  might  be  checked  and  worried  by  all  sorta 
of  straight-laced  notions,  and  thus  I  might  leave  the  flowers  of  life  unplucked  and 
the  fruit  of  the  garden  ungathered.  Give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to 
me."  And  it  is  not  only  the  young  and  the  heedless  that  urge  the  request. 
Would  that  we  grew  wiser  as  we  grow  older  !  "  Give  me  my  portion,"  the  man  of 
the  world  seems  to  say.  "  Money,  and  all  that  it  will  buy — power  and  popularity, 
and  success  and  social  position,  the  excitements  of  commerce,  the  gratification  o( 
political  or  social  ambition — these  are  my  portion.  If  I  were  to  become  religious, 
who  knows  how  my  course  of  life  might  have  to  be  changed  and  modified  ? 
Indeed,  I  might  have  to  alter  its  whole  aim  and  purpose,  and  impose  upon  myself 
all  sorts  of  obligations  which  I  pay  no  heed  to  now.  My  money  is  mine ;  why 
shouldn't  I  nee  it  as  I  please  ?  My  time  is  mine ;  why  should  I  not  spend  it  as  I 
like  ?  My  faculties  and  talents  are  my  own ;  why  should  I  not  employ  them  for 
my  own  gratification  ?  "  "  Give  me  my  portion  of  goods,"  exclaims  the  woman  ol 
the  world.  "  My  children  are  my  own,  and  I  will  train  them  up  in  the  way  wherein 
I  wish  they  should  go.  I  will,  if  I  please,  educate  them  in  vanity,  and  train  them 
to  •  shine  in  society,'  so  that  my  motherly  pride  may  be  gratified.  My  house  is  my 
own ;  it  shall  be  the  home  of  luxury  and  the  temple  of  domestic  pleasure.  I  will 
order  it  as  I  will,  but  there  shaU  be  no  place  there  for  Him  who  was  welcomed  of 
old  at  Bethany.  Jesus  Christ  might  prove  a  troublesome  guest,  and  dispute  my 
Bupreme  authority,  if  He  once  were  welcomed  there.  It  is  my  own  home,  and  I  will  do 
■with  it  as  I  please."  Thus  it  is  that  men  and  women  still  claim  their  portion  of  goods. 
And  God  looks  on,  and  sees  them  take  His  gifts  without  even  the  word  of  thanks 
which  no  doubt  fell  from  the  lips  of  the  prodigal,  and  find  in  these  His  gifts  a 
reason  for  turning  their  backs  upon  the  Giver ;  and  yet  He  does  not  interfere  any 
more  than  this  father  did.  Wilful  man  must  have  his  own  way,  until  at  last,  in 
bitter  grief  and  anguish,  either  here  or  hereafter,  he  reaps  the  fruit  of  it,  and  finds 
that  "  there  is  a  way  that  seemeth  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the 
ways  of  death."  (W.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  God  allows  man  to  tue  his  ind^- 
pendtTice  : — It  is  surely  worthy  of  notice  that  the  father  makes  no  sort  of  difficulty 
of  compliance  with  his  reqnest.  We  do  not  even  hear  of  a  word  of  expostulation 
on  his  part.  And  this  may  teach  us  that  when  we  elect  to  break  away  from  our 
proper  relations  with  God,  and  to  assert  our  own  independence,  or  fancied  indepen- 
dence,  of  Him,  we  are  free  to  do  so.  God  does  not  constrain  our  will  by  the 
assertion  of  His  superior  power.  If  we  are  determined  to  turn  our  backs  on  Him, 
and  break  away  from  His  control,  we  can  do  it,  and  He  won't  hinder  us,  however 
much  it  may  cut  Him  to  the  heart  that  we  should  wish  to  adopt  such  a  course.  I 
eee  a  look  of  sadness  pass  over  that  venerable  face,  but  that  is  the  only  outward 
eign  of  the  sorrow  and  disappointment  that  fiill  the  father's  heart.  He  calls  both 
his  sons  into  his  presence,  and  there  and  then  he  divides  his  whole  fortune  between 
them,  and  the  discontented  boy  finds  himself  possessed  of  all  he  desired,  and  of 
more  than  all  that  he  had  dared  to  hope  for.  At  last  he  is  his  own  master,  and  can 
take  his  own  course,  and  do  just  as  he  pleases.    His  eyes  glisten,  his  heart  bounds; 


CBAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  133 

but  in  the  midst  of  his  wild,  hilarious  excitement  that  sorrowful  look  on  hia 
father's  face  must  ever  and  again,  methinks,  have  risen  on  his  memory.  Do  you 
think,  after  all,  he  was  really  happy  ?  Was  there  not  already  a  bitter  drop  in  hia 
cup  ?  He  had  gained  his  fortune,  but  how  much  had  it  cost !  (Ibid, )  The 
discontented  son  gets  his  wish  : — The  father  might  have  refused.  It  was  a  grave 
step,  but  he  sees  that  it  springs  from  no  sudden  impulse.  He  had  marked  witli 
anxious  looks  the  unmistakable  dissatisfaction  of  his  younger  son.  The  warmth  of 
that  once  loving  heart  has  gradually  died  away  into  a  spirit  of  cold,  sullen,  settled 
discontent.  This  had  not  escaped  the  father's  eyes.  Even  the  flimsy  appearance 
of  propriety,  he  foresees,  must  soon  give  way  to  some  outbreak  of  avowed  rebellion ; 
60  that  now  it  is  no  use  remonstrating — the  time  for  that  is  gone  by.  Things  are 
come  to  such  a  crisis  that  he  has  all  but  thrown  o2  the  yoke.  "  Well,"  thought  he, 
*'  be  it  so,  since  it  must  be.  Better  let  him  have  his  own  way  ;  better  to  let  him 
follow  out  his  own  plans.  He  little  thinks  what  this  step  will  lead  him  to. 
Experience,  perhaps,  may  teach  him,  by  some  bitter  fruits,  the  sin,  and  folly,  and 
ingratitude  of  all  this."  "  He  divided  to  them  his  living."  This  is  God's  method 
with  sinners.  If  they  do  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge,  and  set  their 
heart  upon  their  iniquities,  bursting  the  bonds  of  conscience,  and  trampling  on  the 
warnings  and  precepts  of  His  Word — if  they  have  loved  idols,  and  after  idols  they 
will  go — be  it  so.  God  will  not  contend  for  ever.  He  gives  them  up  to  their  own 
hearts'  desire,  and  leaves  them  to  be  filled  with  their  own  devices.  But  it  is 
a  tremendous  chastisement.  It  is  the  scourging  with  scorpions,  and  not  with 
whips.  Oh,  better  to  hear  any  of  those  terrible  threatenings  tbat  God  thunders 
against  sin  and  sinners,  whereby,  peradventure,  they  may  be  warned  and  turn. 
But  no  sentence  is  so  terrible  as  that  which  silently  leaves  the  sinner  to  himself. 
{W.  B.  Mackenzie,  M.A.)  God  does  not  deny  Joolish,  inexperienced  num  his 
wish :—  The  latter  is  a  free  agent,  and  must  needs  be  treated  as  such.  If  he 
.will  have  the  management  of  his  own  affairs,  why  he  must  just  have  it.  Doubt- 
less there  would  be  many  unreported  conversations  between  the  father  and  the 
youth  before  he  consented  to  give  him  his  portion.  He  would  often  lay  his  hand 
affectionately  on  his  son's  shoulder  and  remonstrate  with  him.  He  would  beseech 
him  to  remain  at  home  and  keep  him  company.  Perhaps  he  would  say,  "  Now  that 
your  mother  is  dead  and  gone,  my  heart  doats  upon  you ;  for  you  resemble  her 
much."  But  no;  the  selfish  youth  would  have  his  own  portion,  and  set  up  a 
separate  establishment.  In  like  manner,  if  men  will  set  up  and  set  off  for  them- 
selves, the  Lord  does  not  absolutely  deny  them  their  wish,  although  He  yields 
reluctantly  and  after  long  expostulation.  And  the  Divine  Spiiit  still  mournfully 
hovers  near,  saying,  •'  Turn  ye,  turn  ye;  for  why  will  ye  die  ?"  [F.  Ferguson,  D.D.) 
The  divided  living  : — '•  He  divided  unto  them  his  living  " — literally  "his  life. "  That 
is  what  the  heavenly  Father  has  done.  He  has  given  His  darling — the  apple  of 
of  His  eye — His  only  begotten  Son — His  life.  He  has  put  Him  down  into  the 
midst  between  the  two  classes  of  characters.  The  one  thief  rails,  the  other  adores  ; 
the  one  son  loves,  the  other  rejects.  But  let  us  beware,  for  "  this  Child  is  set  for 
the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel."  The  great  question  of  the  judgment 
day  will  be,  "How  did  you  treat  My  life,  whom  I  gave  you  as  yoxir  portion ?  "  Yes, 
ever,5-  man  has  a  portion  from  God.  The  humblest  artizan  has  a  portion.  The 
poorest  factory-girl  has  a  rich  dowry.  Jesus  is  her  portion.  Your  birthright,  my 
reader,  is  eternal  life  in  Him.  But  see  that  you  sell  it  not,  like  Esau,  for  a  mess  of 
pottage.  See  that  the  intoxicating  cup,  or  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  do  not  rob 
you  of  immortal  bliss.      {Ibid.)  Took   his  journey  into  a  far  country. — 

Departure  from  home  : — Momentous  is  the  occurrence,  if  not  always  sad,  of  a 
young  man  first  leaving  home.  He  launches  his  barque  on  Ufe's  rough  sea, 
and  will  he  safely  ride  over  the  waters  ?  will  he  avoid  the  quicksands  of  tempta- 
tion ?  will  he  steer  clear  of  the  rocks  of  vicious  indulgence  ?  will  he,  guided  by 
the  heavenly  Pilot,  reach  the  port  of  heaven  in  safety  ?  These  are  problems 
that  the  future  alone  will  solve.  Observe  here — I.  Impiety  obtaining  unjust 
DEMANDS.  We  are  not  aware  that  the  father  made  any  great  opposition  to  those 
demands.  Perhaps  he  had  reasoned  with  him  so  many  times  before,  with  no 
success,  that  he  had  grown  tired.  Perhaps  he  plainly  siw  that  his  son's  heart  was 
gone  from  home,  and  he  felt  by  no  means  anxious  to  retain  a  heartless  boy.  And 
with  a  heaving  breast,  though  but  few  words,  proceeded  to  divide  unto  each  his 
living.  The  young  man  thus  obtained  his  desire.  1.  Man  can  generally  get  what 
be  strives  for.  If  a  diligent,  persevering,  careful  man  sets  his  heart  upon  establish- 
ing a  business,  he  can  generally  succeed.     In  such  cases  the  prizes  are  far  more 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «t. 

common  than  the  blanks.  More  than  that ;  if  a  man  sets  his  heart  in  obtaining 
any  particular  object,  that  object  can  generally  be  had.  Energy,  whether  in  a  bad 
or 'a  good  cause,  will  mostly  be  crowncil  with  success.  This  is  a  terrible  view  to 
take  of  those  who  live  only  for  the  things  of  time.  One  of  the  most  terrifio 
sentences  that  ever  dropped  from  the  Saviour's  lips  illustrates  this  sentiment. 
Speaking  of  the  Pharisees  and  their  motives  for  fasting,  praying,  and  giving  alma: 
♦'  Verily,"  He  says,  '*  I  say  unto  you,  they  have  their  reward."  Not  "  they  shall 
have,"  but  "  they  have."  They  do  tliese  things  to  be  seen  of  men,  and  to  have 
applause  of  men.  That  is  the  height  of  their  ambition,  and  to  that  they  attain. 
2,  A  tremendous  power  this  is  in  man.  He  can  choose  his  own  path,  and  walk  in 
the  way  that  he  has  marked  out.  Like  the  father  of  the  prodigal,  God  will  not 
hinder  him  from  doing  as  he  pleases.  He  did  not  in  paradise;  He  left  Adam  free 
and  unfettered  in  action.  In  like  manner,  when  the  Israelites  cried  out  for  flesh, 
aiid  mourned  for  the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt,  God  heard  their  cry,  and  brought  them 
quails  in  abundance ;  but  the  object  of  their  desire  became  the  rod  of  their  punish- 
ment. And  God  through  all  the  ages  has  acted  in  like  manner.  3.  This  power  ol 
choice  in  man  will  at  once  suggest  his  responsibility.  Be  assured  that  "  Whatso- 
ever a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap,"  I  have  read  of  a  man  who,  wandering 
along  a  rocky  shore  at  ebb  of  the  tide,  saw  a  lobster  under  a  rock,  and  thinking  ha 
could  gain  a  prize  for  his  supper,  put  in  his  hand  to  lay  hold  of  its  claw.  Instead 
of  laying  hold  of  the  lobster,  the  lobster  laid  hold  of  him,  and  he  was  shortly 
horrified  at  finding  that  what  he  meant  to  be  his  captive  was  his  too  sure  captor. 
All  the  strength  that  he  could  exert  could  not  draw  away  his  hand  from  the 
lobster's  pinch.  Above  him  from  rock  and  ledge  hung  shells  and  seaweed,  sure 
signs  that  if  he  remained  there  long  the  waves,  risiug  inch  by  inch,  would  sweep 
completely  over  his  head.  The  waters  began  to  rise ;  they  reached  his  hand.  In 
the  agony  of  despair  he  summoned  every  particle  of  remaining  strength  to  get  the 
imprisoned  limb  free,  but  all  in  vain.  Higher  and  yet  higher  rose  the  waves,  and 
his  last  dying  shriek  was  lost  in  the  roar  of  a  breaker  that  spent  its  fury  on  tha 
rocks  around  him.  You  pity  him,  do  you  not  ?  But  what  would  you  say  if  told  that  ha 
had  deliberately  fastened  himself  to  a  rock  at  ebb  of  the  tide,  and  then  waited  for 
the  waves  to  wash  his  life  away  ?  If  you  pity  the  one,  you  would  be  horrified  at 
the  other.  But  it  is  only  a  too  true  representation  of  the  man  who  lives  without 
God.  II.  Impiety  breaking  loose  fbom  home  kestbaints.  "  And  not  many  days 
after  the  younger  son  gathered  all  together,  and  took  his  journey  into  a  far 
country."  When  the  Emperor  Decimus  desired  to  place  the  crown  upon  the  head 
of  Decius  his  son,  the  young  prince  refused  in  the  most  strenuous  manner,  saying, 
"  I  am  afraid  lest,  being  an  emperor,  I  should  forget  that  I  am  a  son  ;  I  had  rather 
be  no  emperor  and  a  dutiful  son  than  an  emperor  and  such  a  son  as  hath  forgotten 
his  true  obedience."  What  a  contrast  was  that  to  the  case  of  the  prodigal!  Not 
only  did  he  demand  his  share  of  the  goods,  but  he  added  insult  to  injury  by 
refusing  any  longer  to  be  bound  by  the  ties  of  home.  This  was  the  natural  result 
of  his  unnatural  demand.  As  to  locality,  we  cannot  depart  from  God.  He  fills 
heaven  and  earth.  Yet  morally  and  spiritually  man  may  forsake  God.  If  God  ia 
banished  from  the  thoughts.  Ha  is  forsaken.  You  may  be  surrounded  with  the 
light  of  the  sun,  but  although  it  is  noonday,  if  you  persist  in  closing  your  eyes,  it  ia 
the  same  to  you  as  though  there  were  no  sun.  And  if  you  persist  in  banishing  God  from 
your  thoughts,  it  is  the  same  to  you  as  though  there  were  no  God.  (If.  G.  Pascoe.) 
The  prodigal's  departure : — There  is  a  picture  of  Vernet's  which  brings  out  with 
extraordinary  power  his  character  of  selfish  unconcern  for  the  feelings  of  his  father. 
It  represents  the  courtyard  of  an  Eastern  house,  in  which  he  is  taking  leave.  The 
mother  is  leaning,  in  the  depths  of  distress,  against  the  side  of  the  door,  the  father 
is  bending  towards  him  with  a  countenance  full  of  yearning  affection  and  grief,  aa 
if  his  heart  would  break ;  a  leading  domestic,  perhaps  "  the  steward  of  the  house," 
clenches  his  hands  aa  unable  to  restrain  his  feelings  of  indignation,  astonishment, 
and  shame  at  his  cool  indifference  as  he  turns  away  from  his  father's  embrace  to 
a  groom  who  is  holding  a  high-mettled  and  richly-caparisoned  steed,  bo  that  he 
may  mount  it  at  once  and  take  his  departure.  Altogether  it  is  a  dreadful  picture ; 
but  it  may  have  been,  and  no  doubt  was,  far  below  the  reality  of  a  multitude  ol 
Buch  scenes,  vividly  present  to  the  all-comprehending  mind  of  the  Divine  Speaker. 
(M.  F.  Sadler.)  Moral  declension  .-—These  words  have  had  infinite  applications  ; 
every  one,  perhaps,  who  has  heard  them,  has  applied  them  in  many  different  ways. 
No  one  need  contradict  the  other  ;  those  who  have  learnt  the  meaning  from  their 
own  experience  have  understood  it  best.    How  the  sense  of  an  eternal  home,  of  s 


OT4».  XV.]  ST.  LUES.  135 

father's  house,  ia  awake  in  childhood  ;  how  it  dies  out  as  the  youth  begins  to  gather 
all  together — to  make  a  world  for  himself  ;  bow  he  travels  further  and  further  from 
the  remembrance  of  home ;  how  the  Divine  treasures  of  affection,  hope,  intellect, 
health,  become  dissipated ;  how  he  loses  himself  in  the  intoxications  of  the  senses ; 
here  you  have  a  story  which  is  repeated  again  and  again,  and  always  finds  mournful 
facts  in  as  and  in  our  fellows  to  illustrate  and  enforce  it.  And  so  the  records 
of  Gentile  mythology  and  Gentile  history  explain  themselves  to  ua.  We  see  what 
the  cause  of  moral  declension  in  the  nations  of  the  old  world  was  ;  how  the  feeling 
of  the  invisible  lost  itself  ia  visible  worship  ;  how  the  sense  of  unity  broke  into  a 
number  of  objects  of  terror  or  of  beauty ;  how  the  fear  of  a  destroyer  struggled  with 
the  hope  of  a  deliverer ;  how  the  first  overpowered  the  second ;  how  the  belief  in 
justice  contended  with  the  dread  of  a  Power  which  could  overpower  justice  ;  how 
the  lusts  of  the  man  darkened  the  images  of  the  gods  whom  he  adored ;  how  he 
sought,  by  vile  expedients,  to  avert  the  wrath  before  which  he  trembled;  how 
superstitions  grew  to  be  more  fearful ;  how  moral  oorruptioDS  always  gained 
strength  along  with  them  ;  how  protests  against  both  mixed  with  an  unbelief  in 
those  truths  which  the  superstitions  counterfeited,  in  the  righteousness  which  the 
corruptions  defied.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  An  ignoble  departure : — In  old  daya 
the  young  knight  rode  forth  to  do  justice  and  redress  wrong — and  that  was  a  noble 
and  a  hopeful  starting.  But  this  young  prodigal's  riding  forth — it  was  all  meanness 
and  sadness  and  misery.  Look  for  nothing  brave  or  manly  there.  From  innocence 
to  sin,  from  sin  to  sorrow— there  was  no  beauty  in  that  path.  To  be  the  slave  of 
Satan,  to  follow  the  whisper  of  temptation  in  the  black  and  dark  night — there  was 
nothing  but  abomination  in  that  errand.  A  bird  hasting  to  the  snare,  an  ox  led 
to  destruction,  are  the  fit  emblems  of  that  pilgrimage.  The  roads  are  different,  but 
all  deadly;  one  leads  to  madness,  one  to  suicide,  one  to  sudden  destruction,  one  to 
open  shame ;  but  they  all  sweep  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow,  they  all  end  in 
the  chambers  of  death  and  hell.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Leaving  home : — Seldom 
it  may  be  hoped,  does  a  youth  leave  home  simply  because  he  has  tired  of  it ;  still 
more  rarely,  we  trust,  because  he  wishes  to  lead  a  life  of  mere  self-indulgence. 
More  frequently  it  is  on  an  honourable  errand  that  the  youthful  pilgrim  sets  forth. 
A  subsistence  must  be  earned,  an  education  must  be  obtained,  a  profession  has 
been  chosen,  a  Divine  call  is  obeyed ;  and  so  the  student  goes  to  college,  the  recrui6 
seeks  his  regiment,  the  sailor  joins  his  ship,  the  aspirant  after  an  honourable  inde- 
pendence starts  for  the  city  or  the  distant  colony ;  and  there  is  on  both  sides  true 
tenderness — on  the  one  side  the  best  intention,  on  the  other  many  an  earnest 
prayer.  For  character  there  is  a  twofold  security — the  first  commandment  and  the 
fifth — love  to  God  and  hallowed  domestic  affections :  nor  is  that  character  likely  to 
drift  where  both  anchors  are  out,  and  where  the  heart  is  well  moored  both  to  the 
home  on  earth  and  the  home  on  high.  If  yon  wish  to  have  a  happy  and  honour- 
able  career,  you  must  choose  the  best  companions.  Tour  fellow-clerks,  your  neigh- 
bours in  the  shop  or  factory,  yon  cannot  choose :  they  are  chosen  for  yoo ;  but  it 
is  left  in  your  own  option  to  select  your  friends ;  and  yon  may  find  it  a  great  dif- 
ficulty. If  you  were  a  dry,  disagreeable  fellow,  people  would  let  you  alone ;  but  if 
you  are  worth  cultivating ;  if  instead  of  being  a  proser  or  a  pedant,  you  have 
pleasant  dispositions  and  a  frank,  popular  way,  instead  of  being  a  silent,  solemn 
automaton,  or  the  next  thing  to  it,  a  man  of  one  idea — a  wooden  centaur  who  has 
grown  into  the  same  substance  with  his  hobby;  if  you  have  a  rich  and  varied 
nature  ;  if  you  have  humour ;  if  you  are  musical ;  if  you  are  fond  of  athletic  sports  ; 
if  you  read ;  if  you  row — every  separate  liking  is  just  a  several  hook,  a  distinct 
affinity  to  which  a  kindred  spirit  will  be  apt  to  attach  itself,  and  ere  ever  you  are 
aware  you  may  find  yourself  complicated  with  an  acquaintanceship  which,  although 
at  some  point  or  other  agreeable,  is  on  the  whole  cumbrous  or  uncongenial.  It  is 
pleasant  to  feel  that  you  are  liked,  and  it  is  painful  to  keep  at  arm's  length  those 
who  take  to  you  and  would  evidently  value  your  society.  Nor  would  it  be  fair  to 
call  them  by  hard  names.  They  are  not  seducers  or  systematic  assassins,  lying  ia 
wait  for  the  precious  soul ;  and  the  harm  they  do  is  not  so  much  from  having  any 
evil  purpose  as  from  their  having  no  right  principle.  Nevertheless,  if  a  man  carry- 
ing contagion  proposes  a  visit  or  offers  you  his  arm,  although  he  intends  no  injury, 
you  stand  aloof,  and  you  are  not  to  be  denounced  as  a  churl  for  declining  a  danger 
which  he  does  not  realize.  Two  are  better  than  one,  and  yon  will  find  it  both  pro- 
tection and  incentive  if  you  can  secure  a  faithful  friend ;  and  in  some  respects 
better  than  two  are  the  many  ;  therefore  you  cannot  do  more  wisely  than  seek  out 
in  the  Toung  Men's  Society  a  wider  companionship  ;  and  whilst  instructed  by  th« 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU&TRATOR.  [cha».  «▼. 

information  of  some,  and  strengthened  by  the  firmer  faith  or  larger  experience  o  ' 
others,  there  are  important  themes  on  which  you  will  learn  to  think  with  precision, 
and  in  the  exercise  of  public  speaking  you  will  either  acquire  a  useful  talent  or  will 
turn  it  to  good  account.    You  are  a  young  man  away  from  home.    We  have  said, 
choose  good  companions ;  we  must  add,  beware  of  bad  habits.     It  is  of  vast 
moment  to  be  "  just  right  "  when  starting.    At  Preston,  at  Malines,  at  many  such 
places,  the  lines  go  gently  asunder ;   so  fine  is  the  angle  that  at  first  the  paths 
are  almost  parallel,  and  it  seems  of  small  moment  which  you  select.     But  a  little 
farther  on  one  of  them  turns  a  comer  or  dives  into  a  tunnel,  and  now  that  the 
speed  is  full  the  angle  opens  up,  and  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  a  minute  the  divided 
convoy  flies  asunder  :  one  passenger  is  on  the  way  to  Italy,  another  to  the  swamps 
of  Holland  ;  one  will  step  out  in  London,  the  other  in  the  Irish  Chaimel.    It  is  not 
enough  that  you  book  for  the  better  country :  you  must  keep  the  way,  and  a  small 
deviation  may  send  you  entirely  wrong.    A  slight  deflection  from  honesty,  a  slight 
divergence  from   perfect  truthfulness,  from  perfect  sobriety,  may  threw  you  on  a 
wrong  track  altogether,  and  make  a  failure  of  that  life  which  should  have  proved  a 
comfort  to  your  family,  a  credit  to  your  country,  a  blessing  to  mankind.    Beware 
of  the  bad  habit.  It  makes  its  first  appearance  as  a  tiny  fay,  and  is  so  innocent,  so 
playful,  so  minute,  that  none  save  a  precisian  would  denounce  it,  and  it  seems 
hardly  worth  while  to  whisk  it  away.     The  trick  is  a  good  joke,  the  lie  is  white,  the 
glass  is  harmless,  the  theft  is  only  a  few  apples  from  a  farmer's  orchard,  the  bet  is 
only  sixpence,  the  debt  is  only  half-a-crown.     But  the  tiny  fay  is  capable  of  becom- 
ing a  tremendous  giant ;  and  if  you  connive  and  harbour  him,  he  will  nourish  him- 
self at  your  expense,  and  then,  springing  on  you  as  an  armed  man,  will  drag  you 
down  to  destruction.     {James  Hamilton,  D.I),)        Life  abroad : — I.  It  was  a  life 
OF  UNBOUNDED  LICENCE.     My  tcxt  says,  "  He  spent  his  substance  in  riotous  living." 
His  elder  brother  unveils  some  of  that  rioting  by  telling  his  father  that  he  had 
"  devoured  his  living  with  harlots."    What  a  picture  1     He  had  been  trained  by 
godly  parents.    How  soon  did  he  forget  the  guides  of  his  youth !    Not  all  at  once, 
however,  did  he  fall  from  a  pure-minded  youth  to  a  degraded  debauchee.     One 
principle,  smitten  by  the  hand  of  pleasure,  fell,  then  another,  and  at  last  there  was 
nothing  in  common  between  him  and  his  pious  father.     Let  us  look  in  upon  this 
young  man  in  the  midst  of  his  rioting.     He  has  been  for  some  time  now  in  the  far 
country,  and  has  tolerably  well  established  himself  as  a  dissolute  liver.     See  him 
ifi  one  of  his  midnight  orgies.  A  numerous  company  is  present.  The  profane  and  the 
eceptical,  the  abandoned  and  the  unfortunate  are  there.  But  where  is  the  prodigal? 
Surely  that  is  not  he  at  the  end  of  the  room,  with  bloated  face,  and  cold,  grey, 
glassy,  loveless  eye ;  with  person  unclean,  and  garments  barely  fastened ;  with  one 
arm  resting  on  the  shoulders  of  a  dissolute  companion,  and  with  the  other  lifting 
high  the  goblet  in  which  the  wine  is  red  and  sparkling ;  who,  with  the  frequent 
faltering  of  a  drunken  hiccup,  now  swears  bitter  oaths,  and  now  sings  a  lascivious 
song.     Can  this  be  he  ?    II.  It  ended  in  abject  miseky  and  want.     "  And  when  he 
had  spent  all,  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land,  and  he  began  to  be  in 
want."    His  fortune,  enough  for  ordinary  demands,  was  soon  run  through  at  the 
rate  he  lived,  and  at  last,  in  the  midst  of  famine,  he  came  to  absolute  need.    He 
had  spent  all ;  and  as  he  had  never  cultivated  any  branch  of  industry,  and  his 
life  of  vicious  indulgence  had  most  likely  incapacitated  him  for  labour,  he  was 
reduced  to  dire  extremities.     "  He  began  to  be  in  want."    Lord  Chesterfield,  than 
•whom  no  nobleman  has  been  more  celebrated  for  "  all  the  elegancies  of  a  courtly, 
and  all  the  accomplishments  of  a  social,  life,  said,  "  I  am  now  at  the  age  of  sixty 
years ;  I  have  been  as  wicked  as  Solomon ;  I  have  not  been  so  vdse ;  hnt  this  I 
know,  I  am  wise  enough  to  test  the  truth  of  his  reflection,  that  all  is  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit."    He  began  to  be  in  want  I     The  reason  of  this  felt  want,  both 
in  the  prodigal's  and  in  every  sinner's  heart,  is  simply  that  man  has  a  soul !    You 
might   as  well  try  to  feed  your  body  on  ashes  as  satisfy  your  soul  with  sinful 
indulgences.     Reduced  to  such  dire  extremity  he  sought  help.     "He  went  and 
joined  himself  to  a  citizen  of  that  country,  and  he  sent  him  into  his  fields  to  feed 
Bwine."    He  who  once  scorned  to  be  his  father's  son  now  became  a  stranger's  slave. 
He  had  sought  liberty  and  found  a  prison.     Servants  waited  on  him  at  home ; 
he  was  the  lowest  of  all  servants  abroad.    Trapp  truly  says,  '•  Euin  follows  riot  at 
tht\  heels."    And  now  he  comes  to  his  Lowest  state.    "  And  no  man  gave  unto  him." 
We  can  hardly  suppose  that  all  his  former  companions  were  unaware  of  his  sad 
Bondition ;  bat  not  one  of  them  will  lend  him  a  helping  hand,  or  give  him  a  morsel 
«f  bread.     There  is  not  one  of  the  whole  number  that  will  render  him  assistance. 


OSAP.  XV.]  8T.  LUKE,  137 

or  even  afford  him  recognition.     "Know  him,  did  you  say?    Oh  dear  no,  we  da 
not  know  him.     Know  that  swineherd  7    Oh,  no  ;  the  society  in  which  we  move  wa 
hope  is  different  from  that.     Know  that  man  in  rags,  did  you  say  ?    Do  yon  mean 
to  insult  ns  by  insinuating  that  our  companions  are  ragged  7    See  that  wretched 
starveling  before  ?    Certainly  not ;  we  know  nothing  of  him  or  of  his  history  !  "    If 
he  is  sick,  they  will  not  visit  him.  K  he  is  dying,  they  will  not  minister  to  him.  If 
he  dies,  they  will  not  drop  a  tear  over  his  grave,  or  abate  their  revels  for  a  moment. 
How  striking  the  contrast  between  the  Christian  and  the  sinner  in  these  respects ! 
IW.  O.  Pascoe.)        The  nature  and  consequences  of  sin: — I.  Here  is,  first,  the 
NATURE  OF  BIN.    It  is  a  departure  from  our  Heavenly  Father — a  determination  to 
be  independent  of  God — a  taking  of  the  ordering  of  our  hves  into  our  own  handa— 
a  chafing  under  the  restraints  ahke  of  the  Divine  law  and  the  Divine  love,  and  a 
setting  up  of  ourselves  as  our  own  gods.     Cunningly  did  Satan  say  to  our  common 
parents  at  the  first—"  Ye  shall  be   as  God,  knowing  good  and  evil " ;  and  Ktill 
this  self-assertion  lies  at  the  root  of  our  alienation  of  heart  from  God,  and  rebellion 
of  life  against  Him.    But  yet  more,  this  alienation  of  heart  is  from  a  Father  ;  this 
rebellion  is  against  One  who  has  done  more  for  us  than  ever  mother  did  for  the  son 
of  her  love.    We  condemn,  as  the  most  culpable  of  all  things,  the  cruelty  of  a  son 
to  his  venerable  parent ;  and  we  have  scarcely  language  strong  enough  to  express 
our  detestation  of  such  conduct  as  that  of  Absalom  to  his  father.     Yet,  in  God's 
sight,  we  have  been  doing  the  very  same  thing,  and  we  have  given  Him  occa- 
sion to  say  concerning  us,  as  Israel  of  old,  "  Hear,  0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O 
earth ;  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken.     I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and 
they  have  rebelled  against  me."    II.  But,  secondly,  we  have  here  brought  before 
ns  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  SIN.     The  first  stage  of  iniquity  is  riotous  joy.     We  must 
not  keen  that  out  of  view.     There  is  a  pleasure  in  it,  of  a  sort ;  for  if  this  were  not 
so,  men  would  not  be  found  indulging  in  it  at  all.     There  must  be  some  kind  ot 
exhilaration  in  the  flowing  bowl,  or  in  the  wild  thrill  of  sensual  gratification,  or  in 
the  gains  of  dishonesty.    In  every  sin  there  is  something  of  riot.     "  Stolen  waters 
are  sweet,"  just,  perhaps,  because  they  are  stolen ;  but  the  sweetness  does  not  last 
long.     It  turns  to  bitterness  in  the  belly ;  for,  see,  as  the  next  result,  the  waste 
which  it  occasions.       It  wastes  money,  it  wastes   health,  it   wears  the  body  to 
decay ;  but  that  is  not  the  worst.    These  things  here  are  set  forth  as  but  the  out- 
ward indications  of  the  waste  of  the  soul.     And,  in  truth,  what  a  blasting  thing  sin 
is  on  the  human  spirit  I    How  many  who,  in  their  youth,  gave  high  promise  of 
mental  greatness,  are  now  reduced  to  the  merest  drivellers,  unable  either  to  speak 
KT  write   save  under  the  influence  of  opium  or  alcohol  I    There  is  nothing  in 
Iniquity  that  can  give  contentment  to  the  spirit.     "God  has  made  us  for  Himself, 
and  our  souls  are  restless  till  they  rest  themselves  in  Him."    We  could  call  into 
court  nearly  as  many  witnesses  as  there  have  been  hunters  of  happiness,  mighty 
Nimrods  in  the  chase  of  pleasure  and  fame  and  favour.    We  might  ask  the  states- 
man, and  as  we  wished  him  a  happy  new  year.  Lord  Dundas  would  answer,  "  It 
had  need  to  be  a  happier  than  the  last,  for  I  never  knew  one  happy  day  in  it."  We 
might  ask  the  successful  lawyer,  and  the  wariest,  luckiest,  most  self-complacent  of 
them  all  would  answer,  as  Lord  Eldon  was  privately  recording  when  the  whole 
Bar  envied  the  Chancellor,  "  A  few  weeks  will  send  me  to  dear  Encombe,  as  a  short 
resting-place  betwixt  vexation  and  the  grave."    We  might  ask  the  golden  million- 
aire, "  You  must  be  a  happy  man,  Mr.  Eothschild."    "  Happy  I  me  happy  1  What  1 
happy  I  when  just  as  you  are  going  to  dine  you  have  a  letter  placed  in  your  hand, 
saying,  'If  you  don't  send  me  £600,  I  will  blow  your  brains  out ! '      Happy  1  when 
you  have  to  sleep  with  pistols  at  your  pillows."     We  might  ask  the  world-famed 
warrior,  and  get  for  answer  the  "Miserere"  of  the  Emperor-Monk  (Charles  V.),  or 
the  sigh  of  a  broken  heart  from  St.  Helena.     Oh !  shall  we  never  become  wise  ? 
Shall  we  never  learn  that  there  is  nothing  but  misery  while  we  are  away  from  God  ? 
Ye  who  are  seeking  after  happiness  in  earthly  things,  forbear.    Ye  are  pursuing  a 
qnest  more  visionary  than  that  of  the  child,  who  sets  out  to  catch  the  pillars  of  tbe 
many -coloured  rainbow  in  the  far  horizon.    Never,  never  can  you  obtain  what  you 
are  seeking,  save  in  God.    Turn,  then,  and  beseech  Him  to  give  you  that  which 
yon    desire.      {W.  M.    Taylor,   D.D.)         The    far    country: — A  far    country! 
Yes,  indeed,  it  is  a  long  and  weary  journey  that  the  soul  takes  when  it  turns 
its  back  upon  God.      Shall  we  compare  it  to  an  ill-starred  voyage  from  the 
tropics  to  the  Polar  Sea?      I  see  yon  gallant  bark,  as  she  pursues  her  north- 
ward course,  gaily  gliding  over  summer  seas.    She  coasts  along  the  shores  of 
A  vast  continent,  rich  in  tropical  luxuriance  and  bathed  in  perennial  Buuhine ; 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT, 

but  Btill  aB  she  passes  on  the  gorgeous  vision  keeps  fading  from  her  view.  She 
is  northward  bound.  By  and  by  things  begin  to  wear  a  different  aspect.  She 
is  sailing  past  lands  of  the  Temperate  Zone  ;  vegetation  ia  less  luxurious,  the  sun  is 
ever  and  again  obscured,  and  when  it  shines  lacks  its  old  power.  A  few  weeks  more 
and  there  is  another  change ;  sombre  pine  forests  clothe  the  mountain-shoulder  now, 
and  snowy  summits  begin  to  appear  above  them,  and  the  air  grows  chill,  and  the 
sun  seems  wan  and  powerless.  A  little  further,  and  soon  the  pine  woods  are  left 
behind,  and  ever  and  again  huge,  towering  icebergs  begin  to  appear.  But  still  the 
cry  is  "Northward! "  and  the  day  grows  shorter  and  the  long  nights  colder,  and 
the  pitiless  blast  whistles  through  the  frosted  shrouds,  and  in  the  next  scene  there 
is  the  ship  in  "  thrilling  regions  of  thick-ribbed  ice,"  hemmed  in  by  frozen  seas, 
and  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  one  weary  waste  of  desolation,  a  region  of  perpetual 
winter,  bereft  of  almost  every  sign  of  life,  a  place  of  the  shadow  of  death.  Such, 
as  it  seems  to  me,  is  a  picture  of  the  fatal  progress  of  the  human  soul  along  the 
way  of  Cain,  as  he  drifts  further  and  further  from  the  Divine  influence,  and  hia 
nobler  impulses  are  checked,  and  his  wanner  affections  chilled,  and  his  holier 
energies  paralyzed,  while  the  heart  is  hardened  with  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  Thus 
it  is  that  men  turn  their  backs  on  the  true  summer  land,  of  the  soul  in  God,  and 
drift  into  the  perpetual  winter  of  godlessness.  Yes,  there  is  the  chill  of  a  perpetual 
winter  in  that  tragic  word  godless.  A  godless  heart  1  a  heart  whose  highest  honour 
it  should  have  been  to  be  the  very  dwelling-place  of  God ;  a  heart  that  might  have 
been  warmed  and  brightened  with  the  sunshine  of  His  love,  but  now  cold  and  indif- 
ferent to  all  His  influences ;  a  lonesome,  desolate,  orphaned  heart,  robbed  of  its 
highest  honour  and  denied  its  holiest  privileges ;  a  desecrated  shrine,  a  deserted 
temple,  and  yet  an  empty,  weary,  disappointed  heart,  that  nothing  else  can  satisfy. 
A  godless  home  I  where  human  love  is  never  sanctified  by  the  higher  love  of  heaven, 
where  all  the  purest  and  truest  earthly  pleasures  that  the  great  Father  gives  are 
received  as  mere  matters  of  course  without  any  recognition  of  the  Giver,  where  Hia 
smile  never  adds  lustre  to  human  joys,  and  His  sympathizing  comfort  is  never 
sought  in  moments  of  anxiety  and  sorrow ;  a  home  where  cares  weigh  heavily  because 
there  is  no  heavenly  Friend  to  bear  them,  where  strifes  and  dissensions  are  never 
stilled  by  the  Prince  of  Peace,  where  "  the  daily  round,  the  common  task,"  carry  no 
blessing  along  with  them  because  God  is  not  recognized  there.  A  godless  life-work  I 
"  It  is  but  lost  labour  that  ye  haste  to  rise  up  early,  and  so  late  take  rest,  and  eat 
the  bread  of  carefulness."  "  Labour  not  for  the  bread  that  perisheth,  but  for  that 
which  endureth  onto  eternal  life  " ;  but  this  perishing  bread  is  all  that  we  have  left 
to  labour  for  when  once  we  have  broken  away  from  God.  And  so  men  scheme,  and 
plan,  and  speculate,  and  toil,  a'^d  fret,  and  hurry,  and  push  and  sacrifice  much  of 
ease  and  comfort  that  they  mignt  enjoy ;  and  all  for  what  ?  What  does  commercial 
success  mean  but  sooner  or  later  the  loss  of  all  thai  we  nave  been  spending  our 
lives  in  trying  to  gain,  just  because  God  is  excluded  from  our  busy  lives?  Worst  of 
all,  a  godless  religion !  for  religion  may  be  adopted  and  its  observances  respected, 
not  as  a  means  of  bringing  us  nearer  to  God,  but  rather  as  a  means  of  making  ua 
the  better  contented  to  dispense  with  Him.  Our  conscience  is  deadened  by  the 
thought  that  we  come  up  to  the  conventional  standard  in  religion,  and  we  may  be 
less  likely  to  be  alarmed  at  the  thought  of  our  spiritual  danger  than  if  we  had  no 
religion  at  all ;  and  yet  our  religion  may  never  have  brought  ns  into  any  actual 
personal  and  spiritual  contact  with  God.  Oh,  my  brethren,  with  whatever  other 
curse  we  may  be  cursed,  God  save  us  from  the  curse  of  a  godless  rehgion  I  A  god- 
less end  1  Ah  !  this  seems  too  terrible  to  contemplate,  and  yet  we  must  contem- 
plate it ;  for  it  is  set  before  as  that  we  may  take  warning  by  contemplating  it.  My 
friends,  I  would  have  you  remember  that  this  far  country  of  which  I  have  been 
speaking  is  but  the  frontier,  so  to  speak,  of  the  far  realms  of  death.  This  going 
forth  from  the  presence  of  God,  what  is  it  bat  incipient  death  ?  Already  the  wan- 
dering soul  is  drifting  away  from  the  one  life-centre  of  the  universe — the  heart  of 
God ;  and  every  day's  journey  he  takes  is  a  journey  deathward,  until  at  length  the 
terrible  word  "Depart,"  falling  from  the  Judge's  lips,  sets  the  seal  of  doom  upon 
the  inexorable  Nemesis  of  a  lifelong  sin.  (W.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Man  going 
into  the  far  country : — As  it  is  less  labour  to  stay  a  stone  before  it  be  moved,  than 
turn  it  back  again  when  it  is  in  the  tumbling ;  thus,  then,  goeth  a  man  away  further 
find  further  from  the  Lord  by  multiplication  of  his  sins,  as  a  man  by  multiplication 
cf  his  steps  goeth  further  away  from  the  place  wherein  he  was.  It  should  therefore 
le  our  first  care  to  beware  of  iLe  beginnings  of  sin ;  and  the  next  to  beware  w» 
multiply  not  our  sin,  lest  by  so  doing  we  go  far  from  the  Lord.    {Bithop  Cotoper.) 


CHIT,  xv.]  fir.  LUKE.  189 

The  far  country  : — This  Us  oonntry,  then,  is  to  be  estimate  by  the  distance  of  man's 
Trill  and  affections  from  the  Lord,  that  is,  Longinqua  regio  dissmilitudini$,  for 
then  is  a  man  farthest  from  God,  when  he  is  most  unlike  nnto  God.  So  the  Lord 
Himself  expounds  it ;  "  What  iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  Me,  that  they  are 
gone  far  from  Me,  walking  after  vanity,  and  are  become  vain  ?  "  And  the_  apostle 
to  the  Ephesians,  comparing  their  former  estate  by  nature,  with  that  which  now 
they  were  renewed  to  by  grace,  he  saith,  •'  Ye  which  once  were  far  off,  are  now  made 
near  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  'WTiereof  we  see  it  is  sins  that  makes  to  be  far 
from  the  Lord,  grace  again  that  brings  us  near  unto  Him.  Things  that  are  far  off 
were  they  never  so  precious  and  excellent,  either  else  we  see  them  not  at  all,  or  then 
they  seem  far  less  to  us  than  they  are.  The  sun  is  many  times  more  than  the  earth, 
yet  do  we  account  it  less  than  ourselves.  The  reason  is,  that  it  is  far  from  us  when 
men  travel  so  far  to  the  south,  that  the  north  pole  in  their  sight  comes  near  to  the 
earth,  and  at  length  the  sight  thereof  is  intercepted  from  them  by  the  earth,  it  is  a 
Bure  argument  they  are  far  from  it ;  even  so,  when  men  esteem  the  incomprehensible 
majesty  of  God,  who  by  infinite  degrees  surmounts  the  beauty  of  the  sun  to  be  but 
small  in  their  eyes,  or  when  in  their  imagination  they  draw  down  the  Lord  to  as- 
similate or  compare  Him  to  anything  in  earth,  or  when  in  their  affections  the 
earth  comes  in  between  their  souls  and  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  the  love  of  the 
earth  prevails;  it  is  an  argument  such  miserable  souls  are  far  from  the  Lord. 
{Ibid.)  Wasted  his  substance  with  riotous  living. — Wasted  tubxtance: — ^The 
English  word  "substance"  is  ambiguous.  It  may  mean  the  pith  and  marrow 
of  a  man's  body,  or  the  contents  of  his  purse.  It  may  be  taken  both  ways  at 
once;  for  these  two  kinds  of  substance  generally  melt  away  together,  in  the 
bitter  experience  of  the  prodigal.  His  fortune  is  lost;  his  health  has  failed; 
and  his  pleasures,  such  us  they  were,  have  fled.  The  pleasures,  when  they  flee, 
leave  behind  them  stings  and  terrors  in  the  conscience.  The  youth  begins  to  be  in 
want — in  want  of  food,  and  clothing,  and  home;  in  want  of  friends,  in  want  of 
peace—  in  want  of  all  things.  A  waif  drifting  towards  the  eternal  shore — a  lost 
soul.  Such  is  the  track  of  a  prodigal.  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  TToste ;— One  tragic 
word  seems  to  describe  this  young  man's  career  of  fatuous  folly  and  sin  in  that  far 
country,  and  oh,  my  brethren,  it  describes  the  lives  of  many  more  besides  him  1  and 
that  word  is  waste.  "  He  wasted  his  substance  in  riotous  living."  Yes,  I  say  it 
describes  the  lives  of  many  more  beside  him.  Shall  I  be  wrong  in  saying  it  describes 
the  lives  of  all  who  do  not  according  to  the  measure  of  their  light  and  knowledge 
live  to  God  ?  The  man  who  has  turned  his  back  on  God,  and  who  regards  himself 
as  his  own,  has  already  entered  upon  a  course  of  waste,  even  though  he  do  not,  like 
the  prodigal,  waste  his  substance  in  riotous  living.  In  the  case  of  those  who 
emulate  the  prodigal  in  leading  dissipated  and  profligate  lives,  the  waste  is  as 
obvious  as  it  was  in  his  case,  and  unhappily  such  cases  are  by  no  means  rare.  It 
is  astonishing  how  some  men  will  waste  things  that  we  all  value,  and  none,  you 
would  think,  would  willingly  be  stripped  of.  Take,  for  example,  money,  or  social 
position,  or  health,  or  natural  affection.  No  sane  man  doubts  that  each  of  these 
has  a  value  of  its  own ;  indeed  the  general  tendency  of  men  is  perhaps  to  value 
them  too  highly ;  yet  what  multitudes  of  men  ruthlessly  waste  these  precious  pos- 
sessions, as  if  they  were  not  of  the  slightest  value,  and  as  if  it  were  an  object  with 
them  to  get  rid  of  them.  And  if  you  notice  carefully,  it  is  just  the  spirit  pf  inde- 
pendence that  leads  them  to  do  this.  They  conceive  that  liberty  consists  in  doing 
whatever  passing  impulse  may  dispose  them  to  do ;  but  they  feel  that  were  they 
under  the  Divine  control  they  would  be  continually  subjected  to  checks  and  restraints 
which  would  interfere  with  their  impulses,  and  prevent  them  from  doing  what  at 
the  moment  they  might  wish.  So  the  language  of  their  hearts  is,  •*  Let  us  break 
His  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  His  cords  from  us."  And  they  do  exactly  aa 
they  please,  and  the  result  is — waste.  It  is  indeed  surprising  what  exploits  of 
waste  some  men  contrive  to  perform  under  the  influence  of  this  habit  of  wilful  self- 
pleasing.  I  heard  of  a  Bussian  nobleman  not  long  ago  who  was  heir  to  a  fortune 
of  some  £400;000  a  year,  yet  it  had  not  been  in  his  hands  very  long  before  he  was 
actually  a  bankrupt.  It  surely  requires  some  ingenuity  to  get  through  such  a  for- 
tune,  and  yet  somehow  he  managed  it.  A  friend  of  mine  was  called  to  the  bedside 
of  a  poor  miserable  wretch  who  was  dying  of  delirium  tremens.  I  used  the  word 
bedside,  but,  strictly,  bed  there  was  none  in  the  room  where  the  dying  man  lay  in 
his  last  lucid  interval  before  the  terrible  end.  There  he  lay,  bloated,  poverty- 
stricken,  filthy,  scarcely  covered  with  the  rags  which  were  his  only  apology  for  « 
bed;  there  he  lay  dying  in  stony  despair ;  yet  he  told  my  friend  that  he  had  ono« 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 


been  a  prosperous  London  man  of  business,  anci  had  been  worth  his  fifty  thousand 
pounds.  I  visited  a  large  seaside  town  a  few  years  ago,  and  it  was  thought  desir- 
able, as  multitudes  thronged  the  esplanade,  to  send  men  with  boards  aloug  it.  I 
was  told  that  one  of  the  men,  who  carried  the  boards  for  a  slender  pittance  of  a  few 
pence  a  day,  was  the  son  and  heir  of  a  man  who  had  been  once,  and  I  believe  con- 
tinued to  be  up  to  his  death,  one  of  the  richest  shopkeepers  in  that  large  town ;  yet 
here  was  his  son  in  absolute  destitution,  and  he  had  brought  it  all  upon  himself  by 
waste.  But  why  should  I  multiply  instances?  Alas !  there  are  few  of  us  that  have 
not  had  cases  brought  under  our  notice  of  the  almost  incredible  folly  exhibited  by 
those  who  think  themselves  sensible  men  in  this  respect.  I  want  to  lay  stress  upon 
the  fact  that  the  folly  arises  from  our  taking  a  false  view  of  what  money  is,  and  of 
what  our  relations  to  it  are.  If  a  man  looks  upon  money  as  simply  a  means  of  pur- 
chasing self-gratification  in  whatever  form  it  seems  most  attractive,  it  is  not  sur- 
prising that  he  should  squander  it  lightly  under  the  influence  of  a  passing  impulse. 
Considerations  of  prudence  and  forecast  do  not  weigh  against  the  claims  of  self- 
indulgence.  The  object  of  money  seems  to  the  spendthrift  to  be  to  procure 
enjoyment,  and  this  is  to  be  gained,  it  seems  to  him,  rather  by  spending  it  than  by 
keeping  it,  and  therefore  he  proceeds  to  spend  it.  Aud  so  he  wastes  his  substance, 
not  because  he  spends,  but  because  he  regards  that  which  he  spends  as  his  own  to 
do  exactly  what  he  likes  with.  Oh,  how  many  men  are  aU  the  poorer  for  their 
fortunes  1  But  money  is  not  the  only  thing  we  waste  when  we  turn  our  backs  upon 
God,  and  we  can  trace  the  operation  of  the  same  law  in  every  case.  God  has  given 
to  all  of  us  faculties,  and  to  some  of  us  special  gifts  and  talents.  If  we  put  these 
in  His  hands,  as  the  elder  brother  gave  back  to  the  father  his  portion  of  goods,  they 
must  all  contribute  to  our  true  wealth.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  claim  them  for 
ourselves,  and,  regarding  them  as  our  own,  turn  our  backs  upon  the  l%ther,  that 
which  should  have  been  our  gain  begins  to  be  moral  loss,  and  we  are  all  the  poorer 
for  our  natural  endowments.  Well  used  wealth  contributes  to  the  formation  of  a 
generous  and  godlike  character,  it  helps  to  enrich  your  moral  nature ;  and  thus  it 
is  actually  true  that  the  hand  of  the  liberal  maketh  rich.  The  material  substance, 
which  we  can  under  no  circumstances  keep,  passes  from  us,  but  it  leaves  us  morally 
and  spiritually  the  richer  for  its  use.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  regard  our  sub- 
stance merely  as  a  meanS  for  self-gratification,  our  gain  becomes  positive  moral 
Xoss.  The  abuse  or  unholy  use  of  our  substance  means  selfishness  increased  and 
developed,  self-control  weakened,  the  love  of  luxury,  the  passion  for  self-indulgence 
rendered  more  insatiable  than  ever ;  while  our  benevolence  is  diminished,  and  our 
sympathies  are  curtailed,  the  heart  hardened,  and  the  gain  in  the  capacity  to  help 
and  enlighten  others;  gain  in  the  enjoyment  of  ever-enlarging  visions  of  truth; 
gain  in  tlie  acquisition  of  that  spiritual  knowledge  which  in  the  moral  world  must 
always  as  truly  be  power  as  is  secular  knowledge  in  the  physical  world.  A  conse- 
crated intellect  is  wealth  to  the  Church,  wealth  to  the  world,  wealth  to  its  possessor. 
But  if  you  take  your  intellect  out  of  God's  hands  and  regard  it  as  your  own,  the 
process  of  waste  at  once  begins.  Your  very  gifts  become  snares.  Intellectual  pride 
breeds  doubt,  and  doubt  develops  into  crude,  hasty  unbelief.  Or  intellectual  success 
induces  self-conceit,  which  is  one  of  the  worst  moral  diseases  that  man's  nature  can 
be  afHicted  with.  Or  intellectual  gratification  becomes  the  object  for  which  the 
man  lives,  only  to  find,  with  Solomon,  that  in  much  knowledge  is  much  sorrow ; 
and  that,  while  the  head  may  be  filled,  the  heart  remains  empty.  For  we  cannot 
live  for  knowledge  without  finding  out  more  and  more  how  little  we  know,  and  how 
little  we  can  know.  And  this  tends  to  render  life  one  long,  bitter  disappointment ; 
while,  as  the  swiftly-flying  years  bring  the  end  nearer,  we  have  the  melancholy  con- 
viction forcing  itself  upon  us,  that  even  that  little  can  only  be  retained  for  a  short 
time.  "  Whether  there  be  knowledge,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  it  shall  vanish  away."  It 
is  only  waste  after  all.  Or  has  God  given  you  personal  influence,  springing  either 
from  your  natural  character  and  gifts,  or  from  your  social  position?  Mere  or  less, 
I  believe,  He  has  given  this  to  each  of  us ;  a  great  deal  to  some.  What  are  you 
doing  with  it?  Consecrate  it  to  God,  and  use  it  for  the  good  of  man,  and  then  your 
portion  of  goods  in  the  father's  hands  shall  ever  go  on  increasing,  and  your  satis- 
faction shall  ever  become  deeper  and  truer  as  you  use  this  gift  for  its  proper  object. 
Who  shall  describe  the  blessedness  which  flows  back,  to  him  who  so  exercises^  it, 
from  a  well-used  influence  ?  and  who  shall  say  where  its  efifects  will  end,  in  time 
and  in  eternity?  But  if  this  influence  is  used  merely  for  self-gratification,  to 
minister  to  our  love  of  popularity  or  of  power,  once  again  oar  gift  becomes  our  bane, 
and  exercises  a  most  injarious  eiSeot  upon  oar  moral  nature,  ministering  to  oai 


OHA».  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  141 

pride,  and  promoting  our  selfishness,  and  thus  defeating  the  very  purpose  for  tha 
sake  ol  which  the  gift  was  originally  bestowed.  So  here  again  we  have  nothing  but 
waste — the  good  that  might  have  been  done  left  undone  for  ever,  and  actual  harm 
done  both  to  ourselves  and  others  through  that  very  gift  which  should  have  beeu 
for  the  benefit  of  all — and,  as  a  result,  instead  of  a  heart  full  of  true  gratification 
And  satisfaction,  the  terrible  awakening  by  and  by  to  find  that  all  this  influence  has 
been  cast  into  the  wrong  scale.  Oh,  think  of  the  anguish  of  remorse  that  must  fill 
the  heart  at  the  discovery  that  we  have  helped  to  drag  others  down  by  the  abuse  of 
the  very  gift  that  should  have  raised  them,  and  that  we  are  perishing  not  alone  in 
our  iniquity  1  {W.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  late  restraining  a  prodigal: — The 
Evening  Standard,  Friday,  Feb.  26,  1886,  contained  the  following :  (From  our  cor- 
respondent. ) — Paris,  Thursday  Night.  —Considerable  sensation  has  been  caused  in 
French  social  and  financial  circles  by  the  appointment  of  a  curator  or  Conseil  judi- 
ciaire  to  M.  Raymond  SeilliSre,  a  member  of  the  well-known  family  of  bankers  and 
army  contractors.  This  appointment  of  a  Conseil  judiciaire  in  restraint  of  prodi- 
gality  is  a  peculiarity  of  French  law  adopted  or  inherited  from  the  Eoman  law. 
Supposing  A  squanders  his  money  and  the  inheritance  of  his  children,  his  next  of 
kin  are  empowered  to  apply  to  the  law  courts  to  deprive  him  of  the  administration 
of  his  fortune,  and  transfer  it  to  an  advocate  or  solicitor.  No  matter  what  his  age 
may  be,  the  person  thus  dealt  with  is  reduced  to  a  state  of  legal  infancy,  and  no 
debt  he  may  contract  is  recoverable  unless  his  curator  has  sanctioned  it.  In  the 
case  of  M.  Baymond  SeilliSre,  the  application,  which  was  made  at  the  suit  of  his 
brother,  was  grounded  on  the  fact  that  within  twelve  years  he  had  run  through  a 
fortune  of  twelve  millions  of  francs  (£480,000  sterling),  and  had  in  addition  con- 
tracted loans  to  the  amount  of  five  millions  (£200,000  sterling).  One  of  the 
creditors  opposed  on  the  plea  that  the  suit  was  instituted  solely  to  enable  M.  Seil- 
liSre  to  evade  the  payment  of  his  debts.  The  court,  however,  granted  the  applica- 
tion. M.  Eaymond  Seilli^re  was  thirty-nine  years  of  age.  Wasted  substance : — 
He  had  not  been  gone  long  before  his  •'  gathering  "  comes  to  be  "  scattering."  No 
doubt,  he  had  his  pleasure  in  all  this  wasting.  There  is  a  revelling  and  a  merri- 
ment in  these  riotous  passions.  It  is  soon  gone ;  but  stiU  there  is  pleasure,  though 
it  is  short-lived,  in  sin  and  squandering.  The  passions  soon  grow  dull — the  gilding 
wears  ofi — the  music  and  the  dance  grow  insipid  and  wearitt>me,  the  dronkard'a 
caps,  in  time,  deaden,  but  don't  intoxicate.  Even  Byron,  belore  his  life  was  half 
•pent,  WM  forced  to  acknowledge — 

*•  My  days  are  in  the  yellow  leaf. 

The  flowers,  the  fruits  of  love  are  gona; 
The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief. 
Are  mine  alone." 

There  is  the  sinner,  worn,  weary,  wasted ;  he  has  wasted  his  time — ^wasted  hia 
precioas  season  for  preparing  for  eternity — wasted  hia  own  energies  and  power — 
wasted  his  parent's  care,  and  labour,  and  no  shudder  felt  now  when  words  of 
fonl  meaning  pollute  another's  lips,  or  the  name  of  Ood  is  uttered  in  blas- 
pheming rage.  Oh,  how  altered!  But  all  this,  very  significant  as  it  is,  the 
parable  passes  by.  It  is  not  so  much  what  he  saw  or  heard  in  that  strange 
land  as  what  he  wasted,  and  how  he  wasted  it,  that  is  here  marked  down — 
"  He  wasted  his  substance  with  riotous  living."  {W.  B.  2lackemie,  M.A.) 
Riotous  living: — Nothing  can  be  nobler  than  a  true  and  thorough  manhood,  where, 
amid  the  seductions  of  sense,  the  soul  still  retains  the  mastery  of  itself  by 
retaining  its  loyalty  to  God.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  deeply  distressing  to  find  tha 
higher  nature  dethroned  or  in  thraldom.  Wild  stories  circulate  in  many  lands.  In 
Northern  Europe  they  tell  how  a  child  has  been  carried  off  by  wolves,  and  brought 
up  amongst  them — taught  to  live  in  wolfish  fashion,  sleeping  in  the  forest,  joining 
in  the  hunt  of  the  reindeer  or  aurochs,  and  drinking  with  savage  delight  the  blood 
of  the  palpitating  prey.  And  in  Africa  the  like  story  is  told — how  the  man  has 
been  kidnapped  by  the  baboon,  and,  hurried  up  the  mountain,  has  spent  amidst 
these  hideous  monsters  a  horrible  captivity.  The  risk  is  real.  The  climate  may 
be  good,  the  settlement  may  promise  all  that  heart  can  wish,  and  the  vicinity  may 
be  BO  far  cleared  as  to  make  the  immediate  homestead  tolerably  secure ;  but  it  is 
folly  to  deny  all  danger.  A  wise  man  will  be  cautious ;  and  if  cautions  he  need 
not  be  nerroas.  It  is  only  right  and  kind  to  give  warning  ;  and  pleasant  as  is  the 
lot  of  your  inheritance,  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  thickets  and  steep  places 


143  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt.. 

are  hatmted.    Frightful  ogres  frequent  them,  and  they  are  sure  to  Bally  forth  oa 
the  heedless  wanderer.    There  are  even  instances  on  record  where  they  have  vaulted 
over  the  enclosure  and  carried  off  from  the  threshold  some  hapless  victim.     The 
names  of  three  of  the  hest  known  and  most  mischievous  are — the  Lust  of  the  Eye^ 
the  Lust  of  the  Flesh,  and  the  Pride  of  Life  ;  or,  as  they  are  sometimes  called, 
"Vanity,  or  the  Love  of  Display ;  Sensuality,  or  the  Love  of  Low  Pleasure ;  and  the 
Affectation  of  Fashion,  or  the  Keeping-up  of  Appearances.    For  a  hundred  years 
England  has  yielded  no  scholar  comparable  to  Bichard  Porson.    With  a  memory 
in  which  words  and  things  were  alike  imperishable,  and  with  that  marvellous 
intuition  which  enabled  him  to  personate  any  author,  Greek  or  Boman,  and  in  the 
broken  parchment  or  faded  manuscript  at  once  perceive  what  ^schylus  or  Tacitus 
had  meant  to  say,  he  had  withal  a  wit  which  made  him  welcome  at  the  board  of 
rich  and  clever  men ;  and  to  feed  the  wit  they  phed  the  wine,  till  in  floods  of  liquor 
wit  and  wisdom  both  were  drowned,  and,  the  remains  of  the  scholar  buried  in 
mere  beastliness,  the  sot  disappeared  from  society.    For  a  hundred  years  Ireland- 
has  yielded  no  dramatist,  no  orator,  equal  to  Bichard  Brinsley  Sheridan ;  but  even 
for  that  brilliant  genius,  whose  versatile  talents  brought  London  to  his  feet,  and 
carried  captive  the  senate,  strong  drink  was  too  powerful,  and,  in  place  of  bouquets 
and  ribbons,  with  writs  and  executions  showering  around  him,  he  lay  on  his 
desolate  couch  bankrupt  in  character  as  well  as  in  fortune,  and  would  have  been 
carried  off  in  his  blankets  to  the  debtor's  gaol  had  not  the  apparitor  of  a  mightier 
tribunal  stepped  in  before  the  sheriff's  officer  and  claimed  the  prisoner.    For  a. 
hundred  years — nay,  through  all  the  years — Scotland  has  yielded  no  poet  who  could 
seize  the  heart  of  tiie  nation  as  it  was  seized  by  Bobert  Burns — master  alike  of  its 
pathos,  humour,  chivalry.    Alas  1  that  pinions  capable  of  such  a  flight  as  "  Bruc& 
at  Bannockbum  "  and  "  Mary  in  Heaven,"  should  have  come  down  to  get  smeared 
and  bird-limed  on  the  tapster's  bough ;  alas !  that  from  the  Cottar's  Saturday 
Evening  he  shonld  have  passed  away  to  the  companionship  of  drunken  ploughboy» 
and  coarse  bullies  in  their  night-long  carousals  in  low  taverns.    Like  the  spear, 
some  ten  or  twelve  fathoms  long,  with  which  the  Yancouver  Indian  ploughs  the 
river-bed,  and  the  barbed  point  comes  off  in  the  first  great  sturgeon  which  it 
pierces,  ihe  tenacious  fibre  uncoiling  as  he  flies ;  so,  paddling  over  the  surface  of 
society,  it  is  with  a  long  shaft  that  the  demon  of  Drunkenness  explores  for  his 
victims;  but  when  one  of  his  barbs  gets  fairly  through  the  mail  it  usually  fixes  and 
is  fast.    The  line  is  a  long  one,  and  will  hold  for  years.    It  marks  the  victim ;  and 
the  first  time  he  rises  another  dart  strikes  through  his  liver,  and  then  another,  and 
at  last  a  great  many — the  social  glass  leading  on  to  the  glass  suggestive  or  the 
glass  inspiring,  and  the  glass  restorative  leading  on  to  the  glass  strength-giving, 
and  that  again  to  glasses  fast  and  frequent — glasses  care-drowning,  conscience- 
coaxing,  grief- dispelling — till,  gasping  and  dying,  the  hulk  is  towed  ashore,  and 
pierced  through  with  many  sins,  weak,  wasted,  worthless,  the  victim  gives  up  the 
ghost,  leaving  in  the  tainted  air  a  disastrous  memory.    Whether  coarse  or  refined^ 
riot  speedily  wastes  the  reveller's  "  substance."    Not  only  does  it  aap  the  constitu- 
tion, and  soften  the  brain,  and  shatter  the  nerves,  and  enfeeble  the  mind,  but  it 
exhausts  the  estate,  and  soon  brings  the  spendthrift  to  poverty.  And  if  the  passion 
still  urge  and  the  fear  of  God  has  departed,  wild  methods  will  be  tried  to  meet  the 
demand  and  assuage  the  frantic  craving.    Keepsakes  will  be  sold  or  pledged,  ta 
part  with  which  would  once  on  a  time  have  looked  like  sacrilege.     Money  will  b» 
borrowed  as  long  as  any  one  will  lend  it,  and  then  it  will  be  taken  from  the  till,  or 
intercepted  on  the  way  from  a  customer  or  correspondent ;  and  thus — it  is  a  tale  a 
thousand  times  told — dissipation  leads  on  to  dishonesty ;  and  in  keeping  up  the 
jovial  life,  nay,  in  merely  keeping  up  appearances,  character  will  be  vilely  cast 
away.    Our  hearts  are  weak,  and  we  have  continual  need  to  pray,  '*  Deliver  us  from 
evil" ;  for  temptations  are  sometimes  terrible.    When  in  front  of  his  own  cathedral 
Bishop  Hooper  was  fastened  to  the  stake  and  the  fire  was  slowly  burning,  they  held 
np  a  pardon,  and  told  him  that  he  had  only  to  say  the  word  and  walk  at  liberty. 
••  If  you  love  my  soul,  away  with  it  1 "  was  the  exclamation  of  the  martyr  as  every^ 
tortured  fibre  called  for  pity,  but  the  loyal  spirit  revolted  from  the  wickedness.    So 
there  may  come  a  fiery  trial  where  the  adversary  has  got  in  pledge  your  income, 
your  earthly  prospects,  your  parents  or  your  children,  and  asks  if  you  will  be  so 
infatuated  as  to  cast  them  away  when  the  stroke  of  a  pen,  the  pronouncing  of  a 
word,  a  nod  or  sign  would  suffice  and  save  the  whole.    When  the  furnace  is  thua 
■even-times  heated  it  will  need  much  grace,  in  view  of  the  proffered  bribe,  to  cry, 
*'  Away  with  it ! "  and  yet,  through  His  timely  suocoor,  who,  in  the  days  of  Hi» 


CB^.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  143 

flesh  and  in  view  of  an  awful  alternative,  poured  forth  strong  crying  and  tears, 
such  ordeals  have  been  encountered  by  men  of  like  passions  with  oorselves,  and 
from  this  lesser  Gethsemane  they  have  emerged  with  spirit  softened  and  character 
confirmed,  enriched  by  the  loss,  perfected  by  the  suffering.  However,  it  was  not 
by  a  roaring  lion,  but  by  a  plausible  tempter  that  man  was  first  led  into  evil ;  aod 
our  greatest  danger  arises  from  the  subtlety  of  Satan  and  the  pleasures  of  sin.  If 
you  would  pass  innocently  through  a  difficult  world,  keep  within  the  rules.  Let 
your  hfe  be  open,  your  eye  single,  your  walk  in  the  broad  Ught  of  day.  If  a 
mistake  is  committed,  lose  no  time  in  acknowledging  it ;  and  beware  of  getting 
complicated  with  unprincipled  or  low-minded  companions.  They  will  be  sure  to 
use  you  as  the  cloak  or  the  oatspaw  of  their  own  designs,  and  dien,  when  their 
purpose  is  served,  or  when  the  day  of  disclosure  arrives,  they  will  sacrifice  you  and 
save  themselves.  Keep  within  the  homestead.  If  compelled  to  quit  the  parental 
roof,  cast  yourself  aU  the  rather  on  your  heavenly  Father's  grace  and  guidance. 
And  do  not  forsake  the  sanctuary.  {James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  temptations  to 
expense : — The  great  temptations  to  expense  are  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust  of  the 
fiesh,  and  the  pride  of  life  ;  and  to  these  the  great  antidote  is,  not  a  limited  income 
BO  much  as  a  large  self-denial.  It  is  the  lust  of  the  flesh  when  the  little  boy  spends 
all  his  halfpence  on  sugar-plums.  It  is  the  lust  of  the  eye  when  the  peer  cannot 
resist  the  porcelain  of  Sevres  or  the  mosaic  of  Borne,  but  exhausts  his  estate  in 
adorning  his  palace.  It  is  the  pride  of  Ufe  when  the  servant  flaunts  in  finery  and 
lets  her  parents  starve ;  when  the  merchant  spends  on  his  mansion  or  his  equipage 
all  by  which  his  neighbour  or  the  world  might  be  profited.  But  just  as  people  can 
be  profuse  who  are  not  earning  a  penny,  so  there  are  rich  men  who  do  not  riot,  and 
who  in  the  generous  use  of  their  income  enjoy  a  continual  feast.  If  self-denying, 
you,  too,  will  be  rich.  From  personal  expenditure  saving  all  that  yoa  can,  you  wUl 
find  it  available  for  the  most  blessed  of  all  bestowments  ;  and  in  paying  the  school- 
fees  of  a  younger  brother,  in  a  thoughtful  gift  to  a  sister,  in  lightening  the  burden 
of  a  toil-worn  father,  in  promoting  the  comfort  of  a  faithful  old  servant  who  can 
work  no  longer,  in  a  subscription  to  the  missionary  society  or  the  Sunday-school 
excursion,  in  contributing  to  the  happiness  or  welfare  of  others,  you  will  reap  the 
Divine  reward  of  self-denial.  {Ibid.)  Wasted  lives: — Of  five  rich  young  men 
whom  the  Bev.  A.  Wylie  knew,  one,  he  tells  us,  shot  himself,  another  died  of 
delirium  tremens,  another  was  drowned  in  the  midst  of  dissipation,  a  fourth  was 
stabbed  in  a  gambling-house,  and  the  fifth,  assisted  home  by  a  policeman  at  two 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  was  found  dead  on  his  father's  hall  floor.  Carlyle  and  the 
crust: — It  is  related  of  Carlyle,  that  as  he  one  day  approached  a  street  crossing,  he 
suddenly  stopped,  and  stooping  down  picked  something  out  of  the  mud,  at  the  risk 
of  being  run  over  by  one  of  the  many  carriages  in  the  street.  With  his  bare  hands 
he  brushed  the  mud  ofl,  and  placed  the  substance  on  a  clean  spot  on  the  kerb-stone. 
"  That,"  said  he,  in  a  tone  as  sweet  and  in  words  as  beautiful  as  I  ever  heard,  "  is 
only  a  crust  of  bread.  Yet  I  was  taught  by  my  mother  never  to  waste,  and  above 
all,  bread,  more  precious  than  gold,  the  substance  that  is  the  same  to  the  body  that 
the  mind  is  to  the  soul.  I  am  sure  that  the  little  sparrows,  or  a  hungry  dog,  will 
get  nourishment  from  that  bit  of  bread."  Folly  of  leading  a  gay  life  : — A 
practical  illustration  of  the  folly  of  leading  a  gay  life  came  under  the  notice  of  the 
surgical  staff  of  Charing  Cross  Hospital  in  August,  1880.  John  WallberoS,  about 
fifty-five  years  of  age,  residing  at  a  common  lodging-house  in  Westminster,  asked 
the  surgeons  to  attend  to  an  injury  which  he  had  received  to  his  chest,  which,  he 
said,  had  been  caused  by  the  police  whUe  he  was  under  their  charge  that  morning. 
The  man  had  a  military  appearance,  but  was  in  a  shockingly  tattered  and  neglected 
condition,  with  scarcely  any  shoes  to  his  feet.  While  his  chest  was  being  attended 
to  he  gave  the  doctor  a  brief  history  of  himself.  He  said  he  had  graduated  as  a 
B.A.  at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and  as  a  proof  of  his  classical  education  he 
gave  quotations  from  Virgil  and  Homer,  and  challenged  the  doctor  to  a  competition 
in  mathematics.  He  said  his  grandfather  was  once  a  governor-general  of  the  forces 
in  India,  and  he  himself  had  held  a  commission  in  the  army.  His  mother  was  a 
handsome  and,  he  regretted  to  say,  gay  woman,  and,  following  the  example  of  his 
parent,  her  son  had  led  a  life  of  pleasure,  and  now,  instead  of  being,  as  he  once 
was,  m  receipt  of  a  yearly  income  of  £1,500,  he  was  in  the  pitiable  plight  of  being 
without  home,  money,  or  friends.  A  fast  young  man  : — A  fast  young  man !  He 
is  a  lovely  picture  to  some  eyes.  He  leads  the  fashion.  If  anything  is  stirring  in 
the  neighbourhood  where  mirth  and  laughter,  songs  and  revelling  can  be  found,  he 
is  conspicQCQS  amongst  those  who  attend.    If  anything  is  carried  on  that  needs  a 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  XT, 

greater  stock  of  impadence  than  is  common  with  men  he  can  always  command  it. 
He  is  a  fast  young  man.  He  is  fast  in  acquiring  habits  that  old  debauchees  tak* 
years  in  arriving  at.  He  is  fast  in  learning  slang  phrases  with  which  his  speech  ia 
spiced.  He  is  fast  in  breaking  loose  from  home  restraints  at  an  age  when  every 
sensible  young  man  values  a  father's  counsels  and  a  mother's  prayers.  He  is  fast 
in  leading  others,  not  so  far  advanced  as  himself,  into  mischief,  debauchery,  and 
vice.  He  is  fast  in  polluting  virtuous  hearts,  and  in  bringing  desolation  into  once 
happy  homes.  But  there  are  other  things  in  which  he  is  fast.  He  is  fast  in  sowing 
the  seeds  of  disease  in  his  constitution,  and  inducing  premature  old  age. 
He  is  fast  in  driving  out  the  forms  of  virtue  from  his  soul,  and  in  filling  up 
their  places  with  the  filthiest  forms  of  sin.  He  is  fast  in  getting  ready  for  the 
condemnation  of  God,  and  is  fast  in  going  to  perdition !  (W.  O.  Pascoe.) 
When  he  had  spent  all  there  arose  a  mighty  famine. — The  fruits  of  sin  : — What 
are  the  fruits  of  sin  ?  We  see  in  this  parable,  and  we  know  from  our  experience  of 
human  life,  what  the  sinner  himself  thinks  of  it.  He  looks  upon  it  as  au  assertion 
of  liberty.  Now,  we  are  called  upon  in  these  parables  to  contemplate  our  Lord's 
view  of  the  same  subject.  He  shows  us  in  all  three  of  them  that  sin  has  a  kind  of 
liberty  which  does  not  belong  to  the  life  of  holiness ;  but  He  shows  us  also  that 
this  so-called  liberty  is  no  true  liberty,  and  He  reminds  us  that  it  leads  to  misery, 
destitution,  and  the  most  degrading  bondage.  I.  The  wastefulness  of  sin.  Wa 
can  easily  see  bow  extravagance,  heedlessness,  and  idleness  waste  men's  temporal 
possessions.  We  cannot  so  easily  discern  the  wasting  of  our  spiritual  possessions. 
Take  first  the  effects  of  sin  in  the  bodies  of  men.  This  frame  of  ours  is  a  thing 
far  more  sensitive  and  delicate  than  most  of  us  imagine,  and  sin  often  leaves  traces 
upon  it  which  can  never  be  effaced.  The  sins  of  the  flesh  do  visibly  waste  a  portion 
of  that  substance  which  God  divides  to  man.  But  there  are  ravages  committed  by 
sin  which,  however  naked  and  open  they  may  be  to  the  eye  of  Him  with  whom  w«( 
have  to  do,  are  not  easily  discerned  by  the  eye  of  man,  especially  by  the  eye  which 
is  itself  clouded  and  discoloured  by  sin.  Sin,  in  all  its  forms,  is  a  waster.  In  its 
more  decent  and  respectable  forms  it  may  produce  less  apparent  desolation,  and 
yet  the  work  of  destruction  may  be  as  surely  carried  on.  There  are  many  things 
lost  from  a  man's  soul  of  which  he  has  little  knowledge  until  some  startling  revela/- 
tion  is  made  unexpectedly,  or  the  light  of  God's  truth  and  Spirit  shines  in  ani 
illumines  the  inner  darkness.  The  corrupting  and  blighting  of  the  affections,  the 
hardening  of  the  heart,  the  destraction  of  that  tenderness  of  conscience  which  is 
one  of  man's  strongest  safeguards,  the  weakening  of  the  will,  so  that  it  loses  its 
power  of  resistance  to  evil,  the  lost  appreciation  and  enjoyment  of  the  innocent 
pleasures  of  life,  the  utter  inability  to  find  any  satisfaction  in  higher  and  better 
things — this  is  a  fearful  enumeration,  and  yet  it  is  but  a  portion  of  the  loss  which 
is  sustained  through  the  ravages  of  sin.  No  tongue  or  pen  can  describe  it,  for  no 
heart  of  man  can  know  it.  II.  The  sbbvitdds  of  sin.  One  should  suppose  that 
the  sense  of  misery,  arising  from  the  destitution  of  sin,  would  drive  the  suffering 
sinner  to  the  place  of  penitence  and  to  the  throne  of  grace.  And  so  it  sometimes 
does.  But  frequently  the  reverse  happens.  Such  is  often  the  awful  deceitfulness 
of  sin.  Nay,  such  is  oftentimes  the  awful  deceitfulness  of  sin,  that  those  who  have 
reaped  its  bitter  fruits  have  turned  from  one  evil  to  another,  in  the  hope  of  effacing 
the  results  or  the  remembrance  of  previous  transgression ;  or  else,  and  perhaps  tbni 
is  commoner,  they  have  descended  to  deeper  depths  of  sin,  have  gone  the  whole  way 
that  it  was  possible  for  them  to  go,  have  drunk  to  the  very  dregs  the  cup  of  misery 
and  death,  in  the  mad  hope  that  liJfe  and  happiness  might  after  all  be  found  within 
it.  And  thus  have  men  sunk  down  into  that  awful  condition  in  which,  instead  of 
using  their  passions  as  instruments  for  self-gratification,  they  have  been  governed 
and  controlled  by  them.  For  a  time  they  were  their  servants,  but  now  they  have 
become  their  masters.  It  is  a  bondage  which  is  only  too  common,  although  some- 
times its  chains  are  unseen.  In  some  cases,  it  is  plain  and  clear  and  undeniable ; 
in  others  it  is  disguised  and  often  invisible.  Take  the  case  of  the  man  vrho  is 
addicted  to  excessive  drinking.  I  have  seen  men  who  were  amiable,  accomplished, 
fascinating,  fall  under  the  power  of  this  demon.  I  have  seen  men,  the  superior  of 
their  fellows  in  intellect  and  energy,  who  seemed  to  be  made  to  rule  over  men, 
become  themselves  the  slaves  of  intemperance.  And  slavery  and  bondage  are  tha 
right  expressions  to  apply  to  their  condition.  I  have  seen  the  most  frantic  efforts 
made  to  escape  from  this  tyranny.  The  shame,  the  misery,  the  ruin  which  flowed 
from  it  had  been  pressed  on  the  mind  of  its  victim  by  a  friend.  "  Be  a  man,"  ha 
wud  to  the  poor  oronching  slave.     *'  Be  a  man.     Stand  up.     Assert  joor  freedoaii« 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  145 

as  a  child  of  God.  Seek  His  grace,  which  will  not  be  withheld  from  you,  and  by 
the  power  of  that  grace  you  will  arise  and  beat  down  this  enemy  under  your  feet." 
And  courage  returned  to  the  trembling  heart ;  and  the  man  who  had  lain  prostrate 
under  the  throne  of  this  idol  summoned  up  new  strength,  collected  his  energies, 
and  resolved  to  fight  the  battle  over  again,  and  win  it  by  the  help  of  God.  And 
sometimes  it  has  been  done.  And  sometimes,  alas !  it  has  not  bee>  done.  III. 
The  deqbaj>ation  of  sin.  It  was  enough,  one  might  think,  that  the  free  son 
should  become  a  bond  slave.  No  I  He  must  be  taught  all  that  was  involved  in 
slavery.  He  was  sent  into  the  fields  to  feed  swine,  unclean  beasts,  which  it  was  a 
degradation  for  a  son  of  Abraham  to  have  anything  to  do  with  ;  and  there  he  was 
"fain  to  fill  his  belly  with  the  basks  which  the  swine  did  eat"  ;  for  no  man  gave 
him  better  food.  It  is  the  lowest  depth  reached  at  last.  It  is  a  picture  of  men 
"  serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures  " ;  and,  awful  as  it  is,  it  does  not  exceed  the 
truth.  Many  of  us  play  with  sin,  trifle  with  it,  not  knowing  what  it  is.  Like  the 
playful  tiger's  cub,  it  has  not  gained  all  its  fearful  strength,  and  manifests  but  little 
of  all  its  latent  savage  character.  If  we  could  follow  it  in  its  fearful  descent,  and 
Bee  how  it  sinks  deeper  and  deeper  in  the  mire  of  shame  and  infamy,  we  should 
realize  more  clearly  what  is  meant  by  the  degradation  of  sin.  "  What  fruit  had  ye 
in  those  things  of  which  ye  are  now  ashamed?  "  asks  St.  Paul,  well  knowing  what 
the  answer  must  be.  Sin  is  the  parent  of  shame.  {W.  R.  Clark,  M.A.)  The 
tinning  soul  a  sufferer: — The  soul  was  made  for  God,  and  for  delight  in  God.  Sin 
prevents  this  end,  and  therefore  there  must  be  suffering  and  loss.  I.  It  must  be  a 
euFFEBEB.  It  caries  within  a  torment  which  the  poet  has  pictured  under  the  figure 
of  twin  serpents.  Sin  may  be  awhile  alone,  but  it  is  sure  to  bring  forth  suffering. 
1.  Because  God  is  what  He  is.  He  cannot  deny  Himself.  \Yarmth  excludes  its 
opposite,  cold  ;  light  its  opposite,  darkness ;  and  Hfe,  death.  God,  beiug  holy, 
must  be  an  active  opponent  to  sin.  2.  Because  man  is  what  he  is.  Conscience 
only  applauds  right-doing,  but  bites  back  in  remorse  for  sin  committed.  A 
chaplain  was  preaching  in  India,  when  a  deadly  cobra  crawled  into  the  aisle.  It 
was  despatched  without  interrupting  the  service.  Passing  out  after  meeting,  a 
native  struck  his  foot  against  the  head  of  the  dead  reptile.  Instantly  he  cried 
aloud  in  agony,  for  an  envenomed  fang  had  pierced  his  flesh.  Bemedies  were 
unavailing,  and  he  soon  died.  So  the  memory  of  sin  is  like  a  poisoned  fang  in  the 
breast.  3.  Because  of  the  necessity  of  law.  Stanley  never  could  have  led  his  band 
of  barbarians  across  the  dark  continent  had  he  not  subjected  them  all  to  stern, 
rigid  law.  One  of  them  murdered  his  fellow.  It  was  right  that  he  should  receive 
two  hundred  lashes,  and  be  chained  till  delivered  into  the  hands  of  proper 
authorities.  God's  righteous  law  has  its  penalties.  Penalty  is  suffering.  4. 
Experience  teaches  that  a  sinning  soul  is  a  sufferer.  It  is  always  so  in  the  long 
run.  Byron.  H.  The  kind  of  suffeeinq.  1.  It  is  want.  Sin  must  starve 
the  soul,  as  the  plant  pines  for  sunshine  and  cannot  live  on  candle-light.  2, 
r'riendlessness.  3.  Slavery.  The  dominion  of  habit  was  illustrated  in  Bobert 
Burns,  who  said  that  he  would  go  for  a  jug  of  whisky,  though  it  were  guarded  by 
one  who  would  surely  shoot  him  in  the  act — "  for,"  said  he,  "  I  could  not  help  it." 
4.  Degradation  and  utter  loneliness.  In  the  Sistine  Chapel  is  a  picture  by  Angelo, 
which  paints  a  victim  in  the  grasp  of  a  fiend.  Yet  the  fangs  in  his  flesh  are  not  so 
tormenting  as  is  the  mental  anguish  which  the  loss  of  heaven  occasions.  This 
absorbs  his  whole  thought.  (W.  Hoyt,  D.D.)  A  mighty  famine: — Extravagance 
soon  "  brings  the  noble  to  ninepence,"  and  in  the  far  country  it  is  not  far  that  nine- 
pence  will  go.  But  there  may  be  so  mighty  a  famine  and  so  great,  that  even  the 
noble  will  not  buy  the  loaf  of  bread.  One  of  the  most  pitiful  incidents  in  the 
history  of  British  genius  is  the  death  of  Ghatterton.  We  by  no  means  quote  it  as 
a  case  of  riotous  living;  but  it  will  illustrate  the  "want"  which  comes  over  the 
spirit  when  other  resources  fail,  and  the  Father's  house  is  far  away.  When  a  mere 
boy  of  seventeen  he  had  passed  off,  in  the  name  of  an  ancient  English  monk,  poems 
of  his  own,  with  the  archaic  style  so  admirably  simulated,  and  the  historical 
allusions  so  adroitly  managed,  that  for  a  time  many  clever  men  were  taken  La,  and 
enrmised  no  forgery.  Elated  by  the  success  of  this  imposture,  and  conscious  of  no 
common  powers,  from  Bristol  he  came  up  to  London.  There  he  promised  himself 
a  career  of  fame  and  fortune ;  and  as  he  visited  the  theatres,  and  watched  the 
grand  equipages  floating  past,  he  saw  in  no  distant  vision  the  day  when  his  verses 
should  be  in  the  mouths  of  men,  and  when  the  doors  of  the  lordliest  saloons  woold 
open  to  the  poet.  But  the  fame  was  slow  in  coming,  and  meanwhile  the  money 
failed.  Hampered  by  no  restraints  of  conscience,  he  made  up  his  mind  to  pasa 
VOL.  m.  10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xt. 

himself  off  for  a  surgeon,  and  get  appointed  to  a  ship ;  bat  before  he  could  carry 
his  unprincipled  scheme  into  execution,  he  found  himself  quite  penniless.  "  Heavea 
Bend  you  the  comforts  of  Christianity,"  he  wrote  to  a  correspondent ;  "  I  request 
them  not,  for  I  am  no  Christian."  Bitterly  boasting  his  disdain  of  Christianity, 
and  his  independence  of  it,  he  fell  back  on  his  own  resources,  and  a  fortnight  after, 
a  jury  brought  in  a  verdict  otfelo  de  se  on  a  strange  self-willed  youth  found  dead  ia 
his  little  room  in  Brook  Street,  Holbom.  He  cared  not  for  "  the  comforts  of  Chria- 
tianity,"  and  so  when  the  mighty  famine  arose — when  editors  no  longer  cared  for 
his  effusions,  and  when  the  frauds  and  figments  of  years  began  to  collapse — with 
hunger  in  the  cupboard,  and  with  heartless  Muses  staring  at  him  so  hard  and  stony 
— the  trials  which  in  a  Christian  bring  out  the  mettle  and  make  the  man,  in  tha 
case  of  poor  Chatterton  left  no  resource  save  arsenic  and  impotent  anathemas  oq 
human  kind.  Reverting  to  the  riotous  living :  not  only  does  it  exhaust  the  worldly 
substance,  but  by  exhausting  health  and  spirits,  it  destroys  the  power  of  enjoy- 
ment. Poor  as  are  the  joys  of  sense,  it  is  a  stupid  policy  which  would  distil  into  a 
single  cup  every  pleasure,  and  in  one  frantic  moment  drain  it  dry.  Where  life  and 
reason  have  survived  the  wild  experiment,  the  zest  of  existence  is  gone,  and  waking 
up  to  a  flat  and  colourless  world,  fastidious  and  fretful,  blasted  and  blase,  in  a 
frequent  loathing  of  life  and  a  general  contempt  of  mankind,  the  voluptuary  carries 
to  the  grave  the  sins  of  his  youth.  The  Most  High  has  so  constituted  the  mind  of 
man  that  the  indulgence  of  the  malevolent  affections  itself  is  misery  ;  and  of  all 
the  paths  which  at  life's  outset  invite  the  inexperienced  traveller,  the  surest  to 
pierce  through  with  many  sorrows  is  the  path  of  sensual  indulgence.  It  is  a  vain 
attempt — 

*♦  With  things  of  earthly  sort,  with  aught  but  God, 
With  aught  but  moral  excellence,  and  truth,  and  love. 
To  fill  and  satisfy  the  immortal  soul." 

But  yon  are  not  mocked  by  your  Maker.  Those  great  and  glorions  objects  exist 
for  which  He  has  given  you  an  affinity,  and  towards  which,  in  their  most  exalted 
intervals,  the  highest  powers  in  your  nature  aspire.  There  is  truth,  there  is  good- 
ness, there  is  God.  There  is  the  life  of  Jesus  recorded  in  the  Book  ;  there  is  the 
spirit  of  God  now  working  in  the  world.  Ponder  that  life  till,  associated  with  a 
living  Redeemer,  it  shines  around  your  path  a  purifying  protecting  presence.  And 
pray  for  that  spirit,  till  under  His  kindly  teaching  you  "taste  and  see  that  the  Lord 
is  good  " — till  expanded  affections  find  an  infinite  object — till  He  who  has  thus 
strengthened  your  heart  is  become  your  portion  for  ever.  {James  Hamilton,  DJD.) 
The  degradation : — Snow  quickly  melts  when  the  thaw  comes  ;  and  "  a  fool  and  his 
money  are  soon  parted."  I  have  heard  of  people  who  had  suddenly  succeeded  to  a 
legacy  which  they  had  not  sense  to  keep  ;  and  who,  indeed,  were  not  sober  till  all 
their  money  was  exhausted.  Such  a  rapid  race  did  this  young  rake  of  the  parable 
run.  I.  The  famine.  "  Ills,"  the  proverb  says,  "never  come  singly."  That  he 
had  reached  the  bottom  of  his  purse  was  bad  enough  I  but,  to  make  matters  worse, 
at  the  same  time  "  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  the  land."  In  ancient  days  a 
failure  of  the  harvest  spread  dearth  and  death  all  around,  even  as,  a  few  years  ago, 
the  famine  of  Orissa,  where  the  eame  Oriental  mode  of  life  continues,  left  milliona 
of  corpses  on  the  arid  plains  of  India.  Thanks  to  our  commercial  connection  with 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  the  abolition  of  our  Com  Laws,  it  is  not  likely  that  such 
a  lack  of  "  the  staff  of  life  "  will  ever  be  felt  within  our  borders  again,  as  our  fore- 
fathers have  experienced  in  their  day.  The  effect  produced  upon  our  young 
master's  circumstances  was  immediate — he  began  to  be  in  want.  What  a  transi- 
tion from  fulness  to  emptiness  —from  wasteful  extravagance  to  absolute  inability  to 
obtain  the  necessaries  of  life  I  Now  he  would  begin  to  wish  that  he  had  some  of 
the  golden  guineas  back  again  which  he  had  so  recklessly  thrown  away,  and  that 
he  had  husbanded  the  large  resources  which  had  been  so  unsparingly  placed 
at  his  command.  The  prodigal  hungered;  but  he  did  not  at  this  stage  think 
of  returning  to  his  father.  Some  transgressors  take  less  of  chastisement  and 
grief  to  melt  them  down,  and  others  more.  He  seems  to  have  been  specially 
hardened.  He  was  too  proud  to  go  back  yet.  So  "he  went  and  joined 
himself  to  a  citizen  of  that  country."  II.  This  is  the  second  point  to  which 
we  call  attention  in  this  chapter:  Thb  Fee.  A  few  days  ago,  in  this  city 
of  my  habitation,  a  larger  number  than  asaal  of  agricultural  people  wera 
4o  be  seen  in  our  streets,  for  it  was  the  hiring  market  for  the  next  half-year. 


«HAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  147 

Hnndreds  who  came  into  Glasgow  in  the  morning,  not  knowing  who  their  master 
was  to  be,  or  where  their  residence  might  be  situated  throughout  the  summer, 
daring  the  course  of  the  day  oame  to  know  these  important  facts — important, 
because  their  destiny  for  good  or  evil  might  be  largely  influenced  by  the  event.  Poor 
things !  as  I  saw  many  of  them  the  worse  for  liquor,  I  thought  they  did  not  seem 
to  be  in  a  very  fit  state  for  forming  a  cool  judgment,  or  for  departing  to  their  new 
homes.  Doubtless  some  of  them  met  with  good  masters,  and  some  of  them  with 
bad  ones.  Some  of  them  will  rejoice  in  the  decisions  of  the  day,  and  bless  their 
good  fortune ;  whilst  others  will  bitterly  regret  the  same,  aud  call  their  lot  mis- 
fortune. "  Which  things  are  an  allegory."  Christ  is  the  good  master ;  and  Satan 
is  the  bad  master.  Christ  may  be  called  the  Illustrious  Stranger,  who  has  coma 
into  our  world  to  rectify  its  wrongs;  while  Satan  is  "  the  citizen  of  that  country," 
who  has  been  in  it  from  the  first  and  has  done  it  much  evil.  III.  The  rEEDiNO. 
Feeding  I  that's  good  news.  He  will  be  reconciled  to  his  servitude,  if  only  hia 
wants  may  be  supplied.  But,  alas  1  the  feeding  is  not  of  himself  but  of  others — 
and  these  others  he  would  rather  not  have  fed — "  He  sent  him  into  his  fields  to 
feed  swine."  This  is  another  dexterons  touch  of  the  painter.  No  occupation  could 
possibly  have  been  more  degrading  than  this  in  the  eyes  of  Jews,  since  they 
regarded  swine  as  ceremonially  unclean.  It  is  written  in  Lev.  xi.  7,  "And  the 
swine,  though  he  divide  the  hoof,  and  be  cloven-footed,  yet  he  cheweth  not  the 
«ud;  he  is  unclean  unto  yon."  Nor  was  this  feeling  of  aversion  towards  these 
animals  peculiar  to  the  Jews ;  for  Herodotus  teUs  us  that  in  Egypt  swineherds 
-were  not  permitted  to  mingle  with  civil  society,  nor  to  appear  in  the  worship  of  the 
gods,  nor  would  the  very  dregs  of  the  people  have  any  matrimonial  connection  with 
them.  Truly  now  our  young  master  would  be  stripped  of  his  pride.  A  poor,  ragged, 
outcast,  hungry  swineherd  1  Satan's  nobility  sit  on  bad  emiuences.  His  peers  are 
known  by  their  deeper  degradation.  IV.  The  fasting.  "  He  would  fain  have 
filled  his  belly  with  the  husks  the  swine  did  eat;  and  no  man  gave  unto  him," 
The  word  in  the  original  {keratia)  does  not  mean,  properly  speaking,  what  we 
understand  by  husks,  which  are  the  outer  integuments  of  fruit,  but  designates  a 
leguminous  fruit  called  in  modem  language  the  charub  tree,  which  still  grows  in 
the  South  of  Europe,  the  islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  North  of  Aiiica.  It 
is  sometimes  called  "John's  Bread,"  from  the  tradition  that  it  was  the  food  used  by 
John  the  Baptist  during  his  wilderness  life.  On  the  beans  of  this  tree  the  horses 
of  the  British  cavalry  were  fed  during  the  Peninsular  war.  It  would  appear  that 
the  famine  which  is  referred  to  in  the  parable  raged  so  severely  that  both  man  and 
beast  were  put  upon  short  and  spare  allowance.  In  the  fields,  and  when  watching 
fais  unclean  flock,  the  poor  outcast  would  willingly  have  supplemented  his  own 
scanty  meal  by  eating  the  raw,  coarse  fruits  which  the  swine  consumed ;  but  "  no 
man  gave  unto  him."  He  was  not  allowed  to  appropriate  their  portion.  {F. 
Ferguson,  D.D.)  Touch  iron  : — A  minister  from  a  distance  was  preaching  one 
Sabbath,  in  the  parish  church  of  St.  Monan's,  in  the  last  century,  who  did  not 
know  the  strange  superstitions  of  a  fishing  village.  He  was  discoursing  with 
tolerable  fluency  on  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  When  he  came  to  the  words, 
♦'  and  he  sent  him  into  the  fields  to  feed  swine,"  he  thought  that  he  heard  a  sudden 
and  simultaneous  murmur  over  his  congregation,  accompanied  by  an  equally 
sudden  and  simultaneous  movement.  The  explanation  was  that  the  sow  is  an 
anlucky  animal  among  the  fishermen,  as  it  was  unclean  among  Jews;  and  the 
murmur,  which  the  astonished  preacher  heard  proceeding  from  every  lip,  was 
"  Touch  iron  " — for  iron  they  regard  as  a  charm  against  the  harmful  word ;  whUe 
the  movement  he  observed  was  the  effort  of  each  individual  to  put  his  finger  on  the 
nearest  nail  in  the  wood-work  of  the  old  church — a  murmur  and  a  movement  which, 
were  repeated  much  to  his  consternation,  as  in  the  sequel  of  his  exposition  he,  all 
onconscious  of  his  mistake,  used  the  dreaded  word.  A  good  story,  doubtless,  to  be 
told  at  a  tea-table,  or  at  a  bright  fire  on  a  winter  evening — and  ministers,  it  is  to  be 
feared,  by  their  frailties  and  mistakes,  afford  amusement  now  and  than  to  curious 
•nd  critical  neighbourhoods.  But  whether  the  tale  be  an  exaggeration  or  not,  I 
wish  to  turn  the  table  upon  the  story-tellers,  and  consecrate  it  to  the  service  of 
Christ.  Yes ;  ye  who  have  sunk  so  low  in  the  service  of  Satan,  that  he  has  sent 
you  into  the  fields  to  feed  swine — "  Touch  iron  " ;  extend  the  finger  of  faith  to  the 
blessed  nails  of  the  cross,  and,  more  potent  than  fabled  talismanio  charm,  they  will 
raise  you  to  the  dignity  of  the  sons  of  God.  Do  you  complain  that  your  nature  is 
bad — that  as  soon  a  lion  might  be  expected  to  become  •  lamb,  or  a  swine — "  Toach 
iron  " ;  yea,  "  reach  hither  your  hands  and  thrust  them  into  his  side,"  and  Qod'a 


1^  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xt. 

Spirit  will  give  you  clean  hearts  and  right  spirits.  (Ibid.)  Dearth;  or  pain  tht 
end  of  sinful  pleasure : — The  end  of  sinful  pleasure  is  pain,  the  wealth  of  world- 
lings ends  in  fearful  want.  As  the  image  which  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  in  his  dreau 
had  an  head  of  gold,  but  feet  of  clay ;  so  the  glorious  show  of  this  miserable  lif-^ 
of  sinful  men  concludes  with  shame.  The  plenty  which  Egypt  had  in  seven 
years  was  eaten  up  by  the  seven  years  of  famine  following  it.  The  pleasant  river 
of  Jordan  is  at  length  swallowed  up  by  the  salt  sea,  or  loach  of  Sodom.  (Bishop 
Cowper.)  Famine  makers  : — Such  men  help  to  bring  about  famines,  men  who  eat 
all  and  produce  nothing,  men  who  are  consumers  and  non-producers.  These  are 
the  men  that  make  famines.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Sin  costly  : — The  service  of  sin 
is  a  costly  service;  all  the  portion  of  goods  thou  hast  is  not  suflGicient  for  it. 
{Bishop  Cowper.)  Religion  no  waste  : — Wilt  thou  abide  with  the  Lord,  and  serve 
Him  ?  He  shall  teach  thee  to  use  His  gifts  to  His  glory  and  thy  good ;  for  the 
service  of  the  Lord  is  easy,  honourable,  profitable,  nothing  is  wasted,  nothing  is 
lost,  that  thou  ependest  in  it.  {Ibid.)  The  folly  of  extravagance : — To  how  much 
the  portion  of  goods  amounted  which  the  younger  son  took  with  him  we  are  not 
told ;  nor  are  we  told  how  long  it  lasted.  But  once  it  is  in  the  hands  of  a  spend- 
thrift, wonderful  is  the  speed  with  which  money  disappears.  As  paragons  of 
senseless  profusion,  Dante  has  handed  down  the  names  of  Stricca  and  his  com- 
panions, who  sold  their  estates  and  bought  a  princely  mansion  where  they  might 
tpend  their  days  in  revelry.  Their  horses'  shoes  were  silver,  and,  if  one  came  off, 
the  servants  were  forbidden  to  pick  it  up  ;  and,  with  like  disdain  of  mean  economy 
throughout,  the  united  fortunes  lasted  only  twenty  months,  and  they  finished  off  in 
the  utmost  misery.  The  Sienese  spendthrifts  have  been  often  distanced  in  our 
living  day ;  and  the  low  taverns  along  the  Thames,  where  our  sailors  waste  their 
hard-won  earnings— the  hotels  of  Melbourne  and  San  Francisco,  where  successful 
diggers  fool  away  in  a  flash  of  riot  the  gold  for  which  they  have  toiled  so  long,  after 
a  coarse  and  vulgar  fashion  could  parallel  the  wildest  waste  of  Heliogabalus  or 
Lucullus.  More  remarkable  than  the  speed  with  which  the  money  disappears  is 
the  small  satisfaction  which  it  yields.  If,  like  George  Heriot  with  the  king's 
acknowledgment,  you  had  put  the  bank-notes  on  the  hearth,  and  sent  them 
fiaming  up  the  chimney,  they  would  have  left  you  far  richer  than  those  you  have 
ppent  on  reckless  companions  and  riotous  living.  If,  like  Cleopatra,  you  had  dis- 
solved a  pearl — if  you  had  put  together  the  income  of  years — all  that  has  been 
spent  on  self-indulgence — perhaps  in  enticing  others  into  sin — could  you  have  put 
it  all  together,  and,  like  the  queenly  jewel,  dissipated  it  in  dust  and  air,  we  might 
have  been  sorry  for  the  idle  sacrifice,  but  the  wasted  money  would  not  have  wasted 
you.  Cleopatra  had  another  pearl,  the  gift  of  peerless  beauty.  That  gift  was 
perverted  and  it  hatched  a  serpent ;  it  came  back  into  her  bosom — the  asp  which 
stung  her.  So  with  the  possessions  of  the  prodigal.  Talents  laid  up  in  a  napkin, 
pearls  melted  in  vinegar,  will  benefit  no  one ;  but  rank,  fortune,  health,  high  spirits, 
laid  out  in  the  service  of  sin,  are  scorpion-eggs,  and  fostered  and  fully  grown,  the 
forthcoming  furies  will  seize  on  the  con.-cience,  and  with  stings  of  fire  will  torment 
it  evermore.  {James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Monexj  all  gone  : — It  takes  a  great  deal 
longer  to  make  money  than  to  spend  it.  Although  it  is  only  a  little  while  since 
this  young  man  got  one-third  of  his  father's  property,  it  is  all  gone — every  cent  of 
it.  So  you  have  known  men  toiling  for  twenty,  thirty,  forty  years  in  commercial  or 
mechanical  life,  have  acquired  large  property,  to  lie  down  and  die,  leaving  a  great 
estate  ;  and  in  five  years  the  boys  have  got  all  through  ^vith  it.  So  this  young  man 
of  the  text  and  his  money  was  soon  parted.  I  do  not  know  just  how  it  went,  but 
there,  in  the  first  place,  were  his  travelling  expenses.  A  man  who  had  been  brought 
up  as  luxuriantly  as  he  evidently  was,  from  the  surroundings  of  that  home,  could 
not  lodge  just  anywhere,  nor  be  contented  with  plain  fare.  He  had  been  used  to 
see  things  on  a  large  scale,  and  I  do  not  suppose  he  closely  calculated  the  expense. 
I  do  not  suppose  he  always  stopped  to  take  change.  I  suppose  that  sometimes  he 
bought  things  without  any  regard  to  what  they  cost.  Then,  besides  that,  there 
came  in  the  bill  for  his  personal  apparel,  and  a  young  man  who  had  a  third  of 
his  father's  property  in  his  pocket  could  not  afford  to  go  shabbily  dressed,  and  so  he 
must  have  clothes  of  the  best  pattern  and  of  the  finest  material.  Besides  that,  the 
young  man  of  the  text  had  to  meet  the  bill  for  social  entertainment.  He  must 
treat,  and  it  must  be  with  the  costliest  wines  and  the  rarest  viands.  Besides  that, 
the  sharpers  found  out  that  this  young  man  had  plenty  of  money,  and  they  volun- 
teer their  services.  They  will  show  him  the  sights.  They  can  tell  him  things  h« 
never  imagined  away  off  on  that  father's  homestead.    Well,  they  undertake  to  show 


CWAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  149 

thiB  man  the  sights,  and  after  a  while  he  wakes  up  one  day  and  he  ^ays,  "  I  think 
I  will  count  my  money."  And  he  counted  his  money.  It  was  half  gone  ;  but  as 
his  habits  were  thoroughly  fastened  upon  him  he  could  not  stop.  After  awhile  he 
counted  his  money  again,  and  it  was  three-fourths  gone ;  but  he  was  on  the  down 
grade,  going  swifter  and  swifter  and  swifter,  until,  when  he  comes  to  look  for  his 
money,  it  is  all  gone.  Now,  these  associates,  who  stuck  to  him  as  long  as  he  had 
plenty  of  money,  are  gone.  Morning-glories  bloom  when  the  sun  is  coming  up,  not 
when  the  sun  is  going  down.  There  is  no  money  with  which  to  meet  his  expenses. 
Besides  that,  the  crops  have  failed,  and  there  is  famine  in  the  land,  and  at  a  time 
when  affluent  men  are  straitened  about  getting  their  daily  bread,  what  is  to  become 
of  this  poor  fellow,  with  an  empty  pocket  and  a  discouraged  heart  ?  *'  Oh  1  "  you 
Bay,  "let  him  work."  He  cannot  work.  His  hands,  soft  and  tender,  would  be 
dreadfully  blistered  with  toil.  Perhaps  he  comes  then  to  some  place  where  he  can 
get  occupation,  he  thinks,  appropriate  for  an  educated  young  man.  He  comes  to  a 
commercial  establishment  and  asks  for  work.  "  No,"  says  the  head  man  of  the 
business  firm,  "  we  can't  have  you.  Why,  you  are  nothing  but  a  tramp  of  the 
street."  Perhaps  he  comes  to  the  oflBce  of  some  official  of  the  government,  and 
Beeks  employment  by  which  he  can  support  himself.  "  No,"  says  that  officer,  "  a 
man  clad  as  you  are  cannot  find  any  employment  in  my  office."  What  is  he  to  do  ? 
In  a  strange  land.  Money  all  gone.  No  friends.  Bagged.  Wretched.  Undone. 
My  text  with  one  stroke  gives  the  awful  full-length  photograph  :  "  He  began  to  be 
in  want."  Now,  what  does  all  that  mean  ?  It  means  you  and  me.  Our  race  had 
a  good  starting ;  but  we  ail  went  away  from  God,  our  home,  and  we  have  found  sin 
to  be  an  expensive  luxury.  It  despoiled  us.  It  hungered  us.  It  robbed  us.  It 
made  us  hopeless  and  godless.  We  had  a  fine  spiritual  fortune  to  start  with,  and 
we  spent  it,  and  we  "  began  to  be  in  want."  I  care  not  how  fine  our  worldly  estate 
may  be,  or  how  much  bank  stock  we  may  possess,  or  how  elegant  our  social  position. 
Bin  has  pauperized  the  whole  race,  and  until  we  go  back  to  God,  our  home,  we  are  in 
an  awful  state  of  beggary  and  want.  There  is  no  exception  to  it.  {Dr.  Talmage.) 
The  beginning  of  starvation: — There  is  something  very  ominous  in  that  expression, 
"  He  began  to  be  in  want."  It  was  only  a  beginning  of  want,  but  it  was  the  pres- 
Eage  of  starvation,  and  brought  along  with  it  the  forecast  of  an  agonizing  death. 
Let  me  ask  you  to  put  side  by  side  this  expression  and  another,  in  which  the  same 
word  occurs  just  at  the  end  of  the  parable — "  They  began  to  be  merry."  Surely 
both  the  parallelism  and  the  contrast  are  alike  instructive.  Want  begins  when  we 
wander  into  the  far  country,  and  joy  begins  when  we  find  ourselves  restored  to  the 
Father's  bouse;  but  the  want  is  only  the  beginning  of  want,  and  the  joy  is  only 
the  beginning  of  joy.  The  want  must  go  on,  becoming  more  and  more  cruel  and 
tormenting  as  the  mighty  famine  increases,  while  the  "  merriment,"  the  spiritual 
mirth  of  that  "  happy  day  "  which  fixes  our  choice  upon  our  Saviour  and  our  God, 
develops  into  the  quiet  and  calm  but  deeper  and  fuller  happiness  of  a  life  in  which 
the  soul  feeds  on  Christ,  rejoices  in  the  Lord,  and  joys  in  the  God  of  his  salvation. 
Indeed,  do  not  these  contrasted  sentences  suggest  to  our  minds  the  thought  that 
heaven  and  hell  have  their  commencements  here  on  earth,  to  whatever  each  may 
develop  hereafter  ?  For  heaven  is  that  condition  of  existence  that  is  induced  by 
the  satisfying  of  the  soul  in  God.  As  yet  our  heaven  is  incomplete,  for  the  satis- 
faction is  not  yet  full.  Only  when  we  wake  up  in  God's  likeness  shall  we  be  satis- 
fied fully ;  but  even  here  we  are  possessed  of  the  secret  of  satisfaction,  and  when 
the  sense  of  want  arises  we  know  where  to  turn  to  find  what  our  spirits  need.  And 
while  our  joy  in  this  satisfaction  comes  very  far  short  now  of  what  it  will  be,  yet  is 
it  in  kind,  though  not  in  degree,  identical  with  the  very  joy  of  heaven.  We  have 
begun  to  be  merry.  The  chief  cause  of  the  joy  is  the  same,  whether  it  be  felt  in 
heaven  or  on  earth  ;  its  source  is  the  same,  and  its  character  is  the  same.  It  is 
the  very  joy  of  God  in  the  heart  of  man.  And  hell  has  its  commencement  here  on 
•arth  in  the  restlessness  and  inanity  of  the  godless  life,  and  in  the  weariness  and 
dissatisfaction  of  the  godless  heart.  As  fleeting  pleasures  and  visionary  acquisitions 
pass  away,  as  one  broken  cistern  after  another  falls  to  pieces,  as  sorrow  casts  its 
shadow  on  the  home,  as  failure  embitters  our  experience  or  success  disappoints  us, 
the  want  increases  ;  and  the  pain  and  sorrow  of  that  want  are  the  same  in  kind, 
though  not  in  degree,  as  that  which  falls  to  the  lot  of  the  lost  under  the  sentence 
of  doom  ;  for  hell  is  a  want  that  cannot  be  satisfied,  and  a  loss  that  cannot  be 
repaired.  {W.  M.  Hay  Aitkin,  M.A.)  In  want: — ^I  have  seen,  sitting  shoeless 
and  shirtless  on  a  cab,  "joining  himself  to  "  the  driver,  if  haply  he  might  get  any> 
thing  out  of  him,  a  young  man  who  had  inherited  a  large  fortune,  who  had  been  in 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ^r^ 

the  same  classes  with  me  at  school,  and  had  sat  as  a  student  for  the  ministry  on 
the  same  benches  with  me  at  college.     I  have  visited  in  yonder  prison,  where  h« 
was  under  sentence  of  six  months'  imprisonment  for  stealing  a  watch,  which  ha 
had  pawned  for  drink,  a  man  who  was  an  M.A.  of  a  Scottish  University,  and  who 
had  been  Principal  of  a  college  in  a  foreign  land.     I  have  had,  as  a  beggar  at  my 
door,  a  man  of  my  own  age,  brought  up  in  the  same  street  with  me,  who  had 
squandered  a  large  patrimony  in  such  courses  as  I  have  described ;  and  as  I  saw 
the  grey  hair  of  his  premature  old  age  streaming  in  the  wind,  and  heard  him  call 
me  by  the  old  familiar  name  of  my  boyhood,  as  he  besought  me  for  assistance,  I 
could  not  but  think  of  these  words,  "  And  when  he  had  spent  all,  there  arose  a 
mighty  famine  in  the  land,  and  he  began  to  be  in  want."     (W.  M.  Taylor,  D,D.) 
Feeding  swine : — In  the  days  of  the  Regency  there  was  a  man  much  envied,  and  in 
the  ranks  of  fashion  his  influence  was  paramount.     It  was  not  that  he  was  a  states- 
man or  a  hero,  a  thinker  or  a  speaker ;  but,  as  far  as  an  outsider  can  make  it,  ha 
was  a  gentleman.     His  bow,  his  gait,  his  dress,  were  perfection  :  the  Eegent  took 
lessons  at  his  toilette ;  when  peeresses  brought  out  their  daughters  they  awaited 
with  anxiety  his  verdict,  and  no  party  was  distinguished  from  which  he  withheld 
his  presence.    Very  poor  padding  within,  heartless  and  soulless,  the  usual  sawdust 
which  goes  for  a  dandy,  by  infinite  painstaking  and  equal  impudence  he  scrambled 
into  his  much  envied  ascendancy,  the  arbiter  of  taste,  the  director  of  the  drawing- 
room,  the  leader  of  the  great  army  of  beaux  and  butterflies.    Then  came  a  cloud. 
The  prince  withdrew  his  favour,  and,  of  course,  the  prince's  friends.    His  mysterious 
wealth  suddenly  took  wing,  and  means  which  he  took  to  recover  it  sent  him  into 
life-long  exile  at  Calais  and  Caen.     He  had  no  God.     His  God  was  the  sunshine — 
court-favour,  the  smiles  of  the  great  and  the  gay.    The  instant  these  were  with- 
drawn the  poor  Apollo  butterfly  came  fluttering  down,  down  into  the  dust,  and 
never  soared  again.     It  was  all  in  vain  that  old  acquaintances  tried  to  keep  him 
out  of  debt  and  discredit.    With  no  gratitude,  and  with  little  conscience,  and  with 
only  that  amoimt  of  pride  which  makes  the  misanthrope,  he  begged  and  borrowed 
on  all  Bides,  at  the  table  d'hSte  glad  to  get  a  bottle  of  wine  from  some  casual  tourist 
by  telling  stories  of  old  times,  and  unable  to  cross  the  threshold  when  his  only  suit 
of  clothes  was  in  process  of  repair.     The  broken-down  exquisite  began  to  be  in 
want,  and,  when  borrowing  a  biscuit  from  a  grocer,  or  a  cup  of  coffee  from  a  kindly 
hostess,  he  may  have  remembered  the  days  when  he  lavished  thousands  on  folly, 
the  days  when  he  was  the  favourite  guest  at  the  palace.    Truly,  it  was  a  mighty 
famine,  but  it  did  not  bring  him  to  himself.     It  only  alienated  from  mankind  a 
heart  which  had  aU  along  been  estranged  from  the  hving  God,  and  gave  frightful 
force  to  his  cynicism.     "  Madame  de  St.  Ursain,"  as  he  said  to  his  landlady,  "  were 
I  to  see  a  man  and  a  dog  drowning  together  in  the  same  pond,  and  no  one  was 
looking  on,  I  would  prefer  saving  the  dog."    And  whether  it  be  Richard  Savage, 
whose  riotous  living  at  last  imbrued  his  hands  in  another's  blood,  and  then  landing 
him  in  the  debtor's  prison,  left  him  to  be  buried  at  the  cost  of  the  kind-hearted 
gaoler ;  or  Emma,  Lady  Hamilton,  passing  like  a  meteor  through  foreign  courts, 
and  making  wise  men  mad  with  brilliancy  and  beauty,  then  cast  off  by  society,  and 
from  a  sordid  lodging  carried  in  a  deal  box  to  a  nameless  grave  ;  or  men  like  Beck- 
ford,  who,  spending  prodigious  wealth  in  self-idolatry,  have  lived  to  find  that  the 
idol  was  not  worth  the  worship  ;  by  cases  which  it  would  weary  you  to  quote,  we 
might  show  how  invariably,  if  there  be  but  time  to  work  out  the  legitimate  sequel, 
separation  from  God  ends  in  desolation  and  sorrow.     We  might  show  how  often 
the  wayward  child,  who  would  not  sit  contented  at  the  Father's  board  and  eat  the 
children's  bread,  has  ended  at  the  stye,  and  been  fain  to  clutch  at  husks  which  the 
swine  do  eat.    And  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  as  well  as  the  Word  of  God,  we 
might  show  how  inevitably  the  far  country  becomes  a  waste  and  howling  wilderness, 
and  how,  soon  or  late,  the  soul  which  there  abides  must  die  of  hunger.    {James 
Hamilton,  D.D.)        Husks: — The  ''husks  that  the  swine  did  eat"  are  familiarly 
known  as  the  pods  of  the  Ceratonia  siliqtM  of  Linnaeus.  It  is  a  noble  tree,  stretching 
all  along  the  southern  points  of  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  sometimes 
farther  northward,  from  Spain  to  Palestine.    Greece  and  Cyprus  are  the  most 
favoured  places,  but  southern  Italy  is  beautiful  with  these  trees.    The  foliage  ii 
dark  green — evergreen ;  the  pod  is  thick,  and  filled  with  a  viscous,  sweetish  sab- 
stance,  from  which  is  obtained  a  very  useful  dibs  or  molasses,  which  is  often  made 
to  ta^e  the  place  of  a  similar  product  from  the  grape.     These  pods  are  to  be  Been 
now  and  then  for  sale  in  New  Tork  and  Philadelphia.    The  smaller  merchant* 
often  ridiculously  call  them  "  locusts  and  wild  honey,"  with  about  as  much  reason. 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  151 

and  with  just  the  same  mistake,  as  those  who  call  them  "  St.  John's  bread."  The 
pod  is  thickish,  and  generally  breaks  up  when  dry,  the  pieces  still  holding  the 
beans  ;  not  dropping  them  out  as  peas  are  dropped.  The  khartib  bean  can  scarcely 
be  shelled — except  when  fresh,  and  then  not  easily.  Not  only  the  beans,  but  the 
pods  themselves,  are  an  article  of  food  for  both  beast  and  man.  They  are  exported 
to  Europe  and  America,  and  ground  up  to  serve  many  purposes  of  food,  and 
perhaps  adulteration.  One  may  look  over  the  newspaper  lists  of  arrivals  of  vessels 
at  Constantinople,  and  often  see  that  by  far  the  greater  number  of  vessels  were 
loaded  with  khariib  beans  or  pods,  and  most  of  them  from  Limassol  in  Cyprus.  To 
be  sure  these  vessels  are  very  small,  and  one  large  steamer  has  the  capacity  of  a 
hundred  of  them ;  but  in  numbers  these  kharub  cargoes  appear  to  lead  the  list  in 
Constantinople.  The  identity  of  the  fruit  of  the  kharub-tree  with  these  "  husks  " 
does  not  depend  upon  the  Greek  alone  of  the  New  Testament,  but  in  the  Peshitto 
Syriac  rendering,  the  Syriac  and  Arabic  names  of  both  tree  and  fruit,  and  the 
tradition  of  the  country  which  has  kept  the  name.  In  Spain  the  same  Arabio 
name  is  still  retained,  together  with  the  article  attached.  In  Italy  the  same  name 
exists,  though  the  writer  oftener  heard  it  pronounced  carro'ba  than  carru'ba.  In 
Arabic  the  accent  is  on  the  last  syllable.  As  given  in  the  English  dictionaries,  ita 
pronunciation  has  departed  about  as  widely  from  the  original  as  the  information 
they  give  has  departed  from  completeness.  They  lay  it  down  as  car'ob.  That,  how- 
ever, is  more  pardonable  than  the  manner  in  which  most  English-speaking 
Hebraists  abandon  English  coincidences  with  the  true  Shemitic  pronunciation  to 
ftdopt  the  mistakes  of  Germans,  or  the  substitutes  which  Germans  adopted  for 
tetters  in  cases  where  they  "  could  not  frame  to  pronounce  it  right."  Linneeus 
doubtless  named  the  tree  Ceratonia  siliqua  in  order  to  combine  both  the  original 
Greek  and  the  Latin  Vulgate  translation.  The  former  is  keratian  and  the  latter 
tiliquis.  With  regard  to  this  food  as  characteristic  of  the  prodigal's  present  or 
former  condition,  no  great  stress  can  be  laid.  Poor  people  eat  it  now ;  in  Phila- 
delphia it  is  sold  as  a  sweatmeat  to  the  little  boys.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  young 
man  found  such  fare  at  his  father's  table.  The  talmudio  proverb,  however,  says, 
"  When  the  Israelite  must  eat  rejected  food,  then  he  comes  to  himself."  But  they 
have  two  other  proverbs  of  great  beauty  in  this  connection.  The  first  is :  **  The  doora 
of  prayer  are  sometimes  open,  sometimes  shut ;  but  the  doors  of  repentance  are  ever 
open."  The  other  is :  "  No  sin  resists  sorrow  and  penitence."  (Prof.  Isaac  H.  Hall.) 
Pretty  near  to  the  hutks : — Vice-ChanceUor  Blake,  of  Toronto,  in  an  address  at  the 
Mildmay  Conference,  Jane  21, 1882,  said : — A  young  man  came  to  our  city  some  six 
or  seven  years  ago,  the  son  of  a  clergyman.  He  had  been  a  ne'er-do-weel,  and  bad 
been  sent,  as  so  many  are  sent,  abroad,  because  yon  can  do  nothing  with  them  here. 
He  was  taken  up  by  the  Association ;  one  of  the  members  took  him,  and  kept  him 
at  his  house  for  six  months.  To-day  that  young  man  stands  as  the  head  of  a  prin- 
cipal undertaking  in  our  Dominion.  I  don't  wonder  that  his  mother  wrote  a  letter 
from  Italy,  where  she  was  living,  to  say  that  if  the  broad  Atlantic  did  not  separate 
as,  she  would  come  to  thank  us  for  what  our  Association  had  done  for  her  son. 
Another  instance.  A  yonng  man  went  to  the  Southern  States,  a  distance  of  two 
thonsand  miles  from  our  city,  and  the  secretary  of  onr  Association  wrote  and  said, 
"  You  will  find  so-and-so  in  your  city ;  look  him  up,  and  see  if  anything  can  be 
done  for  him."  He  was  so  low  down  that,  although  the  son  of  wealthy  parents,  he 
was  found  in  one  of  the  fish-markets  cleaning  fish.  "  Young  man,"  said  the  delegate 
who  found  him,  "you  have  got  pretty  near  to  the  husks."  "Yes,"  said  he,  "I 
have  ;  it  was  painted  very  bright  as  I  entered,  but  I  find  it  a  very  dark  and  miser- 
able place  where  I  have  got  to."  "Do  you  want  to  leave  it?"  "I  do."  "Are 
you  determined  to  make  a  struggle?"  "Yes."  •'Then  come  to  my  warehouse, 
and  I  will  give  you  a  place.  I  will  expect  you  at  my  Bible-meeting  every  afternoon, 
and  yon  will  come  and  take  a  seat  in  my  pew  at  church."  "  I  will,"  he  said.  At 
our  great  Sunday-school  Convention  last  year  in  the  city,  where  we  had  delegates 
by  the  hundred,  that  young  man  came  as  one  of  the  delegates  sent  up  from  that 
town  in  the  United  States.  Eating  the  huskt : — How  often  do  young  men  break 
away  from  the  wholesome  restraints  of  home  and  of  religious  society,  promising 
themselves  peculiar  enjoyment  in  pursuing  their  wajrward  fancies,  dreaming  of 
wealth,  of  fame,  or  flattering  themselves  with  the  delusive  idea  of  a  good  time  in 
some  vague  adventure !  In  the  journal  of  a  soldier  belonging  to  the  72nd  Begiment 
of  the  English  army,  published  at  the  close  of  the  last  general  continental  war,  an 
instance  of  this  occurs.  The  writer  of  the  journal  had  been  induced,  in  hopes  of  % 
life  of  pleasure,  to  enliat,  and  to  forsake  his  quiet  and  respectable  home,  greatl/ 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  x?. 

to  the  grief  of  his  parents.  A  few  years  afterwards,  he  was,  when  serving  in  th« 
Peninsula,  glad  to  be  allowed  to  eat  of  the  biscuits  which  he  was  employed  to  break 
for  the  bounds  of  the  commander-in-chief,  at  a  time  when  provisions  were  scarce, 
'•  I  ate  them  with  tears,"  he  said,  "  and  thought  of  the  prodigal."  {A.  C.  TJiomson, 
D.D.)  Vain  efforts  of  the  soul  to  find  satisfaction : — The  soul  of  man  is  a  clasp- 
ing, clinging  soul,  seeking  to  something  over  which  it  can  spread  itself,  and  by 
means  of  which  it  can  support  itself.  Aid  just  as  in  a  neglected  garden  you  may 
see  the  poor  creepers  making  shift  to  sustain  themselves  as  best  they  can  ;  one  con- 
volvulus twisting  round  another,  and  both  draggling  on  the  ground ;  a  clematis 
leaning  on  the  door,  which  will  by-and-by  open  and  let  the  whole  mass  fall  down ; 
a  vine  or  a  passion-flower  wreathing  round  a  prop  which  all  the  while  chafes  and 
cuts  it ;  so  in  this  fallen  world  it  is  mournful  to  see  the  efforts  which  human  souls 
are  making  to  get  some  sufficient  object  to  lean  upon  and  twine  around.  (James 
Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  world's  treatment  of  its  votaries  in  time  of  need: — The 
prodigal  of  whom  we  are  speaking  sought  the  companionship  of  the  world.  He 
courted  the  pleasures  of  the  world ;  he  lived  for  the  world,  and  he  spent  his  all 
upon  the  world.  Is  he  singular  in  this  ?  Have  you  not  done  the  same  7  I  speak 
not  now  of  the  world  of  business,  of  commerce  and  trade  ;  I  speak  not  now  of  this 
moving  panorama  of  daily  life  that  surrounds  us  ;  I  believe  even  in  that  respect  I 
might  also  speak  of  the  unsatisfying  nature  even  of  the  world  of  business,  but  I 
speak  not  of  that  now :  I  speak  of  the  world  of  sin — the  world,  as  alluded  to  in  that 
text,  *'  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  of  the  world ;  for  if  any  man  love  the 
world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  The  world  very  cunningly  allures 
you  by  its  pleasures ;  is  that  an  inducement  sufficient  to  lead  you  from  your  Father's 
home?  Then  I  ask  you,  I  catechise  you  to-day.  What  means  that  aching  of  the 
head,  and  that  aching  of  the  heart,  and  that  surfeit  and  disappointment,  which  are 
so  generally  the  accompaniments  of  those  who  follow  after  the  so-called  pleasures 
of  the  world  f  Do  those  pleasures  satisfy  you  ?  Or  will  they  ever  compensate  you 
for  the  loss  of  a  Father's  favour  and  of  a  Father's  countenance  ?  The  world  calls 
off  the  allegiance  of  many  from  the  King  of  kings ;  the  world  lives  on  your  sub- 
stance while  it  lasts,  and  it  sucks  out  no  small  advantage  from  many  a  prodigal. 
But  then,  when  yon,  poor  sinner,  have  spent,  or  rather  misspent,  all  your  golden 
opportunities,  when  you  have  lavished  all  your  hopes  of  heaven,  when  you  have 
bartered  your  heavenly  birthright  for  an  earthly  mess  of  pottage,  what  next? 
Having  cast  your  precious  pearls  before  swine,  be  sure  they  will  turn  and  rend  yon; 
and  the  world  that  once  flattered  you  is  now  the  first  to  forsake  and  forget  you. 
Tell  me,  is  that  a  reward  worth  living  for  ?  Is  that  a  fate  worth  leaving  your  home 
to  purchase  ?  Is  that  a  destiny  worth  putting  yourself  to  so  much  trouble  to  attain  ? 
How  much  better  the  choice  of  Moses — "  choosing  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with 
the  people  of  God  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season  "  ;  or  the  experience 
of  David — "  A  day  in  Thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand  " — spent  in  the  world 
and  in  the  things  of  the  world,  and  in  sin  and  in  the  pleasures  of  the  world  :  "  I 
had  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  my  God,  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of 
wickedness."  And  oh  1  prodigal,  let  it  never  be  said  of  you,  that  you  have  subsided 
to  the  lowest  level  of  sin,  that  you  prefer  to  abide  in  the  tents  of  wickedness,  as  did 
the  prodigal.  (R.  Maguire,  D.D.)  Unsatisfied  desires  : — "Who  will  give  to  the 
hungry  heart  of  man,  whose  appetite  will  not,  cannot,  be  put  off  with  husks,  whose 
desires  are  so  infinite,  whose  yearning  is  so  unutterable  ?  Where  shall  we  look  to 
satisfy  the  craving  of  that  spirit  made  to  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  ?  Who 
will  give  to  him  ?  Shall  we  appeal  to  the  gaudy,  painted  world,  with  its  brief 
pageant,  its  short-lived  joys,  its  aimless  tumult  and  hubbub  ?  What  has  Fashion 
to  give  her  votaries  and  her  victims  ?  A  deUrious  dream,  a  momentary  intoxication, 
a  giddy  whirl  of  social  and  animal  excitement,  and  then  the  bitterness  and  the 
heartache  as  this  unsubstantial  feast  of  Tantalus  passes  from  us,  and  leaves  us  as 
empty  as  ever.  But  the  heart  wants  something  more  than  a  masquerade,  something 
more  than  toys  and  gewgaws,  with  which  for  a  Uttle  season  grown-up  children  may 
disport  themselves — something  more  than  the  sights  and  sounds  that  please  the  eye 
and  ear  for  the  moment,  only  to  leave  the  real  man  still  unpleased,  as  he  asks  im- 
patiently, " Is  this  all  ?  Is  this  all?  "  And  still  the  dismal  record  remains,  "  And 
no  man  gave  unto  him."  To  whom  shall  we  appeal  ?  Can  Mammon  do  nothing 
for  UB?  Surely  never  was  deity  served  with  greater  devotion  by  his  devotees  than 
day  by  day  is  lavished  on  him.  Will  he  do  nothing  for  our  spiritual  hunger  f  Ah, 
my  brethren,  the  value  of  money  is  what  it  will  fetch,  and  if  it  won't  fetch  as  tm« 
satisfaction,  or  peace,  or  hope,  or  moral  dignity,  what  the  richer  are  we  t    Can  the 


CHA*.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  151 

homan  spirit  digest  gold,  or  assimilate  it  to  its  mysterious  substance  ?  The  rich 
fool  in  the  parable  seemed  to  indulge  some  such  delusion,  but  he  only  proved  hia 
folly  by  doing  so.  So  little  can  Mammon  do  for  our  real  happiness,  that  we  are  in 
the  habit  of  distinguishing  the  most  devoted  of  his  worshippers,  the  very  high 
priests  of  Lis  shrine,  with  the  title  of  *'  misers,"  implying  that  they  are  of  all  men  the 
most  miserable.  The  indignant  heart  declines  this  mockery  of  its  desire,  and  still 
the  mournful  sentence  remains  true,  "  And  no  man  gave  unto  him."  Where  shall 
we  look  ?  Shall  we  fall  back  upon  the  charms  of  literature  and  art,  and  satiate  our 
Benses  in  the  hope  of  ministering  to  our  spirits  ?  Here  we  meet  with  some  encourage- 
ment from  some  of  our  modern  teachers,  who  will  have  us  believe  in  no  heaven  save 
a  picture-gallery  or  a  concert-room,  and  in  no  Deity  save  high  art.  And  some  would 
have  us  think  that  Nature  is  our  true  foster-mother,  and  that  the  satisfaction 
denied  elsewhere  is  to  be  found  in  prying  into  her  secrets  and  examining  her  hidden 
mysteries.  These  are  noble  dreamers,  these  hierophants  of  art  and  science ;  and 
perhaps  they  come  the  nearest  of  answering  our  demands.  Yet  even  here  we  only 
lind  disappointment.  The  wise  man  was  right  when  he  said,  "  All  things  are  full 
of  weariness ;  man  cannot  utter  it.  The  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the 
ear  with  hearing."  These  things  please  us  most  in  early  days,  when  first  with 
youthful  enthusiasm  we  begin  to  worship  the  beautiful  or  to  investigate  the  curious ; 
bat  there  is  something  in  man  more  divine  than  taste  and  more  profound  than 
curiosity,  and  this  higher  element  in  man  neither  art  nor  science  can  reach.  "  I 
don't  know  how  it  is,"  said  a  distinguished  art  critic,  a  man  of  the  hii,'hest  culture 
and  refinement,  and  one  who  had  possessed  for  the  greater  part  of  his  life  every 
facility  for  testhetic  enjoyment  in  his  circumstances  and  training — "  I  don't  know 
how  it  is,  but  now,  in  middle  life,  art  no  longer  affects  me  as  it  once  did.  There 
was  once  a  keen  joy  that  I  would  be  conscious  of  in  perusing  a  beautiful  poem,  or 
in  looking  at  a  really  good  picture,  which  I  can't  get  up  now,  however  much  I  may 
try.  I  can't  work  myself  by  any  effort  of  my  will  into  anything  at  all  like  the 
enthusiasm  that  once  seemed  quite  spontaneous.  I  can't  say  I  get  much  enjoyment 
out  of  art  now  ;  it's  more  a  business  than  a  pleasure."  Still  even  in  these  higher 
regions,  visited  only  by  the  few,  and  where  we  might  expect  that  the  mighty  famine 
would  be  less  keenly  felt,  it  remains  true,  "And  no  man  gave  unto  him."  (W.  M. 
Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  When  he  came  to  hlmsell — The  prodigal  repenting  : — I.  Thb 
PBODiOAL  COMES  TO  HIMSELF.  He  had,  as  it  were,  been  all  abroad ;  he  had  not  been 
really  at  home  in  any  sense ;  he  had  not  been  looking  at  himself,  nor  studying  him- 
self, nor  thinking  of  his  real  condition  and  his  real  want.  Those  interests  which 
were  really  his  highest,  and  which  he  should  have  felt  to  be  his  highest,  he  had 
never  for  a  moment  set  his  thoughts  upon.  All  that  he  should  have  cared  about  he 
was  quite  careless  of  ;  unobservant,  ignorant  of  that  which  was  really  his  good.  We 
speak  of  a  man  being  out  of  his  mind ;  we  speak  of  a  man  coming  again  into  his 
right  mind ;  and  these  familiar  expressions  of  ours  may  very  well  serve  to  help  us 
to  see  something  of  the  depth  of  meaning  here — "  He  came  to  himself."  The  mind 
which,  as  it  were,  should  have  been  at  home,  roams  abroad.  So  it  was  with  this 
man  :  his  mind,  fiirst  in  wild  enjoyment,  and  then  in  despairing  expedient ;  himself 
first  clad  in  all  sorts  of  gaiety  and  gaudy  robes,  and  then  clad  again  in  rags ;  at  one 
time  in  the  hannts  of  sensual  pleasure,  at  another  time  in  the  gloomy  caves  of  woe: 
now  intoxicated  with  the  very  delights  on  which  his  soul  was  set,  now  again  obsti- 
nate and  morose.  The  mind  of  his  at  last  came  home — "He  came  to  himself"; 
and  then  it  was,  when  he  came  to  himself,  that  the  great  reality  broke  upon  him, 
and  he  saw  what  was  the  truth  at  the  time,  and  what  had  been  the  truth  before. 
Then  his  real  condition  was  apparent  to  him,  and  all  his  sadness  stood  up  before 
him,  firm,  and  stark,  and  stern,  so  as  to  terrify  him.  And  then  ho  could  not  bat 
contrast  the  state  of  things  in  which  he  was,  and  the  condition  of  things  which  he 
well  knew  existed  at  home — "  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's  have  bread 
enough  and  to  spare  1 "  II.  The  pbodioaii  besolves.  Of  all  the  ways  in  which  he 
had  hitherto  gone,  he  now  finds  that  none  is  the  right  way,  particularly  that  way 
of  all  others  which  he  first  chose  for  himself,  the  way  which  led  him  from  hik 
father's  home,  the  first  way  in  which  he  ever  put  his  feet.  But  now  he  sees  that 
there  is  only  one  certain  way  of  peace  and  hope ;  that  there  is  no  way  like  this — th« 
way  that  brings  him  back  to  his  father.  Therefore  he  determines  to  go  and  to  con- 
fess the  whole — to  make  a  clean  breast  of  the  whole — to  cast  himself  upon  hia 
father's  mercy,  to  be  taken  back  upon  his  father's  terms,  and  apon  no  terms  of  hia 
own — "  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants  "  :  give  me  even  the  very  lowest 
plaee  at  thy  feet ;  only  receive  me  home.     It  is  impossible,  I  think,  to  agree  with 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt 

the  opinion  of  some,  that  in  this  expreesion,  •'  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  ser- 
vants,'' there  is  a  lurking  pride.  Some  suppose  that  in  this  expression  he  purposes 
to  work  out  his  restoration.  It  is  quite  clear,  however,  that  this  explanation  is 
quite  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  and  therefore  cannot  satisfy  the  words  ol 
the  parable.  The  force  of  the  passage  is  not  in  the  words,  "  Make  me  as  one  of 
thy  hired  servants  "  ;  that  is  only  thrown  in  to  heighten  the  effect.  The  force  of 
the  petition  lies  in  the  words.  "  I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son."  Only 
take  me  home ;  only  let  me  find  my  place  near  thee,  in  thy  service,  and  I  am  con- 
tent to  have  any  terms  whatever,  even  though  I  be  "  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants." 
And  it  is  even  thus  that  the  Spirit  of  God  leads  an  awakened  sinner  to  his  Father's 
home  on  high  ;  it  is  even  thus  that  He  pursues  His  work,  when,  having  convinced 
the  man  of  sin,  He  goes  on  to  convince  him  of  righteousness.  The  sinner  is  brought 
to  the  first  real  state  of  true  awakening  of  heart  and  conscience ;  the  sinner  is  made 
to  see  what  he  is  ;  he  comes  to  himself ;  and  then,  by  the  gracious  teaching  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  there  pass  over  him  similar  feelings  to  those  which  filled  this  younger 
son's  mind,  and  then  he  says,  ♦'  I  vrill  arise,  and  go  to  my  Father,  and  will  say  unto 
Him,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  before  Thee  " ;  and  so  he  feels  that  there  is 
no  need  now  for  him  to  abide  where  he  is.  There  may  be,  indeed,  fears ;  there  may 
be  doubts ;  again  and  again  these  will  arise ;  but  there  is  an  ever-urging  impulse  of 
the  Spirit  of  all  grace  upon  his  conscience  and  upon  his  heart  to  take  up  the  words 
80  often,  but,  alas  I  so  vainly  repeated  by  hundreds  of  ns — "  I  will  arise,  and  go  to 
my  Father."  III.  There  is  yet  a  third  stage — the  stage  of  action.  It  is  of  the 
first  consequence  that  action  should  follow  resolution.  In  any  case,  if  a  man  makes 
a  resolution  that  is  worth  anything,  the  sooner  he  puts  it  into  action  the  better ; 
and,  of  all  the  characteristics  which  call  out  admiration,  this  is  above  all  others — 
decision ;  and  the  man  who  knows  not  only  how  to  decide,  but  how  to  act  upon  his 
decision,  is  the  man  whom  others  most  approve ;  that  is  the  man  to  deserve  our 
confidence,  and  the  man  to  get  it.  And  therefore  the  Lord  draws  a  perfect  picture, 
not  simply  of  an  awakened  man,  but  of  a  man  that  feels  pressure ;  not  only  of  a 
man  who  resolves  that  something  must  be  done  to  relieve  this  pressure,  but  one 
who  gets  up  and  does  it ;  a  man  who  acts ;  a  man  who  knows  how  to  do  that  which 
he  has  resolved  to  do—"  He  arose  and  came  to  his  father."  Yes,  there  was  hope 
for  him.  He  felt  that  of  all  places  where  he  was  likely  to  find  peace,  his  father's 
heart  and  his  father's  bosom  was  the  place  where  he  would  find  most.  (C.  D. 
Martton,  M.A.)  The  prodigal'$  convention : — ^L  Thb  causes  of  thk  fbodioal's 
coMvxBsioN.  First,  affliction,  bodily  and  mental.  He  suffered  from  hunger,  from 
hard  treatment,  from  base  ingratitude  of  former  companions,  and  from  a  deep  con- 
Bciousness  of  his  most  degraded  condition.  How  naturally  true  is  all  this.  How  it 
perfectly  accords  with  the  experience  of  all  without  exception  who  sell  themselves 
to  the  world  I  We  do  not  say,  that  many  profligate  and  worldly-minded  men  do 
not  for  a  season  prosper  in  their  career.  No,  on  the  contrary,  for  a  season  their 
path  lies  undisturbed  by  any  piercing  sorrow  or  harrowing  disappointment ;  but, 
notvnthstanding  this,  a  time  does  really  come  when  the  most  reckless  and  the  most 
indifferent  feel  the  bitterness  of  the  vanity  they  have  courted,  and  taste  with  loath- 
ing the  dregs  of  an  existence  they  have  worn  out,  wasted,  and  exhausted  in  the 
service  of  "  the  prince  of  darkness."  Secondly,  a  return  to  reason,  and  to  a  con- 
sciousness of  his  real  state  and  condition,  was  another  cause  in  operation  with  the 
prodigal.  "  When  he  came  to  himself,"  it  is  said ;  so  that  before  this  time  he  was 
not  himself.  He  was  the  slave  of  others,  the  slave  of  his  own  passions  and  pursuits, 
and  thus  he  was  not  himself  in  the  freedom  of  one  who  is  impelled  and  influenced 
by  the  best  and  noblest  feelings  and  faculties  of  our  human  nature.  He  was  like 
one  in  a  dream,  apparently  acting  as  a  sane  and  wakeful  man,  but  in  reality  not 
BO.  Or  he  might  be  justly  considered  as  acting  the  part  of  a  maniac — that  part 
specially  which  throws  up  health,  Ufe,  home,  and  all  the  dearest  bonds  of  en- 
lightened intelligence  and  parental  fondness,  for  a  passing  shadow,  for  a  bubble 
glittering  momentarily  on  the  very  stream  which  breaks  it,  for  false  hopes  which 
rise  only  to  bewilder,  mislead,  and  destroy,  and,  in  short,  for  a  small  section  of 
time  at  the  cost  of  a  bright  immortality.  Thirdly,  another  cause  is  found  in  the 
exercise  and  influence  of  memory.  The  poor  prodigal  goes  back  in  thought  to  the 
home  of  his  father.  He  said,  "  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's  have  bread 
enough,  and  to  spare."  He  remembers  the  days  long  past,  when  be  was  surrounded 
with  every  comfort,  and  when  every  association  of  his  earlier  days  was  hallowed 
by  a  father's  love  and  a  father's  care.  What  a  contrast  does  his  present  miser* 
able  state  offer  to  that  of  a  former  period  1     Well,  and  it  is  still  by  the  power 


CBAP.  XV. J  ST.  LUKE.  1m 

of  memory  that  men  turn  their  thoughts  and  affectionB  towards  God.  n. 
The  besultb.  1.  Here  we  discover,  in  the  first  place,  decision  of  purpose. 
The  young  man  does  not  halt  or  waver  in  his  opinions.  He  is  fully  alive  to  the 
folly  and  sin  of  his  former  course  of  life,  and  now  he  is  determined  upon  a  change. 
And  observe,  this  decision  is  absolutely  necessary  in  the  case  of  all  who  would 
become  members  of  the  household  of  Christ.  There  must  be  a  steady  and  fixed 
determination  to  withstand  every  inducement  to  return,  and  to  pursue  the  object 
Bet  before  the  mind  through  every  difficulty.  The  journey  may  be  long  and  dreary; 
its  pathways  may  be  rugged  and  steep,  full  of  pressing  dangers  on  the  right  hand 
and  on  the  left.  Storms  may  await  you  in  your  passage,  and  many  a  lurking  foe 
may  dodge  your  footsteps  on  their  weary  march  ;  but  the  purpose  to  return  to  God 
must  remain  unchanged  ;  firm  as  the  mountain-summit,  which  still  points  heaven- 
wards, whether  the  sunlight  robes  it  in  reflected  grandeur,  or  whether  the  thunder- 
cloud clothes  it  with  darkness,  and  the  lightning  scorches  it  with  flame.  2.  We 
observe  another  result  in  deep  contrition  of  heart.  The  review  of  a  past  dissolute 
and  thoughtless  career  produces  in  the  awakening  mind  a  humiliating  sense  of 
wrong  and  insult  offered  to  the  kind  and  tender  father  of  an  ungrateful  child.  And 
who  so  kind,  and  merciful,  and  loving  as  the  Father  of  heaven  and  earth  ?  And 
who  80  ungrateful  and  rebellious  as  the  children  of  men  ?  These  are  great  truths 
recognized,  acknowledged,  and  felt  with  the  deepest  humility  by  every  sincere  and 
honest-hearted  disciple  of  the  Saviour.  (W.  D.  Eorwood.)  The  madiiess  oj 
tinners: — It  is  re'ated  in  the  hfe  of  Colonel  Gardiner,  that,  after  his  remarkable 
conversion  from  a  course  of  irreligion  and  debauchery  to  the  fear  and  love  of  God, 
and  a  conduct  agreeable  to  the  gospel,  it  was  reported  among  his  gay  companions 
that  he  was  stark  mad,  a  report  at  which  none  who  know  the  wisdom  of  the  world 
in  these  matters  will  be  surprised.  He  therefore  took  the  first  opportunity  of 
meeting  a  number  of  them  together ;  and  after  having  defended  a  righteous,  sober, 
and  godly  life,  and  challenged  them  to  prove  that  a  life  of  irreligion  and  sensuality 
was  preferable  to  it,  one  of  the  company  cut  short  the  debate,  and  said,  "  Come, 
let  DB  call  another  cause :  we  thought  thia  man  mad,  and  he  is  in  good  earnest 
proving  that  we  are  so."  Perhaps  there  are  few  among  the  irreligious  and  licen- 
tious part  of  mankind  who  would  make  so  frank  a  confession ;  yet  if  we  take  onr 
notions  of  things  from  the  dictates  of  unprejudiced  reason  and  the  Word  of  God, 
we  shall  be  sensible  that  this  sentiment  is  true,  that  religions  men  are  the  only 
persons  in  their  right  minds,  and  that  all  the  rest  are  in  a  state  of  miserable 
distraction.  I.  Evert  unconvebted  sinneb  is  a  madman,  ob  beside  himself.  1. 
He  does  not  use  his  understanding  as  he  ought.  2.  Further,  he  acts  contrary  to 
the  nature  of  things,  his  own  professed  judgment  and  true  interest  (Eccl.  ix.  3). 
"  Madness  in  general,"  as  one  observes,  "  means  such  an  extravagant  deviation 
from  the  common  apprehensions  and  actions  of  men,  as  discovers  either  the  want 
or  total  disorder  of  some  of  the  principal  faculties  which  men  daily  exercise  in 
common  life.  Now  vice  is  the  same  deviation  from  the  established  constitution  of 
nature,  and  the  same  violation  of  its  laws,  as  madness  is  of  the  ordinary  practice 
of  mankind."  As  in  a  natural  lunacy,  there  are  oftentimes  intervals  in  which 
the  unhappy  creature  is  himself,  and  seems  for  a  time  well,  so  it  is  in  this  moral 
disorder.  Sinners  are  sometimes  under  strong  convictions  of  the  misery  of  their 
Btate ;  are  sensible  of  the  necessity  and  excellency  of  true  religion,  and  accuse  and 
condemn  themselves  for  neglecting  it ;  and  for  a  while  they  act  rationally,  but 
Boon  return  to  folly.  The  distraction  appears  again ;  they  grow  worse  than  before, 
and  forget  their  wise  acknowledgments  and  good  resolutions.  3.  He  is  averse  to 
the  proper  methods  of  cure.  In  many  cases  of  lunacy  persons  will  speak  and  act 
rationally  except  upon  one  particular  subject.  So  it  is  here.  Though  with  regard 
to  the  concerns  of  this  world  and  his  temporal  interest  he  may  act  wisely  and 
rationally,  yet  to  that  which  is  "  the  one  thing  needful,"  "  the  whole  of  man,'' 
and  the  main  concern  of  an  immortal  being,  he  pays  little  attention.  But  there  is 
this  difference,  and  it  shows  the  prodigious  foUy  and  madness  of  sinners,  that  their 
distraction  is  voluntary  ;  they  bring  it  upon  themselves  ;  they  choose  it,  and  love 
to  have  it  so.  Such  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  that  when  once  a  man  hath  devoted 
himself  to  it,  he  generally  persists  in  it  against  the  clearest  dictates  of  conscience, 
and  will  call  it  happiness,  though  he  feels  it  to  be  misery,  whereas  a  natural  mad- 
ness is  a  calamity,  not  a  crime,  and  the  unhappy  persons  who  are  affected  with  it 
deserve  our  tenderest  sympathy.  I  observe — II.  When  a  sinneb  bspentb  and 
BSTCBN8  UNTO  GoD  HB  COMES  TO  HiMBEiiT.  So  the  prodigal  lu  the  text.  His 
necessities  brought  him  to  himself.    He  thought  and  considered,  resolved  and 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xr. 

returned  to  his  father.  And  his  father  received  him  "  safe  and  Bonnd,"  as  it  it 
expressed  (ver.  27).  («/".  Orton.)  The  resolution: — I.  In  the  first  place,  we  hare 
brought  before  us  the  trdb  condition  of  the  sinneb  bo  long  as  he  is  awat  fbou 
God.  "  When  he  came  to  himself  " :  that  implies  that  in  some  very  real  sense  ha 
had  not  been  perfectly  himself.  Generally,  commentators  have  supposed  that  the 
reference  here  is  to  insanity,  and  they  tell  us,  with  perfect  truth,  that  the  sinner  ia 
m  some  respects  like  a  madman.  He  follows  delusions  as  if  they  were  realities, 
and  he  treats  reaUtiea  as  if  they  were  delusions.  His  moral  nature  is  perverted, 
just  as  the  lunatic's  intellect  is  beclouded  ;  and,  in  regard  to  duty,  he  makes  mis- 
takes similar  to  those  which  the  maniac  makes  in  ordinary  matters.  So  he  may 
well  be  styled  mad ;  but  there  is  this  solemn  difference  between  him  and  the 
ordinary  lunatic,  that  while  insanity  cancels  responsibility,  the  sinner  is  not  only 
blameworthy  for  his  moral  perversity,  but  his  responsibility  continues  in  spite  of 
it.  Although,  however,  there  are  thus  many  interesting  and  striking  points  of 
resemblance  between  the  condition  of  the  maniac  and  that  of  the  sinner,  I  am  not 
sure  that  the  "  coming  to  himself,"  in  the  verse  before  me,  suggests  the  being 
"  beside  himself,"  as  the  condition  out  of  which  he  came.  Equally  it  may  imply 
that  he  was  "  beneath  himself,"  or  that  there  was  in  him  a  certain  unconscious- 
ness, out  of  which  he  required  to  be  roused  before  he  could  be  thoroughly  himself. 
When,  for  example,  one  has  fainted  away  and  recovers,  we  say  that  "  he  has  come  . 
to  himself  again,"  implying  that  his  consciousness  has  returned.  Now,  in  my 
view,  this  is  the  preferable  way  of  looking  at  the  analogy  of  my  text.  The  moral 
nature  of  this  poor  youth  was  virtually  dead.  His  conscience  had  become  seared, 
so  that  he  was,  in  a  manner,  unconscious  that  there  was  such  a  faculty  within 
him.  It  was  there,  but  it  was  asleep.  It  was  there,  but  it  was  so  precisely  as  the 
intellectual  nature  is  in  a  man  when  he  is  in  a  faint :  it  was  inoperative,  it  was  not 
consciously  possessed  by  him.  At  length,  however,  roused  by  a  sense  of  his 
degradation,  it  awoke,  and  then  he  came  to  himself.  Very  much  in  the  same  way 
the  sinner's  higher  nature  is  dormant  in  him.  II.  But  we  have  here,  secondly, 
the  change  of  this  coNDiTioN — *'he  came  to  himself."  A  new  light  broke  upon 
this  youth  in  the  midst  of  his  darkness.  He  saw  things  as  he  had  never  before 
perceived  them.  Not  till  now  did  he  discover  the  guilt  and  issue  of  the  course 
which  he  had  been  pursuing ;  and  never  in  his  past  experience  had  his  father's 
house  seemed  to  him  so  precious.  For  the  first  time  since  he  left  his  home,  ha 
awoke  from  "  the  dream  his  life-long  fever  gave  him,"  and  things  as  they  were 
stood  unveiled  before  him.  Now,  so  it  is  with  the  sinner.  His  conversion,  too,  ia 
an  awakening.  New  thoughts  stir  within  his  soul ;  new  feelings  vibrate  in  his 
bosom.  He  begins  to  see  what  before  had  been  to  him  almost  like  a  landscape  to  a 
man  born  blind.  It  is  not  that  new  things  are  called  into  existence  outside  of 
him,  for  all  things  are  there  as  they  were  before.  It  is  rather  that  his  eyes  have 
been  opened  to  see  them,  and  the  wonder  of  his  whole  subsequent  life  is  that  he 
never  saw  them  till  then.  He  perceives  now  the  danger  in  which  he  stands,  and 
recognizing  the  ability  and  willingness  of  God  to  help  him,  he  cries,  like  Peter, 
sinking  in  the  waters,  "Lord,  save  me;  I  perish."  III.  But  it  is  time  now  that 
we  should  consider  the  prodigal's  beflections  on  coming  to  himself.  They 
were  twofold — having  regard,  first,  to  himself,  and,  second,  to  his  father's  house. 
In  reference  to  himself,  he  said,  "  I  perish  with  hunger."  Now,  as  I  said  in  the 
outset,  there  was  distinct  progress  here.  Never  before  had  this  youth  allowed  hhn- 
self  to  think  that  death  by  starvation  was  to  be  the  issue  if  he  remained  in  the  far 
land,  but  so  soon  as  that  shaped  itself  to  him  clearly,  he  took  his  resolution  to 
arise.  It  is  the  same  with  men  and  their  return  to  God.  I  believe  that  if  we 
conld  narrow  down  the  choice  of  the  sinner  to  one  or  other  of  these  two  alterna- 
tives— everlasting  destruction,  as  the  consequence  of  guilt,  or  eternal  salvation, 
through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ — we  should  have  no  difficulty  in  impelling  him  to 
decide  in  the  right  direction ;  but  because  he  persists  in  believing  that  there  ia 
some  loophole  left  him  through  which  he  may  escape,  even  if  he  should  not  accept 
salvation  through  Christ,  he  continues  indifferent  to  the  statements  of  the  gospel. 
Awake,  O  sinner  I  to  the  danger  in  which  yon  stand.  If  you  continue  as  you 
are,  there  is  nothing  but  destruction  before  you.  But  the  prodigal's  reflections  had 
reference  also  to  his  father's  house.  He  said,  "  How  many  hired  servants  of  my 
father's  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare !  "  Bread ! — once  he  thought  of  greatness 
and  wealth,  now,  however,  he  will  be  content  with  bread — yea,  if  he  could  only 
have  what  many  a  time  he  had  seen  his  father's  servants  lay  aside  as  not  required 
by  them,  he  would  be  content.    There  was  enough  at  home,  if  he  were  only  there. 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  im 

Now,  similarly,  the  sinner,  in  conversion,  comes  to  the  persuasion  that  there  is 
plenty  for  him  in  God.  If  you  ask  how  this  is  brought  about  in  him,  1  answer,  by 
his  belief  of  the  statements  of  the  gospel,  for  it  is  here  that  we  must  bring  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Cross.  IV.  I  dare  not  conclude  without  noticing,  however  briefly, 
THE  BEsoLUTioN  TO  WHICH  THOSE  BEFLECTI0N3  LED.  "I  wiU  arise  and  go  to  my 
father,  and  will  say  unto  him,  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  before 
thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son.  Make  me  as  one  of  thy 
hired  servants."  This  youth  determined,  there  and  then,  to  go  back  to  his  home, 
not,  however,  in  a  dogged,  sullen  spirit,  but  in  a  thoroughly  penitent  disposition. 
He  blames  no  one  but  himself ;  he  resolves  to  make  a  full  and  frank  acknowledg- 
ment of  his  folly ;  and  now,  instead  of  claiming  anything  as  a  rightful  portion,  he 
13  willing  to  be  treated  as  a  servant.  Now,  taking  this  as  representing  the  sinner's 
repentance,  one  or  two  things  need  to  be  noted,  as  suggested  by  it.  In  the  first 
place,  there  is  an  unreserved  confession  of  sin  :  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against 
heaven  and  before  thee."  He  does  not  soften  matters,  and  speak  of  his  "faults" 
or  his  "failings."  He  does  not  say,  in  a  self -extenuating  way,  "I  have  been  a 
little  wild " ;  but  he  puts  the  plain  truth  forth  in  all  its  hideousness,  "  I  have 
ginned  I "  Neither,  again,  does  he  cast  the  blame  on  others.  His  language  is, 
**  I  have  sinned  ;  the  guilt  is  mine.  I  have  no  wish  to  evade  it,  or  explain  it  away. 
I  am  ashamed  of  myself."  Yet,  once  more,  the  enormity  of  his  wickedness  before 
heaven  is  that  which  most  distresses  him.  He  had  brought  many  evils  on  him- 
self. He  had  inflicted  great  injuries  upon  others ;  but  that  which  most  burdens 
him  now  is  that  he  has  sinned  against  God — the  Father  who  has  done  so  much 
for  him,  and  has  even,  after  all  and  above  all,  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  make 
atonement  for  his  guilt.  This  is  painful  to  him  in  the  extreme,  and  he  can  do 
nothing  but  weep  over  it,  but  his  tears,  in  the  estimation  of  God,  are  of  more 
value  than  the  gUttering  diamond,  for  they  tell  Him  that  He  has  found  at  last  Hia 
long-lost  child.  This  is  true  penitence.  This  is  the  contrite  heart  which  the  Lord 
will  not  despise.  But,  looking  again  at  the  resolution  before  us,  we  find  in  it  a 
determination  to  personal  exertion — "  I  will  arise  1 "  The  prodigal  did  not  wait  till 
some  one  else  should  come  and  lift  him  and  carry  him  to  his  home.  Finally,  here, 
this  resolution  was  promptly  acted  upon — "He  arose  and  went  to  his  father." 
Just  as  he  was,  all  tattered  and  filthy,  he  went  back.  He  did  not  say,  looking  at 
his  garments  the  while,  "  I  cannot  go  this  way ;  I  must  wash  myself,  and  shange 
my  raiment,  and  then  set  out."  Had  he  mused  in  that  fashion,  he  would  probably 
never  have  returned ;  but  he  went  as  he  was.  So,  in  conversion,  the  sinner  gives 
himself  back  to  God  just  as  he  is.  He  does  not  seek  to  make  himself  better. 
He  delays  not  to  work  out  for  himself  a  robe  of  righteousness.  He  waits 
not  even  for  deeper  feelings,  or  for  more  intense  conviction.  He  puts 
himself  into  God's  hands,  sure  that,  for  Christ's  sake,  He  will  make  him 
all  that  he  should  be.  "Such  as  I  am,"  he  says,  "take  me  and  make 
me  such  as  Thou  wouldst  have  me  to  be."  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The 
madne$s  of  sin: — "He  came  to  himself."  This  implies  Ins  former  mad  and 
insane  state.     The  sinner's  condition  is  one  of   madness.     I.  Madness  is  thb 

DERANGEMENT  OF  THE  INTELLECT  DAL  P0WEB3.  II.  In  MADNESS  PASSIOS  BDLE8 
INSTEAD  OF  BEA80N.       III.    MaDNESS   IS  CONNECTED   WITH   STBANGB    DELUSIONS.       IV. 

Madness  will  be  pboved  bv  the  objects  of  choice  akd  bejectiom.  ^  A  sane 
person  prefers  good  to  evil,  safety  to  danger,  Ac.  A  madman  has  no  just  idea 
of  things.  He  trifles  with  peril,  sports  with  danger,  rejects  the  good,  and^  chooseg 
the  evU.  V.  Madness  will  be  manifest  from  the  conversation.  It  is  either 
violent,  incoherent,  or  insipid.  VI.  Madmen  abb  uninfluenced  bt  counsel. 
How  true  of  sinners  I  Parents  have  counselled — "  My  son,  if  thy  heart,"  &o. 
Friends  have  counselled — "  Come  thou  with  us,"  &c.  Ministers  have  counselled ; 
the  Holy  Spirit  has  counselled,  &c.  Yet  sinners  will  not  hear.  VII.  Madmek 
IHINK  ALL  OTHERS  MAD,  SAVE  THEMSELVES.  Mad  infidel,  says  all  believers  are 
mad ;  mad  drunkard,  thinks  the  sober  are  mad,  <S:c.  Worldling  thinks  the 
faeavenly-minded  Christian  is  mad.  Festus,  Paul.  Even  of  Jesus  they  said, 
"He  has  a  devil,  and  is  mad."  VIII.  Madmen  are  dangerous  to  others.  IX. 
Madness  u  often  fatal  in  its  results.  Application :  1.  Spiritual  madness  is 
self -procured,  therefore  wilful  and  altogether  inexcusable.  2.  Spiritual  madneas 
tends  to  the  death  of  the  soul.  Eternal  woe.  3.  For  spiritual  madness  there  is 
one  grand  efficient  remedy,  and  one  only,  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  Ood, 
salvation  by  faith  in  the  merits  of  the  Iiord  Jesus  Christ.  4.  The  application  of 
this  remedy  invariably  brings  sinners  to  a  right  state  of  mind.     (J.  Bunu,  D.D.) 


158  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xr. 

Sin  at  insanity  : — It  is  said  of  the  lost  son  that  after  he  had  sank  into  the  lowest 
depths  of  misery  and  wretchedness  "  he  came  to  himself."  These  words  tell  us  of 
the  madness  of  sin.  I  am  snre  it  is  not  without  reason  that  we  dwell  upon  the 
thought.  I.  And,  in  doing  bo,  I  am  not  forgetting  the  objection,  not  altogether  an 
unreasonable  one,  that  it  is  often  danoebous  to  likoeb  oteb  btil  akd  the 
THOUGHT  of  EVIL.  There  are  morbid,  diseased,  scrupulous  consciences,  we  may 
be  told,  which  will  never  be  rendered  healthy  by  brooding  over  sin ;  and,  beside8> 
it  is  better  for  us  to  be  gazing  up  into  the  clear  blue  sky  of  God's  holiness  and  love 
than  to  be  bending  over  the  foul,  seething,  poisonous  cesspool  of  sin.  And  yet,  on 
the  other  hand,  we  shall  never  escape  from  the  power  of  sin  ontil  we  obtain  true 
views  of  it.  And  then,  with  regard  to  the  other  suggestion,  it  is  indeed  far  better, 
in  all  ways,  that  men  should  raise  up  their  heads  into  the  pure  atmosphere  of 
God's  presence,  and  gaze  upon  the  light  of  His  holiness,  rather  than  hang  over  the 
fumes  of  evil  and  corruption ;  but,  alas !  men  do  hang  over  these,  do  keep  looking 
down  into  the  fermenting,  putrefying  mass  of  evil  without  knowing  its  true 
character,  and  are  continually  inhaling  its  noxious,  deadly  vapours.  It  is  only 
when  they  are  thoroughly  convinced  of  their  pestilential  character  that  they  will 
withdraw  from  their  influence  and  seek  to  breathe  a  purer  atmosphere.  II.  Now, 
let  us  ask  this  question  seriously  :   Abe  wb  all  of  us,  ob  even  many  of  us, 

DEEPLY,  solemnly  IMPEESSED   WITH  THE   FEABFDL,   DBSTKUCIIVE,   DEADLY  CHABACTEB 

OF  SIN  ?  In  order  to  answer  the  question,  let  us  for  one  moment  glance  at  those 
general  features  of  moral  evil  which  have  already  been  brought  before  us  in  this 
parable,  and  then  ask  what  evidence  is  found  among  us  of  that  hatred  and  loathing 
of  sin  which  its  real  character  should  produce.  III.  Sin  is  madness,  from  what- 
ever POINT  OF  view  we  beoabd  THE  SUBJECT.  There  are  different  phases  of  insanity. 
There  is  raving  madness,  there  is  melaneholy  madness,  there  is  the  insanity  of 
mental  imbecility,  there  is  monomania,  the  madness  which  is  excited  by  one  parti- 
cular subject,  whilst  on  all  other  points  the  mind  is  calm  and  rational.  The  mere 
mention  of  these  forms  of  insanity  will  bring  to  your  recollection  corresponding 
forms  of  sin.  You  will  think  of  the  raving  madness  of  unrestrained  anger  and 
violence  of  temper,  or  the  frenzy  of  the  drunkard  ;  you  will  think  of  the  solitary 
brooding  over  secret  sin ;  of  the  foolish,  irrational,  inexplicable  sins  into  which 
men  allow  themselves  to  be  led ;  of  the  one  besetting  sin  which  oftentimes  mar& 
a  character  which  were  otherwise  of  exceptional  and  surprising  excellence.  Or, 
again,  let  us  ask  what  are  the  signs  by  which  we  satisfy  ourselves  that  the  mind 
has  lost  its  balance,  and  we  shall  find  that  these  have  their  antitypes  in  the  lives  of 
sinful  men.  We  say,  for  example,  that  a  man  is  insane  when  he  has  a  weakened 
or  perverted  judgment,  so  weakened  and  perverted  that  he  is  unable  to  discern 
between  truth  and  falsehood,  between  right  and  wrong.  Another  sign  of  insanity 
is  found  in  the  subjection  of  the  will  to  uncontrollable  impulses — when  its  free 
action  is  so  impaired  that  a  sudden  gust  of  passion,  of  anger,  or  of  fear,  or  of  any 
other  passion,  carries  the  whole  man  before  it  as  a  feather  is  carried  by  a  blast  of 
wind.  Or,  again,  among  the  signs  of  insanity  we  reckon  a  liability  to  illusions 
respecting  one's  own  condition  and  circumstances,  or  regarding  those  by  whom  we  are 
surrounded.  Once  more,  not  to  draw  out  the  subject  too  tediously,  we  say  that  a 
man  is  mad  when,  in  the  conduct  of  his  life  or  in  the  management  of  his  affairs,  he 
neglects  the  known  and  ordinary  principles  of  human  action.  Every  one  of  these 
signs  is  to  be  found  among  those  who  are  subject  to  the  dominion  of  sin ;  not  every 
one  in  all  of  them,  but  one  sign  in  one  and  another  in  another,  just  as  it  is  among 
those  who  are  the  victims  of  insanity.  IV.  If  any  think  that  the  language  of  exag- 
geration has  been  employed,  or  if  any  would  desire  to  see  still  more  clearly  the  true 
character  of  sin,  I  will  ask  them  to  consider  the  remedy  which  God  in  His 

WISDOM  AND   LOVE   PROVIDED   FOR   THE    DELIVERANCE    OF    MANKIND.       It    WBS   nothing 

less  than  the  incarnation  and  sacrifice  of  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  God  spared  not 
His  own  Son,  but  gave  Him  up  freely  for  as  alL  How  sore,  then,  must  have  been 
man's  need,  how  terrible  his  malady,  when  no  less  remedy  was  thought  suiEcient 
by  our  Father  in  heaven  1  Let  those  who  think  lightly  of  sin,  of  its  true  character 
and  of  its  effects,  turn  their  eyes  to  Calvary,  contemplate  the  Son  of  God  agonizing 
&nd  dying,  and  then  let  them  consider  the  explanation  of  that  which  He  endures  : 
"  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions.  He  was  bruised  for  oar  iniquities  :  the 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him,  and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  I 
think,  my  brethren,  that  no  one  who  duly  considers  what  is  involved  in  words  like 
these  will  ever  think  or  speak  lightly  on  the  subject  of  sin.  Y.  And  here  it  i«  my 
Anty,  as  it  is  my  privilege,  to  offer  ah  bibnbst  behohstbanob  with  tbo«* — usv 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  159 

THBT  ABE  NOT  A  FEW — WHO  REEU  TO  THIKK  BUT  LITTLE  0»  THAT  AWPTTEi  HALAOT 
^ITH  WHICH   ALL   UEN   ABE    MOBE    OB    LESS    AFFLICTED,   AND   UNDEB   WHICH    MANY  ABE 

NOW  BDFFEBiNO  AND  DTiNQ.  And  let  me  remind  yoa  that  there  is  no  real  care  for 
the  madness  of  sin,  there  is  no  true  remedy  for  this  monster  evil  but  that  which 
tows  in  our  hearts  the  seeds  of  holiness,  as  well  as  sheds  upon  our  conscience  the 
sense  of  pardon.  The  mere  repression  of  evil,  even  if  it  were  by  itself  possible, 
would  be  altogether  insuflBcient.  It  is  not  enough  to  "  cease  to  do  evil " ;  we  must 
"  learn  to  do  well."  We  mast  not  only  forsake  the  service  of  the  world  and  the 
devil;  we  most  become  the  servants  of  God  and  of  Christ.  {W.  R.  Clark,  M.A.) 
Coming  to  himself: — History  tells  os  that  during  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  the 
Spaniards  once  unjustly  imprisoned  some  English  subjects.  No  reasoning  or  expos- 
tulation could  induce  the  Spanish  authorities  to  release  them ;  when  our  queen, 
finding  all  other  means  had  failed,  lost  all  patience,  and  sent  a  peremptory 
message  declaring  that  if  the  imprisoned  English  were  not  immediately  liberated 
her  fleets  and  armies  should  know  the  reason  why.  The  threat  accomplished  more 
than  all  the  previous  remonstrances,  for  at  the  mention  of  "  fleets  and  armies  " 
the  captives  were  inunediately  released.  It  is  often  found  that  one  stroke  of  the 
rod  will  bring  men  to  their  senses  sooner  than  all  the  reasoning  which  can  be 
urged.  They  can  afford  to  be  stubborn  and  perverse  so  long  as  their  persons  are 
secure  ;  but  the  first  smart  of  a  reversed  fortune  will  make  them  yield  to  all  your 
arguments.  So  it  was  with  the  prodigal.  By  the  swine  troughs  he  came  to  him- 
self. I.  The  pbodigal's  madness.  Strange  as  it  may  seem  to  some,  it  may  be 
proved  to  a  demonstration  that  every  unsaved  sinner  under  heaven  is  a  madman  ! 
If  you  saw  a  river  bursting  its  banks,  and  while  the  flood  rushes  over  meadow  and 
lawn,  bearing  everything  before  its  fury,  also  saw  a  man,  who,  perceiving  its 
approach,  begins  to  clap  his  hands  and  laughs  in  high  glee,  making  no  effort  to 
escape  from  the  impending  destruction,  would  you  not  deem  that  man  mad  ?  If 
you  saw  a  snake  coiling  round  the  body  of  a  man,  and  although  he  well  knows 
that  it  will  crush  him  in  a  short  time,  strokes  the  glittering  thing,  and,  absorbed  in 
admiring  its  speckled  scales,  makes  no  effort  to  extricate  himself,  would  you  not 
think  him  mad  ?  If  you  saw  a  beggar  sitting  on  a  dunghill,  with  rags  covering  his 
body,  some  broken  pottery  on  his  head,  and  a  thorn-stick  in  his  hand,  and  shouting 
to  aJl  who  passed  that  he  is  a  king,  his  rags  imperial  purple,  the  broken  pottery  his 
diadem,  and  the  thorn-stick  his  sceptre,  would  you  not  also  deem  him  mad  ?  Or 
if  you  saw  men  seeking  with  all  the  ardour  of  their  nature  certain  ends  by  such 
means  as  in  the  nature  of  things  could  not  possibly  ensure  success,  or  wasting  their 
time  on  the  most  trivial  matters,  while  their  most  important  concerns  are  unattended 
to,  would  yon  not  deem  these  men  beside  themselves  *  And  how  do  sinners  act  ? 
In  common  with  all  mankind  they  want  peace  and  safety,  and  they  seek  them  in 
the  things  that  are  passing  away.  They  want  an  sbidmg  refuge,  and  they  take 
shelter  in  a  world  that  every  day  is  drawing  nearer  to  its  doom.  II.  The  pbodioai. 
r.ETDBNiNG  TO  HiB  SENSES.  "  He  Came  to  himself."  He  went  away  that  he  might 
tind  himself ;  but  the  farther  he  went  from  home  the  farther  he  went  from  himself. 
Self  was  only  found  when  hs  resolved  on  finding  his  father.  1.  The  first  evidence 
of  the  prodigal's  returning  to  his  senses  is  his  stopping  calmly  to  consider.  Tba 
great  want  of  sinners  is  reflection.  But  blinded  by  drink,  or  lust,  or  avarice,  or 
deceived  by  pride  or  imaginary  goodness,  they  heed  not  the  cry  of  the  charmer, 
charm  he  never  so  wisely.  In  their  devotion  to  the  pursnit  of  their  glittering  baubles 
they  are  deaf  to  the  solicitations  of  wisdom  ;  they  will  not  consider.  Beflection  is 
the  window  which  lets  the  light  of  truth  in  upon  the  soul,  that  its  real  wants  may 
be  discovered ;  is  the  friendly  hand  that  plucks  the  child  from  danger  when  the 
hoQse  is  on  fire ;  is  the  voice  of  wisdom  that  checks  the  power  of  passion,  and 
points  to  the  path  of  peace.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Consider  your 
ways."  There  is  hope  of  a  man  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  consider.  2. 
Another  evidence  of  the  prodigal's  returning  to  his  senses  is,  his  forming 
a  right  resolution.  "  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  father."  {W.  O.  Pateoe.) 
A  mind'g  transition : — So  rooted  is  the  heart's  enmity  to  Ood,  that  man  must  often 
be  driven,  as  by  the  blast  of  a  tempest,  to  submission  and  to  duty.  The  prodigal 
moBt  suffer  beneath  want,  and  shame,  and  abandonment  before  he  thinks  on  his 
ways,  and  turns  longingly  to  the  honse  of  his  Father.  How  often  is  it  that  the 
oonseqnences  of  crime — the  disease,  the  misery,  the  remorsefulness  which  wait 
upon  the  track  of  sin,  though  in  themselves  sequences  of  a  purely  natural  law,  are 
nsed  of  Ood  as  means  to  impression  and  salvation  !  You  must  not  suppose  that 
the  mind  of  the  prodigal  came  at  once,  in  sudden  revulsion,  from  heedlessness  ta> 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  xt. 

serious  thought,  and  from  obduracy  to  tender  and  softened  feeling.  There  would 
be,  in  all  probability,  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  mental  working,  several  pre- 
liminary stages.  The  earliest  feelings  would  still  partake  of  the  character  of  resis- 
tance and  rebellion.  An  awakened  conscience,  that  is  not  pacified,  only  exasperates 
into  more  audacious  rebellion.  Many  a  man,  whom  shame  has  only  maddened  into 
more  frantic  resistance,  walks  the  earth  to-day  a  moral  Laocoon,  stung  in  a  hving 
martyrdom  by  the  serpents  which  in  his  bosom  lodge.  It  is  hardly  credible  how 
much,  not  only  of  human  sadness,  but  of  human  sin,  has  sprung  from  the  soul's 
first  passionate  recoil  against  detected  criminality,  or  blasted  reputation,  or  enforced 
penalty,  or  stained  honour.  When  remorse  scourges,  it  is  not,  like  Solomon,  with 
whips,  but,  like  Hehoboam,  with  scorpions  ;  and  the  intolerable  anguish  of  a 
wounded  spirit  has  prompted  to  many  ^a  deed  of  violence,  from  which,  before  his 
passions  were  hounded  into  madness  by  a  guilty  conscience,  the  man  would  have 
shrunk  with  loathing  and  with  horror.  Oh,  when  evil  passions  and  an  evil  con- 
science seethe  in  the  same  caldron,  who  can  imagine  or  create  a  deeper  heU  f  The 
sullen  despondency  with  which  the  prodigal  would  strive  to  reconcile  himself  to  hia 
fate  would  mingle  with  oft-repeated  curses  pronounced  upon  his  adverse  destiny, 
rather  than  his  own  folly.  But  all  this  was  but  the  swathing  grave-cloth  out  of 
whose  folds  the  new  man  was  to  rise — the  gathering  of  the  dark  and  angry  cloud 
which  was  soon  to  be  dissolved  in  showers,  and  on  whose  bosom  the  triumphant 
sun  would  paint  the  iris  by  and  by.  That  ever-present  Spirit  who  strives  with  men 
to  bring  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  was  doubtless  all  the  while  at  work 
upon  the  prodigal's  heart ;  and  when  He  works,  out  of  the  brooding  storm  come  the 
calm  and  the  zephyr  of  the  summer-tide — out  of  the  death  of  enjoyment  the  rare 
blessedness  which  is  the  highest  good — out  of  the  death-working  sorrow  of  the 
world  the  repentance  which  is  unto  life  eternal.  We  know  not  precisely  how  the 
change  was  effected  from  the  hardness  of  heart,  and  contempt  of  God's  word  and 
commandment,  to  the  softening  of  thought  and  contrition.  Perhaps  the  Divine 
Spirit,  wrought  by  the  power  of  memory,  thawed  the  ice  away  from  the  frosted 
spirit  by  sunny  pictures  of  the  past — by  the  vision  of  the  ancestral  home — of  the 
guileless  childhood — of  the  father's  ceaseless  strength  of  tenderness — of  the  spell  of 
a  living  mother's  love,  or  of  the  holier  spell  of  a  dead  one.  I.  A  teansition  from  mad- 
ness TO  REASON.  All  the  habits  in  which  the  sinner  is  wont  to  indulge  answer  to  the 
habits  and  delusions  of  those  who  have  been  bereft  of  reason,  or  in  whom  it  has  been 
deposed  from  its  rightful  government  of  the  man.  Madness  is  rash  and  inconsiderate 
action — action  without  thought  of  consequences.  The  madman's  hand  is  sudden 
in  jlp  violence  ;  the  madman's  tongue  shoots  out  its  barbed  arrows  ;  he  is  reckless 
of  ue  slain  reputation,  or  of  the  murdered  life  ;  and  is  not  like  rashness  a  charac- 
teristic of  the  sinner  ?  Little  recks  he  of  his  own  dishonour,  or  of  the  life  that  he 
has  wasted  in  excess  of  riot.  He  goes  heedlessly  on,  though  his  every  step  were  up 
the  crater's  steep,  and  mid  the  crackling  ashes.  Madness  is  mistake  of  the  great 
purposes  of  life  ;  the  employment  of  the  faculties  upon  objects  that  are  contemp- 
tible and  unworthy.  Hence  you  see  the  lunatic  intently  gazing  into  vacancy,  or 
spending  hours  in  the  eager  chase  of  insects  on  the  wing,  or  scribbling,  in  strange 
medley  of  the  ribald  and  the  sacred,  scraps  of  verse  upon  the  torn-out  pages  of  a 
Bible.  And  are  there  not  greater  degradations  in  the  pursuits  which  engross  such 
multitudes  of  the  unconverted?  When  a  sinner  comes  to  himself  he  blushes  for  his 
former  frenzy  ;  he  feels  himself  a  child  of  the  Divine  ;  he  feels  himself  an  heir  of 
the  eternal  ;  and,  looking  with  a  strange  disdain  upon  the  things  which  formerly 
trammelled  him,  he  lifts  heavenward  his  flashing  eye,  and  says,  "There  is  my 
portion  and  my  home."  H.  There  is  a  transition,  again,  from  pride  to  submission 
AND  ACKNOWLEDGMENT.  In  his  former  mood  of  mind  he  only  intensified  his  own 
rebellion,  and  was  ready,  doubtless,  to  blame  circumstances,  or  companions,  or 
destiny,  or  anything  rather  than  his  own  wickedness  and  folly.  "  AU  things  have 
conspired  against  me  ;  never,  surely,  had  any  one  so  hard  a  lot  as  I.  I  might  not 
nave  been  exactly  prudent  now  and  then,  but  I  have  done  nothing  to  merit  such 
punishment  as  this.  I  will  never  confess  that  I  have  done  wrong  ;  if  I  were  to 
return  to  my  father,  I  would  not  abate  a  hair's-breadth  of  my  privileges  ;  I  would 
insist — and  it  is  right,  for  am  I  not  his  son  T — upon  being  treated  precisely  as  I  was 
before."  So  might  have  thought  the  prodigal  in  his  pride.  But  in  his  penitence 
no  humiliation  is  too  low  for  him — no  concealment  nor  extenuation  is  for  a  moment 
entertained  ;  with  the  expectation,  not  of  sonship,  but  of  servitude,  and  with  the 
frank  and  sorrowful  acknowledgment  of  sin,  he  purposes  to  travel,  and  to  cast  him- 
self at  the  feet  of  his  father.    lU.  A  tbanbition  raou  dsspondbnoy  to  aotivb  anb 


CBAP.XT.]  8T.  LUKE.  1« 

bopefuIj  endeavodb.  There  :s  not  only  the  mental  process,  bat  the  oorrespcnding 
action — ihe  rousing  of  the  soul  from  its  indolent  and  tormenting  despair.  This  ia 
one  main  difference  between  the  godly  sorrow  and  that  consuming  sadness  which 
preys  upon  the  heart  of  the  worldling  :  the  one  disinclines,  the  other  prompts  to 
action  ;  the  one  broods  over  its  own  haplessness  until  it  wastes  and  dies,  the  other 
cries  piteously  for  help,  and  then  exults  in  deliverance  and  blessing.  There  was 
something  more  than  fable  in  the  old  mythology  which  told  of  Pandora's  box — a 
very  receptacle  of  ills  made  tolerable  only  because  there  was  hope  at  the  bottom. 
In  every  true  contrition  there  is  hope.  (W.  M.  Punslwn,  LL.D.)  Coming  to  one's 
telf : — We  may  interpret  this  as  we  use  the  term  familiarly,  as  where  a  man  is  out 
of  his  head,  out  of  his  mind,  and  we  say  when  his  reason  is  restored  that  he  has 
"  eome  to  himself "  again.  Or,  when  a  man  comes  out  of  a  swoon,  he  is  said  to 
"come  to  himself,"  by  which  is  meant,  simply,  that  he  comes  to  the  possession  and 
use  of  faculties  that  for  a  time  were  clouded,  :r  hindered  in  their  tperaiicn.  Yea 
may  also  use  it  in  a  broader  sense ;  and  it  is  thus  that  I  propose  to  use  it.  It  may 
be  made  to  throw  much  light  on  the  course  which  men  are  pursuing  at  large — even 
those  who  do  not  indulge  in  passionate  excesses,  and  in  the  wallow  of  the  appetites. 
It  is  proper  that  we  should  determine  what  a  man's  manhood  is ;  what  it  is  that  is 
man,  in  man.  Not  everything.  There  is  a  difference  between  men  and  the  animated 
creation,  a  part  of  which  they  are.  And  it  is  not  fair  to  attempt  to  determine  our 
manhood  by  the  things  which  we  have  in  common  with  the  ass,  with  the  ox,  with 
the  lion,  or  with  the  serpent.  We  must  rise  higher  than  the  things  which  are 
possessed  by  these  creatures,  in  order  to  find  out  what  manhood  is  in  man.  1. 
Looking  at  it  in  this  light,  the  first  thing  that  I  will  mention,  as  discriminating 
men  from  every  other  part  of  creation,  and  as  constituting  a  portion  of  their  true 
manhood,  is  their  reason — and  that  in  two  aspects.  (1)  First,  let  us  consider  it  as 
a  governing  light  and  power.  I  believe  the  superior  animals  have  the  germs  or 
rudiments  of  reason.  There  is  no  question  that  the  dog  does,  in  a  very  limited 
way,  reason,  and  that  the  elephant  does,  and  that  the  horse  does.  And  that  reason 
in  these  animals  is  of  the  same  general  kind  as  the  human  reason,  I  do  not  doubt. 
But  it  is  very  limited,  very  low,  and  only  occasional.  (2)  The  other  view  which  we 
are  to  take  of  reason,  is  that  by  its  force  we  are  able  to  prophecy.  That  is  to  say, 
experience  does  lay  a  foundation  by  which  a  man  may  judge  from  the  results  of 
certain  causes  to-day  what  will  be  the  results  of  those  causes  to-morrow.  For 
instance,  if  last  year,  sowing,  we  derived  such  and  such  results,  we  prophecy  that 
if  we  sow  this  year,  we  shall  derive  the  same  results.  And  this  it  is  which  distin- 
guishes  between  the  human  and  brute  reason  more  significantly  than  anything  else. 
2.  The  next  constituent  element  of  a  true  manhood  is  moral  sense,  or  a  constitution 
by  which  the  soul  recognizes  moral  obligations,  from  which,  by  a  comparison  of 
the  performance  of  our  life,  measured  by  obligation,  we  come  to  understand  the 
qualities  of  right  and  wrong  ;  to  accept  a  higher  standard  of  obligation  than  mere 
self-will,  or  than  mere  self-indulgence  and  pleasure.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
animals  ever  have  a  conception  of  right  and  wrong.  3.  Then  we  have  one  more 
characteristic — a  spiritual  nature — an  endowment  of  sentiments  which  inspire  the 
idea  of  purity,  of  self-denial,  of  holy  love,  of  supersensuousness.  It  is  in  this  higher 
range  of  faculties,  thus  very  briefly,  compendiously  defined,  that  a  man  is  to  look 
for  his  manhood.  You  are  a  man  by  as  much  as  yon  have  this  particular  part 
developed.  You  are  less  than  a  man  just  in  the  proportion  in  which  you  recede 
and  shrink  from  this  kind  of  measuring.  Since  one's  manhood,  or  his  true  self,  is 
to  be  found  in  his  nobler  attributes,  and  in  his  true  spiritual  relations,  he  who 
leaves  these  unused,  and  lives  in  the  lower  range  of  faculties,  may  be  truly  said  to 
have  forsaken  himself.  He  has  gone  down  out  of  himself  into  that  which  was  a 
supplementary  nature,  an  auxiliary  part.  He  has  left  that  nature  of  reason,  and 
that  nature  of  moral  sense,  and  that  nature  of  spirituality,  which  constitute  hit 
manhood,  and  has  given  himself  up  to  the  range  of  the  senses.  And  that  is  the 
way  the  bird  lives.  That  is  the  way  the  brute  creation  lives.  He  and  they  alike 
live  for  the  gratification  of  the  appetites  and  the  passions.  It  does  not  require  that 
•  man  should  become  an  assassin,  or  a  mighty  criminal,  before  it  can  be  said  that 
he  is  unnaturaL  Every  man  that  teaches  himself  to  find  the  chief  employments 
and  enjoyments  of  his  manhood  lower  than  in  his  reason  and  moral  sentiments  and 
spiritual  nature,  has  forsaken  himself.  Every  man  whose  business  is  manual  and 
physical,  and  who  contents  himself  with  that  business,  and  feeds  himself  by  nothing 
oi^er  than  that,  is  a  creature  that  is  spending  his  life  forces  lower  than  the  lev^ 
of  tne  manhood.  Take  a  step  higher.  Do  you  live  habitually,  in  your  ordinary 
■VOL.  nt.  3 1 


16 J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  xr. 

affairs,  in  joar  social  intercourse,  in  the  things  that  you  seek  And  the  things  thai 
yoa  avoid,  according  to  the  dictates  of  your  moral  sense  ?    Are  you  conscious  tha( 
you  bring  to  bear  upon  your  conduct  the  great  moral  measurements,  the  rights  and 
the  wrongs,  that  have  been  determined  by  the  holiest  experiences  of  the  best  mea 
of  the  world,  and  have  come  down  to  os  in  the  records  of  God's  Word,  as  God's  best 
judgments  expressed  through  such  experiences  through  thousands  of  years  t    Do 
you  live  in  accord  with  them  ?    Are  you  uniformly  generous,  uniformly  unselfish, 
uniformly    true  ?      Is  your   life    straight  ?      Is    your    path    from    day    to    day 
a  line  drawn  as  true  as  a  rule  could  draw  it  ?    Are  you  ri^^t-eous,  or  are  you 
unright-eouB  ?    Measure  your  life  by  this  higher  moral  sentiment.    Is  there  a  man 
who  does  not  know  that  his  life  will  not  bear  any  such  measurement  as  that? 
Every  man  says, "  There  is  not  a  faculty  that,  when  it  acts,  does  not  act  crookedly." 
Take  any  single  one  of  your  feelings  and  watch  it  for  a  single  day,  and  you  will 
find  it  to  be  so.     You  are  living  below  your  true  manhood.     It  is  only  once  in  a 
while  that  you  come  to  yourself.     You  do  once  in  a  while.    When  a  truly  eminent 
Christian  man  dies,  and  the  soimd  of  life  is  for  a  short  time  hushed,  all  your  better 
feelings  lay  down  their  warlike  feathers,  and  there  rises  up  in  your  soul  a  conscious- 
ness, an  ideal,  of  what  you  ought  to  be,  and  how  you  ought  to  live,  for  a  single 
moment,  it  may  be,  or  a  single  hour.     I  have  seen  men  come  over  from  their 
business  in  New  York,   to  attend  the  funeral  of  a  brother — of  some  eminent 
Christian — and  shed  tears  in  this  house.    When,  for  instance,  Brother  Coming 
was  buried,  I  saw  hard-faced  men  cry.      And   I   know   what   we   should  hear 
such  men  say  if  we  could  listen  to  their  conversation  as  they  walk  away  on  such 
occasions.    "Dear  brother,"  says  one,  "we  have  been  working  for  money ;  bat  that 
is  not  the  main  thing.   It  is  only  a  little  while  that  it  can  do  us  any  good."   "  That 
is  true,"  says  another.     "  We  must  die  soon.    It  will  not  be  long  before  there  will 
be  just  such  a  funeral  for  us.    And  are  we  ready  ?  "    And  so  these  two  men,  grey- 
haired,  it  may  be,  very  simple  and  very  much  in  earnest,  give  expression  to  their 
feelings  as  they  go  down  to  Fulton  Ferry.    And  as  they  cross  over  they  say  to 
themselves,  "  I  mil  think  of  these  things,  and  try  to  carry  the  impression  of  them 
with  me."    But  when  they  go  up  the  street  on  the  other  side  they  meet  this  man 
and  that  man,  and  their  minds  are  distracted  from  these  serious  thoughts ;  and 
when  they  get  back  into  their  counting-room  they  forget  all  about  them.     They  did 
think  they  would  tell  their  wives  all  about  it  when  they  got  home  at  night ;  but 
when,  at  the  supper- table,  they  were  asked,  "Husband,  did  you  go  to  the  funeral 
to-day?"  they  said,  "Yes."    "Was  it  a  good  funeral?"    "Very,  very."    That 
was  all  they  had  to  say  about  it !    And  yet  they  had  had  a  revelation.    They  had 
come  to  themselves,  though  it  was  but  for  an  hour.    (H.  W,  Beecher.)      The  dawn 
of  better  thingt: — "  He  came  to  himself."   He  never  had  come  anywhere  to  so  good 
a  pnxpose.    He  had  come  to  a  far  country  and  gained  much  knowledge  at  a  very, 
very  dear  rate.  He  had  come  to  strange  doings,^  and  seen  strange  characters,  whose 
face  it  had  been  a  mercy  never  to  have  seen.    He  has  seen  the  world,  and  some  of 
its  mysteries  of  iniquity,  and  paid  dearly  for  it ;  but  now,  at  length,  he  comes  to 
himself.     He  had  always  been  a  stranger  there,  unwilling  to  converse  seriously 
with  his  own  proud,  flattering,  deceived  heart.    Sometimes,  in  such  cases  as  this, 
a  young  man  cannot  communicate  with  his  friends ;  letters  are  intercepted,  oom- 
mumcation  cut  off.    One  of  Satan's  plans  is  this,  to  put  a  barrier  to  prevent  the 
prodigal  coming  to  himself.    No  prisoner  was  ever  so  vigilantly  watched — none  so 
guarded  with  high  walls,  and  gates,  and  bars,  and  spikes,  as  the  sinner,  to  keep 
him  from  coming  to  himself.    He  is  worked  hard,  he  is  deceived,  he  is  blinded  and 
led  astray ;  he  is  kept  from  church ;  his  Sundays  are  desecrated ;  his  Bible  taken 
away,  or  left  nnread ;  while  bad  books  are  laid  on  his  table,  and  greedily  devoured. 
Every  avenue  seems  blocked  up  by  which  the  prodigal  might  come  to  himself. 
Come  now  to  himself,  let  us  hear  what  he  thinks  and  speaks  to  himself  about. 
"  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I 
here  perish  with  hanger."    The  first  thing  that  now  stands,  like  a  spectre,  in  the 
chamber  of  his  dark  and  troubled  mind,  is  the  long-excluded  image  of  his  father. 
"There,"  thought  he,  "far,  far  away,  there  is  my  father;  his  house,  once  my 
home,  enriched  with  every  comfort;  and  the  servants,  hirelings  as  they  are,  yet  not 
a  want  have  they  that  is  unsupplied ;  and  his  own  son,  in  this  place,  perishing 
with  hanger  I  "    The  recollection  comes  home  fresh  and  vivid  to  his  mind's  eye ; 
he  sees  them  all  again.    And  then,  looking  roond  on  the  sad  reality  of  his  drtHff 
desolation,  his  strength  failing  from  hunger,  he  is  touched  and  humbled  by  tna 
•onttMt — ^I  here,  in  this  wretched  ooontry,  perish  with  hunger.     There  is  um 


«Hi».  XT.]  5r.  LUKE.  163 

picture  of  an  awakened  sinner.  God  be  thanked  for  Ibis.  He  is  at  length  oome 
•to  himself.  The  dream  is  broken.  "  Why,"  says  he — •'  why  should  I  sit  here  to 
starve  ?  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father."  Do  yon  ask  me  whence  came  that 
godly  purpose  ?  I  answer,  from  the  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners.  It  was  no 
spontaneoas  resolution  that  sprung  np  of  itself,  among  the  better  purposes  of  that 
young  man's  nature.  No,  no.  Sinners  do  not  repent  and  turn  to  God  in  that 
fashion  of  themselves.  Let  us  give  the  praise  to  whom  the  praise  is  due.  "  No 
man  can  oome  to  Me,  except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  Me,  draw  him. "  The 
sense  of  his  wretchedness  drew  him — his  dread  of  perishing — the  tender  recol- 
lections of  his  father's  love,  and  his  well-known  mercy — the  desire  springing  up 
in  his  heart,  and  the  hope  of  pardon  springing  up  in  his  breast  —  these  are 
the  drawings  of  the  Father's  grace,  and  these  prevailed  to  bring  his  godly 
purposes    to   good   effect.       (IF.  B.  Mackenzie,  M.A.)  The  prodigal's  mad- 

ness : — He  had  been  under  a  hallucination.  No  doubt,  if  one  had  charged  him 
Mrith  insanity,  he  would  have  denied  the  charge ;  and  if  a  physician's  certificate 
had  been  required  to  prove  his  soundness  of  mind,  he  could  easily  have  got  it  from 
one  of  the  "far  country"  doctors,  who  possibly  had  sat  at  his  table  while  hia 
money  lasted,  and  freely  quaffed  his  mixed  wine ;  but  it  would  not  have  been  so 
easy  for  him  to  get  such  a  certificate  from  his  own  father,  or  his  God.  And  had 
not  his  actions  been  like  the  actions  of  a  madman  T  If  you  saw  a  man  flinging 
sovereigns  in  handfuls  into  the  sea,  would  you  not  be  disposed  to  look  into  his  eyes 
-to  satisfy  yourself  as  to  whether  or  not  the  ray  of  reason  had  altogether  fled  away 
from  these  expressive  orbs  ?  Now,  had  not  this  youth  virtually  done  so?  And  do 
not  multitudes,  in  our  own  day  and  land,  at  race-courses  and  in  taverns,  do  the 
eame  ?  "  But  they  are  amused,"  you  say,  "  and  excited  at  these  places  of  resort." 
And  so  is  the  madman  who  heaves  away  the  sovereigns.  In  truth,  he  pats 
the  shining  coins  to  a  much  more  harmless  use  than  these  other  maniacs. 
^J''.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  Sadness  of  a  lapse  after  recovery  ;-^I  heard  Thackeray  in 
this  city  lecture  on  "The  Four  Georges."  With  his  own  peculiar  eloquence,  he 
described  the  sad  insanity  of  George  III.  I  recollect  especially  his  account  of  the 
poor  king's  transient  recovery.  Mr.  Pitt  was  sent  for.  It  was  a  great  event.  The 
king  had  "  oome  to  himself."  The  Regency  Bill  was  preparing ;  but  even  yet  it 
might  not  be  required.  Alas  1  his  sanity  was  short-lived.  For,  sitting  down  at  his 
iavonrite  organ,  he  played  a  few  notes — stopped — covered  his  face  with  his  hands — 
horst  into  tMurs — and  tiien  reason  fled  for  ever  I 

**  m  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak ; 
To  His  folk  He'll  speak  peace, 
And  to  His  saints  ;  but  let  them  not 
Betum  to  foohshness." 

It  lies  with  them  to  say  whether  they  will  return  to  it  or  not.  The  poor  king  eoold 
not  help  returning  to  his  foolishness,  but  Christians  can.  As  spiritual  insanity, 
from  the  first,  is  voluntary  and  culpable,  so  is  the  relapse  into  it.  Besist  the  devil, 
and  he  and  his  hallucinations  will  flee  from  you.  This  youth  in  the  parable  did 
not  return  to  his  folly  again,  but  to  his  father.  {Ibid.)  A  young  man  come  to 
himself: — "  And  when  he  came  to  himself."  Then  he  had  ran  away  from  himself. 
Precisely.  He  had  not  only  ran  away  from  his  father,  and  his  family,  and  hia 
home ;  bat  he  bad  run  away  from  himself,  made  escape  ftrom  the  voice  of  reason 
«nd  of  conscience,  from  his  better  nature,  from  all  that  constituted  him  a  man. 
No  doubt  he  thought  it  a  very  jolly  Ufe.  Every  desire  was  gratified ;  every  passion 
iiad  its  festival  of  pleasure.  But,  of  course,  this  could  not  last  long.  If  yoa 
unhook  the  pendulum  of  a  clock,  the  works  will  go  fast  and  merrily,  but  they  will 
soon  run  down.  Presently  his  money  was  spent ;  his  capacity  for  pleasure  blunted ; 
his  character  gone ;  and  then  the  reaction  came.  The  man  was  famishing.  It 
was  not  only  food  he  wanted,  but  the  hunger  of  home  was  upon  him,  the  yearning 
for  sympathy,  and  respect,  and  love ;  and  this  brought  him  to  his  senses ;  the 
prodigal  •' came  to  himself."  What  is  it  for  a  young  man  to  come  to  himself  ?  In 
common  everyday  life  the  expression  is  variously  used,  but  always  denotes  that  the 
person  has  come  to  better  judgment,  or  to  a  fuller  use  of  his  faculties,  than  before. 
I  need  not  say,  however,  that  the  expression  on  the  lips  of  our  Divine  Lord  has  a 
broader  and  mo^e  serious  meaning.  A  man  may  be  perfectly  calm  in  temper,  clear 
in  head,  and  vigorous  in  body,  and  yet  never  have  really  "  come  to  himself."  Ha 
may  never  have  apprehended  where  hia  real  manhood  lies.    There  is  a  great  deal 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*„  xt. 

that  we  have  in  common  with  the  lower  animals  :  and,  whilst  yon  keep  to  that 

?)lane — so  long  as  you  live  merely  for  your  baser  appetites  and  passions — so 
ong  as  all  you  do  is  simply  to  sleep,  and  walk,  and  eat,  and  drink,  and  toil 
because  you  roust  toil,  you  have  not  yet  come  to  yourselves,  as  reasonable, 
moral,  and  spiritual  beings.  For  there  are  mainly  three  things  in  which  man 
is  distinguished  from  the  brutes;  and  it  is  by  these,  and  not  by  what  he  has 
in  common  with  them,  that  his  life  should  be  inspired  and  his  actions 
governed.  I  say  that  a  man  truly  comes  to  himself  only  when  the  grand 
motors  of  his  conduct  are  reason,  conscience,  and  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God, 
When  is  it  generally  that  a  man  comes  to  himself  ?  Ah  I  let  this  story  tell.  When 
he  gets  into  trouble.  When  he  "has  spent  all,"  and  begins  to  be  in  want,  and 
"  no  man  gives  unto  him."  I  don't  mean  to  say  that  it  is  only  under  such  condi- 
tions. Thank  God,  no.  There  have  been  men  sitting  here,  with  every  earthly 
thing  to  make  them  contented,  and  God  has  made  this  pulpit  a  bow  from  which 
He  has  shot  an  arrow  straight  to  the  centre  of  their  heart,  and  the  arrow  was  never 
pulled  out  till  they  could  call  Christ  their  own.  Your  sister  wrote  you  a  serious 
letter,  and  dropped  it  into  yon  village  post-office  far  away  ;  it  was  moistened  with 
tears,  and  perfumed  with  prayers  ;  and  when  you  read  it  you  clean  broke  down  and 
fell  on  your  knees  ;  and  since  that  hour  you  have  been  another  man.  The  delicious 
memory  of  those  Sabbath  evenings  in  your  country  home,  ay,  maybe  twenty  years 
ago,  when  in  the  gloaming  (for  the  candles  were  scarcely  needed)  you  all  gathered 
round,  and  old  father  put  on  his  spectacles,  and  opened  the  big  well-worn  Bible, 
and  mother  had  the  youngest  on  her  knee,  and  you  all  read  verse  by  verse,  and 
said  your  catechism,  and  then  sung  a  psalm  together  ;  I.  say,  the  memory  of  this 
has  chastened  you  amid  the  follies  of  this  great  city,  and  made  you  thirst  for  purer 
streams  than  the  giddy  world  can  yield.  But,  as  a  rule,  it  is  by  some  trouble  or 
sorrow  that  God  brings  a  man  to  himself.  Many  a  man  has  "  come  to  himself  " 
under  the  blow  of  some  crushing  bereavement.  Yes ;  all  the  sermons  in  the  world 
would  not  move  him ;  all  our  arguments  failed  to  make  an  impression.  But  one 
day  there  came  to  him  a  stealthy  preacher  without  notes,  and  that  pale  preacher 
was  Death  ;  and  when  he  saw  his  bonnie  little  sister  lying  cold  in  her  coflSn,  or  the 
turf  laid  smoothly  over  the  grave  that  contained  his  precious  mother,  he  could  stand 
it  no  longer ;  he  said,  "  From  this  hour  my  treasure  and  my  heart  shall  be  in 
heaven,"  And  we  have  had  young  men  here  who,  like  this  youth  in  the  parable, 
never  came  to  themselves  till  they  were  in  want.  You  were  out  of  a  situation ;  you 
could  find  nothing  to  do ;  all  your  testimonials  failed  to  get  you  an  opening.  Some 
of  your  friends  treated  you,  as  you  thought,  shabbily.  You  had  letters  blowing  you 
up  for  being  unfortunate.  You  had  spent  all,  and  no  one  gave  unto  you.  Men  who 
used  to  shake  your  hand  so  tightly  that  your  knuckles  ached,  now  gave  you  but  the 
coldest  nod.  How  next  week's  lodging  was  to  be  paid  you  could  not  see.  And  then, 
only  then,  in  the  bitterness  of  your  extremity,  you  flung  yourself  upon  God,  and 
found  that  you  had  a  Father  and  a  Friend  above.  Oh,  how  many  never  find  this 
out  till  the  day  of  sorrow  comes  1  A  good,  pious  man  met  a  poor  ragged  urchin  in 
the  street,  and,  putting  his  hand  on  his  head,  said,  "  My  little  man,  when  your  father 
and  your  mother  forsake  you,  who  will  take  you  up  ?  "  And  what,  think  you,  waa 
the  wee  laddie's  answer  ?  "  The  perlice,  sir."  {J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.)  A  sinner 
brought  to  his  right  mind: — 1.  This  young  man  first  "came  to  himself"  with 
regard  to  the  past.  He  had  thought  previously  that  he  was  acting  *•  sensibly  "  : 
now  he  sees  that  he  has  been  playing  the  fool.  He  has  been  trying  all  along  to 
persuade  himself  that  he  has  really  been  enjoying  himself ;  now  he  suddenly  cornea 
to  the  conclusion  that  all  the  while  he  has  been  a  stranger  to  real  happiness.  Ha 
looks  at  those  four,  or  five,  or  six  years :  before,  he  had  plumed  himself  upon  the 
life  he  had  been  leading ;  now,  he  scarcely  dares  to  think  about  it ;  he  hides  hia 
face  with  shame;  he  buries  it  in  his  hands,  as  he  sits  there  in  the  field,  the  hot 
tears  streaming  through  his  fingers.  "  What  a  fool  I  have  been  1  What  a  wretch 
I  have  been  !  What  a  base  ingrate  I  have  been  !  Good  God  I  wcrt  Thou  to  strike 
me  down  with  a  thunderbolt  of  displeasure  to  the  very  depths  of  hell,  it  is  only 
what  I  deserve."  2.  And  he  "  comes  to  himself  "  with  regard  to  the  present.  He 
finds  himself  face  to  face  with  death.  Nearer  and  nearer  the  grim  spectre  draws ; 
the  bow  seems  already  bent,  and  the  arrow  seems  already  fixed,  and  in  a  moment  the 
fatal  shaft  may  fly,  and  his  mortal  career  may  end  in  doom.  Face  to  face  with  death 
— it  is  an  awfnl  thing  I  He  feels  it  in  his  own  body.  That  strange  numbness  that 
is  creeping  over  him,  that  sense  of  mortal  weakness,  that  stupor  which  has  already 
been  paralyzing  the  senees — what  is  it  ?    Incipient  death.    His  strength  has  passed 


tWAP.  xT.j  ST.  LUKE.  165 

into  weakness ;  he  can  scarcely  totter  across  the  field ;  his  haggard  form  seema 
more  fit  for  a  sepulchre  than  for  human  society.  What  can  he  do  ?  Whatever  he 
can  do  he  must  do  quickly.  The  tide  of  life  is  ebbing  fast ;  a  few  more  hours,  and 
his  opportunity  will  be  gone.  It  is  a  long  way  to  the  country  he  has  left — a  long 
way  to  his  father's  house ;  if  anything  is  to  be  done,  not  so  much  as  a  moment  is 
to  be  lost.  8.  And  thus  it  is  that  he  also  "  comes  to  himself  "  with  regard  to  the 
future.  The  future  1  What  can  he  do  ?  W^hat  hope  is  there  for  him  ?  Has  he 
not  lost  every  chance,  and  thrown  away  every  possibility  ?  Nay,  it  strikes  him 
that  there  is  just  one  faint  ray  of  hope :  it  seems  a  very  faint  one.  Is  there  a 
possibUity  that  he  may  get  some  relief  from  his  friends  in  this  distant  land  ?  No, 
he  has  given  that  up  altogether.  Can  he  not  find  a  better  master  somewhere.  No, 
he  has  tried  all  through  the  famine-stricken  country,  and  this  man  that  has  "  sent 
him  into  the  fields  to  feed  swine  "  is  the  best  that  he  can  find.  What  can  he  do  ? 
Can  he  work  any  harder  ?  No,  he  has  no  strength  left  to  work.  Where  is  hope  to 
be  found  ?  Where  is  that  ray  of  dim,  uncertain  light  coming  from  ?  There  rises 
up  within  his  recollection  the  memory  of  a  peaceful  home,  of  calm,  happy  days. 
The  bright  sunlight  of  his  childhood  returns  to  his  memory  like  a  pleasant  dream 
amidst  the  frightful  horrors  of  his  present  experience.  Could  he  regain  it ;  could 
he  retrace  his  steps,  and  get  one  more  look  at  that  dear  old  place ;  could  he  but  sit 
down  amongst  the  "  hired  servants  "  of  his  father's  house  !  4,  My  friends,  he  not 
only  "  comes  to  himself  "  with  regard  to  himself,  but  also  with  regard  to  his  father: 
he  had  taken  a  wrong  view  of  his  father — a  distorted  view  :  he  had  painted  him  in 
the  most  repulsive  colours ;  now  he  takes  a  different  view  of  the  case,  and  comes  to 
the  conclusion  that,  after  all,  he  was  wrong.  He  had  wronged  those  hoary  hairs. 
The  thought  rises  in  his  mind,  "  He  loved  me  ;  yes,  he  loved  me  after  all ;  I  saw 
the  tear  start  into  his  eye  when  I  left  home ;  he  wrung  my  haud  when  I  went  away 
from  him,  and  his  lip  was  quivering ;  though  I  have  given  him  so  much  trouble,  I 
know  he  loved  me ;  he  was  never  hard  on  me :  when,  as  a  child,  I  wanted  anything 
reasonable,  it  was  always  within  my  reach  ;  if  I  had  childish  troubles,  those  kind, 
fatherly  hands  were  laid  upon  my  brow,  and  fatherly  words  of  tenderness  were 
spoken  in  my  ear — yes,  he  did  love  me ;  I  have  wronged  him,  I  had  no  right  to 
think  him  hard ;  he  was  not  hard :  I  wonder  if  he  is  changed ;  years  have  passed  over 
him,  years  have  passed  over  me  ;  I  left  him  with  a  smiling  countenance  ;  I  put  on 
my  best  appearance,  and  tried  to  seem  as  though  I  did  not  care  a  straw  for  leaving 
hioi :  perhaps  he  has  hardened  his  heart  against  me,  and  will  never  look  at  me 
again ;  yet,  perhaps — perhaps  there  is  something  like  love  in  his  heart  towards  me 
still ;  surely  he  cannot  have  altogether  ceased  to  love  his  poor  wandering  boy."  So 
he  starts  to  his  feet,  and  in  another  moment  the  word  of  resolution  has  sped  forth 
from  his  lips,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father."  It  is  even  so  with  thee,  dear 
awakened  sinner.  So  soon  as  God  begins  to  awaken  thee.  He  awakens  thee  first  of 
all  with  regard  to  the  past.  Are  there  not  some  of  you  that  are  awakened  with 
regard  to  the  past  ?  You  used  to  look  upon  it  with  complacency,  now  you  look 
upon  it  with  horror.  You  used  to  think  well  of  yourself,  now  you  cannot  speak  of 
yourself  too  hardly.  There  was  a  time  when  you  flattered  yourself  that,  at  any 
rate,  you  were  no  worse  than  other  people;  now  it  seems  as  if  you  could  not  invent 
any  epithet  sufficiently  strong  to  indicate  your  horror  and  disgust  at  your  past  life. 
How  is  it  7  You  are  beginning  to  "  come  to  yourself,"  too,  with  regard  to  your 
present.  Yon  find  yourself  face  to  face  with  death.  Spiritual  death  has  already 
grasped  you ;  its  iron  clutch  is  on  you ;  that  dread  spectre  is  looking  yon  in  the 
face ;  you  are  beginning  to  realize,  in  your  own  terrible  experience,  the  force  of 
those  words,  ••  Dying,  thou  shalt  die  t  "  Do  what  you  will,  you  cannot  writhe  out 
of  the  grasp  of  that  terrible  spiritual  arrest.  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  And  you  come  to  yourself  with 
respect  to  the  future.  ••  Is  there  a  possibiUty  that  I  can  be  otherwise  7  May  I  turn 
my  back  upon  the  past  7  Is  it  possible  that  a  sinner  like  me  can  lead  a  new  life  ? 
May  even  I  become  a  new  creature  ?  "  Then  it  is  that  the  soul  begins  to  "  come 
to  itself  "  with  respect  to  the  character  of  the  Father.  Ah,  my  dear  friends,  you 
may  have  maligned  Him,  you  may  have  slandered  Him,  you  may  have  allowed 
Satan  to  misrepresent  Him  to  your  own  fancy ;  you  may  have  conceived  of  Him 
"  as  an  austere  man,  reaping  where  He  had  not  sown,  and  gathering  where  He  had 
not  strawed."  It  seemed  as  though  you  could  not  speak  too  harshly  of  Him.  But 
•11  that  has  changed,  and  you  are  beginning  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  after 
all  He  is  your  Father,  that  He  has  a  Father's  tenderness,  pity  and  love ;  that 
ftlthoogh  yon  have  misrepresented  Him  so  long,  tmd  sinned  against  Him  bo  groaaly. 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xf. 

yet  there  must  be  something  in  that  heart  of  His  that  goes  oat  towards  your  misery. 
Ah!  my  friend,  you  are  only  just  beginning  to  "oome  to  yourself "  about  that 
Father :  but  if  you  will  go  a  little  nearer  to  that  Father's  house,  bare  your  bosom 
to  that  Father's  influence — if  you  will  expose  yourself  to  that  Father's  eye,  it  will 
not  be  long  before  you  will  have  a  different  estimate  from  what  you  have  even  at 
jbia  moment  of  what  that  Father's  love  really  is.  Think  not  of  God  the  Father  as 
ii  He  were  unsympathetic.  Believe  what  Christ  Himself  has  taught  of  His  Father's 
love  (Oh  that  I  could  write  it  on  your  heart  of  hearts  at  this  moment  1) :  "  God  so 
loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  Son."  {W.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  A  sinner 
brought  to  his  right  mind : — A  Christian  father  had  a  son  whose  condact  had  nearly 
broken  his  heart.  He  had  prayed  for  him,  instructed  him  in  the  things  of  God, 
and  done  all  that  his  deep  love  for  his  soul  and  for  his  future  welfare  dictated,  but 
all  to  no  avail.  He  grew  up  a  vile,  hardened  sinner,  and  left  his  father's  home, 
young  in  years  but  old  in  sin.  At  length  that  father  was  thrown  upon  a  bed  of 
death.  Before  breathing  his  last  he  sent  for  his  prodigal  son,  and  asked  him  to 
promise,  after  his  father  was  laid  in  the  grave,  that  he  would  spend  one  hour  alone 
each  day  in  that  room,  for  three  months.  The  son  readily  gave  the  promise.  The 
death  of  his  father  made  but  little  impression  on  him,  and  again  he  rushed  on  in 
his  mad  career  of  sin.  That  hour  alone,  however,  was  a  great  burden  to  him.  He 
greatly  dreaded  it,  yet  did  not  dare  to  break  his  promise,  made  under  such  solemn 
circumstances.  At  last  one  day  the  hour  dragged  along  slower  than  usual.  Ha 
had  an  engagement  with  some  boon  companions,  and  was  in  haste  to  go  and  enjoy 
their  society.  He  often  consulted  his  watch  to  see  how  the  time  passed.  At  last 
the  thought  came  into  his  mind,  "  Why  did  my  father  lay  upon  me  this  strange 
obligation?  "  Then  quick  as  lightning  the  thought  flashed  over  his  mind,  "  My 
father  was  a  good  man,  he  loved  my  soul,  and  it  must  have  been  for  my  soul's 
good  he  did  this,"  This  led  him  to  reflect  upon  his  father's  love,  his  past  life  in 
all  its  vileness,  his  lost  and  desperate  state  as  a  sinner  against  God's  holy  law,  till 
he  fell  upon  his  knees,  and  cried,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  1 "  He  spent 
not  only  the  hour  but  tbe  whole  day  alone  with  God,  nor  did  he  leave  the  room  till 
it  could  be  said  of  him,  that  he  "  had  come  to  himself."  He  came  oat  of  that 
room  a  converted  man.  The  madness  of  sinners : — A  few  months  ago,  I  was 
conducting  a  Mission  in  the  north  of  England,  and  the  clergyman  in  whose  church 
I  was  preaching,  receiving  from  an  anonymous  correspondent  one  of  the  handbills 
which  had  been  circulated  in  preparation  for  the  Mission,  with  two  words  added 
after  the  words  "A  Mission" — viz.,  "for  lunatics";  so  that  it  read,  "A  Mission 
for  lunatics  I  "  I  do  not  suppose  that  the  man  who  wrote  those  words  had  any 
particular  intention  of  telling  the  troth,  but  it  is  startling  to  think  how  near  the 
truth  he  came.  Perhaps,  if  we  could  see  things  as  those  bright  intelligences  see 
them,  who  are  permitted  to  hover  round  this  world  of  ours,  and  to  be  witnesses  of 
human  action,  we  shoold  be  disposed  to  regard  (is  it  not  possible  that  they  do 
regard  ?)  this  world  of  ours  as  one  great  lunatic  asylum.  It  must  seem  strange  to 
them  that  to  men  and  women  there  should  be  made  such  glorious  offers,  that 
before  their  eyes  there  should  be  spread  such  magnificent  possibilities,  and  that,  in 
the  folly  of  their  onbelief,  they  should  turn  their  back  upon  their  own  traest 
interest,  and  sin  against  their  own  sonls.  Lunatics  indeed  I  There  are  dangerous 
lunatics,  frenzied  by  passion  or  goaded  by  ambition,  ao  dangerous  that  some- 
times  their  fellow  lunatics  have  to  put  a  kind  of  restraint  upon  them,  for  fear 
that  the  paroxysms  of  their  mortal  disease  should  carry  them  too  far.  Then 
there  are  harmless  lunatics,  men  and  women  whose  lives  are  simply  insipid, 
who  seem  to  be  jast  as  void  of  any  object  in  life  as  the  butterfly  that  flits 
from  flower  to  flower,  drifted  about  by  every  influence  that  happens  to  be  for 
the  moment  affecting  them,  without  any  stability  of  purpose,  without  any  recog- 
nition of  the  dignity  of  their  own  being.  Then,  again,  there  are  the  self-oom- 
placent  lunatics,  the  men  and  women  who  are  so  particularly  self-satisfied  that 
they  can  afford  to  look  down  upon  everybody  else,  and  persuade  themselves  that 
they  are  models  of  good  sense,  and  that  those  who  are  possessed  of  that  spiritual 
"  wisdom  which  comes  from  above,"  are  themselves  in  a  state  of  insanity.  Is  it 
not  so  ?  Is  not  that  just  the  way  in  which  self-complacent  men  of  the  world  speak 
about  those  who  know  something  of  the  realities  of  eternity  ?  Have  we  not  heard 
it  again  and  again,  till  we  are  almost  tired  of  hearing  it,  e^er  since  the  days  when 
Festus  charged  Paul  with  being  "beside  himself"?  Indeed,  this  is  one  of  the 
features  of  lunacy.  You  go  into  a  lunatic  asylum,  and  you  will  always  find  a  large 
number  of  patients  who  regard  themselves  as  injured  persons,  who  are  suffering  not 


nir.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  167 

from  their  own  disease  of  insanity,  but  from  the  insanity  of  other  people.  Thera 
are  some  who  fancy  themselves  kings  upon  their  throne,  and  their  sabjecta  too 
insane  to  render  them  the  honour  which  is  their  due.  Others,  who  imagine  them- 
selves men  of  vast  wealth  and  possessions,  and  those  who  ought  to  be  their  servants, 
too  insane  to  render  them  the  service  they  have  a  rightful  claim  to.  So,  while  they 
persuade  themselves  that  they  indeed  are  in  the  full  possession  of  their  senses,  they 
also  contrive  to  please  themselves  by  thinking  that  other  persons  who  are  actually 
sane  are  afflicted  with  the  very  disease  from  which  they  are  suffering.  Friends, 
it  is  even  so  in  the  spiritual  world.  The  men  and  women  whom  Satan  has  deluded 
most  completely  are  just  tbose  who  are  the  least  conscious  of  their  own  insanity. 
The  disease  has  taken  bo  firm  a  hold  upon  their  moral  system  that  they  believe  that 
they  are  much  more  sane  than  those  who  are  living  in  the  light  of  Divine  wisdom. 
There  view  of  the  case  is  an  exact  inversion  of  the  truth ;  and  as  long  as  this  moral 
«tupor  continues,  the  efforts  which  are  made  by  those  (who  see  things  as  they  are;, 
to  awaken  them  from  their  fatal  slumber,  are  regarded  by  these  spiritual  lunatioa 
«s  simply  the  indication  of  moral  infatuation,  and  they  themselves,  in  their  pro- 
ioand  stupor,  flatter  themselves  that  they  indeed  alone  are  reasonable  beings. 
{W.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  He  came  to  himself: — The  word  may  be  appUed 
to  one  waking  out  of  a  deep  swoon.  He  had  been  unconscious  of  his 
true  condition,  and  he  had  lost  all  power  to  dehver  himself  from  ^  it ; 
bnt  now  he  was  coming  round  again,  returning  to  consciousness  and  action. 
Betuming,  then,  to  true  reason  and  sound  judgment,  the  prodigal  came  to  himself. 
Another  illustration  of  the  word  may  be  found  in  the  old-world  fables  of  enchant- 
ment :  when  a  man  was  disenthralled  from  the  magician's  spell  he  "  came  to  him- 
eelf."  Classic  story  has  its  legend  of  Circe,  the  enchantress,  who  transformed  men 
into  swine.  Surely  this  young  man  in  our  parable  had  been  degraded  in  the  same 
manner.  He  had  lowered  his  manhood  to  the  level  of  the  brutes.  It  should  be 
the  property  of  man  to  have  love  to  his  kindred,  to  have  respect  for  right,  to  have 
some  care  for  his  own  interest ;  this  young  man  had  lost  all  these  proper  attributes 
of  humanity,  and  so  had  become  as  the  beast  that  perisheth.  But  as  the  poet 
sings  of  Ulysses,  that  he  compelled  the  enchantress  to  restore  his  companions  to 
their  original  form,  so  here  we  see  the  prodigal  returning  to  manhood,  looking  away 
from  his  sensual  pleasures,  and  commencing  a  course  of  conduct  more  consistent 
with  his  birth  and  parentage.  {<7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Beneficial  results  of  affiistion: — 
In  bringing  sinners  to  their  right  mind,  the  sobering  influence  which  God  most 
frequently  employs  in  affliction.  A  man  who  had  a  praying  wife  was  himself  a 
drunkard.  He  was  a  gambler,  and  went  to  all  the  races  within  his  reach,  usually 
returning  tipsy.  Fond  of  fighting,  he  was  withal  a  brutal  husband,  and  often 
struck  his  wife.  Beyond  all  this,  as  he  wished  that  there  was  no  God,  he  tried  to 
persuade  himself  that  there  is  none.  There  never  was  a  bolder  blasphemer.  One 
night,  when  he  was  swearing  dreadfully,  his  wife  begged  him  to  desist.  "  Tom," 
she  said,  "  the  Lord  will  strike  you  dead."  "  Who  is  the  Lord  ?  "  he  shouted,  and 
then  started  off  in  oath  after  oath  with  the  wildest  imprecations,  defying  the  Lord 
to  touch  him,  vociferating  and  gesticulating  till  the  perspiration  stood  upon  hia 
brow,  and  he  sank  down  exhausted  by  his  paroxysm  of  frantic  impiety.  For 
capturing  a  leviathan  Uke  this  you  would  have  thought  of  an  iron  cable ;  you  would 
have  been  for  putting  a  tremendous  hook  in  his  nose.  But  the  Lord  had  hold  of 
him  already.  How  ?  Through  his  excellent  wife,  you  reply.  Well,  she  lost  her 
lather,  and  on  the  Sabbath  after  the  funeral  she  prevailed  on  her  husband  to 
accompany  her  to  church.  The  sermon  was  on  the  depravity  of  man.  He  gnashed 
his  teeth  as  he  heard  it,  and  with  all  his  own  corruption  stirred  to  fury  he  turned 
on  hia  poor  helpmate  as  she  came  home,  and,  in  her  new  mourning,  kicked  her 
downstairs.  But  a  silken  cord,  if  it  be  God's,  will  draw  out  leviathan — nay,  with 
such  a  cord  in  the  hand  of  a  httle  child  He  can  lead  the  lion.  This  brutal  father 
had  a  daughter  two  years  of  age,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  this  babe  the  Lord  often 
stilled  the  enemy  and  avenger.  When  coming  home  in  a  savage  humour,  and 
knocking  about  his  helpless  partner,  the  little  Maria  would  scramble  into  her 
mother's  lap,  and  with  her  pinafore  wiping  the  tears,  would  gently  bid  ber  "  Don't 
cry,  mamma,"  and  turning  on  him  a  reproving  face,  would  say,  "  Ah !  naughty 
papa,  to  make  poor  mamma  cry."  This  little  one  he  really  loved,  and  this  Uttla 
one  tiie  Lord  took.  Soon  after  returning  from  her  grave,  the  father  was  once  more 
persuaded  to  enter  a  place  of  worship ;  and  this  time  the  word  of  the  Lord  found 
him.  The  parable  of  '*  The  wise  and  foolish  virgins  "  opened  his  eyes,  and  feeling 
(hat  if  he  continued  in  his  wickedness  he  must  perish  eternally,  with  all  the 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTHATOR.  [chap.  «▼. 

earnestness  of  an  awakened  conscience  he  began  to  seek  salvation.  Night  and  day 
he  sought  it,  often  with  crying  and  tears;  and  when  at  last  the  Saviour  stood 
revealed  before  him,  he  consecrated  life  to  ELis  service,  and  has  ever  since  proved  • 
faithful  follower  and  a  valiant  soldier  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (James  Hamiliont 
D.D.)  Revulsion  after  excess : — Where  there  is  any  nobleness  in  the  nature,  it 
occasionally  happens,  that  the  very  excess  of  riot  leads  to  a  revulsion.  *'  I  was 
converted  by  six  weeks'  debauchery,"  says  a  somewhat  paradoxical  character  in 
fiction  ;  and  when  the  good  minister  remonstrates  against  his  speaking  thug  lightly 
of  the  Divine  operations,  he  replies,  "  I  am  not  speaking  lightly.  If  I  had  not  seen 
that  I  was  making  a  hog  of  myself  very  fast,  and  that  pig-wash,  even  if  I  oould  get 
plenty  of  it,  was  a  poor  sort  of  thing,  I  should  never  have  looked  life  fairly  in  the 
face  to  see  what  was  to  be  done  with  it."  And  when  the  Spirit  of  God  enkindles 
or  keeps  smouldering  on  from  better  days  any  of  the  finer  feelings,  in  the  very  sight 
of  the  swine-trough  there  is  enough  to  sober  and  startle.  Greek  writers  tell  of  a 
creature  which  combined  every  element  of  hideousness,  and  was  capable  of  much 
mischief  as  well ;  but  if  by  any  chance  it  got  a  glimpse  of  itself,  the  face  in  the 
mirror  was  fatal — the  sight  of  the  monster  slew  the  miscreant.  The  perfection  of 
ugliness  is  evil,  and  if,  like  the  basilisk,  the  sinner  could  only  view  his  own 
deformity,  it  is  a  sight  which  self-complacency  could  never  survive.  {Ihid.)  Ths 
pain  of  self-awakening : — The  process  of  awakening  and  coming  to  ourselves  is 
usually  painful,  sometimes  appalling,  always  humiliating,  and  hence  men  shrink 
from  it,  choosing  rather  to  sleep  on,  even  if  it  be  in  the  sleep  of  death,  than  to  face 
all  the  pain,  and  distress,  and  trouble,  and  conflict  which  must  accompany  an 
awakening.  I  remember  when  I  was  a  boy  a  poor  waggoner  in  our  parish  met  with 
an  accident  that  came  within  a  little  of  costing  him  his  life.  He  was  bringing  a 
load  np  a  very  steep  incline  when  the  horse  jibed,  and  man  and  cart  and  horse  all 
went  over  into  a  reservoir.  The  unfortunate  man  was  held  under  water  by  the  shaft 
of  the  cart,  which  had  fallen  on  the  top  of  him,  and  when  at  last  he  was  extricated 
it  was  supposed  that  life  was  extinct.  Happily  there  was  a  doctor  within  call — 
restoratives  were  applied,  and  the  poor  man's  life  was  saved  ;  but  when,  after  he 
had  been  onder  treatment  for  about  an  hour,  he  began  to  give  signs  of  returning 
animation,  the  first  exclamation  that  he  uttered  was,  "Oh,  let  me  die  1  let  me  diel 
Do,  do,  do  let  me  die !  "  So  cruel  was  the  pain  of  awakening  to  one  who  was  half 
dead.  I  have  often  thought  that  the  cry  of  that  poor  man  at  pain  of  his  physical 
restoration  illustrates  and  explains  the  apparent  perversity  of  some  who  seem  to 
run  away  from  conviction,  and  so  endeavour  to  escape  from  the  blessing  they  so 
sorely  need.  They  shrink  from  coming  to  themselves  because  of  the  pain  and 
anguish  that  this  must  need  induce.  The  cry  of  their  coward  spirit  seems  to  be  not 
nnhke  that  of  that  poor  half-drowned  wretch — "  Oh,  let  me  die !  Do,  do  let  me  die ! " 
But  surely,  brethren,  life  is  worth  having  even  at  such  a  cost.  Surely  these  sorrows 
and  humiliations  of  returning  vitality,  these  birth-throes  of  a  new  and  higher  life,  are 
better  than  "  the  bitter  pains  of  eternal  death,"  where  the  anguish  and  distress  are 
only  part  of  a  process  of  destruction.  (W.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Brought  to 
himself: — A  very  interesting  incident  has  recently  been  published  in  one  of  the 
London  serials,  concerning  the  conversion  of  an  "  Ethiopian  Serenader,"  through 
the  faithfulness  and  holy  guile  of  a  pious  bookseller,  in  an  English  country  town. 
As  it  is  guaranteed  to  be  authentic  by  the  Eev.  Mr.  Maguire,  Vicar  of  Clerkenwell,  and 
illustrates  strikingly  the  portion  of  the  parable  already  considered,  I  will  insert  it 
here : — "  A  band  or  '  troupe '  of  young  men,  with  hands  and  faces  blackened,  and 
dressed  in  very  grotesque  costumes,  arranged  themselves  before  a  publisher's  door 
one  day  for  an  exhibition  of  their  peculiar  '  performances.'  These  people  used  to 
be  called  '  Ethiopian  Serenaders.'  After  they  had.  sung  some  comic  and  some 
plaintive  melodies,  with  their  own  peculiar  accompaniments  of  gestures  and 
grimaces,  one  of  the  party,  a  tall  and  interesting  young  man,  who  had  the  *  look ' 
of  one  wiao  was  beneath  his  proper  station,  stepped  up  to  the  door,  tambourine  in 
hand,  to  ask  for  a  few  '  dropping  pennies '  of  the  people.  Mr.  Garr,  taking  one  of 
the  Bibles  out  of  his  window,  addressed  the  youth — '  See  here,  young  man,  he  said, 
*  I  will  give  you  a  shilhng,  and  this  book  besides,  if  you  wiU  read  a  portion  of  it 
among  your  comrades  there,  and  in  the  hearing  of  the  bystanders.'  'Here's  a 
Bhilliug  for  an  easy  job  1 '  he  chuckled  out  to  his  mates — '  I'm  going  to  give  yon  a 
"  pubUo  reading  1 " '  Mr,  Carr  opened  at  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  St.  Luke's  Gospel, 
and,  pointing  to  tbe  eleventh  verse,  requested  the  young  man  to  commence  reading 
at  ih&t  verse.  '  Now,  Jem,  speak  up  1  *  said  one  of  the  party,  '  and  earn  youx 
•hilling  Like  a  manl'    And  Jem  took  the  Book,  and  read— '"And  He  said,  A 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  168 

certain  man  had  two  sons :  and  the  younger  of  them  said  to  his  father,  Father, 
give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to  me.  And  he  divided  unto  them  hia 
Uving.'"  There  was  something  in  the  voice  of  the  reader,  as  well  as  in  the 
strangeness  of  the  circumstances,  that  lulled  all  to  silence ;  while  an  air  of  serious- 
ness took  possession  of  the  youth,  and  still  further  commanded  the  rapt  attention 
of  the  crowd.  He  read  on — '  "  And  not  many  days  after  the  younger  son  gathered 
all  together,  and  took  his  journey  into  a  far  country,  and  there  wasted  his  substance 
with  riotous  living."  '  '  That's  thee,  Jem  ! '  ejaculated  one  of  his  comrades ;  *  it's 
just  like  what  you  told  me  of  yourself  and  your  father  ! '     The  reader  continued — 

♦  "  And  when  he  had  spent  all,  there  arose  a  mighty  famine  in  that  land ;  and  be 
began  to  be  in  want."  '     *  Why,  that's  thee  again,  Jem  ! '  said  the  voice — •  Go  on  1 ' 

•  "  And  he  went  and  joined  himself  to  a  citizen  of  that  country ;  and  he  sent  him 
into  his  fields  to  feed  swine.  And  he  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with  the  husks 
that  the  swine  did  eat :  and  no  man  gave  unto  him." '  '  That's  like  us  all  1 '  said 
the  voice,  once  more  interrupting ; '  we're  all  beggars,  and  might  be  better  than  we 
are  1  Go  on ;  let's  hear  what  came  of  it.'  And  the  young  man  read  on,  and  as  be 
read  his  voice  trembled — '  "  And  when  he  came  to  himself,  he  said.  How  many 
hired  servants  of  my  father's  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I  perish  with 

hunger  1     I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father "  '    At  this  point  he  fairly  broke 

down,  and  could  read  no  more.  All  were  impressed  and  moved.  The  whole  reality 
of  the  past  rose  up  to  view,  and  in  the  clear  story  of  the  gospel  a  ray  of  hope 
dawned  upon  him  for  his  future.  His  father — his  father's  house — and  his  mother's 
too;  and  the  plenty  and  the  love  ever  bestowed  upon  him  there;  and  the  hired 
servants,  all  having  enough  ;  and  then  himself,  his  father's  son ;  and  his  present 
state,  his  companionships,  his  habits,  his  sins,  his  poverty,  his  outcast  condition, 
his  absurdly  questionable  mode  of  living, — all  these  came  climbing  like  an  in- 
vading force  of  thoughts  and  refiections  into  the  citadel  of  his  mind,  and  fairly 
overcame  him.  That  day — that  scene — proved  the  turning-point  of  that  young 
prodigal's  life.  He  sought  the  advice  of  the  Christian  friend  who  had  thus  pro- 
videntially interposed  for  his  deliverance.  Communications  were  made  to  his 
parents,  which  resulted  in  a  long-lost  and  dearly-loved  child  returning  to  the 
familiar  earthly  home ;  and,  still  better,  in  his  return  to  his  heavenly  Father ! 
He  found,  as  I  trust  my  readers  will,  how  true  are  the  promises  of  the  parable  of 
the  *  Prodigal  Son '  both  for  time  and  for  eternity. 

**  *  Tes,  there  is  One  who  will  not  chide  nor  scoff, 
But  beckons  us  to  homes  of  heavenly  bliss ; 
Beholds  the  prodigal  a  great  way  off, 
And  flies  to  meet  him  with  a  Father's  kiss  I  * " 

(F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  Trouble  draws  the  $oul  to  God: — When  I  was  sixteen  years 
of  age,  a  youth  very  dear  to  me,  two  years  older  than  myself,  was  seized  with 
paralysis  of  the  limbs.  He  was  handsome  and  amiable  and  well-conducted — no 
prodigal,  but  the  delight  of  the  family  circle,  and  a  favourite  throughout  a  wider 
sphere.  The  ailment  advanced  by  very  slow  degrees ;  but  it  advanced,  and  he  died 
before  he  was  twenty-two  years  of  age.  In  the  earliest  stages  he  was  pleasant,  but 
reserved.  Afterwards,  for  a  while,  he  became  sad.  At  the  next  stage  he  opened 
like  a  flower  in  spring,  and  blossomed  into  the  most  attractive  beauty,  both  of 
person  and  spirit.  He  manifested  peace  and  joy  in  believing.  His  society  was  sought 
even  by  aged  and  experienced  Christians.  Mter  his  soiU's  burden  was  reinoved, 
his  face  lighted  up  and  his  lips  opened ;  he  told  me  fully  the  history  of  his  spiritual 
course,  which  he  had  kept  secret  at  the  time.  It  was  this :  When  he  found  himself 
a  cripple,  although  otherwise  enjoying  a  considerable  measure  of  health,  he  saw 
that  the  world  had  for  him  lost  its  charm.  The  happiness  he  had  promised  him- 
self was  blasted.  His  former  portion  was  gone,  and  he  had  none  other.  After  the 
first  sadness  passed,  he  thought  of  turning  towards  Christ  for  comfort ;  but  he  was 
met  and  precipitously  stopped  at  the  very  entrance  on  this  path  by  the  reflection : 
"  Christ  knows  that  as  long  as  I  had  other  pleasures  I  did  not  care  for  Him  ;  He 
knows  that  if  I  come  to  Him  now,  it  is  because  I  have  nothing  else — that  I  am 
making  a  do-no-better  of  Him.  He  will  spurn  me  away.  If  I  had  chosen  Him 
while  &e  world  was  bright  before  me,  He  might,  perhaps,  have  received  me ;  but  as 
I  never  tamed  to  Him  till  I  had  lost  the  portion  I  preferred,  I  can  expect  nothing 
bat  opbraiding."  This  thought  kept  him  long  back.  It  was  like  a  barrier  reared 
across  the  path — the  path  that  leadeth  onto  life — and  he  oonld  not  svirmount  it.  By 


170  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  "      [chap.  o. 

degreee,  however,  as  he  studied  the  ScriptarcB  in  his  enforced  leisure,  he  began  to 
perceive  that,  althoagh  he  deserved  to  be  so  treated,  Christ  would  not  treat  him  so. 
He  discovered  that  "  this  Man  receiveth  sinners  "  when  they  come,  without  asking 
what  it  was  that  brought  them.  Further,  he  learned  that  whether  one  come  when 
the  world  is  smiling,  or  when  it  is  shrouded  in  darkness — whether  he  come  in  health 
or  in  disease — it  is  in  every  case  the  love  of  Christ  that  draws  him ;  and  that  no 
sinner  saved  will  have  any  credit  in  the  end.  All  and  all  alike  wiU  attribute  their 
salvation  to  the  free  mercy  of  God.  At  first  his  thought  was,  "  If  I  had  the 
recommendation  of  having  come  when  my  fortune  was  at  the  full,  I  could  have 
entertained  a  hope."  But  at  last  he  learned  that  whosoever  will  may  come, 
and  that  he  who  cometh  will  in  no  wise  be  cast  out.  On  these  grounds 
he  came  at  Christ's  command,  was  accepted,  and  redeemed.  {W.  Amot,  D.D.) 
Bread  enough  and  to  spare. — Abundance  in  the  Fat}ier'$  home: — I.  First,  let 
us  consider  for  a  short  time  the  mobb  than  abundakce  of  aix  good  things  in 
TEE  Father's  house.  Of  all  that  thoo  needest,  there  is  with  God  an  all-sufficient, 
a  Buperabounding  supply — "  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  Let  us  prove  this  to 
thee.  1.  First,  consider  the  Father  Himself ;  and  whosoever  shall  rightly  consider 
the  Father  will  at  once  perceive  that  there  can  be  no  stint  to  mercy,  no  bound  to  the 
possibilities  of  grace.  If  thou  starve,  thou  starvest  because  thou  wilt  starve ;  for  in 
the  Father's  house  there  is  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  2.  But  now  consider  a 
second  matter  which  may  set  this  more  clearly  before  us.  Think  of  the  Son  of  God, 
who  is  indeed  the  true  Bread  of  Life  for  sinners.  In  the  atonement  of  Christ  Jesus 
there  is  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare  " ;  even  as  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  "  He  is  the 
Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  those  that  beUeve."  8.  But  now  let  me  lead  you 
to  another  point  of  solemnly  joyful  consideration,  and  that  is  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Kow,  sinner,  thou  needest  a  new  life  and  thou  needest  holiness,  for  both  of  tbese 
>ire  necessary  to  make  thee  fit  for  heaven.  Is  there  a  provision  for  this  ?  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  provided  and  given  in  the  covenant  of  grace;  and  surely  in  Him  there 
is  "  enough  and  to  spare."  What  cannot  the  Holy  Spirit  do?  Being  Divine, 
r.othing  can  be  beyond  His  power.  I  must  leave  this  point,  but  I  cannot  do  so 
■u'ithout  adding  that  I  think  "  Bread  enough  and  to  spare  "  might  be  taken  for  the 
motto  of  the  gospel.  II.  According  to  the  text  there  was  not  only  bread  enough  in 
the  house,  but  the  lowest  in  the  Father's  house  enjoyed  enough  and  to 
SPARE.  "We  can  never  make  a  parable  run  on  all  fours,  therefore  we  cannot  find 
the  exact  counterpart  of  the  "  hired  servants."  I  understand  the  prodigal  to  have 
meant  this,  that  the  very  lowest  menial  servant  employed  by  his  father  had  bread 
to  eat,  and  had  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare."  Now,  how  should  we  translate  this? 
Why,  sinner,  the  very  lowest  creature  that  God  has  made,  that  has  not  sinned 
against  Him,  is  well  supplied  and  has  abounding  happiness.  There  are  adaptations 
for  pleasure  in  the  organizations  of  the  lowest  animals.  See  how  the  gnats  dance 
in  the  summer's  sunbeam  ;  hear  the  swallows  as  they  scream  with  delight  when  on 
the  wing.  He  who  cares  for  birds  and  insects  will  surely  care  for  men.  God  who 
hears  the  ravens  when  they  cry,  will  He  not  hear  the  returning  penitent?  He  gives 
these  insects  happiness  ;  did  He  mean  me  to  be  wretched?  Surely  He  who  opens 
His  hand  and  supphes  the  lack  of  every  living  thing,  will  not  refuse  to  open  His 
hand  and  supply  my  needs  if  I  seek  His  face.  Tet  I  must  not  make  these  lowest 
creatures  to  be  the  hired  servants.  Whom  shall  I  then  select  among  men  ?  I  will 
put  it  thus.  The  very  worst  of  sinners  that  have  come  to  Christ  have  found  grace 
*'  enough  and  to  spare,"  and  the  very  least  of  saints  who  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  find  love  "  enough  and  to  spare."  Take  then  the  most  guilty  of  sinners,  and 
eee  how  bountifully  the  Lord  treats  them  when  they  turn  unto  Him.  Did  the  blood 
of  Cbrist  avail  to  cleanse  them  ?  Oh,  yes  ;  and  more  than  cleanse,  for  it  added  to 
them  beauty  not  their  own.  Kow,  if  the  chief  of  sinners  bear  this  witness,  so  do 
the  most  obscure  of  saints.  You  have  many  afflictions,  doubts,  and  fears,  but  have 
yon  any  complaints  against  your  Lord  ?  When  you  have  waited  upon  Him  for  daily 
grace,  has  He  denied  you  ?  III.  Notice  in  the  third  place,  that  the  text  dwells 
upon  the  multitude  or  those  who  have  "  bread  xnodoh  and  to  spare."  The 
prodigal  lays  an  empbasis  upon  that  word,  "  How  many  hired  servants  of  my 
father's  !  "  He  was  thinking  of  their  great  number,  and  counting  them  over.  Ha 
thought  of  those  that  tended  the  cattle,  of  those  that  went  out  with  the  camels, 
of  those  that  watched  the  sheep,  and  those  that  minded  the  com,  and  those  that 
waited  in  the  house ;  he  ran  them  over  in  his  mind  :  his  father  was  great  in  the 
land,  and  had  many  servants ;  yet  he  knew  that  they  all  had  of  the  best  food 
"  enough  and  to  spare."      Now,  0  thou  awakened  sinner,  thou  who  dost  feel  thia 


rv.]  ST.  LUKE.  171 

morning  thy  sin  and  misery,  think  of  the  numbers  upon  whom  God  has  bestowed 
His  grace  already.  Think  of  the  countless  hosts  in  heaven  :  if  thou  wert  introduced 
there  to-day,  thou  wouldst  find  it  as  easy  to  tell  the  stars,  or  the  sands  of  the  sea, 
as  to  count  the  multitudes  that  are  before  the  throne  even  now.  {C.  U.  Spurgeon.) 
1  perish  with  hunger. — The  hunger  of  the  soul : — What  I  propose  for  our  meditation 
is  the  truth  here  expressed,  that  a  life  separated  from  God  is  a  life  of  bitter  hunger, 
or  even  of  spiritual  starvation.  I.  To  exhibit  thk  tbub  grounds  op  the  fact 
BXfcTED ;  for,  as  we  discover  how  and  for  what  reasons  the  hfe  of  sin  must  be  a  life 
of  hunger,  we  shall  see  the  more  readily  and  clearly  the  force  of  those  illustrations 
by  which  the  fact  is  exhibited.  The  great  principle  that  underlies  the  whole  subject 
and  all  the  facts  pertaining  to  it  is,  that  the  soul  is  a  creature  that  wants  food,  in 
order  to  its  satisfaction,  as  truly  as  the  body.  No  principle  is  more  certain,  and 
yet  there  is  none  so  generally  overlooked  or  hidden  from  the  sight  of  men.  Job 
brings  it  forward,  by  a  direct  and  simple  comparison,  when  he  says,  ' '  For  the  ear 
trieth  words,  as  the  month  tasteth  meat "  ;  where  he  means  by  the  ear,  you  per- 
ceive, not  the  outward  but  the  inward  ear  of  the  understanding.  So  the  psalmist 
says,  "  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness."  And  so  also  the 
prophet,  beholding  his  apostate  countrymen  dying  for  hunger  and  thirst  in  their 
sins,  calls  to  them,  saying,  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters  ; 
and  he  that  hath  no  money,  come  ye,  buy,  and  eat.  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money 
for  that  which  is  not  bread?  and  your  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not?  hearken 
diligently  unto  me,  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself 
in  fatness."  In  the  same  way,  an  apostle  speaks  of  them  that  have  tasted  the  good 
Word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come ;  and  another,  of  them  that  have 
tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  and  therefore  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word, 
that  they  may  grow  thereby.  True,  these  are  all  figures  of  speech,  transferred  from 
the  feeding  of  the  body  to  that  of  the  soul.  But  they  are  transferred  because  they 
have  a  fitness  to  be  transferred.  The  analogy  of  the  soul  is  so  close  to  that  of  the 
body  that  it  speaks  of  its  hunger,  its  food,  its  fulness,  and  growth,  and  fatness, 
under  the  images  it  derives  from  the  body.  Hence  you  will  observe  that  our  blessed 
Lord  appears  to  have  always  the  feeling  that  He  has  come  down  into  a  realm  of 
hungry,  famishing  sools.  Apart  from  God,  the  soul  is  an  incomplete  creature,  a 
poor,  blank  fragment  of  existence,  hungry,  dry,  and  cold.  And  still,  alas  I  it  cannot 
think  so.  Therefore  Christ  comes  into  the  vrorld  to  incarnate  the  Divine  nature, 
otherwise  unrecognized,  before  it ;  so  to  reveal  God  to  its  knowledge,  enter  Him 
into  its  faith  and  feeling,  make  Him  its  living  bread,  the  food  of  its  eternity. 
Therefore  of  His  fulness  we  are  called  to  feed,  receiving  of  Him  freely  grace  for 
grace.  When  He  is  received,  He  restores  the  consciousness  of  God,  fills  the  soul 
with  the  Divine  light,  and  sets  it  in  that  connection  with  God  which  is  life — eternal 
life.  Holding  this  view  of  the  inherent  relation  between  created  souls  and  God  as 
their  nourishing  principle,  we  pass — U.   To  a  consideration  of  the  NECESSABt 

VDNOEB  or  A  STATB   OF   SIN,  AKB   THE   TOKENS   BT  WHICH   IT  IS   INDICATED.    A  hungry 

herd  of  animals,  waiting  for  the  time  of  their  feeding,  do  not  show  their  hunger 
mot«  convincingly  by  their  impatient  cries,  and  eager  looks  and  motions,  than  the 
human  race  do  theirs  in  the  works,  and  ways,  and  tempers  of  their  selfish  life.  I 
can  only  point  you  to  a  few  of  these  demonstrations.  And  a  very  impressive  and 
remarkable  one  you  have  in  this — viz.,  the  common  endeavour  to  make  the  body 
receive  double,  so  as  to  satisfy  both  itself  and  the  soul,  too,  with  its  pleasures.  The 
effort  is,  how  continually,  to  stimulate  the  body  by  delicacies,  and  condiments,  and 
eparkling  bowls,  and  licentious  pleasures  of  all  kinds,  and  so  to  make  the  body  do 
cbnble  service.  Hence,  too,  the  drunkenness,  and  high  feasting,  and  other  vices 
of  excess.  The  animals  have  no  such  vices,  because  they  have  no  hunger  save 
amply  that  of  the  body ;  bat  man  has  a  hunger  also  of  the  mind  or  soul  when 
separated  from  God  by  his  sin,  and  therefore  he  must  somehow  try  to  pacify  that. 
And  he  does  it  by  a  work  of  dooble  feeding  pat  upon  the  body.  We  call  it 
Bensaality.  Bat  the  body  asks  not  for  it.  The  body  is  satisfied  by  simply  that 
which  allows  it  to  grow  and  maintain  its  vigour.  It  is  the  nnsatisfied,  hungry 
znind  that  flies  to  the  body  for  some  stimidus  of  sensation,  compelling  it  to 
devoar  so  many  more  of  the  hnsks,  or  carobs,  as  will  feed  the  hungry  prodigal  within. 
There  is  no  end  to  the  diverse  acts  men  practise  to  get  some  food  for  their  soal; 
and  to  whatever  coarse  they  tarn  themselves  yoa  will  see  as  clearly  as  possible 
«hat  they  are  hungry.  Nay,  they  say  it  themselves.  What  sad  bewailings  do 
yoa  hear  from  them,  calling  the  world  ashes,  wondering  at  the  poverty  of 
existence,  fretting  at  the  courses  of  Providence,  and  blaming  their  harshneaa. 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  Xf. 

raging  profanely  against  God's  appointments,  and  venting  their  impatience  with 
life  in  curses  on  its  emptiness.  All  this,  you  understand,  is  the  hunger  they  art 
in.  Feeding  on  carobs  only,  as  they  do,  what  shall  we  expect  but  to  see  them 
feed  impatiently?  This  also  you  will  notice  as  a  striking  evidence  that,  how- 
ever well  they  succeed  in  the  providing  of  earthly  things,  they  are  never  satis- 
fied. They  say  they  are  not,  have  it  for  a  proverb  that  no  man  is,  or  can  be. 
How  can  they  be  satisfied  with  lands,  or  money,  or  honour,  or  any  finite  good, 
when  their  hunger  is  infinite,  reaching  after  God  and  the  fulness  of  His  infinite 
life — God,  who  is  the  object  of  their  intelligence,  their  'love,  their  hope,  theii 
worship ;  the  complement  of  their  weakness,  the  crown  of  their  glory,  the  sub- 
limity of  their  rest  for  ever.  Such  kind  of  hunger  manifestly  could  not  be 
satisfied  with  any  finite  good,  and  therefore  it  never  is,  (H.  Bushnell,  ?)>D.) 
Deceived  by  pleasure : — "Worldly  pleasure,  like  the  rose,  is  sweet,  bat  it  has  its 
thorn.  Like  the  bee  it  gives  some  honey,  but  it  carries  its  sting.  Like  Judas,  it 
gives  the  kiss,  but  it  is  that  of  the  betrayer.  Pleasure  is  good  for  sauce  but  not 
for  food ;  it  may  do  for  digestion,  but  not  for  a  dinner.  Those  who  get  most  of  it 
are  most  deceived.  (C,  Leach.)  Hunger  felt: — If  a  man  is  dying  of  hunger^ 
he  feels  it,  or  of  thirst,  he  feels  it ;  but  the  misery  of  a  sinner  is  not  to  know 
his  misery.  Here  the  type  of  the  prodigal  fails.  I  offer  a  man  the  bread  of  life, 
and  he  tells  me  he  is  not  hungry ;  living  water,  and  he  puts  aside  the  cup,  saying, 
"  I  am  not  thirsty  "  ;  I  find  him  stricken  down  with  a  mortal  disease,  but,  on 
bringing  a  physician  to  his  bedside,  he  bids  us  go,  and  not  disturb  him,  but  leave 
him  to  sleep,  for  he  feels  no  pain.  Insensibility  to  pain  is  his  worst  symptom, 
fatal  proof  that  mortification  has  begun,  and  that,  unless  it  can  be  arrested,  all  is 
over — you  may  go,  make  his  coffin,  and  dig  him  a  grave.  But  let  sensibility 
return,  bo  that  on  pressure  being  applied  to  the  seat  of  disease,  he  shrinks  and 
shrieks  out  with  pain;  alarmed  and  ignorant,  his  attendants  may  imagine  that 
now  his  last  hour  is  come,  but  the  man  of  skill  knows  better.  There  is  life  in 
that  cry — it  proves  that  the  tide  has  turned,  that  he  shall  live.  Sign  as 
blessed,  when  brought  to  a  sense  of  his  sins,  a  man  feels  himself  perishing  ; 
cries  with  Peter,  sinking  among  the  waves  of  Galilee,  "  I  perish  "  ;  with  the 
prodigal,  sitting  by  the  swine-troughs,  ♦•  I  perish  " ;  with  the  jailer,  at  midnight 
in  the  prison,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  I  will  arise 
and  go  to  my  father. — Homesicknest : — There  is  nothing  like  hunger  to  take  the 
energy  out  of  a  man.  A  hungry  man  can  toil  neither  with  pen  nor  hand  nor 
foot.  There  has  been  many  an  army  defeated  not  so  much  for  lack  of  ammu- 
nition as  for  lack  of  bread.  It  was  that  lack  that  took  the  fire  out  of  this  young 
man  of  the  text.  Storm  and  exposure  will  wear  out  any  man's  life  in  time,  but 
hunger  makes  quick  work.  The  most  awful  cry  ever  heard  on  earth  is  the  cry  for 
bread.  I  know  there  are  a  great  many  people  who  try  to  throw  a  fascination,  a 
romance,  a  halo,  about  sin  ;  but  notwithstanding  all  that  Lord  Byron  and  George 
Sand  have  said  in  regard  to  it,  it  is  a  mean,  low,  contemptible  business,  and 
putting  food  and  fodder  into  the  troughs  of  a  herd  of  iniquities  that  root  and 
wallow  in  the  soul  of  man,  is  a  very  poor  business  for  men  and  women  intended 
to  be  sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty  ;  and  when  this  young  man 
resolved  to  go  home,  it  was  a  very  wise  thing  for  him  to  do,  and  the  only  question 
is,  whether  we  will  follow  him.  I.  Tbis  besolution  was  fobued  in  ▲  disgust  at 
HIS  ciBOUHSTANcss.  If  this  youug  man  had  been  by  his  employer  set  to 
culturing  fiowers,  or  training  vines  over  an  arbour,  or  keeping  account  of  the 
pork  market,  or  overseeing  other  labourers,  he  would  not  have  thought  of  going 
home.  If  he  had  his  pockets  full  of  money,  if  he  had  been  able  to  say,  "  I 
have  a  thousand  dollars  now  of  my  own;  what's  the  use  of  my  going  back  to 
my  father's  house?  Do  you  think  I  am  going  back  to  apologize  to  the  old 
man?"  Ah  !  it  was  his  pauperism,  it  was  his  beggary.  A  man  never  wants  the 
gospel  untU  he  realizes  he  is  in  a  famine-struck  state.    II.  This  resolution  of 

THE  TOUNO  MAN  OF  THE  TEXT  WAS  FOUNDED  IN  BORROW  AT   HIS  MISBEHAVIOUR.        It  WaS 

not  mere  physical  plight.  It  was  grief  that  he  had  so  maltreated  his  father. 
It  is  a  sad  thing  after  a  father  has  done  eveiything  for  a  child  to  have  that 
child  be  ungrateful. 

*'  How  sharper  than  •  serpent's  tooth  it  ii^ 
To  have  a  thankless  child." 

That   ii   Shakespeare.      **  A   foolish   son   is   the   heaviness  of  his   mother.* 


CHA».  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  173 

That   is    the  Bible.      Well,    my    friends,    have    not    some    of    as  been    orael 
prodigals  7      Have    we    not    maltreated    our    Father  ?      And    such    a    Father  I 
III.  This  resolution  op  the  text  was  founded  in  jl  feelino  of  homesickness. 
I  do  not  know  how  long  this  young  man  had  been  away  from  his  father's  house, 
but  there  is  something  about  the  reading  of  my  text  that  makes  me  think  he  was 
homesick.     Some  of  you  know  what  that  feeling  is.    Far  away  from  home  some- 
times, surrounded  by  everything  bright  and  pleasant — aplenty  of  friends — you  hava 
said,   ••!  would  give  the  world  to  be  home  to-night."      Well,  this   young  man 
was  homesick  for  his  father's  house.      Are  there  any  here  to-day  homesick  for 
God,  homesick  for  heaven  ?     IV.   The   besolotion  was   immediatelt  put  ihto 
execution.     The  context  says,  "He  arose  and  came  to  his  father."    There  is  a 
man  who  had  the  typhoid  fever,  he  said :"  Oh  I  if  I  could  get  over  this  terrible 
distress ;  if  this  fever  should  depart ;  if  I  could  be  restored  to  health,  I  would 
all  the  rest  of  my  life  serve  God."    The  fever  departed.    He  got  well  enough  to 
go  over  to  New  York  and  attend  to  business.      He  is  well  to-day — as  well  as  ha 
ever  was.    Where  is  the  broken  vow  ?    (De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)      Two  prodigalt ;— I 
will  tell  you  of  two  prodigals — the  one  that  got  back,  and  the  other  that  did  not  get 
back.     In  Richmond  there  is  a  very  prosperous  and  beautiful  home  in  many 
respects.      A  young  man  wandered  off  from  that  home.      He  wandered  very  far 
into  sin.      They  heard  of  him  after,  but  he  was  always  on  the  wrong   track. 
He  would  not  go  home.     At  the  door  of  that  beautiful  home  one  night  there  was 
a  great  outcry.    The  young  man  of  the  house  ran  down  and  opened  the  door  to  sea 
what  was  the  matter.      It  was  midnight.     The  rest  of  the  family  were  asleep. 
There  were  the  wife  and  the  chUdren  of  this  prodigal  young  man.    The  fact  was 
he  had  come  home  and  driven  them  out.      He  said,  "  Out  of  this  house.      Away 
with  these  children ;  I  will  dash  their  brains  out.      Out  into  the  storm  1 "      The 
mother  gathered  them  up  and  fled.     The  next  morning  the  brother,  the  young  man 
who  had  stayed  at  home,  went  out  to  find  this  prodigal  brother  and  son,  and  ha 
came  where  he  was,  and  saw  the  young  man  wandering  up  and  down  in  front  of 
the  place  where  he  had  been  staying,  and  the  young  man  who  had  kept  hia 
integrity  said  to  the  older  brother :  "  Here,  what  does  all  this  mean  ?    What  is  the 
matterwith  you  ?     Why  do  you  act  in  this  way  ?  "     The  prodigal  looked  at  him 
and  sam :  •'  Who  am  1?    Who  do  you  take  me  to  be  ?  "     He  said  :  "  You  are  my 
brother?  "    "  No,  I  am  not.      lam  a  brute.     Have  you  seen  anything  of  my  wife 
and  children?    Are  they  deadf    I  drove  them  out  last  night  in  the  storm.     I  am 
a  brute,  John,  do  you  think  there  is  any  help  for  me  ?     Do  you  think  I  will  ever 
get  over  this  life  of  dissipation  J  "     He  said  :  "John,  there  is  just  one  thing  that 
will  stop  this."    The  prodigal  ran  his  fingers  across  his  throat  and  said:  "That 
will  stop  it,  and  I'll  stop  it  before  night.      Oh !  my  brain ;  I  can  stand  it  no 
longer."      That  prodigal  never  got  nome.     But  I  will  tell  you  of  a  prodigal  that 
did  get  home.    In  Eugland  two  young  men  started  from  their  fathers'  house  and 
went  down  to  Portsmouth — I  have  been  there — a  beautiful  seaport.      Some  of  you 
have  been  there.      The  father  could  not  pursue  his  children — for  some  reason  he 
could  not  leave  home — and  so  he  wrote  a  letter  down  to  Mr.  Griflin,  saying: — "  Mr. 
Griffin, — I  wish  you  would  go  and  see  my  two  sons.     They  have  arrived  in  Ports- 
mouth, and  there  they  are  going  to  take  ship,  and  going  away  from  home.      I  wish 
you  would  persuade  them  back."      Mr.  Griffin  went  and  tried  to  persuade  them 
back.     He  persuaded  one  to  go  ;  he  went  with  very  easy  persuasion,  because  he 
was  very  homesick  already.     The  other  young  man  said :  "  I  will  not  go.    I  hava 
had  enough  of  home ;  I'll  never  go  home."      "  Well,"  said  Mr.  Griffin,  •'  then,  if 
you  won't  go  home,  I'll  get  you  a  respectable  position  on  a  respectable  ship."  "No, 
you  won't,"  said  the  prodigal;  **  no,  you  won't.     I  am  going  as  a  private  sailor,  as 
a  common  sailor — that  will  plague  my  father  most ;  and  what  will  do  most  to 
tantalize  and  worry  him  will  please  me  best."     Years  passed  on,  and  Mr.  Griffin 
was  seated  in  his  study  one  day,  when  a  messenger  came  to  him  saying  there  was 
a  young  man  in  irons  on  a  ship  at  the  dock — a  young  man  condemned  to  deaths 
who  wished  to  see  this  clergyman.      Mr.  Griffin  ivent  down  to  the  dock  and  went 
on  shipboard.      The  young  man  said  to  him,  "  You  don't  know  me,  do  yon  7  " 
"  No,"  he  said,  "  I  don't  know  you."      "  Why,  don't  you  remember  that  young 
man  you  tried  to  persuade  to  go  home,  and  he  wouldn't  go  t "     "  Oh,  yes  1 "  said 
Mr.  Griffin  ;  "  are  you  that  man  t "      "  Yes,  I  am  that  man,"  said  the  other.      "  I 
would  like  to  have  you  pray  for  me.      I  have  committed  murder,  and  I  must  di«; 
but  I  don't  want  to  go  out  of  this  world  until  some  one  prays  for  me.     You  are  my 
father's  friend,  and  I  would  like  to  have  you  pray  for  me."     Mr.  Griffin  went  froia 


174  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt» 

judicial  authority  to  judicial  anthority  to  get  that  young  man's  pardon.     He  slepi 
not  night  nor  day.     He  went  from  influential  person  to  influential  person,  until  ia 
Bome  way  he  got  that  young  man's  pardon.     He  came  down  on  the  dock,  and  as 
he  arrived  on  the  dock  with  the  pardon,  the  father  came.      He  had  heard  that  his- 
son,  under  a  disguised  name,  had  been  committing  crime,  and  was  going  to  be  put 
to  death.      So  Mr.  Griffin  and  the  father  went  on  the  ship's  deck,  and  at  the  very 
moment  Mr.  Griffin  offered  the  pardon  to  the  young  man,  the  old  father  threw  his 
arms  around  the  son's  neck,  and  the  son  said,  ••Father,  I  have  done  very  wrong, 
and  I  am  very  sorry.      I  wish  I  had  never  broken  your  heart.      I  am  very  sorry." 
"  Ohl  "  said  the  father,  '•  don't  mention  it.    It  won't  make  any  difference  now.   It 
is  all  over.    I  forgive  yon,  my  son,"  and  he  kissed  him  and  kissed  him  and  kissed 
him.    To-day  I  offer  you  the  pardon  of  the  gospel — full  pardon,  free  pardon.    I  do 
not  care  what  your  crime  has  been.     Though  you  say  you  have  committed  a  crim» 
against  God,  against  your  own  soul,  against  your  feUow-man,  against  your  family,, 
against    the    day    of   judgment,    against    the  Cross  ol   Christ — whatever   your 
crime  has  been  here  is  pardon,  full  pardon,  and  the  very  moment  yon  take  that 
pardon  your  heavenly  Father  throws  His   arms   around  about  you  and  says, 
"  My  son,  I  forgive  you.      It  is  all  right.      You  are  as  much  in  my  favour  now  as 
if  you  had  never  sinned."    Oh  1  there  is  joy  on  earth  and  joy  in  heaven.    {Ibid.y 
Good  retolutiom  to  be  cherished : — The  good  motions  of  God's  blessed  Spirit,  at 
any  time,  in  any  measure,  though  never  so  weak,  begun,  are  not  to  be  choked,  but 
to  be  cherished.     When  the  Lord  shall  put  any  good  motion  into  our  hearts,  we 
are  to  nourish  and  cherish  the  same ;  to  one  good  motion  we  must  add  a  second,, 
and  to  that  a  third,  and  to  them  a  many,  and  so  fall  to  blowing,  and  give  not  over 
nntil  at  length  they  break  forth  into  a  comfortable  flame  of  godly  practice.   ••  Quench 
not  the  Spirit,"  saith  the  apostle ;  that  is,  quell  not,  choke  not  the  gifts  and  motions 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.   He  useth  a  metaphor  borrowed  from  fire,  whose  heat  and  light 
■when  it  is  put  out,  is  said  to  be  quenched.     Thus  also  he  exhorts  Timothy  to  stir 
up  the  graces  of  God  which  be  in  him.    And  therefore,  in  the  next  place,  let  it- 
serve  for  admonition  to  thee,  and  me,  and  to  us  all,  that  we  beware  how  we  suffer 
that  blessed  heat  to  slake,  which  by  God's  grace  begins  to  be  enkindled  in  our 
hearts.    Suffer  not  that  coal,  that  holy  motion  which  the  Lord  hath  cast  into  thy 
bosom,  to  die  within  thee,  but  blow  it  up,  lay  on  more  fuel,  add  daily  more  and 
more  matter  to  it,  and  tremble  to  lose  the  least  measure  of  God's  gracious  gifts. 
Be  frequent  in  spiritual  exercises,  as  in  hearing,  reading,  meditation.  Christian 
conference,  prayer,  and  the  like.   Let  no  means  be  neglected  that  God  hath  ordained 
for  the  working  of  establishment.     (N.  Rogers.)        Resolution  lasting : — Make  not 
thyself  ridiculous  both  to  God  and  man.    We  all  love  lasting  stuff  in  a  suit,  we 
cannot  away  with  that  horse  that  will  tire ;  and  can  God  like  such  as  do  not  con- 
tinue?   He  cannot  do  it.     (Ibid.)        Resolution  not  followed  to  execution : — Their 
purposes  being  like  the  minutes  of  a  clock,  the  second  follows  the  first,  and  the 
third  the  second,  all  day  and  year  long,  but  never  overtake  the  one  the  other. 
Many  there   are  also,  who  when  the  hand  of   God  is  upon'  them  by  losses,  or 
Eickness,  or  such  like  visitation,  they  purpose  and  promise  great  reformation  ;  but 
when  God's  rod  is  removed,  and  His  hand  taken  away,  they  are  as  bad  as  ever  tbey 
were.    So  that  we  say  of  them,  as  the  wise  man  by  shearing  his  hogs,  •'  Here  is  a 
great  deal  of  cry,  but  a  little  wool."    Here  is  a  great  deal  of  purpose,  but  a  httie 
practice ;  abundance  of  resolution,  but  small  store  of  action.    (Ibid.)        Satan'i 
assailing  resolutions : — As  a  man  pulling  at  an  oak  or  other  tree,  if  he  finds  it 
vielding,  he  plucks  with  greater  force,  and  leaveth  not  till  he  have  it  down,  so  in 
this  case,  if  Satan  find  us  doubting  and  wavering,  he  will  the  more  violently  assault 
us,  and  not  rest  until  be  overcome  us,  when,  if  we  were  resolute  and  constant,  and 
riid  thus  resist  him  with  settled  determination,  he  would  be  out  of  heart,  and,  as 
James  saith,  ••  fly  from  us."    (Ibid.)        Good  resolutions  brought  to  perfection : — 
But  some  may  demand.  What  good  means  are  to  be  nsed  for  the  bringing  theee 
good  motions  to  perfection,  which  is  no  easy  matter,  the  devil  being  ready  to  steal 
every  good  motion  out  of  our  hearts,  and  our  own  corruption  to  extinguish  it, 
before  we  can  bring  it  forth  into  actions  ?    For  the  attaining  to  this,  let  these  rules 
be  practised :  First,  resolve  upon  a  good  ground,  build  thy  resolution  on  a  strong^ 
foundation.    If  thou  resolvest  to  leave  any  sin,  consider  well  the  absolute  necessity 
of  forsaking  of  it,  the  danger  it  will  bring  if  it  be  continued  in.    A  second  means 
is  speedy  execution ;  delay  not,  but  speedily  put  in  practice.     Before  the  iron  cooU 
it  is  good  striking,  and  while  the  wax  is  pliable,  it  is  good  setting  on  the  seal ;  and, 
therefore,  what  Solomon  exhorteth  in  the  case  of  tows  is  generally  to  be  practised 


CHIP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  175 

in  all  holy  pnrposes  and  motions,  "be  not  slack  to  perform  them."  They  that  know 
themselves  know  how  fickle  and  unconstant  their  hearts  are.  ^ow  as  we  would 
deal  with  a  variable  and  unconstant  man,  so  let  us  deal  with  these  hearts  of  ours. 
We  would  take  such  a  one  at  his  word,  and  lay  hold  of  the  opportunity,  when  we  find 
him  in  a  good  vein,  lest  within  a  short  space  he  alter  his  mind.  Our  hearts  are  far 
more  variable  and  unconstant  than  any  man  is.  (Ibid. )  Father: — Remove  the  word 
Father  from  this  sentence,  and  you  rob  it  at  once  of  all  the  wondrous  pathos  that 
lies  in  it,  and  that  has  so  often  brought  tears  to  the  eye  of  the  penitent  and  con- 
trition to  his  heart.  Let  us  say,  '*  Oh,  Sovereign  King,  I  have  sinned  against  Thee ! " 
and  we  may  tremble,  but  we  do  not  weep.  *'  Oh,  Judge  of  all,  I  have  sinned  against 
Thee  1 "  and  perhaps  we  tremble  still  more,  but  our  heart  doesn't  melt.  But  let 
ns  say  and  feel,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  Thee  and  Thy  Fatherly  love," 
and,  lo  1  our  hard  heart  begins  to  break,  and  the  unbidden  tears  most  likely 
begin  to  rise.  What  a  doubly  damnable  sin  to  sin  against  a  Father,  and  such  a 
Father!  A  young  man  at  one  of  our  meetings  to  whom  I  had  spoken  on  the 
previous  evening  said  to  me,  "  When  I  went  home  last  night  I  took  np  my  Bible 
and  began  to  read.  I  had  not  read  very  long  when  I  came  to  these  words,  '  Father, 
I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  in  thy  sight,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called 
thy  son  ; '  and,  I  can  tell  you,  they  pretty  well  broke  my  heart.  I  lay  awake  just 
sobbing,  for  I  don't  know  how  long,  repeating  over  these  words,  'Father,  I  have 
sinned. ' "  (IF.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Man  invited  to  return  to  hit  heme: — Major  D.  W. 
Whittle  was  asked  to  preach  Christ  to  a  great  crowd  in  the  opera  house  at  Pittsburg, 
and  had  but  a  few  moments'  notice.  He  asked  his  wife,  "What  shall  I  say?"  Hi& 
little  girl  spoke  up  earnestly,  "Papa,  tell  them  to  come  home."  He  did  tell  them, 
and  God  wonderfully  blessed  the  simple  message  to  the  conversion  of  many  souls. 
{Christian  Age. )  Great  re$olution$  : — History  tells  us  that  great  soldiers  before 
their  great  battles,  as  Caesar  at  the  Bubicon,  and  Lord  Clive  at  Plassey,  looked  like 
men  inspired  the  moment  they  resolved  on  their  line  of  action.  An  earnest  reso- 
lution, and  the  honest  effort  to  carry  it  through,  will  fetch  you  new  strength.  The 
prodigal  had  formed  the  great  resolve  in  the  greatest  of  all  battles.  And  no  sooner 
resolved  than  done — he  is  off  for  home.  He  is  quick  to  turn  his  thought  into 
pnrpose,  and  his  purpose  into  an  accomplished  fact.  He  had  often  repented  before 
in  a  way,  and  then  repented  of  his  repentance ;  but  now  he  must  burn  his  boats, 
and  break  down  all  the  bridges  behind  him,  and  make  return  to  the  swine-troughs 
impossible.     (J.   Wells.)  The  Fatherhood  of  God : — I  advise  every  one — who 

wishes  to  be  a  true  penitent — first  of  all  to  get  a  firm  hold  upon  the  fact  that  God 
is  his  Father,  his  loving  Father  still.  Our  sins  do  not  change  the  Fatherhood  of 
God.  God  loves  sinners.  If  God  did  not  love  sinners,  why  did  He  give  His  own 
dearly  beloved  Son  to  die  for  sinners  ?  And  is  not  the  feeling  that  his  Father  is 
grieved  the  severest  part  of  that  punishment,  be  that  punishment  whatever  it 
may,  to  every  child  who  has  not  quite  sinned  away  the  finer  joys  and  the  natural 
instincts  of  the  human  heart ?  "I  can  bear  my  punishment,  father ;  bat  I  cannot 
bear  your  tears,  father ! "  was  the  true  outcome  of  a  son's  inmost  feelings  under  his 
father's  chastening.  Never,  whatever  you  have  done  to  offend  God,  or  how  long 
Tou  have  offended  God,  never  let  go  the  feeling  of  the  confidence  of  a  child  to  a 
loving  Father.  "  He  is  my  Father,  He  is  not  changed."  You  are,  not  He.  Do 
not  confuse  your  feelings  and  His  feelings.  Cling  to  the  Fatherhood  of  God. 
The  Father  may  chasten,  very  severely  chasten,  but  He  is  a  Father  who  never 
hates ;  He  is  a  Father  who  never  tires  ;  He  is  a  Father  who  cannot  finally  refuse 
to  accept  the  smallest  confession,  or  one  really  penitential  tear.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.\ 
A  viental picture : — The  picture  of  the  workings  of  the  prodigal's  mind  and  of  their 
practical  results  brings  before  us  the  features  of  genuine  repentance  with  incom- 
parably greater  clearness  and  effect  than  a  treatise  of  any  supposable  length  on 
the  abstract  subject  would  have  done.  The  features  of  true  repentance  apparent 
there  are  these:  1.  A  change  of  mind  :  he  "came  to  himself."  How  opposite  his 
views  and  feelings  now  from  what  they  had  been  when  he  forsook  the  paternal 
abode  1  2.  A  deep  sense  of  guilt  arising  from  a  right  view  of  sin,  as  committed 
not  against  man  only,  but  against  heaven ;  not  against  his  father  only,  but  against 
Gk>d :  "  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  in  thy  sight,"  &o.  3.  A  consequent 
sense  of  entire  unworthiness,  accompanied  with  a  conviction  that,  if  he  met  with 
a  favourable  reception,  he  should  owe  it  entirely  to  free  clemency :  ha  should  have 
no  claim,  no  title  to  it,  but  might  justly  be  rejected :  "  I  have  sinned,  and  am  no 
more  worthy."  And— 4.  A  returning  conviction  that  there  was  no  happiness  for 
lam  but  (mder  his  father's  roof,  and  in  the  possession  of  his  father's  favour :  "  I 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xf. 

am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son,  make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants ;  '* 
let  me  be  but  under  thy  roof,  let  me  be  the  lowest  menial ;  but  let  me  not  be  oast 
out  of  thy  sight,  for  *'  blessed  are  even  these  thy  servants."  I  have  made  myseU 
wretched  and  unworthy,  and  I  envy  the  lowest  of  them.  This  is  the  very  counter- 
part of  the  spirit  in  which  a  truly  penitent  sinner  comes  back  to  God.  {R.  Wardlaw.) 
I  have  sinned. — Confession  of  xin : — And  you  will  see  how  these  words,  in  the  lipa 
of  different  men,  indicate  very  different  feelings.  I.  The  first  case  I  shall  bring 
before  you  is  that  of  the  hardened  sinner,  who,  when  under  terror,  says,  "  I  have 
sinned."  And  you  will  find  the  text  in  the  Book  of  Exodus,  the  9th  chap,  and 
27th  verse  :  "  And  Pharaoh  sent,  and  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  said  nnto 
them,  I  have  sinned  this  time :  the  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  are 
wicked."  But  why  this  confession  from  the  lips  of  the  haughty  tyrant  ?  Of  what 
avail  and  of  what  value  was  his  confession?  The  repentance  that  was  bom  in  the 
storm  died  in  the  calm  ;  that  repentance  of  his  that  was  begotten  amidst  the  thunder 
and  the  lightning,  ceased  so  soon  as  all  was  hushed  in  quiet.  II.  Now  for  a  second 
text.  I  beg  to  introduce  to  yon  another  character — the  double-minded  man,  who 
says,  "  I  have  sinned,"  and  feels  that  he  has,  and  feels  it  deeply  too,  but  who  is  bo 
worldly-minded  that  he  "  loves  the  wages  of  unrighteousness."  The  character  J 
have  chosen  to  illustrate  this,  is  that  of  Balaam  (see  Numb.  xxii.  34).  III.  And 
now  a  third  character,  and  a  third  text.  In  the  First  Book  of  Samuel,  the  I5th 
chap,  and  24th  verse :  "  And  Saul  said  unto  Samuel,  I  have  sinned."  Here  is  the 
insincere  man — the  man  who  is  not,  like  Balaam,  to  a  certain  extent  sincere  in 
two  things  ;  but  the  man  who  is  just  the  opposite — who  has  no  prominent  point 
in  his  character  at  all,  but  is  moulded  everlastingly  by  the  circumstances  that  are 
passing  over  his  head.  To  say,  "I  have  sinned,"  in  an  unmeaning  manner,  is 
worse  than  worthless,  for  it  is  a  mockery  of  God  thus  to  confess  with  insincerity 
of  heart.  IV.  The  doubtful  penitent.  Achan  (Josh.  vii.  20).  Achan  is  the 
representative  of  some  whose  characters  are  doubtful  on  their  deathbeds  ;  who  do 
repent  apparently,  but  of  whom  tho  most  we  can  say  is,  that  we  hope  their  souls 
are  saved  at  last,  but  indeed  we  cannot  tell.  V.  I  must  now  give  you  another  bad 
case ;  the  worst  of  all.  It  is  the  repentance  op  despair.  Will  you  turn  to  the 
27th  chap,  of  Matthew,  and  the  4th  verse  ?  There  you  have  a  dreadful  case  of  the 
repentance  of  despair.  VI.  And  now  I  come  into  daylight.  I  have  been  taking 
you  through  dark  and  dreary  confessions ;  I  shall  detain  you  there  no  longer,  but 
bring  you  out  to  the  two  good  confessions  which  I  have  read  to  you.  The  first  ia 
that  of  Job  in  7th  chap.,  at  the  20th  verse :  "  I  have  sinned  ;  what  shall  I  do  unto 
Th«e,  0  Thou  preserver  of  men  ?  "  This  is  the  repentance  op  the  saint.  VII, 
I  come  now  to  the  last  instance,  which  I  shall  mention ;  it  is  the  case  of  the 
prodigal.  In  Luke  xv.  18,  we  find  the  prodigal  says:  "Father,  I  have  sinned." 
Oh,  here  is  a  blessed  confession?  Here  is  that  which  proves  a  man  to  be  a 
regenerate  character — "Father,  I  have  sinned."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Inordinate 
sorrow  not  necessary  to  repentance  : — If  thus,  then  be  you  assured,  that  though  you 
have  not  been  cast  down  under  that  depth  of  humiliation  that  others  have,  yet  that 
degree  of  humiliation  you  have  had,  God  in  wisdom  saw  to  be  competent,  and 
sufficient  for  you.  It  is  good  to  grieve,  because  we  can  grieve  no  more ;  but  to  perplex 
the  soul  with  needless  fears,  because  we  have  not  been  so  much  humbled  as  others 
(the  former  marks  and  signs  being  found  in  us)  argues  ignorance  and  unthankful- 
ness.  As  if  one  should  cry  out  of  a  skilful  chirurgeon,  for  setting  our  broken  bones 
with  less  pain,  or  curing  our  wounds  with  less  smart,  than  he  did  some  others.  It  may 
be,  God  in  mercy  hath  kept  as  yet  from  thee  the  ghastly  aspect  of  thy  sins,  lest  the 
horror  of  them  should  overwhelm  thee.  Bless  God  for  it,  and  think  not  the  worse 
of  Him  nor  of  thyself,  if  thou  be  brought  home  by  enticements  and  allurements.  It 
is  no  small  advantage  the  devil  takes  through  immoderate  sorrow  of  young  beginners. 
{N.  Rogers.)  The  prodigals  return : — That  cry  of  the  prodigal  to  his  father,  which 
framed  itself  spontaneously  in  his  mind,  when  first  he  came  to  himself  in  his  misery 
and  degradation — I  suppose  it  is  the  common  cry  of  repentant  humanity.  Taking  thia 
cry,  therefore,  as  the  natural  utterance  of  penitent  humanity,  let  us  observe  two  things 
about  it.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  very  humble,  and  therefore  very  hopeful.  "  I  am 
no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son,"  is  no  mere  formal  expression,  such  as  might 
serve  a  purpose  without  costing  anything ;  his  condition  and  his  state  of  mind  were 
too  serious  to  allow  of  hypocrisies,  conscious  or  unconscious ;  it  was  the  genuine 
feeling  of  the  man,  a  feeling  very  painful  and  humiliating,  yet  the  one  which  had 
the  greatest  hold  of  his  mind,  and  therefore  found  the  strongest  expression  in  hia 
irords.    I  need  not  say  that  a  genuine  sense  of  anworthiness  and  of  self -oondemna* 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  Luke.  m 

tioB  is  the  most  hopeful  sign  which  God  can  behold  in  His  returning  children.  But 
we  have  to  observe,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  words  which  the  prodigal 
intended  to  say,  however  natural  and  however  hopeful  they  might  be,  were  founded 
oc  a  mistake,  and  impUed  an  impossibiUty.  For  better  or  worse,  he  was  a  son,  and 
a  son  he  must  remain  ;  his  sins  had  been  the  sins  of  a  son,  not  of  a  servant ;  bin 
punishment  had  been  the  misery  of  a  self-exiled  son,  not  of  a  runaway  servant. 
Now  let  us  ask  how  it  may  have  fared  with  him  in  after  days.  Was  there  nothing 
hard  in  store,  nothing  difficult,  when  the  first  absorbing  happiness  of  his  welcome 
home  was  past?  Would  the  habits  and  the  maimers  which  he  had  learnt  in 
his  long  wanderings  suit  the  gravity  of  his  father's  house  ?  Would  the  restlessness 
which  grows  with  travel  let  him  be  at  ease  even  within  those  pleasant  walls? 
Could  he  without  great  effort  exchange  his  former  unrestrained  licence  for  the  duti- 
ful behaviour  of  a  younger  son  ?  In  one  word,  could  he,  without  a  constant  struggle 
with  himself,  fill  again  the  place  of  a  child  within  his  father's  home  7  Now,  it 
seems  to  me  that  here  is  a  lesson  most  true,  most  necessary  for  us  to  learn.  Many 
of  us  are  apt  to  think  that  when  once  the  prodigal  has  returned,  when  once  the 
sinner  has  repented,  then  all  the  struggle  and  the  difficulty  and  the  sad  conse- 
quence of  former  wilfulness  is  past  and  over — that  henceforth  all  is  calm  and  easy. 
Alas  1  what  ignorance  of  human  nature,  even  of  redeemed  human  nature,  does  such 
a  fancy  display.  The  starved  and  ragged  wanderer  is  indeed  clasped  within  his 
father's  arms,  is  clothed  in  the  finest  and  feasted  of  the  best,  but — he  has  to  live 
henceforth  as  a  son,  and  to  render  to  his  father  the  ready,  thoughtful,  loving  obedi> 
ence  which  is  due  from  a  son.  And  this,  although  it  be  so  great  a  privilege,  so 
much  more  than  we  could  have  asked,  is  yet  so  hard  to  the  obstinate  waywardness, 
to  the  ingrained  lawlessness  of  our  hearts.  It  is  so  hard  that  God  will  have  us  as 
children,  or  not  have  us  at  alL  If  we  might  only  be  as  hired  servants,  and  have 
our  tasks  assigned  to  us,  and  if  we  did  not  do  them  bear  the  loss  of  wages,  and  hear 
no  more  about  it  1  The  more  unworthy  we  feel  ourselves  to  be,  the  more  conscious 
we  are  of  the  real  inferiority  of  our  character  and  of  the  very  mixed  nature  of  our 
motives,  the  more  painful  must  we  feel  our  position  to  be  as  sons  of  Ood.  For  my 
own  part,  I  will  say  that  this  demand  of  a  free  and  loving  obedience,  of  an  obedi- 
ence which  is  absolutely  unlimited,  and  which  must  be  a  law  unto  itself,  is 
harder  than  any  which  God  could  have  made  of  perverse  and  fallen  creatures 
such  as  we.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  would  be  infinitely  easier  to  face  the  fires  or 
the  vnld  beasts  once  for  all,  than  always  to  render  the  loving  service  of  a  child  to 
the  Father  in  heaven,  always  to  strain  after  conformity  to  a  standard  which  is  far 
above  our  reach,  always  to  accommodate  ourselves  to  the  dispositions  of  One  who 
is  infinitely  hoUer  than  we.  What  is  this  to  one  who  feels  the  law  of  sin  at  work 
within  him,  who  feels  the  old  wildness  yet  untamed,  the  old  self-will  yet  unbroken, 
who  consents  to  the  rule  of  the  Divine  life  with  his  mind,  but  caunot  find  how  to 
put  it  in  practice — what  is  it  to  him  but  a  Ufelong,  a  daily,  hourly  martyrdom? 
What  is  it  but  a  perpetual  crucifixion — as,  indeed,  the  Bible  calls  it?  Even  so; 
that  is  the  law  of  Christian  hfe.  What  is  happy  and  hopeful  about  it  is  due  to 
Ood's  great  love  in  receiving  us  once  more  as  His  children;  what  is  sad 
and  disheartening  about  it  is  due  to  oar  own  sin  and  folly  in  having  been 
alienated  so  long  from  Him.  This  is  sad  and  disheartening  in  very  truth, 
but  it  is  saved  from  being  intolerable  t>y  two  things  —  the  hope  of  heaven, 
and  the  sympathy  of  Christ.  For  croceming  heaven,  while  many  beautiful 
things  are  written  in  the  Word  of  Gv,i,  none  is  written  so  beautiful  as  that 
simple  saying,  "  His  servants  shall  serve  Him  " ;  for  that  is  the  very  thing  we 
are  always  trying  to  do,  and  always  failing  to  do  properly  in  this  life.  There 
shall  really  come  a  time  when  it  will  not  be  hard,  not  be  painful,  not  be  against  the 
grain  to  do  God  s  will  in  all  things — when  we  shall  serve  Him  joyfully,  naturally, 
as  children  should,  from  love,  not  from  fear,  for  love,  not  for  reward.  And  then  for 
the  present  distress  there  is  the  sympathy  of  Christ.  That  prodigal  had  an  elder 
brother  who  would  certainly  have  added  to  his  difficulties,  who  would  have  watched 
for  and  reported  any  breach  of  propriety,  and  rejoiced  in  any  mortification.  We 
have  an  elder  Brother  who  has  shared  the  same  hardships  and  endured  the  same 
discipline  as  ourselves — who  feels  an  infinite  sympathy  for  the  failures,  the  self- 
reproaches,  the  mortifications,  which  He  understands  so  well.  Far  from  alienating 
Him  by  our  want  of  success,  every  disappointment  over  which  we  grieve  only  wakes 
in  Him  a  livelier  pity  and  a  more  tender  love.  {B.  Winterbotham,  M.A.)  The 
diffietUty  of  Ood's  service  to  recent  converts : — We  know  that  God's  service  is  perfect 
freedom,  not  a  servitude ;  but  this  it  is  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  long  gerred 
YOL.   XIJ.  18 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

Him ;  at  first  it  is  a  kind  of  servitude,  it  is  a  task  till  oar  likings  and  tastes  come 
to  be  in  unison  with  those  which  God  has  sanctioned.  It  is  the  happiness  of  saints 
and  angels  in  heaven  to  take  pleasure  in  their  duty,  and  nothing  bat  their  duty ; 
for  their  mind  goes  that  one  way,  and  pours  itself  out  in  obedience  to  God,  spon- 
taneously and  without  thought  or  deliberation,  just  as  man  gins  naturally.  This  is 
the  state  to  which  we  are  tending  if  we  give  ourselves  up  to  religion ;  but  in  its 
commencement,  religion  is  necessarily  almost  a  task  and  a  formal  service.  When 
s  man  begins  to  eee  his  wickedness,  and  resolves  on  leading  a  new  life,  he  asks, 
*'  What  must  I  do  ? "  he  has  a  wide  field  before  him,  and  he  does  not  know  how  to 
enter  it.  He  must  be  bid  to  do  some  particular  plain  acts  of  obedience  to  fix  him.  He 
must  be  told  to  go  to  church  regularly,  to  say  his  prayers  morning  and  evening,  and 
statedly  to  read  the  Scriptures.  This  will  limit  his  efforts  to  a  certain  end,  and 
relieve  him  of  the  perplexity  and  indecision  which  the  greatness  of  his  work  at  first 
causes.  But  who  does  not  see  that  this  going  to  church,  praying  in  private,  and 
reading  Scripture,  must  in  his  case  be,  in  great  measure,  what  is  called  a  form  and 
a  task  ?  Having  been  used  to  do  as  he  would,  and  indulge  himself,  and  having 
very  little  understanding  or  liking  for  religion,  he  cannot  take  pleasure  in  these 
religious  duties ;  they  wUl  necessarily  be  a  weariness  to  him ;  nay,  he  will  not  ba 
able  even  to  give  his  attention  to  them.  Nor  will  he  see  the  use  of  them ;  he  will 
not  be  able  to  find  they  make  him  better  though  he  repeat  them  again  and  again. 
Thus  his  obedience  at  first  is  altogether  that  of  a  hired  servant,  "  The  servant 
knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth."  This  is  Christ's  account  of  him.  The  servant 
is  not  in  his  lord's  confidence,  does  not  understand  what  he  is  aiming  at,  or  why  he 
commands  this  and  forbids  that.  He  executes  the  commands  given  him,  he  goes 
hither  and  thither,  punctually,  bat  by  the  mere  letter  of  the  command.  Such 
is  the  state  of  those  who  begin  religious  obedience.  {J.  R.  Newman,  D.D.) 
Complete  surrender  to  God : — There  is  no  mention  made  here  of  any  offering  on  his 
part  to  his  father,  any  propitiatory  work.  This  should  be  well  observed.  The 
truth  is,  that  our  Saviour  has  shown  us  in  all  things  a  more  perfect  way  than  was 
«ver  before  shown  to  man.  As  He  promises  us  a  more  exalted  holiness,  an  exacter 
self-command,  a  more  generous  self-denial,  and  a  fuller  knowledge  of  truth,  so 
He  gives  us  a  more  true  and  noble  repentance.  The  most  noble  repentance  (if  a 
fallen  being  can  be  noble  in  his  fall),  the  most  decorous  conduct  in  a  consoioaa 
sinner,  is  an  unconditional  surrender  of  himself  to  God — not  a  bargaining  about 
terms,  not  a  scheming  (so  to  call  it)  to  be  received  back  again,  but  an  instant  sur- 
render of  himself  in  the  first  instance.  Without  knowing  what  will  become  of  him, 
whether  God  will  spare  or  not,  merely  with  so  much  hope  in  his  heart  as  not 
utterly  to  despair  of  pardon,  still  not  looking  merely  to  pardon  as  an  end,  but 
rather  looking  to  the  claims  of  the  Benefactor  whom  he  has  offended,  and  smitten 
with  shame,  and  the  sense  of  his  ingratitude,  he  must  surrender  himself  to  his 
lawful  Sovereign.  He  is  a  runaway  offender ;  he  must  come  back,  as  a  very  first 
step,  before  anything  can  be  determined  about  him,  bad  or  good  ;  he  is  a  rebel,  and 
must  lay  down  his  arms.  Self -devised  offerings  might  do  in  a  less  serious  matter ; 
as  an  atonement  for  sin,  they  imply  a  defective  view  of  the  evil  and  extent  of  sin  in 
his  own  case.  Such  is  that  perfect  way  which  nature  shrinks  from,  but  which 
our  Lord  enjoins  in  the  parable — a  surrender.  The  prodigal  son  waited  not  for  his 
father  to  show  signs  of  placability.  He  did  not  merely  approach  a  space,  and  then 
stand  as  a  coward,  curiously  inquiring,  and  dreading  how  his  father  felt  towards 
him.  He  made  up  his  mind  at  once  to  degradation  at  the  best,  perhaps  to  rejection. 
He  arose  and  went  straight  on  towards  his  father,  with  a  collected  mind ;  and 
though  his  relenting  father  saw  him  from  a  distance,  and  went  out  to  meet  him, 
■till  his  purpose  was  that  of  an  instant  frank  submission.  Such  must  be  Christian 
repentance :  First  we  must  put  aside  the  idea  of  finding  a  remedy  for  our  sin ; 
then,  though  we  feel  the  guUt  of  it,  yet  we  must  set  out  firmly  towards  God,  not 
knowing  for  certain  that  we  shall  be  forgiven.  He,  indeed,  meets  us  on  our  way 
with  the  tokens  of  His  favour,  and  so  He  bears  up  human  faith,  which  else  woald 
sink  under  the  apprehension  of  meeting  the  Most  High  God ;  still,  for  our  repent- 
ance to  be  Christian  there  mast  be  in  it  that  generous  temper  of  self -surrender, 
the  acknowledgment  that  we  are  tmworthy  to  be  called  any  more  His  sons,  the 
abstinence  from  all  ambitious  hopes  of  sitting  on  his  right  hand  or  His  left,  and 
the  willingness  to  bear  the  heavy  yoke  of  bond-servants,  if  He  should  put  it  upon 
ne.  {Ibid.)  Our  need  of  the  Father :— 1.  I  would  first  recall  your  attention  to 
Masons  which  must  have  marked  more  or  less  frequently  the  lives  of  all  who  heav 
Boa- -seasons  of  inward  uneasiness  without  any  outward  cause.    They  cpme  some- 


«HA*.  XT.]  8T.  LUKE.  179 

times  in  the  dim  solitude  of  evening  or  the  qoiet  night-watches,  sometimes  in  th« 
yet  deeper  solitude  of  a  heartless  human  throng.  2.  We  feel,  it  seems  to  me, 
peculiar  need  of  a  Father  in  heaven,  in  our  communion  with  the  fair  and  glorious 
scenes  of  nature.  Did  you  ever  see  a  little  child  taken  by  his  father  to  see  soma 
ghttering  pageant,  which  seemed  to  the  child  immensely  vast  and  grand  ?  And 
have  you  not  marked  how  the  child  will  at  short  intervals  look  away  from  the  gay 
show  to  his  father's  face,  as  if  to  fortify  himself  by  a  glance  of  love?  Were  I  an 
atheist,  I  would  cut  myself  off  from  every  grand  view  of  nature,  would  shun  the 
mountain  and  the  ocean,  and  shut  my  eyes  against  the  crimson  sunset  and  the 
gemmed  vault  of  night ;  for  all  these  things  would  tell  me  what  a  solitary  being  I 
was,  and  how  unsheltered — they  would  speak  to  me  of  a  stupendous  machinery 
beyond  my  control,  of  gigantic  powers  which  I  could  not  calculate,  of  material 
lorces  which  my  boasted  intellect  could  neither  comprehend  nor  modify.  3.  In  our 
domestic  relations,  we  also  deeply  feel  the  need  of  a  Father  in  heaven.  How  short* 
lived  the  family  on  earth  1  How  frail  the  tie  that  here  makes  us  one  I  0  yes  1  we 
need  the  protecting  providence  and  the  regenerating  spirit  of  our  Father  for  the 
ground  of  immovable  trust,  at  every  stage  of  our  domestic  experience— else  we  might 
well  resign  our  charge  and  remit  our  efforts,  exclaiming  in  despair,  "  Who  is 
snflicient  for  these  things  ? "  4.  Finally,  as  sinners,  we  need  a  Father  in 
heaven.  How  often,  my  Christian  friends,  do  our  attainments  fall  short  of  our 
nims  1  How  often  are  we  betrayed  into  sudden  sins  of  thought  or  speech  1 
Under  such  experiences,  we  need  to  turn  from  our  own  frailty  to  our  heart-seeing 
Father,  with  whom  our  witness  is  in  heaven,  our  record  on  high.  {A.  P.  Feabody.) 
Adoniram  Judson's  conversion  : — A  new  England  student  sets  out  on  a  tour  through 
the  Northern  States.  Before  leaving  home  he  avows  himself  an  iufidel.  His  father 
argues,  his  mother  weeps.  He  can  resist  his  father's  arguments,  but  finds  it  more 
difficult  to  resist  his  mother's  tears.  Still  he  leaves  home,  resolved  to  see  hfe,  its 
dark  side  as  well  as  its  bright,  having  perfect  confidence  in  his  own  self-control  that 
it  will  protect  him  from  anything  mean  and  vicious.  In  the  course  of  his  travels 
he  stops  at  a  country  inn.  The  landlord  mentions,  as  he  lights  him  to  his  room, 
that  he  has  been  obliged  to  place  him  next  door  to  a  young  man  who  is  probably  in 
a  dying  state.  The  traveller  passes  a  very  restless  night.  Sounds  come  from  the 
sick  chamber — sometimes  the  movements  of  the  watchers,  sometimes  the  groans  of 
the  sufferer ;  but  it  is  not  these  that  disturb  him.  He  thinks  of  what  the  landlord 
said — the  stranger  is  probably  in  a  d.ving  state ;  and  is  he  prepared  ?  Alone,  and  in 
the  dead  of  night,  he  feels  a  blush  of  shame  steal  over  him  at  the  question,  for  it 
proves  the  shallowness  of  his  philosophy.     What  would  his  late  companions  say  to 

his  weakness.     The  clear-minded,  intellectual,  witty  E ,  what  would  he  say  to 

such  consummate  boyishness  f  But  stiU  his  thoughts  will  revert  to  the  sick  man. 
Is  he  a  Christian,  cahn  and  strong  in  the  hope  of  a  glorious  immortality,  or  is  he 
shuddering  on  the  brink  of  a  dark,  unknown  future?  Perhaps  he  is  a  *' Free- 
thinker "  educated  by  Christian  parents,  and  prayed  over  by  a  Christian  mother. 
At  last  morning  comes,  and  its  light  dispels  what  he  would  fain  consider  hia 
*'  superstitious  illusions."  He  goes  in  search  of  the  landlord  and  inquires  for  his 
fellow-lodger.  "He  is  dead."  "Deadl"  "Yes,  he  is  gone,  poor  fellow!" 
"  Do  you  know  who  he  was  ?  "    "  Oh  1  yes  ;  he  was  a  young  man  from  Providence 

College,  a  very  fine  fellow ;  his  name  was  E ."    Our  traveller  is  completely 

stunned.    E 1     E was  his  friend,  the  friend  whose  wit  and  raillery  he 

dreaded,  when  he  blushed  at  the  thought  of  his  own  weakness  during  the  wakeful 

flight.     And  E was  now  dead.    The  traveller  pursues  his  journey.     But  one 

single  thought  occupies  his  mind.  The  words  dead  I  lost !  lost !  ring  in  his  ears. 
Neither  the  pleasures  nor  the  philosophies  of  the  world  can  satisfy  him  now.  The 
old  resolution  is  virtually  taken — "  I  will  arise."  He  abandons  his  travels,  and 
turns  his  horse's  head  homewards.  His  intellect  does  not  readily  accept  the 
evidences  of  religion.  But  his  moral  nature  is  thoroughly  aroused.  And  within  a 
few  months  this  young  man  surrenders  his  whole  soul  to  Christ  as  his  Saviour  and 
Lord.  This  was  Adoniram  Judson,  whose  six-and-thirty  years  of  unwearied 
devotion  to  missionary  work  have  won  for  him  the  honourable  appeUation  of  the 
Apostle  of  Burmah.  (J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  The  worlding  arrested: — Christopher 
Anderson  was  an  impulsive  and  fearless  lad,  averse  to  all  hypocrisy  and  deception. 
One  after  another  of  his  brothers  was  converted  to  God,  and  he  was  left  companion- 
less  in  his  ungodly  course.  But  till  he  could  enjoy  religion,  he  was  determined  to 
enjoy  the  world.  Much  of  his  time  was  spent  in  the  country,  and  there  he  was 
a  devotee  to  the  music  and  dancing  in  rural  fStes.     In  town,  where  the  ao« 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

companiments  are  less  harmless,  these  gratifications  were  no  less  keenly  sought 
after  and  indulged  in.  When  about  seventeen  years  of  age  he  was  sometimea 
alarmed  at  the  course  he  was  pursuing,  and  shuddered  at  the  thought  of  where 
it  must  end ;  but  he  would  not  allow  himself  to  think  long  enough  on  the  subject, 
lest  it  should  cost  him  those  pleasures  which  he  knew  to  be  inconsistent  with 
a  godly  life.  But  one  evening,  as  he  was  returning  home  from  a  concert,  he  was 
suddenly  and  strangely  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  vanity  of  the  world  and  its 
pleasures.  There  was  no  vision,  nothing  without,  nothing  within,  on  which  the 
most  critical  could  fasten  a  charge  of  fanaticism.  But  there  was  a  profound  con- 
viction, suddenly  awakened,  as  by  the  finger  of  God,  that  he  was  living  the  life  of 
a  fool,  and  that  he  must  live  it  no  longer.  "  I  will  arise,"  he  said  in  effect.  And 
he  arose,  and  at  once  gave  himself  up  to  God.  The  transition  from  darkness  to 
light,  from  the  spirit  of  bondage  to  the  spirit  of  adoption,  was  nearly  instantaneous. 
In  less  than  one  hour  he  was  conscious  of  the  change.  And  the  reality  of  the 
change  was  attested  by  a  long  life  of  unvarying  constancy,  and  of  service  to  God 
and  man.  (Ibid.)  Luthefs  awakening  : — Martin  Luther  was  worldly,  not  after 
the  merchant's  fashion,  but  after  the  scholar's.  He  gave  himself  to  study,  and 
became  a  Doctor  in  Philosophy.  He  was  not  without  thoughts  of  God,  which 
haunted  him  and  marred  his  happiness,  but  they  were  not  suiUcient  to  turn  the 
current  of  his  life.  Among  his  college  friends  there  was  one,  named  Alexis,  with 
whom  he  was  very  intimate.  One  morning  a  report  was  spread  that  Alexis  had 
been  assassinated.  Luther  hurried  to  the  spot,  and  found  the  report  was  true. 
This  sudden  loss  of  his  friend  affected  him  deeply,  and  he  asked  himself,  "  What 
would  become  of  me  if  I  were  thus  suddenly  called  away  ?  "  Some  months  after  he 
visited  the  home  of  his  childhood,  and  on  his  return  to  the  university  he  was 
x^ithin  a  short  distance  of  Erfurt,  when  he  was  overtaken  by  a  violent  storm.  The 
thunder  roared  ;  a  thunderbolt  sank  into  the  ground  at  his  side.  Luther  threw 
himself  on  his  knees;  his  hour,  he  thought,  was  perhaps  come;  death,  judgment, 
eternity,  were  before  him  in  all  their  terrors,  and  spoke  with  a  voice  which  he 
could  no  longer  resist ;  encompassed  with  the  anguish  and  terror  of  death,  as  he 
himself  relates,  he  made  a  vow,  if  God  would  deliver  him  from  this  danger,  to 
forsake  the  world,  and  devote  himself  entirely  to  His  service.  Risen  from  the 
earth,  having  still  before  his  eyes  that  death  which  must  one  day  overtake  him,  he 
could  be  worldly  no  longer,  he  must  now  be  godly.  His  whole  soul  went  into  the 
resolution,  "  I  will  arise  "  ;  and  arise  he  did  with  singlene?s  and  earnestness  of 
purpose,  nor  lingered  for  one  moment  until  he  found  himself  sheltered  in  peace 
under  the  roof  of  his  heavenly  Father.  [Ibid.)  A  patchwork  quilt : — A  good 
woman,  whose  son  was  in  the  army,  made  a  patchwork  quilt  for  the  Soldiers' 
Hospital.  In  the  white  squares  were  texts  of  Scripture — every  block  had  been 
prayed  and  wept  over.  Many  poor  fellows  had  laid  under  that  quilt.  In  course  of 
time  a  boy  came ;  he  was  nearly  senseless  for  more  than  a  week.  At  last  he  was 
seen  to  kiss  the  patchwork  quilt.  It  was  thought  he  was  wandering,  or  had  found 
a  text  of  hope  or  comfort.  But  no  ;  it  was  a  calico  block,  a  little  crimson  leaf  on 
a  dark  ground.  He  kept  looking  at  it,  tears  in  his  eyes  ;  he  kissed  it  again,  and 
asked,  "  Do  you  know  where  this  quilt  came  from  ?  "  He  was  told  a  good  woman 
had  sent  it,  with  a  note  pinned  on  to  it.  This  they  showed  him  at  his  request. 
His  hand  trembled,  his  cheek  grew  white,  when  he  saw  the  writing.  "  Please  read 
it  to  me  very  slowly,"  he  said.  It  was  read.  **  It  is  from  my  mother  ;  that  bit  of 
calico  was  part  of  her  dress."  Afterwards  he  pointed  out  the  text.  "Father,  I 
have  sinned  against  heaven  and  in  thy  sight,"  and  said,  "I  am  no  more  worthy." 
The  rest  of  the  parable  was  read  to  him.  A  few  days  after  he  said,  "  I  was  a  great 
way  off;  but  God  has  met  me,  and  had  compassion  on  me;  the  Saviour's  love  fills 
me  with  peace."  So  the  mother's  prayers  were  answered,  and  her  son  saved. 
And  he  arose  and  came  to  bis  father.  Good  resolutions  must  he  acted  upon: — 
Conviction  is  the  first  step  to  reformation.  If  we  suffer  conviction  to  cool  upon 
our  minds,  the  force  and  spirit  of  it  will  soon  decay  and  evaporate.  In  all  living 
creatures,  it  may  be  observed,  that  at  first  the  dawnings  and  the  beginning  of  Ufe 
in  them  aie  very  faint  and  hardly  discernible.  It  is  a  small  spark  that  just 
glimmers,  and  may  easily  be  extinguished.  But  if  it  be  cherished  by  heat  and 
food,  a  wonderful  alteration  soon  appears,  and  the  little  animal  unfolds  itself,  and 
assumes  its  proper  form.  So  it  is  in  the  first  appearance  of  a  spiritual  Ufe  :  there 
if  a  conviction  and  a  resolution  ;  and  when  that  is  exerted,  a  gradual  reformation 
ensues.  But  the  spiritual  as  well  as  the  natural  life  is  at  first  a  tender  thing, 
easily  stopped,  and  hardly  recovered.     It  concerns  us,  therefore,  to  cherish  th« 


fliur.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  181 

rising  resolutions,  and  improve  them  into  a  saitable  practice.  It  is  to  be  supposed 
that  there  are  few  persons  who,  when  they  do  evil,  have  not  some  conviction  and 
remorse  arising  upon  it,  with  an  intention  of  amending  and  making  peace  with  God 
some  time  or  other ;  to-morrow,  or  in  a  few  days,  or  before  the  last  hours.  But  in 
this  there  is  too  often  a  fair  appearance  and  no  vital  principle ;  it  is  a  spark  that 
shines  in  a  moment  and  goes  out;  a  forward  blossom  that  is  nipped  by  the  frost  and 
withers  away.  Such  faint  essays  and  weak  resolutions  only  aggravate  the  sins 
committed  against  them ;  and  by  thus  continuing  to  offend,  not  only  peace  of  mind 
is  lost,  but  it  becomes  more  difficult  either  to  make  new  resolutions,  or  to  trust  to 
them  when  they  are  made  ;  and  consequently  to  satisfy  ourselves  of  the  sincerity  of 
Buch  a  repentance.  And  yet  this  is  a  matter  of  infinite  moment,  and  our  all 
depends  upon  it.  The  sooner  it  is  performed,  the  better ;  and  God  hath  promised 
to  concur  with  us  in  the  undertaking.  If  we  arise  and  go  to  Him,  He,  like  the 
lather  in  the  parable,  will  come  forth  to  m^et  us.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Act  at  once 
on  convictions : — It  is  beyond  my  power  to  tell  the  importance  of  acting  at  once  on 
your  convictions.  You  will  never  attain  to  eminence  without  it.  The  pages  of 
history  are  bright  with  the  names,  and  the  pathway  of  eminence  is  now  crowded 
with  men  who  added  this  to  other  qualities  of  mind — they  carried  out  their  purposes 
with  a  depth  and  power  of  resolution  before  which  no  ordinary  considerations  were 
permitted  to  stand.  Take  an  instance.  Nearly  a  hundred  years  ago,  a  young  man 
from  Peterborough  entered  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  His  head  was  clear,  but 
his  manners  clumsy,  his  time  wasted,  and  his  University  privileges  fast  passing 
away  in  idleness.  He  had  spent  an  evening  at  a  party.  At  five  o'clock  next 
morning  he  was  awakened  by  one  of  his  companions  standing  at  his  bedside. 
"  Paley,"  said  he,  "  what  a  fool  you  are  to  waste  your  time  this  way !  I  could  do 
nothing  if  I  were  to  try ;  you  could  do  anything.  1  have  had  no  sleep  with  thinking 
about  you.  Now,  I  am  come  to  tell  you  that,  if  you  continue  this  idle  life,  I  shall 
renounce  your  society."  The  admonition  was  not  lost.  That  very  day,  the  startled 
sluggard  formed  a  new  plan  for  life.  He  rose  every  morning  at  five  ;  he  continued 
at  work  till  nine  at  night.  He  kept  his  resolution.  His  industry  was  unconquer- 
able, his  progress  unrivalled,  until,  in  the  general  examination,  at  the  top  of  the 
list,  as  Senior  Wrangler,  stood  the  name  of  William  Paley,  whose  varied  writings 
on  Christian  Evidences  have  rendered  the  greatest  service  to  the  cause  of  truth. 
The  whole  success  of  your  recovery,  young  man,  hinges  upon  immediate  decision. 
You  must  arise  and  go  to  your  Father.  Four-and-twenty  hours'  delay  may  utterly 
ruin  your  purpose.  Oh,  that  every  one  here,  that  feels  the  relentings  for  past  sin, 
would  this  night  put  his  purpose  into  effect.  (W.  B.  Mackenzie,  M.A.)  The 
turning  point : — ^I.  Hbbb  was  action.  He  had  passed  beyond  mere  thought,  mere 
regret,  mere  resolving;  now  "he  arose."  1.  This  action  of  the  prodigal  was 
immediate,  and  without  further  parley.  2.  The  prodigal  aroused  himself,  and  put 
forth  all  his  energies.  II.  Hebe  was  a  soul  comino  into  actual  contact  with  God. 
It  would  have  been  of  no  avail  for  him  to  have  arisen,  if  he  had  not  come  to  his 
father.  Come  to  God  ;  come  just  as  you  are,  without  merits  or  good  works ;  trust 
in  Jesus,  and  yoar  sins  will  be  forgiven  yon.  III.  In  that  action  there  was  an 
BNTiBB  TtELDiNO  DP  OF  HiusELF.  His  proud  independence  and  self-will  were  gone. 
He  ga*f.  np  all  idea  of  self- justification.  He  yielded  up  himself  so  thoroughly  that 
he  o«»ixcA  his  father's  love  to  him  to  be  an  aggravation  of  his  guilt.  He  also  yielded 
up  aii  bin  supposed  rights  and  claims  upon  his  father.  And  he  made  no  terms  or 
conditions.  IV.  In  this  act  there  was  a  measure  of  faith  in  his  father.  Faith 
in  his  iathor'a  power,  and  in  his  readiness  to  pardon.  V.  This  act  of  comino 
into  coNT/xnr  with  God  is  pebforued  bt  the  sinneb  just  as  be  is.  YI.  This  act 
wrought  tub  obeatest  oomobivablb  change  in  the  man.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him.  The  penitent  received : — I.  The  love  of  God 
discerns  tux  first  motions  of  penitence  in  the  heart  of  man.  The  prodigal 
"  arose  and  came  to  his  father,"  came,  doubting  and  trembling,  wondering,  perhaps, 
bow  he  would  be  received.  Oh  1  how  much  better  was  his  father  than  his  fondest 
hopes  imagined  I  And  how  much  more  gracious  is  God  to  the  penitent  than  he 
could  ever  desire.  II.  And  then,  as  He  discerns  the  beginnings  of  penitence,  so 
HE  MAKES  HASTE  TO  MEET  THE  PENITENT  ON  HIS  WAT.  There  Is  a  loving  minuteness 
in  the  details  of  the  story — in  the  setting  forth  of  the  father's  acts,  his  words,  his 
very  emotions.  It  is  the  minuteness  of  love.  Every  sentiment  of  anger,  every 
emotion  of  resentment,  if  they  bad  ever  been  cherished,  vanished  in  a  moment 
"  His  father  saw  him,  and  bad  compassion  on  him."  He  forgot  bis  ingratitade, 
Mlfishnen,  insolence;  or,  if  he  remembered  them,  the  remembrance  was  over* 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

powered  by  that  which  was  far  stronger,  the  sense  of  the  penitent's  need,  the  feeding 
that  the  needy  one  was  his  son.  It  is  God  in  Christ  who  alone  can  bring  this  lesson 
home  to  ear  and  mind  and  heart,  and  fill  our  whole  being  with  a  sense  of  its  trath. 
Jesus  Christ  speaking  words  of  tenderest  love  and  pity,  performing  acts  of  super- 
human power  and  mercy,  weeping  over  sinful  and  doomed  Jerusalem,  agonizing  on 
the  cross  for  the  salvation  of  a  lost  world,  teaches  us  as  no  other  has  done  the  love 
of  God  for  man,  and  convinces  as  powerfully  that  "His  compassions  fail 
not."  III.  And  the  immediate  effect  of  this  loving  welcome  which  Almighty  God 
accords  to  the  penitent  is  at  once  to  deepen  his  penitencb  and  to  raise  bis  hopes. 
It  is  a  wonderful  picture  of  the  twofold  power  of  the  pardoning  love  of  God.  We 
do  not  cease  to  feel  our  sinfulness,  we  do  not  fail  to  confess  oar  unworthiness, 
because  we  are  assured  of  our  reconciliation  to  God.  The  love  of  God  has  broken 
his  htart  and  humbled  him  in  his  own  eyes  as  no  sense  of  sin  and  misery  had  done; 
but  it  has  also  raised  him  up  again,  and  given  him  new  and  brighter  hopes,  and 
brought  him  into  the  "  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God."  IV.  Nor  is  it  long 
before  the  seal  is  put  upon  the  reconciliation  which  has  been  effected  by  the  great 
AND  blessed  privileges  TO  WHICH  THE  PENITENT  IS  INTRODUCED.  The  penitent  is 
clothed  in  the  robe  of  righteousness  which  was  wrought  for  him  by  the  Passion  of 
our  Lord.  As  the  lost  son  receives  the  signet  ring  on  his  finger,  so  he  is  sealed 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise.  He  is  shod,  too,  "  with  the  preparation  of  the 
gospel  of  peace,"  so  that  he  is  now  no  longer  a  mere  wanderer  from  the  fold  of 
God,  erring  and  straying  from  Him  like  a  lost  sheep,  but  is  able  to  go  with  his 
whole  heart  in  the  way  of  life,  and  is  fitted  for  a  course  of  earnest  devotion  and 
holy  obedience.  There  is  not  a  hne  in  the  whole  glorious  picture  but  has  its 
counterpart  in  the  love  of  God  to  the  penitent  sinner.  And  then  there  is  a  fulness 
of  meaning  in  the  last  words  of  the  joyful  father,  when  he  bids  them  kiU  the  fatted 
calf,  that  they  may  eat  and  be  merry,  because  the  dead  is  alive  and  the  lost  is 
found.  These  words  proclaim  to  as  the  double  truth  of  the  joy  with  which  the 
grace  of  God  fills  the  heart  of  the  penitent  when  he  has  been  adopted  into  the 
family  of  God,  and  of  the  ample  provision  which  has  been  made  for  his  wants  in 
the  kingdom  of  grace  and  glory.  And  now  I  have  bat  two  thoughts  to  urge  upon 
you  in  conclusion.  First,  I  would  remind  yoa  that  all  these  blessings  belong  only 
to  those  who  truly  repent :  not  to  those  who  entertain  some  transient  regrets.  But 
my  second  closing  word  is  one  of  encouragement — of  encouragement  to  those  who 
are  weary  of  evil,  and  desirous  of  returning  to  God.  You,  my  brethren,  find  it  hard 
to  believe  that  God  will  receive  yoa  willingly,  and  "  heal  your  backshding,  and  love 
you  freely."  Contemplate  for  a  moment  the  teaching  of  this  parable.  He  is  saying 
to  yoa,  in  the  most  convincing  and  affecting  language,  "  Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all 
that  the  wicked  should  die?"  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth." 
••  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  from  your  evil  ways ;  for  why  will  ye  die  ?  "  I  beseech  you, 
therefore,  by  the  love  of  God,  that  yoa  will  return  to  Him.  He  is  more  ready  to 
receive  you  than  you  are  to  offer  yourself  to  Him.  {W.  R.  Clark,  M.A.)  The 
prodigal'M  return  : — I.  First,  then,  what  is  the  position  signified  by  being  "  a  great 
way  off  "  ?  I  must  just  notice  what  is  not  that  position.  It  is  not  the  position  of 
the  man  who  is  careless  and  entirely  regardless  of  God ;  for  you  notice  that  the 
prodigal  is  represented  now  as  having  come  to  himself,  and  as  returning  to  his 
father's  hoase.  Once  again,  there  is  another  person  who  is  not  intended  by  this 
description,  namely,  the  very  great  man,  the  Pharisee  who  thinks  himself  extremely 
righteous,  and  has  never  learned  to  confess  his  sin.  You,  sir,  in  your  apprehension, 
are  not  a  great  way  off.  You  are  so  really  in  the  sight  of  God ;  you  are  as  far  from 
Him  as  light  from  darkness,  as  the  east  is  from  the  west ;  bat  yoa  are  not  spoken 
of  here.  Your  hope  of  self -salvation  is  a  fallacy,  and  you  are  not  addressed  in  the 
words  of  the  text.  It  is  the  man  who  knows  himself  lost,  but  desires  to  be  saved, 
who  is  here  declared  to  be  met  by  God,  and  received  with  affectionate  embraces. 
And  now  we  come  to  the  question.  Who  is  the  man,  and  why  is  he  said  to  be  a 
great  way  off  ?  For  he  seems  to  be  very  near  the  kingdom,  now  that  he  knows  his 
need  and  is  seeking  the  Saviour.  I  reply,  in  the  first  place,  he  is  a  great  way  off  in 
his  own  apprehensions.  Oh !  poor  heart ;  here  is  a  comforting  passage  for  thee : 
"  When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion  on 
him."  But  again,  there  is  a  second  sense  in  which  some  now  present  feel  them- 
selves to  be  far  off  from  God.  Conscience  tells  every  man  that  if  he  would  be  saved 
he  mast  get  rid  of  his  sin.  Let  me  present  you  with  one  other  aspect  of  our  distance 
from  God.  You  have  read  your  Bibles,  and  you  believe  that  faith  alone  can  unite 
the  BOOl  to  Christ.    You  feel  that  unless  you  can  believe  in  Him  who  died  upon  th« 


«BAP.  X?.]  ST.  LUKE.  18S 

cross  for  your  sins,  you  can  never  see  the  kingdom  of  God ;  but  you  can  say  this 
morning,  "  Sir,  I  have  striven  to  believe ;  I  have  searched  the  Scriptures,  not  hours, 
but  days  together,  to  find  a  promise  upon  which  my  weary  foot  might  rest :  I  have 
been  upon  my  knees  many  and  many  a  time,  earnestly  supplicating  a  Divine  blessing; 
but  though  I  have  pleaded,  all  in  vain  have  I  urged  my  plea,  for  until  now  no 
■whisper  have  I  had  of  grace,  no  token  for  good,  no  sign  of  mercy.  Well,  poor  soul, 
thou  art  indeed  far  from  God,  I  will  repeat  the  words  of  the  text  to  thee :  "  When 
he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father  saw  him,  and  had  compassion  on  him  "  I 
II.  Our  second  point  is  the  pecdliab  tbodbles  which  agitate  the  breasts  of  those 
who  are  in  this  position.  There  are  yet  many  miles  between  him  and  his  father 
whom  he  has  neglected.  Can  you  conceive  his  emotions  when  for  the  first  time 
after  so  long  an  absence  he  sees  the  old  house  at  home  ?  He  remembers  it  well  in 
the  distance ;  for  though  it  is  long  since  he  trod  its  floors  he  has  never  ceased  to 
recollect  it ;  and  the  remembrance  of  his  father's  kindness,  and  of  his  own  pros- 
perity when  he  was  with  him,  has  never  yet  been  erased  from  his  consciousness. 
xou  would  imagine  that  for  one  moment  he  feels  a  flash  of  joy,  hke  some  flash  of 
lightning  in  the  midst  of  the  tempest,  but  anon  a  black  darkness  comes  over  his 
spirit.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  probable  he  will  think,  "  Oh  !  suppose  I  could  reach 
my  home,  will  my  father  receive  me  ?  Will  he  not  shut  the  door  in  my  face  and 
tell  me  to  begone  and  spend  the  rest  of  my  life  where  I  have  been  spending  the  first 
of  it  ?  Then  another  suggestion  might  arise:  "  Surely,  the  demon  that  led  me  first 
astray  may  lead  me  back  again,  before  I  salute  my  parent."  "  Or  mayhap,"  thought 
he,  "I  may  even  die  upon  the  road,  and  so  before  I  have  received  my  father's 
blessing  my  soul  may  stand  before  its  God."  I  doubt  not  each  of  these  three 
thoughts  has  crossed  your  mind  if  you  are  now  in  the  position  of  one  who  is  seeking 
Christ,  but  mourns  to  feel  himself  far  away  from  Him.  First,  you  have  been  afraid 
lest  you  should  die  before  Christ  has  appeared  to.  you.  You  have  been  for  months 
seeking  the  Saviour  without  finding  Him,  and  now  the  black  thought  comes,  "  And 
what  if  I  should  die  with  all  these  prayers  unanswered  ?  There  was  never  a  soul 
yet,  that  sincerely  sought  the  Saviour,  who  perished  before  he  found  Him.  No ; 
the  gates  of  death  shall  never  shut  on  thee  till  the  gates  of  grace  have  opened  for 
thee.  Your  second  fear  is,  "  Ah,  sir  I  I  am  not  afraid  of  dying  before  I  find  Christ, 
I  have  a  worse  fear  than  that ;  I  have  had  convictions  before,  and  they  have  often 
passed  away;  my  greatest  fear  to-day  is,  that  these  will  be  the  same."  I  have 
heard  of  a  poor  collier,  who  on  one  occasion,  having  been  deeply  impressed  under  a 
sermon,  was  led  to  repent  of  sin  and  forsake  his  former  life ;  but  he  felt  so  great  a 
horror  of  ever  returning  to  his  former  conversation,  that  one  day  he  knelt  down  and 
cried  thus  unto  God,  "  O  Lord,  let  me  die  on  this  spot,  rather  than  ever  deny  the 
religion  which  I  have  espoused,  and  turn  back  to  my  former  conversation  "  :  and  wa 
are  credibly  told,  that  he  died  on  that  very  spot,  and  so  his  prayer  was  answered. 
But  the  last  and  the  most  prominent  thought  which  I  suppose  the  prodigal  would 
have,  would  be,  that  when  he  did  get  to  his  father,  he  would  say  to  him,  "  Get 
along  with  yon,  I  will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  you."  Now,  sinners,  dry  your 
tears ;  let  hopeless  sorrows  cease ;  look  to  the  wounds  of  Christ,  who  died ;  let  all 
your  griefs  now  be  removed,  there  is  no  further  cause  for  them :  your  Father  loves 
you ;  He  accepts  and  receives  yon  to  His  heart.  III.  Now,  in  conclusion,  I  may 
notice  bow  thbsb  fbabs  were  mbt  im  thb  prodioal's  casb,  and  how  they  shall  be 
met  in  ours  if  we  are  in  the  same  condition.  The  text  says,  "  The  Father  saw  him." 
Yes,  and  God  saw  thee  just  now.  That  tear  which  was  wiped  away  so  hastily — as 
if  thoa  wast  ashamed  of  it — God  saw  it,  and  He  stored  it  in  His  bottle.  That  prayer 
which  thou  didst  breathe  just  a  few  moments  ago,  so  faintly,  and  with  such  little 
faith — God  heard  it.  Sinner,  let  this  be  thy  comfort,  that  God  sees  thee  when  thoa 
beginnest  to  repent.  He  does  not  see  thee  with  His  usual  gaze,  with  which  Ha 
looks  on  all  men ;  but  He  sees  thee  with  an  eye  of  intense  interest.  He  has  been 
looking  on  thee  in  all  thy  sin,  and  in  all  thy  sorrow,  hoping  that  thou  wouldst 
repent;  and  now  He  sees  the  first  gleam  of  grace,  and  He  beholds  it  with  joy. 
Never  warder  on  the  lonely  castle  top  saw  the  first  grey  light  of  morning  with  mora 
joy  than  that  with  which  God  beholds  the  first  desire  in  thy  heart.  Never  physician 
rejoiced  more  when  he  saw  the  first  heaving  of  the  lungs  in  one  that  was  supposed 
to  be  dead,  than  God  doth  rejoice  over  thee,  now  that  He  sees  the  first  token  for 
good.  And  then,  the  text  says,  "  He  had  compassion  on  him."  Jehovah's  bowels 
yearn  to-day  over  you.  He  is  not  angry  with  you ;  His  anger  is  passed  away,  and 
Bis  hands  are  stretched  oat  stilL  Nor  did  this  prodigal's  father  stop  in  mere 
•ompassion.    Having  had  compassion,  "  he  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed 


184  THE  BIBJ.ICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  IT. 

him."  This  you  do  not  understand  yet ;  but  yon  Bhall.  As  sure  as  God  is  God,  if 
you  this  day  are  seeking  Him  aright  through  Christ,  the  day  shall  come  when  the 
kiss  of  full  assurance  shall  be  on  your  lip,  when  the  arms  of  sovereign  love  shall 
embrace  you,  and  you  shall  know  it  to  be  so.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  danger  of 
irifling  with  convictions: — A  correspondent  of  the  New  York  Christian  Advocate 
furnishes  the  following  affecting  narrative : — ' '  When  I  was  travelling  in  the  state 
of  Massachusetts,  twenty-six  years  ago,  after  preaching  one  evening  in  the  town  of 

,  a  very  serious-looking  young  man  arose,  and  wished  to  address  the  assembly. 

After  obtaining  leave,  he  spoke  as  follows  : — •  My  friends,  about  one  year  ago,  I  set 
out  in  company  with  a  young  man  of  my  intimate  acquaintance,  to  seek  the  salvation 
of  my  soul.  For  several  weeks  we  went  on  together,  we  laboured  together,  and  often 
renewed  our  covenant  never  to  give  over  seeking  till  we  obtained  the  religion  of 
Jesus.  But,  all  at  once,  the  young  man  neglected  attending  meeting,  appeared  to 
turn  his  back  on  all  the  means  of  grace,  and  grew  so  shy  of  me,  that  I  could  scarcely 
get  an  opportunity  to  speak  with  him.  His  strange  conduct  gave  me  much  painful 
anxiety  of  mind ;  but  still  I  felt  resolved  to  obtain  the  salvation  of  my  soul,  or 
perish,  making  the  publican's  plea.  After  a  few  days,  a  friend  informed  me  that 
my  young  companion  had  received  an  invitation  to  attend  a  ball,  and  was  deter- 
mined to  go.  I  went  immediately  to  him,  and,  with  tears  in  my  eyes,  endeavoured 
to  persuade  him  to  change  his  purpose,  and  to  go  with  me  on  that  evening  to  a 
prayer-meeting.  I  pleaded  with  him  in  vain.  He  told  me,  when  we  parted,  that  I 
must  not  give  him  up  as  lost,  for  after  he  had  attended  that  ball,  he  intended  to 
make  a  business  of  seeking  religion.  The  appointed  evening  came,  and  he  went  to 
the  ball,  and  I  went  to  the  prayer-meeting.  Soon  after  the  meeting  opened,  it 
pleased  God,  in  answer  to  my  prayer,  to  turn  my  spiritual  captivity,  and  make  my 
Boul  rejoice  in  His  justifying  love.  Soon  after  the  ball  opened,  my  young  friend 
was  standing  at  the  head  of  the  ball-room,  with  the  hand  of  a  young  lady  in  his 
hand,  preparing  to  lead  down  the  dance ;  and,  while  the  musician  was  tuning  his 
violin,  without  one  moment's  warning,  the  young  man  sallied  back,  and  fell  dead 
on  the  floor.  I  was  immediately  sent  for,  to  assist  in  devising  means  to  convey  hia 
remains  to  his  father's  house.  You  will  be  better  able  to  judge  what  were  the 
emotions  of  my  heart,  when  I  tell  you  that  that  young  man  was  my  ovra  brother.* " 
Trifle  not,  then,  with  thy  convictions,  for  eternity  shall  be  too  short  for  thee  to 
utter  thy  lamentations  over  such  trifling.  [Ibid.^  The  prodigals  father: — I.  Thh 
father's  etbbight.  He  has  seen  all  your  frailties,  all  your  struggles,  all  your  dis- 
advantages. He  has  not  been  looking  at  you  with  a  critic's  eye  or  a  bailiff's  eye, 
but  with  a  Father's  eye ;  and  if  a  parent  ever  pitied  a  child,  God  pities  you.  Yoa 
Bay :  "  Oh,  I  had  so  many  evil  surroundings  when  I  started  life."  Tour  Father  sees 
it.  n.  The  father's  haste.  He  ran.  No  wonder.  He  didn't  know  but  that  the 
young  man  would  change  his  mind  and  go  back.  He  didn't  know  but  that  he  would 
drop  down  from  exhaustion.  He  did  not  know  but  something  fatal  might  overtake 
him  before  he  got  up  to  the  door-sill,  and  so  the  father  ran.  "  When  he  was  yet  a 
great  way  off,  his  father  ran."  When  the  sinner  starts  for  God,  God  starts  for  the 
sinner.  God  does  not  come  out  with  a  slow  and  hesitating  pace ;  the  infinite 
spaces  slip  beneath  His  feet,  and  He  takes  worlds  at  a  bound.  "  The  father  ran  I " 
III.  The  father's  eisb.  Oh,  this  Father's  kiss  1  There  is  so  much  meaning,  and 
love,  and  compassion  in  it ;  so  much  pardon  in  it ;  so  much  heaven  in  it.  I 
proclaim  Him  the  Lord  God,  merciful,  gracious,  and  long-suffering,  abundant  in 
goodness  and  truth.  Lest  you  would  not  believe  Him,  He  goes  up  Golgotha,  and 
while  the  rocks  are  rending,  and  the  graves  are  opening,  and  the  mobs  are  howling, 
and  the  sun  is  hiding.  He  dies  for  you.  {De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  father'i 
gilence: — We  must  not  fail  to  observe  the  father's  silence  in  reference  to  the  confession. 
There  is  meaning  in  this.  When  a  son  is  received  in  such  circumstances,  express- 
ing his  grief  for  the  past,  what  he  says  is  apt  to  give  occasion  for  reproach,  or,  if 
a  different  spirit  rule,  the  father  is  apt  to  go  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and  frame 
words  of  excuse.  It  is  otherwise  here.  The  father  is  silent,  and  that  silence  is 
Godlike.  He  receives  the  confession,  for  it  is  true,  it  is  necessary ;  nothing  can 
excuse  the  deeds,  nothing  can  change  the  character  of  that  awful  past ;  but  he  doe^ 
not  dwell  upon  the  painful  subject,  he  does  not  open  np  the  wound  afresh.  As  he 
cannot  say  a  word  in  excuse,  he  will  not  speak  at  all.  His  silence  is  condemnation. 
Thus  God  deals  with  man,  maintaining  a  silence  which  is  merciful.  He  casts  the 
Bins  behind  His  back.  '•  He  giveth  to  all  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not."  (Prof. 
Calderwood.)  The  return  and  the  reception: — L  The  prodigal's  betuen  home. 
**  He  aroM  and  oame  to  his  father."   He  did  not  spend  his  remaining  strength  eithef 


ciHAJ.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  18i 

in  useless  regrets,  or  in  mere  resolutions.  "  He  arose  and  came."  In  coming  to 
Christ  we  must  not  allow  difficulties  to  discourage  us.  We  may  expect  them  ;  for, 
if  we  have  lived  in  sin,  we  have  lived  at  a  great  distance  from  Him  ;  and  the  king 
of  the  "  far  country  "  does  not  like  to  lose  a  subject.  There  is  cause  for  all  thij 
steadfastness  of  purpose.  If  you,  who  have  been  awakened,  advance  no  farther, 
sin  will  quickly  overtake  you,  and  will  bind  the  chains  of  habit  still  more  closely 
around  your  soul.  There  is  no  safety  but  in  going  forward  boldly  and  confessing 
Christ.  Haste  I  The  cause  of  so  many  failures  with  those  who  attempt  to  walk  in 
the  '*  narrow  path,"  is,  that  they  attempt  in  their  own  strength.  This  brings  us 
to — II.  The  prodigal's  reception.  "  When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  his  father 
saw  him,  and  had  compassion,  and  ran,  and  fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him." 
That  prince  of  story-tellers,  Dr.  Guthrie,  tells  of  a  young  sailor's  widow,  who  had 
parted  with  her  husband  after  a  few  brief  bright  days  of  wedded  bliss.  He  went  to 
sea  and  never  came  back,  his  ship,  probably  foundering  with  all  her  crew,  was  never 
heard  of  again.  When  the  time  had  arrived  for  her  return,  and  she  came  not,  this 
woman  repaired  to  some  bold  headland  and  watched  the  white  sails  as  they  appeared 
on  the  blue  waves,  and  at  length  as  she  saw  vessels  making  for  the  harbour,  hoped 
that  one  of  them  at  least  would  bring  her  long-lost  one  home.  At  night  on  her 
lone  bed  she  used  to  lie  awake  fancying  she  recognized  his  footstep,  as  some  lata 
traveller  or  midnight  reveller  wended  his  way  home,  but  only  to  sink  back  on  her 
pillow  and  weep  away  her  disappointment  as  the  footstep  passed  her  door.  And 
long  after  hope  had  died  away  in  others'  breasts,  would  she  on  her  lonely  bed, 
or  on  the  headland  close  by,  watch  for  the  coming  of  him  who  never  came 
home  again.  Love  like  this  may  have  prompted  the  father  of  the  prodigal  to 
daily  watch,  with  eager  eye,  the  distant  hill  over  which  he  saw  his  son  go  on  that 
Bad  morning  of  his  leaving  home.  When  the  prodigal  was  a  great  way  off  his 
father  ran  to  meet  him.  The  son  walked;  the  father  ran.  (W.  G.  Pascoe.) 
The  prodigal's  reception : — ^I.  First,  dear  friends,  the  condition  of  such  a  seeker — 
HE  IS  TET  A  GREAT  WAY  OFT.  He  is  a  great  way  off  if  you  consider  one  or  two 
things.  1.  Bemember  his  want  of  strength.  This  poor  young  man  had  for  soma 
time  been  without  food — brought  so  very  low  that  the  husks  upon  which  the  swine 
fed  would  have  seemed  a  dainty  to  him  if  he  could  have  eaten  them.  He  is  so 
hungry  that  he  has  become  emaciated,  and  to  him  every  mile  has  the  weariness  ot 
leagues  within  it.  So  the  sinner  is  a  long  way  off  from  God  when  you  consider  hia 
utter  want  of  strength  to  come  to  God.  2.  He  is  a  great  way  off,  again,  if  yoa 
consider  his  want  of  courage.  He  longs  to  see  his  father,  but  yet  the  probabilities 
are  that  if  his  father  should  come  he  would  ran  away ;  the  very  sound  of  his  father's 
footsteps  would  act  upon  him  as  they  did  on  Adam  in  the  garden — he  would  hide 
himself  among  the  trees.  His  want  of  courage,  therefore,  makes  the  distance  long, 
for  every  step  hitherto  has  been  taken  as  though  into  the  jaws  of  death,  3.  You 
are  a  great  way  off  when  we  consider  the  difficulty  of  the  way  of  repentance.  John 
Bunyan  tells  us  that  Christian  found,  when  he  went  back  to  the  arbour  after  his 
lost  roll,  that  it  was  very  hard  work  going  back.  Every  backsUder  finds  it  so,  and 
every  penitent  sinner  knows  that  there  is  a  bitterness  in  mourning  for  sin  com- 
parable to  the  loss  of  an  only  son.  4.  Let  us  look  into  this  matter,  and  show 
that  while  the  road  seems  long  on  this  account  it  really  is  long  if  we  view  it  in 
certain  lights.  (1)  There  are  many  seeking  sinners  who  are  a  great  way  off  in  their 
life.  (2)  Again,  you  feel  yourself  a  great  way  off  as  to  knowledge.  (3)  In  another 
point  also  many  an  earnest  seeker  is  a  great  way  off ;  I  mean  in  his  repentance. 
Great  way  off  as  you  are,  if  the  Lord  pardons  you,  while  yet  callous  and  con- 
sciously hard  of  heart,  will  you  not  then  fall  at  His  feet  and  commend  that  great 
love  wherewith  He  loved  you,  even  when  ye  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ?  (4) 
Yes,  but  I  think  I  hear  one  say,  "  There  is  another  point  in  which  I  feel  a  great 
way  off,  for  I  have  little  or  no  faith.  I  have  not  the  faith  that  I  want ;  I  am  a  great 
way  off  from  it,  and  I  fear  that  I  shall  never  possess  it."  Yes,  my  brethren,  I 
perceive  your  difficulty,  for  I  have  felt  the  sorrow  of  it  myself;  but  oh  1  my  Lord, 
who  is  the  giver  of  faith,  who  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and  remission 
of  sins,  can  give  you  the  faith  you  so  much  desire,  and  can  cause  you  this  morning 
to  rest  with  perfect  confidence  upon  the  work  which  He  has  finished  for  yon.  II. 
Now  consider  the  uatchi^bs  kindness  ot  the  heatxnlt  Father.  We  must  take 
each  word  and  dwell  upon  it.  First  of  all,  we  have  here  Divine  observation. 
*'  When  he  was  yet  a  great  way  off  his  father  saw  him, "  It  is  true  he  has  always 
Been  him,  God  sees  the  sinner  in  every  state  and  in  every  position.  The  father 
does  not  turn  away  and  try  to  forget  him;  he  fixes  hu  fall  gase  upon  him. 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Observe  this  was  a  loving  observation,  for  it  is  written,  "  his  father  saw  him."  H« 
did  not  see  him  as  a  mere  casual  observer ;  he  did  not  note  him  as  a  man  might 
note  his  friend's  child  with  some  pity  and  benevolence ;  but  he  marked  him  as  a 
father  alone  can  do.  What  a  quick  eye  a  parent  hath  I  The  next  thought  to  be 
well  considered  is  Divine  compassion.  "  When  he  saw  him  he  had  compassion  on 
him."  Does  not  the  word  com-passion  mean  suffering-with  or  fellow-suffering  T 
What  is  compassion,  then,  but  putting  yourself  into  the  place  of  the  sufferer  and 
leehng  his  grief?  Notice  and  observe  carefully  the  swiftness  of  this  Divine  love: 
"He  ran."  After  noticing  thus  observation,  compassion,  and  swiftness,  do  not 
forget  the  nearness :  "  He  fell  upon  his  neck  and  kissed  him."  Observe  how  near 
God  comes  to  the  sinner.  It  was  said  of  that  eminent  saint  and  martyr.  Bishop 
Hooper,  that  on  one  occasion  a  man  in  deep  distress  was  allowed  to  go  into  his 
prison  to  tell  his  tale  of  conscience ;  but  Bishop  Hooper  looked  so  sternly  upon 
him,  and  addressed  him  so  severely  at  first,  that  the  poor  soul  ran  away,  and  could 
not  get  comfort  until  he  had  sought  out  another  minister  of  a  gentler  aspect.  Now, 
Hooper  reaUy  was  a  gracious  and  loving  BOol,  but  the  sternness  of  his  manner  kept 
the  penitent  off.  There  is  no  such  stern  manner  in  oar  heavenly  Father;  he 
loves  to  receive  His  prodigals.  When  he  comes  there  is  no  "  Hold  off  1 "  no  "  Keep 
off ! "  to  the  sinner,  but  He  falls  upon  his  neck  and  He  kisses  him.  In  kissing  his 
eon  the  father  recognizes  relationship.  He  said  with  emphasis,  '•  Thou  art  my 
son."  Again,  that  kiss  was  the  seal  of  forgiveness.  He  would  not  have  kissed 
him  if  he  had  been  angry  with  him ;  he  forgave  him,  forgave  him  all.  There  was, 
moreover,  something  more  than  forgiveness ;  there  was  acceptance.  In  samming 
up,  one  may  notice  that  this  sinner,  thongh  he  was  a  great  way  off,  was  not 
received  to  full  pardon  and  to  adoption  and  acceptance  by  a  gradual  process,  but 
he  was  received  at  once.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  prodigaVt  return: — It  was 
about  midnight  in  one  of  the  suburbs  of  Edinburgh,  and  everything  aroond 
seemed  peaceful  and  quiet,  when  a  young  man,  whose  age  could  not  be  more 
than  nineteen,  cautiously  advanced  towards  one  of  the  few  shops  that  were  to  be 
found  in  that  neighbourhood.  He  seemed  anxious  to  escape  observation;  for, 
although  it  was  so  late,  there  were  still  many  persons  passing  to  and  from  the  city. 
He  very  soon  effected  an  entrance  into  the  shop  in  some  way  known  to  himself,  and 
after  he  gained  admittance,  groped  his  way  into  a  part  of  the  shop  with  which  he 
seemed  well  acquainted,  and  where  he  found  some  matches  and  a  candle,  which  he 
soon  hghted.  Then,  looking  carefully  around  him,  his  eye  lighted  on  a  desk  which 
stood  at  the  forther  end  of  the  counter.  After  trying  it,  he  found  that  it  was 
locked ;  bnt  not  to  be  defeated  in  his  purpose,  he  got  hold  of  some  blunt  instru- 
ment and  forced  the  lock.  In  doing  so  he  made  a  considerable  noise,  and  before 
he  could  proceed  further  in  his  operations  he  heard  a  voice  saying,  "Who  ie 
there  ?  *'  He  began  to  tremble  and  show  signs  of  fear,  and  before  he  had  time  to 
escape  a  door  leading  towards  the  back  part  of  the  premises  was  opened.  A 
middle-aged  woman  with  a  hght  in  her  hand  then  appeared.  The  first  object  that 
attracted  her  attention  was  the  young  man,  who  stood  as  if  he  was  riveted  to  the 
£oor.  She  looked  at  him  for  a  short  time,  and  then  said,  "Oh,  Willie,  Willie,  my 
poor  boy,  have  yon  become  so  wicked  as  to  rob  your  widowed  mother  ?  Willie,  my 
bo^,  this  will  break  my  heart."  "  I  cannot  help  it,  mother,"  he  replied,  in  a  husky 
voice.  "I  must  have  money  ;  and  yon  can  see  by  my  clothes  that  I  have  deserted 
from  my  regiment."  "  I  will  tell  you  what  to  do,"  his  mother  said.  "  Go  back  to 
your  regiment."  "  What  1  go  back  and  be  punished  as  a  deserter  ! "  he  said, 
sullenly.  "  No,  I  will  not.  I  will  have  this  money  that  is  in  the  desk ;  then  I  can 
get  away  to  another  country."  As  he  spoke  he  lifted  the  lid  of  the  desk  and  seized 
the  bag  which  contained  the  money.  While  thus  engaged  his  mother  stepped 
towards  him,  and  grasped  him  by  the  arm,  as  she  said,  pleadingly,  "  Willie,  don't 
do  this  wicked  thing;  the  money  is  of  no  value  to  me — it  is  your  soul  that 
I  value.  Come,  say  tiiat  yon  will  not  take  it,  and  leave  your  mother."  "  Come, 
mother,"  he  said,  doggedly,  "let  go  my  arm"  ;  but  she  still  clung  to  him.  Then 
with  some  violence  he  pushed  her  back  into  a  chair,  and  the  poor  woman  covered 
her  face  with  her  hands  and  wept  bitterly.  "  Ob,  Lord,"  she  said,  "  save  my  poor 
hoy."  As  he  pushed  his  mother  from  him  he  made  for  the  door  with  the  money  in 
his  possession,  bnt  when  he  reached  the  door  he  looked  back,  and  saw  his  moUier 
sobbing  as  her  whole  frame  shook  with  emotion.  He  ptood  for  a  moment  nnde> 
eided  what  to  do  ;  then,  throwing  back  the  money  on  the  counter,  he  put  his  arms 
round  his  mother's  neck.  "  Mother,"  he  said, "  I  will  not  leave  you ;  I  will  go  back  to 
my  regiment  to-morrow."  The  following  morning  WiUie  gave  himself  up  to  the  mili 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  187 

tary  authorities  as  a  deserter,  was  tried  by  court-martial,  and  punished.  Shortly 
afterwards  he  became  seriously  ill,  and  was  sent  to  the  Military  Hospital  at  Edinburgh, 
•where  I  first  met  him.  The  Lord  blessed  the  Word  to  his  soul,  so  that  when  he  was 
discharged  a  short  time  afterwards  he  returned  to  his  mother's  house  a  believer  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  and  a  new  man.  A  short  time  after  his  discharge  he  got  married  to  a 
Christian  young  woman,  and  in  a  few  weeks  afterwards  both  of  them  sailed  for 
Australia,  where  his  voice  has  often  been  heard  preaching  Christ  to  perishing 
sinners,  both  in  the  public  parks  and  in  the  streets  of  the  city  of  Melbourne. 

Before  he  left,  he  said  to  me,  "  I  am  sorry  to  leave  you,  J ,  but  take  this  Bible 

and  keep  it  for  my  sake ;  it  is  the  Bible  my  dear  father  gave  me,  and  I  value  it 
above  almost  anything  I  possess.  Keep  it  for  my  sake,  and  visit  my  mother,  for 
fche  loves  you  as  myself  ;  and  if  we  never  meet  on  earth  again,  let  us  both  so  live 
here  that  we  may  meet  *  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are 
at  rest.'  "  (Notes  from  a  Soldier's  Diary.)  The  return  of  tlie  banished : — Some 
people  once  lived  in  a  happy  isle,  but  for  their  misdeeds  were  banished.  The  place 
of  tiieir  exile,  however,  lay  within  sight  of  their  former  home.  They  could  look 
across  the  channel  and  discern  the  beach,  with  its  border  of  golden  sand,  and  the 
hills  beyond,  with  their  emerald  slopes  and  cool  snow-capped  summits.  Occasion- 
ally, too,  in  the  stiller  weather,  they  could  hear  voices  from  that  land  :  the  shout 
of  happy  playmates,  the  tinkling  tune  of  browsing  flocks,  or  the  mellow  peal 
summoning  to  welcome  worship.  Their  own  was  a  land  of  emptiness.  From  the 
brackish  bog  sprouted  a  few  dingy  weeds,  and  the  glairy  stems,  or  mallows  among 
the  bushes,  were  the  food  of  the  gaunt  inhabitants.  Few  had  any  desire  to  leave, 
or  any  hope  of  bettering  their  condition.  One  exception  we  may  notice.  He  was 
a  thoughtful  character.  With  those  deep,  melancholy  eyes,  which  take  so  much  for 
granted,  and  which  seldom  kindle  to  the  fullest — for  they  have  looked  the  world 
through  and  through,  and  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection — glimpses  of  a  noble  soul 
could  at  times  be  caught  as  it  climbed  to  the  window  of  his  wan  and  wistful  counte- 
nance. Many  an  eager  glance  did  he  direct  towards  the  blessed  isle.  Fain  would 
he  reach  it.  One  morning,  on  waking,  it  struck  him  that  the  opposite  coast  was 
unusually  near.  So  low  was  the  tide  that  perhaps  he  might  ford  it,  or  at  all  events 
swim.  So  down  through  the  swamp  and  over  the  dry  shingle  he  posted ;  and  then 
across  the  sad  and  solid  sand,  off  which  the  gentle  wavelets  had  folded,  right 
athwart  the  wet  stones  and  crackling  fuci,  where  tiny  streams  of  laggard  water  and 
crustaceans  tumbling  topsy-turvy  in  their  crawling  haste  were  trying  to  overtake 
the  ocean,  till  abruptly  met  by  the  rising  tide,  be  found  to  his  dismay  that,  deep  as 
was  the  ebb,  the  channel  still  was  deeper.  Disappointed  here,  he  by  and  by 
bethought  him  of  another  plan.  Westward  of  his  dwelling  the  coast-line  stretched 
away  in  successive  cliffs  and  headlands,  till  it  ended  in  a  lofty  promontory,  which 
in  its  turn  seemed  to  abut  against  the  happy  isle.  Thither  he  made  up  his  mind 
that  he  would  take  a  pilgrimage.  With  slopes  and  swells,  zigzags  and  windings,  it 
turned  out  much  farther  than  it  looked ;  and  when  at  last,  footsore  and  staggering, 
he  got  to  the  summit,  instead  of  a  bridge  to  the  better  land,  he  found  it  a  dizzy 
cliff,  with  the  same  relentless  ocean  weltering  at  its  base.  Baulked  in  this  final 
effort,  he  went  down  and  flung  himself  on  the  rocks  and  wept.  It  was  during  this 
paroxysm  of  vexation  that,  looking  up,  he  noticed  a  little  boat,  with  whose  appear- 
ance he  was  familiar.  He  was  a  little  surprised  to  see  it  there,  for  he  remembered 
that  it  used  to  ride  exactly  opposite  bis  own  habitation,  although,  belonging  to  no 
one  in  particular,  and  not  having  brought  any  of  the  commodities  they  cared  for, 
be  and  the  other  inhabitants  had  never  paid  it  much  attention.  Having  now 
nothing  else  to  do,  he  looked  at  it  eagerly  and  somewhat  wonderingly.  It  neared 
bim.  It  came  close  up  to  the  rocks  where  be  was  seated.  It  was  a  beautiful  boat, 
with  snowy  sail  and  golden  prow,  and  a  red  pennon  flying.  There  was  one  on 
board,  and  only  one.  His  raiment  was  bright  and  glistening,  and  his  features  were 
such  as  could  only  have  come  from  the  happy  isle.  "  Son  of  man,"  he  said,  "  why 
weepest  thou  ?  "  "  Because  I  cannot  reach  yonder  blessed  region."  "  Couldst  thou 
trust  thyself  to  me  ?  "  The  pilgrim  looked,  first  at  the  little  skiff,  and  then  at  its 
benignant  pilot,  and  said,  "  I  can."  With  that  timid  "yes  "  he  stepped  on  board, 
and  like  a  sunbeam,  so  swift,  it  bore  bim  away  from  that  dismal  coast ;  and  ere  be 
oould  believe  it  he  was  a  denizen  of  the  happy  isle,  breathing  its  immortal  air  ;  at 
home  amidst  its  loveliness,  and  numbered  with  its  citizens.  The  happy  isle  ifl 
peace  with  God — the  blessed  state  which  men  when  sinless  occupied.  The  dreary 
land  is  the  state  of  alienation  from  the  living  God,  in  which,  with  joyless  aoquies- 
«enoe,  so  many  are  living.    And  the  little  skiff — the  only  means  of  passing  ovef 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  vr. 

from  the  oo»  ragion  to  the  other — is  the  atonement,  the  intercession  of  Jesas 
Christ.  {James  Hamilton,  D.D.)  "My  father  will  meet  me"  : — A  friend  got 
into  a  railway  carriage  in  Liverpool  to  gO'^r  north  in  Scotland,  and  there  sat 
beside  him  a  pale,  weak,  worn  young  mother,  and  she  had  upon  the  bend  of  her 
arm  a  strong  but  restless  babe.  Surely,  he  thought,  this  mother  is  not  able  to  carry 
this  child  all  these  hundreds  of  miles.  After  a  little  he  put  the  question  to  her, 
" Are  yoo  going  far ? "  "I  am."  ** Are  you  going  to  carry  that  child  all  tha 
way?"  "Yes,  lam."  "  Will  you  not  get  tired  ?  You  look  tired  now."  "lam 
not  well,  and  I  am  tired,  and  I  do  feel  that  it  is  a  long  way  to  go  ;  but  oh  1 " — and 
the  tears  stole  down  her  cheek — "  I  do  not  mind,  for  my  father  will  meet  me  there." 
Ah  I  beloved,  thou  mayest  have  many  a  load  to  carry,  many  a  sin  to  weep  over, 
many  a  long  and  weary  day  in  life's  journey,  and  but  little  strength,  little  to  solace 
or  comfort ;  but  never  mind,  yon  are  going  home,  to  die  no  more,  and  your  Father 
will  meet  you  at  the  journey's  fend.  Conversion  not  necessarily  a  protracted 

procens : — "When  we  read  of  the  prodigal  being  a  great  way  off,  and  so  are  led  to 
think  of  his  return  as  a  long  and  toilsome  journey,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that 
conversion  is  necessarily  a  protracted  process.  The  coming  back,  of  course,  in  the 
parable,  must  correspond  to  the  departure  into  the  far  land ;  and  though  frequently 
there  is  a  considerable  time  of  anxiety  and  struggle  between  the  moment  of 
awakening  and  the  time  when  the  soul  finds  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  yet  this 
dark  middle-passage  is  by  no  means  espential.  Rather  it  is  the  result  either  of 
faulty  views  as  to  the  way  of  salvation,  or  of  a  want  of  faith  in  it  as  it  is  presented 
to  the  sinner.  On  this  point  I  cannot  refrain  from  reproducing  an  anecdote  which 
I  heard  one  evening  in  conversation  from  the  lips  of  Mr.  Spurgeon.  An  earnest 
young  evangelist  was  one  morning  on  his  way  from  Granton  to  Edinburgh,  and 
overtook  a  Newhaven  fishwife  carrying  her  burden  to  the  market.  Anxious  to  do 
some  good,  he  said  to  her,  •'  There  you  go  with  your  burden  on  your  back.  Once 
I  had  a  heavier  load  than  that,  but,  thank  God,  I  have  got  rid  of  it  now."  "  Oh," 
she  replied,  "  yon  mean  the  burden  that  John  Bunyan  speaks  of ;  I  know  all  about 
that ;  but  I  have  got  rid  of  mine  many  and  many  a  year  ago.  "  I  am  happy  to 
hear  of  it,"  said  the  evangelist.  "  Yes,"  she  answered ;  "  but,  do  you  know,  I  don't 
think  that  man  Evangelist  was  a  right  preacher  of  the  gospel  at  all.  When 
Christian  asked  him  where  he  was  to  go,  he  said,  Do  you  see  yonder  wicket-gate  ? 
He  said  he  didn't ;  and  it  was  no  wonder.  He  asked  again.  Do  you  see  yonder 
shining  light  7  and  he  said  he  did ;  and  then  Evangelist  directed  him  to  make  for 
that.  Now,  what  business  had  he  to  speak  either  about  the  shining  light  or  the 
wicket-gate?  Couldn't  he  have  pointed  him  at  once  to  the  Eedeemer's  cross. 
Christian  never  did  lose  his  burden  till  he  saw  that  cross ;  and  he  might  have  seen 
it  sooner  if  Evangelist  had  known  his  business  better.  Much  good  he  got,  too,  by 
making  for  the  shining  light.  Why,  before  he  knew  where  he  was,  he  was  flounder- 
ing in  the  Slough  of  Despond  ;  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  man  Help  he  would 
never  have  got  out."  "  What !  "  said  the  evangelist  to  her,  "  were  you  never  in  the 
Slough  of  Despond  t "  "  Ay,  many  a  time,  many  a  time,"  was  the  reply ;  "  but 
let  me  tell  you,  young  man,  it's  a  hantel  easier  to  get  through  that  slough  ynth 
your  burden  off  than  with  your  burden  on  I  "  Now,  though  as  a  record  of  what 
often  actually  happens,  the  immortal  allegorist  has  given  us  a  truthful  portraiture, 
the  Christian  fishwife  was  in  the  right ;  for  the  moment  a  sinner  rightly  appre- 
hends and  thoroughly  believes  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  he  loses  his  sin-burden , 
and  this  may  be  after  no  painfully  protracted  process  of  agony  and  inward 
conflict.  IW.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  father'$  readiness  to  forgive  : — ^As  the 
father  in  the  parable  ran  to  meet  the  returning  prodigal,  so  the  Lord,  while 
slow  to  condemn,  makes  haste  to  forgive.  Some  time  ago  a  devoted  Christian 
worker  in  Edinburgh,  finding  a  young  woman — one  of  the  fallen — in  rapid  decline, 
earnestly  entreated  her  to  go  back  to  her  home.  "  No,"  she  said,  "  I  cannot ;  my 
parents  would  never  receive  me."  Her  Christian  friend  knew  what  a  mother's 
heart  was,  so  she  sat  down  and  wrote  a  letter  to  the  mother,  telling  her  that  she 
had  met  her  daughter,  who  wai  deeply  grieved,  and  wanted  to  return.  The  next 
post  brought  an  answer  back,  and  money  along  with  it  for  the  journey,  and  on  the 
envelope  was  written,  "  Immediately  1  immediately  1  "  That  was  a^  mother'a 
heart;  she  fully  forgave,  and  desired  the  earliest  possible  return.  This  is  what 
the  great  and  loving  God  is  saying  to  every  wandering  sinner:  "Come  imme- 
diately."  Yes,  backsliders,  you  catmot  come  home  too  soon ;  for  He  will  forgive 
jou  graciously  and  love  you  freely,  and  in  heaven  there  will  be  joy  unspetikabla 
©?«r  jour  retom.        Tfie  Father's  joy  at  the  sinner's  return: — This  infinite  joy  in 


OHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE.  I8f 

the  Father's  heart  seems  to  as  appalling  when  we  read  of  it,  and  try  to  believe 
that  it  is  an  actual  revelation  of  the  Divine  mind.  It  is  high — we  cannot  attain 
onto  it ;  that  is  our  natural  language.  And  yet  all  Christendom  is  but  an  expres- 
sion of  this  truth.  What  does  the  message  of  Christ's  full  and  perfect  sacrifice 
mean — what  do  the  sacraments  mean — if  it  is  not  this  ?  Are  they  not  manifesta- 
tions of  One  who  of  His  tender  love  to  mankind  gave  His  only  begotten  Son  to 
take  our  nature  upon  Him,  and  to  suffer  death  upon  the  cross.  Passion  Week  is 
either  a  dream  or  it  is  a  translation  into  fact  of  this  parable.  It  is  a  witness 
that  the  parable  applies  equally  to  both  the  sons  of  the  Father  —  to  those 
who  are  near  and  to  those  who  are  afar  off.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 
And  the  son  ssild  luito  him,  Father.  —  Confession  and  restoration : — ^I.  Thb 
rBODiGAij's  CONFESSION.  1.  This  confessiou  was  the  result  of  repentance.  2.  This 
confession  of  the  prodigal  showed  that  his  repentance  was  real.  "  Father,  I  have 
sinned."  There  was  nothing  fictitious  about  that  confession.  It  was  the  welliug 
up  of  a  bursting  heart,  too  full  of  sadness,  too  conscious  of  error,  too  desirous  of 
forgiveness  to  think  of  an  excuse,  or  to  say  anything  but  the  simple  truth — "  I 
have  sinned."  It  is  a  beautiful  confession,  when,  coming  from  the  lips  of  a  truly 
earnest  man,  it  is  whispered  into  the  ear  of  God.  3.  This  confession  of  the 
prodigal  showed  that  his  repentance  was  evangelical.  "I  have  sinned  against 
heaven  and  in  thy  sight."  The  earthly  aspect  of  the  sin  he  saw  in  all  its  vileness; 
but  when  he  turned  his  eyes  towards  heaven,  he  felt  that  God  had  been  more 
bitterly  sinned  against.  4.  This  confession  of  the  prodigal  was  humble — "  And 
.am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son."  He  did  not  say  that  he  was  humble ; 
true  humility  never  does  this  ;  but  he  showed  it.  IL  The  pbodioal's  bestobatiom. 
1.  The  prodigal  was  restored  to  honour.  "  The  best  robe."  2.  He  is  restored  to 
dignity.  Bing  on  finger.  3.  He  is  restored  to  comfort  and  strength.  Shoes  on 
feet.  4.  He  is  restored  to  abundant  provision.  Fatted  calf.  iW.  G.  Faseoe.) 
Bring  forth  the  best  robe. — The  best  robe : — I.  The  sinner  by  nature  is  spiriiuai.]:<y 
NAKED.  Prodigal  in  rags.  II.  A  suitable  bobe  has  been  graciously  prepared. 
Not  "go  and  prepare  one,"  but  "bring  it  forth."  III.  It  is  of  unpaballelsd 
BEAUTS  AND  VALUE.  "  The  best  robe."  Its  beauty  indescribable.  Its  beauty  never 
fades.  Purchased  for  us  by  a  great  price ;  but  no  price  is  asked  from  us.  An 
invulnerable  robe ;  clothed  in  it  we  have  nothing  to  fear.  lY.  It  is  brought  to 
us  and  put  upon  ub  by  appointed  aobncy.  V.  It  is  the  Fatheb's  gift.  VI. 
Bestowed  upon  none  but  the  sincebely  penitent.  {J.  Dobie,  D.D.)  The  best 
robe : — The  best  robe  is  the  "  garment  of  salvation,"  or  the  "  robe  of  righteous- 
ness," which  God  puts  upon  every  one  who  believes  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
1.  It  is  the  best  robe,  because  it  cost  so  much  labour  to  make  it.  2.  It  is  the  best 
robe,  because  becoming  to  all  persons.  3.  The  excellence  of  this  robe  is  seen  in 
its  suitableness  for  all  occasions.  4.  It  is  the  best  robe,  because  it  wears  so  well. 
5.  Because  it  costs  so  little.  The  poorest  person  and  the  greatest  sinuer  may  have 
it  for  nothing.  6.  Because  it  is  the  robe  we  shall  wear  in  heaven.  It  wiU  be  our 
"court  dress."      (D.  Wiriters.)  The  best  robe: — By  the  best  robe  we  may 

Boripturally  understand  what  theologians  and  preachers  have  all  along  designated 
"the  robe  of  righteousness."  It  covers  at  once  and  completely  the  rags  and 
unseemliness  of  sin.  It  was  woven  on  Calvary  for  the  race  of  man,  out  of  the 
white  warp  of  Divine  mercy  and  the  blood-red  woof  of  the  Bedeemer's  sacrifice. 
It  is  like  Christ's  own  garment  for  which  lots  were  cast,  "  without  seam,  woven 
from  the  top  throughout,"  and  of  which,  when  He  was  stripped  by  His  executioners. 
He  was  significantly  arrayed  in  the  "  scarlet  robe,"  emblematical  of  our  crimson 
transgressions  which  He  bore.  This  robe  of  righteousness  has  been  hung  up  in 
heaven's  gospel-wardrobe,  "  and  is  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe."  It  is 
beautifully  bedecked  with  the  ornaments  of  holiness,  which  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
with  delicate  hand,  has  embroidered  on  its  indestructible  texture.  An  affecting 
anecdote  has  been  preserved  concerning  the  work  of  God  in  Jamaica,  before  our 
slaves  were  set  free.  Although  Britain  had  not  liberated  them,  God's  Spirit  often 
broke  their  spiritual  chains;  and  the  joy  of  salvation  visited  black  and  white  alike. 
Once,  at  a  certain  plantation,  a  slave  had  entered  into  the  peace  of  the  gospel, 
while  his  master  still  remained  in  darkness ;  and  the  black  f  reedman  thus  addressed 
the  white  bondman,  who  had  not  yet  got  rid  of  the  galling  chains  of  sin  and  Satan. 
"  You  see,  Massa,  it  just  like  this.  A  gentleman  pass  our  house  one  day  and  he 
offer  two  robe  for  notink— one  to  you  and  one  to  me.  Me  poor  negro — very  poor — 
got  no  good  clothes — very  glad  to  get  robe  for  de  taking.  But  yon  rich  man — ^hab 
plenty  better  robe  ob  your  own — you  too  proud  to  take  de  kind  man's  robe.  Jest  so. 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Xf, 

Massa,  wid  de  gospel.  De  Lord  Jesns  Christ  is  passing  by  our  plantation  wid  robe  ok 
righteousness  for  poor  sinners.  Me  poor  sinful  negro — black  skin — black  sin — very 
glad  to  get  de  robe  dat  was  woven  on  de  tree  ;  but  you  go  great  deal  to  church — gib 
much  money — hab  minister  many  time  in  your  house — tink  yourself  very  good- 
Christian — not  willing  to  take  de  robe  as  a  free  gift.  O  Massa,  be  persuade  to  be- 
poor  in  spirit  hke  poor  negro,  and  take  de  robe  ob  righteousness  as  a  free  gift." 
{F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  The  ring: — It  is  a  conscience -keeping  ring.  I  cannot 
explain  my  meaning  here  without  narrating  one  of  those  Arabian  tales  in  which  a  deep 
meaning  is  often  found  hidden.  A  genius  or  guardian  spirit  presented  to  his  protege 
a  ring,  which  had  this  virtue,  that  whenever  the  wearer  went  against  the  wishes  of 
his  protector,  it  tightened  upon  his  finger  and  gave  him  pain.  Beautiful  emblem^ 
of  the  new  heart  and  tender  conscience  which  God's  grace  brings  to  the  penitent 
and  believing  soul  1  That  is  the  magic  ornament  which  the  returning  prodigal 
receives  when  his  father  dresses  him  for  the  feast,  and  which  unspeakably  exceed* 
in  value  the  rarest  jewels  that  sparkle  on  the  brow,  the  neck,  or  hand  of  haughty 
beauty.  {J.  Ferguson.)  A  father't  pity  and  love  : — A  preacher  one  day  wound 
up  his  sermon  by  saying  that  there  was  not  a  man  in  London  so  far  gone  but  he 
could  be  saved.  Next  morning  a  young  lady — a  tract  distributor — requested  an 
interview,  and  repeated  his  words.  "Do  you  mean  itr  "  *•  I  do."  "  Well,  there 
is  a  man  down  in  the  East  End  of  London  who  says  there  is  no  hope  for  him.  I 
wish  you  would  go  and  see  him."  He  went  down  into  one  of  those  dark  alleys  till 
be  came  to  a  miserable-looking  building.  And  up  in  the  fifth  storey  he  found  the 
young  man,  mangled  and  bruised  by  the  effects  of  sin.  The  minister  talked  to 
him  and  told  him  of  the  sinner's  Friend,  and  prayed  with  him  until  at  last  light 
began  to  break  into  his  soul,  and  he  was  able  to  say,  '•  I  could  die  happy  if  I  could 
hear  my  father  say, '  I  forgive  you.'  He  lives  in  the  West  End  of  London,  but  he 
has  had  my  name  taken  out  of  the  family  records.  He  treats  me  as  if  I  were 
dead."  "  I  will  go  and  see  him,"  said  the  minister.  He  found  his  abode — & 
beautiful  mansion — rang  the  bell,  and  was  answered  by  a  servant  in  livery.  He 
inquired  if  his  master  was  in,  and  presently  the  man  came  down.  "  I  believe  you 
have  a  son  called  Joseph  ? "  "  No,"  he  said,  "I  have  no  boy  of  that  name.  I 
had,  but  I  have  disinherited  him.  There  is  nothing  good  about  him."  "  But," 
eaid  the  minister,  "  he  is  your  boy,  nevertheless."  "  Is  my  Joseph  sick  ?  "  "  Yes, 
he  18  at  the  point  of  death.  I  ask  you  if  you  will  forgive  him.  If  you  will,  he 
can  die  in  peace.  Tell  me  that  you  forgive  him,  and  I  will  take  the  message  to 
him."  "  No,  no;  if  my  boy  is  sick,  I  will  go  and  see  him."  And  so  the  carriage 
was  taken  out,  and  they  went  to  the  dark  alley  in  the  East  Eud.  The  father 
hardly  recognized  him.  The  boy  said,  "Father,  can  you  forgive  me?"  "Oh, 
Joseph,  I  would  have  forgiven  you  long  ago,  if  I  had  known  you  wanted  me  to. 
Let  my  servants  take  you  and  put  you  in  the  carriage."  "  No,  father,  I  am  not 
•well  enough  to  be  moved.  I  shall  not  live  much  longer,  but  I  can  die  happy  now." 
And  Boon  he  passed  away  to  meet  his  Lord  and  Saviour.  Let  us  eat,  and  be 
merry. — Joy  on  the  prodigal's  return  : — I.  The  new  convebt's  jot.  You  have  seen, 
perhaps,  a  man  running  for  his  temporal  liberty,  and  the  officers  of  the  law  after 
him,  and  you  saw  Lim  escape,  or  afterward  you  hear  the  judge  had  pardoned  him, 
and  how  great  was  the  glee  of  that  rescued  man  ;  but  it  is  a  very  tame  thing  that 
compared  with  the  running  for  one's  everlasting  life,  the  terrors  of  the  law  after 
him,  and  Christ  coming  in  to  pardon  and  bless  and  rescue  and  save.  You  remember 
John  Bunyan  in  his  great  story  tells  how  the  pilgrim  put  his  fingers  in  his  ears,  and 
ran,  ciying  :  "  Life,  life,  eternal  life  1  "  A  poor  car-driver  in  this  city,  some  months 
ago,  after  struggling  for  years  to  support  his  family,  suddenly  was  informed  that  ar 
large  inheritance  was  his,  and  there  was  a  joy  amounting  to  bewilderment;  but  that  is 
a  small  thing  compared  with  the  experience  of  one  when  he  has  put  in  his  hands  the 
title-deeds  to  the  joys,  the  raptures,  the  splendours  of  heaven,  and  he  can  truly  say, 
"  Its  mansions  are  mine,  its  temples  are  mine,  its  songs  are  mine,  its  God  is  mine !  " 
Oh,  it  is  no  tame  thing  to  become  a  Christian.  It  is  a  merry-making.  It  is  the 
killing  of  the  fatted  calf.  It  is  a  jubilee.  II.  The  father's  jot.  At  the  opening 
of  the  Exposition  in  New  Orleans  I  saw  a  Mexican  flutist,  and  he  played  the  solo, 
and  then  afterward  the  eight  or  ten  bands  of  music,  accompanied  by  the  great 
organ,  came  in ;  but  the  sound  of  that  one  flute  as  compared  with  all  the  orchestras 
was  greater  than  all  the  combined  joy  of  the  universe  when  compared  with  the 
resounding  heart  of  Almighty  God.  IIL  Tbb  jot  or  the  ministebs  of  bblioion. 
They  blew  the  trumpet,  and  ought  they  not  to  be  glad  of  the  gathering  of  the 
host?    They  pointed  to  the  fall  supply,  and  ought  they  not  to  rejoice  when  thirtttj 


CHIP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  191 

Bonis  plunge  as  the  hart  for  the  water  brooks  ?  They  came  forth,  saying :  "  All 
things  are  now  ready" — ought  they  not  to  rejoice  when  the  prodigal  sits  down  at 
the  banquet  ?  IV.  The  jot  of  all  eabnest  Chbistuns.  V.  The  joy  op  the  inhabi- 
tants or  HEAVEN.  (De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  merry  household : — I.  The  occasion 
OF  this  mibtb.  It  was  the  restoration  of  the  prodigal  son.  II.  The  pabticifatobs 
IN  this  mibth.  1.  The  father  took  part  in  this  mirth.  But  for  him,  indeed,  there 
had  been  no  merry-making.  And  in  that  happy  party  there  was  none  so  happy  as 
the  father  I  2.  The  servants  took  part  in  this  mirth.  They  rejoiced  in  sympathy 
with  their  master.  "  They  say  that  if  a  piano  is  struck  in  a  room  where  another 
stands  unopened  and  untouched,  he  who  lays  his  ear  to  the  latter  will  hear  a  string 
witbin,  as  if  touched  by  the  hand  of  a  shadowy  spirit,  sounding  the  same  tone. 
But  how  far  more  strange  that  the  strings  of  the  heart  vibrate  to  those  of  another." 
Joy  meets  joy,  feeling  meets  feeling.  The  rapturous  gladness  of  the  father  is 
caught,  and  like  two  torches  blended,  heightened  by  the  servants  as  they  crowd  the 
hall,  and  with  music  and  dancing  begin  to  be  merry.  When  a  sinner  is  converted 
to  God  the  sympathy  of  all  holy  beings  is  with  him.  3.  The  prodigal  himself  took 
part  in  this  mirth.  He  had  the  greatest  cause  of  all  to  do  so.  Had  he  not  been 
rescued  from  a  misery  worse  than  death — the  misery  of  a  sinful  life  ?  Had  he  not 
been  restored  to  all  the  honours  he  had  originally  possessed  ?  Oh  1  the  blessedness 
of  that  hour  when  God  first  whispered  forgiveness  to  our  heart.  III.  The  effect  of 
THIS  mibth.  It  would  establish  the  prodigal  in  his  new  mode  of  life.  ( W.  Q.  Pascoe.) 
The  safety  of  moral  return : — Christmas  Evans  was  once  describing  the  prodigal's 
coming  back  to  his  father's  house,  and  he  said  that  when  the  prodigal  sat  at  the 
father's  table  his  father  put  upon  his  plate  all  the  daintiest  bits  of  meat  that  he 
could  find  ;  but  the  son  sat  there  and  did  not  eat,  and  every  now  and  then  the  tears 
began  to  flow.  His  father  turned  to  him  and  said,  "  My  dear  son,  why  are  you 
midiappy  ?  You  spoil  the  feasting.  Do  you  not  know  that  I  love  you  t  Have  I 
not  joyfully  received  you  f  "  •'  Yes,"  he  said,  "  dear  father,  you  are  very  kind,  but 
have  you  really  forgiven  me  ?  Have  you  forgiven  me  altogether,  so  that  you  will 
never  be  angry  with  me  for  all  I  have  done  ?  "  His  father  looked  on  him  with 
ineffable  love  and  said,  "  I  have  blotted  out  thy  sins  and  thy  iniquities,  and  will 
remember  them  no  more  for  ever.  Eat,  my  dear  son."  The  father  turned  round 
and  waited  on  the  guests,  but  by  and  by  his  eyes  were  on  his  boy,  they  could  not 
be  long  removed.  There  was  the  son  weeping  again,  but  not  eating.  "  Come,  dear 
child,"  said  his  father,  "come,  why  are  you  still  mourning?  What  is  it  that  you 
want  ?  "  Bursting  into  a  flood  of  tears  a  second  time,  the  son  said,  **  Father,  am  I 
always  to  stop  here?  Will  you  never  turn  me  out  of  doors  ?  "  The  father  repUed, 
"  No,  my  child,  thou  shalt  go  no  more  out  for  ever,  for  a  son  abides  for  ever." 
Still  the  son  did  not  enjoy  the  banquet ;  there  was  still  something  rankling  within, 
and  again  he  wept.  Then  his  father  said,  "  Now,  tell  me,  tell  me,  my  dear  son, 
all  that  is  in  thy  heart.  What  do  you  desire  more? "  The  son  answered,  "Father, 
will  you  make  me  stop  here  ?  Father,  I  am  afraid  lest,  if  I  were  left  to  myself,  I 
might  play  the  prodigal  again.  Oh,  constrain  me  to  stay  here  for  ever !  "  The 
father  said,  "  I  will  put  my  fear  in  thy  heart,  and  thou  shalt  not  depart  from  me.'* 
"  Ah  1  then,"  the  son  replied,  "  it  is  enough,"  and  merrily  he  feasted  with  the  rest. 
So  I  preach  to  you  just  this — that  the  great  Father,  when  He  takes  you  to  Himself, 
will  never  let  you  go  away  from  Him  again.  Whatever  your  condition,  if  you  trust 
your  soul  to  Jesus,  you  shall  be  saved,  and  saved  for  ever.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Heavenly  merry-makings  : — It  is  now  his  turn  to  act  the  prodigal  in  lavishing  all 
upon  the  penitent.  Little  wonder  that  the  elder  brother  reproached  the  father  as 
the  greater  prodigal  of  the  two.  Such  a  costly  merry-making  had  never  been  in 
their  quiet  home.  The  prodigality  of  grace  surpasses  the  prodigality  of  sin.  The 
best  robe,  the  ring,  and  the  shoes  were  the  dress  of  a  free-born  son,  and  showed  to 
all  that  ihe  lost  son  had  received  the  highest  favours  the  father  could  bestow. 
"  The  fatted  calf "  was  well  known  to  the  servants,  as  at  Jewish  farms  a  calf  was 
fattened  for  great  festivals.  "  And  they  began  to  be  merry  "  (ver.  24),  but  we  are 
not  told  when  they  ended.  Heaven  has  its  merry-makings  as  well  as  earth,  and 
they  celebrate  the  prodigal's  home-coming.  {J.  Wells.)  His  elder  son. — The 
elder  ton: — The  elder  son  was  one  who  had  always  remained  at  that  very 
home  from  which  the  younger  had  wandered,  and  to  which  he  had  at  last 
returned.  He  had  been  a  faithful  son,  doing  his  father's  commandments, 
and  the  parable  would  lose  all  its  point,  unless  we  were  to  see  in  it  a  picture  ot  a 
father's  heart  which  has  depth  and  warmth  enough  not  only  to  love  a  son  who 
obeys,  but  to  forgive  a  son  who  disobeys  and  repents.    The  elder  eon  was  not 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  jOBkr.  XT. 

therefore  a  self-righteous  Pharisee.  He  was  not  a  hypocrite.  But  he  was  a  some- 
•what  narrow  good  man.  He  was  a  type  of  thousands  among  the  Jews,  and  of 
thousands  still  among  Christians,  who  look  with  jealous  suspicion  upon  all  who 
have  been  once  abandoned  and  now  have  repented  and  turned  to  God.  They  have 
never  fathomed  the  depths  of  sin.  From  their  childhood  they  have  walked 
uprightly.     I.  In  the  first  place  we  may  see  that  the  position  of  the  eldek  son 

IS   PREFERABLE    TO   THAT   OF   THE   YOUNQEB   BECAUSE    OF   THE   EISK   HE    ESCAPED.      It   is 

true  that  the  younger  son  returned,  but  then  he  might  not  have  returned.  When 
he  turned  his  back  upon  his  father's  house,  it  might  have  been  for  ever.  II.  The 
position  of  the  elder  brother  is  preferable  because  a  life  of  continuous  godliness 

IS   FAB   EASIEB   THAN  A  LIFE    OF   GODLINESS    SUCCEEDING  A  LIFE    OF   SIN.      The  piodigal, 

remember,  does  not  start  hfe  afresh.  He  is  not  brought  back  to  the  point  of 
innocence  from  which  he  started.  His  soul  is  not  cleared  and  cleansed  from  all 
the  past.  If  he  be  able  to  exercise  a  fair  command  over  his  speech  and  outward 
conduct,  so  as  not  to  break  out  into  the  words  and  deeds  of  his  profligate  career, 
think  how  his  memory  and  his  imagination  are  poisoned  1  He  has  to  undo  so 
much  that  has  been  done.  He  has  to  strive  hard  to  break  the  links  of  association 
which  connect  him  with  evil  thoughts.  What  would  he  not  sacrifice  if  he  could  bat 
just  wipe  out  of  his  remembrance  the  tormenting,  polluting  past.  Bat  he  cannot. 
Though  it  be  forgiven  by  God,  it  is  there  still  to  be  struggled  with.  He  has  to  pull 
down  much  that  he  has  built  up  ;  he  has  to  tear  up  much  that  he  has  planted ;  he 
has  to  put  a  double  watch  at  those  points  where  he  so  often  fell ;  he  often  feels  the 
old  sin  reviving  and  struggling  for  mastery  again,  and  trembles  lest  he  should  be 
-vanquished-  Whereas  the  son  who  has  remained  at  home  has  grown  up  into  godli- 
aiess  with  his  advancing  years.    IH.  Viewed  as  a  whole,  the  life  of  the  son  who 

BEMAINED  AT   HOME   MUST   YIELD   FAB  HOBE   PLEASURE  TO  GOD  THAN   THE   LIFE   OF  THK 

SON  WHO  WANDEBS  AND  THEN  EETUBNS.  Let  experience  be  called  in  to  testify  which 
is  preferable,  the  joy  which  a  parent  has  over  a  son  who  is  obedient  and  virtuous, 
who  never  sets  at  nought  the  laws  of  the  house,  whose  ear  is  ever  ready  to  hear  and 
hands  to  do  the  will  of  his  father,  the  serene  joy  which  is  felt  every  day  and  all  the 
day,  the  joy  which  is  like  quiet  and  peaceful  sunshine,  or  that  tumultuous  gladness 
which,  after  years  of  pain  and  sorrow  over  a  son's  profligacy,  welcomes  him  home. 
liet  any  parent  on  earth  who  has  the  well-being  of  his  children  at  heart  answer,  and 
he  will  say.  Give  me  the  obedient,  loving  son,  with  the  quiet  tranquil  joy  from  day 
to  day,  before  the  brief  ecstasy  after  long  agony,  which  arises  from  a  repenting 
prodigal.  The  one  is  but  a  mountain  torrent-— the  other  is  a  deep  and  noiseless 
stream.  And  as  with  the  parent  so  too  with  the  children  ;  the  joy  of  the  obedient 
one  is  higher  than  that  of  the  returning  one.  It  may  not  seem  so,  because  of  the 
feast  which  the  returning  one  sees  provided  for  him.  The  merriment  will  cease. 
The  fatted  calf  will  not  be  killed  again  to-morrow.  Even  the  prodigal's  joy  will 
sober  down  after  a  while,  and  he  will  have  to  find  a  sweeter  banquet,  though  a  lesa 
exciting  one,  in  doing  the  will  of  his  father.  {E,  Mellor,  D.D.)  The  prodigal's 
elder  brother : — 1.  The  first  point  which  we  have  to  consider  is,  that  the  elder  could 
not  rejoice,  on  account  of  jealousy,  in  the  return  of  his  younger  brother.  That  such 
a  character  should  take  no  delight  in  welcoming  one  of  his  own  blood  from  habits 
which  were  leading  him  to  inevitable  ruin  is  a  most  humihating  proof  that  "  every 
suan  at  his  best  estate  is  altogether  vanity."  Nor  can  we  suppose  that  our  Lord 
intends  us  to  regard  this  character  as  an  exception  to  the  general  rule ;  quite  the 
reverse.  We  may  find  in  this  elder  brother  our  own  likeness.  There  is  scarcely  a 
fault  more  common  than  this  very  jealousy  and  grudging  of  good  to  others.  In 
proof  of  this,  a  sceptical  philosopher,  whose  wisdom  we  may  suppose  was  not 
drawn  from  the  sacred  page,  but  from  his  own  observation,  has  sneeringly  affirmed 
that  we  rejoice  in  the  misfortunes  of  our  friends  ;  and,  though  we  may  hope  this  is  not 
universally  true,  it  certainly  requires  much  more  Christian  charity  than  most  of  U3 
possess  to  rejoice  from  the  heart  in  our  neighbour's  good  fortune.  2.  The  second 
remarkable  point  in  the  character  of  the  elder  brother  is,  that  he  set  a  value  and 
merit  upon  his  own  decent  behaviour.  Now  nothing  can  be  more  fatal  to  a  right 
^ew  of  our  position  towards  God  than  to  suppose  that  any  merit  can  attach  to  our 
obedience ;  or  that  it  would  be  less  incumbent  upon  us  to  obey  were  all  prospective 
recompense  removed  1  The  only  sound  reason  why  we  should  ever  live  well  is  that 
<Ood  has  commanded  it — the  only  motive  which  can  effectually  influence  our  conduct 
is  love  for  Him.  The  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  brief  consideration  of  the  elder 
brother's  character  is  what  I  have  already  summed  up  in  the  early  part  of  my  dis- 
tfourse.    1.  In  the  first  place,  his  past  respectable  domestic  conduct  could  not  hava 


CHAP.  XV.]  ST.  LUKE,  19k 

been  the  fruits  of  genuine  good  afifections.  ']?hroughout  the  parable  there  is  not  thee 
faintest  trace  of  affection  for  any  one  but  himself.  2.  Secondly,  it  is  evident  that, 
however  good  his  life  may  have  been,  his  real  taste  v^as  not  for  holiness  and  what 
is  right.  The  mere  fact  that  he  oonld  not  take  delight  in  the  reformation  of  his 
brother  is  sufficient  to  prove  this.  3.  Finally,  the  many  years*  service  of  which  the 
elder  brother  boasted  had  not  been  given  out  of  love  to  his  parent :  if  he  had  not 
been  watching  from  time  to  time  for  instances  of  parental  indulgence,  he  could  at 
any  rate  feel  they  were  his  due — "Long  as  I  have  served  thee  thou  never  gavest  me 
a  kid  1  "  Thus  did  want  of  real  love  for  his  father  unamiably  show  itself,  hidden 
probably  alike  from  himself  and  others  until  circumstances  arose  to  develop  it. 
Such  a  deficiency  strikes  at  once  all  remaining  interest  from  his  character ;  and 
stained  in  sin  as  the  prodigal  had  been,  still,  in  his  remnant  of  good  afifections,  we 
trace  how  Divine  grace  operates  more  easily,  and  conquers  more  effectually,  when 
it  has  to  combat  the  vices  of  youthful  excess,  than  when  it  has  to  contend  with 
decent  formalism,  a  hard  and  cold  heart,  a  jealous  temper,  self-righteousness,  and 
conceit.  {A.  Gatty,  D.D.)  The  elder  son  : — It  was  a  joyless  life,  that  of  the  old 
Bon.  While  his  dull  round  of  duty  lacked  the  colour  and  merriment  of  the 
prodigal's  gay  time,  it  found  no  compensation  from  any  sympathy  of  affection 
betwixt  himself  and  his  father.  They  were  men  of  rery  different  characters.  The 
father's  heart  yearned  incessantly  after  his  lost  boy ;  but  this  worker  in  the  field 
wasted  no  love  on  him.  Alone  or  with  the  labourers  he  wrought ;  and  his  chief 
intercourse  with  his  father  was  when  he  took  his  orders.  Hear  his  own  account  ol 
it :  "  These  many  years  do  I  slave  to  thee,  nor  did  I  transgress  at  any  time  thy 
command."  To  be  a  bondservant,  that  was  his  chosen  place  ;  to  have  wilfully  dis- 
obeyed no  injunction,  that  was  his  boast.  Yet  he  had  friends  elsewhere  who  were 
not  his  father's  friends,  and  desires  after  other  company  than  met  at  his  father's 
table  ;  for,  had  he  earned  any  pleasure  by  his  toil,  it  would  have  been,  he  says,  a 
kid  with  which  to  make  merry  with  his  own  companions.  Even  this  he  did  not 
get.  It  was  thankless  service.  No  glow  of  family  love  warmed  it.  Yet,  if  not 
quite  satisfied,  the  old  son  was  in  a  measure  content  to  hold  this  unsonlike  place, 
just  because  his  cold  heart  had  never  dreamed  that  sonship  meant  anything  mora 
than  this.  The  problem  was,  how  to  teach  him  that;  how  to  open  up  what  tender- 
ness the  heart  of  his  father  held,  and  what  the  claim  of  a  son  really  meant,  so  that 
he  shall  discover  that  he  for  one  has  never  yet  entered  into  the  joy  of  that  relation- 
ship, nor  known  what  is  the  deep  confidential  love  which  binds  true  parent  and 
true  child  in  one.  What,  then,  does  sonship  really  mean  ?  It  means  that  there  ia 
more  sacred  strength  in  that  single  word  "son"  than  in  ever  so  many  years  oi 
laborious  servitude  ;  for  it  is  the  power  of  love  and  not  of  law  which  says,  "  All  that 
I  have  is  thine."  It  means  that  this  Father  of  yours,  whom  you  haTe  been  observ- 
ing as  a  taskmaster,  and  misjudging  as  a  niggard,  you  have  never  really  known  in 
His  Fatherhood ;  for  see,  to  this  scapegrace,  just  because  he  ia  become  again  a  sor? 
mdeed,  and  dares  to  trust  the  father's  heart,  that  father's  heart  brims  over  instantly 
with  unutterable  tenderness  and  a  generosity  that  knows  no  bounds.  Oh,  it  means» 
if  yon  will  learn  it,  that  you  have  been  as  little  of  a  true  son  as  this  pitied  outcast; 
-else  might  you  also  have  rejoiced  all  through  these  weary  years  past,  in  a  love  no 
less  strong,  in  a  joy  no  less  deep,  than  the  love  and  joy  of  this  festive  day ;  nay, 
more  deep  and  strong,  if  less  noisy  or  exuberant,  because  springing  out  of  the  calm 
depths  of  an  unbroken  intercourse,  unmarred  by  the  memory  of  separation  or  the 
■hadow  of  guilt ;  for  "  Thou  art  ever  with  me  "  I  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  elder 
brother : — The  aim  of  every  Christian  is  to  be  complete  in  Christ ;  but  how  many  of 
His  own  are  poor  in  the  possession  of  His  sympathies,  His  generosity  and  meekness. 
His  large  views  ?  Let  us  see  how  these  are  represented  by  the  elder  brother,  and 
show  how  onr  Father  in  heaven  deals  with  the  errors  of  such  a  disposition.  I.  Thb 
BouBCES  OF  iMPEBFECTioN  IN  THIS  CHABACTEB.  1.  Wrong  views  of  the  character  oi 
God.  This  man  had  not  sufficient  trust  in  the  integrity  and  goodness  of  his  father. 
2.  Wrong  views  of  the  nature  of  religious  service.  This  elder  brother  considered 
the  service  of  his  father  as  legal  and  constrained.  The  child  of  Ood  ought  to  have 
a  feeling  of  possession  in  the  property  of  his  Father,  serving  Him  as  a  son  who  i» 
native  to  the  inheritance.  3.  Wrong  feeling  towards  the  objects  of  the  Divine 
mercy.  To  mention  the  evils  of  his  brother's  life,  at  such  a  time  as  this,  was  bad 
taste,  and  worse  feeling.  He  might  have  trusted  the  honest  affection  of  his  father, 
and  waited  till  his  own  soal  rose  to  that  high  eminence.  That  feeling  which 
refuses  to  recognize  a  man  as  one  of  the  family  of  God,  because  he  has  greatly 
Binned,  is  a  bad  feeling.  II.  The  Ditxme  beiudt.  The  same  love  which  receives 
Tou  m.  13  -  — 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

the  prodigal  home  now  argues  with  the  narrow-minded  saint.  That  love  is  great  to 
cover  faults,  and  to  develop  the  most  unpromising  germs  of  goodness.  It  ia  not 
expended  in  the  single  eSort  of  forgiveness,  bat  has  reserves  of  force  to  transform, 
purify,  and  elevate.  There  are  souls  within  the  kingdom  of  God  who  are  not  fully  ia 
sympathy  with  the  greatness  of  the  Divine  love.  There  are  surfaces  on  which,  whea 
the  Light  falls,  some  of  the  rays  are  quenched,  and  the  reflection  is  imperfect.  Thera 
are  some  souls  who  fail  to  reflect  the  fall  splendour  of  the  love  of  God.  What  we 
know  of  this  heavenly  principle  depends  upon  what  we  are  able  to  receive.  1.  The 
flrst  remedy  for  this  state  of  mind  is  to  impress  us  with  the  sacredness  and  worth 
of  true  feeling.  There  is  a  logic  of  the  heart  which  no  sophistry  can  invade  or 
dissipate.  Let  ns  follow  those  impulses  of  the  Divine  love  within  as,  though 
we  cannot  now  mark  out  by  our  reason  the  whole  journey.  At  what 
time  the  mind  disposes  to  unbelief,  the  heart  can  restore  us  to  faith. 
2.  Another  remedy  is — We  are  reminded  that  God's  resources  are  infinite. 
Lavish  bounty  of  design  and  provision  is  the  rule  of  nature.  How 
grudging  and  narrow  is  man  1  How  good  is  God  I  3.  We  are  reminded 
that  constancy  of  service  is  superior  to  sudden  rapture.  {The  Lay  Preacher.) 
He  was  angX7. — The  angry  brother  : — I.  The  want  of  syusktuy  with  a  bbothkb's 
CONVEBSION.  The  prodigal's  brother  is  "  angry  and  will  not  go  in."  Angry  at 
what  ?  The  salvation  of  a  brother  !  The  reception  of  the  lost  one  home  again  ! 
No  true  saint  will  look  coldly  on  a  poor  sinner  who  staggers  to  the  mercy-seat. 
n.  SeIiTIshmess  passing  censube  ok  cacseb  fob  gladness.  Selfishness  is  a  fire  that 
burns  all  love  out  of  the  soul.  Selfishness  is  an  angry  beast  whose  iron  hoof 
crushes  every  flower  in  the  garden  of  sympathy.  Selfishness  is  a  monster  that  has 
no  eye  for  the  beautiful,  no  ear  for  music,  no  appreciation  of  poetry  or  sentiment. 
Selfishness  is  a  lean-souled  miser  who  would  snatch  a  crust  from  the  hand  of  a 
beggar,  and  would  begrudge  hospitality  to  a  starving  wanderer.  UI.  Angeb  shut- 
ting OUT  FBOU  A  feast  OF  JOY.  "He  WBS  angry  and  would  not  go  in."  {W.  O. 
Pascoe.)  The  elder  ton's  dissatisfaction : — How  plausible  this  reasoning  sounds  I 
How  perfectly  invincible  it  must  have  seemed  to  this  dutiful  son !  And  yet,  if  we 
examine  it,  what  does  it  come  to  but  this  t  "I  have  been  obedient,  and  I  ought  to 
be  paid  for  my  obedience.  My  brother  has  been  disobedient.  Why  art  thou  glad 
that  he  haa  ceased  to  be  disobedient  ?  I  see  no  caase  for  satisfaction  in  that.  It 
causes  me  no  delight."  Here  is  that  flagrant  opposition  between  the  Divine  pur- 
pose and  the  purpose  of  those  who  had  been  called  to  be  the  ministers  of  His  will 
and  purpose,  which  our  Lord  has  been  detecting  in  all  His  dealings  with  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees?  "  The  Father's  joy  is  in  the  restoration  of  the  lost.  You  have  no 
such  joy.  Ton  think  the  removal  of  their  curse,  of  their  sin,  is  an  injury  to  you." 
But  is  this  consistent  with  the  words,  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  Uiat  I 
have  is  thine."  Thoroughly  consistent.  For  what  do  these  words  signify  but  this : 
"  Son,  I  have  called  thee  to  know  my  goodness  and  loving-kindness.  I  have  called 
thee  to  be  a  dispenser  of  that  knowledge  to  the  children  of  men.  I  can  give  thee 
no  greater  treasure.  I  can  make  thee  partaker  of  no  higher  bliss  than  my  own. 
Thou  wilt  not  have  that  ?  Thou  wishest  for  another  kind  of  joy  than  mine  ?  Well, 
if  thou  choosest  it,  thou  must  have  it.  Thou  must  try  what  that  selfish  joy  ia 
worth ;  whether  it  satisfies  thee  better  than  the  husks  which  the  swine  eat  have 
satisfied  thy  brother.  But  before  thou  formest  that  terrible  resolution,  I  will 
come  out  and  entreat  thee.  I  will  urge  thee  to  partake  of  my  festival.  I  will  vin- 
dicate thy  right  to  it.  I  will  conjure  thee  to  enter  into  thy  father's  blessedness. 
Thoa  dost  enter  it  when  thou  ownest  the  outcast  for  thy  brother,  when  thou 
makest  merry  and  art  glad  because  he  was  dead  and  is  alive  again,  he  was  lost  and 
is  found."  So  pleaded  the  Eternal  Father  by  the  mouth  of  Jesus  with  His  Jewish 
people.  So  pleads  He  with  us  in  this  Passion  Week.  Do  you  want  wages  for  your 
virtue,  for  your  faith,  for  your  superiority  to  the  rest  of  mankind  1  You  must  ask 
the  devil  for  those  wages ;  for  the  service  of  pride  he  will  give  you  strictly  and 
punctually  the  wages  of  death.  Do  you  desire  the  delight  of  the  Father  who  so 
loved  the  world  as  to  give  His  only-begotten  Son  for  itr^  Do  you  want  the 
delight  of  the  Son  who  poured  out  His  blood  for  all  men,  who  is  the  Saviour  of  all 
men  ?  Do  you  want  the  delight  of  the  Spirit,  who  is  seeking  to  bring  all  to  repent- 
ance and  tine  knowledge  of  the  truth  ?  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with  Me,  and  all  that 
I  have  ia  thine."  Thou  mayest  possess  My  own  character.  Thou  mayest  declar* 
My  purpose  to  those  who  have  lost  themselves.  Thou  mayest  be  My  instrument  in 
finding  them.  And  if  they  never  hear  thy  feeble  voice,  thou  needest  not  doubt 
that  they  will  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  Man ;  that  by  hunger  and  misery  H« 


i«HAP.  XV.]  8T.  LUKE.  .198 

■will  remind  them  of  their  Father's  house ;  that  they  will  arise  and  go  to  Him ;  that 
He  will  meet  them  when  they  are  a  great  way  off ;  that  He  will  embrace  them  and 
bring  them  to  His  banquet ;  that  His  Spirit  will  enable  them  to  feed  on  the  perfect 
Sacrifice,  and  to  ofifer  themselves  acceptable  sacrifices  to  Him.  (F.  D.  Maurice, 
M.A.)  Self-importance  : — 1.  Observe  how  self-importance  makes  a  man  moody 
and  unhappy.  He  who  is  always  thinking  of  his  own  excellences,  renders  himself 
thereby  unfit  to  enjoy  the  good  of  others,  and  is  prone  to  imagine  that  every  token 
of  affection  given  to  another  is  an  insult  offered  to  himself.  Hence  he  is  touchy, 
sensitive,  irritable,  and  envious.  There  is  no  surer  way  to  make  ourselves  miser- 
able than  to  think  of  ourselves  more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think.  It  isolates  us 
from  all  about  us.  May  God  deliver  us  from  this  idolatry  of  self,  on  whose  altar  all 
true  nobleness  and  real  happiness  are  completely  immolated  I  2.  Notice,  again, 
how  repulsive  to  others  this  self-important  spirit  is.  You  cannot  take  to  this  elder 
brother.  Even  in  his  wanderings  and  sins,  the  younger  was  more  lovable  than  he, 
his  industry  and  sobriety  notwithstanding.  So  it  is  ever  with  the  selfish  one.  He 
is  a  non-conductor  in  society.  The  electricity  of  love  never  passes  through  him  ; 
and  in  the  end,  all  loving  hearts  are  driven  from  him.  Thus  he  is  not  only  the 
most  unhappy,  but  also  the  most  useless  of  men.  He  has  no  magnetism  about  him. 
He  can  gain  no  entrance  into  the  hearts  of  others.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The 
elder  son's  disposition: — When  a  Christian  of  long  standing  and  irreproachable 
character,  who  has  known  some  degree  of  happiness  in  Christ,  but  has  not  had 
anything  approaching  to  ecstasy,  is  inclined  to  be  suspicious  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  transport  of  him  who  has  just  been  converted  from  a  life  of  grossest  sin,  and  is 
disposed,  in  envy,  to  ask,  "  Why  should  such  experiences  be  granted  to  him,  while 
I,  who  have  been  seeking  to  follow  Jesus  all  my  days,  know  nothing  of  them  ?  "  we 
have  the  working  of  the  same  disposition  as  that  which  the  elder  brother  here  dis- 
played. When  a  minister  of  age  and  excellence,  who  is  mourning  over  the  apparent 
iruitlessness  of  his  labours,  is  tempted  to  ask  how  it  oomes  that  a  young  brother,  in 
the  very  outset  of  his  career,  is  made  instrumental  in  bringing  multitudes  to  Christ, 
and  permits  himself  to  think,  if  not  to  say,  that  it  is  "  mean  "  in  God  to  pass  by  an 
old  and  faithful  servant  such  as  he  has  been,  and  to  use  and  bless  an  inexperienced 
lad ;  or  when  a  stickler  for  order  and  decorum  murmurs  that  the  Lord  should 
Jionour  with  success  the  irregularities  of  a  revival  meeting,  and  the  labours  of  some 
"  converted  burglar,"  in  larger  measure  than  he  seems  to  bless  the  stated  workings 
of  the  authorised  ministry  in  the  ordinary  exercises  of  the  sanctuary ;  or  when  some 
father,  prominent  in  the  Church  for  piety  and  usefulness,  is  led,  in  his  haste  and 
in  his  self-importance,  to  ask,  "  How  comes  it  that  the  children  of  thisone  and  that 
one — of  little  name  among  the  brethren,  and  hardly  known  for  their  zeal  and 
devotedness — are  all  converted,  while  my  son  is  permitted  to  grow  up  in  sin,  and  to 
become  tome  a  source  of  constant  anxiety  ?  " — in  each  and  all  of  these  we  have  aphasis 
of  that  unlovely  disposition  which,  in  the  elder  brother,  is  here  condemned.  The 
Sabbath-school  teacher  who  throws  up  the  work  because  another  seems  more  suc- 
cessful in  it  than  himself ;  the  labourer  in  any  department  of  benevolent  activity,  who, 
because  he  thinks  that  more  is  made  of  some  one  else  than  of  himself,  gives  way  to 
personal  pique,  and  will  have  no  more  to  do  with  the  concern ;  the  over-sensitive, 
irritable,  petted  man,  who  is  for  ever  taking  offence,  and  manages  somehow  to  ex- 
clude himself  from  every  society  with  which  he  has  been  connected,  and  to  estrange 
himself  from  the  sympathy  and  co-operation  of  all  with  whom  he  has  come  into 
■contact ;  may  all  look  here,  and  in  the  elder  brother  of  this  parable  they  will  behold 
themselves.  (Ibid.)  Dlder  brotherliness  : — Some  years  ago  I  preached  to  my 
congregation  in  Liverpool,  one  Lord's  Day  morning,  from  this  episode  in  the  parable 
of  the  Prodigal  Son.  As  I  was  leaving  the  church  for  my  home,  I  was  requested  to 
visit  a  dying  man  whom  I  had  seen  frequently  before,  but  who  was  just  then,  appa- 
rently, about  to  pass  within  the  veil.  He  had  been  for  many  years  a  careless  and 
irreligious  man  ;  but  as  I  spoke  with  him  from  time  to  time,  I  marked  that  a  great 
change  had  come  over  him.  I  had  conversed  faithfully  and  earnestly  with  him,  of 
Jesus  and  His  salvation ;  and  he  had  turned  in  sincere  penitence  to  his  Father,  and 
was,  as  I  sincerely  believe,  accepted  with  Him.  When  I  entered  his  room  that 
morning,  I  found  him  in  great  happiness,  rejoicing  in  the  near  prospect  of  being 
with  his  Lord,  and  apparently  perfectly  happy.  I  talked  with  him  a  little  on  the 
things  of  the  kingdom,  and  after  prayer  I  took  my  leave.  His  brother-in-law  fol- 
lowed me  downstairs,  and  said,  "I  cannot  understand  this  at  all.  Here  have  I 
-beep  serving  Christ  for  these  twenty  years,  and  I  have  never  experienced  such  joy 
AS  he  expresses  ;  and  yet  be  has  not  been  a  Christian,  if  he  be  really  one,  for  aiorv 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap,  iv, 

tlian  a  few  weeks."  Immediately  I  recognized  tLe  elder  brother,  and  I  stayed  long 
enough  to  show  him  just  how  he  looked  in  the  light  of  this  parable.  I  told  hin) 
that  I  had  been  preaching  about  him  that  very  morning.  "  About  vie  f  "  he  said. 
"  Yes,  about  you  "  ;  and  I  then  went  on  to  explain  to  him  the  meaning  of  this  epi- 
sode, while  I  warned  him  of  the  danger  of  being  angry,  and  refusing  to  go  into  the 
Father's  house  to  share  the  joy  over  the  returning  prodigal.  The  result  was 
that  he  saw  his  error,  and  was  delivered  from  his  envy.  Now,  that  incident, 
occurring  just  at  that  precise  time,  has  given  a  new  point  to  the  parable  in  my  view 
ever  since,  and  makes  me  far  more  anxious  to  get  the  elder-brotherliness  out  of 
my  own  heart  than  to  identify  the  elder  brother  with  any  particular  class.  (Ibid.) 
Pharisaism  in  ourselves : — There  is  sufficient  Pharisaism  in  each  of  us  to  justify  the 
application  of  this  to  ourselves.  They  who  have  long  served  God  with  care  and 
diligence,  and  yet  find  their  life  a  hard  struggle,  with  few  bright  passages,  many 
disappointments,  and  never  joy  such  as  tbe  penitent  at  once  enters  into,  naturally 
feel  some  soreness  that  one  step  should  bring  a  lifelong  sinner  abreast  of  them. 
Tou  may  have  been  striving  all  your  days  to  be  useful,  and  making  great  sacrifices 
to  further  what  you  believe  to  be  the  cause  of  God,  and  yet  you  cannot  point  to 
any  success  ;  but  suddenly  a  man  converted  yesterday  takes  your  place,  and  all 
things  seem  to  shape  themselves  to  his  hand,  and  the  field  that  was  a  heart-break 
to  you  is  fertile  to  him.  You  have  denied  yourself  every  pleasure  that  you  might 
know  the  happiness  of  communion  with  God,  and  you  have  not  known  it,  but  you 
see  a  banquet  spread  in  God's  presence  for  him  who  has  till  this  hour  been  delight- 
ing in  sin.  You  have  had  neither  the  liotous  living  nor  the  fatted  calf.  You 
have  gone  among  the  abandoned  and  neglected,  and  striven  to  enlighten  and  lift 
them ;  you  have  done  violence  to  your  own  feelings  that  you  might  be  helpful  to 
others;  and,  so  far  as  you  can  see,  nothing  has  come  of  it.  But  another  man  who 
has  lived  irregularly,  who  has  not  prepared  himself  for  the  work,  who  is  untaught, 
imprudent,  unsatisfactory,  has  the  immediate  joy  of  wirming  souls  to  God.  Have 
you  not  been  tempted  to  say,  "  Verily,  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in  vain,  and 
washed  my  hands  in  irmocency  "  7  All  this  may  be  needful  to  convince  you  that  it 
is  not  service  that  wins  God's  love  ;  that  His  love  is  with  you  now,  and  that  your 
acceptance  of  it  will  make  all  that  has  seemed  to  you  grievous  to  be  light  and  happy. 
Take  refuge  from  all  failure  and  disappointment  in  the  words,  "  Son,  I  am  ever 
with  thee,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine."  Learn  to  find  your  joy  in  Him,  and  yon 
will  be  unable  to  think  of  any  reward.  (Marcus  Bods,  D.D.)  Contracted  views  in 
religion : — In  the  conduct  of  the  father,  there  seemed,  at  first  sight,  an  evident 
departure  from  the  rules  of  fairness  and  justice.  Here  was  a  reprobate  son  received 
into  his  favour  on  the  first  stirrings  of  repentance.  What  was  the  use  of  serving 
liim  dutifully,  if  there  were  no  difference  in  the  end  between  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked  ?  This  is  what  we  feel  and  act  upon  in  life  constantly.  In  doing  good  to 
the  poor,  for  instance,  a  chief  object  is  to  encourage  industrious  and  provident 
habits  ;  and  it  is  evident  we  should  hurt  and  disappoint  the  better  sort,  and  defeat 
our  object,  if,  after  all,  we  did  not  take  into  account  the  difference  of  their  conduct, 
<iiough  we  promised  to  do  so,  but  gave  those  who  did  not  work  nor  save  all  the 
benefits  granted  to  those  who  did.  The  elder  brother's  case,  then,  seemed  a  hard 
one ;  and  that,  even  without  supposing  him  to  feel  jealous,  or  to  have  unsuitable 
notions  of  his  own  importance  and  usefulness.  Apply  this  to  the  case  of  religion, 
and  it  still  holds  good.  At  first  sight,  the  reception  of  the  penitent  sinner  seems  to 
interfere  with  the  reward  of  the  faithful  servant  of  God.  Just  as  the  promise  of 
pardon  is  abused  by  bad  men  to  encourage  themselves  in  sinning  on,  that  grace  may 
abound  ;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  misapprehended  by  the  good,  so  as  to  dispirit 
them.  For  what  is  our  great  stay  and  consolation  amid  the  perturbations  of  this 
world  ?  The  truth  and  justice  of  God.  This  is  our  one  light  in  the  midst  of  dark- 
ness. *'  He  loveth  righteousness,  and  hateth  iniquity;  "  "just  and  right  is  He." 
Where  else  should  we  find  rest  for  our  foot  all  over  the  world?  The  condescending 
answer  of  the  father  in  the  parable  is  most  instructive.  It  sanctions  the  great  truth 
which  seemed  in  jeopardy,  that  it  is  Twt  the  same  thing  iu  the  end  to  obey  or  dis- 
obey, expressly  telling  us  that  the  Christian  penitent  is  not  placed  on  a  footing  with 
those  who  have  consistently  served  God  from  the  first.  "  Son,  thou  art  ever  with 
Me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine  "  :  that  is,  why  this  sudden  fear  and  distrust?  can 
there  be  any  misconception  on  thy  part  because  I  welcome  thy  brother  ?  dost  thou 
not  yet  understand  Me  ?  Surely  thou  hast  known  Me  too  long  to  suppose  that 
thou  canst  lose  by  his  gain.  TAott  art  in  My  confidence.  I  do  not  make  any  outward 
display  of  kindness  towards  thee,  for  it  is  a  thing  to  be  taken  for  granted.    We  giv* 


CHAP.  XV.-]  ST.  LUKE.  191 

praise  and  make  professions  to  strangers,  not  to  friends.  Thou  art  My  heir,  all  that 
1  have  is  thine.  "  O  thou  of  little  f nith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt  ?  "  Who  could 
have  thought  that  it  were  needful  to  tell  to  thee  truths  which  thou  hast  heard  all 
thy  life  long  ?  Thou  art  ever  with  Me  ;  and  canst  thou  really  grudge  that  I  should 
by  one  mere  act  of  rejoicing,  show  My  satisfaction  at  the  sinner's  recovery,  and 
sliould  console  him  with  a  promise  of  mercy,  who,  before  he  heard  of  it,  was  sink- 
ing down  under  the  dread  of  deserved  punishment  7  "  It  was  meet  that  we  should, 
make  merry  and  be  glad,"  thou  as  well  as  thy  Father.  Such  is  our  merciful  God's 
answer  to  His  suspicious  servants,  who  think  He  cannot  pardon  the  sinner  without 
withdrawing  His  favour  from  them  ;  and  it  contains  in  it  both  a  consolation  for  the 
perplexed  believer  not  to  distrust  Him  ;  and  again,  a  warning  to  the  disobedient, 
not  to  suppose  that  repentance  makes  all  straight  and  even,  and  puts  a  man  in  the 
same  place  as  if  he  had  never  departed  from  grace  given.  But  let  us  now  notice 
the  unworthy  feeling  which  appears  in  the  conduct  of  the  elder  brother.  "  He  was 
angry,  and  would  not  go  "  into  the  house.  How  may  this  be  fulfilled  in  our  own 
case  ?  There  exists  a  great  deal  of  infirmity  and  foolishness  even  in  the  better  sort 
of  men.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  considering  the  original  corrupt  state  of 
their  nature,  however  it  is  to  be  deplored,  repented  of,  and  corrected.  Good  men  are, 
like  Elijah,  "jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,"  and  rightly  solicitous  to  see  Hia 
tokens  around  them,  the  pledges  of  His  unchangeable  just  government ;  but  then 
they  mix  with  such  good  feelings  undue  notions  of  self-importance,  of  which  they 
are  not  aware.  This  seemingly  was  the  state  of  mind  which  dictated  the  complaint 
of  the  elder  brother.  This  will  especially  happen  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  in 
the  most  favoured  situations  in  the  Church.  All  places  possess  their  peculiar 
temptation.  Quietness  and  peace,  those  greatest  of  blessings,  constitute  the  trial  of 
the  Christiana  who  enjoy  them.  They  becomt  not  only  over-confident  of  their 
knowledge  of  God's  ways,  but  positive  in  their  over-confidence.  They  are  apt  to 
presume,  and  so  to  become  irreverent.  Give  them  much,  they  soon  forget  it  is 
much  ;  and  when  they  find  it  is  not  all,  and  that  for  other  men,  too,  even  for  peni- 
tents, God  has  some  good  in  store,  straightway  they  are  offended.  Without  denying 
in  words  their  own  natural  unworthiness,  and  still  having  real  convictions  of  it  to  a 
certain  point,  nevertheless,  somehow,  they  have  a  certain  secret  over-regard  for 
themselves  ;  at  least  they  act  as  if  they  thought  that  the  Christian  privileges 
belonged  to  them  over  others,  by  a  sort  of  fitness.  And  they  like  respect  to  be  shown 
them  by  the  world,  and  are  jealous  of  anything  which  is  likely  to  interfere  with  the 
continuance  of  their  credit  and  authority.  Perhaps,  too,  they  have  pledged  them- 
selves to  certain  received  opinions,  and  this  is  an  additional  reason  for  their  being 
suspicious  of  what  to  them  is  a  novelty.  Hence  such  persons  are  least  fitted  to  deal 
with  difficult  times.  Ood  works  wondrously  in  the  world  ;  and  at  certain  eras  His 
providence  puts  on  a  new  aspect.  Beligion  seems  to  be  failing,  when  it  is  merely 
changing  its  form.  God  seems  for  an  instant  to  desert  His  own  appointed  instru- 
ments, and  to  be  putting  honour  upon  such  as  have  been  framed  in  express 
disobedience  to  His  commands.  For  instance,  sometimes  He  brings  about  good  by 
means  of  wicked  men,  or  seems  to  bless  the  efforts  of  those  who  have  separated  from 
His  Holy  Church  more  than  those  of  His  true  labourers.  Here  is  the  trial  of  the 
Christian  faith,  who,  if  the  fact  is  so,  must  not  resist  it,  lest  haply  he  be  fonnd 
fighting  against  God,  nor  must  he  quarrel  with  it  after  the  manner  of  the  elder 
brother.  But  he  must  take  everything  as  God's  gift,  hold  fast  his  principles,  not 
give  tJiem  up  because  appearances  are  for  the  moment  against  them,  but  believe  all 
things  will  come  round  at  length.  On  the  other  hand,  he  must  not  cease  to  beg  of 
God,  and  try  to  gain,  the  spirit  of  a  sound  mind,  the  power  to  separate  truth  from 
falsehood,  and  to  try  the  spirits,  the  disposition  to  submit  to  God's  teaching,  and 
the  wisdom  to  act  as  the  varied  course  of  affairs  requires.  (J.  H.  Newman,  I).D.) 
Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me. — Constant  obedience  better  than  repentance : — Here  the 
father,  who  at  first  rejoiced  so  greatly  at  the  return  of  the  prodigal,  yet  in  hia 
sedate  judgment  makes  a  wide  difference  between  the  penitent  son  and  the  innocent 
son.  Let  us,  then,  make  out  this  point.  1.  It  is  in  itself  a  singular  advantage  to 
have  set  out  well  betimes,  and  to  have  kept  the  right  way,  like  the  elder  son  in  the 
parable,  who  always  adhered  to  his  father.  There  is  a  sort  of  proverb  which  says 
that  a  young  saint  makes  an  old  sinner  ;  a  young  angel  makes  an  old  devil.  But 
this  proverb  seems  to  have  been  made  by  the  devil,  or  by  one  of  his  agents,  on  pur- 
pose to  ridicule  and  discourage  an  early  piety,  which  of  all  acquisitions  is  the  most 
valuable.  2.  They  have  likewise  this  advantage,  that  the  difficulties,  struggles, 
and  dangers,  which  they  have  to  encounter,  are  not  so  formidable  as  thos*  to  whiok 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

einnera  remain  exposed,  even  after  their  repentance  and  their  good  resolutions. 
Nothing  is  so  hard  as  to  overcome  old  vices,  and  to  root  up  evil  habits  ;  for  by  cua- 
torn  they  have  taken  firm  hold,  just  like  chronical  diseases,  which  are  seldom  cured. 
From  such  grievous  inconveniences  he  is  freed  who  hath  been  accustomed  to  regular 
obedience.  3.  There  cannot  be  that  settled  content  and  security  in  the  return  and 
repentanc«  of  a  sinner,  as  there  is  in  an  uniform  and  unbroken  compliance  with  the 
laws  of  God.  His  hope  will  not  be  without  a  mixture  of  fear,  as  his  fear 
is  not  without  a  mixture  of  hope.  4.  Neither  can  such  a  penitent  be  so 
much  in  the  favour  of  God,  and  so  highly  rewarded  by  Him,  aa  one  of 
more  constant  and  regular  virtues.  This  is  a  plain  rale  of  eternal  justice;  it 
follows  from  the  declarations  that  God  will  render  to  every  one  according  to  his 
works.  5.  A  regular  obedience  makes  us  more  truly  and  properly  the  children  of 
God.  Let  us  now  review  a  little  the  nature  of  the  foregoing  doctrine.  1,  This 
doctrine  allows  whatsoever  is  due  to  repentance,  and  excludes  none  of  the  encourage- 
ments to  it.  Bepentance  is  the  sovereign  cure  for  the  worst  diseases  of  the  soul  ; 
but  it  must  be  applied  in  due  time.  Yet  still  it  is  better  to  be  always  well,  than  too 
often  to  stand  in  need  of  this  medicine.  2.  Be  it  observed  that  we  are  speaking  all 
this  while  of  repentance  for  evil  habits,  and  for  great  and  wilful  offences  ;  and  aa 
to  this  repentance,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  many  Christians  stand  not  in  need  of  it. 
3.  This  shows  the  advantage  of  early  habits  of  goodness.  Nothing  makes  religion 
sit  so  well  upon  us,  as  when  it  hath  taken  the  first  possession  of  the  mind.  4. 
This  doctrine  prevents  a  common  and  pernicious  mistake  about  repentance  ;  and 
that  is,  to  delay  it,  and  to  trust  that  a  late  sorrow  and  remorse  shall  rein- 
state an  offender  in  the  favour  of  God.  5.  This  doctrine  stands  upon 
such  plain  and  solid  principles,  that  no  interpretation  of  any  passages  of 
Scripture    contrary    to    it    can    possibly    be    true.      {J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Ever 

tvith  God : — All  will  admit  that  the  angels  in  light  have  ever  been,  and  ever 
are,  with  God;  but  the  question  has  sometimes  been  keenly  discussed  among 
critics  and  theologians,  "  May  it  be  said  that,  during  this  dispensation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  some  children  have  been  so  admirably  trained,  that  they  have  never  wholly 
left  their  Heavenly  Father,  but  have  been  •  ever  with  Him  '  ?  "  A  sermon  was  once 
preached  on  this  parable,  by  an  earnest  minister  of  the  gospel,  during  a  series  of 
revival  meetings,  in  which  he  went  the  length  of  saying  that  "  it  might  be  main- 
tained concerning  those  who '  could  not  recollect  a  time  when  they  did  not  love 
Christ,'  that,  like  the  elder  son,  they  had  never  left  their  Father.  They  might  be 
imperfect  like  him,  and  need  forgiveness,  as  he  evidently  needed  it — still  they  had 
never  wholly  left  their  Father."  In  supporting  this  position,  the  preacher  could 
not  see  that  he  was  doing  any  disrespect  to  the  grace  of  God.  Indeed,  he  was 
rather  magnifying  it,  since  God  had  promised  to  be  the  God  of  His  people's  seed, 
as  well  as  their  own  God.  When  I  was  asked  my  opinion  concerning  this  repre- 
sentation, I  replied  that  I  was  inclined  to  go  that  length  myself.  There  seems  still 
to  be  such  a  thing  as  being  "called  from  the  womb."  Observe,  this  tenet  does  not 
involve  a  denial  of  human  depravity.  It  does  not  amount  to  the  assertion  that  any 
responsible  human  being  has  lived  an  absolutely  perfect  life,  being  literally  free 
from  sin,  except  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  only  ventures  humbly  to  express  the  hope, 
to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  God's  grace,  that  where  there  has  been  much  parental 
prayer  and  exemplary  religious  education,  "  the  first  springs  of  thought  and  will  " 
may  have  been  so  early  gained  for  the  Redeemer,  that  the  soul,  although  conscious 
of  waywardness  and  sin,  and  therefore  needing  atoning  blood,  has  never  been 
wholly  withdrawn  from  God's  fold,  so  that  He  could  say  to  such  a  follower  near  the 
end  of  his  course,  "  Son,  thou  hast  ever  been  and  ever  art  near  Me."  {F.  Ferguson, 
D.D.)  Love  for  all: — There  is  room  for  all.  Sometimes,  when  a  little  babe  has 
been  bom  in  a  house,  the  elder  child  is  jealous.  The  two-year-old  envier  has  been 
seen  using  its,  happily  not  very  forcible,  fists  against  the  tiny  occupant  of  the  cradle, 
because  its  arrival  had  deprived  him  of  customary  attention,  and  of  that  monopoly 
of  love  which  he  had  enjoyed  before.  Then  the  concerned  parent  has  taken  the 
sulking  pugilist  on  her  knee  and,  with  a  tear  in  her  eye,  has  said, "  You  are  mother's 
pet  stiU.  She  has  room  in  her  heart  for  yon  and  your  baby  brother  too.  You  will 
always  be  mother's  child,  although  baby  h»s  come  home — only  you  have  been  here 
many  days,  but  he  is  only  newly  arrived.  Therefore,  wonder  not  at  our  joy,  and 
grieve  not,  if  for  a  time,  you  seem  to  be  overlooked."  This  is  exactly  the  argu- 
ment of  the  text,  with  the  element  of  prodigality  left  out.  (^Ibid.)  It  was  meet 
that  we  should  make  merry. — Good  reasons  for  joy  : — I.  It  is  meet  that  we  should 
KJoice,  because  when  a  sinner  is  brought  to  repentance,  the  kingdom  of  Christ  ia 


^HAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  199 

thereby  promoted.  He  is  all  in  all.  Everything  turns  upon  yonr  receiving  Him. 
Life  and  death,  heaven  or  hell,  felicity  or  ruin,  here  and  hereafter,  all  rest  with  Him. 
2.  It  is  meet  that  we  should  rejoice,  because,  then,  an  immortal  creature  is  rescued 
from  misery,  and  another  traveller  is  on  the  road  to  heaven.  3.  It  is  meet  that  we 
should  rejoice,  because  a  sinner  brought  to  repentance  will  injure  others  no  more. 
When  a  sinner  is  converted,  another  agent  of  destruction  is  removed.  Another  gun 
ou  the  enemy's  ramparts  is  spiked.  Another  soldier  in  Satan's  army  is  struck 
down.  Another  poison-chalice  is  dashed  from  the  devil's  hand.  Another  upas  tree 
is  uprooted.  Another  electric  cloud  is  dispersed,  to  send  down  thunder  and  death 
»o  more.  Another  vessel  of  honour  is  placed  in  the  Master's  house,  prepared  for 
His  use,  to  be  employed  hereafter  in  His  blessed  and  holy  service.  (W.  B.  Macken- 
zie, M.A.)  God's  joy  at  the  sinner's  return  : — I  saw  in  Amsterdam  the  diamond 
matting,  and  I  noticed  great  wheels,  a  large  factory  and  powerful  engines,  and  all 
the  power  was  made  to  bear  upon  a  small  stone  no  larger  than  the  nail  of  my  little 
finger.  All  that  huge  machinery  for  that  little  stone,  because  it  was  so  precious  ! 
Methinks  I  see  you  poor  insignificant  sinners,  who  have  rebelled  against 
your  God,  brought  back  to  your  Father's  house,  and  now  the  whole  universe  is 
lull  o£  wheels,  and  all  those  wheels  are  working  together  for  your  good,  to  make 
out  of  you  a  jewel  fit  to  glisten  in  the  Redeemer's  crown.  God  is  not  represented 
«s  saying  more  of  creation  than  that  "  it  was  very  good,"  but  in  the  work 
of  grace  He  is  described  as  singing  for  joy.  He  breaks  the  eternal  silence,  and 
cries,  "  My  son  is  found."  As  the  philosopher,  when  he  had  compelled  nature 
to  yield  her  secret,  ran  through  the  street,  crying,  "  Eureka !  Eureka  I  I  have 
found  it !  I  have  found  it ! "  so  does  the  Father  dwell  on  the  word,  "  My  son 
that  was  dead,  is  alive  again,  he  that  was  lost  is  found."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Was  dead,  and  Is  alive  again. — Life  after  death  : — Startling  tales  are  some- 
times related  around  the  fire,  on  a  winter's  night,  of  the  dead  who  have  come  to  life 
Again.  I  remember  being  told  in  my  youth  that  the  mother  of  two  eminent  mini- 
sters had  been  buried  in  a  swoon  before  her  twin  sons  were  bom.  The  covetous 
sexton,  having  opened  her  grave,  was  cutting  off  her  finger  to  get  her  gold  marriage 
ring,  when  she  awoke  and  spoke.  Who  could  envy  such  an  one  a  joyous  jubilation 
on  her  return  to  life  ?  And  who  should  envy  the  quickened  sinner  the  honour  that 
is  paid  him  by  God  and  man  ?  For  he  is  often  brought  to  spiritual  life  when  the 
Lord,  by  His  faithful  knife  of  chastisement,  outs  some  prized  and  precious  treasure 
away.  Some  time  ago  the  great  Dr.  Livingstone  was  thought  to  be  dead— wholly 
lost  in  the  African  wilds.  I  so  thoroughly  believed  the  report  which  his  lying  com- 
panions circulated,  that  I  preached  a  discourse  which  was  designed  to  do  him 
honour,  and  especially  the  God  he  had  served.  I  take  great  pleasure  in  here 
acknowledging  that  my  discourse  was  premature,  and  in  expressing  my  delight  at 
the  news  of  the  Doctor's  safety  which  has  since  reached  our  shores,  as  well  as  my 
hope  that  he  may  soon  be  welcomed  home  by  his  friends  "  safe  and  sound."  And 
what  friend  or  fellow-townsman  could  grudge  him  a  very  special  and  remarkable 
reception — because  "  he  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again ;  and  was  lost,  and  is  found  "  ? 
This  is  the  very  "  expostulation  "  by  means  of  which  the  Saviour  in  this  parable 
seeks  to  still  the  murmurs  of  the  Pharisees,  and  which  at  every  time  of  revival 
eamestnessand  revival  success  is  specially  appropriate.  A  youngwoman  mentioned  to 
me  one  day  that  her  brother,  an  engineer  in  a  steamer  between  Bombay  and  the  Eed 
Sea,  had  informed  her  in  a  recent  letter  that  he  saw  the  Abyssinian  prisoners  land 
at  Suez.  They  looked  pale  and  exhausted.  They  had  the  appearance  of  people 
who  had  suffered  much  by  anxiety  and  confinement.  But,  as  they  stepped  ashore, 
all  the  Europeans  crowded  around  and  gave  them  three  hearty  cheers,  which  they 
acknowledged  with  smiles  of  gratitude  and  satisfaction.  I  wish  that  I  had  seen 
them  land.  I  would  have  cheered  too  with  all  my  might.  For  Britain  had  done  a 
grand  thing  in  sending  out  that  expedition — enough  to  stamp  her  as  in  reality  Great 
Britain  in  Qie  eyes  of  the  nations.  Nor  can  we  find  a  better  illustration  of  the 
gospel.  It  was  meet  that  the  sympathizing  spectators  at  Suez  should  make  the 
welkin  ring  with  their  shouts  of  joy ;  for  the  captives  of  Theodore,  like  the  captives 
of  sin  and  Satan,  "  had  been  dead,  and  were  alive  again ;  and  had  been  lost,  and 
were  found."  And  who  could  grudge  them  such  a  welcome  to  life  and  liberty  again  ? 
(F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  Concludivg  reflection  on  this  parable : — If  John  iii.  16,  and 
1  Tim.  i.  15,  have  been  the  most  usefiU  of  Scripture  texts,  the  parable  of  the  prodigal 
son  has  been  one  of  the  most  useful  of  Scripture  paragraphs.  If  Bom.  iii.  19-^1 
has  ever  been  esteemed  by  scholars  the  loctu  classicus  for  the  display  of  th* 
righteousness  of  God,  Luke  xv.  11-32,  has  ever  been  regarded  by  evangelists  as  th« 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ^chap.  m. 

Ucus  $anctug  etfertiUs  for  the  display  of  the  love  of  God.  I  ■would  also  obsery* 
that  it  Buits  rich  and  poor  alike.  I  was  paying  a  pastoral  visit  one  day  to  one  ol 
the  officials  of  a  great  poor-house  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city  in  which  my 
lot  has  been  cast.  The  chaplain  asked  me  to  conduct  evening  prayers.  I  found 
myself  placed  in  unwonted  circumstances.  I  etood  in  a  spacious  hall,  capable  of 
containing  fifteen  hundred  individuals,  and  seated  like  a  church.  About  twelve 
hundred  paupers  joined  in  the  evening  devotions.  Three  times  a  day  they  were 
wont  to  assemble  there  to  receive  the  plain  supplies  of  the  bread  that  perisheth, 
which  charity  had  provided ;  and,  twice  a  day,  to  worship  God.  My  heart  filled 
as  they  sang  with  me  the  beautiful  paraphrase,  beginning  "0  God  of  Bethel,  by 
whose  hand,"  and  especially  when  they  came  to  the  couplet— 

••  O  spread  Thy  covering  wings  aroond 
Till  all  our  wanderings  cease  "  ; 

for  the  great  building  in  which  they  sang  in  rough,  unpolished  strains,  since  it  bacl 
been  reared  by  Christ-inspired  benevolence,  looked  like  the  covering  wings  of  the 
Almighty,  which  had  been  spread  around  them.  In  the  course  of  conversation,  at  the 
close  of  the  service,  the  chaplain  informed  me  that  several  of  the  ministers  of  the  city 
had  preached  on  the  Sabbath  evenings  of  the  preceding  summer,  and  that  the  poor 
people  had  been  greatly  delighted  with  their  discourses.  But  what  had  pleased 
them  most  of  all  had  been  a  sermon  by  the  late  Doctor  Norman  Macleod  on  the 
Parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  I  had  noticed  in  the  newspapers  that  he  had  delivered 
the  same  sermon,  a  few  weeks  before,  to  a  fashionable  audience,  when  many  car- 
riages were  standing  at  the  door.  It  delighted  me  that  he  had  dispensed  that 
identical  supply  of  the  bread  of  life  to  the  inmates  of  the  poor-house ;  for,  in  truth, 
we  are  all  on  a  level.  We  are  all  God's  offspring,  and  are  all  pensioners  on  His 
bounty.  The  poor  people  had  enjoyed  greatly  the  rich  representation  of  the  love  of 
God  which  the  parable  contains.  Many  of  them  had  been  bathed  in  tears.  For  the 
career  of  the  prodigal  had  been  their  career.  They  would  not  have  been  glad  of 
the  poor-house,  if  they  had  not  "wasted  their  substance  with  riotous  living."  And 
not  only  had  the  arms  of  the  world's  charity  been  opened  to  receive  them,  but, 
warmer  and  kindlier  far,  the  arms  of  the  Divine  good-will  were  ready  to  clasp  them 
round.  Yes,  the  parable  to  which  I  am  bidding  farewell  for  the  present  suits  the 
high  and  low,  the  rich  and  poor,  the  West  End  and  the  East  End  alike.  Lastly,  it 
is  capable  of  edifying  application  to  the  hour  of  death.  Here  we  are  all  *•  in  a  far 
country."  ••  At  home  in  the  body,  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord."  We  often  feel 
that  our  engagements  and  pursuits  are,  like  the  prodigal's  occupation,  beneath  the 
dignity  of  our  immortal  spirits.  Amid  degraded  men  we  sigh  for  the  purity  and 
royalty  of  our  Father's  house  on  high.  At  length  a  gentle  summons  comes  in 
friendly  disease ;  and  the  dying  Christian,  responding  to  the  call,  says,  "  I  will 
arise  and  go  to  my  Father."  As  he  lies  upon  his  bed  of  pain,  in  crowded  city  or 
rural  hamlet,  "  his  Father  sees  him  afar  oft  and  has  compassion  on  him."  By  the 
kind  ministrations  of  His  grace,  *•  He  makes  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness."  At  length, 
when  his  disembodied  spirit  approaches  the  heavenly  house,  a  father's  kiss  and  a 
father's  welcome  are  received.  Then  the  robe  of  glory,  the  ring  of  full  redemption, 
and  spiritual  shoes,  are  given  to  the  weary  traveller.  Oh,  what  rejoicing  takes  place 
over  his  safe  arrival,  at  the  heavenly  feast,  amid  whose  transports  he  completely 
forgets  the  sorrows  of  the  far  country  I  No  sullen  celestials  seem  jealous  of  his 
«ordial  reception — 

**  The  wondering  angels  round  Him  throng 

And  swell  the  chorus  of  His  praise,"  (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XTL 


V«BB.  l-«.  There  was  a  certain  rich  man,  which  had  a  steward.— CJkmt'i  tenaiO* 
«re  stewards: — I.  Show  what  things  thkt  abb  entbustbd  wtfh,  that  abb  ko» 
THxiB  own.  1.  AH  earthly  good  things,  as  riches,  health,  time,  opportunities.  S. 
▲Iso  spiritual  goods,  via.,  the  gospel  and  its  ministration,  spiritual  knowledge,  glfti^ 


CHAP,  ivi.]  ST.  LUKE.  201 

grace,  the  worship  of  God,  and  His  ordinances,  promises,  providences,  and  care  of 
His  holy  temple  or  vineyard.  II.  Show  why  wk  mcst  cakefully  improve  aix. 
THiKOS  THAT  ABE  IN  ODB  HANDS.  1.  Earthly  things.  (1)  Because,  whatsoever  we 
have  put  into  our  hands  is  to  advance  the  honour  of  our  great  Lord  and  Master, 
Jesus  Christ,  and  to  refresh,  comfort,  and  support  the  whole  household  where  we 
are  placed.  (2)  Because  we  liave  nothing  that  is  our  own  ;  it  is  our  Lord's  goods. 
(3)  Because  if  we  are  not  faithful  in  the  least,  it  may  stop  the  hand  of  Christ  from 
giving  the  greater  things  to  us.  (4)  It  will  be  otherwise  a  wrong  and  great  injustice 
to  the  poor,  or  to  such  for  the  sake  of  whom  they  that  are  rich  are  entrusted  with 
earthly  wealth,  in  withholding  that  which  is  theirs  by  Christ's  appointment  from 
ihem  ;  and  so  a  clear  demonstration  of  unfaithfulness  both  to  God  and  man;  and 
it  may  provoke  God  to  take  away  from  them  what  they  have.  (5)  Because  we  must 
in  a  short  time  be  called  to  give  an  account  of  our  stewardship ;  we  must  expect  to 
hear  Clirist  say,  "  What  have  you  done  with  My  gold  and  silver.  My  corn.  My  wool, 
and  My  flax  ?  How  is  it  that  My  poor  have  wanted  bread  and  clothes,  and  My 
ministers  have  been  neglected  and  forced  to  run  into  debt  to  buy  necessaries  to 
support  their  families  ?  "  (6)  Because  if  these  good  things  be  not  rightly  and  f aith- 
f uUy  improved  as  Christ  commands.  His  poor  and  His  ministers  may  be  exposed  to 
great  temptations,  and  their  souls  borne  down  and  sorely  discouraged  ;  and  Satan 
may  get  advantages  against  them,  for  many  snares  and  dangers  attend  outward 
want ;  moreover  the  name  of  God  and  religion  may  also  thereby  be  exposed  to  the 
contempt  of  the  world.  Who  can  believe  we  are  the  people  of  God,  when  they 
cannot  see  that  love  to  one  another  among  them  which  is  the  character  of  true 
Christians  ?  Or  how  should  they  think  that  we  believe  the  way  we  are  in  is  the  true 
way  and  worship  of  God  ?  2.  Spiritual  things.  (1)  The  gospel  and  its  ministra- 
tion, because  it  is  given  to  the  end  that  we  may  profit  thereby.  It  is  Christ's 
chief  treasure,  and  that  which  He  intrusts  very  few  with.  If  not  improved,  He 
may  take  it  away  from  us,  as  He  has  already  from  others.  When  that  goes,  God, 
Christ,  and  all  good  goes,  and  all  evil  will  come  in.  (2)  Spiritual  gifts,  knowledge, 
&o.,  because  given  for  the  use  and  profit  of  the  Church ;  and  they  that  have  them 
are  but  stewards  of  them,  which  they  are  commanded  to  improve  (1  Pet.  iv.  10). 
Use :  Get  your  accounts  ready ;  you  know  not  but  this  night  Christ  may  say,  •'  Give 
an  account,"  &o.  {B.  Reach.)  All  men  are  stewards  of  God  : — A  friend  stepping 
into  the  office  of  a  Christian  business  man  one  day,  noticed  that  he  was  standing 
at  his  desk  with  his  hands  full  of  banknotes,  which  he  was  carefully  counting,  as 

he  laid  them  down  one  by  one.    After  a  brief  silence  the  friend  said  :  "  Mr.  H , 

just  count  out  ten  pounds  from  that  pile  of  notes  and  make  yourself  or  some  other 
person  a  life  member  of  the  Christian  Giving  Society  I"  He  finished  his  count, 
and  quickly  replied,  "I'm  handling  trust  funds  nowl"  His  answer  instantly 
flashed  a  light  on  the  entire  work  and  life  of  a  Christian,  and  the  friend  replied  to 
his  statement  with  the  question,  "Do  you  ever  handle  anything  but  trust  funds?" 
If  Christians  would  only  realize  that  all  that  God  gives  us  is  "  in  trust,"  what  a 
change  would  come  over  our  use  of  money  I  "I'm  handling  trust  funds  now." 
Let  the  merchant  write  the  motto  over  his  desk ;  the  farmer  over  the  income  of  his 
farm ;  the  labourer  over  his  wages ;  the  professional  man  over  his  salary ;  the 
banker  over  his  income ;  the  housekeeper  over  her  house  expense  purse  ;  the  boy 
and  girl  over  "  pocket  money  " — and  what  a  change  would  be  made  in  our  life.  A 
business  man  who  had  made  a  donation  of  one  thousand  pounds  to  a  Christian 
enterprise,  once  said  in  the  hearing  of  the  writer — "  1  hold  that  a  man  is  account- 
able for  every  sixpence  he  gets."  There  is  the  gospel  idea  of  "  trust  funds."  Let 
parents  instruct  and  train  their  children  to  "  handle  trust  funds  "  as  the  stewards 
of  God's  bounty,  and  there  will  be  a  new  generation  of  Christians.  Tlie  proper 
improvement  of  temporal  possessions: — ^I.  That  the  common  maxims  of  human 
wisdom  in  the  conduct  of  worldly  affairs,  and  even  those  of  carnal  and  unjust 
policy,  may  be  usefully  applied  for  our  direction  in  the  concerns  of  religion,  and 
they  reproach  the  folly  and  slothfulness  of  Christians  in  working  out  their  salva- 
tion ;  "  the  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of 
light."  II.  The  second  observation  is,  that  riches  and  other  gifts  of  providence  are 
but  little  in  comparison  with  the  greater  and  more  substantial  blessings  which  God 
is  ready  to  bestow  on  His  sincere  and  fal^^hful  servants ;  that  these  inferior  things 
are  committed  to  Christians  as  to  stewards  for  the  trial  of  their  fidelity,  and  they 
who  improve  them  carefully  to  the  proper  ends  for  which  they  were  given,  are 
entitled  to  the  greater  benefits  which  others  forfeit,  and  render  themselves  on- 
worthy  of,  by  negligence  and  onfaithfolness.     This  is  the  meanini;  of  the  l(Hk 


202  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ckap.  zn. 

and  11th  verses — "  He  who  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  is  faithful 
also  in  much  ;  and  he  who  is  unjust  in  the  least,  is  unjust  also  in  much  ; 
if,  therefore,  you  have  not  been  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon,  who  wiD 
commit  to  your  trust  the  true  riches  ?  "  We  may  further  observe  upon  this  head, 
that  God  hath  wisely  ordered  the  circumstances  of  this  life  in  suboidination  to 
another.  The  enjoyments  of  our  present  state  are  the  means  of  trying  our  virtue, 
and  the  occasions  of  exercising  it,  that  so  by  a  due  improvement  of  them  to  that 
purpose,  we  may  be  prepared  for  the  perfection  of  virtue,  and  complete  happiness 
hereafter.  This  might  be  illustrated  in  a  variety  of  particular  instances — indeed, 
in  the  whole  compass  of  our  worldly  affairs,  which,  according  as  they  are  conducted, 
either  minister  to  virtue  or  vice.  By  the  various  uncertain  events  of  life,  as  some 
are  tempted  to  different  distracting  passions,  to  eager,  anxious  desire,  to  fear  and 
sorrow,  so  there  is  to  better  disposed  minds  an  opportunity  of  growing  in  self- 
dominion,  in  an  equal  and  uniform  temper,  and  a  more  earnest  prevalent  desire  of 
true  goodness,  which  is  immutable  in  all  external  changes ;  in  afllictions  there  is  a 
trial  and  an  increase  of  patience,  which  is  of  so  much  moment  as  to  be  represented 
in  Scripture  as  the  height  of  religious  perfection.  Knowledge,  likewise,  is  capable 
of  being  greatly  improved  for  the  service  of  mankind ;  and  all  our  talents  of  this 
Eort,  which  are  distributed  promiscuously  to  men,  though  little  in  themselves,  and 
with  respect  to  the  main  ends  of  our  being,  yet  to  the  diligent  and  faithful  servant, 
who  useth  them  well  and  wisely  for  the  cause  of  virtue,  and  under  the  direction  of 
its  principles,  they  bring  great  returns  of  real  and  solid  benefit,  which  shall  abide 
•with  him  for  ever.  Thus  it  appeareth  that  Divine  Providence  hath  wisely  ordered 
the  circumstances  of  our  condition  in  this  world,  in  our  infancy  of  being,  so  that 
by  the  proper  exercise  of  our  own  faculties,  and  the  industrious  improvement  of  the 
opportunities  which  are  afforded  us,  we  may  be  prepared  for  a  better  and  happier 
state  hereafter.  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  we  are  unjust  to  our  great  Master,  and  to 
ourselves,  that  is,  to  our  highest  interest,  in  the  little,  which  is  now  committed  to 
us,  we  thereby  forfeit  the  greatest  good  we  are  capable  of,  and  deprive  ourselves  of 
the  true  riches.  If  in  the  first  trial  which  God  taketh  of  us,  as  moral  agents 
during  our  immature  state,  our  state  of  childhood,  we  do  not  act  a  proper  part,  but 
are  given  up  to  indolence  and  sloth,  and  to  a  prodigal  waste  of  our  talents,  the  con- 
sequences of  this  folly  and  wickedness  will  naturally,  and  by  the  just  judgment  of 
God,  cleave  to  us  in  every  stage  of  our  existence ;  of  which  there  is  a  familiar 
instance  every  day  before  us  in  those  unhappy  persons  who  having  from  early  youth 
obstinately  resisted  the  best  instructions,  for  the  most  part  continue  unreclaimed 
through  their  whole  lives,  and  bring  themselves  to  a  miserable  end.  Let  us,  there- 
fore, always  consider  ourselves  as  now  under  probation  and  discipline,  and  that  eternal 
consequences  of  the  greatest  moment  depend  upon  our  present  conduct.  III.  The 
third  observation  is,  that  the  things  or  this  wokld  committed  to  odb  tecbt  abb  not 

OtJB  OWN,  BUT  THE  PEOPEKTT  OF  ANOTHER;  BUT  THE  GITTB  OF  GoD,  OBANTED  IS.  TSERBWABD 
OF  ODB  IMPBOVINO  THEM  FAITHFtTLLT,  HATE  A  NEABEB  AND  MOBE  IMMEDIATE  BKLATION  TO 
OUBSELVES,  AND  A  STEICT  DISEP ARABLE  CONNECTION  WITH  OUB  HAPPINESS.     "And  if  yOU 

have  not  been  faithful  in  that  which  is  another's,  who  will  give  you  that  which  i« 
your  own  ?  "  (ver.  12. )  The  things  which  are  said  to  be  another's,  are,  the  unrighteous 
mammon,  and  others  like  it ;  God  is  the  sovereign  proprietor  of  them ;  they  are 
foreign  to  the  constitution  of  the  human  nature,  and  their  usefulness  to  it  is  only 
accidental  and  temporary.  But  the  other  goods,  virtuous  integrity  and  the  favour 
of  God,  enter  deeper  into  the  soul,  and  by  its  essential  frame  are  a  never-failing 
Bpring  of  joy  and  consolation  to  it  in  every  state  of  existence.  It  is  very  surprising 
that  a  man,  who  so  much  loveth  and  is  devoted  to  himself,  being  naturally  and 
necessarily  so  determined,  should  be  so  ignorant,  as  many  are,  what  that  self  really 
is,  and  thereby  be  misled  to  place  his  affections  on  something  else  instead  of  it. 
By  the  least  attention  every  man  will  see  that  what  is  meant  by  himself  is  the  same 
person  or  intelligent  agent,  the  thinking,  conscious  "  I,"  which  remaineth  unaltered 
in  all  changes  of  condition,  from  the  remembrance  of  his  earliest  thoughts  and 
actions  to  the  present  moment.  How  remote  from  this  are  riches,  power,  honour, 
health,  strength,  the  matter  ingredient  in  the  composition  of  the  body,  and  even  its 
limbs,  which  may  be  all  lost,  and  self  still  the  same  ?  These  things,  therefore,  are 
*•  not  our  own,"  meaning  by  that,  what  most  properly  and  unalienably  belongeth  to 
ourselves ;  we  hold  them  by  an  uncertain,  precarious  tenure,  they  come  and  go, 
while  the  same  conscious,  thinking  being,  which  is  strictly  the  man  himself,  con- 
tinneth  unchanged,  in  honour  and  dishonour,  in  riches  and  poverty,  in  sickness  and 
health,  and  all  the  other  differences  of  our  outward  state.    But,  on  the  contrary,  a 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  803 

Btate  of  religions  virtue,  which  it  is  the  intention  of  Christianity  to  bring  us  to,  and 
which  is  the  immediate  effect  of  improving  our  talents  diligently  and  faithfully, 
that  "  kingdom  of  God  which  is  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost " ;  this  is  of  a  quite  different  kind,  it  entereth  into  our  very  selves,  and 
closely  adhereth  to  us ;  it  improveth  our  nature,  refineth  and  enlargeth  its  noblest 
powers ;  it  is  so  much  "our  own,"  as  to  become  our  very  temper,  and  the  ruling  bent 
of  our  minds  ;  there  is  nothing  we  are  more  directly  conscious  of  in  ourselves  than 
good  dispositions  and  good  actions  proceeding  from  them,  and  the  consciouaness  is 
always  accompanied  with  delight.  The  good  man  is  therefore  "  satisfied  from  him- 
self," because  his  satisfaction  ariseth  from  a  review  of  his  goodness  which  ia 
intimately  his  own.  (J.  Abernethy,  M.A.)  Stewardship  : — I.  The  office  of 
STEWAED.  1.  A  steward  is  a  man  who  administers  a  property  which  is  not  his  own. 
His  relation  to  property  is  distinguished  on  the  one  hand  from  that  of  those  who 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  property,  because  the  steward  has  everything  to  do 
with  it  that  he  can  do  for  its  advantage ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  from  that  of  the 
'jwner  of  the  property,  because  the  steward  is  no  sense  the  owner  of  it,  but  only  the 
administrator.  His  duty  towards  it  is  dependent  on  the  will  of  another,  and  it  may 
terminate  at  any  moment.  2.  The  office  of  a  steward  is  before  all  things  a  trust.  It 
represents  in  human  affairs  a  venture  which  the  owner  of  a  property  makes,  upon 
the  strength  of  his  estimate  of  the  character  of  the  man  to  whom  he  delegates  the 
care  of  the  property.  3.  An  account  must  at  some  time  be  rendered  to  some  one. 
(1)  We  are  accountable  to  public  opinion.  (2)  To  our  own  conscience.  (3)  To 
God.  If  man  has  no  account  to  give,  no  wrong  that  he  does  has  the  least  conse- 
quence. If  man  has  no  account  to  give,  no  wrong  that  is  done  to  him,  and  that  is 
unpunished  by  human  law,  will  ever  be  punished.  If  man  has  no  account  to  give, 
life  is  a  hideous  chaos;  it  is  a  game  of  chance  in  which  the  horrible  and  the 
grotesque  alternately  bury  out  of  sight  the  very  last  vestiges  of  a  moral  order.  If 
man  has  no  account  to  give,  the  old  Epicurean  rule  in  all  its  profound  degradation 
may  have  much  to  say  for  itself  (1  Cor.  xv.  32).  n.  Human  life  is  a  btewabd- 
8BIP.  We  are  stewards,  whether  as  men  or  as  Christians ;  not  less  in  the  order  of 
nature  than  in  the  order  of  grace.  1.  Every  owner  of  property  is  in  God's  sight  a 
steward  of  that  property,  and,  sooner  or  later,  He  will  demand  an  account.  Has  it, 
however  little,  been  spent  conscientiously ;  or  merely  as  the  passion  or  freak  of  the 
moment  might  suggest  ?  2.  Or,  the  estate  of  which  we  are  stewards  is  a  more 
interesting  and  precious  one  than  this.  It  is  situated  in  the  world  of  the  mind,  in 
the  region  where  none  but  knowledge  and  speculation  and  imagination  and  taste 
have  their  place  and  sway.  Tet  all  this  is  not  ours,  but  God's.  He  is  the  Author 
of  the  gifts  which  have  laid  out  the  world  of  taste  and  thought  and  knowledge ; 
and  each  contributor  to  that  world,  and  each  student,  or  even  each  loiterer  in  it,  is 
only  the  steward,  the  trustee,  of  endowments,  of  faculties  which,  however  intimately 
his  own  when  we  distinguish  him  from  other  men,  are  not  his  own  when  we  look 
higher  and  place  them  in  the  light  of  the  rights  of  God.  "  Give  an  account  of  thy 
stewardship. "  The  real  Author  and  Owner  of  the  gifts  of  mind  sometimes  utters 
this  summons  to  His  stewards  before  the  time  of  death.  He  withdraws  the  mental 
life  of  man,  and  leaves  him  still  with  the  animal  life  intact  and  vigorous.  Go  to  a 
lunatic  asylum,  that  most  pitiable  assortment  of  all  the  possibilities  of  human 
degradation,  and  mark  there,  at  least  among  some  of  the  sufferers,  those  who  abase 
the  stewardship  of  intelligence.  3.  Or,  the  estate  of  which  we  are  stewards  is  some- 
thing higher  still.  It  is  the  creed  which  we  believe,  the  hopes  which  we  cherish, 
the  religion  in  which  we  find  our  happiness  and  peace  as  Christians.  With  this 
treasure,  which  He  has  withheld  from  others,  God  has  entrusted  us  Christians, 
in  whatever  measure,  for  our  own  good,  and  also  for  the  good  of  our  fellow-men. 
Beligion,  too,  is  a  loan,  a  trust ;  it  is  not  an  inalienable  property.  4.  And  then, 
growing  out  of  those  three  estates,  is  the  estate  of  influence — that  subtle,  inevitable 
effect  for  good  or  for  ill  which  man  exerts  upon  the  lives  of  those  around 
him.  The  question  is,  what  use  are  we  making  of  it ;  how  is  it  telling 
npon  friends,  acquaintances,  servants,  correspondents,  those  who  know  us 
only  from  a  distance — are  we  helping  them  upwards  or  downwards,  to  heaven 
or  to  hell  t  Surely  a  momentous  question  for  aU  of  us,  since  of  this  stewardship 
events  may  summon  ns  before  the  end  comes  to  give  account.  5.  And  a  last 
estate  of  which  we  are  but  stewards,  is  health  and  life.  Thift  bodily  frame,  so 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  of  such  subtle  and  delicate  texture  that  the  wonder 
is  that  it  should  bear  the  wear  and  tear  of  time,  and  last  as  long  as  for  many  of  ni 
it  does — of  this  we  are  not  owners,  we  are  only  stewards.    It  is  most  assuredly  no 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvr 

creation  of  our  own,  this  body ;  and  He  who  gave  it  as  will  in  any  case  one  day 
withdraw  His  gift.  And  yet  how  many  a  man  thinks  in  his  secret  heart  that  if  ha 
owns  nothing  else,  he  does  at  least  own,  as  its  absolute  master  might  own,  tha 
fabric  of  flesh  and  bones,  nerves  and  veins,  in  which  his  animal  life  resides  :  that 
with  this,  at  least,  he  may  rightfully  do  what  he  will,  even  abuse  and  ruin  and 
irretrievably  degrade,  and  even  kill ;  that  here  no  question  of  another's  right  can 
possibly  occur ;  that  here  he  is  master  on  his  own  ground,  and  not  a  steward.  Oh, 
piteous  forgetfulness  in  a  man  who  believes  that  he  has  a  Creator,  and  that  that 
Creator  has  His  rights!  Oh,  piteous  ingratitude  in  a  Christian,  who  should 
remember  that  he  is  not  his  own,  but  is  bought  with  a  price,  and  that  therefore  he 
should  glorify  God  in  his  body  no  less  than  in  his  spirit,  since  both  are  God's  ! 
Oh,  piteous  illusion,  the  solemn  moment  for  dissipating  which  is  ever  hurrying  on 
apace  I  The  Author  of  health  and  life  has  His  own  time  for  bidding  us  give 
an  account  of  this  solemn  stewardship — often,  too,  when  it  is  least  expected. 
( Canon  Liddon).  Moral  steivardship  ; — I.  Men  abb  stewards.  1.  In  regard  to 
their  talents.  (1)  Time.  (2)  Money.  (3)  Physical,  mental,  and  moral  abilities. 
2.  In  regard  to  their  privileges.  Each  privilege  is  a  sacred  talent,  to  be  utilized 
for  personal,  spiritual  end.  Golden  in  character.  Uncertain  in  continuance.  3. 
In  regard  to  their  opportunities.  Men  are  responsible  not  only  for  what  they  do, 
but  also  for  what  they  are  capable  of  doing.  II.  Men  abb  stewabcs  only. 
Whatever  we  have,  we  have  received,  hold  in  trust,  and  must  account  for  to  God. 
III.  The  beckoning  day  is  coming.  1.  The  day  of  reckoning  is  certain.  2. 
Uncertain  as  to  the  time.  3.  Divine  in  its  procedure.  God  Himself  will  make  the 
final  award.  4.  Solemn  in  its  character.  5.  Eternal  in  its  issues.  Learn — 1. 
That  moral  responsibility  is  a  solemn  thing.  2.  It  is  imposed  upon  us  without  our 
own  consent.  3.  That  we  cannot  avert  the  day  of  reckoning.  4.  That  upon  the 
proper  use  of  our  tftlents  shall  we  reap  the  reward  of  hfe  and  blessedness.  5. 
That  unfaithfulness  to  oar  solemn  responsibilities  will  entail  eternal  disgrace  and 
everlasting  reprobation.  (J,  Tesseyman.)  The  ttewardship  of  life: — I.  The 
TBiJST  BEPOSED  iH  US — *'  Thy  Stewardship."  Stewardship  is  based  upon  the  idea 
of  another's  proprietorship.  1.  Of  the  Divine  Proprietorship.  2.  Stewardship 
implies  interests  entrusted  to  human  keeping  and  administration.  3.  Stewardship 
implies  human  capabiUty.  Faithfulness  cannot  be  compelled  by  an  omnipotent 
Buler.  It  is  a  subject  of  moral  choice.  II.  The  end  or  oub  stewabdship  as 
HEBE  scooEBTED — *'  Give  an  account.  Thou  mayest  be  no  longer  steward." 
Moral  responsibility  is  the  solemn  heritage  of  all  rational  ^intelligences.  1.  The 
stewardship  may  be  held  to  be  determinable  at  death.  Moral  power  continues, 
and  moral  obligations  and  duties  rest  on  the  spirit.  So,  there  will  be  stewardship 
in  eternity.  But  here  the  concern  is  with  "  the  deeds  done  in  the  body."  2. 
Stewardship  may  practically  be  determined  before  the  last  hoar  of  mortal  history. 
{The  Preacher' $  Monthly.)  The  unjust  steward: — 1.  We  are  stewards,  not  pro- 
prietors. 2.  Let  me  urge  upon  you  to  be  faithful  in  whatsoever  position  in  life 
you  may  be.  3.  It  is  only  as  yon  are  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  you,  that  yon  will 
be  able  to  realize  your  true  position,  and  act  with  true  faithfulness.  {A.  F. 
Barfield.)  Christian  prudence : — I.  The  obligation  to  this.  1.  Because  we 
are  dependent  on  God.  2.  Because  we  are  accountable  to  Him.  H.  Its  pbofeb 
NATXTBE.  1.  In  general.  (1)  It  is  provident  of  the  future.  (2)  It  conceals  not 
from  itself  the  true  state  of  matters.  (3)  It  is  inventive  of  means  for  its  well- 
being.  (4)  It  forms  its  purpose  with  greatest  determination.  (5)  It  discloses 
clearly  who  or  what  can  be  of  service  to  it  for  the  accomplishment  of  its  purpose. 
(6)  It  does  not  content  itself  with  purposes,  but  goes  immediately  to  action.  (7) 
It  employs  the  time  without  delay.  (8)  It  transacts  everything  with  careful 
consideration.  2.  In  particular.  (1)  It  employs  temporal  goods  in  well-doing. 
(2)  It  is  mindful  of  death  and  the  day  of  reckoning.  (3)  It  has  an  eye  to  eternal 
bliss.  III.  The  consequences  of  it.  1.  It  obtains  the  approval  of  the  Lord  and 
Judge  of  all.  2.  It  renders  as  capable  and  worthy  of  receiving  greater,  truer, 
abiding  goods.  (F.  G.  Lisco .)  Lessons : — 1.  A  regard  to  our  own  interest  is  a 
commendable  principle.  The  great  fault  which  men  commit  is,  that  they  mistake 
the  nature  as  well  as  the  means  of  happiness.  2.  There  is  another  object  which 
our  Saviour  has  in  view.  It  is  to  compare  the  sagacity  and  exertion  which  worldly 
men  employ  in  order  to  attain  their  ends  with  the.lukewarmness  and  negligence  of 
the  children  of  light.  Do  we  not  see  with  what  ardour  and  perseverance  those 
who  place  their  happiness  in  wealth  pursue  their  grand  object  ?  3.  We  learn  from 
this  parable,  aad  the  observations  of  our  Saviour  which  accompany  it,  the  manaei 


OHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  205 

in  which  riches  may  be  applied  for  the  advancement  of  happiness.  4.  From  this 
passage  we  may  learn  the  benefit  which  good  men  may  derive  from  observing  the 
vices  which  prevail  aroond  them.  This  lesson  our  Saviour  has  taught  us.  By 
seeing  vice,  as  it  appears  in  the  world,  we  may  learn  the  nature  and  character,  the 
effects  and  consequences  of  it.  6.  But  the  principal  object  of  this  parable  was 
evidently  to  teach  us  that  the  exercise  of  forethought  is  an  important  duty 
required  of  all  Christians.  Forethought,  then,  is  necessary  to  reformation.  It  is 
not  less  necessary  to  improvement.  For  does  not  improvement  presuppose  that 
we  seek  or  watch  for  opportunities  of  exercising  our  benevolent  affections — of 
doing  good  and  kind  actions — and  of  supplying  the  importunate  wants  of  the  needy 
and  the  destitute  ?  (J.  Thornton,  D.D.)  The  unjust  steward  an  example  in  one 
respect : — If  we  were  to  wait  for  perfect  men,  men  perfect  in  all  parts  and  on  all 
feides  of  their  character,  before  admiring  them  or  asking  others  to  admire  them, 
whom  should  we  admire  ?  what  models  or  examples  could  we  hold  up  before  our 
children  or  our  neighbours  ?  Instead  of  turning  so  foolishly  from  the  instruction 
human  life  offers  us,  we  detach  this  quality  or  that  from  the  character  of  men,  and 
admire  that,  without  for  a  moment  meaning  to  set  up  all  the  man  was  or  did  as  a 
complete  model,  an  exact  and  full  epitome  of  human  excellence.  We  can  call  the 
attention  of  our  children  to  the  dexterity  of  a  cricketer  or  a  juggler  without 
supposing,  or  being  supposed,  to  make  him  the  beau  ideal  of  mental  and  moral 
character.  We  can  admire  Lord  Bacon  as  one  of  "  the  greatest "  and  "  wisest "  of 
mankind,  if  we  also  admit  him  to  have  been  one  of  "the  meanest."  We  can 
quote  an  eminent  sceptic  as  a  very  model  of  patience  and  candour,  yet  deplore  hia 
scepticism.  Both  we  and  the  Bible  can  detach  noble  qnahties  from  the  baser 
matter  with  which  they  are  blended,  and  say,  ♦'  Imitate  these  men  in  what  was 
noble,  pure,  lovely,"  without  being  supposed  to  add,  "  and  imitate  them  also  in 
what  was  mean,  weak,  immoral."  Why,  then,  should  we  deny  our  Lord  the 
liberty  we  claim  for  ourselves  ?  What  should  we  expect  of  Him  but  the  mode  of 
teaching  which  pervades  the  Bible  throughout  ?  Above  all,  why  should  we  suppose 
Him  to  approve  what  is  evil  in  the  men  He  puts  before  us,  unless  He  expressly 
warns  us  against  it,  when  we  ourselves,  and  the  iDSpired  writers,  seldom  make  any 
such  provision  against  misconception  f  Bead  the  parable  honestly,  and,  according 
to  all  the  analogies  of  human  and  inspired  speech,  you  will  expect  to  find  some 
excellent  quality  in  the  steward  which  you  will  do  well  to  imitate  ;  but  yoa  will 
not  for  an  instant  snppose  that  it  is  his  evil  qualities  which  you  are  to  approve. 
Do  any  ask,  "  What  was  this  excellent  quality  ?  "  Mark  what  it  is,  and  what  alone 
it  is,  that  even  his  lord  commends  in  the  Unjust  Steward.  It  is  not  his  injustice, 
but  his  prudence.  "His  lord  commended  him  because  he  had  done  wisely" — 
— because  on  a  critical  occasion  he  had  acted  with  a  certain  promptitude  and 
sagacity,  because  he  had  seen  his  end  clearly  and  gone  straight  at  it.  Did  he  not 
deserve  the  praise?  (S.  Cox).      Our  stewardship  : — I.  In  thb  pkesent  life  evbbt  one 

OP  VB  HAS  THE  CHARACTER  AND  PLACE  OF  A  STEWARD.  II.  ThE  TIME  OF  ODR  STEWARD- 
SHIP WILL  HAVE  AN  END.  1.  It  wiU  end  certainly  at  death.  2.  It  may  end 
suddenly.  3.  Our  stewardship,  once  ended,  shall  be  renewed  no  more.  When 
death  comes,  our  negligences  and  mismanagement  are  fatal.     HI.  On  cub  ceasino 

TO   BE    STEWARDS,   AN     ACCOUNT   OF  OUR     STEWARDSHIP   WILL     BB    REQUIRED.      1.     Who 

must  give  an  account  ?  I  answer,  every  one  that  lives  and  is  here  a  steward,  2. 
To  whom?  And  this  is  to  God;  to  God  by  Christ,  to  whom  all  judgment  is  com- 
mitted. 3.  Of  what  will  an  account  be  demanded?  The  text  says,  of  our 
stewardship,  i.e.,  how  we  have  acted  in  it  while  it  lasted.  4.  \Vhen  will  such  an 
account  be  demanded  ?  The  Scripture  tells  us — (1)  Immediately  upon  every  one's 
going  out  of  his  stewardship.  (2)  Most  solemnly  at  the  last  day.  5.  What  is 
conveyed  in  the  expression,  "  Give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship  "  ?  (1)  That 
God  will  deal  with  every  one  in  particular.  (2)  That  notice  is  taken,  and  records 
kept  of  what  every  one  now  does,  and  this  in  order  to  a  future  judgment,  when  all 
is  to  be  produced,  and  sentence  publicly  passed.  (8)  Every  one's  account  called 
for  to  be  given,  shall  be  according  to  the  talents  wherewith  he  was  entrusted. 
Application :  1.  Is  every  one  in  the  present  life  to  be  considered  as  a  steward  of 
all  that  he  enjoys  ?  How  unreasonable  is  pride  in  those  who  have  the  largest 
share  of  their  Lord's  goods  ;  as  they  have  nothing  but  what  they  have  received, 
and  the  more  their  talents,  the  greater  the  trust.  2.  What  cause  of  serious 
concern  have  all  that  live  under  the  gospel,  left,  as  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace 
of  God,  they  should  receive  it  in  vain,  and  have  their  future  condemnation 
aggravated  by  their  present  advantages,  as  neglected  or  abused  ?     3.  Will  the  time 


206  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xyv 

cf  OHT  stewardship  have  an  end  ?  What  a  value  should  we  put  upon  it,  as  • 
season  in  which  we  are  to  act  for  eternity.  4.  The  believer  has  no  reason  to  faint 
under  the  difficulties  of  his  stewardship  ;  seeing  it  will  have  an  end,  a  most 
desirable  one ;  and  neither  the  services  nor  sufferings  of  the  present  time  are 
worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  glory  to  be  revealed.  5.  When  our  stewardship 
ends,  must  an  account  be  given  up?  It  is  hence  evident,  that  the  soul  survives  the 
body,  and  is  capable  of  acting  and  of  being  dealt  with  in  a  way  of  wrath  or  mercy, 
according  to  the  state  in  which  it  goes  away ;  and  hereupon — 6.  How  great  and 
important  a  thing  is  it  to  die ;  it  being  to  go  in  spirit  to  appear  before  God,  and 
give  an  account  of  all  that  we  have  done  in  the  body,  and  to  be  dealt  with  accord- 
ingly? What  is  consequent  upon  it?  {Daniel  Wilcox.)  Faithful  stewardship: — 
In  this  parable  the  man  was  dispossessed  from  his  place  because  he  wasted  goods 
which  did  not  belong  to  him.  He  had  been  in  various  ways  careless.  The  par- 
ticular nature  of  his  carelessness  is  not  specified  ;  but  this  is  specified — that  he 
was  to  be  dispossessed  because  he  was  not  faithful  in  the  management  of  the  property 
of  another.  Our  subject,  then,  is :  The  use  of  funds  not  your  own,  but  intrusted 
to  your  administration  or  keeping.  Men  think  they  have  a  complete  case  when 
they  say,  "  Here  is  a  power  in  my  hand  for  a  definite  end,  and  I  shall  use  it  for 
that  end ;  but  I  find  that  it  is  a  power  which  may  accomplish  more  than  that :  it 
can  do  good  for  more  than  the  owner.  I  can  use  it  and  derive  benefit  from  it.  I 
can  also  benefit  the  community  by  my  operations.  Besides,  it  will  never  be  known. 
Therefore  men  who  are  weaker  than  I  will  not  be  tempted  by  my  example  to  do  the 
same  thing.  It  will  never  injure  the  owner,  it  will  help  me,  through  me  it  will 
benefit  many  others,  and  no  evil  shall  come  from  it."  This  would  seem  to  make 
the  thing  secure ;  but  let  us  examine  the  matter.  1.  It  would  not  be  honest,  and 
therefore  it  would  not  be  wise,  to  use  other  people's  property  for  our  own  benefit, 
secretly,  even  if  it  were  safe.  If  it  did  them  no  harm,  if  it  did  you  good, 
and  if  nobody  knew  it,  it  would  not  be  honest.  You  have  no  business  to  do  it  under 
any  circumstances.  And  it  does  not  make  it  any  better  that  you  have  managerial 
care  over  property.  In  that  event  the  sin  is  even  greater ;  for  you  are  bound  to 
see  to  it  that  it  is  used  for  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  committed  to  your  trust, 
and  not  for  anything  aside  from  that.  2.  No  man  has  a  right  to  put  property  that 
is  not  his  own  to  all  the  risks  of  commerce.  What  if  a  man  thus  employing  trust 
funds  does  expect,  what  if  he  does  mean,  so  and  so  ?  That  is  nothing.  He  might 
as  well  throw  a  babe  out  of  a  second-story  window,  and  say  that  he  hoped  it  would 
lodge  in  some  tree  and  not  be  hurt,  as  to  endanger  the  property  of  othira  held  in. 
trust  by  him,  and  gay  that  he  hopes  it  will  not  come  to  any  harm.  What  has  that 
to  do  with  it  ?  The  chances  are  against  its  being  safe.  3.  No  man  has  a  right  to 
put  his  own  character  for  integrity  and  honesty  upon  a  commercial  venture.  No 
man  has  a  right  to  enter  upon  an  enterprise  where,  if  he  succeeds,  he  may  escape, 
but  where,  if  he  fails,  he  is  ruined  not  simply  in  pocket,  but  in  character ;  and  yet 
this  is  what  every  man  does  who  uses  trust  funds  for  his  own  purposes.  He  takes 
the  risk  of  destroyiug  himself  in  the  eyes  of  honest  men.  He  places  his  own  soul 
in  jeopardy.  4.  No  man  has  a  right  to  put  in  peril  the  happiness,  welfare,  and 
good  name  of  his  family,  of  the  neighbourhood,  of  the  associates  and  friends  with, 
whom  he  has  walked,  of  the  Church  with  which  he  is  connected,  of  his  partners  in 
business,  of  all  that  have  been  related  to  him.  5.  No  man  has  a  right  to  under- 
mine the  security  of  property  on  which  the  welfare  of  individuals  of  the  community 
depends  in  any  degree.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  Sunday-school  teacher — a 
tteward : — I.  First,  then,  the  steward.  What  is  he  ?  1.  In  the  first  place  the 
steward  is  a  servant.  He  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  servants,  but  he  is  only  a  servant. 
No,  we  are  nothing  better  than  stewards,  and  we  are  to  labour  for  our  Master  in 
heaven.  2.  But  still  while  the  steward  is  a  servant,  he  is  an  honourable  one. 
Now,  those  who  serve  Christ  in  the  office  of  teaching,  are  honourable  men  and 
women.  3.  The  steward  is  also  a  servant  who  has  very  great  responsibility 
attached  to  his  position.  A  sense  of  responsibility  seems  to  a  right  man  always  a 
weighty  thing.  II.  And  now,  thk  acootjnt — "  Give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship."' 
Let  us  briefly  think  of  this  giving  an  account  of  our  stewardship.  1.  Let  us  first 
notice  that  when  we  shall  come  to  give  an  account  of  our  stewardship  before  God, 
that  account  must  be  given  in  personally  by  every  one  of  us.  While  we  are  here, 
we  talk  in  the  mass ;  but  when  we  come  before  God,  we  shaU  have  to  speak  as 
individuals.  2.  And  note  again,  that  while  this  account  must  be  personal  it  must 
be  exact.  Ton  will  not,  when  you  present  your  acconnt  before  God,  present  the 
gross  total,  bat  every  separate  item.      3.  Now  remember,  once  again,  that  the 


mrnn.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  207 

account  must  be  compiete.  Ton  will  not  be  allowed  to  leave  ont  something,  you 
•will  not  be  allowed  to  add  anything.  III.  And  now,  though  there  are  many  other 
things  I  might  say,  I  fear  lest  I  might  weary  you,  therefore  let  me  notice  some 
occasions  when  it  will  be  well  for  you  all  to  give  an  account  of  your  stewardship  ; 
and  then  notice  when  you  must  give  an  account  of  it.  Ton  know  there  is  a  proverb 
that  *'  short  reckonings  make  long  friends,"  and  a  very  true  proverb  it  is.  A  man 
will  always  be  at  friendship  with  his  conscience  as  long  as  he  makes  short 
rec£:onings  with  it.  It  was  a  good  rule  of  the  old  Puritans,  that  of  making  frank 
and  full  confession  of  sin  every  night ;  not  to  leave  a  week's  sin  to  be  confessed  on 
Saturday  night,  or  Sabbath  morning,  but  to  recall  the  failures,  imperfections,  and 
mistakes  of  the  day,  in  order  that  we  might  learn  from  one  day  of  failure  how  to 
achieve  the  victory  on  the  morrow.  Then,  there  are  times  which  Providence  puts 
in  your  way,  which  will  be  excellent  seasons  for  reckoning.  For  instance,  every 
lime  a  boy  or  girl  leaves  the  school,  there  is  an  opportunity  afforded  you  of  thinking. 
Then  there  is  a  peculiar  time  for  casting  up  accounts  when  a  chUd  dies.  But  it 
you  do  not  do  it  then,  I  will  tell  you  when  you  must ;  that  is  when  you  come  to  die» 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  A  certain  rich  man  had  a  steward : — We  learn  here  incidentally, 
bow  evenly  balanced  are  the  various  conditions  of  life  in  a  community,  and  how 
ittle  of  substantial  advantage  wealth  can  confer  on  its  possessor.  As  your 
property  increases,  your  personal  control  over  it  diminishes  ;  the  more  you  possess^ 
the  more  you  must  entrust  to  others.  Those  who  do  their  own  work  are  not 
troubled  with  disobedient  servants  ;  those  who  look  after  their  own  affairs  are  not 
troubled  with  unfaithful  overseers.  {W.  Amot.)  Give  an  account  of  ttiy 
etewardsMp. — An  account  demanded: — 1.  An  account  of  the  blessings  received^ 
children  of  prosperity.  2.  An  account  of  the  fruit  of  trial,  members  of  the  school 
of  suffering  1  3.  An  account  of  the  time  measured  oat  to  you,  sons  of  mortality ! 
4.  An  account  of  the  message  of  salvation  received,  ye  that  are  shined  upon  by  that 
light  which  is  most  cheering!  {Van  Oosterzee.)  How  much  owest  thou  unto 
my  Lord  7 — The  obligations  of  Great  Britain  to  the  gospel : — I.  Our  first  appeal  must 
be  made  to  rest  upon  the  broad  basis  of  oub  PRtviLEOES  as  a  nation.  How  much,  I 
ask,  do  we  of  this  land  owe  to  the  God  of  all  mercies,  as  inheritors  of  the  noble 
patrimony  of  a  constitutional  government ;  as  dwelling  under  the  shadow  of  equal 
law ;  as  enriched  with  a  commerce  which  allies  us  with  the  most  distant  extremities 
of  the  earth ;  as  honoured,  in  the  great  brotherhood  of  nations,  for  our  literature, 
for  our  science,  for  our  vanguard  position  in  all  the  eimobling  arts  of  life ;  as  rich 
in  agencies  for  promoting  the  physical  and  moral  happiness  of  all  classes  of  our 
people,  providing  for  the  young,  the  old,  the  fallen,  the  outcast — for  the  poor  a 
shelter,  and  for  the  sick  a  home ;  as  enjoying  a  liberty  of  thought  and  conscience, 
free  as  the  winds  which  sweep  round  our  shores,  and  yet  as  having  a  governing 
power  over  the  opinions  of  other  nations,  which  controls  more  than  half  the  world? 
For  how  much  of  such  blessings  we  are  indebted  to  our  Christianity,  we  may  admit, 
it  is  not  easy  to  determine.  Here,  then,  I  rest  my  first  appeal  to  your  gratitude  as 
possessors  of  a  national  Christianity.  Beligion,  says  Burke,  is  the  basis  of  civil 
society,  and  education  in  its  truths  is  the  chief  defence  of  nations.  It  hallows  the 
sanctions  of  law.  It  puts  the  seal  of  heaven  on  social  order.  It  ministers  to 
learning  and  the  liberal  arts.  It  strengthens  the  foundations  of  civil  liberty.  It 
refine:!  tb«  habits  of  domestic  life.  It  makes  each  home  that  embraces  it  a  centre 
of  blessing  to  the  neighbourhood,  and  every  country  that  adorns  and  honours  it  a 
centre  of  light  unto  the  world.  And  this  is  the  religion  which  by  the  gospel  is 
preached  unto  you.  "  How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  t "  II.  But  let  me 
urge  a  claim  upon  your  gratitude,  in  the  next  place,  abisino  out  or  that  pube  and 

BEPOBMED  FAITH,  WHICH  IN  THIS  COUNTRY  IT  IS  OUB  PEIVILEOE  TO  BNJOT.      "  HoW  muoh 

owest  thou  unto  thy  lord,"  for  the  glorious  light  and  liberty  of  the  Protestant  faith, 
for  the  recovered  independence  of  our  ancient  British  Church,  for  the  Protestantism 
of  Bidley,  and  Latimer,  Jewel,  and  other  faithful  men,  who  witnessed  for  the  truth 
of  Gcd  by  their  teaching,  and  some  of  them  with  their  blood  ?  1.  How  much  do 
we  owe  for  a  permanent  standard  of  religious  faith — for  a  "  form  of  sound  words  " 
which  yet  bows  impUcitly  to  the  decision  of  the  sacred  oracles  to  approve  its 
soundness?  2.  Again,  how  much  do  we  owe  for  the  clearer  views — brought  out 
anew  as  it  were  from  the  concealment  and  dust  of  ages — of  the  method  of  a  sinner'a 
acceptance  and  justification,  through  faith  in  the  merits  of  Christ  to  deliver,  and  by 
the  influences  of  His  Spirit  to  restore.  3.  Again,  we  owe  much  to  the  men  of  those 
times  for  their  vindication  of  the  great  principles  of  political  and  religious  freedom, 
and  the  services  thereby  rendered  to  the  oaase  of  moral  progress  in  the  world. 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  xyi, 

ni.  I  must  not  ooDclnde,  brethren,  without  urging  upon  you  one  form  of  gratitude, 
which,  to  those  who  have  experience  of  it,  will  be  far  more  constraining  than  any  I 
have  yet  brought  before  you,  I  mean  the  debt  which  you  owe  to  the  God  of  auCi 

ORA.CK  AS  BEING  Y0DE8ELVE8  PABTAKEBS  OF  THE  SPIBIT  AND  HOPES  OF  THE  GOSPEL.     And 

I  ask  how  much  owest  thou  for  a  part  in  Christ,  for  a  sense  of  forgiveness,  for  tha 
weight  lifted  off  the  burdened  conscience.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  universality  oj 
debt  to  God  : — I.  I  turn  at  first  to  the  established  chbistun  and  ask,  How  much 
owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  ?  II.  Is  any  here  a  lover  of  pleasubb  mobe  than  a 
lovebofGod?  How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord  ?  *' He  was  a  man  of  sorrowa 
and  acquainted  with  grief."  0  will  ye  defraud  Jesus  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  by 
making  an  idol  of  the  world  and  bowing  down  before  it  as  before  your  God  ?  III. 
Are  any  among  you  offending  God,  by  disregard  op  His  laws,  or  unbelief  of  His 
obeat  salvation.  IV.  There  are  persons  who  have  declined  in  religion.  "  Ye 
did  run  well,  who  hath  hindered  you  ?  "  O  take  with  you  words  of  penitence  and 
sorrow,  and  lurn  to  the  Lord  your  God.  Y.  Once  more.  Let  me  address  thb 
AVFLicTED  SERVANT  OF  Christ,  and  say.  How  much  owest  thou  uuto  my  Lord  ? 
(E.  P.  Buddicom.)  Man's  debt  to  his  Maker: — I.  I  might  remind  you,  in  the 
first  place,  of  our  obligations  to  God,  as  creatures  of  His  hand.  He  not  only  made 
OS,  but  He  preserves  us  ;  "in  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  Are 
(here  no  obligations  that  we  have  incurred,  in  consequence  of  our  constant  reception 
of  these  varied  mercies  at  the  hands  of  God  ?  11.  But  I  proceed  to  take  another 
view  of  our  subject,  and  to  remind  you  how  we  are  indebted  to  God  as  sinnebs 
AGAINST  His  bighteous  LAW.  You  will  remember  that  the  blessed  Saviour  teaches 
us  to  look  upon  sins  in  the  light  of  debts.  Surely  there  is  none  present  who  would 
have  the  hardihood  to  say  that  he  owes  nothing  (Jer.  ii.  22,  23).  III.  Let  ma 
remind  you  next,  of  duties  that  have  been  neglected.  Alas !  how  long  a  list 
might  here  be  made,  in  the  catalogue  of  unworthiness,  ingratitude,  and  guilt  I  To 
say  nothing  of  our  unprofitableness,  under  the  public  ordinances  and  means  of 
^ace,  what  says  conscience  as  to  our  daily  communion  with  God  in  privacy  and 
retirement  ?  IV.  I  must  remind  you,  further,  of  opportunities  that  have  been 
iDNiuPROVED.  We  have,  first,  the  opportunities  of  gaining  good,  and  then  the 
opportunities  of  doing  good.  V.  But  there  is  yet  another  view  of  our  subject.  How 
much  do  we  owe  unto  Him,  as  those  who  have  hopes  of  pardon  through  His  mercy 
in  Christ  Jesus?  (W.  Cadman,  M.A.)  Owing  to  God : — A  merchant,  who  was  a 
God-fearing  man,  was  very  successful  in  business,  but  his  soul  did  not  seem  to 
prosper  accordingly ;  his  offerings  to  the  Lord  he  did  not  feel  disposed  to  increase. 
One  evening  he  had  a  remarkable  dream ;  a  visitor  entered  the  apartment,  and 
quietly  looking  round  at  the  many  elegancies  and  luxuries  by  which  he  wa3 
surrounded,  without  any  comment,  presented  him  with  the  receipts  for  his  subscrip- 
tions to  various  societies,  and  urged  their  claims  upon  his  enlarged  sympathy.  The 
merchant  repUed  with  various  excuses,  and  at  last  grew  impatient  at  the  continued 
Appeals.  The  stranger  rose,  and  fixing  his  eye  on  his  companion,  said,  in  a  voice 
that  thrilled  to  his  soul,  "  One  year  ago  to-night,  you  thought  that  your  daughter 
lay  dying ;  you  could  not  rest  for  agony.  Upon  whom  did  you  call  that  night?  " 
The  merchant  started  and  looked  up ;  there  seemed  a  change  to  have  passed  over 
the  whole  form  of  his  visitor,  whose  eye  was  fixed  upon  him  with  a  calm,  penetrating 
look,  as  he  continued — "  Five  years  ago,  when  you  lay  at  the  brink  of  the  grave, 
And  thought  that  if  you  died  then,  you  would  leave  a  family  unprovided  for — do 
Toa  remember  how  you  prayed  then  ?  Who  saved  you  then  ?  "  Pausing  a  moment, 
he  went  on  in  a  lower  and  still  more  impressive  tone — "  Do  yoa  remember,  fifteen 
years  since,  that  time  when  yoa  felt  yourself  so  lost,  so  helpless,  so  hopeless ;  when 
you  spent  day  and  night  in  prayer ;  when  you  thought  you  would  give  the  world  for 
one  hour's  assurance  that  your  sins  were  forgiven — who  listened  to  you  then  ?  " 
"  It  was  my  God  and  Saviour  I "  said  the  merchant,  with  a  sudden  burst  of  remorse- 
ful feeling ;  "  oh  yes,  it  was  He  1 "  "  And  has  He  ever  complained  of  being  called 
on  too  often  ?  "  inquired  the  stranger,  in  a  voice  of  reproachful  sweetness.  "  Say — 
are  yoa  willing  to  begin  this  night,  and  ask  no  more  of  Him,  if  He,  from  thia 
time,  win  ask  no  more  of  you?"  "Oh,  never  I  never  1"  said  the  merohsuit, 
throwing  himself  at  his  feet.  The  figure  vanished,  and  he  awoke ;  his  whole 
soul  stirred  within  him.  "  0  God  and  Saviour  1  what  have  I  been  doing  1  Take 
all— take  everything  1     What  is  all  that  I  have,  to  what  Thou  hast  done  for  me  ?  " 

Y«r.  8.    ABd  tha  Lord  eommended  tlie  u^oBt  steward.— TA«  ur^ust  ttttoar4 
ttaehing  a  le$»om<tffrudeuMS-^l.  How  iiiitduiu.t  kumd  up  wuh  xaoh  OTHsa  tarn 


CHAP.  XVI. ]  ST.  LUKE.  209 

TiBTtJBS  AND  VICES,  GOOD  AND  EVIL,  IN  THIS  HUMAN  woBLD.  In  fact,  HO  bad  man  is 
without  some  redeeming  quality ;  and  no  good  man  (who  is  merely  man)  is  without 
eome  taint  or  defect  that  mars  the  harmony  and  soils  the  whiteness  of  character. 
In  the  best  men  there  is  something  to  regret  ;  in  the  worst  there  is  something  to 
admire  and  to  imitate.  What,  e.g.,  can  possibly  be  worse  than  the  general  conduct 
of  this  steward  ?  Here  he  is  treated  with  generous  confidence  by  his  employer,  and 
he  is  guilty  first  of  a  carelessness  in  dealing  with  his  master's  property,  which 
amounts  to  a  breach  of  trust,  and  next  of  a  deliberate  effort  to  gain  credit  for  per- 
sonal generosity,  and  to  make  provision  for  his  own  future  by  falsifying  the  bonds 
in  his  keeping,  which  represent  debts  due  to  his  employer.  The  man's  moral 
nature,  we  say,  must  have  utterly  broken  down,  before  such  conduct  could  have, 
been  possible  ;  and  yet  our  Lord  discerns  an  excellence  glittering  amidst  this  moral- 
darkness.  He  puts  forth  His  hand,  and  He  isolates  from  the  corruption  which  sur- 
rounds it  in  the  steward's  character,  and  He  lifts  up  on  highjthat  it  may  be  admired^ 
and  copied  in  Christendom  to  the  very  end  of  time  one  single  virtue — the  virtue  o£ 
prudence.  II.  The  high  religious  taluk  of  prudence  ;  its  need  and  function  in. 
relation  to  the  life  and  future  of  the  soul.  Prudence  is  in  man  what  providence  is 
in  Almighty  God.  Its  great  characteristic  is,  that  it  keeps  its  eye  upon  what  is 
coming ;  it  looks  forward  to  the  future  that  really  awaits  us.  What  is  that  future  ? 
Nothing,  most  assuredly,  nothing  that  lies  within  the  compass  of  the  few  years,  if 
indeed,  there  are  to  be  a  few  years,  that  will  precede  our  disappearance  from  this 
visible  scene,  but  the  existence  beyond,  of  whatever  character  it  be,  to  which,  so 
far  as  we  know,  there  is  neither  term  nor  limit.  We  know  what  to  think  of  the 
men  who  trifle  with  baubles  when  great  earthly  interests  are  trembling  in  the 
balance,  in  those  solemn  moments  which  come  and  pass,  and  come  not  again,  the 
moments  on  which  all  depends.  Who  can  forget  Carlyle'a  description  of  the  un- 
happy Louis  XVI.,  when,  in  his  endeavour  to  escape  from  the  triumphant  revolu- 
tion, he  was  brought  to  a  standstill  by  the  suspicious  officiousness  of  some  of  the 
petty  local  authorities  of  Varennes  ?  A  httle  nerve  would  have  enabled  the  king 
to  escape  the  barrier  that  his  enemies  had  thrown  across  the  public  road,  by  making 
a  slight  circuit  in  his  carriage  through  the  adjoining  fields,  and  in  twenty  minutes 
or  half  an  hour  he  would  have  been  safe  among  his  friends  ;  and  the  course  of  his 
own  life  and  all  European  history  might  have  been  very  different,  to  say  the  least, 
from  the  event.  But  he  hesitated,  and  hesitation  was  ruin.  He  hesitated,  and  as 
they  showed  him  into  the  parlour  of  the  village  inn  he  discussed,  with  the  good- 
humoured  courtesy  that  belonged  to  him,  the  precise  quality  of  the  burgundy  that 
was  placed  upon  the  table.  But  meanwhile  events  outside  were  shaping  themselves 
irrevocably  into  the  fatal  grooves  of  that  long  procession  of  humihation  and  suffer- 
'.tag  which  ended  with  the  guillotine.  This  life,  for  many  of  us,  is  the  halt  at 
Varennes.  It  is  incumbent  on  us  first  of  all  to  feel  how  immense  are  the  issues  that 
depend  on  the  use  we  make  of  its  fleeting  moments.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that 
its  opportunities  are  as  brief  as  the  consequences  that  depend  on  them  are  incal- 
culable. This  power  of  anticipating  the  reality,  the  reality  as  distinct  from  the 
appearance,  is  the  first  ingredient  of  religious  prudence.  We,  too,  have  the  sentence 
of  dismissal  hanging  over  us ;  but  do  we  understand  what  it  means,  as  did  the 
unjust  steward  in  the  parable  7  For  the  second  business  of  prudence  is  to  take 
measures  to  prepare  for  that  which  is  coming  on  ns,  and  to  lose  no  time  in  doing 
BO.  We  must  not  let  things  drift,  and  trust  for  a  good  issue  to  some  imaginary 
chapta  of  accident ;  we  must  make  friends,  as  did  the  steward,  who  will  receive  as 
in  this  new  future  into  their  houses.  And  who  are  those  friends  ?  Clearly  the 
triends  suggested  by  the  parable  are  the  poor.  The  story  of  Fernandez  de  Cordova^ 
who  wrapped  up  in  his  robe  the  leper  who  was  lying  deserted  by  all  men  on  the 
roadside,  and  who  set  him  down  on  his  bed  to  find  indeed  that  he  had  passed  away» 
but  also  to  trace  on  his  brow,  on  his  hands,  on  his  feet,  the  marks  of  His  sacred 
passion,  embodies  why  the  poor  can  be  said  to  be  received  into  everlasting  habita- 
tions. They  are  not  alone,  they  are  identified  with  One  who  has  shared  their 
sufferings  without  sharing  their  weakness ;  and  who  knows  well  how  to  reward  that 
which  is  done  to  Himself  in  them.  Yes,  most  assuredly,  one  Friend  there  is  whose 
power  to  help  us  is  without  limit.  He  can  help  us  through  our  passage  to  our  new 
home,  for  He  died  that  by  His  death  He  might  destroy  him  that  hath  the  power  of 
death,  and  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to 
bondage.  And  He  can  provide  for  us  when  we  get  there,  since  among  His  parting 
words  were  these :  "  In  My  Father's  house,"  <&o.  Are  our  relations  with  Him  suoh 
fts  to  warrant  oar  claiming  His  help  in  the  hour  of  need  ?  (Canon  Liddon.)  Le$$on» 
TOL.  m.  14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xn; 

from  the  children  of  this  world: — 1.  From  their  sagacity  learn  to  forecast  ho^» 
to  please  God;  to  forearm  ourselves  against  all  assaults  and  wiles  of  Satan ;  to  fore" 
think,  and  to  be  in  some  measure  provided  beforehand  of  needful  and  propef 
expedients  for  any  exigent  or  cross  accident  that  may  probably  befall  us.  2.  From 
their  industty  learn  not  to  be  slothful  in  doing  service,  not  to  slack  the  time  of  our 
repentance  and  turning  to  God ;  to  run  with  constancy  and  courage  the  race  that  i3 
set  before  us  ;  to  think  no  pains,  no  travel,  too  much,  that  may  bring  us  to  heaven  ; 
to  work  out  our  salvation  to  the  uttermost  with  fear  and  trembling.  3.  From  their 
hypocrisy  and  outward  seeming  holiness  learn  to  have  our  conversations  honest 
towards  them  that  are  without,  not  giving  the  least  scandal  in  anything  that  may 
bring  reproach  upon  the  gospel ;  to  shun  the  very  appearances  of  evil ;  and  having 
first  cleansed  the  inside  well,  to  keep  the  outside  handsome  too,  that  by  our  piety, 
devotion,  meekness,  patience,  obedience,  justice,  charity,  humility,  and  all  holy 
graces,  we  may  not  only  stop  up  the  mouth  of  the  adversary  from  speaking  evil  of  us, 
but  may  also  win  glory  to  God,  and  honour  and  reputation  to  our  Christian  profes- 
sion thereby.  4.  From  their  unity  learn  to  follow  the  truth  in  love,  to  lay  aside 
vain  janglings,  and  opposition  of  science  falsely  so  called  ;  to  make  up  the  breaches 
that  are  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  by  moderating  and  reconciling  differences,  rather 
than  to  widen  them  by  multiplying  controversies,  and  maintaining  hot  disputes ; 
to  follow  the  things  that  make  for  peace,  and  whereby  we  may  edify  one  another. 
This  doing,  we  may  gather  grapes  of  thorns  ;  make  oil  of  scorpions ;  extract  all  the 
medicinal  virthe  out  of  the  serpent,  and  yet  leave  all  the  poisonous  and  malignant 
quality  behind.  (Bishop  Sanderson.)  Ninth  Sunday  after  Trinity  : — ^It  was  a 
piece  of  sheer  rascality  from  beginning  to  end.  There  was  no  honesty  in  the  man. 
He  was  out  and  out  a  child  of  this  world — an  example  of  the  bad  faith  and  base 
principles  which  govern  in  those  who  have  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes. 
Thongh  he  did  most  unjustly,  he  yet  did  '•  wisely."  There  was  a  cunning,  skill,  cal- 
culation, farsightedness,  and  perfection  of  adjustment  of  means  to  his  ends,  worthy  of 
all  praise,  if  only  it  had  been  used  in  a  better  cause.  And  it  is  just  here  that  we  &ni 
the  chief  point  in  this  parable.  Separating  the  morality  of  the  deed  from  the  wit 
that  directed  it,  the  Saviour  fixes  upon  the  skill  and  prudence  of  this  unjust  man 
as  an  illustration  of  the  foresight  and  calculation  which  should  mark  our  conduct 
with  reference  to  the  necessities  that  are  upon  us  in  relation  to  eternity.  There  are 
three  things  specially  noticeable  in  the  case  of  this  shrewd  villain,  in  which  his 
example  furnishes  copy  for  our  imitation.  1.  He  considerately  directed  his  thoughts 
towards  the  future.  His  worldliness  and  wickedness  we  are  of  course  to  eschew. 
But  as  he  looked  forward  to  his  needs  when  his  stewardship  was  ended,  so  are  we 
to  have  respect  to  the  solemn  realities  of  the  judgment  and  another  life.  2.  The 
unjust  steward  was  also  very  diligent  in  improving  his  time,  and  making  th«  most 
of  his  opportunities.  If  ever  there  was  energy  in  him,  it  was  now  called  into  the 
fullest  activity.  Here  was  wisdom.  Had  he  waited,  postponed,  delayed,  the  oppor- 
tunity  would  have  passed.  0  that  miserable  delusion,  Time  enough  yet  I  How 
many  has  it  utterly  and  irremediably  ruined !  3.  The  unjust  steward  made  very 
efficient  use  of  very  transient  possessions.  The  control  of  his  master's  estates  was 
in  process  of  passing  for  ever  from  his  hands.  But  he  was  wise  enough  to  make 
them  yet  tell  for  his  advantage  in  the  beyond.  And  in  allusion  to  this  the  Saviour 
says,  "  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness  " ;  that  is,  of 
the  deceitful  and  fleeting  riches  of  this  world ;  "  that  when  ye  fail  they  may  receive 
you" — or,  ye  may  be  received — "into  everlasting  habitations."  There  is  nothing 
flo  fleeting  and  uncertain  as  riches.  But  fleeting,  deceptive,  and  uncertain  as  they 
are,  so  long  as  they  are  in  our  hands,  they  may  be  turned  to  good  account,  and 
made  to  tell  advantageously  upon  our  eternal  peace.  We  cannot  buy  admission 
into  heaven  with  money.  But  we  can  add  to  our  blessedness  with  money,  and 
attain  to  higher  rewards  in  heaven  by  a  right  disposition  of  the  possessions  of  this 
life.  "He that  giveth  to  the  poor,  lendeth  to  the  Lord";  and  the  same  shall  be 
returned  again  with  interest.  "  The  liberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat."  Closehanded 
miserliness,  and  reckless  waste  and  speculation,  are  as  sinful  and  incompatible  with 
piety,  as  profaneness  and  unbelief.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Worldlings  an  example 
to  Christians : — I.  Thet  becoqnize  mobbclbablt  the  necessity  of  personal  efpobt 
-TO  BNSUBi  SUCCESS.  It  was  so  with  this  unjust  steward.  Must  do  something.  It 
is  so  with  the  politician,  lawyer,  business  man.  Instead  of  merely  hoping,  wishing, 
they  put  their  shoulder  to  the  wheel.     II.    Thbt  becoomize  mobb  oleablt  thb 

NEED  OF    THOUOHT,  BBFLEOTION,   ON   THE    METHODS    TO   BE    ADOPTED.       III.    ThBT   ABB 
MOBB   WILLDIO   TO   KAKB   PXBSONAI.  BACBIFI0E8.       lY.    ThXT   UOBB   FBEQUENTLX  MAXI 


<nup.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  2U 

SBU-EXAMiNATioN.  Take  stock.  See  whether  they  are  advancing  or  going  back- 
ward. (J.Ogle.)  The  wisdom  of  making  provision  for  the  future : — I.  It  is  pakx 
OF  OBEAT  WISDOM  TO  PROVIDE  FOB  THE  FUTDEE.  1.  This  appears  by  the  care  and 
practice  of  all  wise,  rational  men.  2.  It  appears  by  the  care  and  labour  of  irrational 
or  mere  animal  creatures.  3.  It  appears  to  be  a  point  of  great  wisdom,  because 
God  Himself  bewails  the  folly  of  His  people  of  old  upon  this  respect  (Deut.  xxxii. 
29).  4.  It  must  needs  be  great  wisdom  to  provide  for  the  future  well-being  of  our 
souls,  because  all  that  were  ever  esteemed  to  be  wise  before  or  above  all  other  things 
preferred  this  matter  (Heb.  xi.  25,  26  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  18).  5.  Because  there  is  no  avoid- 
ing our  entering  into  an  endless  state  of  joy  or  sorrow.  6.  Because  the  soul  far 
exceeds  in  worth  the  body  and  all  things  in  this  world,  7.  Because  God  from 
eternity  studied  and  provided  for  the  future  good  of  our  souls  and  bodies  for  ever. 
8.  Consider  how  soon  I  or  any  may  fail,  how  soon  the  youngest  may  like  a  flower 
lade  away  ;  it  may  be  this  year,  this  month,  this  week,  nay,  this  night.  9.  If  you 
are  not  provided  for  your  future  state,  consider  how  dismal  at  death  your  state  will 
be.  Is  it  not  the  highest  wisdom  to  prevent  or  seek  to  escape  the  greatest  evil,  and 
be  possessed  of  the  greatest  good  ?  10.  Consider  that  God  has  found  out  a  way  to 
make  us  happy  for  ever ;  and  observe  what  promises  He  has  made  to  such  as  before 
all  things  seek  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and  His  righteousness.  11.  How  have  many 
thousands  bewailed  their  great  folly  in  not  providing  for  the  time  to  come! 
II.  What  futobb  time  is  it  such  wisdom  to  peovidb  fob  ?  1.  Against  that  time 
when  the  means  of  grace  may  fail,  or  all  provision  for  the  future  may  utterly  be  cut 
ofif,  or  our  understanding  fail.  2.  The  hour  of  death.  3.  The  day  of  judgment. 
ill.  Show  wherein  a  wise  and  pbodent  care  to  provide  for  the  future  consists. 
1.  We  ought  to  think  of  our  future  state,  into  which  we  shall  and  must  pass,  when 
the  soul  shall  be  separated  from  the  body.  (1)  Think  of  the  certainty  of  a  future 
state  of  joy  or  sorrow.  (2)  The  nearness  of  it.  2.  Consider  the  necessity  of  your 
knowing  Christ,  or  of  being  united  to  Him  by  faith  ;  for  unless  you  truly  believe  in 
Jesus  thrist,  you  cannot  be  prepared  for  the  time  to  oome.  3.  This  wisdom  oon- 
eists  in  a  careful  use  of  the  means  God  aflords,  and  has  ordained,  in  order  to  faith, 
or  a  sinner's  believing  in  Christ  Jesus.  (1)  Prayer.  (2)  The  hearing  of  the  Word 
{Isa.  xlii.  23).  Conclusion :  1.  This  reproves  such  as  pursue  the  world  as  if  they 
came  into  it  for  no  other  end  but  to  eat  and  drink  and  heap  a  little  white  and  yellow 
earth.  2.  It  reproves  such  as  prefer  the  world  above  the  Word,  and  the  body 
above  the  soul.  3.  It  reproves  such  as  put  the  evil  day  afar  off,  as  if  we 
spoke  of  things  that  will  be  long  before  they  come.  4.  It  commends  those 
who  are  heavenly,  it  shows  the  saints  only  are  truly  wise.  {B.  Keach.) 
Lessons  that  the  Church  may  learn  from  the  world : — Note  some  respects  in  which 
the  world  shames  the  Church.  1.  There  is  the  clearness  of  vision  with  which  the 
worldly  man  perceives  the  object  of  his  pursuit.  2.  There  is  the  unremittmg 
effort  with  which,  in  relation  to  the  attainment  of  this  world's  good,  men  pursue 
their  object.  Eeligion  is  not  so  real  to  most  of  us  as  markets  and  money  are  to 
merchants.  3.  Think  how  careful  men  of  the  world  are  to  use  all  their  resources 
for  the  attainment  of  their  end.  No  drones.  No  square  men  in  round  holes.  4. 
Think  how  determinedly  the  children  of  this  world  refuse  to  be  deterred  from  pro- 
secuting their  schemes  by  the  temporary  failure  of  their  efforts.  5.  Is  it  not  true 
that  even  the  children  of  light  themselves  prosecute  their  worldly  affairs  in  far 
more  vigorous  fashion  than  their  religious  duties  ?  Does  not  care  sometimes  well- 
nigh  crowd  prayer  out  of  our  lives  ?  Are  we  not  all  too  prone  to  count  our  own 
private  business  that  which  must  be  done,  and  God's  work  that  which  may  be  done  ? 
{J.  R.  Bailey.)  An  example  of  wisdom  from  the  unjust  steward  : — I.  The  wisdom 
OF  this  wobiiD.  There  are  three  classes  of  men.  Those  who  believe  that  one  thing 
is  needful,  and  choose  the  better  part,  who  believe  in  and  live  for  eternity ;  these 
are  not  mentioned  here  :  those  who  believe  in  the  world,  and  hve  for  it :  and  those 
who  believe  in  eternity,  and  half  live  for  the  world.  Forethought  for  self  made  the 
steward  ask  himself,  "  What  shall  I  do  ? "  Here  is  the  thoughtful,  contriving, 
sagacious  man  of  the  world.  In  the  affairs  of  this  world,  the  man  who  does  not 
provide  for  self,  if  he  enter  into  competition  with  the  world  on  the  world's  principles, 
soon  finds  himself  thrust  aside  ;  he  will  be  put  out.  It  becomes  necessary  to  jostle 
and  struggle  in  the  great  crowd  if  he  would  thrive.  With  him  it  is  not,  first  the 
kingdom  of  God ;  but  first,  what  he  shall  eat,  and  what  he  shall  drink,  and  where- 
withal shall  he  be  clothed.  Note  the  kind  of  superiority  in  this  character  that  is 
commended.  There  are  certain  qualities  which  really  do  elevate  a  man  in  the  scale 
«f  being.    He  who  pursues  a  plan  steadily  is  higher  than  he  who  hves  by  the  hour. 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

Ton  cannot  but  respect  such  an  one.  The  value  of  self-command  and  self-denial  ia 
exemplified  in  the  cases  of  the  diplomatist  who  masters  his  features  while  listening  ; 
the  man  of  pleasure  who  is  prudent  in  his  pleasures ;  the  man  of  the  world  who 
keeps  his  temper  and  guards  his  lips.  How  often,  after  speaking  hastily  the  thought 
which  was  uppermost,  and  feeling  the  cheek  bum,  you  have  looked  back  in  admir- 
ation on  some  one  who  held  his  tongue  even  though  under  great  provocation  to 
epeak.  n.  In  contrast  with  the  wisdom  of  the  children  of  this  world,  the  Redeemer 
Bhows  THE  INCONSISTENCIES  OT  THE  CHiLDBEN  OF  LIGHT.  Now  the  Want  of  Christian 
wisdom  consists  in  this,  that  our  stewardship  is  drawing  to  a  close,  and  no  provision 
i8  made  for  an  eternal  future.  We  are  all  stewards.  Every  day,  every  age  of  life, 
eyery  year,  gives  us  superintendence  over  something  which  we  have  to  use,  and  the 
use  of  which  tells  for  good  or  evil  on  eternity.  Childhood  and  manhood  pass.  The 
day  passes :  and,  as  its  close  draws  near,  the  Master's  voice  is  heard — "  Thoo 
mayest  be  no  longer  steward."  And  what  are  all  these  outward  sjrmbols  but  types 
and  reminders  of  the  darker,  longer  night  that  is  at  hand  ?  One  by  one,  we  are 
tamed  out  of  all  our  homes.  The  summons  comes.  The  man  lies  down  on  his 
bed  for  the  last  time  ;  and  then  comes  that  awful  moment,  the  putting  down  the 
extinguisher  on  the  light,  and  the  grand  rush  of  darkness  on  the  spirit.  Let  us 
now  consider  our  Saviour's  application  of  this  parable.  There  are  two  expressions 
to  be  explained.  1.  "  Mammon  of  unrighteousness."  Mammon  is  the  name  of  a 
Syrian  god,  who  presided  over  wealth.  Mammon  of  unrighteousness  means  the 
god  whom  the  unrighteous  worship — wealth.  It  is  not  necessarily  gold.  Any 
wealth ;  wealth  being  weal  or  well-being.  Time,  talents,  opportunity,  and  authority, 
all  are  wealth.  Here  the  steward  had  influence.  It  is  called  the  mammon  of  un- 
righteousness, because  it  is  ordinarily  used,  not  well,  but  ill.  Power  corrupts  men. 
Biches  harden  more  than  misfortune.  2.  "Make  to  yourselves  friends."  Wise 
arts,  holy  and  unselfish  deeds,  secure  friends.  Wherever  the  steward  went  he 
found  a  friend.  The  acts  of  his  beneficence  were  spread  over  the  whole  of  his 
master's  estate.  Go  where  he  would,  he  would  receive  a  welcome.  In  this  way 
our  good  actions  become  our  friends.  And  if  it  be  no  dream  which  holy  men  have 
entertained,  that  on  this  regenerated  earth  the  risen  spirits  shall  Uve  again  in 
glorified  bodies,  then  it  were  a  thing  of  sublime  anticipation,  to  know  that  every 
spot  hallowed  by  the  recollection  of  a  deed  done  for  Christ,  contains  a  recollection 
which  would  be  a  friend.  Just  as  the  patriarchs  erected  an  altar  when  they  felt 
God  to  be  near,  till  Palestine  became  dotted  with  these  memorials,  so  would  earth 
be  marked  by  a  good  man's  life  with  those  holiest  of  all  friends,  the  remembrance 
of  ten  thousand  little  nameless  acts  of  piety  and  love.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
The  mperiority  of  the  worldly  man's  wisdom  to  the  godly  man's  : — I.  Our'  first  object 

is  TO  KBTABUSH  THE   VACT,  THAT  "  THE  CHILDBEN  OF  THIS  WOBLD  ABE  WISEB  IN  THEIB 

OBNERATiON  THAN  THE  CHILDBEN  OF  LIGHT."  We  hold  Unreservedly,  in  both  these 
respects,  the  wisdom  of  "  the  children  of  this  world  "  is  a  vast  deal  more  conspicuous 
than  the  wisdom  of  "the  children  of  light."  You  need  only  cast  your  eye  over  the 
busy  group  of  the  world's  population,  and  you  will  observe  for  the  most  part  a 
fixedness  of  purpose  which  is  altogether  admirable.  If  a  man  have  turned  hit 
desires  on  the  amassing  of  money,  he  will  not  be  driven  aside,  even  for  a  solitary 
moment,  from  the  business  of  accumulation ;  it  will  be  plain  to  all  around  him, 
that  he  is  literally  given  up  to  the  influence  of  one  engrossing  and  domineering 
passion ;  and  if  pleasure  and  ambition  do  exert  over  him  authority,  they  are  but 
tributaries  to  the  prominent  desire,  and  in  no  sense  the  principal  in  the  empire  of 
his  heart.  The  case  is  exactly  the  same  with  the  man  of  ambition :  he  has  fastened 
his  wishes  on  some  lofty  point  in  the  scale  of  human  preferment,  and  it  is  not  the 
eyren  voice  of  voluptuousness,  and  it  is  not  the  stem  ruggedness  of  the  upward 
path,  by  which  he  can  be  induced  to  turn  away  his  eagle  glance  from  the  shadowy 
prize  which  floats  above  him.  But  if  we  turn  from  "  the  children  of  this  world  "  to 
*'  the  children  of  light,"  we  shall  not  find  the  fixedness  and  constancy  Of  purpose 
which  we  see  indicated  in  "the  children  of  the  world."  But  we  go  on  to  observe, 
in  the  second  place,  that  wisdom  is  to  be  discovered  in  the  choice  and  employment 
of  means  as  well  as  in  fixedness  and  constancy  of  purpose  ;  and  thus  we  think  in 
this  respect  the  comparison  will  go  against  "  the  children  of  light."  You  cannot 
fail  to  observe  among  the  men  of  the  world  a  singular  shrewdness  in  finding  oat 
the  methods  most  likely  to  effect  their  designs,  and  as  singular  a  diligence  in  trying 
and  adapting  them.  You  will  see  nothing  irrelevant,  nothing  which  in  all  prob- 
ability is  likely  to  frustrate  in  p]ace  of  forwarding,  no  risks  run  unless  the  ohanoes 
of  advantage  do  more  than  apparently  counterbalance  the  chances  of  damage.  You 


caup.  XVI.]  8T.  LUKE.  21f 

will  not  find  them  endangering  their  property  by  exposing  it  to  sharpers,  as  a 
Christian  does  his  piety  by  bringing  it  in  contact  with  unrighteousness.  You  will 
not  observe  them  so  dull  of  apprehension,  when  there  are  opportunities  of  personal 
aggrandizement  to  be  improved,  as  religious  men  appear  when  God  affords  them 
occasions  to  become  better  acquainted  with  Himself.  You  will  not  detect  in  them 
that  indiscreetness  in  making  associations  with  parties  who  are  not  likely  to  help 
them,  which  you  see  in  believers  running  heedlessly  into  fellowship  with  unbelievers. 
The  complaint  of  the  prophet  has  lost  nothing  of  its  force  in  coming  down  through 
a  succession  of  centuries  ;  "  Men  are  wise  to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good  they  have  no 
knowledge."  And  if  in  the  choice  of  means,  pre-eminence  of  wisdom  must  be 
denied  to  "  the  children  of  light,"  then  in  the  employment  of  means  we  fear  they 
Btill  less  can  be  held  supreme.  If  you  take  "  the  children  of  light  "  in  the  Church 
where  they  are  professedly  giving  their  whole  soul  to  the  service  of  God,  and  take 
"  the  children  of  this  world  "  on  the  exchange,  when  avowedly  occupied  with  their 
temporal  aggrandizement,  on  which  side  will  you  find  the  most  devoted  attention 
to  the  business  in  hand  ?  If  you  take  "  the  children  of  light,"  when  met  by  diffi- 
culties in  their  heavenward  career,  and  "  the  children  of  the  world  "  when  stopped 
in  the  path  of  human  preferment,  which  will  set  themselves  with  the  most  out  and 
out  energy  to  overleap  the  impediments?  If  you  take  *'  the  children  of  light"  when 
scoffers  are  around  them  jeering  their  piety,  and  "  the  children  of  the  world  "  when 
sarcasms  are  being  passed  on  covetousness  or  ambition,  which  will  be  most  moved  ? 
II.  "We  come  now  to  investigate  tbb  causes  to  which  the  superiority  under 
REVIEW  MAY  BE  LEOiTiMATELY  TRACED.  In  the  first  placc  it  would  Seem  well-nigh 
impossible  that  the  dehghts  of  the  next  world  should  exert  as  powerful  and  per- 
vading an  influence  as  tiie  delights  of  the  present  world,  which  address  themselves 
directly  to  our  senses.  "  The  children  of  the  world  "  have  nothing  to  do  but  to 
follow  the  dictates  of  their  senses  ;  while  we  do  almost  say,  that  "  the  children  of 
light  "  begin  by  doing  violence  to  their  senses.  And  thus,  while  worldly  men  may 
bring  mind  and  body,  and  life  together  to  the  pursuit  of  their  end,  godly  men  have 
the  body  as  well  as  the  mind  from  the  outset  to  the  termination  of  their  career  to 
combat  with ;  and  if  it  be  lawful  to  bring  forward  these  truths,  by  way  of  excuse 
they  may  clearly  be  adduced,  as  accounting  for  the  fact  that  the  imgodly  exhibit 
greater  constancy  of  purpose  than  the  godly ;  or  in  other  words,  that  "  the  children 
of  this  world  are  in  their  generation  wiser  than  the  children  of  light. "  Again,  the 
unrighteous  have  only  to  do  with  one  world ;  whereas  the  righteous  have  necessarily 
to  do  with  two  worlds.  If  I  make  the  amassing  of  wealth  my  end,  I  may  give  to  it 
an  undivided  and  an  andistracted  attention,  I  concern  not  myself  with  the  things 
of  eternity ;  and  what  then  shall  interfere  with  my  pressing  on  in  the  pursuit  of 
the  things  of  time?  It  is  widely  different  with  "the  children  of  light."  There 
must  be  earthly  matters  just  as  well  as  heavenly  matters  which  require  their  atten- 
tion ;  they  cannot  detach  themselves  from  commerce,  or  from  labour,  or  from  study, 
and  care  only  for  the  soul  as  if  there  were  no  body  to  provide  for,  just  as  the  worldly 
care  only  for  the  body  as  if  there  were  no  soul  to  provide  for ;  and  though  it  may  be 
perfectly  true,  according  to  some  of  oar  foregoing  remarks,  that  the  minor  interests 
may  be,  and  ought  to  be,  made  subservient  to  the  major ;  it  is  equally  true  that  the 
difficulty  is  almost  incalculable  of  so  using  the  present  world  as  not  to  abuse  it,  and 
following  the  occupations  of  earth  with  the  dispositions  of  heaven.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  children  of  this  world  wiser  than  the  children  of  light : — The  words  are  a  com- 
parison, in  which  we  have — 1.  The  persons  compared,  "  the  children  of  this 
world,"  and  '•  the  children  of  light."  It  is  a  very  usual  phrase  among  the  Hebrews, 
when  they  would  express  anything  to  partake  of  such  a  nature  or  quality,  to  call  it 
the  BOD  or  child  of  such  a  thing.  Thas  good  men  are  called  "  the  children  of  God," 
and  bad  men  "  the  children  of  the  devil " ;  those  who  mind  earthly  things,  and 
make  the  things  of  this  world  their  greatest  aim  and  design,  are  called  "  the  children 
of  this  world  " ;  and  those  who  are  better  enhghtened  with  the  knowledge  of  their 
own  immortality,  and  the  beUef  of  a  future  state  after  this  life,  are  called  "  the 
children  of  light."  2.  Here  is  the  thing  wherein  they  are  compared,  and  that  is, 
as  to  their  vrisdom  and  prudence.  3.  The  object  of  this  prudence,  which  is  not  the 
same  in  both ;  as  if  the  sense  were  that  "  the  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  than 
the  children  of  light "  as  to  the  things  of  this  world ;  but  here  are  two  several 
objects  intended,  about  which  the  prudenoe  of  these  two  sorts  of  persons  is  lespeo* 
lively  exercised,  the  concernments  of  this  world  and  the  other ;  and  our  Saviour'i 
meaning  is,  "  that  the  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  generation,"  that  is, 
in  their  way  ;  vii ,  as  to  the  interests  and  eonoernments  of  this  world,  "  than  thi 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvj. 

children  of  light  "  are  in  theirs ;  viz.,  as  to  the  interests  and  concernments  of  tha 
other  world.  4,  Here  is  a  decision  of  the  matter,  and  which  of  them  it  is  that 
excels  in  point  of  prudence,  in  their  way;  and  our  Saviour  gives  it  to  the  "  children 
of  this  world";  they  "are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light." 

1.  I  SHALL  BNDEAVOrB  TO  CONriBM  AND  ILLUSTKATE  THE  TRUTH  OF  THIS,  BY  CONSIDEBINO 

THE  8EVEBAL  PABT8  AND  PROPERTIES  OP  WISDOM.  1.  They  are  usually  more  firmlj 
fixed  and  resolved  upon  their  end.  Whatever  they  set  up  for  their  end,  riches,  or 
honours,  or  pleasures,  they  are  fixed  upon  it,  and  steady  in  the  prosecution  of  it. 

2.  "  The  children  of  this  world  "  are  wiser  in  the  choice  of  means  in  order  to  their 
end  ;  and  this  is  a  great  part  of  wisdom,  for  some  means  will  bring  about  an  end 
with  less  pains,  and  difficulty,  and  expense  of  time  than  others.  3.  "  The  children 
of  this  world  "  are  commonly  more  diligent  in  the  use  of  means  for  the  obtaining 
of  their  end;  they  will  sweat  and  toil,  and  take  any  pains,  "  rise  up  early,  and  lie 
down  late,  and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulness " ;  their  thoughts  are  continually 
running  upon  their  business,  and  they  catch  at  every  opportunity  of  promoting  it ; 
they  will  pinch  nature,  and  harass  it ;  and  rob  themselves  of  their  rest,  and  all  the 
comfort  of  their  lives,  to  raise  their  fortune  and  estate.  4.  The  men  of  the  world 
are  more  invincibly  constant  and  pertinacious  in  the  pursuit  of  earthly  things  ;  they 
are  not  to  be  bribed  or  taken  off  by  favour  or  fair  words  ;  not  to  be  daunted  by  diffi- 
culties, or  dashed  out  of  countenance  by  the  frowns  and  reproaches  of  men.  5. 
The  men  of  the  world  will  make  all  things  stoop  and  submit  to  that  which  is  their 
great  end  and  design ;  their  end  rules  them,  and  governs  them,  and  gives  laws  to  all 
their  actions ;  they  will  make  an  advantage  of  everything,  and  if  it  will  not 
serve  their  end  one  way  or  other,  they  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.     II.  Give 

SOME  PROBABLE  ACCOUNT  OP  THIS  BY  CONSIDERING  WHAT  ADVANTAGES  "  THE  CHILDREN 
OP   THIS    world"    HAVE    ABOVE    "THE    CHILDREN   OF  LIGHT."       1.    The    things    Of   thiS 

world  are  present  and  sensible,  and,  because  of  their  nearness  to  us,  are  apt  to 
strike  powerfully  upon  our  senses,  and  to  affect  us  mightily,  to  excite  our  desires 
after  them,  and  to  work  strongly  upon  our  hopes  and  fears:  but  the  things  of 
another  world  being  remote  from  us,  are  lessened  by  their  distance,  and  conse- 
quently are  not  apt  to  work  so  powerfully  upon  our  minds.  2.  The  sensual  delights 
and  enjoyments  of  this  world  arefbetter  suited,  and  more  agreeable  to  the  corrupt 
and  degenerate  nature  of  men,  than  spiritual  and  heavenly  things  are  to  those  that 
are  regenerate.  3.  The  worldly  man's  faith  and  hope,  and  fear  of  present  and  sensible 
things,  is  commonly  stronger  than  a  good  man's  faith  and  hope,  and  fear  of  things 
future  and  eternal.  Now  faith,  and  hope,  and  fear,  are  the  great  principles  which 
govern  and  bear  sway  in  the  actions  and  lives  of  men.  4.  The  men  of  the  world 
have  but  one  design,  and  are  wholly  intent  upon  it,  and  this  is  a  great  advantage. 
Application  to  one  thing,  especially  in  matters  of  practice,  gains  a  man  perfect 
experience  in  it,  and  experience  furnisheth  him  with  observations  about  it,  and 
these  make  him  wise  and  prudent  in  that  thing.  But  good  men,  though  they  hav« 
a  great  affection  for  heaven  and  heavenly  things,  yet  the  business  and  necessities 
of  this  life  do  very  much  divert  and  take  them  off  from  the  care  of  better  things;  they 
are  divided  between  the  concernments  of  this  life  and  the  other,  and  though  there  be 
but  one  thing  necessary  in  comparison,  yet  the  conveniences  of  this  Ufe  are  to  be 
regarded ;  and  though  our  souls  be  our  main  care,  yet  some  consideration  mast  be 
had  of  our  bodies,  tbat  they  may  be  fit  for  the  service  of  oar  souls ;  so  that  we 
cannot  always  and  wholly  apply  ourselves  to  heavenly  things,  and  mind  them  as 
the  men  of  the  world  do  the  things  of  this  world.  5.  The  men  of  the  world  have  a 
greater  compass  and  liberty  in  the  pursuit  of  their  worldly  designs,  than  good  men 
have  in  the  prosecution  of  their  inteiests.  The  "  children  of  light "  are  limited  and 
confined  to  the  use  of  lawful  means  for  the  compassing  of  their  ends  ;  but  the  men 
of  the  world  are  not  so  strait-laced ;  they  are  resolved  upon  the  point,  and  will 
stick  at  no  means  to  compass  their  end.  Concluding  remarks :  1.  Notwithstanding 
the  commendation  which  hath  been  given  of  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  yet  upon  the 
whole  matter  it  is  not  much  to  be  valued  and  admired.  It  is,  indeed,  great  in  its 
way  and  kind;  bat  it  is  applied  to  little  and  low  purposes,  employed  about  the  con- 
cernments of  a  short  time  and  a  few  days,  about  the  worst  and  meanest  part  of 
onrselves,  and  accompanied  with  the  neglect  of  greater  and  better  things.  This  is 
.wisdom,  to  regard  our  main  interest ;  but  if  we  be  wrong  in  our  end  (as  all  worldly 
men  are),  the  faster  and  farther  we  go,  the  more  fatal  is  our  error  and  mistake. 
"  The  children  of  this  world  "  are  out  in  their  end,  and  mistaken  in  the  main ;  they 
are  wise  for  this  world,  which  is  inconsiderable  to  eternity ;  wise  for  a  little  while, 
•nd  fools  for  evar.    3.  From  what  hath  been  said,  we  may  infer,  that  if  we  los«  our 


«HAP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  215 

fiouls,  and  come  short  of  eternal  happiness,  it  is  throngh  oar  own  fault  and  grosi 
neglect ;  for  we  see  that  men  are  wise  enough  for  this  world;  and  the  same  prudence, 
and  care,  and  diligence,  applied  to  the  concernments  of  our  souls,  would  infallibly 
make  us  happy.  3.  What  a  shame  and  reproach  is  this  to  the  children  of  light  I 
{Archbishop  Tillotson.)  Sagacity  commended: — It  is  merely  the  wisdom,  the 
practical  sagacity,  the  tavoirfaire  of  the  steward  that  is  commended  to  our  attention 
and  imitation.  A  bad  thing  may  be  well  done.  The  most  admirable  qualities — in- 
dustry, perseverance,  bravery,  quickness — may  serve  to  accompUsh  a  wicked  as  well  aa 
a  righteous  purpose.  Few  can  withhold  a  tribute  of  applause  from  the  forger  who 
successfully  copies  a  very  difficult  bank-note,  or  elaborates  a  professedly  mediaaval 
document  so  as  to  deceive  even  the  experts.  No  one  commends  the  morality  of  David 
when  he  played  the  madman  at  Gath,  and  scrabbled  on  the  gate ;  but  who  has  not 
smiled  at  his  skill  in  meeting  the  occasion,  in  overreaching  all  his  enemies,  and 
making  them  serve  him  by  the  simple  device  of  hiding  the  brightest  intellect  of  the 
age  under  the  vacant,  silly  stare  of  the  idiot  ?  The  wisdom  of  the  unjust  steward, 
which  we  are  invited  to  admire,  appeared  mainly  in  his  business-like  apprehension 
of  the  actual  situation  in  which  he  was  placed,  and  his  sagacity  and  promptitude 
in  making  the  most  of  it.  He  looked  the  facts  in  the  face.  He  did  not  buoy  him* 
self  up  with  delusive  hopes.  He  did  not  waste  his  brief  opportunity  in  idle 
expectations.  He  manfully  faced  the  inevitable,  and  this  was  his  salvation.  The 
ability  to  do  so  is  a  great  part  of  what  is  known  as  a  strong  character  {Marevta 
Dods,  D.D.)  The  true  wisdom: — Our  Lord  pronounced  the  children  of  this  world 
"  wise  in  their  generation  " ;  and  who  can  doubt  that  thousands  who  are  lost  would, 
with  God's  blessing,  be  saved,  did  they  bring  the  same  prudence,  and  diligence,  and 
energy  to  their  eternal,  as  they  do  to  their  temporal  interests?  But  in  how  many 
people  is  consummate  wisdom  joined  to  the  greatest  folly  ?  They  are  wise  enough 
to  gain  the  world,  and  fools  enough  to  lose  their  souls.  Convince  a  man  that  the 
only  way  to  save  his  life  is  to  part  with  his  limb,  and  he  does  not  hesitate  aa 
instant  between  living  with  one  hmb  and  being  buried  with  two.  Borne  into  the 
operating  theatre,  pale,  yet  resolute,  he  bares  the  diseased  member  to  the  knife. 
And  how  well  does  that  bleeding,  fainting,  groaning  sufferer  teach  us  to  part  with 
our  sins  rather  than  with  our  Saviour.  If  life  is  better  than  a  limb,  how  much 
better  is  heaven  than  a  sin  ?  Two  years  ago  a  man  was  called  to  decide  between 
preserving  his  life,  and  parting  with  the  gains  of  his  lifetime.  A  gold-digger,  he 
stood  on  the  deck  of  a  ship  that,  coming  from  Australian  shores,  had — as  some  all 
but  reach  heaven — all  but  reached  her  harbour  in  safety.  The  exiles  had  been 
coasting  along  their  native  shores  :  and  to-morrow,  husbands  would  embrace  their 
wives,  children  their  parents,  and  not  a  few  reaUze  the  bright  dream  of  returning 
to  pass  the  evening  of  their  days  in  happiness  amid  the  loved  scenes  of  their  youth. 
But  as  the  proverb  runs,  there  is  much  between  the  cup  and  the  lip.  Night  came 
lowering  down ;  and  with  the  night  a  storm  that  wrecked  ship,  and  hopes,  and 
fortunes,  all  together.  The  dawning  light  but  revealed  a  scene  of  horror — death 
staring  them  in  the  face.  The  sea,  lashed  into  fury,  ran  mountains  high  ;  no  boat 
could  live  in  her.  One  chance  still  remained.  Pale  women,  weeping  children, 
feeble  and  timid  men  must  die  ;  but  a  stout,  brave  swimmer,  with  trust  in  God,  and 
disencumbered  of  all  impediments,  might  reach  the  shore,  where  hundreds  stood 
ready  to  dash  into  the  boiling  surf,  and,  seizing,  save  him.  One  man  was  observed 
to  go  below.  He  bound  around  his  waist  a  heavy  belt,  filled  with  gold,  the  hard 
gains  of  his  life ;  and  returned  to  the  deck.  One  after  another,  he  saw  his  fellow- 
passengers  leap  overboard.  After  a  brief  but  terrible  struggle,  head  after  head  went 
down — sunk  by  the  gold  they  had  fought  hard  to  gain,  and  were  loth  to  lose. 
Slowly  he  was  seen  to  unbuckle  his  belt.  His  hopes  had  been  bound  up  in  it.  It 
was  to  buy  him  land,  and  ease,  and  respect — the  reward  of  long  years  of  hard  and 
weary  exile.  What  hardships  he  had  endured  for  it  1  The  sweat  of  his  brow,  the 
hopes  of  day  and  the  dreams  of  night,  were  there.  If  he  parts  with  it,  he  is  a 
beggar  ;  but  then  if  he  keeps  it,  he  dies.  He  poised  it  in  his  hand ;  balanced  it  for 
a  while  ;  took  a  long,  sad  look  at  it ;  and  then  with  one  strong,  desperate  effort, 
flung  it  far  out  into  the  roaring  sea.  Wise  man  1  It  sinks  with  a  sullen  plunge  ; 
and  DOW  he  follows  it — not  to  sink,  but,  disencumbered  of  its  weight,  to  swim ;  to 
beat  the  billows  manfully ;  and,  riding  on  the  foaming  surge,  to  reach  the  shore. 
Well  done,  brave  gold-digger  1  Ay,  well  done,  and  well  chosen ;  but  if  *'  a  man," 
as  the  devil  said,  who  once  spoke  God's  truth,  *•  will  give  all  that  he  hath  for  his 
life,"  how  much  more  should  he  give  all  he  hath  for  his  soul?  Better  to 
part  with  gold  than  with  God ;  to  bear  the  heaviest  cross  than  miM  a  heaveulf 
onmn  1    (T.  Quthrie,  D.D.) 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  {cbkp  rn. 

Yer.  9.  Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrlgliteousneu. — Th« 
right  use  of  unrighteous  mammen: — By  the  "  mammon  of  unrighteousness  "  we  are 
very  clearly  to  understand  money ;  but  why  it  has  been  so  called  by  Christ  is  not 
BO  evident.  Perhaps  the  simplest,  as  it  is  certainly  the  most  obvious  explanation, 
is  because  it  is  so  frequently  unrighteously  acquired,  and  bo  much  more  frequently 
as  the  man's  own  possession,  and  not  as  a  trust  of  which  he  is  merely  a  steward. 
But,  however  the  epithet  "  unrighteous  "  may  be  accounted  for,  the  thing  which  it 
characterizes  is  money.  Now,  there  is  a  time  when  that  shall  fail.  Death  says  to 
each  man,  "  Give  an  account  of  thy  stewardship,  for  thou  mayest  be  no  longer 
steward."  We  can  carry  with  us  nothing  out  of  this  world.  Money  cannot — 
simply  and  only  as  money — be  transferred  into  the  world  beyond ;  but  it  may  be 
80  used  in  this  world  as  to  add  to  and  intensify  a  Christian's  happiness  in  the 
next.  We  are  familiar  with  the  fact,  in  our  daily  lives  here,  that  money  may 
become  the  means  of  procuring  that  which  is  better  than  itself.  Thus  knowledge 
is  better  than  wealth ;  yet  by  a  wise  use  of  wealth  we  may  acquire  knowledge. 
So,  by  a  judicious  employment  of  money  as  trustees  for  God,  in  commonicating  to 
the  necessities  of  the  saints,  we  shall  secure  that  those  whom  we  have  thus 
relieved  shall  receive  us  into  everlasting  habitations.  This  use  of  money  vrill  not 
purchase  our  admission  into  heaven ;  but  it  will  make  friends  for  us  there,  whose 
gratitude  will  add  to  our  enjoyment,  and  increase  our  blessedness.  It  will  not  open 
the  gates  for  our  entrance.  Only  Christ  is  the  door.  Through  Him  alone  can  we 
gain  ingress.  But  it  will  affect  what  Peter  calls  the  "  abundance  "  of  our  entrance, 
for  it  will  secure  the  presence  there  of  those  who  have  been  benefited  by  our  faith- 
ful stewardship ;  and,  chiefest  of  all,  it  will  be  rewarded  with  the  approbation  of 
Him  who  will  say,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  My  brethren, 
ye  did  it  unto  Me."  It  is  of  grace  alone,  through  Christ,  that  we  are  permitted  to 
enter  heaven ;  but  once  there,  the  measure  of  reward  will  be  graduated  according 
to  that  of  our  faithfulness  here  as  "good  stewards  of  the  manifold  bounties  of 
God."  Those  who  have  been  helped  and  blessed  by  our  service  wiU  lead  us  up  to 
the  throne,  and  say,  "  This  is  he  of  whom  we  have  often  spoken,  and  to  whom  we 
were  so  much  beholden  in  the  life  below  " ;  and  He  who  sitteth  thereon  will  reply, 
"  Well  done  :  let  it  be  done  unto  him  as  unto  the  man  whom  the  King  delighteth 
to  honour."  Thus,  though  money  cannot  be  taken  with  us  into  the  future  life,  we 
yet  may  so  employ  it  here,  in  stewardship  for  God,  as  to  send  on  treasure  before  ua 
into  heaven,  in  the  shape  of  friends,  who  shall  throughout  eternity  redouble  and 
intensify  our  happiness.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  mammon  of  unrighteous' 
ness: — "Mammon"  is  just  the  Syrian  word  for  money,  and  it  is  called  "un- 
righteous "  or  "  unjust"  because  those  to  whom  our  Lord  was  speaking  had  made 
their  money  by  injustice.  It  was  as  little  their  own  as  the  unjust  steward's  was. 
The  steward  was  unjust  because  he  had  not  regarded  himself  as  a  steward ;  and  in 
60  far  as  we  have  forgotten  this  fundamental  circumstance,  we  also  are  unjust. 
We  may  not  have  consciously  wronged  any  man  or  defrauded  any ;  but  if  we  have 
omitted  to  consider  what  was  due  to  God  and  man,  the  likelihood  is  we  have  more 
money  than  we  have  a  right  to.  The  name,  indeed,  "  unrighteous  mammon,"  is 
sometimes  sweepingly  applied  to  all  wealth  and  material  advantages,  because  there 
is  a  feeling  that  the  whole  system  of  trade,  commerce,  and  social  life  is  inex- 
tricably permeated  with  fraudulent  practices  and  iniquitous  customs — so  permeated 
that  no  man  can  be  altogether  free,  or  is  at  all  hkely  to  be  altogether  free,  from  all 
gailt  in  this  matter.  Take  any  coin  out  of  your  pocket  and  make  it  tell  its 
history,  the  hands  it  has  been  in,  the  things  it  has  paid  for,  the  transactions  it  has 
assisted,  and  you  would  be  inclined  to  fling  it  away  as  contaminated  and  filthy. 
But  that  coin  is  a  mere  emblem  of  all  that  comes  to  you  through  the  ordinary 
channels  of  trade,  and  suggests  to  you  the  pollution  of  the  whole  social  condition. 
The  clothes  you  wear,  the  food  you  eat,  the  house  you  Uve  in,  the  money  you  are 
asked  to  invest,  have  all  a  history  which  will  not  bear  scrutiny.  Oppression,  greed, 
and  fraud  serve  you  every  day.  Whether  you  will  or  not  you  are  made  partakers 
of  other  men's  sins.  You  may  be  thankful  if  your  hands  are  not  soiled  by  any 
Btain  that  you  have  wittingly  incurred ;  but  even  so,  you  must  ask.  What  com- 
pensation can  I  make  for  the  unrighteousness  which  cleaves  to  mammon  ?  how  am 
I  to  use  it  now,  seeing  I  have  it?  Our  Lord  says,  "  You  are  to  make  friends  with 
it,  who  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  habitations."  Yon  are  so  to  use  your 
opportunities  that  when  your  present  stewardship  is  over  you  may  not  be  turned 
out  in  the  cold  and  to  beggary,  but  may  have  secured  friends  who  will  give  you  a 
welcome  to  the  eternal  world.    If  is  the  same  view  of  the  connection  of  this  worM 


our.  X71.]  ST.  LUKE,  SIT 

and  the  next  which  onr  Lord  gives  in  His  picture  of  the  last  jadgment,  when  Ha 
eays,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it,"  <&o.  Those  whom  we  have  done  most  good 
to  are,  as  a  rule,  those  whom  we  have  most  loved ;  and  what  better  welcome  to  a 
new  world,  what  more  grateful  gnidance  in  its  ways,  could  we  desire  than  that  of 
those  whom  here  on  earth  we  have  loved  most  dearly  ?  Can  you  promise  yourselves 
any  better  reward  than  to  meet  the  loving  recognition  and  welcome  of  those  who 
have  experienced  your  kindness;  to  be  received  by  those  to  whom  you  have 
willingly  sacrificed  money,  time,  opportunities  of  serving  yourself?  {Marcut 
Dods,  D.I).)  A  profitable  investment: — The  old  Jewish  writers  tell  us  of  a 
certain  avaricious  Babbi  who  was  very  anxious  to  invest  his  wealth  to  the  best 
advantage.  A  friend  undertook  to  do  Uiis  for  him.  One  day  the  Babbi  asked  the 
name  of  the  investment  from  which  he  was  assured  he  would  receive  the  highest 
interest.  His  friend  answered,  "  I  have  given  all  your  money  to  the  poor."  You 
know,  that  if  you  were  going  to  take  a  journey  into  some  foreign  country,  you 
would  change  your  English  money  for  the  currency  of  the  place  to  which  you 
were  bound.  You  would  convert  your  sovereigns,  and  bank  notes,  and  shillings, 
into  dollars,  or  roubles,  or  francs,  or  what  not.  Well,  remember  that  we  all  have 
to  take  a  journey  into  a  land  beyond  the  grave,  where  our  money,  and  our  pride, 
and  our  intellect,  and  our  strength,  and  our  success  will  not  avail  us — these  will 
not  be  the  currency  of  the  country.  Let  us  change  our  currency  now,  and  get 
such  property  as  faith,  love,  purity,  gentleness,  meekness,  truth — these  alone  will 
pass  current  in  the  better  country.  Consecrate  your  wealth,  or  your  work,  or  your 
influence,  or  whatever  you  have  to  God.  {H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  M.A.)  Making 
friends  of  mammon : — Probably  most  of  us  understand  that  we  are  to  do  what  good 
we  can  vrith  our  '•  goods  "  now,  in  order  that  when  we  die  we  may  receive  the 
reward  of  our  good  deeds.  But  that  is  a  very  partial  and  imperfect  reading  of  the 
words.  It  is  true  that  our  Lord  promises  us  an  eternal  reward  :  but  "  eternity"  ia 
a  word  that  covers  the  present  and  the  past  as  well  as  the  future.  It  is  true  He 
promises  that,  if  we  make  friends  of  mammon,  then,  when  mammon  fails  us, 
our  "  friends  will  receive  us  ";  and  it  is  also  true  that  mammon  will  fail  us  when 
we  die,  for  it  is  very  certain  that  we  cannot  carry  it  out  of  the  world  with  us,  even 
in  the  portable  form  of  a  cheque-book.  But  may  not  mammon  fail  us  before  we 
die  ?  May  we  not,  even  while  we  are  in  this  life,  lose  our  money,  or  find  that  there 
are  other  losses  for  which  no  money  can  compensate  us  ?  We  know  very  well  that 
we  may,  some  of  us  know  it  only  too  sadly.  Biches  have  wings  for  use,  and  not 
only  for  show.  It  is  not  only  the  grim  face  of  Death  that  scares  them  to  flight ; 
they  flee  before  a  thousand  other  alarms.  The  changes  and  accidents  in  which 
they  fail  us  are  innumerable ;  there  are  countless  woimds  which  gold  will  not  heal, 
en^ess  cravings  which  it  will  not  satisfy.  And  the  very  point  and  gist  and  value  of 
our  Lord's  promise  is  that,  whenever  mammon  fails  us,  in  life  and  its  changes  and 
sorrows  no  less  than  in  death,  if  we  have  previously  made  friends  out  of  it,  these 
friends  will  open  eternal  tabernacles  in  which  our  stricken  spirits  may  find  refuge 
and  consolation.  It  is  this  present,  this  coustant,  this  eternal  reward  of  a  wise 
use  of  our  temporal  possessions  on  which  we  need  most  of  all  to  fix  our  thoughts. 
And,  remember,  we  all  need  it,  the  poor  no  less  than  the  rich.  For  we  all  have 
some  acquaintance  with  mammon,  though  for  some  of  us,  happily,  it  is  a  very 
distant  acquaintance.  We  all  have  8  Uttle  money,  or  money's  worth,  at  our  con- 
trol, and  may  take  one  of  two  courses.  Well,  now,  suppose  a  man  has  lived  long 
enough  to  feel  his  feet  and  to  consider  the  courses  that  are  open  to  him,  and  to  be 
sincerely  anxious  to  take  the  right  course  and  to  make  the  best  use  he  can  of  his 
life.  All  around  him  he  sees  neighbours  who  are  pushing  on  with  the  utmost 
eagerness  in  the  pursuit  of  fortune,  who  are  sacrificing  ease,  culture,  pleasure, 
health,  and  at  times  conscience  itself,  in  their  love  for  that  which  St.  Paul  pro- 
nounces to  be  a  root  of  all  evil,  a  temptation  and  a  snare,  and  which  Christ  says 
makes  it  very  hard  for  a  man  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  He  has  to  determine 
whether  or  not  he  will  join  in  this  headlong  pursuit — whether  he,  too,  will  risk 
health  of  body,  culture  of  mind,  and  sensitive  purity  of  conscience,  in  the 
endeavour  to  grow  rich,  or  richer  than  he  is.  He  sees  that  the  dignity  and 
comfort  and  peace  of  human  life  depend  largely  on  his  being  able  to  supply  a  large 
circle  of  wants,  without  constant  anxiety  and  care ;  but  he  also  feels  that  he  has 
many  wants,  and  these  the  deepest,  which  mere  wealth  will  not  supply.  Accordingly, 
he  resolves  to  work  diligently  and  as  wisely  as  be  can,  in  order  to  secure  an 
adequate  provision  for  his  physical  necessities,  and  to  guard  his  independence;  but 
be  resolves  also  that  he  will  not  sacrifice  himself,  or  all  that  is  bwt  and  purest 


218  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  JTfc 

and  most  refined  in  himself,  to  the  pursuit  of  money  and  what  it  will  fetch.  Hence, 
BO  far  as  he  can,  he  limits  his  wants ;  he  keeps  his  tastes  simple  and  pure;  and  by 
labours  that  do  not  absorb  his  whole  time  and  energies  he  provides  for  the  dn« 
gratification  of  these  tastes  and  wants.  Hence  also  he  gives  a  good  deal  of  hi» 
time  and  energy  to  reading  good  books,  let  us  say,  or  to  mastering  some  natural 
science,  or  to  developing  a  taste  for  music  and  acquiring  skill  in  it.  He  expects 
his  neighbour,  who  had  no  better  start  nor  opportunities  than  he,  to  grow  far 
richer  than  he  himself  has  done,  if  his  neighbour  think  only  of  getting  and  invest- 
ing money.  And  therefore  he  does  not  grudge  him  his  greater  wealth,  nor  lock  on 
it  with  an  envious  eye;  he  rather  rejoices  that  he  himself  has  given  up  some  wealth 
in  order  to  acquire  a  higher  culture,  and  to  develop  his  literary  or  artistic  tastes. 
Here,  then,  we  have  two  men,  two  neighbours,  before  us.  The  one  has  grown  very 
rich,  has  far  more  money  than  he  can  enjoy,  more  even  perhaps  than  he  quite 
knows  how  to  spend  or  invest,  but  he  has  hardly  anything  except  what  his  money 
•will  procure  for  him.  The  other  has  only  a  modest  provision  for  his  wants,  but  he 
has  a  mind  stored  with  the  best  thoughts  of  ancient  and  modern  wisdom,  an  eye 
which  finds  a  thousand  miracles  of  beauty  in  every  scene  of  Nature,  and  an  ear 
that  trembles  under  the  ecstasy  of  sweet  harmonious  sounds.  By  some  sadden 
turn  of  fortune,  mammon  fails  them  both;  they  are  both  reduced  to  poverty:  both, 
BO  soon  as  they  recover  from  the  shock,  have  to  make  a  fresh  start  in  life.  Which 
of  the  two  is  better  off  now  ?  Which  of  them  has  made  real  friends  to  himself  out 
of  the  mammon  while  he  had  it?  Not  the  wealthier  of  the  two  assuredly ;  for, 
now  that  he  has  lost  his  wealth,  he  has  lost  all  that  he  had  :  he  has  Uved  only  to 
get  rich ;  when  his  riches  went,  all  went.  But  the  other  man,  the  man  who  read 
and  thought  and  cultivated  his  mental  faculties,  he  has  not  lost  all.  His  money 
has  gone,  but  it  has  not  taken  from  him  the  wise  thoughts  he  had  gathered  from 
books,  or  his  insight  into  the  secrets  and  beauties  of  Nature,  or  the  power  to  charm 
from  the  concord  of  sweet  sounds.  He  is  simply  thrown  more  absolutely  on  these 
inward  and  inseparable  possessions  for  occupation  and  enjoyment.  While  he  had 
it  he  made  friends  to  himself  out  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness ;  and,  now 
that  it  has  failed  him,  those  friends  receive  him  into  tabernacles  which  are  always 
open,  and  in  which  he  has  long  learned  to  find  pleasure  and  to  take  rest.  Poor 
and  imperfect  as  this  illustration  is,  for  there  are  losses  in  which  even  Science  and 
Art,  even  Nature  and  Culture,  can  give  us  but  cold  comfort — it  may  nevertheless 
sufiSce  to  make  our  Lord's  words  clear.  For,  obviously,  if  a  man  give  a  good  part 
of  the  time  he  might  devote  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth  to  religious  culture,  instead 
of  to  merely  mental  culture ;  if  he  take  thought  and  spend  time  in  acquiring  habits 
of  prayer  and  worship  and  obedience  and  trust,  in  acquainting  himself  with  the 
will  of  God  and  doing  it;  if  he  expend  money,  and  time  which  is  worth  money  to 
him,  in  helping  on  the  works  of  the  Church  and  in  ministering  to  the  wants  of  the 
sorrowful  and  guiJty^he,  too,  has  made  to  himself  friends  out  of  the  mammon  of 
unrighteousness,  and  friends  that  will  not  fail  him  when  mammon  fails  him,  but 
will  receive  him  into  taberuHcles  of  rest.  However  poor  he  may  be,  he  can  still 
pray,  and  read  his  Bible,  and  put  his  trust  m  God,  and  urge  the  guilty  to  penitence, 
and  speak  comfort  to  the  sorrowful ;  and,  by  his  cheerful  content  and  unswerving 
confidence  in  the  Divine  goodness,  he  may  now  bear  witness,  with  an  eloquence  far 
beyond  that  of  mere  words,  to  the  reality  and  grandeur  of  a  truly  religious  life. 
Faith,  hope,  charity,  righteousness  and  godliness,  patience  and  meekness, 
will  not  close  their  doors  against  him,  because  mammon  has  slammed  his  door 
ip^  his  face.  These  are  eternal  friends,  who  pitch  their  tabernacles  beside  us  wher- 
ever our  path  may  lead,  and  who  welcome  us  to  the  rest  and  shelter  they  afford 
all  the  more  heartily  because  we  have  not  where  to  lay  our  head.  (S.  Cox.} 
The  earthly  life  a  heavenly  training  : — It  has  been  observed  by  an  eminent  critic, 
that  the  words,  "mammon  of  unrighteousness"  might  be  better  rendered,  "mammon 
of  deceitfulness  "  ;  for  Christ  never  condemned  the  possession  of  wealth  as  in  itself 
an  unrighteous  thing.  It  is  very  often  the  righteous  reward  of  praiseworthy 
toil.  But  He  speaks  of  it  as  deceitful,  because  he  who  trusts  to  it  will  find  that  itR 
promises  are  hes,  and  will  fail  at  last,  leaving  him  miserably  alone ;  and  with  this 
failure  Christ  contrasts  the  certainty  of  eternal  possessions.  We  can  enter  now 
into  the  meaning  of  the  parable.  If  the  riches  of  life — which  are  only  one  and  a 
comparatively  insignificant  circumstance  in  man's  earthly  history — may  prepar* 
him  for  eternity,  then  it  follows  that  every  circumstance  of  life — our  wealth  or  our 
poverty,  our  work  or  our  rest — may  form  a  training.  Here,  then,  seems  to  be  the 
thought  which  Christ  has  shadowed  forth  in  this  eurthly  form — Every  circnmstano* 


CEAP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE,  il9 

cf  man's  life  may  become  a  traicLng  for  immortality.  It  is  obvious  that  if  this  be 
tiue  it  is  of  supreme  importance.  But  how  is  it  possible  for  all  our  life  to  become 
a  training  for  immortality  ?  or,  to  use  the  words  of  Christ,  how  may  we  so  make 
friends  of  our  earthly  circumstances,  that  when  they  have  passed,  we  may  have 
been  prepared  by  their  employment  for  the  everlasting  habitations  ?  The  tenth 
arid  eleventh  verses  of  this  chapter  imply  two  great  principles  on  which  this 
possibility  is  founded — the  eternity  of  God's  law,  and  the  perpetuity  of  man's 
character.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  possible  to  make  every  circumstance  of  life 
part  of  one  grand  training,  because  the  law  of  the  immortal  life  is  the  law 
of  a  blessed  life  here.  "  He  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least  is  faithful 
also  in  much;  and  he  that  is  unjust  in  the  least  is  unjust  also  in  much." 
These  words  imply  that  the  law  of  God  which  guides  us  here  extends  over  all 
worlds.  The  life  of  time  is  ruled  by  no  different  law  from  that  which  prevails 
in  the  great  life  of  eternity.  The  faithfulness  which  makes  men  blessed 
here,  is  the  same  law  of  life  which  creates  their  blessedness  there.  This 
is  obviously  the  first  great  principle  that  renders  it  possible  for  us  to  make 
our  present  circumstances  an  education  for  the  everlasting  world.  If  the  law 
which  prevails  there  were  essentially  different  from  that  which  prevails  here,  then 
no  present  conduct,  no  employment  of  the  earthly,  could  prepare  for  the  heavenly ; 
we  should  have  to  learn  a  new  rule  of  life,  and  every  present  circumstance  would 
be  vain  as  affording  a  preparation  for  the  life  to  come.  This  is  all  we  need  know 
of  the  future,  as  far  as  regards  our  present  conduct.  This  thought  may  perhaps 
be  made  clear  to  every  one  by  taking  an  illustration  with  which  we  are  all  famiUar. 
We  know  that  in  different  countries  different  customs  are  adopted  and  different 
laws  prevail.  Actions,  which  in  this  land  would  be  thought  natural,  would  be 
considered  absurd  in  another.  Deeds,  which  in  one  land  are  common,  might  else- 
where be  regarded  as  crimes.  The  man  who  would  travel  into  other  countries 
must  first  of  all  acquaint  himself  with  their  social  customs,  and  study  the  require- 
ments of  their  laws.  He  thus  prepares  himself  to  enter  other  lands  without 
danger,  and  live  another  life  without  difficulty.  Now  we  have  a  journey  to  make 
at  no  distant  period  into  another  world.  We  stand  looking  at  its  dim  outlines, 
seeing  friend  after  friend  depart,  waving  us  their  sad,  solemn  farewells,  and  knowing 
that  we  must  soon  set  out  for  that  distant  region.  But  the  law,  whose  fulfilment 
is  love,  pervades  every  world  of  the  bit  ssed.  The  love  of  God,  which  forms  the 
Christian  blessedness  in  this  low  earth,  is  the  source  of  the  highest  angels'  bhss  in 
the  great  eternity.  Therefore  we  have  no  new  law  of  life  to  learn.  The  other  fact 
requisite  to  show  this  is  the  perpetuity  of  human  character.  See  verse  11 :  "If 
therefore  ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon,  who  will  commit 
to  your  trust  the  true  riches  ?  "  In  their  deepest  meaning  the«e  words  involve  this 
principle — "  Unfaithful  in  time,  unfaithful  in  eternity."  Some  illustration  of  this 
perpetuity  of  human  character  is  afforded  us  by  the  dif&culty  of  changing  men's 
characters  in  this  world.  How,  for  instance,  can  you  change  the  character  of  a 
hard,  selfish,  worldly  man  ?  You  cannot  do  it  by  reasoning.  We  know  not  what 
tstaie  may  await  us  after  death,  but  as  far  as  we  can  gather  from  the  teachings  of 
the  Bible,  death  immortalizes  character.  All  life's  affections,  and  fellowships,  and 
friendships — all  the  revelations  we  have  of  human  nobleness  and  grandeur — if  they 
teach  us  more  of  God  by  revealing  the  Godlike,  become  a  discipline  for  eternity. 
Every  glory  in  nature — the  pomp  of  autumn,  the  rejoicing  beauty  of  the  spring, 
the  splendour  of  the  sunset,  or  the  majesty  of  the  starry  hosts — everything,  in  fact, 
in  the  outer  world  which  raises  our  thoughts  to  the  Divine,  becomes  a  training  for 
the  immortal.  Every  dark  temptation  that  makes  us  strong  in  resistive  might ; 
every  gloomy  doubt  that  by  its  conquest  helps  to  strengthen  our  faith,  every 
Borrow  that  drives  us  to  repose  more  utterly  on  the  eternal  love,  becomes  a  schooling 
for  the  higher  world,  where  the  presence  of  the  Father  is  boundless  joy.  In  con- 
clusion, let  us  observe  the  practical  application  of  the  words  of  our  text.  They 
are  a  call  to  action.  The  duty  to  which  Christ  here  summons  us  is  to  watch  the 
formation  of  character.  They  contain  also  a  lesson  of  encouragement.  {E.  L. 
Hullt  B.A.)  The  Christianas  farewell  to  business : — I.  A  fabewell  imports  a 
itOOK  BSBiND.  What  is  there  in  the  Christian's  last  look  at  the  world  ?  It  is  a  fact 
that  that  look  must  be  taken.  We  may  avoid  many  things,  but  not  that.  Of  the 
end  of  business  we  can  have  no  doubt.  If  it  end  not  before  death,  it  will  at  death. 
When  the  end  comes,  there  will  be  a  tenderness  in  the  adieu.  Of  course,  there  will 
be  much  to  make  a  farewell  pleasant.  Business  will  be  an  object  of  not  uumingled 
ttgret.    1.  But  still,  "me  say,  there  must  be  tenderness  in  the  adieu.   It  is  an  adieo. 


1^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xn. 

2.  Bat  there  are  other  sources  of  regret.  Business  has  been  a  sooroe  of  positive 
enjoyment.  It  has  suppUed  a  wholesome  excitement.  It  has  exercised  the 
active  powers.  3.  Nor  can  we  omit  to  remark  that  when  the  Christian  fails 
in  death,  he  leaves,  in  business,  that  which  has  been  the  channel  and  scene 
of  spiritual  things.  It  is  in  business  he  has  "  exercised  himself  to  godliness." 
The  place  of  work  has  been  the  place  of  prayer.  II.  Let  us  now  oontemplata 
the  Christian  in  that  bbioht  pbospect  which  is  befobb  him  when  he  leaves 
THE  WORLD,  EB  he  looks  forward  to  "  the  everlasting  habitations "  to  which  he 
will  be  "received"  at  his  failure  in  death.  That  ground  is  ChrisL  It  is  not 
because  we  are  by  good  works  entitled  to  it,  that  we  oan  obtain  an  inheritance 
above.  1.  And,  therefore,  I  remark,  first,  that  though  secular  life  closes  at 
death,  the  Christian  retains  all  that  made  that  life  holy  and  noble.  With 
many,  business  was  an  end ;  with  him,  it  was  a  means.  With  many,  the  thought, 
the  care,  the  aim,  the  ambition,  were  all  comprised  in  this  outward  world ; 
with  him  the  outward  world  was  but  a  glass,  a  tool,  a  stepping-stone.  2.  And 
w}jile  the  Christian  retains  his  principles,  which  made  his  business  good  and 
holy  and  happy,  those  principles  are  transferred  to  a  better  sphere  at  death.  8. 
The  Christian,  in  failing  at  death,  will  be  able  not  only  to  expect  the  continuance 
of  holy  activity  in  a  better  sphere,  but  to  connect  his  past  with  his  future  activity. 
(/.  A.  Morrii.)  Wealth  changed  into  the  coin  of  heaven : — Every  rich  man  who 
is  growing  selfish  and  using  all  his  money  for  earthly  uses  only  should  study  this 
parable.  It  would  surely  cure  him.  Money  may  be  made  a  grand  thing  both  now 
and  hereafter ;  for  by  liberality  you  can  change  it  into  the  current  coin  of  heaven. 
You  are  like  an  orphan  maid  I  read  of,  whose  kind  master  allowed  her  to  give 
away  the  fruit  of  his  garden,  that  she  might  raise  up  friends  for  herself  among  the 
neighbours.  Wealth  thus  used  is  worthy  of  its  name,  which  is  just  weal  writ 
large.  {J.  Wells.)  Mammon  :—'M.&ramon,  the  world — ah,  is  it  not  adverse  to 
the  interests  of  our  souls  ?  What  then  7  Believer,  adversary  though  it  be,  you  may 
make  it  your  friend.  A  skilful  seaman,  when  once  fairly  out  to  sea,  can  make  a 
wind  from  the  west  carry  him  westward  t  he  can  make  the  wind  that  blows  right 
in  his  face  bear  him  onward  to  the  very  point  from  which  it  blows.  When  he  arrives 
at  home,  he  is  able  to  say,  the  wind  from  the  west  impelled  me  westward,  and  led 
me  into  my  desired  haven.  Thus  if  we  were  skilful,  and  watchful,  and  earnest^ 
we  might  make  the  unrighteous  mammon  our  friend ;  we  might  so  turn  our  side 
to  each  of  its  tortuous  impulses,  that,  wilUng  or  unwilling,  conscious  or  unconscious, 
it  should  from  day  to  day  drive  us  nearer  home.     (W.  Arnot.)  The  everlasting 

dwellingi: — I.  What  kind  or  dwellings  abb  these?  1.  The  sweetest  peace 
reigns  in  them,  as  regards  the  body.  (1)  There  is  no  earthly  burden.  (2)  There 
are  no  afilictions  or  tribulations.  2.  The  sweetest  peace,  as  regards  the  soaL 
(1)  There  is  no  struggle.  (2)  There  is  no  peril.  3.  The  greatest  joy  reigns  in 
them.  II.  Fob  whom  abb  tbb  bveblastino  dwellings?  1.  Not  for  sinners 
(Bev.  xxi.  27).  (1)  The  unjust.  (2)  The  uncharitable.  (3)  The  unbelieving. 
(4)  Drunkards.  (5)  The  nnchaste.  (6)  The  slothful.  (7)  Blasphemers.  2.  Only 
for  the  just.  To  heaven  we  are  led — (1)  By  unwavering  faith.  (2)  By  childlike 
humility.  (3)  By  a  strenuous  combat.  (4)  By  true  justice.  {Joseph  Schuen.) 
How  the  little  may  be  used  to  get  the  great : — I.  First,  then,  I  desire  to  consider 
briefly  that  strange,  new  standard  of  value  which  is  set  up  here.  On  the  one  side 
is  placed  the  whole  glittering  heap  of  all  material  good  that  man  can  touch  or 
handle,  all  that  wealth  can  buy  of  this  perishable  world;  and  on  the  other  hand 
there  are  the  modest  and  unseen  riches  of  pure  thoughts  and  high  desires,  of  a 
noble  heart,  of  a  Ufe  assimilated  to  Jesus  Christ.  The  two  are  compared  in  three 
points — as  to  their  intrinsic  magnitade,  as  to  their  quality,  as  to  our  ownership  of 
them.  Of  the  great  gUttering  heap  our  Lord  says :  "  It  is  nothing,  at  its  greatest 
it  is  small " ;  and  of  the  other  our  Lord  says :  "  At  its  smallest  it  is  great."  All 
the  wealth  of  all  the  Bothschilds  is  too  little  to  fill  the  soul  of  the  poorest  beggar 
tbat  stands  by  their  carriage  door  with  hungry  eyes.  The  least  degree  of  truth,  of 
love,  of  goodness,  is  bigger  in  its  power  to  fill  the  heart  than  all  the  externals  that 
human  avarice  can  gather  about  it.  Can  we  thus  enter  into  the  understanding  of 
Christ's  scale  and  standard,  and  think  of  all  the  external  as  "  that  which  is  least," 
and  of  all  the  inward  as  "  that  which  is  much  "  ?  The  world  looks  at  worldly 
wealth  through  a  microscope  which  magnifies  the  infinitesimally  small,  and  then  it 
looks  at  "  the  land  that  is  very  far  oS  "  through  a  telescope  turned  the  wrong  way, 
which  diminishes  all  that  is  great.  But  if  we  can  get  up  by  the  side  of  Jesus  Christ 
And  see  things  with  His  eyes  and  from  His  station,  it  will  be  as  when  a  man  olimba 


CHIP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  281 

a  mountain,  and  the  little  black  line,  as  it  seemed  to  him  when  looked  at  from  the 
plain,  has  risen  up  into  a  giant  clilf ;  and  all  the  big  things  down  below,  as  they 
eeemed  when  he  was  among  them,  have  dwindled.  That  white  speck  is  a  palace ; 
that  bit  of  a  green  patch  there,  over  which  the  skylark  flies  in  a  minute,  is  a  great 
lord's  estate.  Oh,  dear  brethren,  we  do  not  need  to  wait  to  get  to  heaven  to  learn 
heaven's  tables  of  weights  and  measures  1  One  grain  of  true  love  to  God  is  greater 
in  its  power  to  enrich  than  a  California  of  gold.  Take,  again,  the  second  anti- 
thesis, the  "unrighteous  mammon"  and  "the  true  riches."  That  word,  "un- 
righteous "  in  its  application  to  material  good,  is  somewhat  difficult.  If  we  keep 
strictly  to  the  antithesis  "unrighteous"  must  be  the  opposite  of  "true."  The 
word  would  then  come  to  mean  very  nearly  the  same  as  "deceitful " — that  which 
betrays.  And  bo  we  have  presented  to  us  the  old  familiar  thought  that  external 
good  of  all  sorts  looks  to  be  a  great  deal  better  than  it  is.  It  promises  a  great  many 
things  that  it  never  fulfils,  tempting  us  as  a  fish  is  tempted  to  the  hook  by  a  bait  which 
hides  the  hook.  But  the  inward  riches  of  faith,  true  holiness,  lofty  aspirations, 
Christ-directed  purposes,  all  these  are  true.  They  promise  no  more  than  they 
perform.  They  bring  more  than  they  said  they  would.  No  man  ever  said,  "  I  have 
tasted  Thy  love,  and  lo  I  it  does  not  satisfy  me  !  I  have  realized  Thy  help,  and  lo ! 
it  has  not  been  enough  1  "  And  then  the  last  contrast  is  between  "  another's  "  and 
"  your  own."  Another's  ?  Well,  that  may  mean  God's ;  and  therefore  you  are 
stewards,  as  the  whole  parable  that  precedes  the  text  has  been  teaching.  But  I  am 
not  sure  that  that  is  the  only,  nor  indeed  the  principal  reference  of  the  word  here. 
And  I  think  when  our  Lord  speaks  of  all  outward  possessions  as  being,  even  whilst 
mine,  another's,  He  means  to  point  there,  not  only  to  the  fact  of  stewardship,  but 
also  to  the  fact  of  the  limitations  and  defects  of  all  outward  possessions  of  outward 
good.  That  is  to  say,  there  is  no  real  contact  between  the  outward  things  that  a 
man  has  and  himself.  The  only  things  that  you  really  have,  paradox  as  it  sounds, 
are  the  things  that  you  are.  AH  the  rest  you  hold  by  a  very  slight  tie,  like  the 
pearls  that  are  sewn  upon  some  half-barbarous  Eastern  magnate's  jacket,  which  he. 
shakes  off  as  he  walks.  So  men  say,  "  This  is  mine  I  "  and  it  only  means  "  It  is 
not  yours."  There  is  no  real  possession,  even  while  there  is  an  apparent  one, 
and  just  because  there  is  no  real  contact,  because  there  is  always  a  gap  between 
the  man  and  his  goods,  because  he  has  not,  as  it  were,  gathered  them  into  himself, 
therefore  the  possession  is  transient  as  well  as  incomplete.  It  slips  away  from  the 
hand  even  whilst  you  hold  it.  And  just  as  we  may  say,  "  There  is  no  present,  bat 
everything  is  past  or  future,  and  what  we  call  the  present  is  only  the  meeting  point 
of  these  two  times,"  so  we  may  say,  there  is  no  possession,  because  everything  ia 
either  coming  into  my  hands  or  going  oat  of  them,  and  my  apparent  ownership  is 
only  for  a  moment.    I  simply  transmit. 

*'  'Twas  mine,  'tis  his,  and  has  been  slave  to  thoasando." 

And  so  it  passes.  And  then  consider  the  common  accidents  of  life  which  rob  men 
of  their  goods,  and  the  waste  by  the  very  act  of  use,  which  gnaws  them  away  as 
the  sea  does  the  cliffs  ;  and,  last  of  all,  death's  separation.  What  can  be  taken 
oat  of  a  man's  hands  by  death  has  no  right  to  be  called  his.  II.  Notice  for  a  moment 
the  other  broad  principle  that  is  laid  down  in  these  three  verses,  as  to  the  highest 
USB  OF  THE  LOWER  GOOD.  Whether  you  are  a  Christian  man  or  whether  you  are 
not,  this  is  true  about  you,  that  the  way  in  which  you  deal  with  your  outward 
goods,  your  wealth,  your  capacity  of  all  sorts,  may  become  a  barrier  to  your 
possessing  the  higher,  or  it  may  become  a  mighty  help.  There  are  plenty  of  people, 
and  some  of  them  listening  to  me  now,  who  are  kept  from  being  Christians  because 
they  love  the  world  so  much.  The  world  thinks  that  the  highest  use  of  the  highest 
things  is  to  gain  possession  of  the  lowest  thereby,  and  that  truth  and  genius  and 
poetry  are  given  to  select  spirits  and  are  wasted  unless  they  make  money  out  of 
them.  Christ's  notion  of  the  relationship  is  exactly  the  opposite,  that  all  the  out- 
ward is  then  lifted  to  its  noblest  purpose  when  it  is  made  rigidly  subordinate  to 
the  highest ;  and  that  the  best  thing  that  any  man  can  do  with  his  money  is  so  to 
spend  it  as  to  "purchase  for  himself  a  good  degree,"  "laying  np  for  himself  in 
•tore  a  good  foundation  that  he  may  lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  III.  And  now  let 
me  say  one  last  word  as  to  the  jtaithtxtlness  which  tbcs  utilizes  the  lowsst 
jlb  k  HEARS  or  possessing  uobs  ruLLT  thb  highest.  Yon  will  be  **  faithful "  if, 
through  all  yoar  administrations  of  your  possessions,  there  rang,  first,  the  prineipl* 
of  stewardship  ;  yon  will  be  "faithful "  if,  through  all  your  adininiBtration  of  Toot 


\ 

\ 

222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn» 

eartbly  possessions,  there  runs,  second,  the  principle  of  sacrifice ;  you  will  be 
"faithful"  if,  through  all  your  administration  of  your  earthly  possessions,  there 
runs,  third,  the  principle  of  brotherhood.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Wise  expendir 
ture  : — Christ  here  tells  us  plainly  which  is  the  path  of  wisdom.  When  we  see  a 
man  making  ducks  and  drakes  of  his  money,  we  call  him  a  fool — and  so  he  is, 
from  our  point  of  view,  because  he  might  be  acquiring  solid  advantages  with  what 
he  is  wasting.  But,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  gospel,  we  are  just  as  great  fool» 
ourselves,  for  those  solid  advantages  of  which  we  speak  are  probably  as  far  from 
being  eternal  as  the  others ;  keeping  our  eyes  fixed  upon  the  everlasting  future,  we 
must  admit  that  every  penny  spent  upon  ourselves  is  as  much  wasted  as  if  we  had 
chucked  it  into  the  river.  Do  not  then  ask  me,  "  May  I  allow  myself  this  luxury  ?  " 
or  "  May  I  not  indulge  this  taste  ?  "  Of  course  you  may,  as  long  as  it  is  harmless, 
but  you  will  be  wiser  if  you  don't,  for  you  might  with  the  same  money  be  making 
friends  for  eternity.  This  saying  of  our  Lord,  then,  is,  in  its  fulness,  for  those 
that  can  receive  it,  and  they  are,  perhaps,  as  few  as  they  are  happy  ;  when  we  get 
to  heaven  and  behold  the  richness  of  their  reward,  the  overfiowing  happiness  ot 
those  who  have  spent  and  been  spent  in  making  others  happy,  we  shall  wonder  how 
we  could  have  been  so  stupid  as  to  waste  our  money  on  ourselves.  For  the  rest  of 
us,  it  is  a  principle  which  we  must  acknowledge^  humbly,  even  if  we  have  not 
strength  of  mind  to  act  upon  it  much  at  present.  We  may  still  decide,  perhaps, 
to  live  up  to  our  income,  to  live  according  to  our  rank,  to  maintain  a  certain  style, 
and  so  on,  but  we  will  not  be  such  contemptible  hypocrites  as  to  pretend  that  this 
is  the  path  of  Christian  wisdom.  The  principle  which  Christ  lays  down  we 
shall  keep  before  our  eyes,  and  we  shall  pray  that  it  may  sink  little  by  little  into 
our  hearts,  until  it  begin  to  bear  fruit  in  our  lives — the  principle,  I  mean,  that 
every  penny  spent  on  self  is  wasted,  every  penny  we  can  learn  to  part  with  is 
saved  because  laid  up  with  Him.  (R.  Winterbotham,  M.A.)  Charity  the  road 
to  wealth: — You  want  to  double  your  riches,  and  without  gambling  or  stock-jobbing. 
Share  it.  Whether  it  be  material  or  intellectual,  its  rapid  increase  will  amaze  you. 
What  would  the  sun  have  been,  had  he  folded  himself  up  in  darkness  •  Surely  he 
would  have  gone  out.  So  would  Socrates.  This  road  to  wealth  seems  to  have  been 
discovered  some  three  thousand  years  ago  ;  at  least  it  was  known  to  Hesiod,  and 
has  been  recommended  by  him  in  the  one  precious  line  he  has  left  us.  But  even 
he  complains  of  the  fools  who  did  not  know  that  half  is  more  than  the  whole.  And 
ever  since,  though  mankind  have  always  been  in  full  chase  after  riches,  though  they 
have  not  feared  to  follow  Columbus  and  Gama  in  chase  of  it,  though  they  have 
waded  through  blood,  and  crept  through  falsehood,  and  trampled  on  their  own 
hearts,  and  been  ready  to  ride  on  a  broomstick,  in  chase  of  it,  very  few  have  ever 
taken  the  road,  albeit  the  easiest,  the  shortest,  and  the  surest.   {J.  C.  Hare.) 

Vers.  10-13.  Faithful  In  that  wMcIi  Is  least. — On  living  to  God  in  small  thing* : — 
...  u'.  Notice  how  Utile  we  know  concerning  the  relative  importance  of  events  and 

« ~  -  duties.    We  use  the  terms  "  great "  and  "  small  "  in  speaking  of  actions,  occasions, 

plans,  and  duties,  only  in  reference  to  their  mere  outward  look  and  first  impres- 
sion. Some  of  the  most  latent  agents  and  mean-looking  substances  in  nature  are 
yet  the  most  operative ;  but  yet,  when  we  speak  of  natural  objects,  we  call  them 
great  or  small,  not  according  to  their  operativeness,  but  according  to  size,  count, 
report,  or  show.  So  it  comes  to  pass  when  we  are  classing  actions,  duties,  or 
/  occasions,  that  we  call  a  certain  class  great  and  another  small,  when  really  the 
^  latter  are  many-fold  more  important  and  influential  than  the  former.  We  are 
generally  ignorant  of  the  real  moment  of  events  which  we  think  we  understand. 
2.  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  even  as  the  world  judges,  small  things  constitute 
almost  the  whole  of  life.  S.  It  very  much  exalts,  as  well  as  sanctions  this  view, 
that  God  is  so  observant  of  small  things.  He  upholds  the  sparrow's  wing,  clothes 
the  lily  with  His  own  beautifying  hand,  and  numbers  tbe  hairs  of  His  children.  He 
holds  the  balancings  of  the  cluuds.  He  maketh  small  the  drops  of  rain.  i.  It  is 
a  fact  of  history  and  of  observation  that  all  efficient  men,  while  they  have  been 
men  of  comprehension,  have  also  been  men  of  detail  Napoleon  was  the  most 
effective  man  in  modern  times — some  will  say,  of  all  times.  The  secret  of  his 
character  was,  that  while  his  plans  were  more  vast,  more  various,  and,  of  course, 
more  difficult  than  those  of  other  men,  he  had  the  talent,  at  the  same  time,  to  fill 
them  up  with  perfect  promptness  and  precision,  in  every  particular  of  execution. 
There  must  be  detail  in  every  great  work.  f^.  It  is  to  be  observed  tbat  there  is 
HWte  xeal  piety  in  adorning  one  small  than  one  great  occasion.     This  may  seem 


(9 


OBAf.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  22» 

paradoxical,  but  what  I  intend  will  be  seen  by  one  or  two  illustrations.  I  have 
spoken  of  the  minuteness  of  God's  works.  When  I  regard  the  eternal  God  as 
engaged  in  polishing  an  atom,  or  elaborating  the  functions  of  a  mote  invisible  to 
the  eye,  what  evidence  do  I  there  receive  of  His  desire  to  perfect  His  works  1  No 
gross  and  mighty  world,  however  plausibly  shaped,  would  yield  a  hundredth  part  th& 
intensity  of  evidence.  An  illustration  from  human  things  will  present  a  closer 
parallel.  It  is  perfectly  well  understood,  or  if  not,  it  should  be,  that  almost  any 
husband  would  leap  into  the  sea,  or  rush  into  the  burning  edifice  to  rescue  a 
perishing  wife.  But  to  anticipate  the  convenience  or  happiness  of  a  wife  in  some 
small  matter,  the  neglect  of  which  would  be  unobserved,  is  a  more  eloquent  proof 
of  tenderness,  6.  The  importance  of  living  to  God  in  ordinary  and  smaU  things,  is 
seen  in  the  fact  that  character,  which  is  the  end  of  religion,  is  in  its  very  nature  » 
growth.  Application :  1.  Private  Christians  are  here  instructed  in  the  true  method 
of  Christian  progress  and  usefulness.  2.  Our  subject  enables  us  to  offer  some  useful 
suggestions,  concerning  the  manner  in  which  Churches  may  be  made  to  prosper. 
3.  Finally,  some  useful  hints  are  suggested  to  the  ministers  of  Christ.  (H.  Bush- 
iieU,  D.D.)  The  value  of  little  things: — "Who  has  despised  the  day  of  small 
things  ?  "  Not  the  sagacious  men  of  the  world,  to  whom  experience  has  taught  the 
necessity  of  husbanding  the  minutes  that  make  up  days,  and  the  pence  that  grow 

to    pounds.        I.   OCB   LIVES  VOB    THE    MOST    PABX    ABE    MADB   UP   OF   LITTLE   THINGS, 

AND  BY  THESE  ouB  PRINCIPLE  IS  TO  BE  TESTED.  There  are  Very  few  who  have  to 
take  a  prominent  place  in  the  great  conflicts  of  their  age,  and  to  play  their  part  in 
the  arena  of  public  life.  The  vast  majority  must  dwell  in  humbler  scenes,  and  be 
content  to  do  a  much  meaner  work.  The  conflicts  which  a  Christian  has  to 
maintain,  either  against  the  evil  in  his  own  soul,  or  in  the  narrow  circle  where 
alone  his  influence  is  felt,  appear  to  be  very  trivial  and  unimportant,  yet  are  they 
to  him  the  battle  of  life  and  for  life,  and  true  heroism  is  to  be  shown  here  as  well' 
as  in  those  grander  struggles  in  which  some  may  win  the  leader's  fame,  or  even  the 
martyr's  crown.  It  will  stimulate  us  to  faithfulness  in  such  little  things  if  we  bear 
in  mind  the  way  in  which  the  Master  regards  the  humblest  works  that  are  done, 
and  the  poorest  sacrifices  that  are  made  from  a  pure  feeling  of  love  to  Him.  He 
can  recognize  and  bless  the  martyr-spirit  even  though  it  be  shown  in  other  ways 
than  the  endurance  of  bonds,  or  the  suffering  of  death.  There  is  not  a  tear  of 
sympathy  with  the  sorrows  of  others  which  we  shed  that  falls  without  His  know- 
ledge. His  presence  is  with  us  to  encourage  and  strengthen  us  in  these  little  as  in 
the  greater  trials,  and  faithfulness  here  will  have  its  own  reward.  II.  Little 
PEFBCI8  weaken  the  INFLUENCE  OF  MANY  viBTUEs.  "  One  sinner "  (the  wise  man 
tells  us)  **  destroy eth  much  good,"  and  then  following  out  the  principle  he  proceeds 
to  show  by  an  expressive  illustration  how  a  little  sin  or  even  folly  in  a  good  xa&u 
may  rob  him  of  much  of  the  power  that  otherwise  he  would  possess  for  good- 
"  Dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  apothecary  to  send  forth  a  stinking  savour,, 
80  doth  a  little  folly  him  that  is  in  reputation  for  wisdom  and  honour."  The  world 
is  always  on  the  watch  for  the  faults  of  Christians.  But  the  point  on  which  we 
wish  chiefly  to  insist  is  that  men's  estimate  of  our  character  is  regulated  chiefly  by 
their  observation  of  little  things.  III.  Little  tbinos  oontbibdib  hatebially  to 
THU!  FOBUATioN  OF  CHABACTEB,  Under  the  operation  of  varied  causes,  of  whose 
power  over  us  we  are  hardly  conscious,  we  are  continually  growing  in  holiness  of 
■inking  lower  and  lower  in  sin,  by  a  process  so  gradual  as  to  be  scarcely  perceptible. 
Conversion  may  be  sudden,  but  not  sanctification.  Our  power  of  resistance  is  to 
grow  by  constant  exercise  ;  our  love,  fed  by  the  ministry  of  Providence  and  grace, 
is  to  burn  with  an  ever  brighter  and  purer  flame ;  our  path  is  to  be  like  the  shining 
light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  Thus,  by  listening  to 
every  voice  of  instruction,  by  using  every  opportunity,  by  watchfulness  in  the  leasi 
things,  are  we  to  attain  spiritual  increase.  There  is  a  part  of  our  Lancashire  coask 
on  which  the  sea  is  making  steady  encroachments.  Those  who  have  long  been 
familiar  with  its  scenery  can  point  yon  to  places  over  which  the  tide  now  rolls  it» 
waters,  where  a  few  short  years  ago  they  wandered  along  the  grassy  cliff,  and  stood 
to  watch  the  play  of  the  wild  waves  beneath.  From  year  to  year  the  observer  may- 
note  continued  alteration — fresh  portions  of  the  cliff  swept  away,  and  the  bed  of  the 
ocean  becoming  ever  wider.  Were  he  to  ask  for  an  account  of  these  changes,  some 
would  tell  him  that  during  a  terrible  tempest  the  sea  had  rolled  in  with  more  than 
its  Qsnal  violence  and  carried  away  great  fragments  of  solid  earth — and  fancy  that 
thus  they  had  told  the  whole  story.  His  own  eyes,  however,  gave  him  fuller  infor- 
xnation.    He  sees  aroond  him  preparations  for  Uie  desolations  of  the  ooming  winter* 


«24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Xyi. 

Other  places  are  now  menaced  with  the  fate  of  their  predecessors,  and  the  work  if 
already  being  done — the  process  may  be  gradual,  but  sure — every  tide  of  more  than 
ordinary  power  is  contributing  something  towards  it — "by  httle  and  little"  tha 
work  advances,  and  all  is  making  ready  for  the  fiercer  storm  which  shall  put  tha 
final  stroke  to  what  may  seem  to  be  the  work  of  a  night,  but  is  in  reality  that  of 
weeks  and  months.  This  is  a  picture  but  too  true  of  incidents  in  the  spiritual  life 
of  man.  Sometimes  the  successive  steps  of  the  process  are  all  hidden,  and  we  see 
only  the  sad  result ;  in  others  its  advances  may  be  more  distinctly  marked.  (/.  O. 
Guinness,  B.A.)  Gradual  attainment  of  holiness  : — Holinesa  of  character  is  not  a 
,^  thing  into  which  we  can  jamp  in  a  moment,  and  just  when  we  please.     It  is  not 

/f^  like  a  mushroom,  the  growth  of  an  hour.     It  cannot  be  attained  without  great 

^^••^  watchfulness,  earnest  effort,  much  prayer,  and  a  very  close  walk  with  Jesus.    Like 

the  coral  reef  which  grows  by  little  daily  additions  until  it  is  strong  enough  to 
resist  the  mighty  waves  of  the  ocean,  so  is  a  holy  character  made  up  of  what  may 
be  called  littles,  though  in  truth  each  of  those  littles  is  of  vast  importance.  Little 
duties  prayerfully  discharged  ;  little  temptations  earnestly  resisted  in  the  strength 
which  God  supplies  out  of  the  fulness  which  He  has  made  to  dwell  in  Jesus  Christ 
for  His  people ;  little  sins  avoided,  or  crucified  ;  these  all  together  help  to  form  that 
holy  character  which,  in  the  hour  of  need,  will  be,  under  God,  such  a  sure  defence 
to  the  Christian.  (A.  C.  Price,  B.A.)  Fidelity  in  little  things: — In  every 
l^j>^-        thought,  word,  and  act  of  an  intelligent  agent,  there  is  a  moral  principle  involved. 

1.  Fidelity  in  little  things  commends  itself  to  us,  when  we  consider  our  inability 
to  estimate  the  prospective  value,  power,  and  influence  of  the  smallest  things. 

2.  Fidelity  in  little  things  commends  itself  when  we  consider  that  it  is  only  by 
attention  to  small  things  that  we  can  hope  to  be  faithful  in  great.    Great  events 

^  J  .  often  turn  on  little  hinges.  Chemists  say,  one  grain  of  iodine  will  impart  its  colour 
'•"'  to  seven  thousand  times  its  weight  in  water.  So,  often,  a  little  deed  containing  a 
great  moral  principle  will  impart  its  nature  to  many  hearts  and  lives.  3.  Attention 
to  small  things  is  important,  as  it  relates  to  our  individual  character.  Its  effect  is 
subjective  as  well  as  objective.  A  beautiful  character  reaches  its  climax  by  pro- 
gressive development.  You  cannot  paint  it  on  the  life.  It  must  be  inwrought^ 
4.  The  example  given  as  by  Christ,  our  great  prototype,  should  prompt  us  to 
fidelity  in  little  things.  5.  We  should  exercise  the  strictest  fidelity  in  all  things, 
small  and  great,  because  we  are  to  be  judged  in  view  of  these  things.  (J.  W. 
Bledsoe.)  On  religious  principle ;— Consider  the  excellence  of  religious  principle — 
1.  In  the  energy  of  its  operation.  (1)  Promptness  in  decision.  (2)  Determination 
to  do  one's  duty.  (3)  Courage.  (4)  Self-denial.  2.  In  the  uniformity  of  its 
effects.  3.  In  the  extent  of  its  influence.  It  prompts  to  the  discharge  of  every 
duty,  and  to  the  avoidance  of  every  sin.  4.  The  simplicity  of  its  character. 
6.  The  perpetuity  of  its  existence.  Undecaying  and  immortal.  {Essex  Remem- 
irancer.)  Faithful  in  little,  faithful  in  much : — Now  let  us  look,  for  a  moment 
4>r  two,  at  these  three  principles.    I.  From  the  highest  point  of  view,  tbue  vaith- 

iFULNESS    KKOWB    KO    DISTINCTION    BETWEEN    OBSAT    AND    SMAIiL    DUTIES.       FrOm  the 

highest  point  of  view — that  is,  from  God's  point  of  view — to  Him,  nothing  is  great, 
nothing  small,  as  we  measure  it.  The  worth  and  the  quality  of  an  action  depends 
on  its  motive  only,  and  not  at  all  on  its  prominence,  or  on  any  other  of  the 
Accidents  which  we  are  always  apt  to  adopt  as  the  tests  of  the  greatness  of  oar 
/  'deeds.  The  largeness  of  the  consequences  of  anything  that  we  do  is  no  measure  of 
^  the  true  greatness  or  true  value  of  it.  So  it  is  in  regard  to  God  Himself,  and  His 
doings.  What  can  be  little  to  the  making  of  which  there  goes  the  force  of  a  soul 
that  can  know  God,  and  must  abide  for  evermore  ?  Nothing  is  small  that  a  spirit 
43au  do.  Nothing  is  small  that  can  be  done  from  a  mighty  motive.  Faithfulness 
measures  acts  as  God  measures  them.  "  Large  "  or  "  small "  are  not  words  for  tha 
vocabulary  of  conscience.  It  knows  only  two  words — right  and  wrong.  The  circle 
that  is  in  a  gnat's  eye  is  as  true  a  circle  as  the  one  that  holds  within  its  sweep  all 
the  stars ;  and  the  sphere  that  a  dew-drop  makes  is  as  perfect  a  sphere  as  that  of 
the  world.  AU  duties  are  the  same  which  are  done  from  the  same  motive ;  all  acta 
which  are  not  so  done  are  ahke  sins.  Faithfulness  is  one  in  every  region.  Large 
or  small  is  of  no  account  to  the  Sovereign  eye.  "  He  that  reoeiveth  a  prophet  in 
4he  name  of  a  prophet  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward,"  because  though  not  gifted 
'With  the  prophet's  tongue,  he  has  the  prophet's  spirit,  and  does  his  small  act  of 
hospitaUty  from  the  very  same  prophet-impulse  which  in  another,  who  is  more 
ioftily  endowed,  leads  to  burning  words  and  mighty  deeds.  Faithfulness  is  faith* 
folness,  on  whatsoever  scale  it  be  set  forth  1    II.  Then — in  another  point  of  ynam. 


•■IP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  925 

FAITHFULNESS    IN    SMALL    DUTIES    IS    EVEN    GBEATEB    THAN    rAITHFOTjNESB    IN    GREAT. 

Great  things  that  are  great  because  they  seem  to  have  very  wide-reaching  conse- 
quences, and  seem  to  be  hfted  up  upon  a  pinnacle  of  splendour ;  or  great  things 
that  are  great  because  there  was  severe  resistance  that  had  to  be  overcome  before 
we  did  them,  and  sore  temptations  that  were  dragging  us  down  on  our  way  to  the 
performance  of  them — are  really  great  and  lofty.  Only,  the  little  duties  that  had 
no  mighty  consequences,  no  glittering  splendour  about  them,  and  the  little  duties 
that  had  not  much  strife  with  temptation  before  they  were  done,  may  be  as  great, 
as  great  in  God's  eye,  as  great  perhaps  in  their  consequences,  as  great  in  their 
rewards,  as  in  the  other.  Ah,  my  brother,  it  is  a  far  harder  thing,  and  it  is  a  far 
higher  proof  of  a  thorough-going  persistent  Christian  principle  woven  into  the  very 
texture  of  my  soul,  to  go  on  plodding  and  patient,  never  taken  by  surprise  by  any 
small  temptation,  than  to  gather  into  myself  the  strength  which  God  has  given  me» 
and,  expecting  some  great  storm  to  come  down  upon  me,  to  stand  fast  and  let  it 
rage.  It  is  a  great  deal  easier  to  die  once  for  Christ  than  to  live  always  for  Him» 
It  is  a  great  deal  easier  to  do  some  single  mighty  act  of  self-surrender,  than  daily — 
unnoticed,  patiently — to  "  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts.*'  Let  a» 
neither  repine  at  our  narrow  spheres,  nor  fancy  that  we  can  afford  to  live  care- 
lessly in  them  because  they  are  narrow.  The  smallest  duties  are  often  harder — 
because  of  their  apparent  insignificance,  because  of  their  constant  recurrence — 
harder  than  the  great  ones.  But  do  not  let  us  forget  that  if  harder,  they  are  on  the- 
whole  more  needful.    The  world  has  more  need  of  a  great  number  of  Christian 

{>eople  doing  little  things  like  Christians,  than  it  has  need  of  one  apostle  preaching 
ike  an  apostle,  or  one  martyr  dying  like  a  martyr.  The  mass  of  trifles  makes 
magnitude.  The  little  things  are  greater  than  the  great,  because  of  their  number. 
They  are  more  efficacious  than  the  single  lofty  acts.  Like  the  air  which  in  th& 
lungs  needs  to  be  broken  up  into  small  particles,  and  diffused  ere  it  parts  with  its 
vitalizing  principle  to  the  blood,  so  the  minute  acts  of  obedience,  and  the  exhibition 
of  the  power  of  the  gospel  in  the  thousand  trifles  of  Christian  lives,  permeating 
everywhere,  will  vitalize  the  world  and  will  preach  the  gospel  in  such  a  fashion  as 
never  can  be  done  by  any  single  and  occasional,  though  it  may  seem  to  be  more 
lofty  and  more  worthy,  agency.  Honour  the  trifles,  and  you  will  find  yourself  right 
ftbout  the  great  things  1     Lastly :  Faithfulness  in  that  which  is  least  is  thb 

PRBPABATION    FOB,   AND    8E0UBES    OUB    HAVINQ    A    WIDEB    SPHEBE    IN   WHICH   TO   OBEY 

God.  Of  course,  it  is  quite  easy  to  see  how,  if  once  we  are  doing,  what  I  have 
already  said  is  the  harder  task — habitually  doing  the  little  things  wisely  and  well, 
for  the  love  of  Christ  and  in  the  fear  of  God — we  shall  be  fitted  for  the  sorest 
eudden  temptations,  and  shall  be  made  able  to  perform  far  larger  and  far  more 
apparently  splendid  acts.  Every  power  strengthens  by  exercise.  Every  act  of 
obedience  smoothes  the  road  for  all  that  shall  come  after.  And,  on  the  other  side, 
the  same  process  exactly  goes  on  to  make  men,  by  slow  degrees,  unfaithful  in  all. 
Tampering  with  a  trifle  ;  saying.  Oh,  it  is  a  small  matter,  and  I  can  venture  it ;  or. 
It  is  a  little  thing,  too  little  for  mighty  motives  to  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it — that 
ends  in  this — "  unjust  also  in  much."  My  brother,  life  is  all  great.  Life  is  great 
because  it  is  the  aggregation  of  littles.  As  the  chalk  cliffs  in  the  South,  that  rear 
themselves  hundreds  of  feet  above  the  crawling  sea  beneath,  are  all  made  up  of  the 
minute  skeletons  of  microscopic  animalculffi  ;  so  life,  mighty  and  awful  as  having 
eternal  consequences,  life  that  towers  beetling  over  the  sea  of  eternity,  is  made  up 
of  these  minute  incidents,  of  these  trifling  duties,  of  these  small  tasks ;  and 
if  thou  art  not  "faithful  in  that  which  is  least,"  thou  art  unfaithful  in  the 
whole.  He  only  is  faithful  that  is  full  of  faith.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Guilt  f.,fW* 
not  to  be  estimated  by  gain: — I.  The  great  principle  of  the  text  is,  that  he 
who  has  sinned,  though  to  a  smaU  amount  in  respect  of  the  fruit  of  his  transgres- 
sion— provided  he  has  done  so  by  passing  over  a  forbidden  limit  which  was  distinctly 
known  to  him,  has,  in  the  act  of  doing  so,  incurred  a  full  condemnation  in  respect 
of  the  principle  of  his  transgression.  In  one  word,  that  the  gain  of  it  may  be  small, 
while  the  guilt  of  it  may  be  great ;  that  the  latter  ought  not  to  be  measured  by  the  y  /^ -•'/»-.•-- 
former ;  but  that  he  who  is  unfaithful  in  the  least  shall  be  dealt  with,  in  respect  ol  — — rT" 
the  offence  he  bas  given  to  God,  in  the  same  way  as  if  he  had  been  unfaithful  in 
much.  1.  The  first  reason  which  we  would  assign  in  vindication  of  this  is,  that, 
by  a  small  act  of  injustice,  the  line  which  separates  the  right  from  the  wrong  is 
just  as  effectually  broken  over  as  by  a  great  act  of  injustice.  There  is  no  shading 
off  at  the  margin  of  guilt,  but  a  clear  and  vigorous  delineation.  It  is  not  by  a 
gentle  transition  that  a  man  steps  over  from  honesty  to  dishonesty.  There  it- 
▼01..  m.  16 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OTTip.  xn. 

between  them  a  wall  rising  np  unto  heaven ;  and  the  high  authority  of  heaven 
mast  be  stormed  ere  one  inch  of  entrance  can  be  made  into  the  region  of  iniquity. 
The  morality  of  the  Saviour  never  leads  him  to  glosa  over  beginnings  of  crime.  3; 
The  second  reason  why  he  who  is  unfaithful  in  the  least  has  incurred  the  con. 
demnation  of  him  who  is  unfaithful  in  much,  is,  that  the  littleness  of  the  gain,  so 
far  from  giving  a  littleness  to  the  guilt,  is  in  fact  a  circumstance  of  aggravation. 
There  is  just  this  difference.  He  who  has  committed  injustice  for  the  sake  of  alesa 
advantage  has  done  it  on  the  impulse  of  a  less  temptation.  Nay,  by  the  second 
reason,  this  may  serve  to  aggravate  the  wrath  of  the  Divinity  against  him.  It 
proves  how  small  the  price  is  which  he  sets  upon  his  eternity,  and  how  cheaply  ha 
can  bargain  the  favour  of  God  away  from  him,  and  how  low  he  rates  the  good  of 
an  inheritance  with  Him,  and  for  what  a  trifle  he  can  dispose  of  all  interest  in  His 
kingdom  and  in  His  promises.  It  is  at  the  precise  limit  between  the  right  and  the 
wrong  that  the  flaming  sword  of  God's  law  is  placed.  It  is  there  that  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  "  presents  itself,  in  legible  characters,  to  our  view.  It  is  there  where  the 
operation  of  His  commandment  begins  ;  and  not  at  any  of  those  higher  gradations 
where  a  man's  dishonesty  flrst  appals  himself  by  the  chance  of  its  detection,  or 
appals  others  by  the  mischief  and  insecurity  which  it  brings  upon  social  life.  II. 
Let  us  now  attempt  to  unfold  a  few  of  the  pkactical  consequences  that  may  bb 
SBAWN  FROU  THE  PBiNOiPLE  OF  THE  TEXT,  both  in  respect  to  our  general  relation 
with  God,  and  in  respect  to  the  particular  lesson  of  faithfulness  which  may  be 
deduced  from  it.  1.  There  cannot  be  a  stronger  possible  illustration  of  our 
argument  than  the  very  first  act  of  retribution  that  occurred  in  the  history  of  our 
species.  What  is  it  that  invests  the  eating  of  a  solitary  apple  with  a  grandeur  so 
momentous  ?  How  came  an  action,  in  itself  so  minute,  to  be  the  germ  of  such 
mighty  consequences  ?  We  may  not  be  able  to  answer  all  these  questions ;  but  we 
may  at  least  learn  what  a  thing  of  danger  it  is,  under  the  government  of  a  holy 
and  inflexible  God,  to  tamper  with  the  limits  of  obedience.  2.  Let  us,  therefore, 
urge  the  spirit  and  the  practice  of  this  lesson  upon  your  observation.  It  is  evange- 
lizing human  life  by  impregnating  its  minutest  transactions  with  the  spirit  of  the 
gospel.  It  is  strengthening  the  wall  of  partition  between  sin  and  obedience.  It  is 
the  teacher  of  righteousness  taking  his  stand  at  the  outpost  of  that  territory  which 
he  is  appointed  to  defend,  and  warning  his  hearers  of  the  danger  that  lies  in  a 
single  footstep  of  encroachment.  It  is  letting  them  know  that  it  is  in  the  act  of 
stepping  over  the  limifr  that  the  sinner  throws  the  gauntlet  of  his  defiance  against 
the  authority  of  God.  It  may  appear  a  very  little  thing,  when  you  are  told  to  be 
honest  in  little  matters ;  when  the  servant  is  told  to  keep  her  hand  from  every  one 
article  about  which  there  is  not  an  express  or  understood  allowance  on  the  part  of 
her  superiors  ;  when  the  dealer  is  told  to  lop  off  the  excesses  of  that  minuter 
{raudulency  which  is  so  currently  practised  in  the  humble  walks  of  merchandise  ; 
when  the  workman  is  told  to  abstain  from  those  petty  reservations  of  the  material 
of  his  work  for  which  he  is  said  to  have  such  snug  and  ample  opportunity ;  and 
when,  without  pronouncing  on  the  actual  extent  of  these  transgressions,  all  are  told 
to  be  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  else,  if  there  be  truth  in  our  text,  they  incur 
the  guilt  of  being  unfaithful  in  much.  It  may  be  thought,  that  because  such 
dishonesties  as  these  are  scarcely  noticeable,  they  are  therefore  not  worthy  of 
notice.  But  it  is  just  in  the  proportion  of  ^their  being  nnnoticeable  by  the  human 
,  eye,  that  it  is  religious  to  refrain  from  them.  These  are  the  cases  in  which  it  will 
be  seen,  whether  the  control  of  the  omniscience  of  God  makes  up  for  the  control  of 
human  observation — in  which  the  sentiment,  that  "  Thou  God  seest  me  1  "  should 
carry  a  preponderance  through  all  the  secret  places  of  a  man's  history — in  which, 
when  every  earthly  check  of  an  earthly  morality  is  withdrawn,  it  should  be  felt  that 
the  eye  of  God  is  upon  him,  and  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  in  reserve  for  him. 
/r.   Chalmer$,  D.D.)  Faithfulness  in  little  things  : — In  our  text  the  Master 

declares  that  fidelity,  which  is  an  element  of  conscience,  must  be  thorough.  It 
must  not  be  an  optional  thing,  chosen  when  we  see  that  it  will  be  better  than  any 
other  instrument  to  secure  a  desired  end.  It  must  belong  to  every  part  of  life, 
pervading  it.  It  must  belong  to  the  least  things  as  much  as  to  the  highest.  It  is 
not  a  declaration  that  Uttle  things  are  as  important  as  great  things.  It  is  not  a 
declaration  that  the  conscience  is  to  regard  all  duties  as  of  one  magnitude  and  of 

(one  importance.  It  is  a  declaration  that  the  habit  of  violating  conscience,  even  in 
the  least  things,  produces  mischief  that  at  last  invalidate  it  for  the  greatest,  and 
that  is  a  truth  that  scarcely  can  have  contradiction.  I  propose  to  illustrate  thin 
trath  in  some  of  its  relations  to  life.     In  the  first  place,  I  shall  speak  of  th« 


«HAr.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  227 

heedlessness  and  anconscientiouEness  with  which  men  take  up  opinions  and  form 
judgments,  on  every  side  and  of  every  kind,  in  daily  life.  In  regard  to  events,  men 
seldom  make  it  a  matter  of  conscience  to  see  things  as  they  are,  and  hear  things  aa 
they  really  report  themselves.  They  follow  their  curiosity,  their  sense  of  wonder, 
their  temper,  their  interests,  or  their  prejudices,  instead  of  their  judgment  and 
their  conscience.  There  are  few  men  who  make  it  a  point  to  know  just  what  things 
do  happen  of  which  they  are  called  to  speak,  and  just  how  they  happen.  How 
many  men  were  there  round  the  corner?  '* Twenty,"  says  the  man,  quickly. 
There  were  seven.  How  long  did  you  have  to  wait?  "Two  hours,  at  least."  It 
was  just  three-quarters  of  an  hour  by  the  watch.  So,  in  a  thousand  things  that 
happen  every  day,  one  man  repeats  what  his  imagination  reported  to  him,  and 
another  man  what  his  impatient,  irritable  feelings  said  to  him.  There  are  very 
few  men  that  make  it  a  matter  of  deliberate  conscience  to  see  things  as  they  are, 
and  report  them  as  they  happen.  This  becomes  a  great  hindrance  to  business, 
clogs  it,  keeps  men  under  the  necessity  of  revising  their  false  impressions  ;  expends 
time  and  work ;  puts  men  on  false  tracks  and  in  wrong  directions  ;  multiplies  the 
burdens  of  life.  But  its  worse  effect  is  seen  in  the  judgments  and  prejudices  which 
men  are  liable  to  entertain  about  their  fellow-men,  and  the  false  sentences  which 
they  are  accustomed  to  issue,  either  by  word  of  mouth  or  by  thoughts  and  feelings. 
In  thousands  of  men,  the  mind,  if  unveiled,  would  be  found  to  be  a  Star-chamber 
filled  with  false  witnesses  and  cruel  judgments.  The  effect  in  each  case  may  be 
small,  but  if  you  consider  the  sum-totals  of  a  man's  life,  and  the  grand  amount  of 
the  endless  scenes  of  false  impressions,  of  wicked  judgments,  of  causeless  prejudices, 
they  will  be  found  to  be  enormous.  This,  however,  is  the  least  evil.  It  is  the 
entire  untrastworthiness  of  a  moral  sense  which  has  been  so  dealt  with  that  is  most 
to  be  deplored.  The  conscience  ought  to  be  like  a  perfect  mirror.  It  ought  to 
reflect  exactly  the  image  that  falls  upon  it.  A  man's  judgment  that  is  kept  clear 
by  commerce  with  conscience  ought  to  reveal  things  as  they  are,  facts  as  they  exist, 
«nd  conduct  as  it  occurs.  Now  it  is  not  necessary  to  break  a  mirror  to  pieces  in 
order  to  make  it  worthless.  Let  one  go  behind  it  with  a  pencil,  or  with  a  needle  of 
the  finest  point,  and,  with  delicate  touch,  make  the  smallest  line  through  the  silver 
coating  of  the  back ;  the  next  day  let  him  make  another  line  at  right  angles  to 
that ;  and  the  third  day  let  him  make  still  another  line  parallel  to  the  first  one  ; 
and  the  next  day  let  him  make  another  line  parallel  to  the  second,  and  so  continue 
to  do  day  by  day,  and  one  year  shall  not  have  passed  away  before  that  mirror  will 
be  80  scratched  that  it  will  be  good  for  nothing.  It  is  not  necessary  to  deal  it  a 
hard  blow  to  destroy  its  power ;  these  delicate  touches  will  do  it,  little  by  little.  It  '.V^ 
is  not  necessary  to  be  a  murderer  or  a  burglar  in  order  to  destroy  the  moral  sense ; 
bat  ah !  these  million  Uttle  infelicities,  as  they  are  called,  these  scratchings  and 
raspings,  take  the  silver  off  £rom  the  back  of  the  conscience — take  the  tone  and 
temper  out  of  the  moral  sense.  Nay,  we  do  not  need  even  such  mecbanical  forca 
as  this;  just  let  the  apartment  be  uncleansed  in  which  the  mirror  stands:  let 
j>articleg  of  dust,  and  the  little  flocculent  parts  of  smoke,  settle  film  by  film,  fiaka 
by  fiake,  speck  by  speck,  upon  the  surface  of  the  mirror,  and  its  function  ia 
destroyed,  so  that  it  will  reflect  neither  the  image  of  yoorself  nor  of  anything  else. 
Its  function  is  as  much  destroyed  as  if  it  were  dashed  to  pieces.  Not  even  is  this 
needed ;  only  let  one  come  so  near  to  it  that  his  warm  breath  falling  on  its  cold 
face  is  condensed  to  vapour,  and  then  it  can  make  no  report.  Now  there  are  eom- 
paratively  few  men  who  destroy  their  moral  sense  by  a  dash  and  a  blow,  bnt  there 
is  many  a  man  whose  conscience  is  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron.  The  effect  of  this  is 
not  merely  to  teach  us  the  moral  lesson  that  man  is  fallible ;  it  is  to  diminish  the 
trust  of  man  in  man.  And  what  is  the  effect  of  diminishing  that  ?  It  is  to 
introduce  an  element  which  dissevers  society,  which  drives  men  away  from  one 
another,  and  takes  away  our  strength.  Faith  in  man,  trust  in  man,  is  the  great 
law  of  cohesion  in  human  society.  And  so  this  infidelity  in  little  things  and  little 
dnties  works  both  inwardly  as  well  as  outwardly.  It  deteriorates  the  moral  sense  ; 
it  makes  men  nnreUable ;  it  makes  man  stand  in  doubt  of  man  ;  it  loosens  the  ties 
that  bind  society  together,  and  make  it  strong ;  it  is  the  very  counteracting  agent 
of  that  divine  love  which  was  meant  to  bring  men  together  in  power.  The  same 
truth,  yet  more  apparently,  and  with  more  melancholy  results,  is  seen  in^the  on- 
trustworthiness  and  infidelity  of  men  in  matters  of  honesty  and  dishonesty.  The 
man  that  steals  one  penny  is — just  as  great  a  transgressor  as  if  he  stole  a  thousand 
dollars  ?  No,  not  that.  The  man  that  steals  one  single  penny  is — as  great  a 
transgressor  against  the  laws  of  society  as  if  he  stole  a  thousand  dollars  T    No,  aol 


,C 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

jj^^^^jij*  exactly  that.  The  man  that  steals  one  penny  is — jast  as  great  a  transgressor 
against  the  commercial  interests  of  men  as  if  he  stole  a  thousand  dollars  ?  No, 
not  that.  The  man  that  steals  a  penny  is  just  as  great  a  transgressor  against  the 
purity  of  his  own  conscience  as  if  he  stole  a  million  of  dollars.  The  danger  of  these 
little  things  is  veiled  under  a  false  impression.  You  will  hear  a  man  say  of  hia 
boy,  '*  Though  he  may  tell  a  Httle  lie,  he  would  not  tell  a  big  one ;  though  he  may 

Sractise  a  little  deceit,  he  would  not  practise  a  big  one ;  though  he  may  commit  a 
ttle  dishonesty,  he  would  not  commit  a  big  one."  But  these  little  things  are  the 
ones  that  destroy  the  honour,  and  the  moral  sense,  and  throw  down  the  fence,  and 
let  a  whole  herd  of  buffaloes  of  temptation  drive  right  through  you.  Criminals  that 
die  on  the  gallows  ;  miserable  creatures  that  end  their  days  in  poorhouses ;  wretched 
beings  that  hide  themselves  in  loathsome  places  in  cities ;  men  that  are  driven  as 
exiles  across  the  sea  and  over  the  world — these  are  the  ends  of  little  things,  the 
beginnings  of  which  were  thought  to  be  safe.  It  is  these  little  things  that  constitute 
your  peculiar  temptation  and  your  worst  danger.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Little  things 
tests  of  character : — Can  you  discover  a  man's  character  more  accurately  by  his 
public,  extraordinary  acts,  than  by  his  ordinary,  everyday  conduct  and  spirit? 
Which  is  the  true  Marlborough — the  general  in  the  field  winning  brilliant  victories, 
or  the  peculator  in  his  chamber  manipulating  papers  for  defrauding  the  public 
treasury  ?  Which  is  the  real  man — Lord  Bacon  on  the  bench,  or  Lord  Bacon  with 
open  palm  behind  his  back  feeling  for  bribes  ?  Which  is  the  true  woman — the  lady 
in  the  parlour  courteously  receiving  her  guests,  or  the  termagant  rendering  home 
wretched  by  everyday  exactions  and  scoldings  ?  Jesus  teaches  that  the  little  things 
of  everyday  life  reveal  true  character,  and  show  the  man  as  he  is  in  himself,  by 
referring  to  the  ordinary  tempers  by  which  he  is  governed.  Is  it  not  plain,  when 
simply  announced,  that  general  conduct  in  little  things  is  a  truer  test  of  a  man's 
real  character  than  occasional  isolated  acts  could  be  ?  1.  Little  things  make  up 
the  vast  universe.  The  clouds  gather  up  the  rains  in  moisture,  and  part  with  them 
in  drops.  The  stars  do  not  leap  fitfully  along  their  orbits,  but  measure  with  equal 
movement  each  consecutive  mile.  All  the  analogies  of  nature  point  to  the  minute 
as  essential  to  the  harmony,  glory,  and  utility  of  the  whole.  And  little  things  are 
as  necessary  in  their  places  in  the  moral,  as  in  the  physical  world.  2.  Jehovah  is 
observant  of  little  things.  Sparrows.  Lilies.  Jehovah  neglects  nothing.  Nothing 
is  so  little  as  to  be  beneath  His  notice.  His  providence  regards  with  equtJ 
distinctness  a  worm  and  a  world,  a  unit  and  a  universe.  You  are  unlike  your 
God  and  Saviour  if  you  neglect  little  things.  «'3.  Little  things  engross  the  most  of 
life.  Great  events  are  only  occasional.  Frequency  and  regularity  would  take 
away  from  their  greatness,  by  rendering  them  common.  We  shall  find  little  to  do, 
if  we  save  our  energies  for  great  occasions.  If  we  preserve  our  piety  for  prominent 
services,  we  shall  seldom  find  place  for  its  exercise.  Piety  is  not  something  for 
show,  but  something  for  use ;  not  the  gay  steed  in  the  curricle,  but  the  plough- 
horse  in  the  furrow;  not  jewellery  for  adornment,  but  calico  for  home  wear  and 
apron  for  the  kitchen.  4.  Attention  to  little  things  is  essential  to  efficiency  and 
^^.^^^uccess  in  accomplishing  great  things.  Letters  are  little  things,  but  he  who  scouts 
/t^yl  the  alphabet  will  never  read  David's  psalms.  The  mechanic  must  know  how  to 
^-"■^  sharpen  his  plane,  if  he  would  make  a  moulding ;  the  artist  must  ©ix  colours,  if  he 
would  paint  landscapes.  In  every  direction  the  great  is  reached  through  the  little. 
He  will  never  rise  to  great  services  who  will  not  pass  through  the  little,  and  train 
/  his  spiritual  nature,  and  educate  his  spiritual  capabilities.  Through  faithfulness  in 
the  least  he  rises  to  faithfulness  in  the  much,  and  not  otherwise.  5.  Little  things 
are  causes  of  great  events,  springs  of  large  influences.  To  know  whether  a  thing  is 
really  small  or  great,  you  must  trace  its  results.  Xerxes  led  millions  to  the  borders 
of  Greece.  It  looked  to  the  world  like  a  big  thing.  The  whole  vast  array 
accomplished  nothing.  It  turned  out  a  very  small  business.  The  turning  of  a  tiny 
needle  steadily  toward  a  fixed  point  is  a  little  common  thing,  but  it  guides  navies  along 
safe  and  sure  paths,  over  unmarked  oceans.  So  a  magnetic  word  has  guided  a  soul 
through  a  stormy  world  to  a  peaceful  haven.  A  simple,  secret  prayer  has  pierced 
and  opened  clouds  to  pour  down  showers  of  spiritual  blessings  upon  a  city  or  state. 
6.  Conscientiousness  in  little  things  is  the  best  evidence  of  sincere  piety.  7.  Faith- 
fulness in  little  things  is  essential  to  true  piety.  The  principle  of  obedience  is  simply 
doing  what  the  Lord  requires  because  He  requires  it.  There  is  nothing  little  if  God 
requires  it.  The  veriest  trifle  becomes  a  great  thing  if  the  alternative  of  obedience 
or  rebellion  is  involved  in  it.  Microscopic  holiness  is  the  perfection  of  excellence. 
To  hve  by  the  day,  and  to  watch  each  step,  is  the  true  pilgrimage  method.    (/.  L. 


OHAP.  xn.]  ST.  LVKh.  229 

Burrows,  D.D.)        Trial  of  fidelity  : — Here  are  two  great  truths  suggested  to  ns. 

1.  That  we  are  here  in  this  world  merely  on  trial,  and  serving  our  apprenticeship. 

2.  That  it  is  our  fidelity  that  is  tried,  not  so  much  whether  we  have  done  great  oi 
little  things,  but  whether  we  have  shown  the  spirit  which  above  all  else  a  steward 
should  show — fidelity  to  the  interests  entrusted  to  him.  The  two  verses  following, 
in  which  this  is  applied,  may  best  be  illustrated  by  familiar  figures.  "  If,"  says  our 
Lord,  "  ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon,  who  will  commit  to 
your  trust  that  which  is  real?  "  He  considers  us  all  in  this  world  as  children  busy 
with  mere  playthings  and  toys,  though  so  profoundly  in  earnest.  But,  looking  at 
^luldren  so  engaged,  you  can  perfectly  see  the  character  of  each.  Although  the 
actual  things  they  are  doing  are  of  no  moment  or  reality ;  although,  with  a  frank- 
ness and  penetration  not  given  to  their  elders,  they  know  they  are  but  playing,  yet 
each  is  exhibiting  the  very  qualities  which  will  afterwards  make  or  mar  him,  the 
selfish  greed  and  fraud  of  one  child  being  as  patent  as  the  guileless  open-handedness 
of  the  other.  To  the  watchful  parents  these  games  that  are  forgotten  in  the  night's 
sleep,  these  buildings  which  as  soon  as  complete  are  swept  away  to  make  room  for 
others,  are  as  thorough  a  revelation  of  the  character  of  the  child  as  affairs  of  state 
and  complicated  transactions  are  of  the  grown  man.  And  if  the  parent  sees  a 
grasping  selfishness  in  his  child,  or  a  domineering  inconsiderateness  of  every  one 
but  himself,  as  he  plays  at  buying  and  selliug,  building  and  visiting,  he  knows  that 
these  same  qualities  will  come  out  in  the  real  work  of  life,  and  will  unfit  their  pos- 
sessor for  the  best  work,  and  prevent  him  from  honourable  and  generous  conduct, 
and  all  the  highest  functions  and  duties  of  life.  So  our  Lord,  observant  of  the 
dispositions  we  are  showing  as  we  deal  with  the  shadowy  objects  and  passing  events 
of  this  seeming  substantial  world,  marks  as  off  as  fit  or  unfit  to  be  entrusted  with 
what  is  real  and  abiding.  If  this  man  shows  such  greed  for  the  gold  he  knows  he 
must  in  a  few  years  leave,  will  he  not  show  a  keener,  intenser  selfishness  in  regard 
to  what  is  abiding  ?  If  he  can  trample  on  other  people's  rights  for  the  sake  of  a 
pound  or  two,  how  can  he  be  trusted  to  deal  with  what  is  infinitely  more  valuable  ? 
If  here  in  a  world  where  mistakes  are  not  final,  and  which  is  destined  to  be  burned 
np  with  all  the  traces  of  evil  that  are  in  it — if  in  a  world  which,  after  all,  is  a  mere 
card-house,  or  in  which  we  are  apprentices  learning  the  use  of  our  tools,  and  busy 
with  work  which,  if  we  spoil,  we  do  no  irreparable  harm — if  here  we  display  incor- 
rigible negligence  and  incapacity  to  keep  a  high  aim  and  a  good  model  before  us, 
who  would  be  so  foolish  as  to  let  us  loose  among  eternal  matters,  things  of  abiding 
importance,  and  in  which  mistake  and  carelessness  aud  infidelity  are  irreparable  ? 
{Marcus  Dods,  D.D.)  We  are  being  watched  : — A  merchant  sees  among  his  clerks 
one  whose  look  and  bearing  are  prepossessing,  and  he  thinks  that  by  and  by  this 
lad  might  possibly  make  a  good  partner;  he  watches  him,  but  he  finds  him 
gradually  degenerating  into  slipshod  ways  of  doing  his  work,  coming  down  late  in 
the  mornings,  and  showing  no  zeal  for  the  growth  of  the  business ;  and  so  the 
thought  grows  in  his  mind,  "  If  he  is  not  faithful  in  that  which  is  another  man's, 
how  can  I  give  him  the  business  as  his  own  ?  I  can't  hand  over  my  business  to  one 
■who  will  squander  what  I  have  spent  my  life  in  accumulating ;  to  one  who  has  not 
sufficient  liking  for  work  to  give  himself  heartily  to  it,  or  sufficient  sense  of  honour 
to  do  it  heartily  whether  he  likes  it  or  no.  Much  as  I  should  like  to  lift  him  out  of 
a  subordinate  situation,  I  cannot  do  so."  Thus  are  determined  the  commercial  and 
social  prospects  of  many  an  unconscious  youth,  and  thus  are  determined  the  eternal 
prospects  of  many  a  heedless  servant  of  God,  who  little  thinks  that  the  Master's 
eye  is  upon  him,  and  that  by  hasting  to  be  rich  he  is  making  himself  eternally  poor, 

and  by  slackness  in  God's  service  is  ruining  his  own  future.     {Ibid.)       Influence  oj       ^  ^j 
little  things : — A  jest  led  to  a  war  between  two  great  nations.      The  presence  of  a     '     .V 
comma  in  a  deed  lost  to  the  owner  of  an  estate  one  thousand  pounds  a  month  for 
eight  months.   The  battle  of  Corunna,  in  1809,  is  said  to  have  been  fought,  and  the 
life  of  that  noble  officer  Sir  John  Moore  sacrificed,  through  a  dragoon  stopping  to 
drink  while  bearing  despatches.     A  man  lighting  a  tire  on  the  sea-shore  led  to  the 
Bev.  John  Newton's  honoured  labours  and  life  of  usefulness.      Little  kindnestet : — 
We  sin  by  omitting  cheap  acts  of  beneficence  in  our  daily  walk  and  among  oar  early 
companionship.     The  web  of  a  merciful  life  is  made  up  of  these  slender  threads.        ,  \ 
{J.  W.  Alexander,  D.D.)      Little  sins  : — A  man  who  was  hung  at  Carlisle  for  house-     (*t/ 
breaking  declared  that  his  first  Btep  to  ruin  was  taking  a  halfpenny  out  of  his 
mother's  pocket  while  she  was  asleep.    Another  offender,  convicted  of  housebreak- 
ing at  Chester,  said  at  the  gallows,  "  You  are  come  to  see  a  man  die.      Oh  1  take 
warning  by  me.     The  first  beginning  of  my  ruin  was  Sabbath- breaking.     It  led  mt 


d^ 


^ 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn, 

into  bad  company,  and  from  bad  company  to  robbing  orchards  and  gardens,  anc! 
then  to  housebreaking,  and  that  has  brought  me  to  this  place."  Faithfulne$* 
shown  in  restitution  of  wrongful  gains  : — A  brother  in  the  ministry  took  occasion  to 
preach  on  the  passage,  "  He  that  is  unjust  iu  the  least  is  unjust  also  in  much." 
The  theme  was,  "  that  men  who  take  advantage  of  others  in  small  things  have  the 
very  element  of  character  to  wrong  the  community  and  individuals  in  great  things, 
where  the  prospect  of  escaping  detection  or  censure  is  as  little  to  be  dreaded."  The 
preacher  exposed  the  various  ways  by  which  people  wrong  others ;  such  as  borrow- 
ing, by  mistakes  in  making  change,  by  eiTors  in  accounts,  by  escaping  taxes  and 
custom-house  duties,  by  managing  to  escape  postage,  by  finding  articles  and  never 
seeking  owners,  and  by  injuring  articles  borrowed,  and  never  making  the  fact  known 
to  the  owner  when  returned.  One  lady  the  next  day  met  her  pastor,  and  said,  "  I 
have  been  to  rectify  an  error  made  in  giving  me  change  a  few  weeks  ago,  for  I  felt 
bitterly  your  reproof  yesterday."  Another  individual  went  to  Boston  to  pay  for  an 
article  not  in  her  bill,  which  she  noticed  was  not  charged  when  she  paid  it.  A  man 
going  home  from  meeting  said  to  his  companion,  "I  do  not  believe  there  was  a  man 
in  the  meeting-house  to-day  who  did  not  feel  condemned."  After  applying  the 
sermon  to  a  score  or  more  of  his  acquaintances,  he  continued,  "Did  not  the  pastor 
utter  something  about  finding  a  pair  of  wheels?"  "I  believe  not,  neighbour  A. 
He  spoke  of  keeping  little  things  which  had  been  found."  "  Well,  I  thought  he 
said  something  about  finding  a  pair  of  wheels,  and  supposed  he  meant  me.  I  found 
a  pair  down  in  my  lot  a  while  ago."  "Do  you,"  said  his  companion,  "  know  who 
they  belong  to  ?  Mr.  B.  lost  them  a  short  time  ago."  The  owner  was  soon  in  the 
possession  of  his  wheels.  (Vermont  Chronicle.)  Unfaithfulness  in  little: — A  king 
appointed  one  servant  over  his  gold  treasure,  another  over  his  straw.  The  latter'a 
honesty  being  suspected,  he  was  angry  because  the  gold  had  not  been  trusted  to 
him.  The  king  said,  "  Thou  fool,  if  thou  couldst  not  be  trusted  with  straw,  how 
can  any  one  trust  thee  with  gold?"  (Archbinhop  Trench.)  Momentary  unfaith- 
fulness to  be  avoided: — A  Corsican  gentleman,  who  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the 
(Jenoese,  was  thrown  into  a  dark  dungeon,  where  he  was  chained  to  the  ground. 
While  he  was  in  this  dismal  situation  the  Genoese  sent  a  message  to  him,  that  if 
he  would  accept  of  a  commission  in  their  service,  he  might  have  it.  "  No,"  said 
he ;  "  were  I  to  accept  your  offer,  it  would  be  with  a  determined  purpose  to  take 
the  first  opportunity  of  returning  to  the  service  of  my  country.  But  I  would  not 
have  my  countrymen  even  suspect  that  I  could  be  one  moment  unfaithful. "  Y» 
cannot  serve  God  and  mammon. — The  crime  of  avarice : — I.  Keasons  why  avakicb 
SHOULD  BE  GDAKDED  AGAINST.  1.  The  avaricious  man  usually  leads  a  miserable  life, 
making  no  use  of  his  wealth.  2.  Avarice  takes  away  a  man's  peace  of  mind.  (1) 
The  avaricious  man  is  in  constant  disquietude — (a)  Through  terror  of  losing  hia 
possessions.  (6)  Through  envy  of  others,  and  the  craving  to  possess  their  property, 
(c)  Through  desire  to  accumulate  more  wealth.  (2)  The  avaricious  man  is  incon- 
solable at  the  loss  of  his  riches.  2.  Avarice  is  a  base  vice,  and  the  source  of  many 
other  vices.  3.  Avarice  almost  inevitably  leads  to  eternal  ruin.  II.  Means  to  bb 
ADOPTED  FOB  ouAEDiNQ  AGAINST  AVAKicE.  1.  Eudeavour  to  know  yoursclf,  your 
inclinations,  passions,  desires  ;  and  examine  yourself  in  order  to  ascertain 
whether  you  cannot  find  some  symptom  of  avarice  within  yourself.  Such  symptoms 
are — (1)  A  greater  confidence  in  temporal  goods  than  in  Almighty  God  (Psa.  lii.  7). 
/(2)  Unscrupulousness  in  the  manner  of  acquiring  temporal  goods.  (3)  Excessive 
grief  at  the  loss  of  temporal  goods.  (4)  If  you  do  not  use  temporal  goods  for  the 
glory  of  God,  nor  for  your  own  and  your  neighbours'  needs.  2.  Strive  to  keep  from 
your  soul  the  vice  of  avarice.  ,(1)  By  continual  struggle  against  the  concupis- 
cence of  money  and  riches  (Psa.  Ixii.  10).  (2)  By  the  exercise  of  opposite  virtues, 
especially  that  of  Christian  charity.  You  will  experience  the  joys  earned  by  these 
virtues.  (3)  By  supplication  for  the  removal  of  the  temptation.  (Chevassu.) 
The  two  masters  : — "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters  ;  for  either  he  will  hate  the  one 
and  love  the  other :  or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other.  Ye 
cannot  serve  Qod  and  mammon  "  (Matt.  vi.  24).  In  one  point  of  view,  this  sounds 
very  strangely  ;  for  nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  we  can  serve  two  masters. 
Every  child  that  is  dutifully  reared  serves  two  masters — its  father  and  its  mother ; 
and  it  is  quite  possible  for  one  to  be  a  servant  of  a  whole  family  of  masters.  But 
in  order  that  this  may  take  place,  it  is  indispensably  necessary  that  the  mastera 
should  be  alike  in  feeling,  and  identical  in  interest.  But  if  masters  are  antagonistia 
the  one  to  the  other,  if  their  interests  are  not  only  different  but  conflicting,  if  to 
serve  one  of  necessity  puts  you  in  opposition  to  the  other,  then  it  is  impossible  ta 


OTAP.  XVL]  ST.  LUKE.  231 

serve  two.  And  the  more  jou  look  at  it  the  plainer  it  becomes.  Sappoae  one  maa 
represents  perfect  honoor,  and  anotbei  represents  perfect  meanness,  and  you  under- 
take to  serve  both  of  them,  what  sort  of  sucoess  will  you  have  ?  Suppose  one  man 
be  called  Truth,  and  another  be  called  Falsehood,  and  you  attempt  to  serve  both  of 
them,  is  it  not  plain  that  you  will  either  hate  the  one  and  love  the  other,  or  else 
hold  to  the  one  and  despise  the  other  ?  You  cannot  serve  both  at  the  same  time. 
No  man  can  serve  purity  and  lust  at  the  same  time.  No  man  can  serve  good  nature 
and  anger  at  the  same  time.  Are  God  and  mammon,  then,  antagonistic  7  And  what 
are  the  ways  in  which  man  is  looked  at  from  the  two  spheres — the  Divine  and  the 
earthly  ?  Mammon  regards  man  as  a  creature  of  time  and  this  world,  and  thinks 
of  him,  plans  for  him,  educates  him,  and  uses  him,  as  if,  like  the  beast  of  the  field, 
he  only  had  existence  here,  and  as  if  his  existence  was  only  related  to  the  comforta 
that  belong  to  this  state  of  being.  But  God  looks  upon  man  as  a  creature  of  eternal 
duration,  passing  through  this  world.  The  chief  end  and  interest  of  men  are  also 
viewed  antagonistically.  In  short,  man  in  his  immediate  and  visible  good,  is  that 
which  mammon  regards.  On  the  other  hand,  God  regards  not  ind^erently  the 
interests  of  our  body ;  but  more  He  regards  the  interests  of  our  being.  Mammon 
builds  men  in  the  finer  traits  which  they  possess  in  common  with  animals.  God 
would  build  men  in  those  traits  which  they  have  in  common  with  Him.  One  builds 
for  this  world  exclusively.  The  other  builds  for  this  world  and  the  next.  There 
is  nothing  more  certain  than  that  a  man's  character  depends  upon  his  ruling  purpose. 
Let  us  look  at  it.  A  man  may  be  a  thoroughly  worldly  man — that  is,  all  his  ruling 
aims,  and  desires,  and  expectations,  may  make  him  worldly ;  and  yet  he  may  bo 
observant  of  external  religious  services.  A  man  is  not  to  be  supposed  to  be  less  a 
worldly  man  because  when  the  Sabbath  day  comes  round  he  knows  it.  He  may  be, 
also,  a  believer  in  the  gospel,  and  in  the  most  evangelical  and  orthodox  type  of 
doctrine — as  an  idea.  It  is  quite  possible  for  a  man  to  be  supremely  worldly,  and 
yet  to  have  strong  religions  feelings.  There  is  nothing  more  common  than  instances 
which  go  to  show  that  we  like  as  a  sentiment  things  that  we  do  not  like  as  an 
ethical  rule.  Nay,  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  go  further,  and  yet  be  a  thoroughly 
worldly  man.  And  here  it  is  that  the  distinction  comes  in.  Although  a  man  may 
be  a  servant  of  mammon,  and  may  serve  him  with  heart  and  soul ;  yet,  externally, 
there  may  be  a  great  many  appearances  that  look  as  though  he  was  serving  God. 
And  men  really  seem  to  think  that  they  can  serve  God  and  mammon !  1.  There 
is  reason  to  believe  that  the  morality  of  multitudes  of  men,  though  they  are  good 
in  some  degree,  leaves  out  that  which  alone  can  make  it  a  ground  of  complacence 
and  trust.  A  man  may  be  a  moral  man,  and  leave  out  the  whole  of  the  life  to 
come.  The  Greeks  were  moral  men,  many  of  them.  The  Bomans  were  moral 
men,  many  of  them.  2.  There  is  reason  to  fear  that  the  religion  of  multitudes  of 
professors  of  religion  is  but  a  form  of  church-morality.  You  may  teU  me  that  this 
is  a  misjudgment.  I  hope  it  is.  But  what  sort  of  lives  are  we  living,  when  it  is 
possible  to  misinterpret  them?  What  if  I  should  have  occasion  to  say  the 
same  things  about  your  allegiance  to  the  government  that  I  have  said  about 
your  religion?  There  is  not  a  man  of  any  note  in  the  community  about 
whose  allegiance  you  have  any  doubt.  If  I  point  to  one  man,  you  say,  "  He 
is  not  true  to  his  country."  If  I  point  to  another  man,  you  say,  "  He  is  loyal "  ; 
and  you  state  facts  to  prove  it.  You  say,  "  When  his  personal  interest  came  in 
collision  with  the  interest  of  the  country,  and  one  or  the  other  bad  to  be  given  up, 
he  gave  up  his  personal  interest."  But  when  God's  claims  come  in  collision  with 
your  personal  interests,  God's  claims  go  down,  and  your  personal  interests  go  up. 
Now,  there  ought  to  be  no  cause  for  doubt  that  you  are  Christians.  A  man  is  bound 
to  live  towards  his  country  so  that  there  shall  be  no  mistake  about  his  patriotism. 
And  Gtod  says,  "  You  are  bound  to  live  towards  Me  so  that  in  some  way  men  shall  see 
that  you  are  My  children."  You  are  bound  to  live  in  everything  as  you  do  in  some 
things.  You  are  attempting,  partly  through  ignorance,  partly  by  reason  of  care- 
lessness, and  partly  on  account  of  too  low  an  estimate  of  the  sacredness  of  your 
religious  obligations,  to  serve  God  with  your  right  hand,  and  mammon  with  your 
left ;  and  men  see  it,  and  they  doubt  you ;  and  that  is  not  the  worst  of  it — they 
donbt  God,  they  doobt  Christ,  they  doubt  the  reality  of  religion.  And  to  be  th« 
occasion  of  doubt  concerning  matters  of  such  grave  importance,  is  oulpable.  No 
man,  therefore,  has  a  right  to  allow  any  mistake  to  exist  in  the  matter  of  his  Chris- 
tian character.  There  is  need.  Christian  brethren,  of  severe  tests  in  this  particular. 
YoQ  need  to  settle  these  questions  :  "  Where  is  my  allegiance  ?  Am  I  with  God, 
and  for  God  supremely?"    (H.  W.  Beecher.)        The  two  contrary  master $,  or  tht 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUb'TRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

inconsistency  of  the  service  of  God  and  the  world : — For  the  opening  and  proseoating 
of  which  words,  consider — 1.  "What  these  two  masters  are.  2.  What  it  is  to  8erv6 
tbem.  3.  How  none  can  serve  them  both.  4.  Why  none  can  serve  them  both.  6. 
The  use  and  application.  For  the  first  of  these,  these  two  masters  are  God  and  the 
world,  but  with  much  difference,  as  we  may  see  severally.  God  is  a  Lord  and 
Master  absolutely,  properly,  and  by  good  right  in  Himself ;  being  in  His  own 
nature  most  holy,  most  mighty,  most  infinite  in  glory  and  sovereignty  over  all  His 
creatures.  Again,  He  is  a  Lord  and  Master  in  relation  to  as :  and  not  only  by 
right  of  creation  and  preservation  as  we  are  men  and  creatures,  but  also  by  right  of 
redemption  and  sanctification,  as  new  men  and  new  creatures.  1.  He  hath  made 
a  covenant  with  us,  first  of  works,  and  then  of  grace.  2.  He  hath  appointed  our 
work.  3.  He  hath  as  a  Master  appointed  us  liberal  wages,  even  a  merciful  reward 
of  eternal  life.  Thus  is  God  a  Lord  and  Master.  Now,  on  the  other  side,  theworld 
is  called  a  master  or  lord,  not  by  any  right  in  itself,  or  over  us,  but — 1.  By  usurpa- 
tion. 2.  By  man's  corruption,  and  defection  from  the  true  God.  3.  By  the  world's 
general  estimation,  and  acceptation  of  the  wealth  and  mammon,  as  a  lord  and 
great  commander ;  which  appeareth — (1)  By  subjecting  themselves  to  the  basest 
services  of  wealth  for  wealth.  (2)  By  affecting  wealth  as  the  chief  good.  (3)  By 
depending  (as  servants  on  their  masters)  on  their  wealth.  Concerning  the  serrica 
of  thes«  masters,  we  must  mark,  that  our  Saviour  saith  not,  A  man  cannot  serve 
God  that  hath  riches,  but.  He  cannot  serve  God  and  riches.  For  he  that  cannot 
distinguish  between  having  the  world,  and  serving  the  world,  cannot  understand 
this  text  and  conclusion  of  Jesus  Christ.  Our  Lord  well  knew  it  was  lawful 
both  to  have,  and  to  seek,  and  to  use  the  world  holily  and  humbly.  But  how  may 
we  conceive  that  one  cannot  be  servant  to  two  masters,  or  to  these  two  ?  In  these 
conditions :  1.  Not  at  the  same  time.  2.  Not  in  their  proper  commands ;  for  as 
they  are  contrary  lords,  so  they  command  contrary  things,  and  draw  to  contrary 
courses.  One  calls  to  works  of  mercy,  charity,  compassion,  liberality,  and  the  like ; 
the  other  to  cruelty,  and  unmercifulness,  to  shut  our  eyes  from  beholding  our  own 
flesh,  to  shut  our  ear  from  the  cry  of  the  poor,  to  shut  our  purse  and  hand  from  the 
charitable  relief  of  Christ's  poor  members.  And  how  can  one  man  obey  both  these 
in  their  contrary  commands  ?  3.  No  man  can  serve  two  masters  in  sovereignty, 
unless  they  be  subordinate  one  to  the  other,  and  so  their  commands  concur  in  order 
one  to  another,  and  cross  not  one  another.  The  reasons  whereof  are  these  :  1.  A 
servant  is  the  possession  of  his  master ;  and  one  possession  can  have  but  one  owner 
and  possessor  at  once.  2.  The  servant  of  the  world  sets  up  his  wealth  as  an  idol 
in  his  heart ;  by  which  the  worldling  forsakes  the  true  God,  and  turns  to  most  gross 
idolatry.  So  of  the  second  reason.  3.  The  apostle  (Eom.  vi.  16)  asks  thus,  *•  Enow 
ye  not,  that  to  whomsoever  ye  give  yourselves  as  servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye 
are  whom  ye  do  obey,  whether  of  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obedience  unto  righteous- 
ness?" But  the  distinction  implies  that  they  cannot  obey  both  together.  4.  No 
man  can  serve  these  two  masters,  because  a  man'  cannot  divide  his  heart  between 
God  and  the  world  ;  and  if  he  could,  God  will  have  no  part  of  a  divided  heart,  as 
Elijah  said  in  that  case  (1  Kings  xviii.  20).  How  may  I  know  what  master  I  serve  ? 
1.  Whom  hast  thou  covenanted  withal?  God  or  the  world?  To  whom  hast  thou 
wholly  resigned  thyself?  Is  thy  strength  become  God's?  Is  thy  time  His?  thy 
labour  His?  2.  Every  servant  is  commanded  by  his  master.  God's  servant  knows 
his  Lord's  mind  and  pleasure,  and  readily  attempts  it,  even  in  most  difficult  com- 
mandments. 3.  Every  servant  receives  wages  of  his  own  master,  and  thrives  by 
his  service.  Of  whom  doest  thou  receive  wages  ?  4.  Which  of  these  two  masters 
Invest  thou  best  ?  He  that  is  thy  master,  thy  affection  must  cleave  to  him,  as  is 
said  of  the  prodigal.  5.  If  thou  beest  the  servant  of  God,  thy  wealth  is  His  servant 
as  well  as  thyself.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Oneness  of  service: — What  we  all  want 
is  unity  of  character.  We  are,  most  of  us,  too  many  characters  folded  up  into  one. 
This  want  of  unity  of  character  is  the  chief  secret  of  almost  all  our  weakness.  No 
life  can  be  a  strong  life  which  has  not  a  fixed  focus.  Another  consequence  of  ttiis 
uncertainty  of  aim  and  this  divided  allegiance  is  that  we  really  are  missing  the 
goodness  and  happiness  of  everything.  We  have  too  much  religion  thoroughly  to 
enjoy  the  world,  and  too  much  of  the  world  thoroughly  to  enjoy  religion.  Our  con- 
victions haunt  us  in  the  world,  and  our  worldliness  follows  us  even  to  our  knees. 
But  there  is  a  worse  consequence  than  this.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  grieved  in  us,  and 
Christ  is  wounded,  and  the  Father  is  dishonoured.  For,  which  is  worse,  to  be  half 
Joved  or  not  to  be  loved  at  all  ?  Where  you  have  a  right  to  all,  is  not  partial  love 
ft  mockery  and  an  insult?    The  question,  the  all-important  question  is.  What  ia 


CHAP.  XVI.]  8T.  LUKE.  838 

the  remedy?  Bat  first,  before  I  speak  of  that,  let  me  draw  yonr  attention  to  a 
distinction  which  is  not  without  its  force.  The  word  "  masters  "  in  the  text  does 
not  actually  carry  the  meaning  of  "masters"  and  "servants"  in  the  ordinary 
acceptation  of  the  phrases.  It  might  be  literally  translated,  according  to  the  root 
of  the  word,  "proprietors"  or  "lords."  "No  one  can  serve  two  proprietors." 
This  emphasizes  the  sentence.  God  has  a  property,  all  property,  in  you.  By  right 
you  are  His.  The  world  is  not  your  proprietor.  You  are  not  made  to  be  the  world's. 
But  now  I  return  to  the  question,  "  How  can  we  best  attain  to  serve  one  lord  ?  "  I 
should  answer  first,  without  hesitation,  by  making  that  one  Master,  or  Proprietor, 
or  Lord,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  more  than  this.  God  has  given  the  govern- 
ment and  the  sovereignty  of  this  world  till  the  day  of  judgment,  to  Jesus  Christ. 
Therefore  He  is  our  Proprietor  and  our  Master.  Therefore  I  say,  begin  with 
believing  that  you  are  forgiven.  Let  Jesus — as  your  own  dear  Saviour — occupy 
His  right  place  in  your  heart.  The  rest  is  quite  sure.  You  wiU  want  no  other 
Master.  ,  All  life  is  service.  The  happiness  or  the  unhappiness  of  the  service 
depends  on  who  is  the  master.  If  self  is  the  master,  the  service  will  be  a  failure ! 
If  the  world  is  the  master,  the  service  wiU  soon  become  drudgery  I  If  Christ  is  the 
master,  the  service  will  be  liberty;  the  law  will  be  love,  and  the  wages  life,  life  for 
ever.  If  self,  and  the  world,  and  Christ,  be  all  masters,  the  diluted  service  will  be 
nothing  worth.  There  will  be  no  "  service  "  at  all.  Self  will  go  to  the  top,  and  self 
will  be  disappointed.  But  if  the  "  Master  "  be  one,  and  that  one  God,  that  concen- 
tration will  give  force  to  every  good  thing  within  you.  Life  will  be  a  great  success. 
The  service  will  be  sweet.  {J.  Vauglian,  M.A.)  Impossible  to  serve  God  and 
mammon : — We  cannot  possibly  serve  both  God  and  mammon.  **  When  you  see  a 
dog  following  two  men,"  says  Ralph  Erskine,  "  you  know  not  to  which  of  them  he 
belongs  while  they  walk  together ;  but  let  them  come  to  a  parting-road,  and  one  go 
one  way,  and  the  other  another  way,  then  will  you  know  which  is  the  dog's  master. 
So  while  a  man  may  have  the  world  and  a  religious  profession  too,  we  cannot  tell 
which  is  the  man's  master,  God  or  the  world ;  but  stay  till  the  man  come  to  a 
parting-road.  God  calls  him  this  way,  and  the  world  calls  him  that  way.  Well, 
if  God  be  his  master,  he  follows  truth  and  righteousness,  and  lets  the  world  go  ; 
bat  if  the  world  be  his  master,  then  he  follows  the  flesh  and  the  lusts  thereof,  and 
lets  God  and  conscience  go."  It  is  always  so.  The  lukewarm  can  never  be  trusted, 
but  the  heartily-loving  are  ever  loyal. 

Vers.  14-18.  The  Pharisees  also,  who  were  coTOtons. — Loven  of  money : — 
Those  "lovers  of  money"  heard  what  things?  As  rulers  of  the  people  they 
heard  the  parable  of  the  "  unjust  steward,"  and  their  own  doom  as  men  entrusted 
with  the  priceless  riches  of  God's  teaching  pronounced:  "How  is  it  that  I  hear 
this  of  thee?"  They  heard,  "He  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least" — 
money — "is  faithful  also  in  much."  I.  "Lovers  of  monkt"  dkeidb  a  strict 
BCBDPULOsiTT.  "Be  faithful  in  the  least."  Many  of  the  customs  of  trades  and 
professions  are  out  of  harmony  with  the  gospel  teaching  on  strict  conscientiousness. 

II.    "LOVEEB   or  money"    deride    the    TEACHINO    of    the    GOSPKIi  ON   SEIjF-DENIAL. 

Self-denial  and  a  race  for  wealth  are  incompatible  things  :  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God 
and  mammon."  III.  "Lotebs  of  money"  deride  those  who  cali.  the  pursuit 
o»  biches  the  woeship  of  "  mammon."  IV.  "  Lovers  of  money  "  need  bousing 
BY  A  STERNER  TEACHINO.  Was  uot  the  Saviour  impelled  to  the  utterance  of  the 
parable  of  "  Dives  and  Laizarus  " — look  at  it — by  the  looks  of  contempt  implied  in 
the  word  i^efivKritpiZov,  the  distended  nostril  and  curled  lip  of  these  Pharisees  ? 
Does  this  help  to  explain  our  Lord's  unusual  severity  :  "  In  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes, 
being  in  torment "  ?  Nothing  will  shake  "  the  lover  of  money  "  but  stern  teaching, 
and  not  always  that.  (Clerical  World.)  Te  are  they  which  Justly  yourselves 
before  men. — Men  often  highly  esteem  what  God  abhors  : — Show  how  and  why  it  is 
that  men  highly  esteem  that  which  God  abhors.  1.  They  have  a  different  rule  of 
judgment.  God  judges  by  one  rule  ;  they  by  another.  God's  rule  requires 
universal  benevolence ;  their  rule  is  satisfied  with  any  amount  of  selfishness,  so 
it  be  sufficiently  refined  to  meet  the  times.  The  world  adopts  an  entirely  different 
rale,  allowing  men  to  set  up  their  own  happiness  as  their  end.  But  God's  rule  is, 
"  Seek  not  thine  own."  God  regards  nothing  as  virtue  except  devotion  to  the  right 
ends.  The  right  end  is  not  one's  own,  but  the  general  good.  Hence  God's  rule 
requires  virtue,  while  man's  rule  at  best  only  restrains  vice.  Men  very  incon- 
siderately judge  themselves  and  others,  not  by  God's  rule,  but  by  man's.  Here  I 
mast  notice  some  of  the  evidences  of  this,  and  furnish  some  illustrations.    Thos,, 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [khap.  sn. 

lor  example,  a  mere  negative  morality  is  highly  esteemed  by  some  men.  Again,  a 
religion  which  is  merely  negative  is  often  highly  esteemed.  So  also  of  a  religion 
vrhich  at  best  consists  of  forms  and  prayers,  and  does  not  add  to  these  the 
energies  of  benevolent  effort.  Again,  the  business  aims  and  practices  of  business 
men  are  almost  universally  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.  Professed 
Christians  judge  themselves  falsely,  because  they  judge  by  a  false  standard.  One 
of  the  most  common  and  fatal  mistakes  is  to  employ  a  merely  negative  standard. 
The  good  Christian  in  the  world's  esteem  is  never  abrupt,  never  aggressive,  yet  he 
is  greatly  admired.  He  has  a  selfish  devotion  to  pleasing  man,  than  which  nothing 
is  more  admired.  Now,  this  may  be  highly  esteemed  among  men ;  but  does  not 
God  abhor  it  ?  (C.  G.  Finney,  D.D.)  God  knoweth  your  hearts. — The  heart- 
searcher: — I.  This  truth  is  eminently  calculated  to  deepen  our  sense  of  the 
unapproachable  greatness  of  the  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  II.  This  truth 
illustrates,  not  the  greatness  only,  but  also  the  forbearance  and  mercy  of  God.  III. 
This  truth  should  teach  you,  my  brethren,  the  folly,  not  to  dwell  on  the  guilt,  of 
f  ormaUty  and  hypocrisy.  IV.  This  truth  is  adapted  to  console  and  encourage  the 
often  misjudged  and  afflicted  people  of  God.  V.  This  truth  assures  us  beforehand 
of  the  equity  of  the  Divine  awards  at  the  judgment-day.  {C.  M,  Merry.)  God's 
knowledge  of  the  heart: — At  the  present  day  many  persons  have  photographs  of 
their  faces  taken,  which  they  present  to  their  friends.  But  if  it  were  possible  to 
have  an  album  of  photographs  taken  of  our  sinful  souls,  reveahng  and  blazoning 
forth  all  the  evil  deeds  they  had  each  done,  all  the  evil  words  they  had  ever 
spoken,  and  all  the  evil  thoughts  they  had  ever  thought,  how  hideous  and  horrible 
would  such  pictures  be  I  Would  any  man  dare  to  give  his  true  soul-photograph  to 
any  brother  man  ?  I  think  not ;  and  far  less  to  his  friends.  Yet  the  things  and 
thoughts  we  would  thus  conceal  from  others,  and  even  from  ourselves,  are  all 
known  to  God.  He  has  full  and  faithful  photographs  of  all ;  for  He  is  perfectly 
cognizant  of  every  single  one  of  our  evil  deeds,  and  words,  and  imaginations.  Nay, 
possibly  we  unwittingly  carry  about  with  os  complete  photographs  of  our  own 
souls.  May  not  the  unsaved  soul  carry  this  record  with  it  at  death  ?  May  not 
unsaved  sinners  be  thus  both  their  own  self-accusers  and  witnesses  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ?  Nor  can  anything  except  His  blood,  "which  cleanseth 
from  all  sin,"  blot  and  wash  out  the  record  of  our  iniquities,  and  prepare  the  soul, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  to  receive  the  image  of  His  Son.  {Sir  James  Simpson.) 
Every  man  presseth  Into  It. — Violence  victorious : — L  The  state  op  the  Church 
IN  THE  New  Testament.  1.  A  kingdom.  2.  The  kingdom  of  heaven.  II.  The 
DISPOSITION  OF  those  WHO  SEEK  THIS  KiNODou.  Violent.  1.  Between  us  and  the 
blessed  state  we  aim  at  there  is  much  opposition ;  and  therefore  there  must  be 
violence.  (1)  The  means  of  grace  and  salvation  are  opposed  from  within  us.  (2) 
There  is  also  opposition  from  the  world,  (a)  Snares  and  delights,  to  quench  our 
pleasure  in  the  good  things  of  the  Spirit,  {b)  Fears,  terrors,  and  scandals,  to  scare 
us  from  doing  what  we  ought.  2,  God  will  have  this  violence  and  striving,  to  test 
the  truth  of  our  profession.  3.  God  will  have  us  get  these  things  with  violence, 
that  we  may  value  them  more  when  we  have  them.  4.  The  excellence  of  the  thing 
requires  violence.  6.  The  necessity  requires  it.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  place 
of  refuge  as  well  as  a  kingdom  to  enrich  us.  UL  The  success  of  this  eaqebnebs. 
The  violent  take  the  kingdom  by  force.  Why  t  1.  Because  it  is  promised  to  the 
violent  (Matt.  vii.  7 ;  Kev.  iii.  19-21).  2.  The  spirit  whereby  a  man  is  earnest  is  a 
victorious  spirit.  The  Spirit  of  God  possesses  them;  and  with  His  help  they 
cannot  fail.  3.  Only  the  violent'^  take  it,  because  God  ofFers  it  on  this  condition 
alone.  4.  Only  the  violent  can  prize  it  when  they  have  it.  (R.  Sibbes,  D.D.) 
Taken  by  force  : — Let  us  look  in  a  large  way  at  this  important  truth.  Everything 
great  on  earth  has  to  be  achieved  by  long,  earnest,  persistent  toil.  If  you  seek  to 
become  master  of  any  art,  any  literature,  any  science,  any  accomplishment,  you  do 
not  sit  down  and  say,  "  God  is  the  giver  of  all  good,  and  I  shall  not  be  so  arrogant 
as  to  strive  for  that  which  He  alone  can  bestow."  You  know  very  well  it  can  only 
be  had  by  meeting  every  obstacle  and  conquering  it.  The  very  value  of  the  thing  is 
estimated  often  by  the  straining  endeavour,  the  unconquerable  zeal,  and  the  cease- 
less labour  which  are  requisite  to  its  attainment.  We  so  often  see  only  the  results 
in  certain  lives,  and  not  the  long  processes  which  have  been  leading  np  to  those 
results,  that  we  are  tempted  sometimes  to  forget  this.  A  poet  writes  some  versea 
that  cause  the  whole  nation's  soul  to  bum  and  glow ;  an  orator  makes  some  speech 
that  thrills  his  country  to  its  very  heart's  core ;  a  philosopher  observes  some  pheno- 
mena  which  open  up  a  whole  field  of  scientific  truth.    We  are  dazsled  with  tha 


OUT.  XVI.]  57.  LUKE.  235 

enccess ;  we  are  forgettnl  of  tbe  long,  patient  hours  of  study  and  of  thonght  which 
have  gone  before.  MillionB  had  seen  apples  fall  before  Newton  did,  and  it  revealed 
nothing  to  them ;  millions  had  seen  the  kettle-lid  blown  off  by  steam  before  "Watt 
did,  and  it  suggested  no  thought  to  them  ;  millions  had  lost  their  dearest  friend 
before  Tennyson  lost  Hallam,  and  they  wrote  no  "  In  Memorlfem  "  ;  millions  had 
watched  nations  reeling  with  the  shock  of  revolution  before  Bnrke  gazed  on  the 
shattered  throne  and  the  polluted  altar  of  France,  and  no  burning  words  of 
eloquence  fell  from  their  lips  or  from  their  pen.  To  the  souls  trained  in  patient 
thought  the  revelation  of  great  truth  comes — or  rather,  what  are  common  facts  to 
others  are  revelations  to  them.  Don't  call  these  things  accidents.  "The  acci- 
dental falling  of  an  apple  was  the  cause  of  the  discovery  of  the  laws  of  gravity," 
Bays  a  popular  treatise.  A  fearful  untruth.  The  cause  of  the  discovery  was  the 
long  period  of  deep  self-sacrificing  thought  which  Newton  had  given  to  Nature. 
"  What  a  lucky  man  Newton  was  to  have  that  apple  fall  before  him  I "  said  a  young 
man  once,  in  my  hearing.  "Bather,"  said  a  thoughtful  man,  standing  by,  "  what 
a  lucky  apple  to  fall  before  Newton  I "  There  is  a  world  of  truth  in  that.  So  one 
might  go  through  the  whole  range  of  human  experience  and  culture,  and  every- 
where the  kingdom  that  you  want  to  become  master  of  has  to  be  taken  by  force. 
The  door  is  opened  to  the  persistent  knocking.  The  bread  is  given  to  the 
imwearied  demand.  The  treasure  is  found  by  the  one  who  has  been  seeking. 
Now  we  come  to  the  highest  life  of  all — to  the  culture  of  that  part  of  our  nature 
which  transcends  all  else.  Is  it  not  this  great  principle  which  pervades  all  the 
physical  and  mental  world;  which  we  see  in  every  tiny  plant  as  it  struggles 
through  the  earth  towards  the  light,  in  every  mighty  oak  scarred  with  the 
lightnings  and  storms  of  ages,  in  every  torrent  that  fights  its  way  towards  the 
ocean  ;  which  we  see  in  every  achievement  of  physical  science,  in  every  path  she 
has  constructed  across  mountain  or  morass,  in  every  railroad  for  which  she  has 
torn  and  blasted  a  way  through  the  granite  of  the  earth ;  which  we  see  in  every 
great  painting  that  has  glowed  with  beauty  on  the  canvas,  in  every  great  work  of 
the  sculptor  who  has  made  the  cold  marble  breathe  and  live ;  which  we  see  in 
every  page  of  every  great  book  in  which  Science  records  her  facts,  or  poet,  or 
historian,  or  philosopher  has  penned  his  researches  and  his  thoughts — is  not,  I  say, 
this  great  principle,  which  thus  meets  us  everywhere — in  all  noble  results,  and  all 
great  achievements,  in  every  department  of  human  thought  and  life — to  be  found 
anywhere  in  the  grander  life  of  the  immortal  soul  t  Surely  it  is,  brethren,  and  we 
ignore  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  of  His  apostles  if  we  regard  Christ's  religion  as 
merely  a  means  by  which  we  are  to  be  saved  from  all  trouble  and  responsibility 
about  the  future.  There  are  people  who  tell  you  that  all  jon  have  to  do  is  to 
"  accept  Christ,"  "  believe  in  Him,"  and  then  He  has  done  all  for  you — you  need 
have  no  more  anxiety  or  trouble.  All  through  those  Epistles,  which  are  so  full  of 
the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  where  Christ  and  Him  crucified  is  the  central 
fact  of  the  Christian  faith,  the  apostle,  in  words  which  thrill  with  the  living  power 
of  deep  personal  experience,  speaks  of  the  Christian  life  as  a  ceaseless,  protracted, 
fearful  struggle.  He  exhausts  things  sacred  and  profane  to  find  imagery  to  depict 
and  to  impress  this  truth.  The  Christian  life  is  a  race  for  which  no  previous 
preparation  is  too  careful ;  in  which  every  nerve  is  to  be  strained,  and  on  which 
all  our  force  is  to  be  concentrated,  that  we  may  "obtain  the  prize"  (1  Cor. 
ix.  24-27).    (T.  T.  Shore,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  Than  one  tittle  of  the  law  to  fail — Power  and  perpetuity  of  law : — H 
you  have  read  the  Pentateuch,  and  especially  the  books  of  Exodus  and  Leviticus, 
with  care,  you  have  perhaps  wondered  why  a  system  of  laws,  so  complicated,  so 
careful  of  little  things,  so  rigidly  exact  in  its  directions  about  them,  should  ever 
have  been  enacted.  Viewing  it  in  certain  aspects,  it  may  be  that  a  sort  of  half 
suspicion  has  crossed  your  minds  that  legislation  of  this  kind  is  really  unworthy  of 
such  a  being  as  God.  But  when  the  purpose  of  its  Divine  Author  is  seen,  when 
the  relation  of  the  Law  of  Moses  to  the  Jews  as  a  separated  people  and  to  the 
gospel  dispensation  is  fully  understood,  the  whole  system  appears  in  quite  a  new 
Ught.  Tbe  marks  of  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness  are  clearly  discernible  in  all  its 
parts,  even  in  its  minutest  details.  This  Mosaic  code  is  "  the  Law"  spoken  of  in 
the  text.  It  embodies  many  precepts  of  universal  apphcation  and  eternal  authority 
— it  included,  indeed,  the  whole  moral  law ;  bat  as  a  code,  it  was  enacted  for  a 
specific  end,  and  was  to  continue  in  force  for  a  specific  period.  Until  this  end  was 
gained,  and  this  period  completed,  not  a  jot  or  tittle  of  it  could  be  annulled.     The 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  xrt. 

system  possessed  all  the  mighty  power  of  law — nothing  could  set  it  aside.  To 
regard  or  to  treat  any  one  of  its  provisions  as  an  effete  or  antiquated  or  oselesa 
thing,  was,  in  effect,  to  charge  the  Divine  Lawgiver  with  folly.  Hence  the 
strong  language  in  which  our  Lord  asserts  its  power  and  its  perpetuity  until 
the  fulness  of  the  time  had  come.  "  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  one  jot 
or  tittle  of  the  law  cannot  fail."  These  words  announce  a  great  truth ;  what  is 
here  affirmed  of  the  law  in  a  distinctive  sense  is  true  of  law  universally.  God,  who 
called  the  universe  into  existence  by  the  word  of  His  power,  governs  it  according 
to  the  counsel  of  His  own  will.    Now  the  great  truth  which  the  text  asserts  is  this, 

viz.,  THAT  THE  LAWS  WHICH  GOVERN  THE  UNIVERSE  ARE  OF  INFINITELY  MORE  CONSE- 
QUENCE THAN  THE  UNIVERSE  ITSELF — that  it  is  of  Unspeakably  more  importance 
that  the  former  should  be  maintained  than  that  the  latter  should  exist — that  all 
the  creatures  of  God,  rational  and  irrational,  should  obey  the  laws  to  which  Ho 
has  been  pleased  to  subject  them,  that  they  should  work  in  harmony  with  these 
enactments,  than  that  any  or  all  of  them  should  be  kept  in  being.  Glorious  as 
are  all  the  works  of  God,  yet  if  you  should  take  any  one  of  them,  consider  it  apart 
from  all  others,  or  view  it  as  a  mere  isolated  thing,  you  would  perceive  Uttle,  if 
any,  excellence  in  it.  It  would  indeed  bespeak  the  creative  energy  of  Him  who 
made  it,  but  you  could  not  discover  from  it  alone  whether  He  is  wise  and  good,  or 
the  reverse.  It  is  only  when  you  regard  it  in  its  relations  to  other  things,  and 
ascertain  why  it  was  made,  and  see  its  exact  fitness  to  an  end,  that  its  real  glory 
and  greatness  as  a  work  of  God  shine  forth.  How  beautiful  to  us  is  the  spectacle 
of  a  field  of  waving  corn?  Its  very  verdure  is  refreshing  to  the  eye,  because 
adapted  to  the  structure  of  our  organ  of  vision,  while  its  yellow  ripeness  gives  the 
promise  of  an  abundant  supply  of  the  food  we  need.  But — if  we  may  imagine  such 
a  thing — transfer  it  to  a  world  of  creatures  with  a  constitution  totally  unlike  ours, 
its  beauty  would  vanish  because  its  fitness  to  an  end  would  be  lost.  The  glory  of 
creation,  then,  arises  mainly  from  the  benign  ends  and  perfect  adaptations  of  ita 
countless  parts.  And  hence  it  is  that  the  universe  must  be,  as  we  have  already 
said,  under  law  to  God,  and  that  the  maintenance  of  the  laws  which  govern  it  is 
vastly  more  important  than  the  existence  of  the  universe  itself.  In  the  working  of 
the  stupendous  mechanism  of  the  heavens,  all  is  orderly  and  harmonious  so  long 
as  the  law  which  governs  its  movements  is  obeyed.  But  suppose  the  reverse  of 
this  to  be  the  case— that  the  law  of  gravitation  was  liable  to  incessant  interrup. 
tions,  that  the  forces  which  produce  the  beautiful  steadiness  we  now  observe 
operated  according  to  no  fixed  rule,  either  as  to  direction  or  degree,  bo  that 
satellites  should  rush  off  into  boundless  space,  or  dash  furiously  against  each 
other,  and  the  planets,  starting  from  their  orbits,  should  wander  at  their  will 
through  immensity,  or  should  be  suddenly  deluged  with  the  fogs  or  the  flames  (as 
the  case  may  be)  of  a  comet,  while  this  fair  earth  of  ours,  according  as  chance 
drove  her  near  to  or  far  distant  from  the  sun,  were  converted  into  a  fiery  furnace 
or  a  globe  of  ice.  We  may  try  to  fancy  the  state  of  things  tmder  such  a  reign  of 
anarchy,  though  the  boldest  imagination  must  come  far  short  of  the  reality.  But 
the  main  question  is,  can  we  suppose  that  God  would  suffer,  even  for  a  moment, 
such  a  lawless  universe  to  exist?  No.  He  is  a  '•  God  of  order,"  and  it  were  far 
better  to  remand  creation  to  its  original  nothingness,  than  to  permit  disorder  and 
confusion  thus  to  gain  the  mastery  over  it ;  better  annihilate  it  at  once,  than  not 
maintain  its  laws  in  full  supremacy  and  force.  "Heaven  and  earth  may  pass 
away,  but  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  laws  shall  not  fail."  Let  us,  if  you  please,  take 
another  illustration  from  the  earth  on  which  vra  dwell.  Here,  too,  vre  observe 
a  grand  and  complicated  system  of  physical  operations  incessantly  going  on,  of 
physical  laws  perpetually  at  work.  But  suppose  that  the  whole  of  this  wonderful 
economy  of  nature  were  mysteriously  disturbed — that  her  processes,  apparently  v. 
complicated,  yet  never  confused,  were  suddenly  left  to  chance,  and  were  subject  to 
no  laws,  so  that  men  sowed  fields  and  reaped  nothing,  and  then  again  where  they 
planted  nothing  they  reaped  abundance;  so  that  their  food  one  day  ministered 
nourishment,  and  the  next  deadly  poison ;  nor  could  they  tell  whether  the  water 
they  drank  would  quench  or  increase  their  thirst ;  that  the  darkness  of  night,  the 
light  of  day,  the  heat  of  summer,  the  frost  of  winter,  lasted  through  periods  so 
indefinite,  and  were  liable  to  changes  so  great  and  sudden,  that  none  could  predict 
what  a  moment  would  briug  forth;  I  ask,  again,  could  God  permit  this  goodly 
earth  of  ours  to  fall  into  a  condition  so  utterly  lawless  and  so  destructive  to  all 
the  creatures  that  dweU  upon  its  saiiace?  No  indeed.  Better  a  thousandfold 
thai  it  w«N  blotted  from  existence  than  that  it  should  become  such  a  prey  oL 


OBAF.  ZTi.]  ST.  LUKE.  237 

anarchy,  such  a  plaything  of  chance,  without  law,  without  life — a  world  as  dia- 
honooring  to  its  Maker  as  it  would  be  intolerable  for  man.  But  let  us  come 
nearer  home  and  taks  an  HiLUSTiUTioN  tbom  uan  hiussu.  In  whatever  aspect 
we  view  him,  whether  as  a  physical,  social,  intellectual,  or  moral  being,  we  find 
him  the  subject  of  laws — of  laws  unchangeable  as  the  eternal  Lawgiver  Himself ; 
and  harsh  as  the  announcement  may  soand,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  not  to 
maintain  these  laws  would  be  far  greater  evil  than  the  destruction  of  the  human 
race ;  better  that  men  should  perish  than  that  these  laws  should  be  set  aside.  We 
may  not  trifle  with  any  one  of  these  laws,  to  which  He  who  "  formed  us  of  clay 
and  made  us  men  "  hath  subjected  our  physical  nature.  If  we  do,  it  is  at  our 
peril ;  for  although  these  laws  are  not  enforced  by  precisely  the  same  penalty,  yet 
we  should  ever  remember  that  each  has  a  penalty  of  its  own  ;  and  whether  it  be 
more  or  less  severe,  we  must  endure  the  punishment  if  we  venture  to  violate  the 
law.  Let  the  motive  which  prompts  a  man  to  disregard  the  laws  of  health,  or  the 
manner  in  which  the  thing  is  done,  be  what  it  may;  let  him,  for  example,  turn 
night  into  day — whether  he  be  a  student,  whose  intense  zeal  for  knowledge  keeps 
him  at  his  books  when  he  should  be  iu  bed,  or  a  miserable  sensualist,  who  gives 
his  midnight  hours  to  revelry  and  banqueting — the  inevitable  result  to  him  will  be 
a  ruined  constitution.  God  will  not  modify  the  order  He  has  established  so  as  to 
suit  the  convenience  of  your  depraved  appetites;  He  will  not  change  His  laws  to 
accommodate  either  the  unwise  student  or  the  miserable  sensualist.  "  Heaven  and 
earth  shall  pass,  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  His  law."  So  it  is  with  men  considered 
as  SOCIAL  BEINGS.  There  are  laws  of  social  life  ordained  of  God,  and  though  we 
cannot  always  trace  their  operation  so  distinctly  as  we  can  the  working  of  those 
which  govern  the  material  creation,  we  may  still  be  certain  that  the  former  are 

i*u6t  as  uniform  and  immutable  as  the  latter.  We  only  need  to  open  our  eyes  and 
ook  at  what  is  going  on  around  us  to  be  convinced  of  this  trath.  Economy, 
diligence,  prudence,  truthfulness,  unswerving  probity,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
extravagance,  self-indulgence,  falsehood,  deceit,  trickery,  on  the  other,  do  not 
yield  their  respective  fruits  at  random  or  by  chance.  No.  There  is  a  law  which 
renders  these  results  invariable.  "  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit,  nor  a 
corrupt  tree  good  fruit."  The  trickster,  the  time-server,  the  two-faced  flatterer, 
may  secure  the  position  or  the  office  on  which  his  heail  is  set,  but  real  honour  and 
lasting  power  he  never  wins.  God's  law  forbids  it.  And  the  experience  of  all  ages 
embodied  in  the  proverbs  of  all  nations,  as  well  as  the  word  of  eternal  truth, 

f)rove8  that  in  the  long  run  such  men  always  reap  their  proper  reward,  and  go  at 
ast  to  their  own  place.  Thus  far  we  have  viewed  the  teaching  of  our  text  mainly 
as  it  bears  upon  men's  present  interests  and  their  earthly  life.  It  contains  lessons  of 
still  higher  moment.  We  know  that  this  world  is  the  prelude  of  another,  and  even 
here  below  we  have,  in  the  relation  of  youth  to  age,  a  striking  image  of  the  relation 
which  subsists  between  this  world  and  the  next,  between  our  present  life  and  the 
everlasting  life  to  come.  He  who  wastes  the  period  which  God  has  allotted  to 
make  a  man  of  him — a  period  short  indeed,  as  it  consists  of  only  a  few  years,  but 
fluflicient  for  the  purpose  if  rightly  improved — wastes  what  he  never  can  replace. 
Such  is  the  law  of  our  present  earthly  existence,  and  in  it  we  see  shadowed  forth 
the  law  of  our  future  and  eternal  life.  The  very  gospel,  which  brings  life  and 
immortality  to  light,  emphatically  proclaims  that  sin  and  suffering  are  conjoined 
by  a  law  immutable  as  the  eternal  throne.  It  is  surely  needless  for  me  to  bring 
arguments  to  substantiate  the  charge  that  you  are  a  siuner  against  God.  Your 
own  conscience  confesses  it,  "  your  own  heart  condemns "  you.  Well,  this  word 
of  Him  who  cannot  lie  tells  you,  in  terms  too  plain  to  be  misunderstood,  that 
perish  you  must  for  ever,  unless  saved  through  the  righteousness  and  atonement  of 
the  Son  of  God.  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the 
law  cannot  faiL"  Let  me,  in  conclusion,  add  as  a  word  of  warning,  that  the 
instrument  with  which  the  devil  most  successfully  assails  the  young  and  the  old 
is  scepticism  in  regard  to  the  momentous  truth  taught  in  the  text.  This  is  his 
grand  temptation,  and  was  the  weapon  with  which  he  gained  his  dismal  triumph 
over  the  common  mother  of  our  race.  "  Why  not  eat  of  the  tree  of  knowledge," 
he  asked,  **  that  stands  in  the  midst  of  the  garden — its  form  so  beautiful  to  the 
sight,  its  fruit  so  sweet  to  the  taste ? "  "I  am  under  a  law,"  replied  Eve,  " that 
forbids  me  to  touch  it,  and  it  is  enforced  by  the  awful  penalty  of  death."  "  But 
surely,"  rejoined  the  tempter,  **  you  must  have  misapprehended  the  meaning  of 
your  Maker ;  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  He  will  ever  inflict  upon  you  a  punish- 
ment  sq  dreadful  for  an  offence  so  trifling."    Alas  I    "  She  took,  ahe  ate,  oatth 


238  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Iobai.  xvir 

felt  the  wonnd,  and  Nature  from  her  seat  sighing,  gave  Bigns  of  woe  that  all  waa 
lost."  Precisely  so  does  the  same  "father  of  lies"  deceive  the  youth  with 
reference  to  tiie  connection  that  subsists  between  the  springtide  and  the  summer 
and  autumn  of  our  present  life.  He  who  is  old  enough  to  understand  anything, 
however  inconsiderate  of  the  personal  bearing  of  the  truth,  knows  perfectly  welt 
that  he  must  sow  the  seed  if  he  would  reap  the  harvest.     (J.  Forsyth^  D.D.) 

Vers.  19-31.   Tbere  was  a  certain  rlcli  man. — Dives  and  Latanu : — I.    Thb 

AliLOTMENTS  OP  DlVINB  PROVIDENCE   ON   EARTH  ARK   NOT   ALWAYS  EVENLY  BASED  UPON  A 

BEGisTEB  OF  HUMAN  DESERT.  1.  The  rlch  man  is  not  offered  as  a  luminous  exhibi- 
tion of  personal  worth  (see  vers.  19-21).  2.  On  the  other  hand,  Lazarus  was  a 
beggar,  and  frightfully  diseased.  His  condition  was  pitiable.  But  it  does  not 
follow  that  he  had  been  immoral,  nor  that  he  was  utider  judgment  for  crime. 
Neither  of  these  men  represented  in  the  parable  took  his  moral  state,  or  received 
his  everlasting  reward,  from  his  earthly  lot.     H.   The  question  as  to  a  man's 

ACCEPTANCE   WITH   GOD    TURNS  ON   PERMANENT    CHARACTER.       1.   The  name  whioh  thiS 

poverty-stricken  invalid  bears  is  all  that  is  given  us  at  this  stage  in  the  story  to 
indicate  that  he  was  a  religious  man.  It  is  simply  the  ancient  Eleazar  put  into  the 
New  Testament  Lazarus — the  Hebrew  translated  to  Greek — and  means  "God  is  my 
help."  It  is  plain  that  our  Lord  Jesus  designed  this  as  a  sufficient  description  of 
him.  As  Alford  shrewdly  remarks,  he  purposed  "  to  fill  in  the  character  of  the 
poor  man."  He  doubtless  gave  the  appellation,  as  Bunyan  bestowed  the  name  of 
his  hero  in  Pilgrim's  Progress :  he  called  his  name  •*  Christian  "  because  he  was  » 
Christian.  And  this  beggar  here  is  called  "  God  is  my  help,"  because  he  was  a 
good  man,  living  according  to  his  light  by  the  help  of  God.  2.  But  the  other 
man's  character  is  under  a  full  exhibition.  He  was  luxuriously  self-seeking.  H» 
lavished  his  wealth  upon  himself,  and  fed  his  appetites  unrestrainedly.  He  was 
inhumane.  The  very  brutes  in  Perea  were  less  brutal  than  Dives.  The  rich  man 
was  not  only  in  his  conduct  heartless,  but  in  his  custom  irreligious ;  for  the  Jewish 
law  demanded  consideration  of  the  poor  with  a  hundred  reiterated  precepts ;  these 
he  habitually  disobeyed.  And  in  the  end  of  the  tale  we  have  the  intimation  that, 
above  everything  else.  Dives  never  paid  any  attention  to  what  Moses  and  th» 
prophets  were  thundering  in  his  ears  from  the  Scriptures  about  making  preparation 
for  another  world  which  was  lying  out  beyond  this.  We  reach  the  conclusion  that 
in  this  parable  the  rich  man  represents  a  worldly  sinner.     III.  Again :  We  learn 

HERE  THAT  DEATH  IS   THB   INEVITABLE   EVENT  WHICH   USHERS  IN  THE   CERTAIN   IMMOB- 

TALTTT  OF  EACH  HUMAN  BouL.  1.  Both  of  thoso  men  died.  2.  Both  of  these  meit 
found  themselves  living  after  they  had  died.    IV.  What  comes  afteb  death  is  to 

us   OF  FAR   more   IMPORTANCE  THAN  WHAT  COMES  BEFOBB.      1.   For,  firSt,  it  gathers  Up 

now  into  itself  whatever  went  before,  and  includes  all  its  consequences.  ^  2.  And 
then  what  comes  after  death  introduces  fresh  and  heavy  experiences  of  its  own. 
The  contrast  is  offered  of  highest  felicity  with  most  extreme  suffering.  That  other 
life  will  be  quite  as  sensitive  as  this,  and  possibly  more  so.  Power  of  suffering  may 
be  augmented.  There  will  be  recognition  of  fnends  and  relatives  and  neighbours 
in  that  new  existence.  These  souls  all  appear  to  know  each  other  in  those  moments' 
of  terrible  candour.  And  they  understand  each  other,  too,  at  last;  there  is  great 
plainness  of  speech  among  them.  V.  The  gospel  invitation  beaches  its  limit  Of 
THIS  STATE  OF  ouB  EXISTENCE.  1.  There  will  be  no  increase  in  the  ordinary  means 
of  grace.  2.  No  novel  form  of  address  will  be  possible  (vers.  30,  31).  (C.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  The  rich  and  the  poor,  here  and  hereafter: — The  case  is  that  of 
one  who  had  great  wealth,  and  enjoyed  it,  and  lived  handsomely,  but  took  no 
thought  to  the  poor  brother  outside.  He  had  his  evil  things  in  the  same  hour  in 
which  the  brother  in  the  grand  house  had  his  good  things ;  and  this  went  on,  day 
after  day,  while  the  two  men  neared  another  life :  but  when  that  life  began,  there 
came  a  change.  Now,  it  seems  clear,  from  the  way  in  which  the  case  is  put,  that 
this  change,  which  was  in  fact  a  revolution,  and  brought  with  it  a  precise  reversal 
of  the  states  of  those  two  men,  came  in  a  line  of  predetermined  events.  It  implies 
the  working  of  a  law,  which  may  have  been  fulfilled  in  countless  instances  already, 
and  is  destined  to  act  and  rule  so  long  as  the  lots  of  men  are  unequal  in  this  life. 
If  this  be  so,  it  ought  to  make  those  of  us  uneasy,  who  perceive,  in  comparing 
themselves  with  their  neighbours,  that  they  are  having  their  good  things  now.  It 
seems  a  just  inference  from  this  parable,  which  was  undoubtedly  intended  as  a 
lesson  and  a  warning  for  us  all,  that  Almighty  God,  the  Righteous  and  Just, 
Although  He  may  for  the  present  permit  the  poor  to  sofier,  has  made  a  law  in  th«' 


VRkT.  XVI.]  8T.  LUKE.  239 

due  execution  -whereof  there  may  be  expected  a  complete  npset  of  conditiona  by 
ftnd  by,  on  our  passage  into  another  life.  Many  years  ago,  in  the  early  winter,  I 
found  myself  one  evening  at  a  rich  man's  table,  with  others  bidden  to  the  feast. 
We  had  our  good  things.  Nothing  was  wanting  to  the  completeness  of  our  enter- 
tainment in  which  appeared,  in  their  order,  all  delicious  viands,  with  condiments 
and  delicacies,  and  whatsoever  is  pleasant  to  the  eyes  and  good  for  food.  There 
shone  the  precious  metals,  and  rare  porcelains  and  crystal,  while,  amidst  roses  and 
other  choice  flowers  appeared,  in  rich  warm  hues  as  of  the  ruby  and  the  topaz,  the 
fruit  of  the  vines  of  distant  lands.  As  one  surveyed  the  cheerful  company  xmaer 
the  soft  brilliancy  of  many  lights,  it  was  a  pleasant  scene ;  in  their  lifetime  they 
were  receiving  their  good  things  ;  and  not  as  dissolute  revellers,  but  after  the  way 
of  the  highly  respectable,  to  whom  all  this  came  as  to  men  and  women  to  the 
manner  born,  and  living,  as  became  their  station,  the  life  of  the  rich  and  the  free. 
In  less  than  an  hour  after  leaving  that  scene,  I  found  myself  descending,  by  dim 
and  muddy  steps,  the  basement  of  a  miserable  house  in  the  same  city,  and  entering 
a  room  some  feet  below  the  level  of  the  sidewalk.  What  light  there  was  in  that 
forlorn  apartment  came  from  a  dull  tallow  candle ;  the  feeble  ray  fell  on  bare  walls 
and  a  bare  floor,  and  showed  no  furniture  but  an  old  bedstead,  without  clothes  or 
bedding,  or  so  much  as  a  truss  of  straw.  On  the  floor  sat  two  children,  thinly  clad, 
crouching  close  to  an  old  rust-eaten  stove,  in  which  a  faint  redness  glimmered 
through  the  choked-up  ashes,  the  very  mockery  of  a  fire.  The  little  ones  had  no 
food ;  their  mother,  they  said,  was  abroad  to  see  if  she  could  get  them  a  bit  of 
something  to  eat,  while  a  neighbour  had  given  her  the  candle  by  the  aid  of  which 
I  made  out  the  pitiful  scene.  There  was  the  other  side  of  the  parable ;  the  old,^ 
old  story  :  •♦and  likewise  Lazarus  evil  things."  Under  the  winter's  evening,  the 
two  rooms  told  their  separate  stories  to  the  Lord ;  the  "  good  things  "  there,  the 
"  evil  things  "  here ;  just  as  it  has  been  from  the  beginning.  Alas  1  the  heart  die» 
down  at  such  contrasts.  Who  could  look  on  two  such  pictures  within  the  sam» 
hour,  and  admit  that  things  are  as  they  ought  to  be  in  this  world  ?  And  if,  at 
such  a  moment,  he  remembers  the  words  of  the  parable,  it  cannot  but  occur  to  him,, 
as  was  just  now  said,  that  there  must  be  a  hidden  law  of  adjustment,  whose  working, 
will  be  revealed  in  due  season.  He  must  say  to  himself :  It  cannot  be  that  these 
things  are  to  last  for  ever ;  and  moreover,  it  cannot  be  that  he  who  is  indifferent 
to  them  while  they  last  can  finally  go  unpunished.  Indifference  on  these  points 
is  crime ;  and  crime  must  bring  retribution.  We  have,  then,  in  the  words  of  our 
Lord  in  the  parable  a  very  serious  intimation ;  and,  in  common  daily  experience,. 
an  argument  of  great  persuasive  force  urging  us  to  heed  it.  It  is  one  of  the 
gravest  of  questions  how  we  are  to  deal  with  the  terrible  problems  thus  raised ; 
problems  which  could  not  be  more  urgent  or  more  practical ;  which  relate  to  both 
worlds  at  once ;  to  the  estates  of  men  in  this  life,  and  to  the  estates  of  those  same 
men  in  the  life  hereafter.  We  want  light  on  a  dark  question ;  infidelity  and  anti- 
Christian  social  science  fail  as  here ;  the  latter  amuses  as  with  a  jack-a-lantenir 
leading  nowhere  but  into  greater  embarrassments ;  the  former  blows  out  what  light 
remains,  and  by  destroying  society  reduces  all  men  everywhere  to  present  terror 
and  ultimate  barbarism.  Fortunately  for  the  human  race  there  are  ideas  a» 
different  from  infidel  or  socialistic  notions  as  light  from  darkness ;  ideas  put  forth 
by  our  blessed  Lord,  and  kept  afloat  by  the  powerful  agency  of  that  religion  which 
He  founded  and  sustained.  In  these  ideas,  fully  realized  and  widely  applied, 
resides  the  only  hope  of  relief.  Let  as  recall  them  to  our  thoughts  and  see  in  whai 
subtle  and  perhaps  unsuspected  way  they  help  us  all — the  poor  who  are  in  misery 
here,  and  the  rich  who  are  in  peril  hereafter.  First,  then,  Christianity  never  ha» 
attempted  to  eliminate  the  rich  as  a  class.  It  is  God's  will  that  there  shall  always 
be  the  rich  and  the  poor.  But  although  the  rich  are  permitted  to  be  among  as  and 
to  have  a  place  in  His  Church,  yet  another  thing  is  true.  They  are  told  that  their 
riches  are  a  real  and  a  deadly  peril ;  as  if  a  man  had  in  his  house  what  might  at 
any  moment  take  fire  or  explode  and  destroy  his  life.  And,  more  than  this  :  the 
vast  difference  between  them  and  the  poor  is  one  of  those  which  seem  to  be  unfair 
and  onjust,  in  a  human  point  of  view.  I  mean  that  if  yon  take  man  and  man 
there  is  no  reason  a  priori  why  the  rich  man  should  not  be  in  the  poor  man's  place 
and  the  poor  man  in  the  rich  man's,  and  often  no  reason  can  be  found  in  the 
characters  of  the  men  themselves.  "  Why  is  not  that  poor  brother  where  I  am  and 
I  in  his  place?  It  seems  scarcely  just  to  him  now ;  it  cannot  go  on  for  ever."  II 
all  the  rich  felt  thus  the  sorrows  of  the  poor  would  be  at  end,  even  for  this  life ; 
ftnd  ihe  rich  woold  feel  thus  if  they  were  penetrated  with  the  spirit  of  the 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ceap.  xn, 

gospel.  Even  so  mach  as  there  is  (and  blessed  be  Godl  there  is  much  ol 
ithis  nobility  of  Christian  love),  has  done  and  is  doing  a  vast  deal  of  good, 
and  alleviating  the  misery  and  sorrow  of  the  poor.  {Morgan  Dix,  D,Ij.f 
Dives  and  Lazarus: — I.  Thb  bich  man  in  his  atfluencb  and  enjoyments.  II. 
Lazabus  in  his  povbbty.  1.  A  beggar.  2.  Homeless.  3.  Afflicted  in  person.  III. 
The  death  of  Lazabus.  1.  At  his  death  he  becomes  the  subject  of  angelic  minis- 
tration. 2.  He  is  conveyed  in  triumph  to  glory.  IV.  The  demise  of  thb  bich  uah. 
1.  His  riches  could  not  save  him  from  death.  2.  They  could  only  secure  him  an 
imposing  funeral.  Lessons :  1.  That  piety  on  earth  is  often  allied  with  poverty  and 
sofiering.  2.  That  earthly  prosperity  and  magnificence  are  no  proofs  of  the  Divine 
favour.  3.  That  whatever  be  our  condition  in  this  world,  we  are  travelling  towards 
another.  4.  That  death  is  inevitable  to  all  stations  and  ranks.  {J.  Bums,  D,D.) 
Dives  and  Lazarus  after  death : — I.  We  see  Lazarus  in  the  abode  of  the  blessed. 
His  state  is  one  of — 1.  Bepose,  after  the  toils  of  life.  2.  Dignity,  after  the  humilia- 
ting scenes  of  his  earthly  adversity.  3.  Abimdance,  after  want.  4.  Bliss,  after 
grief  and  sorrow.  II.  We  abb  befebbed  to  Dives  as  consiqned  to  the  bbgions  or 
the  lost.  "In  torments."  1.  Torments  arising  from  the  awful  change  he  had 
experienced  when  death  removed  him  from  his  wealth  and  luxuries  on  earth.  2. 
Torments  from  unallayed  desires.  He  seeks  now  even  for  one  drop  of  water,  but 
in  vain.  3.  Torments  from  the  bitter  and  despairing  anguish  of  his  doomed  spirit. 
4.  Torments  of  keen  self-reproach.  5.  Torments  from  the  direct  iniliction  of  the 
righteous  wrath  of  God.  6.  Torments  from  having  the  world  of  joy  and  glory 
within  the  range  of  his  distracted  vision.  III.  We  abb  bemindbd  of  his  unavailino 
PBAYEBS.  1.  For  the  alleviation  of  his  own  agonies.  2.  For  additional  means  to 
save  his  brethren.  Lessons :  1.  How  awful  it  is  to  die  in  a  carnal,  unregenerata 
etate.  2.  How  connected  are  the  concerns  of  time  with  the  realities  of  eternity. 
**  Whatsoever  a  man  sows  that  shall  he  also  reap."  3.  How  all-important  is  real 
personal  piety.  4.  The  sufficiency  of  the  means  appointed  for  man's  salvation. 
{Ibid.)  Lessons  from  the  parable : — 1.  Let  us  learn  here  that  "  one  thing  is  need- 
ful " — the  care  of  the  soul.  What  can  riches  do  without  this  t  2.  Let  us  learn, 
that,  if  the  word  of  God  revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  if  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  if 
the  promises  and  the  warnings  written  there,  do  not  convince  us,  do  not  turn  us  to 
God — then  nothing  would.  3.  Observe  from  this  parable,  that  hell  will  be  the  por- 
tion not  only  of  the  grossly  wicked,  the  swearer,  the  adulterer,  the  drunkard,  the 
dishonest,  the  liar ;  for  we  read  not,  that  the  rich  man  was  any  of  these :  yet  he 
perished.  4.  What  comfort  may  this  parable  give  to  the  Christian  in  suffering  I 
\e.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  The  rich  man  and  Lazarus: — I.  Thb  contbasts.  1.  In 
their  external  circumstances.  (1)  One  rich;  the  other  poor.  (2)  One  elegantly 
clothed ;  the  other  as  a  beggar.  (3)  One  sumptuously  fed ;  the  other  desiring  the 
rich  man's  crumbs.  (4)  One  in  health ;  the  other  physically  wretched.  (5)  One 
socially  influential ;  the  other  in  beggarly  isolation.  2.  In  their  spiritual  condition. 
(1)  One  exulting  in  his  wealth ;  the  other  contented  in  his  poverty.  (2)  One  satis- 
fied with  his  earthly  possessions ;  the  other  seeking  treasure  in  heaven.  (3)  One 
selfish  and  ungodly ;  the  other  a  self-sacrificing  believer.  3.  In  their  eternal  destiny. 
^1)  One  cast  into  hell ;  the  other  carried  into  heaven.  (2)  One  tormented ;  the  other 
<;omforted.  (3)  One  associated  with  demons;  the  other  in  companionship  with 
Abraham.  (4)  One  in  unalterable  anguish ;  the  other  in  permanent  blessedness. 
U.  The  lessons.  1.  As  to  Providence.  (1)  Worldly  prosperity  no  proof  of  aooep- 
ianoe  with  God.  (2)  Poverty  and  distress  no  proof  of  Divine  abandonment.  (3) 
Worldly  isolation  compatible  with  Dirine  companionship.  2.  As  to  spiritual  life. 
il)  Ease,  luxury,  and  social  elevation  do  not  lead  to  spiritual-mindedness.  (2) 
Beggary,  physical  helplessness,  and  deprivation  of  all  worldly  comforts,  not  able 
to  wean  the  beUever  from  God.  (3)  The  Holy  Scriptures  God's  best  guide  to  spiri- 
tual truth.  8.  As  to  the  future  state.  (1)  That  man  has  an  immortal  nature.  (2) 
That  death  does  not  affect  the  constituents  of  this  nature  in  respect  either  to  {a) 
Its  consciousness ;  (b)  memory ;  (c)  conscience.  (3)  That  death  does  not  affect  tna 
moral  condition  of  this  nature.  (4)  Heaven  and  hell,  respectively  appointed  for  the 
good  and  bad.  (5)  Heaven  and  hell,  eternally  separated  by  an  impassable 
gulf.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  A  wealthy  but  sad  family: — I.  A  wealthy 
rAMiLY.  •*  Wore  purple  and  fine  linen  every  day."  Probably  the  great  magnates 
of  the  neighbourhood,  n.  A  laboe  family.  Six  brothers.  UI.  A  family 
WHICH  DBATH  HAD  VISITED.  "The  rich  man  died  and  was  buried."  Death 
will  neither  be  bribed  by  wealth,  nor  wait  for  preparation.  IV.  A  family, 
mm  ov  WHioH  was  2h  hell.    Secular  wealth  is  sometimes  soul-degrading.     V.  k 


CHAP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  241 

FAMItiT  WHOSE  BTTRTIVINO  BB0THER8  WEBB  JlLL  ON  THE  BOAD  TO  ETJIN.  VI.  A  PAMILT 
WHOSE  DECEASED  BBOTHEB  BECOILED  AT  THE  IDEA  Oy  BEUNION.  VII.  A  FAMILT  WH(P 
POSSESSED  AI>L  THE  MEANS  THEY  NEEDED   OR    WOULD   EVEB    HAVE    FOB   SPIRITUAL   SAIiTA- 

TioN.  {Anon.)  Opportunity  for  charity  : — "There  was  a  certain  beggar  named 
Lazaras,  which  was  laid  at  his  gate."  This  is  a  fact  of  importance  in  the  history 
of  Dives.  Lazaras  enters  on  the  stage  not  merely  to  present  a  striking  contrast  to 
the  rich  man's  state,  but  as  one  with  whom  the  latter  had  relations.  Lazarus  re- 
presents opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  humanity.  That  is  the  chief  if  not  the  sole 
purpose  for  which  he  appears  in  the  first  scene.  {A.  B.  Bruce.)  Wealth  making 
friends  for  the  future : — What  a  vastly  greater  benefit  Dives  might  have  gained 
through  Lazarus,  had  he  only  turned  his  acquaintance  with  him  to  account  in  good 
time.  Had  he  made  of  him  a  friend  with  his  worldly  possessions  he  might  have 
been  his  companion  in  paradise.  But  now,  so  far  from  attaining  that  felicity,  he 
cannot  even  obtain  the  little  favour  he  craves.  (Ibid.)  Contrasts: — This  para- 
ble is  full  of  sharp  contrasts.  1.  There  is  the  contrast  in  the  life  of  these  two  men. 
The  one  rich,  the  other  a  beggar.  The  rich  man  had  great  possessions,  yet  one 
thing  he  lacked,  and  that  was  the  one  thing  needful.  Lazarus,  the  beggar,  was 
after  all  the  truly  rich  man,  "as  having  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things." 
2.  Next,  there  is  a  contrast  in  the  death  of  these  two  men.  3.  And  there  is  a  con- 
trast in  the  after  time  for  these  two  men.  The  rich  man  was  buried,  doubtless, 
with  great  pomp.  Some  of  us  have  seen  such  funerals.  What  extravagance  and 
display  take  the  place  of  reverent  resignation  and  quiet  grief!  Of  the  beggar's 
burial  place  we  know  nothing.  4.  But  the  sharpest  contrast  of  all  is  in  the  world 
beyond,  from  which  for  a  moment  Jesus  draws  back  the  veil.  {H.  J.  Wilmot  Bux- 
ton, M.A.)        Dives  and  Lazarus:^-!.  The  unequal  distribution  of  the  gifts  of 

PEOVIDENCE  AMONGST  MANKIND.  II.  ThE  DECISIVE  ADJUSTMENT  OF  THINGS  THAT  TAKES 
PLACE  AT  DEATH.  III.  ThE  EVEBLASTINO  8EPABATI0N  THAT  TAKES  PLACE  AT  DEATH 
BETWEEN  THE  BI0HTE0U8  AND  THE  WICKED.  IV.  ThE  VIEW  THAT  IS  TAKEN  OF  THIS  LIFB 
WHEN  ONCE  THEY  GET  OUT   INTO   THE   FUTUEE.      V.    ThE    SUFFICIENCY   OF  THE   BEVBLA- 

noN  THAT  God  has  given  to  confirm  all  these  things.  {J.  E.  Beaumont.)  Dive» 
and  Lazarus: — I.  The  circumstances  of  Dives  in  his  two  different  states  of 
EXISTENCE.  1.  In  this  world  Dives  was  possessed — (1)  Of  an  abundance  of  earthly 
good.  (2)  He  knew  how  to  enjoy  this  abundance,  according  to  the  usual  meaning 
of  this  phraseology.  (3)  He  was  probably,  so  far  as  pertains  to  human  nature  in 
these  circumstances,  possessed  of  entire  ease  of  mind.  2.  At  death  his  situation 
was  in  all  respects  reversed.  (1)  He  was  disembodied.  (2)  In  absolute  want  of  alH 
things.  (8)  Despised.  (4)  Miserable.  II.  The  circumstances  of  Lazarus  in  thb 
PRESENT  WOBLD,  AND  IN  THE  FUTUBE.  1.  In  thls  world,  Lazarus  was — (1)  In  a  state* 
of  the  most  abject  poverty.  (2)  Miserable.  2.  In  the  future  world  he  was — (1) 
Bich  in  the  abundance  of  all  things.  (2)  Honourable.  (3)  Happy.  (T.  Dwight, 
D.D.)  The  rich  man  and  Lazarus : — I.  The  besemblancb  between  these  two 
MEN.  1.  The  parable  speaks  of  a  rich  man  and  a  poor  man ;  and  the  resemblance 
between  them  may  be  traced,  first,  in  the  mortality  of  their  bodies.  They  were- 
both  men,  sinfnl  men,  and  consequently  dying  men.  No  sooner  is  it  said  that  "the- 
beggar  died,"  than  it  is  added,  "  the  rich  man  also  died."  And  thus  mast  end  the' 
history  of  ns  all.  2.  These  men  resembled  each  other  also  in  the  immortality  of 
their  sonls.  The  sonl  of  the  poorest  amongst  us  is  as  immortal  as  the  soul  of  the 
richest.  8.  To  these  two  points  of  resemblance  between  these  men,  we  may  add  a 
third,  not  indeed  absolutely  expressed  here,  but,  like  the  fact  we  have  just  alluded 
to,  evidently  to  be  inferred — accountableness  to  God.  It  was  not  chance  which 
placed  them  where  they  are.  They  went  thither  from  a  bar  of  judgment.  IL  Lei 
as  proceed  to  notice,  secondly,  the  diffebence  between  these  two  men,  with  ths 
6B0UND8  OB  REASONS  OF  IT.  They  differed  in  two  points.  1.  In  their  earthly  por- 
tion. How  great  a  contrast !  Where  shall  we  find  its  origin  ?  It  warns  us  against 
judging  of  men's  character  by  men's  condition.  That  diversity  of  condition,  which 
we  may  wonder  at  but  cannot  alter,  which  has  prevailed  more  or  less  in  every  age 
and  nation  notwithstanding  every  attempt  to  put  an  end  to  it,  that  diversity  mast 
be  traced  to  the  sovereign  will  of  God.  And  He  suffers,  or  rather  He  establishes  it, 
because  it  is  conducive  to  oar  welfare  and  His  own  glory.  (1)  It  serves  to  show  as^ 
among  other  things,  the  i>overty  of  the  world  and  the  all-sufiScienoy  of  God.  (2> 
Besides,  this  diversity  of  condition,  this  mixture  of  poverty  and  riches  on  the  earth, 
answers  a  farther  end — it  proclaims  to  thoughtless  man  another  world.  Thero 
must  be  a  world  in  which  the  just  Governor  of  the  oniverse  will  assert  His  justice, 
«rill  vindicate  His  character,  and  render  to  the  sons  of  men  according  their  works^ 
▼oi^  m.  16 


842  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

2.  The  two  men  it  speaks  of  differed  in  their  eternal  eondition.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 
The  contrast  in  eternity  : — The  first  truth  here  saggested  is  that  by  the  allotmenta 
of  His  providence  in  the  present  world,  God  does  not  distinguish  between  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked.  It  has  been  the  grief  of  many  good  men,  that  the  dis- 
pensations of  providence  in  this  world  afford  bo  little  evidence  of  the  impartiality 
and  rectitude  of  the  Divine  government.  Whether  it  be  to  show  the  comparative 
sneanness  and  significance  of  all  earthly  good,  or  that  the  Father  of  mercies  is  kind 
even  to  the  evil  and  unthankful,  or  to  illustrate  their  own  impenitence  and  ob- 
duracy, or  to  give  them  the  opportunity  of  filling  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  t 
or  to  accomplish  all  these  purposes — the  fact  is  unquestioned — that  thus  far  in  the 
history  of  the  world,  by  far  the  greater  portion  of  those  who,  like  the  rich  man  in 
the  parable,  have  fared  sumptuously  every  day,  have  been  of  the  wicked  rather  than 
of  the  righteous.  The  real  disposition  of  the  Divine  mind  toward  holiness  and  sia 
must  be  exhibited  in  the  distribution  of  good  and  evil  in  accordance  with  their  re- 
spective characters.  The  present  world,  therefore,  is  but  the  season  of  trial,  with  a 
view  to  a  future  retribution.  We  must  look  beyond,  if  we  would  see  the  line  of 
demarcation  between  the  friends  and  foes  of  God  drawn  with  visible  and  pemianent 
distinctness.  This  difference  will  be  clearly  and  distinctly  made,  at  the  end  of  the 
world.  The  time  of  trial  on  the  earth  was  never  designed  to  be  long.  Human  life 
with  all  its  invaluable  opportunities,  is  but  "  a  vapour  that  appeareth  for  a  httle 
while  and  then  vanisheth  away."  Every  man  then  enters  upon  allotments,  which, 
so  far  from  being  influenced  by  his  earthly  standing,  are  exclusively  determined  by 
Jiis  moral  character.  There  will  be  a  difference  of  character,  of  place,  of  society,  of 
employment,  of  prospects.  They  will  be  unlike  in  every  conceivable  particular. 
iG.  Spring,  I).D.)  Worldly  gratification  and  its  terrible  mockery : — My  friends, 
do  you  remember  that  old  Scythian  custom,  when  the  head  of  a  house  died  ?  How 
lie  was  dressed  in  his  finest  dress,  and  set  in  his  chariot,  and  carried  about  to  his 
friends'  houses ;  and  each  of  them  placed  him  at  his  table's  head,  and  all  feasted  in 
his  presence  ?  Suppose  it  were  offered  to  you,  in  plain  words,  as  it  i$  offered  to 
you  in  dire  facts,  that  you  should  gain  this  Scythian  honour,  gradually,  while  you 
yet  thought  yourself  alive.  Suppose  the  offer  were  this :  You  shall  die  slowly ;  your 
blood  shall  daily  grow  cold,  your  flesh  petrify,  your  heart  beat  at  last  only  as  % 
Tusted  group  of  iron  valves.  Your  life  shall  fade  from  you,  and  sink  through  the 
earth  into  the  ice  of  Caina;  but,  day  by  day,  your  body  shall  be  dressed  mors 
gaily,  and  set  in  higher  chariots,  and  have  more  orders  on  the  breast — crowns  on 
its  head,  if  you  will.  Men  shall  bow  before  it,  stare  and  shout  round  it,  crowd 
after  it  up  and  down  the  streets ;  build  palaces  for  it,  feast  with  it  at  their  tables' 
heads  all  the  night  long;  your  soul  shall  stay  enough  within  it  to  know  what  they 
ido,  and  feel  the  weight  of  the  golden  dress  on  its  shoulders,  and  the  furrow  of  the 
;erown-edge  on  the  sktill — no  more.  Would  you  take  the  offer,  verbally  made  by 
the  death-angel?  Would  the  meanest  among  us  take  it,  think  you?  Yet  practically 
and  verily  we  grasp  at  it,  every  one  of  us,  in  a  measure ;  many  of  us  grasp  at  it  in  its 
fulness  of  horror.  Every  man  accepts  it,  who  desires  to  advance  in  life  without  know* 
ing  what  life  is ;  who  means  only  that  he  is  to  get  more  horses,  and  more  footmen, 
and  more  fortune,  and  more  public  honour,  and — not  more  personal  soul.  He  only 
as  advancing  in  life,  whose  heart  is  getting  softer,  whose  blood  warmer,  whose  brain 
iqoicker,  whose  spirit  is  entering  into  living  peace.  And  the  men  who  have  this  life 
in  them  are  the  true  lords  or  kings  of  the  earth — they,  and  they  only.  (John  Ruskin.) 
The  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus : — I  proceed  to  observe  the  vast  difference 
'between  men's  conditions  in  this  world  and  the  other.  The  rich  man  prospered 
here,  and  was  afterwards  tormented.  And  it  is  very  agreeable  to  the  wisdom  of 
<God  to  make  such  a  difference  between  men's  conditions  in  this  world  and  the 
4)ther,  and  that  for  these  two  reasons :  1.  For  the  trying  of  men's  virtue.  2.  In 
order  to  the  recompensing  of  it.  From  this  consideration  of  the  difference  between 
the  condition  of  men  in  this  world  and  the  other,  we  may  infer — (1)  That  no  man 
should  measure  his  felicity  or  imhappiness  by  his  lot  in  this  world.  (2)  We  should 
not  set  too  great  a  value  upon  the  blessings  of  this  life.  (3)  We  shonld  not  be 
excessively  troubled  if  we  meet  with  hardship  and  affliction  here  in  this  world, 
because  those  whom  God  designs  for  the  greatest  happiness  hereafter  may  receive 
.«vil  things  here.  (4)  We  should  do  all  things  with  a  regard  to  our  future  and 
<eternal  state.  (Archbishop  Tillotson.)  The  true  valuation  of  man : — In  this  life, 
under  the  managery  of  ordinary  Providence,  the  worst  men  may  abound  with  the 
good  things  of  this  life,  and  better  men  are  sometimes  shortened  and  want  even  the 
jMoeuary  conveniences  of  Ufe.    Of  this  I  shall  speak  but  a  word,  because  it  is  ft 


CHAP,  xn.'s  ST.  LUKE.  24» 

matter  of  easy  observatijQ.  This  David,  Job,  and  Jeremiah  stumbled  at.  That 
tight,  property,  and  title  are  founded  in  nature,  not  in  grace.  God  gave  the  world 
and  the  things  thereof  unto  the  sons  of  men.  If  I  would  prove  this  to  be  mine,  I 
must  prove  my  title,  not  by  miracle,  but  as  the  law  and  usage  of  the  country  where 
I  dwell  do  state  and  determine  ;  therefore  I  will  say  no  more  in  this  particular.  I. 
I'hat  if  we  would  take  a  right  estimate  of  man,  we  must  consider  him  in  respect  to 
&  double  state — here  and  hereafter — and  that  for  these  two  reasons :  1.  Because 
there  is  less  of  man  here  and  more  hereafter.  2.  Because  man  is  more  valuable 
than  this  world  represents  him  to  be.  I.  The  first  of  these  I  will  make  appear  in 
three  particulars,  that  there  is  less  of  man  here  and  much  more  hereafter.  1.  In 
respect  of  his  time  and  continuance  in  being.  2.  In  this  state  there  is  less  of  right 
judgment  of  things  and  persons.  Things  here  go  under  false  appearances,  and 
persons  here  are  under  the  power  of  lying  imaginations.  3.  Less  of  weal  or  woe  is 
in  this  state  than  in  the  other,  for  men  in  this  state  do  not  fully  reap  the  fruit  of 
their  own  ways  ;  they  do  not  come  to  the  proof  of  the  bargain  they  have  made.  In 
the  respects  before  mentioned  and  others  that  possibly  might  be  superadded,  it 
appears  that  there  is  less  of  man  in  this  world.  But  I  may  also  adjoin,  by  way  of 
exception,  some  particulars  to  the  contrary,  for  I  must  acknowledge  that  in  some 
respects  our  being  in  this  world  is  very  considerable.  I  will  instance  in  three 
particulars — 1.  In  respect  of  man's  possibility.  2.  In  respect  of  man's  oppor- 
tunity. 3.  In  respect  of  man's  well-grounded  faith  and  expectation.  I  now 
come  to  the  second  reason.  Why,  if  we  would  make  a  just  estimate  of  man, 
-we  must  consider  him  in  respect  to  his  double  state  of  existence,  in  time  and  in 
eternity.  For  man  is  a  much  more  valuable  creature  than  his  affairs  in  this 
world  represent,  him  to  be,  and  this  I  will  make  appear  in  three  particulars. 
Because — 1.  Man  is  here  in  his  state  of  infancy ;  yea,  he  is  as  it  were  imprisoned 
and  encumbered  with  a  gross,  dull,  and  crazy  body.  2.  In  this  state  man  is 
neither  as  he  should  be,  nor,  if  he  himself  well  consider,  as  he  would  be.  The 
state  of  man  in  this  world  doth  represent  him  subject  to  the  same  vanity  that  all 
other  creatures  lie  under  (Job  xvii.  14).  This  state  represents  a  man  as  very 
low  and  mean  because  he  is  subjected  to  low  and  mean  employments — fit  only 
to  converse  with  other  creatures.  This  present  state  represents  a  man  in  a 
condition  of  beggary,  dependence,  and  necessity  (Job  i.  21).  This  state  represents 
a  man  as  worn  out  with  solicitude  and  care  for  himself,  as  being  tormented  with 
fear,  and  more  to  seek  than  any  other  creature.  This  state  represents  man  to  be 
in  danger  from  him  that  is  next  him,  and  of  his  own  kind ;  for  so  is  the  world 
through  sin  become  degenerate,  that  one  man,  as  it  were,  is  become  a  wolf  to 
another.  Lastly,  the  state  of  man  in  this  life  represents  his  condition  otherways 
than  indeed  it  is ;  that  is,  it  represents  a  man  the  object  of  the  devil's  envy, 
usurpation,  and  tyranny.  He  is  called  the  "  Prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the 
spirit  that  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience  "  (Eph.  ii.  2).  For  the  close  of 
this  particular  I  shall  add  a  word  or  two  of  application.  And— 1.  If  so  be  there 
is  less  of  man  here  and  more  hereafter,  if  when  we  would  take  a  right  estimate  of 
man  we  must  consider  him  in  respect  of  his  double  estate,  hereafter  as  well  as 
here,  then  those  persons  are  guilty  of  the  greatest  madness  and  folly  that  consider 
themselves  only  in  order  to  this  life ;  whereas  these  men  have  souls  to  save  or  to 
lose,  and  there  is  another  state  that  will  commence  and  begin  after  the  expiration 
of  this.  2.  My  next  inference  from  what  hath  been  said  is — that  we  should  not 
b«  tempted  in  this  life  to  do  anything  to  the  prejudice  of  our  fntiue  state,  the  state 
of  eternity ;  but  to  let  things  be  considered  according  to  the  true  worth  and  value, 
lest  they  find  cause  to  repent,  when  it  is  too  late,  of  the  pleasures  they  took  in  their 
unlawful  actions.  II.  The  second  proposition  is — that  the  state  of  man  in  the  life 
to  come  holds  a  proportion  to  his  affairs  in  this  life.  1.  Let  it  be  understood  that  I 
have  no  intention  at  all  to  speak  one  word  to  countenance  the  creature's  merit 
with  God,  for  that  I  conceive  to  be  incompatible  to  the  condition  of  the  highest 
angel  in  glory  properly  to  merit  anything  at  the  hand  of  God.  2.  Again,  when  I 
say  the  state  of  man  in  the  world  to  come  holds  a  proportion  to  his  affairs  in  this 
world,  you  must  not  understand  it  means  worldly  circumstances  of  wealth,  hononr, 
pleasure,  strength,  or  worldly  privileges.  Therefore  in  the  affirmative,  two  things 
there  are  belonging  to  men  in  this  state  which  are  the  measures  of  onr  happiness 
in  the  future  state — (1)  The  internal  disposition  and  mental  temper.  (2)  The 
illicit  acts  which  follow  the  temper  and  are  connatural  to  it.  These  are  our 
acquisitions,  through  the  grace  and  assistance  of  God,  which  always  is  to  be 
^inderstood  as  principal  to  all  good,  though  it  be  not  always  expressed,  for  all  good 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt^ 

is  of  God.  And  for  this  I  will  give  you  an  account  that  it  must  be  so.  1.  Fronj 
the  nature  of  the  thing,  for  goodness  and  happiness  are  the  same  thing  materially ; 
in  nature  they  are  the  same,  as  malignity  and  misery  are  the  same  in  nature  too. 
2.  From  the  judgment  of  God,  and  those  declarations  which  He  hath  made  ol 
Himself  in  the  Scriptures,  which  everywhere  declare  that  He  will  render  to  every 
one  according  to  right  (Rom.  ii.  6-8).  Then  let  men  look  well  to  their  mental 
dispositions,  and  to  their  moral  actions.  This  is  of  a  mighty  use  in  religion  to 
understand  the  true  notion  of  moral  actions.  From  the  words  of  the  text  I 
shall  observe  briefly  two  things  more— First.  That  worldly  prosperity  is  no  certain 
forerunner  of  future  happiness ;  for  this  is  a  thing  heterogenial,  and  is  from  dis- 
tinct and  quite  other  causes.  The  providence  of  God  governs  the  world,  and  the 
laws  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  are  quite  different  things.  1.  Let  no  man  make 
himself  a  slave  to  that  which  is  no  part  of  his  happiness.  2.  Let  him  take  his 
chief  care  about  that  which  is  in  certain  conjunction  with  happiness,  and  that  is 
the  noble  generous  temper  of  his  soul,  and  the  illicit  acts  of  his  mind.  Secondly. 
We  see  from  hence  that  men  change  terms,  circumstances,  and  conditions,  one  with 
another  in  the  world  to  come.  For  an  account  of  this — 1.  Things  many  times  are 
wrong  here,  but  they  will  not  be  wrong  always.  2.  The  present  work  is  to  exercise 
virtue.  This  is  a  probation  state,  a  state  of  trial,  and  if  so,  there  must  be  freedom 
and  liberty  of  action.  3.  The  final  resolution  and  last  stating  of  things  is  reserved 
to  another  time  when  no  corrupt  judge  shall  sit,  but  He  shaU  come  that  shall 
judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  The  use  I  will  make  of  this  is — 1.  Therefore, 
do  not  envy  any  one's  condition  ;  it  is  not  safe,  though  glory  attend  upon  it  for  a 
while  (Psa.  xxxvii.  1).  2.  Satisfy  thyself  in  thine  own  condition  if  it  be  good  and 
virtuous,  for  then  it  is  safe.  3.  Have  a  right  notion  and  judgment  of  the  business 
of  time,  which  is  to  prepare  for  the  future  state.  I  will  conclude  this  discourse  with 
these  four  inferences  :  1.  Then  it  is  folly  and  madness  for  men — as  frequently  they 
do — to  estimate  or  consider  themselves  wholly  or  chiefly  by  their  affairs  in  this 
world,  and  by  the  good  things  thereof,  such  as  are  power,  riches,  pleasures.  2.  Then 
it  is  the  great  concernment  of  our  souls  not  at  all  to  admit  of  any  temptation  or 
suggestion  to  do  anything  in  this  Ufe  to  the  prejudice  of  our  state  in  eternity.  _  3. 
Then  it  is  fairly  knowable  in  this  state,  and  by  something  thereof  as  a  foregoing 
participation  or  sign,  what  our  state  and  condition  for  sort  and  kind  will  be  in  the 
world  to  come.  4.  Then  faith  and  patience  to  go  through  the  world  withal,  for  the 
day  draws  on  apace  for  the  stating  and  rectifying  of  things,  the  proportioning  of 
recompense  and  reward  to  action,  and  the  completing  and  consummating 
what  is  weak  and  imperfect  for  the  present.  He  is  unreasonably  im- 
patient and  hasty  who  will  not  stay  and  expect  the  season  of  the  year 
and  what  that  brings,  but  mutters  and  complains^  of  injury  and  hard 
measures  because  he  cannot  have  harvest  in  seed-time.  (£>'.  Whichcote.) 
The  sin  of  neglecting  to  be  charitable : — Here  are  three  great  aggravations  of  tiie 
rich  man's  uncharitableness — I.  That  here  was  an  object  presented  to  him. 
II.  Such  an  object  as  would  move  any  one's  pity,  a  man  reduced  to  extreme  misery 
and  necessity.  III.  A  little  relief  would  have  contented  him.  1.  That  uninerci- 
fulness  and  uncharitableness  to  the  poor  is  a  very  great  sin.  It  contains  in  its 
very  nature  two  black  crimes.  (1)  Inhumanity ;  it  is  an  argument  of  a  cruel  and 
savage  disposition  not  to  pity  those  that  are  in  want  and  misery.  (2)  Besides  the 
inhumanity  of  this  sin,  it  is  likewise  a  great  impiety  toward  God.  Unmercifulness 
to  the  poor  hath  this  fourfold  impiety  in  it — it  is  a  contempt  of  God ;  an  usurpa- 
tion upon  His  right;  a  slighting  of  His  providence;  and  a  plain  demonstration 
that  we  do  not  love  God,  and  that  all  our  pretences  to  religion  are  hypocritical  and 
insincere.  2.  That  it  is  such  a  sin,  as  alone,  and  without  any  other  guilt,  is  suf- 
ficient to  ruin  a  man  for  ever.  The  parable  lays  the  rich  man's  condemnation 
upon  this,  it  was  the  guilt  of  this  sin  that  tormented  him  when  he  was  in  hell. 
The  Scripture  is  full  of  severe  threatenings  against  this  sin  (Prov.  xxi.  13).  _  Our 
eternal  happiness  does  not  so  much  depend  upon  the  exercise  of  any  one  single 
grace  or  virtue,  as  this  of  charity  and  mercy.  Faith  and  repentance  are  more 
general  and  fundamental  graces,  and,  as  it  were,  the  parents  of  all  the  rest :  but  of 
all  single  virtues,  the  Scripture  lays  the  greatest  weight  upon  this  of  charity  ;  and 
if  we  do  truly  believe  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  and  the  promises  and  threatenings 
of  it,  we  cannot  but  have  a  principal  regard  to  it.  I  know  how  averse  men 
generally  are  to  this  duty,  which  make  them  so  full  of  excuses  and  objections 
against  it,  1.  They  have  "children  to  provide  for.  This  is  not  the  case  of  all,  and 
they  whose  case  it  is  may  do  well  to  consider  tliat  it  will  not  bo  •roiss  to  laava 


CHAT.  VII.]  ST.  LUKE.  245 

a  blessing  as  well  as  an  inheritance  to  their  children.  2.  They  tell  us  they  intend 
to  do  something  when  they  die.  It  shows  a  great  backwardness  to  the  work  when 
we  defer  it  as  long  as  we  can.  It  is  one  of  the  worst  compliments  we  can  put  upon 
God  to  give  a  thiug  to  Him  when  we  can  keep  it  no  longer.  3.  Others  say,  they 
may  come  to  want  themselves,  and  it  is  prudence  to  provide  against  that.  To  this 
I  answer — (1)  I  believe  that  no  man  ever  came  the  sooner  to  want  for  his  charity 
David  hath  an  express  observation  to  the  contrary  (Psa.  xxxvii.  25).  (2)  Thou 
mayest  come  to  want  thouj^h  thou  give  nothing  ;  in  which  case  thou  mayest  justly 
look  upon  neglect  of  this  duty  as  one  of  the  causes  of  thy  poverty.  (3)  After  all 
our  care  to  provide  for  ourselves,  we  must  trust  the  providence  of  God;  and  a  man 
can  in  no  case  bo  safely  commit  himself  to  God  as  in  well-doing.  But,  if  the  truth 
were  known,  I  doubt  covetousness  lies  at  the  bottom  of  this  objection :  however,  it 
is  fit  it  should  be  answered.  (1)  I  say,  that  no  man  that  is  not  prejudiced,  either 
by  his  education  or  interest,  can  think  that  a  creature  can  merit  anything  at  the 
hand  of  God,  to  whom  all  that  we  can  possibly  do  is  antecedently  due  ;  much  less 
that  we  can  merit  so  great  a  reward  as  that  of  eternal  happiness.  (2)  Though  we 
deny  the  merit  of  good  works,  yet  we  firmly  believe  the  necessity  of  them  to  eternal 
life.  {Archbishop  Tillotson.)  Tlwughts  : — 1.  Eiches  constitute  a  serious,  though 
not  insuperable,  obstacle  to  one's  salvation  ;  and  poverty,  in  itself  undesirable,  is, 
in  a  spiritual  aspect,  less  dangerous  than  riches.  2,  Before  Him  who  seeth  not  as 
man  seeth,  the  millionaire  has  no  advantage  over  the  mendicant.  3.  The  soul  is 
the  same  self-conscious  existence  immediately  after  death  that  it  was  before  ;  and 
death  ushers  some,  at  once,  into  a  state  of  conscious  enjoyment,  and  some  into  a 
state  of  conscious  misery.  4.  They  that  would  not,  while  probationers,  cry  to  God 
for  mercy,  will,  in  eternity,  look  in  vain  for  mercy  to  either  God  or  man.  5.  Those 
whom  God  designs  to  save  He  finds  it  necessary  to  chasten,  so  that  life's  evil  things 
may  wean  them  from  the  world  and  fit  them  the  better  to  enjoy  an  eternity  of  good 
things.  But  there  are  men  of  the  world  who  have  their  portion  in  this  life.  They 
prefer  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season,  rather  than  to  suffer  affliction 
with  the  people  of  God,  and  hence  they  in  their  lifetime  receive  their  good  things 
but  are  tormented  in  the  world  to  come.  6.  While  here,  sinners  are  urged  to  cross 
the  moral  chasm  which  separates  them  from  saints,  for  Christ  has  bridged  it ;  bu< 
after  death  it  becomes  to  them  an  unbridged,  impassable  gulf.  7.  How  deluded 
are  they  who  suppose  that  converse  with  the  dead  is  possible,  or  that  the  unseen 
world  can,  in  that  way,  be  partly  unveiled.  An  inspired  book  was  God's  wise  and 
jhosen  mode  of  acquainting  us  with  spiritual  truths,  and  he  who  has  this  book, 
yet  disregards  its  teachings,  will,  in  eternity,  reap  the  bitter  consequences.  (T. 
Williston.)  Dives  and  Lazarus: — L  The  ruruBB  state  is  one  of  ketribction. 
IL  The  future  state  is  one  into  which  memory  enters  as  a  factor  of  happiness 

OB  HI8EBY.  III.  In  the  FUTURE  STATE  INTEREST  IB  FELT  IN  THOSE  WHO  ARE  STILL  IN 
THE  BODY.      IV.  God  BESTOWS  UPON  US  HERE  AND  NOW  ALL  THE  PRIVILEOES  WHICH  ABB 

NEEDFUL  TO  PREPARE  FOB  THE  FUTURE  STATE.  CoHclusion :  1.  The  seriousness  and 
solemnity  of  this  earthly  probation.  2.  The  folly  of  those  who  use  this  life  simply 
for  their  own  gratification.  3.  The  nearness  of  eternity.  4.  The  justice  of  God's 
requirement  of  assent  to  His  truth  and  compliance  with  His  demands.  5.  The 
importance  of  an  immediate  acceptance  of  the  gospel,  and  immediate  preparation 
for  judgment.  {J.  R.  Thomson,  M.A.)  Luxury  disregarding  suffering : — Mdlle. 
Taglione,  the  celebrated  dancer,  spent  her  last  London  season  at  Her  Majesty's 
Theatre  in  1847.  She  said  she  would  not  return  to  London,  being  dissatisfied  with 
the  admiration  which  she  received.  The  season  was  exceptionally  brilliant, 
"  though  it  was  said  that  bread  was  dear,  and  the  misery  of  the  people  great." 
"  One  would  never  suspect  it,"  said  the  famous  dancer,  "  to  see  so  many  splendid 
equipages,  and  so  many  diamonds  on  the  white  shoulders  of  the  ladies."  Wanton 
extravagance  : — "  The  age  cannot  be  very  good,"  remarked  Hannah  More,  "  when 
the  strawberries  at  Lady  Stormonth's  breakfast  last  Saturday  morning  cost  one 
hundred  and  fifty  pounds."  Too  respectable  for  hell : — A  wealthy  merchant  of 
Philadelphia,  who  would  not  listen  to  the  gospel  message  in  health,  sent  for  me  at 
his  death-bed.  I  told  him,  "  I  have  nothing  new  to  tell  you.  You  are  a  sinner, 
and  here  is  a  Saviour.  Do  you  feel  your  guilt,  and  will  yon  take  a  Saviour  ?  " 
"  No.  There  must  be  some  better  place  Uian  hell  for  a  man  of  my  respectability." 
(S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Eiches  and  perdition : — Ay,  and  so  it  is  with  the  wicked  man 
nowadays.  He  gets  rich,  but  what  is  the  use  of  being  wealthy  if  you  must  be 
damned  ?  Fool  that  he  is,  if  he  buys  a  gold  coffin,  how  would  that  help  him  * 
8nppoM  be  is  laid  out  with  a  bag  of  gold  in  each  hand,  and  a  pile  of  it  between  hii 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  m. 

legs,  how  will  that  help  him  f  Others  seek  to  get  learning,  but  what  is  the  good 
of  learning  if  you  sink  to  perdition  with  it  ?  Take  up  the  learned  man's  skull,  and 
what  is  the  difference  between  that  and  the  skull  of  the  merest  pauper  that  scarcely 
knew  his  letters  ?  Brown  unpalpable  powder,  they  both  crumble  down  into  the 
same  elements.  To  die  in  a  respectable  position,  what  is  the  use  of  it  ?  What  are 
a  few  more  plumes  on  the  hearse,  or  a  longer  line  of  mourning  coaches  ?  Will 
these  ease  the  miseries  of  Tophet  ?  Ah  1  friends,  you  have  to  die.  Why  not  make 
ready  for  the  inevitable  ?  Oh !  if  men  were  wise,  they  would  see  that  all  earth's 
joys  are  just  like  the  bubbles  which  our  children  blow  with  soap  ;  they  glitter  and 
they  shine,  and  then  they  are  gone,  and  there  is  not  even  a  wreck  left  behind. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  just  retribution  of  selfishness  : — How  marvellously  just 
was  the  retribution  of  selfishness  I  with  what  wonderful  precision  was  the  punish- 
ment adapted  to  the  sin  !  During  the  life  of  Lazarus,  he  had  laid  at  the  rich  man's 
gate,  whence  he  could  behold  the  pomp,  and  Lear  the  revelry,  that  reigned  in  the 
gorgeous  mansion  ;  and  he  had  asked  only  for  the  crumbs  that  fell  from  the  table, 
and  even  these  were  denied  him.  But  after  death  the  rich  man  and  the  beggar 
are  hterally  made  to  change  places.  Dives  is  placed  where  he  can  be  a  spectator 
of  the  happiness  of  Lazarus ;  and  he  desires,  but  desires  in  vain,  a  single  drop 
from  those  gushing  fountains  which  he  saw  on  the  other  side  of  the  gulf.  You 
cannot  but  observe  how  accurately  Dives  has  become  what  Lazarus  was,  and 
Lazarus  what  Dives.  Lazarus  was  the  beggar,  now  Dives  is.  Lazarus  saw,  though 
he  did  not  share  the  abundance  of  Dives;  Dives  now  sees,  but  only  sees,  the 
abundance  of  Lazarus.  Lazarus  asked  for  crumbs,  and  Dives  asks  for  a  drop. 
Crumbs  were  refused,  and  now  even  the  drop  is  withheld.  Thus  the  selfish  man 
is  made  to  feel  his  selfishness  through  being  placed  in  the  precise  position  of  the 
supplicant,  whom  his  selfishness  had  caused  him  to  neglect.  It  may  be  thus  in 
regard  to  every  other  sin,  that  the  wicked  will  be  so  circumstanced  in  futurity,  that 
their  sins  will  be  forced  on  their  recollection,  and  thus  conscience  be  kept  for  ever 
on  the  alert — for  ever  on  the  fret.  And  all — for  indeed  these  are  things  too  dreadful 
to  be  dwelt  on  long — all  we  can  say  is,  that  if  the  selfish  man  is  to  beg  in  vain 
from  the  victims  of  his  selfishness,  if  the  envious  is  to  be  forced  to  gaze  on  the 
splendour  of  those  whom  he  envied,  if  the  seducer  is  to  be  made  to  feel  himself  for 
ever  the  seduced — yea,  if  punishment  is  to  be  so  exactly  the  picture  of  crime,  that 
a  man  shall  seem  to  be  eternally  receiving  in  his  own  person  the  very  wrongs  that 
he  did  to  others,  so  that  every  stroke  beneath  which  he  writhes  will  appear  as  the 
reflected  blow  of  his  own  violence  rebounding  on  himself,  then,  indeed,  must  we 
be  living  under  a  government  which  will  vindicate  its  righteousness  ;  and  he  who, 
in  Scriptural  language,  "  sows  the  wind,"  must  be  a  spectacle  of  justice  when  com- 
pelled to  "reap  the  whirlwind."  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Self-denial  necessary  to 
salvation  : — This  rich  man  was  no  open  sinner,  but  he  was  simply  living  to  and  for 
self  ;  he  enjoyed  life,  as  men  say,  to  the  full ;  he  got  out  of  it  all  the  satisfaction 
he  could ;  self  was  the  centre  round  which  his  thoughts,  his  time,  his  money 
revolved  ;  he  indulged  his  taste  for  fine  dress  and  good  food  without  restraint.  In 
the  face,  then,  of  this  awful  warning,  ask  yourself  the  question,  Can  it  be  said  that 
my  life  is  marked  by  self-denial  ?  do  I,  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  that  only,  do  that 
which  is  against  my  natural  inclinations,  and  leave  undone  that  which  I  should 
otherwise  be  inclined  to  do?  or,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  my  constant  aim  and 
desire  to  get  as  much  enjoyment  for  myself  as  I  can  in  life,  if  not  to  the  loss  and 
injury  of  others,  yet  without  any  particular  thought  or  care  about  them  ?  And  it 
will  not  do  to  reckon  as  acts  of  self-denial  instances  in  wbich  our  wills  and  inclina- 
tions have  been  thwarted,  either  by  others,  or  by  the  direct  action  of  God's  provi- 
dence. We  must  all  of  us  endure  a  great  many  crosses  and  disappointments 
whether  we  will  or  no ;  no  doubt  the  rich  man  had  occasionally  his  cares  and 
vexations.  These  do  not  leave  the  stamp  of  the  cross  upon  our  lives,  except  when 
they  are  made  to  minister  to  our  spiritual  good  through  a  willing  and  loving 
acquiescence  in  the  will  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  They  may  become  only  the 
occasion  of  fresh  sin  in  the  shape  of  fretfulness  and  discontent.  Self-denial  is 
something  very  different  from  these.  It  is  the  habit  of  mind  which  leads  us  in 
everything  to  ask,  not  how  may  I  best  please  myself,  but,  how  may  I  best  serve 
God  and  aid  the  souls  and  bodies  of  others  ?  Take,  for  instance,  the  question  of 
time.  We  are  naturally  selfish  about  our  time  ;  we  like  to  spend  it  in  the  manner 
which  most  gratifies  self.  Self-denial  will  set  us  about  asking.  Can  I,  by  giving; 
this  or  that  hour  which  I  should  othervdse  devote  to  amusement,  bring  any  aid  or 
pleasure  to  others  f    Or  again,  take  the  question  of  money.    We  naturally  like  t« 


OBAT.  XVI.]  BT.  LUKE.  24? 

«]^nd  oar  money  on  ourselves,  or  on  some  object  which  brings  gratification  to  selL 
Self-denial  will  suggest  to  as  to  give  up  something  which  we  should  otherwise  havs 
liked  in  order  to  devote  the  money  to  God.  And  do  not  let  us  shrink  back  aa 
though  self-denial  were  some  hard,  bitter  thing :  it  brings  with  it  greater  pleasure 
than  self-indulgence.  And  we  may  begin,  if  we  have  never  practised  it  before,  by 
$mall  acts ;  God  accepts  even  the  cop  of  cold  water  given  for  Christ's  sake.  (S.  W, 
Skejington,  M.A.)        ConsciovM  esittenee  after  death: — I.  These  is  such  a  tbinq 

AS   CONTINUANCB    07    EXISTENCE — AND    Ot    C0MS0I0C3    EXISTENCE — AFTER   DEATH.       II. 

This  condition  or  conscious  existence  mat  be  one  of  intense  misebt.     III. 

CONSIDEB    WHAT    IT    WAS    IN    THE    BICH    UAN'S    EABTHLT    LIFE     WHICH    LEO    TO    SUCH 

CALAMITOUS   EESOLTS.      (Gordou  Calthrop^   M.A.)  The  mind  made  a  hell : — 

A  great  and  rich  man  in  one  of  our  towns  in  the  West  was  once  taken  sick 
and  lost  his  mind.  When  he  recovered  from  his  sickness  he  was  still  a  deranged 
man.  He  seemed  never  to  know  his  own  wife  or  children.  He  forgot  all  his 
old  friends.  For  seven  long  years  he  was  in  this  unhappy  state.  One  day, 
while  sitting  in  the  room  where  his  daughters  were,  he  sprang  from  his  chair 
And  cried  out  in  great  joy,  "  Thank  God  I  am  out  at  last !  "  I  cannot  describe  the 
scene  of  that  hour.  He  embraced  and  kissed  his  daughters.  He  wept  with  joy  on 
the  bosom  of  his  wife,  and  acted  as  if  he  had  not  seen  them  for  many  years.  At 
last  he  said  to  them,  "  For  seven  long  years  I  have  been  in  a  burning  hell.  It  was 
•  horrible  cavern  of  lakes  and  rocks  and  mountains  of  fire.  I  saw  millions  there, 
but  could  find  no  friend.  I  was  ever  burning,  yet  never  consumed ;  ever  dying,  yet 
never  dead.  No  light  of  the  sun  shined  there,  and  no  smile  of  God  was  seen.  I 
remembered  there  every  sinful  thing  I  had  done,  and  was  tormented  in  my  soul.  I 
thought  of  the  sufferings  and  death  of  that  blessed  Saviour,  and  how  I  had  treated 
Him.  There  was  no  rest  to  my  soal  day  nor  night.  I  had  no  hope  there.  Tet  I 
wandered  in  madness  to  find  some  way  of  escape.  At  last,  as  I  stood  on  the  top  of 
a  high  rock  blazing  with  heat,  I  saw  in  the  distance  a  little  opening  like  the  light  of 
the  sky.  I  jumped  headlong  down,  and  with  all  my  powers  made  my  way  towards 
it.  At  last  I  climbed  up  to  it,  and  worked  and  struggled  through  ;  and,  blessed  be 
God,  here  I  am  again,  with  my  beloved  wife  and  children."  Now,  my  friends,  sup- 
pose there  is  no  such  place  as  hell.  Suppose  some  one  should  be  so  foolish  as  to 
hope  that  there  is  no  such  place.  Yet  remember,  that  if  God  can  make  a  man's  own 
mind  such  a  heU  as  this  while  he  is  yet  in  this  world,  He  can  find  a  still  more  fear- 
ful  hell  for  him  in  the  world  to  come.  {Bishop  Meade.)  Where  i*  hell  f — "  Where 
is  hell  ?  "  was  the  question  once  asked  by  a  scoffer.  Brief  but  telling  was  the  reply, 
"Anywhere  outside  of  heaven."  (Biblical  Museum.)  No  relief  possible  in  hell : — 
It  is  an  overpowering  refiection  I  but  we  have  sometimes  emboldened  ourselves  to 
inquire  what  would  bring  relief  and  support  to  the  lost  in  hell  ?  What  could  soften 
the  keenness  of  that  flame  ?  And  two  considerations  have  raised  themselves  in  our 
mind  as  those  which,  coald  they  be  indulged,  might  yield  the  assuagement  that  we 
had  ventured  to  suppose.  1.  The  first  consideration  we  should  demand  is,  that  the 
sufferer  of  the  doom  might  feel  that  it  was  inevitable.  The  idea  of  fate  sets  us  free 
from  the  sense  of  blame.  2.  The  second  consideration  which  might  subdue  the 
fierceness  of  infernal  agonies,  would  be  that  they  are  undeserved-  It  would  be  joy 
to  the  prisoners,  could  they  only  reflect,  •'  We  are  the  victims  of  arbitrary  justice ! " 
Spirit  has  not,  however,  passed  into  such  regions  with  either  of  these  consolations, 
nor  found  them  there  I  Spirit  never,  in  fearful  soliloquy,  spake :  "  Necessity 
wrought  this  chain,  and  malignity  locked  it ! "  Spirit  never  exclaimed :  "  Despite 
of  myself,  I  was  dragged  hither,  and  here  in  violation  of  all  truth  and  equity  I  am 
ehained  1 "...  It  is  the  converse  of  these  thoughts  that  deepens  the  outer  dark- 
ness, that  accumulates  the  horrors  of  the  pit.  "  It  need  not  have  been."  What  a 
self-upbraiding  1  "  Justice  had  none  other  recourse."  What  a  self-condemnation  1 
•*  Why  would  ye  die?  "  is  the  rebuke  for  ever  in  their  ear  I  ••  We  indeed  justly,"  is 
the  confession  for  ever  on  the  tongue  1  (R.  W.  Hamilton.)  Final  impenitence  : — 
It  is  something — it  is  a  step  towards  higher  reaches  of  faith,  to  be  well  assured  of 
the  existence  and  reality  of  this  invisible  realm,  in  which  the  spirits  of  the  departed 
energize  (for  surely  such  is  the  plain  teaching  of  the  parable)  after  they  are  severed 
from  the  body,  and  go  through  all  the  processes  of  consciousness,  thought,  and  feel- 
ing. It  is  something  to  believe,  or  rather  something  to  realize  the  truth,  that  there 
is  indeed  a  world,  more  thickly  peopled  with  the  spirits  of  the  departed  than  this 
earth  is  with  the  bodies  of  the  living  ;  and  that  among  the  inhabitants  of  this  world 
there  are  movements  of  mind,  actings  of  the  will,  the  memory,  the  understanding, 
the  affections :  on  the  one  hand,  a  spiritual  intercommunion  with  Christ  and  th« 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

members  of  Christ,  fetching  deepest  peace  into  the  soul ;  on  the  other,  •!!  the 
agitations  of  fear,  remorse,  compunction,  and  despair.  The  reahn  is  to  as  a 
shrouded  realm,  but  surely  not  the  less  real  because  we  cannot  apprehend  it  with 
our  sense'^.  Let  us  now  consider  briefly  That  the  text  implies  of  the  circumstances, 
sentiments,  and  character  of  the  rich  worldling,  who  is  represented  as  undergoing 
torments.  I.  As  to  his  circumstances.  It  is  sufficiently  indicated  that  he  was  a  Jew 
by  descent.  He  calls  Abraham  father,  and  Abraham,  though  separated  from  him  by  • 
great  gulf,  though  unable  to  render  him  assistance,  or  comply  with  his  request,  doe& 
not  refuse  t^  recognize  him.  "  Abraham  said  unto  him.  Son,  remember."  What  1  a 
son  of  Abraham,  and  yet  an  outcast  I  Circumcised  the  eighth  day,  and  yet  a  repro- 
bate !  A  child  of  God's  covenant,  and  yet  a  vessel  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction  I 
II.  From  the  position  and  circumstances  of  this  rich  worldling,  we  next  proceed  to 
consider  his  sentiments.  He  is  represented  as  imploring  Abraham  to  save  his  five 
brethren  from  the  doom  in  which  he  had  irretrievably  involved  himself,  by  sending 
them  an  unearthly  warning  of  the  reality  of  a  future  state  of  existence,  and  of  ita 
horrors  for  the  ungodly.  It  does  not  seem  that  every  spark  of  natural  affection, 
exile  from  God  and  from  happiness  though  he  be,  is  extinguished  in  this  man's 
breast.  III.  Let  me  mention  a  third  point,  still  more  favourable  to  his  salvation 
than  the  two  preceding,  but  still  quite  insufficient  to  secure  it :  this  is,  that  so  far 
as  appears  from  the  narrative,  he  had  not  been  guilty  of  any  crime,  of  any  gross  or 
palpable  offence  whatever.  He  had  not  hurled  blasphemous  defiance  against  the 
Most  High.  My  brethren,  these  remarks  may  serve  to  confute  the  fatal  error  of 
those  in  whose  estimation  the  only  real  sins  in  existence  are  sins  of  commission. 
How  many  are  there  who  congratulate  themselves  on  the  many  wrong  things  which 
they  have  never  done.  What,  then,  was  the  sin,  a  wilful  and  impenitent  continu- 
ance in  which  ensured  the  eternal  loss  of  this  worldling's  soul  ?  The  sin,  in  it« 
root  (for  every  sin  has  a  root,  a  state  of  mind  out  of  which  it  springs  and  to  which 
it  is  referable),  was  unbelief.  But  I  must  hasten  on  to  point  out  the  particular 
development  of  unbelief  with  which  this  narrative  presents  us.  If  a  man  have 
no  realizing  apprehension  of  a  future  state,  still  more  if  he  entertain  doubts 
respecting  some  revealed  particulars  of  that  state,  the  natural  consequence, 
the  practical  operation  of  such  views,  will  be  a  living  for  this  world.  All 
beyond  the  grave  is,  in  such  a  man's  apprehensions,  hazy,  indistinct,  oncer- 
tain.  His  aim  was  to  enjoy  himself,  to  lead  a  life  of  ease  and  self-indul- 
gence. He  secluded  himself,  as  much  as  he  could,  from  annoying  sighti 
and  distressing  sounds.  Whenever,  accidentally,  misery  or  want  met  his  eye,  he 
turned  away  as  from  an  object  distressing  to  contemplate.  And  hence,  probably, 
more  than  from  any  settled  hardness  of  heart,  sprang  his  culminating  offence, 
his  entire  lack  of  service  to  God's  poor.  Behold  then,  brethren,  in  these  words,  the 
origin  and  development  of  that  sin  which,  cherished  to  the  end  of  his  days,  issued 
in  the  ruin  of  his  soul — practical  unbelief  ;  a  living  unto  self  and  for  this  world  ; 
an  entire  forgetfulness  of  the  wants  of  others.  Nothing  flagrant,  nothing  vicious, 
nothing  openly  immoral,  but  quite  enough  to  conduct  him  to  that  awful  realm, 
where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched.  My  brethren,  our  subject 
admits  of,  or  rather  it  challenges,  a  close  application  to  our  own  circumstances,  and 
that  in  regard  both  of  the  times  on  which  we  are  fallen,  and  of  the  place  in  which 
our  lot  is  cast.  1.  A  subtle  disbelief  of  the  spiiitual  world  in  general,  and  of  a 
future  state  of  existence  (at  least  on  the  side  of  eternal  punishment),  is  fast  insinu- 
ating itself  into  the  minds  of  the  respectable,  the  educated,  and  thoughtful  classes. 
Again,  there  is  a  growing,  and  even  avowed,  disbelief  among  the  most  earnest  and 
thoughtful  men  of  the  day  on  the  subject  of  eternal  punishment.  And  here  I  would 
remark  that  disbelief  of  the  future  world,  in  any  of  its  aspects,  is  very  closely  con- 
nected with  disbelief  of  the  uiween  world  which  is  at  present  around  us.  I  shall 
suppose,  then,  the  case  of  a  man  who,  while  orthodox  in  all  the  main  articles  of  his 
religious  belief,  and  nominally  a  member  of  the  Church,  has  allowed  his  faith  in 
things  nnseen  and  eternal  to  be  secretly  sapped.  In  that  he  resembles  Dives.  2. 
The  second  point  to  which  I  shall  call  your  attention,  in  applying  to  our  own  con- 
sciences the  warning  of  the  text,  is  the  atmosphere  of  religious  privilege,  which  my 
academical  hearers  specially,  but  those  residing  in  the  city  also  in  good  measure, 
habitually  inhale.  Yet  who  does  not  know  that,  where  no  corresponding  zeal  and 
spirituahty  exist  in  the  heart,  this  frequency  of  religious  ordinance  and  privilege  acta 
rather  as  a  soporific  than  as  a  stimulant,  makes  eternal  things  more  hazy  and  less 
substantial  than  they  were,  when  worship  more  rarely  recnrred  7  8.  Now,  oar  Lord, 
ID  the  parable  before  as,  represents  tfaiis  development  of  resonrces  as  liaving  • 


«BAP.  XVI.  1  SI.  LUKE.  849 

dangeroas  tendency,  as  contribating  something  material  to  strengthen  the  impeni 
teuce  of  the  natural  heart.  (Dean  Qoulhurn.)  Natural  affection  dUtinguUked 
from  the  faith  and  love  of  the  gospel: — "We  desire  to  show  what  light  the  parable 
throws  on  the  obligation  and  the  motives  of  Christian  benevolence:  First,  by 
setting  before  us,  in  the  rich  man,  a  character  in  which  that  grace  is  deficient ; 
and,  secondly,  by  setting  before  us,  in  Lazarus,  a  fitting  object  for  its  exercise.  I. 
We  find  in  the  rich  man  a  character  devoid  of  Christian  benevolence,  or  the 
Christian  principle  of  benevolence ;  and  this  defect  rendered  all  his  goodness  of  any 
other  sort  unavailing,  for  that  he  was  good  in  some  points  and  in  a  certain  sense 
we  gather  from  the  conclusion  of  the  parable.  And  why  does  he  select  his  brothers 
alone,  from  the  victims  of  his  example?  It  must  be — it  can  only  be — from 
the  relentings  of  fraternal  tenderness.  The  earnestness  of  his  prayer,  that  they 
might  not  "  also  come  to  the  place  of  torment,"  marks  the  still  remaining  sensitive- 
ness of  his  natural  sensibilities,  and  the  strength  of  his  natural  affection.  In  the 
first  place — ^how  little  is  that  sensibility  and  natural  affection  to  be  depended  upon, 
which  even  the  condemned  in  the  place  of  torment  may  feel  1  What  1  will  you 
build  your  hope  of  heaven  on  a  virtue  which  you  may  share  in  common  with  the 
accursed  inmates  and  inhabitants  of  hell  f  Will  you  plume  and  pride  yourselves 
on  your  kindly  feelings,  or  your  goodness  of  heart,  as  a  security  that  all  is  well,  and 
that  ultimately,  somehow  or  other,  you  cannot  but  be  happy,  when  you  see  much  of 
that  kindliness  of  feeling,  and  what  you  call  goodness  of  heart,  in  the  regions  ot 
everlasting  woe  ?  Learn,  then,  ye  who  are  living  in  friendship  with  the  world,  yet 
still  in  conscious  enmity  against  God — loving  perhaps  your  brother,  according  to 
the  flesh,  with  much  tenderness  of  human  affection,  yet  untaught  to  love  your  God 
with  all  your  heart,  and  to  love  your  neighbour  for  His  sake — learn  to  estimate  the 
real  worth,  or  rather  worthlessness,  of  your  much-vaunted  goodness  of  heart.  It  is 
not  a  goodness  that  will  carry  you  to  heaven.  But,  in  the  second  place,  we  must 
put  the  case  more  strongly  still.  We  must  observe  that  this  natural  sensibility  and 
affection,  when  the  views  are  thus  enlarged  by  taking  in  eternity  as  well  as  time, 
may  become  itself  the  very  source  of  misery  and  torment.  It  is  evidently  so  repre- 
sented in  the  case  of  this  rich  man.  His  solicitude  about  his  brothers  very  much 
increased  his  own  sufferings,  and  aggravated  the  agony  of  his  own  hopeless  con- 
demnation. This  is  a  very  striking  and  appalling  view  to  take  of  the  misery 
awarded  to  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving.  It  shows  how  the  very  best,  the  most 
amiable  and  generous,  feelings  of  the  unrenewed  and  unregenerated  soul,  may 
become  themselves  the  means  and  occasions  of  its  sorer  punishment.  Experience 
even  here  on  earth  shows,  that  affection  makes  us  partakers  of  the  sufferings  aa 
well  as  the  joys  of  our  fellow-creatures  and  friends.  His  love  to  his  brothers  on 
earth  superseded  his  love  to  his  Father  in  heaven.  And  fitly  therefore  now,  that 
very  love  is  made  to  minister  the  punishment  due  to  him  for  his  breach  of  the  firsv 
and  great  commandment.  He  loved  his  brethren  independently  of  God.  He 
made  them  partakers  of  his  pleasures  ;  and  partakers  also  of  his  sin.  Have 
you  no  fear,  I  ask — that  in  the  very  attachment  you  are  now  forming — in  the  very 
affection  you  are  now  indulging — in  the  friendship  and  love  which  every  day  i^ 
rendering  more  intense,  as  you  lavish  on  its  object  all  proofs  and  tokens  of 
tendeiest  regard — you  may  be  but  treasuring  up  the  very  instruments  of  wrath 
against  the  day  of  wrath  f  Cultivate  the  charities  of  social  and  domestic  life  ; 
but  be  sure  that  you  cultivate  them  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  in  the  full 
and  steady  prospect  of  eternity.  II.  We  turn  now  to  the  other  party  in  this 
scene,  the  other  figure  in  this  picture.  We  consider  the  beggar,  and  his  claim 
to  sympathy  and  relief.  It  is  a  claim  which  the  benevolence  of  mere  natural 
feeling  overlooked,  but  which  the  benevolence  of  Christian  principle  insists 
upon  having  regarded.  It  is  in  this  light,  accordingly,  that  the  Christian  con- 
siders his  fellow-men  ;  as  being  either  actually  partakers,  or  capable  of  yet 
becoming  partakers,  of  the  grace  and  the  glory  of  God.  This  is  the  ground 
of  the  esteem  in  which  he  holds  them — this  the  measure  of  the  value  he  assigns 
to  them.  How  different  is  this  esteem  of  men,  on  account  of  the  worth  and  viJue 
of  their  souls,  from  the  careless  and  casual  sympathy  of  mere  natural  com- 
passioD,  and  how  vastly  more  effectual  as  a  motive  of  benevolence  ?  The  man  ot 
natural  kindness  and  sensibility,  touched  with  the  sight  of  woe,  and  moved  to  pity 
and  to  tears,  may  utter  the  Toice  of  tenderness,  and  stretch  forth  the  hand  of 
charity.  But  the  object  of  his  compassion  has  no  great  importance  or  value  in  hia 
eyes.  All  the  interest  he  takes  in  him  is  simply  on  account  of  his  present  suffering. 
Bat  now,  if  you  were  to  view  that  individual  in  the  light  in  which  Christianity 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap,  xn, 

represents  him  ;  as  one  of  those  whom  the  Father  willeth  lo  save,  and  for  whos* 
Eouls  He  gave  His  own  Son  to  die  ;  how  would  the  intensity  of  your  concern  in 
Him  be  deepened,  and  how  would  your  sense  of  obligation  to  Him  be  enhanced  1 
Again,  how  different  is  this  Christian  view  of  the  preciousness  of  every  human 
being,  from  the  view  which  mere  infidel  philanthropy  takes  I  On  the  infidel 
hypothesis — what  at  the  best,  in  the  eye  of  enlightened  benevolence,  is  the  race  of 
man  ?  A  succession  of  insects — creatures  of  a  day,  fluttering  their  few  hours  of 
shade  and  sunshine,  and  then  sinking  into  endless  night.  Is  it  worth  while  to  fret 
end  toil  much  for  such  a  generation  ?  It  is  the  gospel  alone  that  shows  the  real 
value  of  man — of  individual  man — as  having  a  spirit  that  will  never  die  ;  and 
enforces  the  regard  due  to  him  from  his  fellow-men  on  the  ground  of  his  being  the 
object  of  the  regard  of  their  common  God.  See,  then,  that  you  love  him  as  God 
loves  him.  God  is  kind  to  the  evil  and  to  the  unthankful,  because  He  would  have 
them  to  be  saved.  Be  you  kind  to  them  also  ;  and  with  the  same  view.  Abound 
towards  them  in  all  good  works.  Melt  their  hearts,  though  hard  and  sullen 
as  lead,  by  heaping  your  benefits  as  coals  of  fire  upon  their  heads.  (Dr.  Candlish.) 
The  rich  man's  prayer : — I.  A  good  act  at  a  wrong  time.  II.  A  good  prayer 
for  a  wrong  purpose.  III.  A  good  effort  with  no  effect.  {The  Preacher' t  Analyst.) 
Son,  remember. — The  retributive  power  of  memory  : — Those  who  believe  in  the 
immortality  of  the  soul  must  also  believe  in  the  immortality  of  its  faculties — 
reason,  memory,  conscience.  I.  What,  then,  is  memory  f  Let  ub  fiest  defink 
THE  faculty.  Every  one  is  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  knowledge  which  we  have 
once  acquired,  the  things  we  have  seen  and  done,  the  experiences  that  we  have  had, 
though  not  always  present  to  the  mind,  are  nevertheless  so  retained,  that  the  same 
things  may  be,  and  often  are,  recalled  to  our  mental  notice.  Every  one  is  fully 
conscious  of  such  a  fact  in  his  own  history.  We  designate  this  fact  by  the  term 
memory.  Memory  is,  therefore,  the  mind's  power  of  preserving  and  knowing  its 
own  past  history.  It  is  the  same  in  both  worlds.  We  are,  moreover,  so  constructed, 
that  we  cannot  discredit  the  knowledge  given  by  memory.  I  am  as  certain  of  what 
I  distinctly  remember,  as  I  can  be  of  anything.  The  absolute  loss  of  memory 
would  destroy  the  whole  framework  of  man's  mental  existence,  by  limiting  hia 
intellectual  life  to  the  impressions  of  the  passing  moments.     II.  Let  ub  say  that 

MEMORY   OPERATES  IN  OBEDIENCE  TO  ESTABLISHED  AND  PERMANENT  LAWS.      By  them  WB 

conduct  the  process  of  memory.  We  do  it  without  labour,  yea,  by  necessity,  having 
no  power  not  to  do  it.  Thus  we  think  of  ourselves  as  intelligent,  conscious, 
voluntary,  in  both  worlds,  in  both  exercising  memory  according  to  fixed  laws,  some 
of  which  at  least  rule  our  present  life.  III.  I  wish  to  call  your  attention  to  the 
EXTENT  OF  ITS  RETENTIVE  AND  REPRODUCTIVE  POWER.  In  the  amazlug  grcatuess  of 
this  power,  as  we  observe  it  in  time,  we  shall  perhaps  find  the  condition  of  at  least 
conjecturing  what  it  will  be  in  eternity.  It  was  the  opinion  of  Lord  Bacon  that 
nothing  in  one's  antecedent  history  is  ever  irrecoverably  forgotten.  Coleridge  held 
the  same  view.  We  know,  as  a  matter  of  positive  experience,  that  the  prominent 
and  leading  facts  of  life  past  are  safely  retained  in  the  bosom  of  memory.  The 
many  instances  of  remarkable  memory  that  we  gather  from  history  are  an 
instructive  commentary  upon  the  greatness  of  this  power.  Themistocles,  we  are 
told,  could  call  by  their  names  the  twenty  thousand  citizens  of  Athens.  It  is  said 
of  Cyrus,  that  he  could  repeat  the  name  of  every  soldier  in  his  army.  There  are 
also  many  striking  and  peculiar  cases  of  resuscitated  knowledge,  in  which  ap- 
parently extinct  memories  are  suddenly  restored.  Numerous  instances  of  quickened 
memory,  under  the  influence  of  physical  causes,  show  what  the  mind  may  do  under 
special  and  extraordinary  exaltations  of  its  activity.  Persons  on  the  brink  of 
death  by  drowning  are  said  to  have  unusually  vivid  visions  of  the  past.  If  such  be 
memory  here,  in  this  nascent  state  of  our  being — this  mere  infancy  of  our  in- 
tellectual  life — what  may  it  not  be,  and  what  may  it  not  do,  when,  with  onr  other 
faculties,  freed  from  a  body  of  flesh  and  blood,  it  shall  soar  in  progressive  expansion 
and  enlargement  through  the  ages  of  a  coming  eternity  ?    IV.  What  is  to  be  th» 

IMPRISBION  OF  MEMORY  UPON  OUB  HAPPINESS  OR  MISERY  IN  THE  FUTURE  WORLD  ?      That 

so  great  a  power  will  make  an  impression  upon  the  soul,  pleasant  or  painful, 
according  to  the  character  of  the  facts  embraced  in  the  exercise,  is  an  inference 
derivable  not  only  from  the  greatness  of  the  power,  but  equally  from  the  ample 
materials  of  onr  present  experience.  (S.  T,  Spear,  D.D.)  The  memory  of  tht 
lost; — I.  There  is  satisfactory  evidence  that  thb  memory  of  babthly  scenes  wm, 
BE  RETAINED  IN  ETERNITY.  This  is  impUed  in  the  very  nature  of  retribution.  The 
•oul  is  to  be  punished  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body ;  and  unless  it  remember 


CHAP.  XVI.3  ST.  LUKE.  151 

those  deeds,  how  can  it  know  for  what  it  is  panished  ?  The  nature  of  retribution, 
and  the  end  of  God's  government  in  it,  require  that  the  soul  should  remember. 
Moreover,  the  philosophy  of  the  mind  itself  teaches  the  same  thing.  Go  to  the 
place  of  your  birth,  and  look  at  the  objects  that  were  familiar  to  you  in  early  days, 
and  the  scenes  and  events  of  childhood,  which  have  been  gone  from  you  for  years, 
■will  come  thronging  up  from  the  storehouse  of  memory,  and  you  will  almost  think 
yourself  a  child  again.  The  past  is  not  for  ever  gone,  and  at  the  appropriate  signal 
it  can  all  be  summoned  before  us.  And  is  there  any  evidence  that  death  will  break 
this  chain  of  memory?     II.  Not  onlt  will  the  memoby  exist  in  the  fdtubk 

WOBLD,  BUT  IT  WILL  PBOBABLT  POSSESS  FAB  GEEATEB  ACTIVITY  AND  ENEBOY  THAN  IN  THE 
PBESENT  life,  and  thus  BE   ENABLED  TO  BECALL  THE   PAST  WITH  A  DISTINCTNESS  AND 

▼iViDNESS  NOW  WHOLLY  UNKNOWN.  That  our  knowing  faculty  wiU  be  vastly  increased 
is  expressly  asserted  in  the  Word  of  God.  Why  not,  then,  the  remembering 
faculty,  which  is  so  intimately  associated  with  it?  ILL  What  subjects  will 
pbobably  be  most  pkominent  in  the  beflections  of  the  lost  soul.  1.  They  will 
remember  the  gifts  of  Providence,  for  which  they  requited  their  Maker  with 
ingratitude  and  rebellion.  2.  They  will  doubtless  remember  the  spiritual  privileges 
which  they  failed  to  improve.  3.  Sinners  will  remember  in  eternity  the  evil 
influence  which  they  exerted  while  on  earth,  and  all  the  fatal  consequences  of  it. 
(D.  B.  Coe.)  Son,  remember : — Like  Fear,  like  Hope,  like  Love,  like  Conscience, 
Memory  has  a  place,  a  large  place,  in  the  heart,  in  the  life,  and  therefore  in  the 
gospel.  Whose  to-day  is  not  the  product  of  a  number  of  yesterdays?  Whose 
present  is  not  the  very  fruit  and  harvest  of  his  past  ?  We  should  expect  that  this 
thing — call  it  faculty,  gift,  talent,  infliction,  or  what  you  will — would  have  a  place, 
and  it  has  a  large  place,  in  Revelation ;  for  Eevelation  is  nothing  else  than  God 
speaking  to  man  as  he  is,  and  calling  him  to  something  of  which  he  has  in  him 
already  the  capability  and  the  germ.  God  Himself  ascribes  to  Himself  memory  ; 
speaks  of  remembering,  and  remembering  not ;  speaks  of  remembering  man's 
Borrows  and  His  own  mercy ;  speaks  of  that  other  faculty,  the  reverse  of  memory, 
the  power  of  forgetting,  which  is  a  more  Divine  faculty  still,  when  it  is  exercised, 
as  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  God,  in  so  putting  away  a  man's  sins  that  He 
remembers  them  no  more.  And  God  bids  man  exercise  memory;  bids 
him  remember  his  own  sins,  and  be  ashamed,  bids  him  remember  God's 
commandments,  and  set  himself  to  obey ;  bids  him  remember  his  last  end, 
and  make  preparation:  bids  him  remember  death,  judgment,  and  eternity,  and 
the  great  gulf  fixed.  1.  Eemember,  we  will  say  first,  God's  dealings  with  thee.  0, 
it  is  not  philosophy,  it  is  mer«  commonplace  vulgar  infidelity,  which  makes  any  of 
ne  doubt  whether  God  has  been  about  our  path  and  about  our  journey  in  the  time 
past  of  our  life.  If  we  have  not  seen  Him,  it  is  the  worse  for  us.  2.  Remember  the 
opportunities,  seized  or  neglected,  with  which  God  in  the  past  has  furnished  and 
endowed  you.  Who  can  think  of  his  school-days,  and  not  reproach  himself 
bitterly  with  neglects,  now  irreparable,  of  instructions  and  influences  which  might 
have  altered  the  very  complexion  of  his  life  ?  Who  can  remember  his  friends,  and 
not  mourn  over  evil  done  and  good  left  undone  ?  And  when  we  pass  from  these 
outward  gifts  to  such  as  are  altogether  spiritual ;  when  we  think  of  the  Word  of 
God,  and  His  House,  and  His  Ministry,  and  His  Sacraments ;  then,  there  is  a 
eolemnity,  an  awfulness,  even  as  it  is  heard  in  this  hfe,  in  the  charge,  "  Son, 
remember."  3.  Eemember  the  blessings  God  has  showered  upon  thee.  {Dean 
Vaughan.)  Memory  in  another  world: — I.  In  another  state,  memoey  will  be  so 
WIDENED  AS  TO  TAKE  IN  THE  WHOLE  LIFE.  We  bcUeve  that  the  contents  of  the 
intellectual  nature,  the  capacities  of  that  nature  also,  are  all  increased  by  the  fact 
(tf  having  done  with  earth  and  having  left  the  body  behind.  But  whether  saved  or 
lost — he  that  dies  is  greater  tban  when  yet  living;  and  all  his  powers  are  intensified 
and  strengthened  by  that  awful  experience  of  death,  and  by  what  it  brings  with  it. 
Memory  partakes  in  the  common  quickening.  There  are  not  wanting  analogies  and 
experiences  in  our  present  life  to  let  us  see  that,  in  fact,  when  we  talk  about  for- 
getting we  ought  to  mean  nothing  more  than  the  temporary  cessation  of  conscious 
remembrance.  Everything  which  you  do  leaves  its  effect  with  you  for  ever,  just  as 
long-forgotten  meals  are  in  your  blood  and  bones  to-day.  Every  act  that  a  man 
performs  is  there.  It  has  printed  itself  upon  his  soul,  it  has  become  a  part  o£ 
himself :  and  though,  like  a  newly  painted  picture,  after  a  little  while  the  colours 
go  in,  why  is  that  ?  Only  because  they  have  entered  into  the  very  fibre  of  the 
canvas,  and  have  left  the  surface  because  they  are  incorporated  with  the  substance, 
and  they  want  but  a  t.iuch  of  varnish  to  flash  out  again  I  As  the  developing  solution 


281  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLDSTRaTOR.  [oha».  xH. 

brings  oat  the  image  on  the  photographic  plate,  so  the  mind  has  the  strange  power, 
by  fixing  the  attention,  as  we  say  (a  short  word  which  means  a  long,  mysteriona 
thing)  upon  that  past  that  is  half  remembered  and  half  forgotten,  of  bringing  it 
into  clear  consciousness  and  perfect  recollection.  The  fragmentary  remembrances 
which  we  have  now,  hft  themselves  above  the  ocean  of  forgetfulness  like  islands  in 
some  Archipelago,  the  summits  of  sister  hills,  though  separated  by  the  estranging 
sea  that  covers  their  conveiging  sides  and  the  valleys  where  their  roots  unite.  The 
solid  land  is  there,  though  hidden.  Drain  off  the  sea,  and  there  will  be  no  more 
isolated  peaks,  bat  continuous  land.  In  this  life  we  have  but  the  island  memoriea 
heaving  themselves  into  sight,  but  in  the  next  "  the  Lord  "  shall  **  cause  the  sea  to 
go  back "  by  the  breath  vi  His  mouth,  and  the  channels  of  the  great  deep  of  a 
human  heart's  experiences  and  actions  shall  be  laid  bare.  "  There  shall  be  no 
more  sea  "  ;  but  the  solid  land  of  a  whole  life  will  appear  when  God  says,  "  Son, 
remember  I "  So  much,  then,  for  my  first  consideration — namely,  that  memory  in 
a  future  state  wUl  comprehend  the  whole  of  life.      II.  Another  thing  is,  that 

MKMOBT  IN  A  FCXUBE  STATE  WILL  PBOBABLT  BB  SO  BAPID  AS  TO  BMBBACE  ALL  THE   PAST 

LIFE  AT  ONCE.  We  do  not  know,  we  have  no  conception  of  it,  the  extent  to  which 
our  thinking,  and  feeling,  and  remembrance,  are  made  tardy  by  the  slow  vehicle  of 
this  bodily  organization  in  which  the  soul  rides.  As  on  the  little  retina  of  an  eye 
there  can  be  painted  on  a  scale  inconceivably  minute,  every  tree  and  mountain-top 
in  the  whole  wide  panorama,  so,  in  an  instant,  one  may  run  through  almost  a 
whole  lifetime  of  mental  acts.  Ah,  brethren,  we  know  nothing  yet  about  the 
rapidity  with  which  we  may  gather  before  us  a  whole  series  of  events;  so  that 
although  we  have  to  pass  from  one  to  another,  the  succession  may  be  so  swift,  as 
to  produce  in  our  own  minds  the  effect  of  all  being  co-existent  and  simultaneous. 
As  the  child,  flashing  about  him  a  bit  of  burning  stick,  may  seem  to  make  a  circle 
of  flame,  because  the  flame-point  moves  so  quickly,  so  memory,  though  it  does  go 
from  point  to  point,  and  dwells  for  some  inconceivably  minute  instant  on  each  part 
of  the  remembrance,  may  yet  be  gifted  with  such  lightning  speed,  with  such 
rapidity  and  awful  quickness  of  glance,  as  that  to  the  man  himself  the  effect  shall 
be  that  his  whole  life  is  spread  out  there  before  him  in  one  instant,  and  that  he. 
Godlike,  sees  the  end  and  the  beginning  side  by  side.  Yes  ;  from  the  mountain  of 
eteiTiity  we  shall  look  down,  and  behold  the  whole  plain  spread  before  us.  Once 
more :  it  seems  as  if,  in  another  world,  memory  would  not  only  contain  the  whole 
life,  and  the  whole  life  simultaneously  ;  but  would  perpetually  attend  or  haunt  us. 
III.  A  CONSTANT  BEMEMBBANCE.  It  docs  uot  He  in  OUT  power  even  in  this  world,  to 
decide  very  much  whether  we  shall  remember  or  forget.  There  are  memories  that 
vnll  start  up  before  us,  whether  we  are  willing  or  not.  Like  the  leprosy  in  the 
Israelite's  house,  the  foul  spot  works  its  way  out  through  all  the  plaster  and  the 
jiaint ;  and  the  house  is  foul  because  it  is  there.  I  remember  an  old  castle  where 
they  tell  us  of  foul  murder  committed  in  a  vaulted  chamber  with  a  narrow  window, 
by  torchlight  one  night ;  and  there,  they  say,  there  are  the  streaks  and  stains  of 
blood  on  the  black  oak  floor;  and  they  have  planed,  and  scrubbed,  and  planed 
again,  and  thought  they  were  gone — but  there  tbey  always  are,  and  continually  up 
comes  the  dull,  reddish-black  stain,  as  if  oozing  itself  out  through  the  boards  to 
witness  to  the  bloody  crime  again  I  The  superstitious  fable  is  a  type  of  the  way  in 
which  a  foul  thing,  a  sinful  and  bitter  memory — gets  engrained  into  a  man's  heart. 
He  tries  to  banish  it,  and  gets  rid  of  it  for  a  while.  He  goes  back  again,  and  the 
spots  are  there,  and  will  be  there  for  ever ;  and  the  only  way  to  get  rid  of  them  is  to 
destroy  the  soul  in  which  they  are.  Memory  is  not  all  within  the  power  of  the  will 
on  earth ;  and  probably,  memory  in  another  world  is  still  more  involuntary  and  still 
more  constant.  A  memory,  brethren,  that  mil  have  its  own  way ;  what  a  field  for 
sorrow  and  lamentation  that  is,  when  God  says  at  last,  **  Now  go — go  apart ;  take 
thy  life  with  thee ;  read  it  over ;  see  what  thou  hast  done  with  it  1 "  One  old 
Boman  tyrant  had  a  punishment  in  which  he  bound  the  dead  body  of  the  murdered 
to  the  living  body  of  the  murderer,  and  left  them  there  scaffolded.  And  when  that 
voice  comes,  "  Son,  remember  1 "  to  the  living  soul  of  the  godless,  nnbelienng. 
Impenitent  man,  there  is  bound  to  him  the  murdered  past,  the  dead  past,  his  own 
life ;  and,  in  Milton's  awful  and  profound  words, 

•*  Which  way  I  fly  is  hell — myself  am  hell  1 " 

There  is  only  one  other  modification  of  this  awful  faculty  that  I  would  remind  yoa 
el;  and  that  is — lY.  That  in  a  future  life  usuobt  will  bk  assoolltbo  wrni  a 


CHAP,  xvi.]  ST.  LUKE.  95S 

PERFECTLY  ACCURATE   KNOWLEDGE    OF   THE  CONSEQtTENCES,  AND  A  PEKFKCTLT  BEN8ITITK 

CONSCIENCE  A8  TO  THE  CBiMiNALiTT  OF  THE  PAST.  You  Will  have  cause  and  CODSe- 
quence  put  down  before  you,  meeting  each  other  at  last.  There  will  be  no  room 
then  to  say,  *•  I  wonder  how  such  and  such  a  thing  will  work  out,"  "  I  wonder  how 
such  a  thing  can  have  come  upon  me  "  ;  but  every  one  will  have  his  whole  life  to 
look  back  upon,  and  will  see  the  childish  sin  that  was  the  parent  of  the  full-grown 
vice,  and  the  everlasting  sorrow  that  came  out  of  that  little  and  apparently 
transitory  root.  The  conscience,  which  here  becomes  hardened  by  contact  with  sin, 
and  enfeebled  because  unheeded,  will  then  be  restored  to  its  early  sensitiveness  and 
power,  as  if  the  labourer's  horny  palm  were  to  be  endowed  again  with  the  softness 
of  the  infant's  little  hand.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  that  is  an  instrument  of 
torture.  It  is  more  difficult  to  see  how  such  a  memory  can  be  a  source  of  gladness, 
and  yet  it  can.  Calvary  is  on  this  side,  and  that  is  enough  1  Certainly  it  is  one  of 
the  most  blessed  things  about  "  the  faith  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,"  that  it  makes  a 
man  remember  his  own  sinfulness  with  penitence,  not  with  pain — that  it  makes  the 
memory  of  past  transgressions  full  of  solemn  joy,  because  the  memory  of  past 
transgressions  but  brings  to  mind  the  depth  and  rushing  fulness  of  that  river  of 
love  which  has  swept  them  all  away  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west.  [A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  present  life  a$  related  to  the  future  : — Let  us  notice  some 

particulars  in  wnich  we  see  the  operation  of  this  principle.  What  are  the  "  good 
things,"  which  Dives  receives  here,  for  which  he  must  be  "  tormented"  hereafter  ? 
and  what  are  the  "  evil  things,"  which  Lazarus  receives  in  this  world,  for  which  h© 
will  be  "  comforted  "  in  the  world  to  come  7  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  worldly  man 
derives  a  more  intense  physical  enjoyment  from  this  world's  goods  than  does  the 
child  of  God.  He  possesses  more  of  them,  and  gives  himself  up  to  them  without 
self-restraint.  Not  many  rich  and  not  many  noble  are  called.  In  the  past  history 
of  mankind  the  great  possessions  and  the  great  incomes,  as  a  general  rule,  have  not 
been  in  the  hands  of  humble  and  penitent  men.  In  the  great  centres  of  trade  and 
commerce — in  Venice,  Amsterdam,  Paris,  London — it  is  the  world,  and  not  the 
people  of  God,  who  have  had  the  purse,  and  have  borne  what  is  put  therein.  So 
far  as  this  merely  physical  existence  is  concerned,  the  wicked  man  has  the  advan- 
tage. 2.  In  the  second  place,  the  worldly  man  derives  more  enjoyment  from  sin, 
and  suffers  less  from  it,  in  this  life,  than  does  the  child  of  God.  The  really 
renewed  man  cannot  enjoy  sin.  His  sin  is  a  sorrow,  a  constant  sorrow,  to  him.  He 
feels  its  pressure  and  burden  all  his  days,  and  cries,  "  0  wretched  man,  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  And  not  only  does  the  natural  man 
«njoy  sin,  but,  in  this  life,  he  is  much  less  troubled  than  is  the  spiritual  man  with 
reflections  and  self-reproaches  on  account  of  sin.  This  is  another  of  the  "  good 
things  "  which  Dives  receives,  for  which  he  must  be  "  tormented " ;  and  this  is 
another  of  the  "  evil  things "  which  Lazarus  receives,  for  which  he  must  be 
"  comforted."  1.  In  view  of  this  subject,  as  thus  discussed,  we  remark,  in  the  first 
place,  that  no  man  can  have  his  •'  good  things" — in  other  words,  his  chief  pleasure — 
in  both  worlds.  There  is  no  alchemy  that  can  amalgamate  substances  that  refuse 
to  mix.  No  man  has  ever  yet  succeeded,  no  man  ever  will  succeed,  in  securing  both 
the  pleasures  of  sin  and  the  pleasures  of  holiness— in  living  the  life  of  Dives,  and 
then  going  to  the  bosom  of  Abraham.  2.  And  this  leads  to  the  second  remark, 
that  every  man  must  make  his  choice  whether  he  will  have  his  "good  things  "  now, 
or  hereafter.  Every  man  is  making  his  choice.  The  heart  is  now  set  either  upon 
Ood,  or  upon  the  world.  3.  Hence  we  remark,  in  the  third  place,  that  it  is  the 
duty  and  the  wisdom  of  every  man  to  let  this  world  go,  and  seek  his  •'  good  things  " 
hereafter.  Our  Lord  commands  every  man  to  sit  down  like  the  steward  in  the 
parable,  and  make  an  estimate.  He  enjoins  it  upon  every  man  to  reckon  up  the  advan- 
tages upon  each  side,  and  see  for  himself  which  is  superior.  (W.  G.  T.  Shedd,D.D.) 
Memory  as  an  element  in  future  retribution  : — Memory  is  that  power  of  the  soul  by 
which  it  retains  the  knowledge  acquired  by  the  perceptions  and  consciousness  of 
the  past.  Its  operations  are  altogether  inscrutable  by  us,  and  we  can  give  no  other 
account  concerning  them  than  this  :  that  God  has  so  made  us  that  our  minds  have 
this  particular  power.  Memory  is  in  every  man  the  infallible  autobiographer  of 
the  soul,  and  on  its  pages,  however  much  they  may  be  now  concealed  from  view, 
are  recorded  every  thought  and  feeling,  every  word  and  action,  everything  ex- 
perienced and  everything  perceived,  during  the  course  of  life.  As  in  our  meteoro- 
logical stations,  by  a  delicate  instrument,  with  which  some  of  yon  may  be 
acquainted,  the  strength  and  direction  of  the  wind  are  by  the  wind  itself  registered 
without  intermission  from  hour  to  hour,  so  on  the  tablets  of  memory  the  whole  history 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xn» 

of  the  soul  is  by  the  soul  itself  recorded  with  the  most  minute  and  unerring  exactnessi 
Not  indeed  that  all  that  is  at  every  moment  consciously  present  to  the  mind. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  forgetfulness,  but  over  against  that  we  must  place  the  fact 
that  things  forgotten  at  one  time  are  remembered  at  another,  so  that  we  may  fairly 
conclude  that  nothing  is  ever  completely  lost  by  the  souL  Memory  furnishes  the 
material  on  which  conscience  shall  pronounce,  and  conscience  gives  to  memory  the- 
sting  which  turns  it  into  remorse.  This  is  evident,  even  in  the  present  life.  Our 
own  experience  testifies  thereto  ;  and  though  a  poet  has  sung  in  strains  of  beauty  of 
the  Pleasures  of  Memory,  there  are  few  of  as  who  could  not  tell  a  thrilling  tale  of 
its  agonies  as  well.  But  in  the  case  of  the  world  to  come,  over  and  above  these 
things  which  make  memory  even  here  a  scourge  to  the  sinner,  there  are  three  con- 
siderations which  are  calculated  to  intensify  its  power  of  torment.  1.  Memory 
shall  there  recall  the  events  of  time  as  seen  in  the  perspective  of  eternity.  In  the 
crowd  and  hurry  of  the  present,  things  bulk  before  us  disproportionately.  We  need 
to  be  at  a  distance  from  them  before  we  can  estimate  them  rightly.  That  is  one 
reason  why  the  past  is  seen  always  more  correctly  when  it  is  past,  than  it  was  when 
it  was  present ;  and  why  it  is,  that  in  taking  a  review  of  anything,  we  observe  more 
clearly  where  we  have  failed,  or  in  what  we  have  been  to  blame,  than  we  did  at  the 
time  when  we  were  engaged  in  it.  Yon  may  despise  now  the  blessings  which  yoa 
enjoy,  but  when  they  have  gone  from  you  to  return  nevermore,  you  shall  see  them 
in  their  proper  brightness,  and  upbraid  yourselves  for  your  madness  in  letting  them 
go  unimproved.  2.  But  another  thing  calculated  to  intensify  the  power  of  memory 
as  an  instrument  in  the  retribution  of  the  future  life,  is  the  fact  that  there  it  shall 
be  quickened  in  its  exercise,  and  we  shall  not  be  able  to  forget  anything.  Things 
of  which  we  are  now  oblivious  shall  there  be  brought  back  with  lurid  distinctness  to 
our  remembrance,  and  actions  long  buried  beneath  the  sands  of  time  shall,  like  the 
ruins  of  Pompeii,  be  dug  up  again  into  the  light,  and  stand  before  as  as  they  were 
at  first.  Among  ancient  manuscripts  which  modern  research  has  brought  to  light, 
there  are  some,  called  by  learned  men  palimpsests,  in  which  it  has  been  discovered 
that  what  was  originally  a  gospel  or  an  epistle,  or  other  book  of  Holy  Scripture, 
had  been  written  over  by  a  mediaeval  scribe  with  the  effusions  of  a  profane  poet ; 
but  now,  by  the  application  of  some  chemical  substance,  the  original  sacred  record 
has  been  produced,  and  is  used  as  an  authority  in  settling  the  reading  of  disputed 
passages.  So  the  pages  of  memory  are  palimpsests.  8.  Another  thing  which  will 
intensify  the  power  of  memory  as  an  element  in  future  retribution  is  the  fact  that,. 
ic  the  case  of  the  lost,  conscience  shall  be  rectified  and  give  just  utterances  regard* 
ing  the  events  reviewed.  As  he  now  is,  the  sinner  can  look  back  with  mirth  oil 
Bome  hour  of  frantic  dissipation,  or  some  deed  of  shame ;  but  then  conscience  will 
compel  him  to  contemplate  such  things  with  the  agony  of  remorse.  As  he  now  is, 
he  can  congratulate  himself  on  having  done  a  clever  thing  when  he  has  overreached 
his  neighbour;  but  then  he  will  lose  sight  of  the  cleverness  of  the  act  in  the  guilt  by 
which  it  was  characterized.  As  he  now  is,  he  can  gloss  over  his  excesses  by  speak- 
ing of  himself,  in  the  specious  and  entirely  deceptive  phraseology  of  the  world,  a» 
*•  fast,"  or  •*  a  little  wUd,"  or  "  sowing  his  wild  oats,"  or  the  like  ;  but  then 
conscience  will  insist  on  calling  things  by  their  right  names,  and  each  act  of  wicked- 
ness will  stand  out  before  him  as  rebellion  against  God.  Thus,  with  conscience 
rectified  and  memory  quickened,  it  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  the  agony  of  the 
lost,  while  at  the  same  time  the  retributive  consequences  of  sin  in  the  future  life 
are  seen  to  be  not  the  effects  of  some  arbitrary  and  capricious  sentence,  but  the 
natural  and  necessary  results  of  violating  the  law  v«%ich  was  written  at  first  upon 
onr  moral  constitution.  Appucation  :  1.  Look  at  these  things  in  their  bearing  on 
the  privileges  which  at  present  we  so  lightly  esteem.  Every  blessing  disregarded 
now  will  there  be  recalled  by  memory,  and  transformed  by  conscience  into  an 
upbraiding  reprover  and  a  horrible  tormentor.  2.  Again,  let  as  apply  the 
principles  which  have  been  before  onr  minds  this  morning  to  the  opportnnities  of 
doing  good  to  others  which  we  have  allowed  to  go  by  us  unimproved.  Behold  here, 
how  the  conscience  of  this  man  gives  sting  to  his  memory  as  he  recalls  the 
resources  which  were  at  his  command,  and  sees  how  much  he  might  have  done 
with  them  for  the  promotion  of  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  his  fellow-men.  Never 
before  had  he  seen  his  responsibility  for  them  as  he  sees  it  now,  and  now  that  he  does 
see  it  in  its  true  light,  he  is  not  able  to  act  according  to  its  directions,  to  that  the 
perception  of  it  only  magnifies  and  intensifies  his  agony.  But  is  there  no  voice  of 
warning  in  all  this  to  us  ?     (W.  M,  Taylor,  D.D.)      ReJ!eetion$  ofsinnert  in  hell : — 

L  WB    XATB    BBASOH   TO    BXLIBTB    THAI    TBB    DAMNED    WILL    HATB    BEFLBCTIOMB.      1.. 


CEA».  XVI.]  8T.  LUKE.  J6& 

Their  natural  powers  and  faculties  will  not  only  be  continued,  bat  vastly 
etrengthened  and  enlarged.  2.  They  will  not  meet  with  the  same  obstructions  to 
mental  exercises  that  they  meet  with  here  in  their  present  state  of  probation.  Here 
their  cares,  their  troubles,  their  employments  and  various  amusements,  dissipate 
their  thoughts  and  obstruct  reflection.  But  there  such  objects  will  be  entirely 
removed  from  their  reach  and  pursuit.  3.  God  will  continually  exhibit  before  their 
view  such  things  as  will  excite  the  most  painful  reflections  and  anticipations.  He 
wUl  set  their  sins  in  order  before  them,  in  their  nature,  magnitude,  and  peculiar 
aggravations,  so  that  they  cannot  obliterate  them  from  their  minds.  He  will 
exhibit  all  his  great,  amiable,  and  terrible  attributes  of  power,  holiness,  justice,  and 
sovereignty  before  them,  and  give  them  a  constant  and  realizing  sense  of  His  awful 
presence  and  displeasure.  He  will  give  them  no  rest  and  no  hope.  Let  us  now — 
U.  Take  a  sebiods  view  of  their  bitteb  bbflbctions  in  the  regions  op  despair.  1. 
They  will  realize  what  they  are.  Eational  and  immortal  beings,  which  can  never 
cease  to  exist  nor  to  suffer.  2.  They  will  realize  where  they  are.  In  helL  3.  The 
damned  will  reflect  whence  they  came  to  that  place  of  torment.  They  will  reflect 
upon  the  land  of  light  and  the  precious  advantages  they  there  enjoyed^ 
before  they  were  confined  to  the  regions  of  darkness.  4.  They  will  reflect 
upon  all  that  was  done  for  them,  to  prevent  them  from  falling  into  the  pit  of  perdi- 
tion. 5.  They  will  realize  that  they  destroyed  themselves,  which  will  be  a  source 
of  bitter  and  perpetual  reflections.  6.  They  will  reflect  upon  what  they  had  done, 
not  only  to  destroy  themselves,  but  others.  7.  They  will  reflect  upon  what  good 
they  might  have  done,  while  they  lived  in  the  world.  8.  It  will  pain  them  to  think 
how  they  once  despised  and  reproached  godliness,  and  all  who  lived  holy  and  godly 
bves.  9.  Their  clear  view  of  the  happiness  of  heaven  will  be  a  source  of  tormenting 
reflections.  10.  Finally,  they  will  reflect  not  only  upon  what  they  have  been,  and 
might  have  been,  but  upon  what  they  are,  and  always  will  be.  They  wiU  reflect 
that  being  filthy,  they  shall  be  filthy  still ;  that  being  unholy,  they  shall  be  unholy 
still ;  and  that  being  miserable,  they  shall  be  miserable  still.  Application :  1.  If 
the  state  of  the  damned  has  been  properly  described,  then  it  is  of  great  importance 
that  ministers  should  preach  plainly  upon  the  subject,  and  if  possible,  make  their 
bearers  realize  the  danger  of  going  to  hell.  2.  If  the  miseries  of  the  damned  be 
such  as  have  been  described,  then  it  deeply  concerns  sinners  to  take  heed  how 
they  hear  the  gospel.  3.  If  the  miseries  of  the  damned  be  such  as  have  been 
described,  then  we  see  why  the  Scripture  represents  this  world  as  so  dangerous  to 
sinners.  4.  If  the  miseries  of  the  damned  arise  from  bitter  reflections,  then  all 
sinners,  in  their  present  state,  are  fit  for  destruction.  They  have  just  such  views, 
«nd  feelings,  and  reflections  in  kind,  as  the  damned  have.  5.  If  the  miseries 
of  the  damned,  and  the  character  of  sinners,  be  such  as  have  been  described, 
then  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  some  sinners  are  very  near  to  the  pit  of  perdition. 
They  are  in  the  broad  road  which  has  led  many  such  persons  as  they  are 
to  the  place  where  there  is  no  light,  and  no  hope.  The  symptoms  of 
eternal  death  are  upon  them,  though  they  know  it  not.  (N.  Emmont,  D.D.) 
The  influence  of  memory  increasing  the  misery  of  the  lost : — What,  speaking  of  a  lost 
BOol,  will  he  remember  in  another  world?  I.  The  possessions  hb  had  in  this: 
Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good  things,  and  likewise 
Lazarus  evil  things :  but  now  he  is  comforted ;  and  thou  art  tormented."  Yes, 
all  shall  be  recollected:  the  gains  in  business  that  this  lost  soul  in  perdition 
secured  when  he  was  an  inhabitant  of  our  world ;  his  patrimonial  possessions,  his 
accumulations  of  wealth,  his  splendid  mansions,  his  gay  equipage,  his  sumptuous 
living,  his  retinue  of  servants,  everything  that  constituted  his  gaiety  and  his 
grandeur,  and  all  his  pomp  and  circumstance.  But  what  advantage  wiU  it  be  to 
have  a  voice  perpetually  saying  to  him  throughout  eternity,  "  Son,  remember  that 
thou  in  thy  Lifetime  receivedst  thy  good  things  "  ?  Oh,  V.ie  sting  of  that  past 
tense — "  thou  hadst "  1  II.  Lost  bouls  wnji  bemehbbb  theib  wobij>ly  plbasubeb. 
The  poet  has  said,  and  every  man's  experience  sustains  the  propriety  and  truth  of 
the  expression,  "  Of  joys  departed  never  to  return,  oh  how  painful  the  remembrance.'^ 
Think  of  the  votary  ot  this  world's  pleasure,  think  of  the  man  of  fashion,  think  of 
the  woman  given  up  to  little  else  than  earthly  delights,  suddenly  arrested  in  their 
career,  and  carried  into  eternity,  away  from  aJl  their  pleasures,  to  a  land  where  no 
sounds  of  mirth,  no  voice  of  song,  no  note  of  music,  ever  break  upon  the  ear. 
m.  Thb  lost  soul  will  bembmbbb  ih  btbbnitt  his  binb.  The  great  multitude 
forget  theirs  now  as  soon  as  they  are  oommitted;  and  any  man  that  sets  him« 
•elf  down  to  the  task  of  counting  the  number  of  his  transgresBionB,  will  find  ht 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

is  engaged  in  as  hopeless  a  work  as  numbering  the  stars  that  burst  on  his  viev 
on  a  clear  winter's  night.  The  lurid  flashes  of  perdition  will  throw  light 
on  this  subject,  and  for  ever  settle  the  question,  that  sin  is  an  infinite  evil ;  and 
then  all  excuses  will  be  silenced.    IV.  The  lost  soul  will  recollect  in  eternitt 

ITS  MEANS  Oy  grace,  ITS  OPPORTUNITIES  OF  SALVATION,  ITS  ADVANTAGES  FOR  OBTAINING 
ETERNAL    LIFE.       V.    ThE  LOST   SOUL  IN   ETERNITY,    WILL    REMEMBER   ITS   IMPRESSIONS, 

CONVICTIONS,  PURPOSES,  AND  RESOLUTIONS,  ON  EARTH.  Sometimes  it  is  painful  to  you 
now  to  think  of  this,  and  you  are  ready  to  say,  "  Oh,  that  I  had  never  heard  that 
sermon ;  oh,  that  I  had  never  had  those  impressions  ;  oh,  that  those  convictions 
had  never  taken  hold  of  my  heart  1  I  cannot  enjoy  my  sins  as  I  once  did ;  I  am 
half  spoiled  for  the  world,  though  I  am  not  a  member  of  the  Church."  Yes,  and 
you  know,  that  often  the  scene  of  festivity,  in  which  others  experience  no  inter- 
ruption, is  marred  for  you.  Then  think,  young  man,  think  what  will  be  the  case 
in  eternity,  when  a  voice  shall  say,  "  Son,  remember  thy  impressions ;  remember 
thy  convictions."  {J.  A.  James.)  The  eternity  of  memory: — ^Death  destroys 
neither  the  soul's  capacities  nor  energies.  Memory  is  eternal ;  it  therefore  behoves 
us  to  ask  with  what  we  are  storing  it.  1.  Consciousness  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
all  responsible  life,  and  soon  merges  into  the  fuller  day  of  self-consciousness.  Self- 
consciousness  is  the  knowledge  which  self  attains  when  it  says  "I,"  and  recognizes 
that  "  I "  is  distinct  from  anything  else  in  the  universe ;  and  involves  three  things — 
the  knowledge  of  "  myself,"  of  something  not  "  myself,"  and  of  the  relations  arising 
between  what  is  "myself"  and  what  is  not  "  myself."  2.  In  order  to  make  these 
relations  explicit,  we  need  a  faculty  to  tell  ns  that  we  existed  yesterday,  and  what 
other  faculty  is  this  but  memory  ?  But  unless  we  make  memory  to  subsist  in  two 
|>arts,  as  a  capacity  to  retain  and  an  energy  to  recall,  we  shall  not  explain  its  work- 
ings, or  be  able  to  see  in  what  way  it  is  deathless.  8.  The  principles  by  which 
active  memory  works  among  the  treasures  of  passive  memory  to  .recall  things  new 
and  old,  are  called  the  primary  and  the  secondary  laws  of  association.  Ideas  and 
actions  have  relation  to  time,  and  connect  with  each  other  like  links  in  a  chain. 
Sometimes  we  perceive  the  connection  between  the  ideas  which  memory  recalls,  at 
other  times  we  do  not ;  and  yet  there  is  some  connection,  just  as  when  a  row  of 
balls  is  struck  at  one  end,  the  force  is  transmitted  through  them,  and  the  ball  at  the 
other  end  takes  np  the  motion  and  the  journey  of  the  impinging  ball.  4.  But  if 
memory  is  thus  complete  and  deathless — as  without  doubt  it  is— some  one  may  ask, 
"  How  is  it  possible  for  any  to  go  from  an  imperfect  life,  with  its  imperishable 
record,  and  derive  any  pleasure  from  its  contemplation  ?  "  I  answer :  "  In  the  life 
•of  heaven  love  will  predominate,  and  by  the  laws  of  association  it  will  bring  forth 
from  the  storehouse  only  such  reminiscences  as  are  pure  and  holy."  Conclusion  : 
In  view  of  all  this,  how  wise  and  necessary  for  our  future  happiness  to  All  the 
present  life  and  its  passing  moments  with  kind  words,  upright  thoughts,  and  useful 
actions.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  will  not  the  memory  of  an  evil  life,  if  unchecked 
by  grace  and  unrestrained  by  holy  love,  constitute  a  source  of  keenest  misery  ? 
Will  not  a  deathless  memory  work  upon  the  quickened  conscience,  and  gnaw  like  a 
worm  that  never  dieth,  or  bum  like  a  fire  that  is  never  quenched  ?  (L.  0.  Thompson.) 
Materials  for  a  future  judgment  in  the  constitution  of  tlie  human  mind ; — The  argu- 
ment from  memory  for  a  future  judgment  is  powerful,  because,  on  every  excursion 
of  the  mind  into  the  past,  there  is  now  a  judgment  of  conscience,  and  an  expectation 
of  a  righteous  award.  Now  if  there  be  within  the  circle  of  our  natural  knowledges 
or  capacities  the  prediction  of  any  event,  we  look  inevitably  for  some  grounds  of  the 
prediction,  or  some  signs  that  it  is  a  probability,  and  that  the  event  promised  will 
take  place.  If  it  be  rumoured  among  the  people  of  a  vast  city  that  a  new  and 
magnificent  Hall  of  Justice  is  to  be  built,  and  if  there  be  seen  a  multitude  of  work- 
men collecting  materials  at  the  stated  place  of  the  proposed  building,  those  materials 
are  a  strong  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  common  rumour.  And  just  so,  when  the 
conscience  of  all  mankind  tells  of  a  judgment  to  come,  and  we  see  how  the  matenala 
for  that  judgment  are  accumulating,  and  the  demand  and  necessity  for  it  increasing, 
and  how  the  busy  memory  is  occupied  with  collecting  and  arranging  those  materials, 
the  proof  becomes  very  strong ;  the  common  rumour  of  the  world  and  of  the  individual 
conscience  is  so  corroborated,  that  one  who  looks  fairly  at  the  light  of  nature,  even 
ispart  from  that  of  Eevelation,  cannot  doubt.  And  every  instance  of  the  power  of 
memory,  every  elucidation  of  the  laws  under  which  the  mind  acts  in  its  operations 
of  remembrance,  and  every  instance  of  the  manner  in  which  conscience  accompanies 
this  work,  affords  additional  conviction.  The  first  instance  we  shall  give  of  the 
myolontary  power  of  memory,  is  that  noted  one  presented  by  Coleridge,  which  shall 


«EAr.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  257 

be  related  mainly  in  the  words  and  with  the  conclusions  of  that  eminent  man.  The 
fact  that  the  case  may  be  80  familiar  to  some  of  our  readers  as  to  be  almost  a 
truism  does  not  lesson  its  importance.  A  young  woman,  he  says,  of  four  or  five- 
and-twenty,  who  could  neither  read  nor  write,  was  seized  with  a  nervous  fever, 
during  which  the  priests  and  monks  in  the  neighbourhood  supposed  that  she 
became  possessed  of  the  devil.  She  continued  incessantly  talking  Latin,  Greek, 
and  Hebrew,  in  very  pompous  tones,  and  with  most  distinct  enunciation.  The  case 
had  attracted  the  particular  attention  of  a  young  physician,  and  by  his  statement 
many  eminent  physiologists  and  psychologists  visited  the  town,  and  cross-examined 
the  case  on  the  spot.  Sheets  full  of  her  ravings  were  taken  down  from  her  own 
mouth,  and  were  found  to  consist  of  sentences  coherent  and  intelligible  each  for 
itself,  but  with  little  or  no  connection  with  each  other.  Of  the  Hebrew,  a  small 
portion  only  could  be  traced  to  the  Bible ;  the  remainder  seemed  to  be  in  the 
Habbinical  dialect.  A  trick  or  conspiracy  was  out  of  the  question.  Not  only  had 
the  young  woman  ever  been  a  harmless,  simple  creature,  but  she  was  evidently 
labouring  under  a  nervous  fever.  In  the  town  of  which  she  had  been  a  resident  for 
many  years,  as  a  servant  in  different  families,  no  solution  presented  itself.  The 
physician,  however,  determined  to  trace  her  past  life,  step  by  step  ;  for  the 
patient  herself  was  incapable  of  returning  a  rational  answer.  He  searched  out  the 
place  of  her  nativity,  and  from  a  surviving  uncle  learned  that  the  patient  had  beea 
charitably  taken  by  an  old  Protestant  pastor  at  nine  years  of  age,  and  had  remained 
with  him  some  years,  till  his  death.  Of  this  pastor  the  uncle  knew  nothing,  but 
that  he  was  a  very  good  man.  With  great  difficulty  he  at  length  discovered  a  niece 
of  the  pastor's,  who  had  lived  with  him  as  his  housekeeper,  and  had  inherited  his 
effects,  and  who  remembered  the  girl.  Anxious  inquiries  were  made  concerning 
the  pastor's  habits,  and  the  solution  of  the  phenomenon  was  soon  obtained.  For  it 
appeared  that  it  had  been  his  custom  for  years  to  walk  up  and  down  a  passage  of 
his  house,  into  which  the  kitchen  door  opened,  and  to  read  to  himself  with  a  loud 
voice  out  of  his  favourite  books.  A  considerable  number  of  these  were  still  in  the 
niece's  possession.  She  added,  that  he  was  a  very  learned  man,  and  a  great 
Hebraist.  Among  the  books  were  found  a  collection  of  Babbinical  writings,  together 
with  several  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  Fathers;  and  the  physician  succeeded  in 
identifying  so  many  passages  with  those  taken  down  at  the  young  woman's  bedside, 
that  no  doubt  could  remain  in  any  rational  mind  concerning  the  true  origin  of  the 
impression  made  on  her  nervous  system.  "  This  authenticated  case,"  Coleridge 
concludes,  "  furnishes  both  proof  and  instance  that  relics  of  sensation  may  exist  for 
an  indefinite  time  in  a  latent  state,  in  the  very  same  order  in  which  they  wer» 
originally  impressed ;  and  as  we  cannot  rationally  suppose  the  feverish  state  of  the 
brain  to  act  in  any  other  way  than  as  a  stimulus,  this  fact,  and  it  would  not  be 
difficult  to  adduce  several  of  the  same  kind,  contributes  to  make  it  even  probable 
that  all  thoughts  are  in  themselves  imperishable ;  and  that,  if  the  intelligent  faculty 
should  be  rendered  more  comprehensive,  it  would  require  only  a  different  and 
apportioned  organization,  the  body  celestial  instead  of  the  body  terrestrial,  to  bring 
before  every  human  soul  the  collective  experience  of  its  whole  past  existence.  And 
this,  perchance,  is  the  dread  book  of  judgment,  in  whose  mysterious  hieroglyphics 
every  idle  word  is  recorded.  Yea,  in  the  very  nature  of  a  living  spirit,  it  may  be 
more  possible  that  heaven  and  earth  should  pass  away,  than  that  a  single  act,  a 
single  thought,  should  be  loosened  or  lost  from  that  living  chain  of  causes,  to  all 
whose  hnks,  conscious  or  unconscious,  the  free  will,  our  only  absolute  self,  is 
coextensive  and  copresent."  This  last  remark  respecting  the  copresence  of  the  will 
in  all  our  intelligent  Ufe,  conscious  or  unconscious,  is  of  the  utmost  solemnity  and 
importance.  Dr.  Abercrombie  relates  another  example,  which  he  puts  under  the 
phenomena  of  dreams,  but  which  is  in  reality  a  development  of  memory.  It  occurred 
with  one  of  his  own  intimate  friends,  a  gentleman  connected  with  one  of  the 
principal  banks  in  Glasgow.  He  was  at  his  place  at  the  teller's  desk,  when  a  person 
entered,  demanding  payment  of  the  sum  of  six  pounds.  There  were  several  waiting, 
who  were  entitled  to  be  attended  to  before  him;  but  he  was  extremely  impatient, 
and  rather  noisy ;  and  being  likewise  a  remarkable  stammerer,  he  became  so 
annoying  that  another  gentleman  reqaested  the  teller  to  pay  him  his  money  and 
get  rid  of  him.  He  did  so,  accordingly,  but  with  an  expression  of  impatience  at 
being  obliged  to  attend  to  him  before  his  turn,  and  thought  no  more  of  the  trans- 
action. At  the  end  of  the  year  the  books  of  the  bank  could  not  be  made  to  balance, 
the  deficiency  being  exactly  six  pounds.  He  spent  days  and  nights  in  endeavouring 
to  discover  the  error,  but  without  success ;  when  at  last  one  night  retiring  to  bed 
▼oii.  m.  17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  Xf\. 

much  fatigued,  he  dreamed  of  being  at  his  place  in  the  bank,  where  the  transaction 
with  the  stammerer  passed  before  him  in  all  its  particulars.  He  found  on 
examination  that  the  sum  paid  had  not  been  inserted  in  the  book  of  accounts,  and 
that  it  exactly  amounted  to  the  error  in  the  balance.  His  memory,  which  "had 
failed  him  during  the  day,  had  wrought  during  sleep  with  perfect  exactness.  This 
was  simply  an  instance  of  the  revival  of  old  associations,  which  had  passed  for  a 
season  from  the  mind  and  been  forgotten.  Thus  it  is  that  all  mistakes  in  our 
accounts  for  eternity,  arising  from  forgetf ulness  here,  will  be  rectified  when  the  mind 
acts  with  its  full  power  in  the  spiritual  world.  The  stars  come  out  by  night  that 
were  hidden  by  the  day,  and  ten  thousand  thousand  worlds  of  transactions  and  of 
consequences  will  be  revealed  in  the  firmament  of  man's  consciousness,  when  the 
delusions  of  time  and  sense  shall  have  given  way  to  the  realities  of  eternity.  From 
the  experience  of  Niebuhr,  the  celebrated  Danish  traveller,  Dr.  Abercrombie  relates 
an  instance  of  the  vividness  with  which,  as  the  light  of  the  day  of  this  world  ii 
retiring,  the  past  realities,  that  are  to  encircle  our  being  in  the  judgment,  throng 
opoQ  the  mind  ;  whether  they  be  scenes  of  innocent  delight,  or  of  guilt  and  terror. 
When  old,  blind,  and  so  infirm  that  he  was  able  only  to  be  carried  from  his  bed  to 
his  chair,  he  used  to  describe  to  his  friends  the  scenes  which  he  had  visited  in  his 
early  days,  with  wonderful  minuteness  and  vivacity.  When  they  expressed  their 
astonishment,  he  told  them  that  as  he  lay  in  bed,  all  visible  objects  shut  out,  the 
pictures  of  what  he  had  seen  in  the  East  continually  floated  before  his  mind's  eye, 
so  that  it  was  no  wonder  he  could  speak  of  them  as  if  he  had  seen  them  yesterday. 
With  like  vividness  the  deep  intense  sky  of  Asia,  with  its  brilliant  and  twinkling 
hosts  of  stars,  which  he  had  so  often  gazed  at  by  night,  was  reflected,  in  the  hours 
of  stillness  and  darkness,  on  his  inmost  soul.  Now  these  were  simply  the  beautiful 
images  of  nature,  that,  having  once  made  their  impressions  on  a  sensitive  soul, 
could  never  be  forgotten.  But  if  pictures  daguerreotyped,  as  it  were,  upon  the  soul 
from  abroad,  can  thus  be  reproduced  after  the  lapse  of  a  lifetime,  as  vivid  as  when 
the  soul  first  received  into  its  depths,  as  in  a  mirror,  the  reflection  of  the  glory  of 
God's  universe,  how  much  more  certainly,  with  how  much  greater  exactitude,  must 
everything  which  the  mind  itself  has  originated,  every  spontaneous  movement  of 
thought  and  feeling,  every  development  of  character,  be  treasured  in  the  memory, 
to  be  reproduced  when  conscience  calls  for  it  1  If  Niebuhr's  memory  had  been 
filled  with  scenes  of  sin,  or  with  the  recollection  of  sensual  and  sinful  pleasures, 
instead  of  those  exquisite  images  of  Oriental  scenery,  how  intensely  painful  would  hia 
old  age  have  been  in  the  reproduction  of  such  accumulated  forms  of  evil,  with  con 
science  passing  judgment  on  them  all  1  Sometimes  the  acquisitions,  the  knowledges, 
of  the  earUest  period  of  life,  long  utterly  disused  and  forgotten,  come  suddenly  and 
spontaneously  again  into  power  and  exercise,  as  indestructible  possessions  of  the 
soul.  Sometimes  it  seems  as  if  an  invisible  power  were  busy  removing  or  replacing 
at  will,  as  in  a  camera  obscura,  the  pictures  in  the  memory.  Sometimes  those  that 
lie  lowest,  at  the  bottom  of  the  pile,  are  placed  uppermost,  excluding  all  others,  and 
sometimes  the  last  drawn  are  the  last  seen.  But  how  easy  for  the  Divine  Being, 
acting  simply  by  the  laws  of  the  mind,  to  bid  the  soul  stand  still,  and  to  draw  forth 
before  it,  plate  after  plate,  the  impressions  of  every  moment,  hour,  day,  week,  of 
existence,  and  let  the  conscience  meditate  upon  it !  And  what  an  employment  for  a 
guilty  and  unpardoned  soul  t  Even  a  single  scene  of  guilt  may  fully  arrest  and 
occupy  the  mind  for  almost  any  period.  There  are  cases  of  persons,  whose  sane  and 
healthy  action  of  mind  has  been  disordered,  having  their  consciousness  arrested 
npon  one  single  event  or  idea,  and  remaining  involved  in  that  event,  or  revolving 
that  idea,  for  the  period  of  near  fifty  years.  This  we  call  insanity.  But  suppose 
an  immortal  mind  to  stand  thus  petrified  as  it  were  in  the  eternal  world  for  a  similar 
interval  of  time,  brooding  in  guilty  consciousness  over  some  one  scene,  idea,  or  act 
of  guilt.  Would  not  this  be  one  of  the  direst  images  by  which  the  mind  can  body 
forth  its  conceptions  of  the  misery  of  hell  ?  When  the  missionary,  Mr.  Moffat,  had 
once  been  preaching  to  the  natives  in  Africa,  his  attention  was  arrested  by  a  young 
man  in  the  midst  of  a  group  that  had  gathered  around  him,  to  whom  he  was  preach- 
ing over  from  memory  the  sermon  he  had  heard,  imitating  Mr.  M.'s  gestures,  as 
well  as  repeating  his  language,  with  great  solemnity.  He  repeated  the  sermon 
almost  verbatim,  and  when  Mr.  Moffat  remarked  to  him  that  he  was  doing  what  ha 
himself  could  not  have  done,  he  did  not  appear  conscious  of  any  superior  ability, 
but  touched  his  forehead  with  his  finger,  and  remarked,  "  When  I  hear  anything 
great,  it  remains  there."  By  "great,"  he  evidently  meant  in  the  sense  of  solemnity 
M  connected  with  the  soul's  destiny  in  the  eternal  world.    And  indeed  there  it 


«BAi>.  rvi.]  ST.  LUKE.  259 

nothing  great  but  with  reference  to  eternity,  nothing  worth  preserving  or  remember- 
ing but  in  its  relation  to  that.  But  all  things  that  have  the  stamp  of  that  greatness 
remain  there,  as  the  poor  untutored  negro  observed,  there  in  the  mind,  and  can 
ne^or  pass  from  the  memory.  The  instances  of  memory  we  have  presented  are 
mi/st  of  them  involuntary,  spontaneous ;  they  are  instances  of  power,  of  activity, 
■which  could  not  be  checked  or  prevented.  Had  it  been  ever  so  much  against  the 
will  of  the  master  of  the  faculty,  that  would  have  made  no  difference.  The  busy 
operator,  with  the  utmost  indifference  to  the  soul's  wishes,  would  have  brought  out 
and  displayed  the  mind's  innumerable  stores.  It  is  no  matter  whether  they  be  full 
of  sin  and  shame,  or  such  as  the  mind  would  delight  to  avouch  and  greet  again  as 
its  creations  or  possessions.  The  memory  does  not  ask  whether  the  mind  be 
pleased  with  them,  but  starts  them  into  being.  Nay,  the  more  displeasing  they  are, 
the  more  certain  they  are  to  be  recalled  ;  for  this  is  one  manifest  way  in  which  the 
law  of  association  acts,  and  anything  which  the  mind  greatly  fears,  is  for  that  very 
reason  held  tight  to  it.  If  you  put  by  an  article  of  your  experience,  and  say  that  it 
is  proscribed,  debarred  from  remembrance ;  if  you  say,  I  never  wish  to  see  that  again, 
let  it  be  buried  and  never  have  a  resurrection — it  may  be  a  single  word,  deed,  look, 
event,  or  incident — the  very  label  which  you  put  upon  it,  "never  to  be  revealed,"  the 
very  burial  service  which  you  perform  over  it,  the  very  act  of  your  will,  consigning 
it  to  eternal  banishment  and  forgetfulness,  secure  its  eternal  existence  and  power 
over  you.  Your  unwillingness  to  look  at  it  compels  you  to  look.  Your  dread  and 
unwillingness  give  it,  in  fact,  an  additional,  morbid,  torturing  action  within  you, 
find  attraction  over  you.  Hatred  is,  in  some  respects,  a  stronger  bond  than  friend- 
ship. What  we  hate  and  dread  we  remember  with  a  dreadful  energy,  and  so  long 
as  the  hatred  and  dread  exist,  the  object  of  it  cannot  be  forgotten.  We  have  reason 
to  believe  that  even  to  a  guilty  soul  nothing  will  be  more  dreadful,  more  hateful, 
than  the  realities  of  past  sins.  The  state  of  a  man's  system  in  health  may  not 
attract  his  notice.  It  seems  the  very  plenitude  of  health  to  be  in  such  enjoyment 
■oi  it,  that  no  particular  sensations  excite  notice.  But  let  there  be  a  festering  wound 
in  any  organ  in  the  system,  and  it  shall  excite  more  notice  than  the  healthful  state 
of  the  whole  system  besides.  If  there  could  be  such  a  thing  as  a  coal  of  living  fire 
wound  up  as  a  ganglion  in  a  man's  nervous  system,  it  would  compel  and  concentrate 
all  his  attention.  But  every  sin,  unforgiven,  is  such  a  coal  of  fire.  The  secretions 
of  evil,  of  guilt,  in  our  experience,  are  secretions  of  irritating,  painful  action, 
secretions  of  remorse,  compelling  the  remembrance.  The  more  painful  they  are, 
the  more  we  would  forget  them ;  but  of  course  the  more  we  would  forget  them,  the 
more  certainly  we  remember  them.  We  can  quicken  memory,  but  we  cannot  dis- 
possess it  of  any  of  its  stores,  we  cannot  make  ourselves  forget.  The  very  attempt 
at  forgetfulness  does  but  startle  the  memory.  The  involuntariness  of  memory  is 
the  security  for  its  fall  and  impartial  action  at  the  judgment.  The  involuntariness 
of  memory  grows  out  of  the  nature  of  the  law  of  association.  By  this  law  of  our 
teing,  one  thing,  by  having  been  connected  with  another,  suggests  and  recalls  it. 
In  this  way  all  events  and  all  thoughts  may  be  so  linked  together  that  it  one  be 
preserved  the  whole  are  inevitably  in  existence.  Now  there  being  a  connection 
between  every  thought  and  thing  in  God's  universe,  and  some  other  thought  or 
thing,  and  between  every  experience  in  our  nature  and  some  other  experience,  it  is 
impossible,  under  this  law,  but  that  all  should  come  to  light,  impossible  that  any^ 
thing  whatever  should  be  lost.  If  two  persons,  or  things,  or  ideas,  are  seen  but 
•once  in  proximity  or  relation,  the  association  may  be  weak ;  one  may  not  now 
necessarily  suggest  the  other.  But  if  seen  often,  the  association  becomes  so  strong 
as  to  be  inevitable  and  irresistible.  Thus,  if  a  man  be  a  notorious  drunkard,  every 
time  you  see  that  man  you  will  think  of  his  habit  of  drunkenness ;  or  if  a  man  be 
a  profane  swearer,  every  time  you  see  that  man,  or  ever  hear  of  him,  you  will  think 
of  his  habit  of  profane  swearing.  The  thought  of  a  man  conspicuous  in  a  page  of 
history  which  is  well  known,  brings  up  the  details  of  that  history.  What  person 
ever  thinks  of  William  Tell,  without  seeing  the  child,  the  arrow,  and  the  apple  ?  If 
there  be  an  alarm-bell,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  hear  rung  only  on  occasions  of 
danger,  the  sound  of  the  bell  will  always  suggest  the  image  of  the  danger ;  so,  the 
moment  we  hear  the  fire-bell,  the  mind  inevitably  pictures  the  evil  of  which  it  is 
the  warning.  In  the  country,  when  the  bell  tolls  slowly  and  at  measured  intervals, 
you  instantly  think  of  death  and  a  funeral.  On  the  other  hand,  the  noise  of  sleigh- 
bells  brings  to  the  mind  all  ideas  of  life  and  activity  ;  a  bracing  atmosphere,  a  fine 
road  covered  with  snow,  the  laughter  of  merry  parties,  the  health  and  activity  of 
winter.    Again,  you  can  aoaroely  hear  the  sound  of  the  violin,  but  it  suggests  th« 


S60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Jtvi. 

danoe  ;  of  the  drum,  but  it  brings  before  you  all  the  excitement  and  fnry  of  war. 
A  case  of  surgical  instruments  teUa  you  of  ghastly  wounds.  The  smell  of  camphor 
in  a  room  makes  you  inquire  if  any  one  be  ill ;  so  does  the  sight  of  a  physician 
entering  the  house.  These  are  common  instances  of  the  operation  of  the  law  of 
association,  in  regard  to  things  seen  or  known  in  connection  or  relation.  It  is  a 
law,  which,  even  viewed  merely  in  an  external  operation,  as  a  cord,  binding  our 
knowledges  in  bundles,  may  be  as  powerful  for  evil  as  for  good.  We  may  lay  hold 
upon  it  for  the  accomplishment  of  a  happy  and  useful  training  of  the  mind  and 
heart,  or  an  education  in  all  folly  and  misery.  The  law  of  association  is  at  the 
foundation  of  most  of  our  prejudices  and  superstitions.  Children,  whose  minds  are 
filled  with  nursery  tales  of  ghosts  and  goblins,  are  afraid  to  be  left  alone  in  the 
dark ;  darkness  has  become  associated  in  their  mind  with  frightful  images.  Now 
it  is  possible  to  conceive  of  its  being  associated  with  nothing  but  images  of  secarity 
and  repose.  The  degree  of  activity  and  wideness  of  sweep  in  this  law,  in  different 
minds,  may  make  a  genius  out  of  one  person,  a  dull  plodder  out  of  another.  It  has 
much  to  do  with  the  development  and  power  of  the  imagination.  The  might  and 
majesty  of  its  action,  amidst  sublime  materials,  may  be  seen  in  the  poetry  of  Milton, 
whose  imagination  combined,  in  such  intensity  and  comprehensiveness,  the  associa- 
tive and  aggregative  faculty.  The  constitution  of  the  mind  of  John  Foster  was 
remarkable  in  this  respect.  His  associations  were  intensely  vivid,  so  that  words 
affected  him  with  all  the  power  of  realities.  In  one  of  his  Essays  he  speaks  of  a 
young  person  (and  he  is  supposed  to  refer  to  himself,  at  a  period  when  he  was  en- 
chanted with  the  stories  of  Gregory  Lopez  and  other  recluses),  with  whom  at  any 
time  the  word  '•  hermit  "was  enough  to  transport  him,  like  the  witch's  broom-stick,  to 
the  solitary  hut,  surrounded  by  shady,  solemn  groves,  mossy  rocks,  crystal  streams, 
and  gardens  of  radishes.  The  words  "woods"  and  "forests"  are  said  to  have  produced 
in  his  mind  the  most  powerful  emotion.  In  one  of  his  letters  he  says,  "  I  have  just 
been  admiring  the  marvellous  construction  of  the  mind,  in  the  circmnstance  of  ita 
enabling  me,  as  I  sit  by  my  candle  here,  in  a  chamber  at  Chichester,  to  view  almost 
as  distinctly  as  if  before  my  eyes,  your  house,  the  bam,  the  adjacent  fields,  neigh- 
bouring houses,  and  a  multitude  of  other  objects.  I  can  go  through  each  part  of  the 
house,  and  see  the  exact  form  of  the  looms,  tables,  maps,  cakes  of  bread,  and  so  on, 
down  to  my  mother's  thimble.  Yet  I  still  find  myself  almost  three  hundred  miles 
off.  At  present  I  take  no  notice  of  the  things  now  about  me  ;  but  perhaps  at  soma 
future  time,  at  a  still  greater  distance,  I  may  thus  review  in  imagination  the  room 
in  which  I  now  write,  and  the  objects  it  contains  ;  and  I  find  that  few  places  where 
I  have  continued  some  time  can  be  thus  recollected  without  some  degree  of  regret ; 
particularly  the  regret  that  I  did  not  obtain  and  accomplish  all  the  good  that  was 
possible  at  that  place,  and  that  time.  Will  it  be  so,  when  hereafter  I  recollect  this 
time,  and  this  place  ?  "  This  is  exceedingly  striking,  and  we  are  here  brought  from 
mere  external  things,  whether  of  knowledge  or  imagination,  to  inward  experiences, 
the  voice  of  conscience,  the  goings  on  of  our  inward  and  permanent  being.  Here 
it  is,  and  in  the  circle  of  the  sweep  of  connection  between  the  moral  responsibilities 
of  that  permanent  being  and  the  world  around  us,  that  the  law  of  association  acts 
for  eternity ;  and  if  it  be  true,  as  Wordsworth  declares,  that  the  faculty  of  imagi- 
nation was  given  us  to  incite  and  support  the  eternal  part  of  our  being,  equally  true 
it  is  that  the  associative  law  and  faculty  bears  reference  to  the  same.  It  is  with 
reference  to  the  responsibilities  and  realities  of  eternity,  and  to  the  materials  which 
we  ourselves  have  gone  on  voluntarily  providing  for  eternity,  that  it  possesses  such 
indestructible  and  unlimited  dominion.  Without  this  law,  the  memory  would  be  a 
thing  of  chance,  a  perfect  chaos.  By  this  law,  all  things  are  connected,  so  con- 
nected, that,  begin  at  whatever  part  of  the  chain  you  may,  be  sure  of  whatever  link 
you  please,  all  the  rest  will  follow,  or  may  be  regained.  There  can  be  nothing  lost, 
nothing  forgotten.  But  this  law  is  not  that  of  mere  connection,  by  evident  and 
known  links  of  circumstances  ;  it  is  also  that  of  suggestion.  One  idea,  or  train  of 
ideas,  that  may  have  been  introduced  by  direct  connection  with  some  present  person 
or  thing,  shall  suggest  to  the  mind  another,  by  mere  resemblance  or  contrast,  or  by 
an  abrupt  transition,  of  which,  at  the  time,  we  can  give  no  account.  The  causes 
by  which  the  law  of  association  is  thus  rendered  active  and  powerful  are  multitudi- 
nons  almost  beyond  computation.  And  they  respect  almost  equally  the  power  and 
activity  of  memory,  and  the  processes  of  present  thought.  If  I  see  a  face  resembling 
that  of  a  dear  absent  or  departed  relative  or  friend,  I  say,  it  reminds  me  of  that  beloved 
individual ;  it  may  also  suggest  to  me  a  thousand  busy  thoughts  in  the  present  or  for 
the  future.    Now  the  occasions  on  which  this  suggestive  power  is  exercised  are  as 


«BiJ>.  XVI. J  ST.  LUKE.  261 

multiplied  as  the  experiences  of  our  being.  The  various  innnmerable  and  intermin- 
able  relations  between  external  things,  cause  and  effect,  resemblance  and  contrast, 
nearness  of  time  and  place,  position,  preceding  or  succeeding,  high  or  low,  first  or 
last,  order  or  disorder ;  and  in  moral  and  intellectual  processes  and  experiences, 
the  same  and  other  relations,  influenced  and  varied  by  everything  that  can  have 
power  in  building  up  our  being,  in  developing  our  character;  as  the  home  and 
discipline  of  childhood,  the  instructions  and  examples  of  the  family  circle,  the  tenor 
of  our  pursuits  and  studies,  the  books  read,  the  kind  of  minds  conversed  with,  the 
habits  of  sentiment,  opinion,  feeling,  action,  formed  and  indulged  ;  all  these  are 
occasions  and  influences,  on  and  under  which  the  law  of  association  works.  The 
part  which  this  law  of  association,  therefore,  is  to  play  in  men's  future  judgment, 
and  in  the  determination  of  their  state  for  eternity,  is  evident.  Without  it,  except 
by  an  external  manifestation  of  things,  as  in  a  book,  there  could  be  no  judgment, 
and  but  a  weak  self-condemnation.  If,  for  example,  when  a  man  sees  a  fellow- 
being  with  whom,  in  time  past,  he  has  had  transactions,  the  sight  of  that  person 
did  not  recall  those  transactions,  if  each  particular  were  a  thing  to  be  remembered 
by  itself,  and  had  no  associating  links  of  thought  and  feeUng,  no  power  «f  relation 
to  bring  up  other  things,  a  man  might  meet  a  person  whom  he  has  greatly  injured, 
and  yet  not  meet  again  the  memory  of  that  injury.  A  man  might  meet  another, 
against  whom  he  has  borne  false  witness,  so  as  to  fill  the  slandered  man's  life  with 
misfortune  and  misery,  and  yet  might  feel  Utile  or  no  compunction  at  the  meeting, 
because  of  the  want  of  this  law  of  association,  whereby  things  that  have  been 
together,  or  related  together,  suggest  each  other.  Accordingly,  because  of  the 
'weakness  of  this  law  of  association  in  some  persons,  there  is  a  great  defect  in 
memory;  and  of  course  the  vividness  of  one's  recollections  must  be  greatly  depen- 
dent on  the  energy  and  power  with  which  this  law  acts.  A  man's  compunction  or 
remorse  for  sin  will  depend  greatly  on  his  remembrance  of  the  circumstances  and 
feelings  with  which  the  sin  was  committed.  And  if  by  any  means  it  could  be 
possible  to  evade  this  law  of  association,  if  you  could  break  up  the  inevitable  chain 
that  connects  every  part  of  a  man's  being  with  aU  his  feelings  and  memories,  and 
with  him  every  creature  and  thing  he  has  ever  had  to  do  with,  if  you  could  loosen 
some  link,  and  part  the  series,  then  a  man's  condemnation  and  misery  on  account 
of  sin  might  be  cot  so  inevitable,  that  is,  his  self-condemnation,  and  his  misery 
from  compunction  and  remorse.  So  much  of  the  essence  of  this  article  of  remorse 
depends  on  the  remembrance  of  things  in  their  order  and  connection,  on  the 
remembrance  of  associated  feelings,  on  the  remembrance  of  Uttle  circumstances 
that  surrounded  any  act,  and  made  up  what  might  be  called  the  scenery  of  it,  that 
if  a  man  could  succeed  in  getting  rid  of  these,  if  he  could  break  the  links  of  associa- 
tion, if  he  were  not  bound  inevitably  and  for  ever  to  them,  or  if  he  could  make  a 
chaos  or  confusion  out  of  them,  he  would  be  comparatively  secure.  But  there  is  no 
possibility  of  this.  In  being  judged,  a  man  is  to  be  thrown  back,  not  on  the  bare 
recollection  of  his  sins,  but  on  all  the  circumstances  and  feeUngs  in  and  with 
which  they  were  committed.  Not  merely  the  sin  will  be  remembered,  but  all  the 
then  reproaches  of  conscience,  all  the  light  under  which  it  was  committed,  all  the 
self-deception  exercised  will  be  made  plain,  all  the  aggravations  of  the  sin  will 
come  to  view,  and  all  the  dreadful  feelings  that  followed  it  will  be  renewed  and 
deepened.  Every  sin  of  injury  against  others,  against  the  feelings  of  others,  against 
the  interests  of  others  in  any  way,  will  be  connected  with  all  the  materials  of  com- 
punction and  remorse  that  preceded,  accompanied,  or  grew  out  of  it.  And  some- 
timee  little  circumstances,  or  what  seemed  httle  at  the  time,  shall  have  extra- 
ordinary power,  be  invested  with  a  world  of  feeling  and  of  meaning.  A  single  look,  a 
siogle  word,  a  circumstance  that  passed  like  a  flash  of  lightning,  shall  have  mean- 
ing and  feeling  enough  connected  with  it  to  be  dwelt  upon  for  ever  and  ever.  We 
might  consider  this  in  the  case  of  the  murderer ;  a  dying  word,  a  dying  look  of  his 
victim,  shall  have  more  horror  to  him  in  the  recollection,  than  the  bare  remembrance 
of  his  crime  could  ever  have.  And  there  may  be  cases  in  which  the  exercise  of  a 
erael,  severe,  or  hard-hearted  disposition,  the  turning  away  from  the  cry  of  a 
fellow-being  in  distress,  the  infliction  of  a  pang  on  the  feelings  by  a  cruel  or  con- 
temptuous word,  shall  be  followed  by  the  face  of  the  man  so  grieved,  by  the  pictnre 
of  the  wounded  spirit  with  the  arrow  festering  in  it,  in  the  soul  of  the  sinner,  to  dwell 
there  for  ever.  For  it  must  be  that  every  injniy  shall  have  a  time  for  its  revenge  ; 
every  violence  done  to  the  feelings,  or  the  welfare  of  others,  shall  be  perfectly 
remembered,  and  in  this  very  way  memory  shall  have  its  revenge.  So  that  a  dying 
murdered  man,  if  he  wished  for  eternal  vengeance  on  his  murderer,  wished  to  make 


2G2  '  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tvu 

it  secure  beyond  escape  and  for  ever,  and  had  the  command  over  the  mind  of  tha 
assassin  to  write  there  whatever  he  pleased  through  eternity,  need  only  say  that 
one  word,  "  remember."  And  every  poor,  oppressed  bondman,  and  every  individual 
helplessly  borne  down  by  a  man  greedy  of  gain,  ar-d  every  creature,  indeed,  unjustly 
treated  in  any  way,  need  only  say,  "  remember."  For  this  law  of  association  makes 
such  remembrance  eternally  perfect.  And  this  law,  though  it  be  less  active  and 
apparently  less  perfect  now  in  some  persons  than  in  others,  and  sometimes  exceed- 
ingly deficient,  yet  is  perfect  and  universal  in  the  very  structure  of  our  being ;  and 
when  the  peculiar  causes  that  now  binder  its  perfect  operation  in  some  miuds  shall 
be  removed,  will  bring  everything  together.  We  often  look  with  surprise  in  this 
world  at  some  men's  carelessness  in  regard  to  sin,  at  the  hardness  of  their  con- 
science, at  the  utter  absence  of  conviction.  It  is  principally  because  this  law  of 
association  is  not  now  in  active  operation  in  regard  to  the  past.  And  hence  a  man 
sometimes  thinks  he  has  escaped  from  his  past  sins,  or  that  the  remembrance  of 
them,  if  it  comes,  will  not  be  so  severe  and  terrible,  the  consciousness  of  them  not 
60  fresh,  so  lively,  so  powerful.  But  it  will.  And,  moreover,  there  are  things  on 
which,  at  the  time,  he  dwelt  but  for  a  moment,  flashes  of  thought  and  feeling,  gone 
as  soon  as  experienced,  and  movements  of  the  soul  covered  and  put  out  of  view  by 
other  successive  movements,  on  which  he  is  to  dweU,  and  which  he  is  to  experience 
again,  at  leisure.  Flashes  of  thought,  feeling,  judgment,  that  passed  at  the  time 
like  lightning,  although  with  a  voice  as  of  God's  thunder  ;  he  is  to  see  them  again 
and  deliberately ;  he  is  to  hear  the  peal  again,  and  dwell  upon  it ;  he  is  to  listen  to 
the  voice  of  conscience  again,  and  dwell  upon  it.  And  he  is  to  do  this  with  larger 
associations  still,  a  more  comprehensive  circle  of  associated  considerations,  than  he 
then  deemed  himself  encompassed  by.  His  connections  with  the  universe,  his 
place  under  God's  government,  his  attitude  in  regard  to  God's  law,  his  place  under 
the  atonement,  his  relation  to  Jesus  Christ,  all  his  relations  as  a  spiritual  being,  are 
to  be  dwelt  upon.  How  the  law  of  God,  and  the  character  of  God,  and  the  weight 
of  his  own  infinite  obligations  to  God  were  connected  with  his  own  sins,  with  every 
one  of  them,  he  did  not  care  to  consider,  when  he  committed  them.  What  light 
they  threw  upon  them,  how  much  more  aggravated  they  made  them  than  they  were 
when  considered  merely  with  reference  to  society  or  to  one's  self,  he  had  not  time, 
in  the  whirl  of  sin,  to  think  of.  What  they  were  in  the  light  of  the  cross  of  Christ, 
in  reference  to  the  suSering  of  Christ,  in  reference  to  the  scheme  of  redemption, 
their  associations  with  this  scheme,  and  the  condemnation  they  draw  for  ever  from 
it,  he  had  neither  time  nor  inclination  to  examine.  He  would  not  have  had 
inclination,  if  he  had  had  time  ;  and  this  was  a  part  of  the  operation  of  the  law  o£ 
association,  from  which,  above  all  else,  if  he  had  seen  it,  he  would  have  desired  to 
be  released.  But  he  will  have  plenty  of  time  for  its  consideration.  And  the  law  of 
association  in  his  mind  \rill  carry  him,  in  all  these  directions,  into  an  infinitude  of 
conviction  and  remorse.  In  the  direction  toward  God,  as  well  as  toward  men, 
toward  Christ  as  well  as  toward  God,  toward  the  law  and  the  gospel,  the  associated 
relations,  consequences,  and  condemnation  of  his  sins  will  be  boundless  and  eternal. 
This  is  the  structure  of  our  being.  What  subject,  exclaimed  Mr.  Burke,  on  one 
occasion,  does  not  branch  out  into  infinity  7  This  is  especially  the  case  with  the 
moral  relation  of  our  being.  We  are  fearfuUy  and  wonderfully  made.  How  single 
circumstances  connect  worlds  of  dreadful  meaning,  we  sometimes  see  developed  in 
a  striking  manner.  A  man's  sins  in  this  world  are  often  like  old  forgotten,  buried, 
coins.  They  have  grown  rusty  and  illegible.  They  are  laid  away  in  the  mind  like 
the  lumber  in  the  shop  of  an  antiquary.  But  tbey  all  have  an  image  and  super- 
scription. They  have  dates  and  hieroglyphics,  full  of  meaning.  And  there  is  a 
process  by  which  they  may  be  restored.  The  rust  can  be  rubbed  from  the  surface, 
and  by  fire,  if  no  way  else,  the  letters  can  again  be  read.  So  it  is  with  men's  for- 
gotten sins.  They  are  to  have  a  resurrection.  Some  of  them  shall  rise  even  with 
the  body,  shall  pass  from  this  earthly  body  into  that  spiritual  body,  which  is  to 
spring  from  it.  For  as  the  body  that  is  laid  in  the  grave  is  to  be  in  some  sense  the 
germ  of  that  body  which  is  to  be  raised,  so  the  character  of  the  body  which  is  to  be 
raised  shall  be  determined  by  the  character  of  the  body  which  is  interred.  He 
that  soweth  to  his  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption.  Sin  is  the  seed,  sin  and 
death  shall  be  the  harvest.  Neither  can  the  sins,  which  are  not  written  in  a  man's 
constitution,  be  forgotten,  any  more  than  those  which,  in  their  consequences  in  hia 
spiritual  body,  are  to  rise  with  him  in  the  resurrection.  All  shall  come  to  light. 
The  image  and  superscription  shall  be  visible.  The  consideration  of  this  law  of 
our  nature  suggests   some  solemn  admonitions,  not  only   with  reference  to  th& 


ST.  LUKE.  28a 


inevitable  memory  and  production  of  &11  our  past  experience  at  the  judgment,  but 
•with  reference  to  the  character  we  are  forming  now.  What  are  our  habits  of 
asBociation  ?  Do  they  bind  us  to  God  and  salvation  ?  Are  we  linked  by  them  to 
the  cross  and  the  Saviour  ?  We  have  the  power  to  connect  ourselves  everlastingly 
with  the  elements  of  heaven  or  hell.  A  man  may  surround  his  soul  with  the 
scenery  of  either  world,  may  Uve  with  fiends  or  angels  beforehand.  With  what 
thoughts  does  he  keep  company  ?  What  are  the  habitual  trains  of  association  in 
his  ideas  and  feehngs  ?  They  bind  him  to  themselves,  whatever  be  their  nature, 
every  day,  month,  year,  more  closely,  more  unalterably,  more  indissolubly.  If  they 
are  evil — and  they  are  evil — if  God  be  excluded  from  them,  then  they  grow  stronger 
and  stronger,  till  a  man  is  taken  in  his  own  iniquity,  and  holden  with  the  cords  of 
his  sin.  And  at  length  it  were  as  easy  to  change  the  very  laws  of  nature  as  to 
change  the  current  of  association,  which  has  become  indissoluble  habit.  Of  what 
infinite  importance  is  it  that  the  train  of  a  man's  habitual  associations  be  elevated 
and  holy  1  Let  him  remember  that  his  daily  habits  of  association  are  his  education 
for  eternity.  They  may  grow  up  and  steal  upon  him  as  imperceptibly  in  progress 
aa  the  green  blade  steals  from  the  ground  and  passes  into  the  ripe  full  com  in  the 
Bar,  ready  for  the  harvesting.  But  their  daily  tenor  is  developing  and  fixing  hia 
.character  for  eternity.  Therefore,  with  what  tender  care  and  mercy  does  God 
surround  us  with  truths,  providences,  and  infiuences,  to  win  us  to  Himself,  to  gain 
lor  His  love  and  grace  the  ruling  place  in  our  affections.  (G.  B.  Gheever,  D.D. ) 
The  potoer  of  memory  : — The  completeness  of  passive  memory  to  receive  and  retain 
sverything  that  comes  in  contact  with  the  mind,  even  though  it  enter  consciousness 
as  faint  as  a  ray  of  hght  from  a  star  so  remote  that  it  twinkles  one  second  and 
fades  the  next,  is  one  of  the  interesting — shall  I  say  startling  ? — discoveries  of 
mental  science.  And  the  proof  of  this,  though  indirect,  amounts  to  a  demon- 
stration. 1.  A  first  fact  is  the  wonderful  power  of  recollection  which  some  men 
are  known  to  possess.  Sir  Walter  Scott  repeated  a  song  of  eighty-eight  verses  which 
he  had  never  heard  but  once,  and  that,  too,  three  years  before.  Woodfall,  tho 
stenographer,  could  report  entire  debates  a  week  after  they  had  been  delivered  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  and  this  without  any  help  from  writing.  But  instances 
like  these  need  not  be  multiplied.  In  old  age  the  scenes  of  childhood  and  youth 
reappear  vnth  startling  clearness,  and  ofttimes  the  sins  of  youth  are  recalled  b.v  a 
terrified  conscience.  2.  A  second  fact  is  seen  in  the  flood  of  memories  which  sudden 
danger  brings  to  consciousness — the  chief  events  of  life,  and,  among  these,  things 
entirely  forgotten.  This  is  the  experience  of  persons  rescued  from  drowning  or  violent 
death.  Admiral  Beaufort  states  that  during  the  moments  of  submergence  every 
incident  of  his  life  seemed  to  glance  across  his  recollection,  not  in  mere  outline, 
but  the  whole  picture  filled  up  with  every  minute  and  collateral  feature.  (L.  O. 
Thompson.)  The  boon  of  forgetfulness  : — Great  sinners  have  even  prayed  for 
madness  as  a  blessing,  because  they  knew  that  memory  would  perish  with  the 
mind,  of  which  it  ia  a  part.  But  nature  was  ever  saying  to  them,  "  Son, 
remember."  The  intoxicating  oap  owes  not  a  little  of  its  fascination  to  its  power 
of  drowning  hatefol  memories.    Lord  Byron  says — 

**I  plunged  amid  mankind.    Forgetfulness 
I  sought  in  aU,  save  where  'tis  to  be  found. 
And  that  I  have  to  learn." 

"  Oh,  give  me  the  art  of  oblivion,"  cried  Themistocles.  A  man  once  offered  to 
teach  a  philosopher  the  art  of  memory  for  five  talents.  "  I  will  give  you  ten  talents," 
was  the  reply,  "  if  you  will  teach  me  the  art  of  forgetting."  Very  touching  is  the 
old-world  fable  that  between  earth  and  the  happy  plains  of  Elysium — the  classical 
heaven— the  river  Lethe  flows,  and  that  whoever  tastes  its  waters  forgets  all  hia 
past.  The  heathens  knew  that  there  could  be  no  happiness  hereafter  unless  some- 
how memory  let  go  its  hold  of  past  sins.  Gentle  sleep  owes  its  healing  power  to 
this,  that  it  helps  us  to  forget.  Oh,  to  bury  our  dead  past  as  men  bury  their  dead 
out  of  their  sight ;  for  one  sin  vividly  remembered  has  sometimes  power  to  make 
the  whole  life  bitter.  "Forgetfulness,"  it  has  been  said,  "  is  the  daughter  of  time," 
but  our  parable  shows  that  she  is  not  always  the  daughter  of  eternity,  as  forgetting 
is  impossible  to  the  impardoned.  {J.  Wells.)  You  can't  rub  it  out  I — *'  Don't 
write  there,"  said  a  little  newspaper  boy  to  a  dandified  youth,  whom  in  the  waiting* 
room  of  a  railway  station  he  saw  about  to  scratch  something  with  hia  diamond  riiM 
on  a  mirror  that  was  hanging  on  the  walL    "  Don't  write  there  I "    **  Why  not  t  * 


264  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOh  [chap.  ivi» 

' '  Because  you  can't  rub  it  out !  "  So  would  I  have  you,  my  anconverted  hearer, 
to  be  careful  what  you  write,  in  your  words  and  actions,  on  the  tablets  of  your 
memory.  You  can't  rub  it  out !  and  as  you  think  of  that  surely  you  will  agree 
with  me  that  "  the  time  past  of  your  lives  may  suffice  to  have  wrought  the  will  of 
the  Gentiles."  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Power  of  memory  : — It  is  the  teaching  of 
modern  science  that  no  force  is  lost  in  the  universe.  It  may  be  changed  into  other 
forces,  but  its  equivalent  is  perpetuated.  Heat  becomes  motion,  and  motion  stopped 
becomes  heat.  Hence  any  change  in  the  universe  must  affect  every  part  of  the 
universe.  The  jar  of  the  present  moment  shakes  the  world,  and,  Proctor  says,  all 
worlds.  By  your  voice  you  set  in  motion  currents  of  air  which  meet  on  the  other 
side  of  the  globe.  No  man  can  speak  blasphemy  or  foulness  even  in  privacy 
without  having  the  whole  universe  for  an  audience.  We  are  moved  upon  by 
physical  influences,  born  ages  ago,  in  the  remotest  domain  of  space.  In  like 
manner  the  forces  which  originate  in  this  world  affect  all  worlds.  Nothing  is  lost 
in  the  hard  domain  of  matter.  Is  it  likely  that  anything  is  lost  in  the  sensitive 
realm  of  mind  ?  Let  us  not  think  that  the  mental  history  of  our  life  is  to  be  lost. 
Great  libraries  have  been  lost  and  scholars  have  wept,  but  the  book  of  the  human 
eoul  has  not  yet  been  destroyed,  and  all  its  obscure  passages  will  yet  be  illumined. 
All  that  is  needed  is  a  sensation  strong  enough  to  bring  the  past  to  life.  The 
judgment  bar  of  Christ  will  make  us  remember.  What  a  terrible  retribution  would 
be  the  giving  of  a  lost  soul  to  the  contemplation  of  himself  1  With  what  anguish 
would  he  look  on  his  own  vanquished  years!  "Sad  memory  weaves  no  veil  to  hide 
the  past."  Hour  after  hour,  year  after  year,  the  past  Ufe  is  unfolded,  and  in  the 
midst  of  that  past  he  beholds  the  form  of  Jesus  and  seems  to  hear  His  words  of 
sorrow  and  of  doom : — "  Ail  thy  life  long  have  I  stretched  forth  My  hands  to  thee, 
and  thou  wouldest  not."  A  great  gulf. — The  bridgeless  gulf: — I.  In  trying 

solemnly  to  tpeak  upon  this  flatter,  I  shall  commence  with  this — tbebb  is  ko 
PASSAGE  FEOM  HEAVEN  TO  HKLL — "  They  which  would  pass  from  hence  to  you, 
cannot."  Glorified  saints  cannot  visit  the  prison-house  of  lost  sinners.  They  did 
both  grow  together  until  the  time  of  the  harvest ;  it  is  not  necessary,  now  that 
harvest  has  come,  that  they  should  lie  together  any  longer.  It  were  inconsistent 
with  the  perfect  joy  and  the  beatific  state  of  the  righteous,  with  its  perfect  calm 
and  purity,  that  sin  should  be  admitted  into  their  midst,  or  that  they  should  be 
permitted  to  find  companionships  in  the  abodes  of  evil.  Those  who  are  nearest 
and  dearest  must  be  divided  from  you,  if  you  perish  in  your  sins.  II.  As  we 
cannot  go  from  heaven  to  hell,  so  the  text  assures  us,  "  Neitheb  can  they  comb 
TO  us  THAT  WOULD  COME  FBOM  THENCE."  The  siuuer  canuot  come  to  heaven  for  a 
multitude  of  reasons.  Among  the  rest,  these  :  1.  First,  his  own  character  forbids 
it.  2.  Moreover,  not  only  does  the  man's  character  shut  him  out,  but  also  the 
sinner's  doom.  What  was  it?  "These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment." 
If  it  is  everlasting,  how  can  they  enter  heaven  ?  3.  Moreover,  sinner,  thou  canst 
not  go  out  of  the  prison-house  because  God's  character  and  God's  word  are  against 
thee.  Shall  God  ever  cease  to  be  just  ?  III.  But  now,  once  again  to  change  the 
subject  for  a  few  minutes,  I  have  to  notice  in  the  third  place,  that  while  no  persons 
can  pass  that  bridgeless  chasm,  so  no  things  can.  Nothing  can  come  from  hell  to 
heaven.  Rejoice  ye  saints  in  light,  triumph  in  your  God  for  this — no  temptation 
of  Satan  can  ever  vex  you  when  once  you  are  landed  on  the  golden  strand ;  yon  are 
beyond  bowshot  of  the  arch-enemy  ;  he  may  howl  and  bite  his  iron  hands,  but  bis 
bowlings  cannot  terrify  and  his  bitings  cannot  disturb.  IV.  Again,  we  change  the 
strain  for  a  fourth  point,  and  this  a  terrible  one.  As  nothing  can  come  from  hell 
to  heaven,  so  nothing  heavenly  can  ever  come  to  hell.  There  are  rivers  of  life  at 
God's  right  hand — those  streams  can  never  leap  in  blessed  cataracts  to  the  lost.  Not 
a  drop  of  heavenly  water  can  ever  cross  that  chasm.  1.  See  then,  sinner,  heaven 
is  rest,  perfect  rest — but  there  is  no  rest  in  hell ;  unceasing  tempest.  2.  Heaven, 
too,  is  a  place  of  joy ;  there  happy  fingers  sweep  celesti^  chords ;  there  joyous 
spirits  sing  hosannahs  day  without  night ;  but  there  is  no  joy  in  hell.  3.  Heaven 
is  the  place  of  sweet  communion  with  God.  4.  There  is  no  communion  with  God 
in  hell.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  impassable  gulf:~TheTe  is  in  a  forest  in 
Germany  a  place  they  call  the  "deer-leap,"  two  crags  about  eighteen  yards  apart, 
between  them  a  fearful  chasm.  This  is  called  the  "  deer- leap,"  because  once  a 
hunter  was  on  the  track  of  a  deer ;  it  came  to  one  of  these  crags ;  there  was  no 
escape  for  it  from  the  pursuit  of  the  hunter,  and  in  utter  despair  it  gathered  itself 
op,  and  in  the  death  agony  attempted  to  jump  across.  Of  course  it  fell,  and  wat 
dashed  on  the  rocks  far  beneath.    Here  is  a  path  to  heaven.    It  is  plain,  it  is  safe. 


CSAP.  XVI.1  8T.  LUKE.  28t 

Jesns  marks  it  oat  for  every  man  to  walk  in.  Bat  here  is  a  man  who  says,  '*  I 
won't  walk  in  that  path ;  I  will  take  my  own  way."  He  comes  on  until  he  confronts 
the  chasm  that  divides  his  soal  from  heaven.  Now  bis  last  hoar  has  oome,  and 
he  resolves  that  he  will  leap  that  chasm,  from  the  heights  of  earth  to  the  heights  of 
heaven.  Stand  back,  now,  and  give  him  full  swing,  for  no  soal  ever  did  that 
Buccessfully.  Let  him  try.  Jump !  Jump !  He  misses  the  mark,  and  he  goes 
down,  depth  below  depth,  "  destroyed  without  remedy."  Men  1  angels  1  devils  t 
what  shall  we  call  that  place  of  awful  catastrophe  ?  Let  it  be  known  for  ever  as  "  the 
sinner's  death-leap."  [De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  state  of  the  »oul  after  death : — 
I.  Dying  does  not  suspend  consciousness.  The  Bible  knows  nothing  of  "  dormant 
soals."  Death  takes  down  the  scaffolding,  but  not  the  edifice.  II.  Dtino  does 
NOT  EFFACE  BEMEMBBANCE  OF  THE  LiviNO.  Thought  spccds  back  to  earth  and 
earthly  friends.  Those  on  earth  may  forget  the  spirit  world,  but  those  in  that 
world  forget  not  earth.  III.  Dtino  does  not  ohanob  chabacteb.  A  physical 
change  cannot  affect  moral  quality.  IV.  Dying  bbinos  condition  and  chaeacteb 
into  accobd.  These  two  men,  whose  outward  condition  was  so  anlike,  were  equally 
different  in  character.  When  death  came,  each  went  to  his  own  place,  one  to  be 
«' comforted,"  because  the  germinant  seeds  of  peace  and  love  were  in  his  own 
heart ;  the  other  to  be  "  tormented,"  because  the  devouring  flames  of  unbelief  and 
selfishness  were  in  his  own  bosom.  V.  Dying  kendees  the  condition  bbsultino 
FBOM  CHABACTEB  PERMANENT.  Man  may  hope  that  although  he  die  impenitent,  he 
will  in  the  future  life  find  some  path  to  heaven.  But  the  Bible  points  to  none. 
The  rich  man  had  new  light,  but  it  did  not  make  him  penitent.  It  did  not  humble 
him  for  his  8in.  It  did  not  banish  his  unbelief.  It  did  not  expel  his  selfishness. 
It  did  not  fill  his  heart  with  love.  It  helped  him  to  see,  what  perhaps  he  had 
before  disbelieved,  that  life  on  earth  is  the  only  time  to  prepare  for  life  beyond  the 
grave.  The  only  way  to  heaven  is  by  coming  into  harmony  with  God.  {P.B.Davis.) 
The  great  gulf: — The  gulf  is  not  one  of  space  or  locality,  but  must  be  sought  in 
the  souls  of  individuals.  It  is  not  of  place,  but  of  being.  It  existed  before  the 
rich  man  and  Lazarus  died.  Death  did  not  create  it.  As  in  life,  so  in  death,  there' 
can  be  no  passing  over  it.  Between  the  spiritually-minded  man  and  the  carnally- 
minded  man  a  gulf  is  fixed.  One  cannot  be  as  the  other :  nothing  is  so  impossible. 
Between  the  pure  wife  and  mother  and  the  harlot  that  walks  the  streets  a  great  gulf 
is  fixed.  The  gulf  cannot  be  passed — one  cannot  go  to  the  other.  You  say, 
"  Cannot  the  pure  woman  fall  ?  "  She  cannot  fall,  and  remain  what  she  is.  To 
fall  would  not  be  to  cross  the  chasm ;  to  fall  would  be  filling  it  up ;  no  gulf  would 
any  longer  exist ;  she  would  have  become  even  as  the  other.  But  look  at  it  in  this 
way — each  remaining  what  she  is,  could  either  transfer  to  the  other  her  personal 
qualities  ?  Could  the  one  on  the  blissful  side  convey  one  drop  of  purity  or  joy  of 
womanhood  to  the  other  poor  wretch  in  her  flame  of  torment?  Would  not  she 
have  to  refuse  for  herself,  and  for  all  her  sisters,  a  drop  of  water  for  the  cooling  of 
her  blistered  tongue  ?  No,  there  can  be  no  crossing ;  only  a  filling  up.  And, 
if  I  were  disposed  to  use  this  parable  on  either  side  of  the  controversy  in 
reference  to  the  future,  I  should  say,  in  the  case  of  the  rich  man,  that  process 
had  already  begun.  But  I  do  not  think  it  legitimate  to  ase  it  on  either  one 
side  or  the  other.  The  gulf  does  not  symboUze  fixedness  of  destiny;  but  the 
dividing  lines  of  good  and  evil  character,  and  consequent  misery  and  bliss.  No 
man  can  live  in  sin  and  selfishness,  and  reap  ultimate  advantage.  A  process 
is  going  on  in  him  as  he  thus  lives,  which  separates  him  in  ever  greater 
distance  from  the  possibilities  of  spiritual  peace  and  bliss.  {W.  Hubbard.) 
If  one  went  unto  them  from  the  dead. — Lazarus  and  his  message : — 1.  There  is 
something  common  to  this  life  and  that  to  come.  Heaven  will  give  as  the  full 
gratifying  banquet ;  but  here  we  have,  as  it  were,  the  crumbs  of  the  heavenly  table, 
not  tossed  to  us  disdainfully,  but  furnished  to  as  compassionately  that  we  may  not 
perish  whilst  we  are  waiting  for  the  hour  when  all  our  holy  appetites  shall  be 
satisfied  to  the  full.  2.  Now  concerning  our  estimation  of  the  relative  worth  of 
this  life  and  the  life  beyond.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole 
world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  " — says  Christ.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine 
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father  " — says  Christ.  Evidently,  then, 
oar  Lord,  whilst  He  had  the  warmest  sympathies,  the  truest  natural  affections,  and 
the  keenest  eye  for  whatever  gleamed  forth  of  interest  in  human  affairs— loving  the 
earth,  though  not  "  earthly  " — evidently  our  Lord  makes  the  preponderant  motive 
of  life  here,  the  expectation  of  complete  and  satisfying  life  hereafter.  8.  Now 
eonceming  the  law  on  which  the  decision  turns  as  to  where  we  shall  be  placed  in  ft 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  m, 

world  to  come.  In  Christ's  last  public  parable,  the  test  of  the  jndgment  is  Love. 
The  Gentile  nations  are  brought  before  Him ;  the  sheep — those  who  are  ready  fof 
the  green  pastures  of  the  ancient  but  ever  fresh  kingdom — why  are  they  ready  ? 
Because  they  did  whatsoever  good  their  hand  found  to  do.  If  anybody  wanted 
help  and  needed  pity,  they  brought  help  and  did  not  spare  their  pity ;  but  the  goats 
were  those  who  might  have  given  help,  but  gave  none ;  who  might  have  given  pity, 
but  had  none  to  give.  They  had  no  tears  ready  ;  and  they  rather  avoided  a  prison 
if  they  had  friends  in  it ;  for  who  wants  to  have  to  do  with  friends  whose  fortunes 
have  fallen?  Now  how  very  simple  all  these  tests  are,  but  very  searching;  but  they 
are  all  comprised  and  infolded  in  this  one  word  "  love. "  Hadst  thou  any  real  love  ? 
What  other  test  could  there  be  than  this  ?  4.  Concerning  then  the  changes  and 
stages  of  the  world  to  come.  Did  our  Lord  say  anything  about  a  man  getting  a  bad 
place  in  the  next  world,  and  afterwards  being  better  off  ?  No.  Did  He  say  anything 
to  make  persons  comfortable  in  the  supposition  that  there  was  such  a  Divine  mercy ; 
that  if  they  lived  as  they  would,  carelessly  here,  nevertheless  the  smart  might  not  be 
60  very  keen  hereafter  ?  Was  it  likely  that  our  wise  Lord  would  encourage  us  in  the 
too  common  spirit  of  postponement?  Was  it  likely  that  our  Lord,  who  was  intent 
upon  the  best,  would  allow  people  foolishly  to  congratulate  themselves  that  they 
might  aim  at  something  very  far  below  the  best,  and  that  at  least  they  would  be 
Eure  to  escape  the  worst  ?  The  only  security  is  this — faith  in  the  heart,  that  life  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  purifies  this  world  and  every  other :  the  one  life  by 
which  a  man  may  be  in  heaven  whilst  on  earth ;  the  one  life  by  which  the  very 
lowest  who  sit  even  upon  the  dunghill,  dependent  upon  the  crumbs,  and  often 
weeping  over  their  own  sorrows,  may  have  communion  with  God's  holy,  exalted 
angels  who  soar  in  His  presence,  or  rest  at  His  feet,  and  who  neither  shed  tears 
nor  suffer  pain.     (T.   T.  Lynch.)        The  sufficiency  of  the  Divine  revelation : — 

J.  ThEBE  IB  A  BEVELATION  GIVEN  TO  MAN,  TO  GUIDE  HIU  TO  HAPPINESS.  U.  TbS 
BEVELATION  WHICH  IS  GIVEN  TO  MAN  IS  SUFFICIENT  FOB  HIS  SALVATION.  IIL  II"  THE 
GIVEN  BEVELATION  IS  NEGLECTED,  AN  EXTBAOBDINABY  INTERPOSITION  IS  NOT  TO  BB 
EXPECTED.       IV.     The   neglect   AND   CONTEMPT  OP  THE   EEVEALBD   WOBO   WILL  PBOVE 

THE  INEVITABLE  BUIN  OP  THE  UNGODLY.  (The  Preochcrs'  Treasury.)  The  moral 
tffect  of  a  visit  from  the  dead  : — The  folly  of  demanding  that  one  should  visit  us 
from  the  dead,  for  the  double  purpose  of  proving  the  future  state  and  preparing  us 
for  it,  will  appear  if  you  will  look  thoughtfully — 1.  At  the  sort  of  witness  and 
testimony  demanded.  As  to  the  witness,  it  is  for  "  one  from  the  dead,"  and  his 
proposed  duty  is  to  "  testify  "  to  the  living.  Not  an  angel ;  but  a  dead  man.  And 
he  is  to  come  back  to  earth  not  to  work  prodigies,  but  to  bear  witness.  If  such  a 
spirit  were  seized  with  either  a  voluntary  or  involuntary  impulse  to  return  to  his 
earthly  theatre  of  action  and  begin  life  afresh,  in  what  way  would  such  a  wanderer 
make  himself  known  to  your  senses  ?  Can  you  tell  ?  Now  the  first  thing  necessary 
to  your  satisfaction  would  be  to  recognize  him  as  a  human  soul,  fresh  from  the  fields 
of  immortality.  If  there  should  be  more  than  one,  you  must  know  all  of  them  to 
be  veritable  witnesses  in  order  to  beheve  them,  and  how  will  you  settle  this  in  each 
case  ?  In  this  world  a  witness,  oral  or  by  parole,  is  always  recognized  through  his 
body.  But  the  body  which  this  spirit  wore  on  earth  lies  unstirred  in  the  sepulchre. 
The  general  character  of  human  spirits,  and  the  possession  of  specific  secrets  for 
their  identification,  are  very  insecure  signs,  on  which  we  can  place  but  slight 
dependence.  And  does  it  mend  the  matter  at  all,  even  if  his  body  should  be  raised 
for  this  visit  ?  Here  you  see  that  the  men  who  reject  the  evidence  of  miracle  in  all 
ether  cases  insist  upon  the  working  of  the  most  stupendous  miracle  possible,  before 
they  will  believe  one  word  in  this  case.  Supposing,  then,  that  God  had  granted  the 
request  of  Dives  by  sending  Lazarus  back  to  the  "  five  brethren,"  and  they  had 
recognized  him,  how  would  his  visit  have  acted  upon  their  minds  morally  if  they 
were  men  of  thought,  reason,  and  common  sense  ?  Let  us  see.  Eight  there  the 
thrilling  spectacle  of  spectral  testimony  begins.  Their  very  first  thought  would 
relate  to  the  reality  of  the  witness  himself ;  whether  he  were  an  entity  or  a  phantasm. 
They  wonld  demand  of  him  the  proof  that  he  had  really  lived  and  died,  and  visited 
the  shaded  provinces  of  departed  souls,  that  he  had  become  known  to  their  brother 
there,  and  returned  to  this  globe  in  a  provable  identity.  They  would  then  demand 
proof  that,  as  a  witness,  his  own  mind  was  not  influenced  by  optical  illusion, 
spectral  disease;  that  it  was  solid,  sound,  and  well  balanced,  and  so  that  his 
narrative  was  not  the  fruit  of  an  excited  fancy.  Nay,  they  would  need  to  convince 
themselves  that  their  own  brains  did  not  reel  before  him  in  delusion.  When  all 
this  should  be  settled,  then  the  real  diffioultiei  of  the  apparition  witness  would  bat 


CBip,  XVI.]  8T.  LUKE.  267 

just  begin,  if  he  were  not  scoated  »nd  ridiculed  nntil  he  were  ready  to  abandon  hia 
own  convictions  and  discredit  his  own  story.  The  very  attempt  to  express  the  first 
sentence  would  confound  him,  because  it  would  discover  to  him  a  set  of  ethereal 
conceptions  taken  up  into  his  own  incorporeal  existence,  with  which  earth  had  no 
analogies,  and  therefore  has  no  words  nor  methods  by  which  they  can  be  intelligibly 
stated  or  understood.  2.  Testimony  so  given,  and  by  such  a  deponent,  would  be 
totally  inadequate  to  its  alleged  purpose,  both  in  its  nature  and  effects.  How  can 
the  eye  of  the  body  fixed  upon  a  corporal  being  convince  the  understanding  about 
the  invisible  things  of  the  eternal  world  ?  These  are  things  of  faith,  not  of  sight, 
like  so  many  colours  of  the  rainbow.  K  the  risen  Christ  is  no  proof  to  the  senses, 
much  less  can  one  like  ourselves  from  the  dead  be  a  convincing  witness  to  warn  us. 
It  is  much  more  likely  that  we  should  want  to  kill  him  than  to  be  **  persuaded  " 
by  him  ;  just  as  the  Jews  callously  wanted  to  kill  Lazarus  of  Bethany  when  Jesus 
had  raised  him  from  the  dead.  I  can  easily  tmderstand  how  the  presence  of  a  man 
raised  from  the  dead  might  terrify  a  guilty  sinner ;  how  the  apparition  might  put 
him  under  an  appalling  spell,  so  that  his  heart  fluttered ;  a  prisoner  under  the 
charms  of  magic  ;  but  I  cannot  see  how  the  bondage  of  evil  habits  could  be  broken, 
or  the  deceptive  charms  of  sin  dissolved  by  such  a  startling  apparition.  Even  the 
pure  presence  of  an  angel  stooping  to  an  earthly  mission  has  been  so  terrific  to 
holy  men,  that  they  have  feared  death  in  consequence.  But  how,  if  a  ghastly 
spectre  should  glare  upon  guilty  and  hardened  men  from  the  solitudes  of  eternity, 
and  address  them  in  sepulchral  tones ;  surely  their  blood  would  curdle,  their  nerves 
shrink,  their  hearts  faint,  and  their  life  become  ice.  How  can  all  this  be  related  to 
genuine  repentance?  (T.  Armitage,  D.D.)  The  claims  of  revealed  truth: — 
I.   There   exists  a  revelation   from   God,   designed   fob    ihb    guidance   and 

SALVATION  OF  MAN.  II.  ThIS  REVELATION  IS  FULLY  QCALIEIED  TO  ACCOMPLISH  THE 
PURPOSES  FOB  WHICH  IT  WAS  GIVEN.  IH.  On  THE  REJECTION  OP  REVELATION,  IT  IS 
NOT   TO  RE   EXPECTED   THAT  ANT    SUPERNATURAL  VISITATIONS  WOULD   PRODUCE  A  SAVINQ 

IMPRESSION  OH  THE  HEART.  1.  The  cause  which  produces  the  rejection  of  the 
message  of  God  in  His  written  Word,  will  operate  also  against  the  message  which 
might  be  taught  by  supernatural  agency.  2.  It  is  equally  easy  to  explain  away  a 
supernatural  visitation,  as  it  is  to  explain  away  the  evidence  of  revelation.  3.  The 
inefficiency  of  supernatural  visitations  has  been  shown  by  experience.  4.  It  is  the 
positive  arrangement  of  God,  that  His  word,  as  given  in  the  inspired  reeord,  and 
proclaimed  in  the  established  ordinances  of  grace,  shall  be  the  only  means  of 
persuasion  and  conversion ;  and  the  promise  of  the  Spirit's  influence  does  not 
extend  to  any  other  instrumentality.    IV.  The  rejection  op  Divine  revelation, 

IB    THE   CAUSE   OP  FUTURE   CONDEMNATION   AND    MISERY.       (J.  PaTBOTlS.)  The  Divine 

authority  and  sufficiency  of  the  Christian  religion: — I.    The  suFFiciENcy  o»  the 

STANDING    REVELATION    OP    God'S    WILL    IN    THE    SCEIPTURES,    TO    BEING    MEN  TO   BE- 

PENTENCB.  1.  The  Scriptures  give  us  sufficient  instructions  what  we  should  believe, 
or  are  a  sufficient  rule  of  faith.  2.  The  Scriptures  give  us  complete  directions  in 
matters  of  practice,  or  are  a  sufficient  rule  of  life.  3.  The  Scriptures  are  attended 
with  sufficient  evidence  of  their  truth  and  divinity.  4.  The  religion  of  Jesus 
proposes  sufficient  excitements  to  influence  our  faith  and  practice.    II.  The  vanity 

AND   UNREASONABLENESS   OF  THE   OBJECTION  AGAINST   THE   CHRISTIAN  RELIGION,  AND  OP 

DEMANDING  ANOTHEB.  {President  Davies.)  The  unreasonableness  of  unbelief: — 
I.  Consider  the  evidence  op  Divine  truth  presented  by  one  risen  prom  the 
DEAD.  1.  The  impressions  made  by  one  who  was  seen  to  rise  from  the  grave,  and 
gave  to  the  spectators  his  testimony  concerning  a  future  state,  would  undoubtedly 
be  great  and  solemn.  2.  The  evidence  which  would  attend  everything  said  by  such 
a  person  would  be  irresistible.  II.  Examine  the  evidence  op  Divine  truth 
furnished  by  the  Scriptures,  and  the  advantage  which  they  possess  fob  con- 
viNciNO  AND  persuading  THE  MIND.  In  this  examination — 1.  The  thing  that  meets 
ns  is,  that  the  Scriptures  were  written  by  God,  and  were  therefore  written  in  the 
best  manner  that  was  possible  to  accomplish  their  end.  The  things  which  are 
communicated  in  the  Scriptures  concerning  our  future  existence  are  in  their  nature 
the  most  solemn  and  impressive  which  can  be  conceived.  They  are  such  as  God 
thought  it  wisest  and  best  to  communicate,  and  are  therefore  certainly  the  wisest 
and  best  possible.  In  tiieir  own  nature  also,  and  as  they  appear  in  themselves 
to  our  eyes,  they  possess  an  immeasurable  solemnity  and  importance.  8.  Beside 
the  things  which  a  person  risen  from  the  dead  coold  unfold,  the  Scriptures  afford 
many  others  pre-eminently  important  and  affecting.  4.  All  these  things  come 
directly  from  God  Himself,  and  are  invested  with  His  authority.    5  The  Scriptures 


269  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrt. 

were  attested  by  miracles  very  numerons,  and  certainly  not  less  solemn  and  im- 
pressive than  the  resurrection  of  a  man  from  the  dead.  III.  Show  that  thb 
DOCTBiNE  JS  TRDE,  On  this  subject  I  observe — 1.  That  we  ourselves  do  not 
ordinarily  dispute  the  truth  of  the  scriptural  declarations,  nor  the  sufficiency  of  the 
evidence  by  which  they  are  supported ;  and  yet  are  in  very  few  instances  persuaded 
to  repent.  2.  Those  who  were  witnesses  of  these  very  miracles  generally  did  not 
repent.  3.  Among  all  the  persons  with  whom,  while  they  were  anxiously  solicitona 
about  their  salvation,  I  have  had  opportunity  to  converse,  I  do  not  remember  even 
one  who  ever  mentioned  his  own  indisposition  to  repent,  as  in  any  degree  derived 
from  the  want  of  evidence  to  support  the  truth  of  the  Scriptures.  Concluding 
remarks  :  1.  It  is  manifest  from  these  considerations  that  the  reason  why  mankind 
do  not  embrace  the  gospel  is  not  the  want  of  evidence.  2.  From  these  observa- 
tions, it  is  clear  that  no  evidence  will  persuade  a  sinful  heart.  (T.  Dwight,  D.D.) 
The  sufficiency  of  the  Divine  revelation : — I.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that 
God   should  do  mobb   fob  the   conviction   of  men,  than   to  affobd  them  a 

STANDING  BEVELATION  OF  HiS  MIND  AND  WILL ;   BDCH  AS  THAT  OF  THE  HoLT  SCRIPTUBES 

IS.  This  is  strongly  implied  in  Abraham's  first  answer,  "  They  have  Moses  and 
the  prophets,  let  them  hear  them  " ;  as  if  he  had  said — having  such  means  of 
conviction  80  near  at  hand,  why  should  they  desire  and  expect  any  other  ?  It  is  in 
this  case  of  the  Scriptures,  as  in  that  of  God's  providence ;  God  does  not  commonly 
prove  His  providence  to  men  by  extraordinary  instances  of  His  power,  and  by 
changing  the  course  of  nature,  to  convince  every  man  in  the  world  that  He  governs 
it ;  but  by  standing  testimonies  of  His  wisdom,  and  power,  and  goodness ;  by  these 
God  does  sufficiently  satisfy  considerate  men  of  His  government  and  care  of  the 
world.  The  case  is  the  same  as  to  Divine  revelation.  We  tempt  God  by  demand- 
ing extraordinary  signs,  when  we  may  receive  so  abundant  satisfaction  in  an  ordinary 
way.    II.  It  is,  upon  the  whole  mattes,  vebi  imfbobable  that  those  who  beject 

THIS   public    BSTELATION    OF   GoD,  SHOULD   BE   EFFECTUALLY   CONVINCED,  THOUQH   ONE 

SHOULD  SPEAK  TO  THEM  FBOM  THE  DEAD.  1.  Bccause,  If  such  miraoles  were  frequent 
and  familiar,  it  is  very  probable  they  would  have  but  very  little  effect ;  and  unless 
we  suppose  them  common  and  ordinary,  we  have  no  reason  to  expect  them  at  all 
2.  Men  have  as  great  or  greater  reason  to  believe  the  threatenings  of  God's  Word 
as  the  discourse  of  one  that  should  speak  to  them  from  the  dead.  3.  The  vety 
same  reason  which  makes  men  to  reject  the  counsels  of  God  in  His  Word,  would, 
in  all  probability,  hinder  them  from  being  convinced  by  a  particular  miracle.  4. 
Experience  does  abundantly  testify  how  ineffectual  extraordinary  ways  are  to  cor 
vince  those  who  are  obstinately  addicted  and  wedded  to  their  lusts.  6.  An  effectual 
persuasion  (that  is,  such  a  belief  as  produceth  repentance  and  a  good  life)  is  the 
gift  of  God,  and  depends  upon  the  operation  and  concurrence  of  God's  grace,  which 
there  is  no  reason  to  expect  either  in  an  extraordinary  way  or  in  an  extraordinary 
degree,  after  men  have  obstinately  rejected  the  ordinary  means  which  God  hath 
appointed  to  that  end.  Concluding  remarks :  1.  Since  the  Scriptures  are  the  public, 
and  standing  revelation  of  God's  will  to  men,  and  the  ordinary  means  of  salvation, 
we  may  hence  conclude  that  people  ought  to  have  them  in  such  a  language  as  they 
can  understand.  2.  Let  us  hear  and  obey  that  public  revelation  of  God's  will, 
which,  in  so  much  mercy  to  mankind,  He  hath  been  pleased  to  afford  to  us.  P 
Those  who  are  not  brought  to  repentance,  and  effectually  persuaded  by  this  clear 
and  public  revelation,  which  God  hath  made  of  His  will  to  men  in  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures, have  reason  to  look  upon  their  case  as  desperate.  {Archbishop  Tillotson.) 
The  sufficiency  of  Scripture : — I.  At  first  bioht  we  mioht  think  it  almost  impos- 

BIBLB  FOB  us  NOT  TO  OBEY  ONE  BISINS  UP  FBOM  THE  QBAVE,  AND  STANDING  BEFOBB  U9 
WITH  ALL  THE   SIGNS  AND   KYSTEBIES  OF  A  SPIRIT  COME   FBOM  THE   UNSEEN  WOBLD.        lu 

most  of  US  there  is  a  shrinking  fear  of  the  supernatural  as  well  as  of  wonderment, 
and  we  can  well  understand  the  terror  the  night-spectre  was  adapted  to  produce  in 
the  mind  of  Eliphaz,  the  friend  of  Job.  The  message  may  or  may  not  be  remem- 
bered, but,  in  either  case,  evil  does  its  work.  The  memory  of  the  vision  becomes 
fainter  and  fainter,  and  the  ring  of  the  message  dies  away  in  the  distance,  until  at 
last  it  is  heard  no  more,  thought  of  and  felt  no  more.  Besides,  what  is  simply 
heard  by  the  ear  is  apt  to  be  twisted  into  some  meaning  of  our  own  construction, 
and,  like  tradition  generally,  be  overloaded  with  strange  fables  and  unnatural 
descriptions.  Hence  we  learn  from  the  declaration  of  Abraham — II.  Ths  great 
TALUS  AND  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  SACRED  ScBiPTUBEB.  They  are  ever  before  us,  ever  sa 
plain  and  simple  that  "  a  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  need  not  err  therein."  To 
ai  we  have  not  only  the  testimony  of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  but  of  our  Lord  Him- 


«HAP.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  269 

fielf.  With  the  whole  of  Qod's  moral  revelation  before  as,  bearing  with  it  ths 
«videnoe  of  the  most  ancient  life,  combined  with  the  evidence  of  a  life  wherein 
ancient  and  modern  meet  in  harmony  and  truth,  what  need  we  more  ?  It  may  be 
said  to  as,  "  If  we  believe  not  Christ,  neither  will  we  believe  if  one  rose  from  the 
dead,"    IL  Why  is  this  ?  Why  did  Abraham  fokesee  thb  inutility  of  oiviNa  any 

ADDITIONAL  INFOBMATION   BEYOND  WHAT  IS  ALREADY   GIVEN  ?      Why,  if   the   Bible  fails, 

will  a  spirit  from  the  dead  fail  also  ?  The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  intensity 
and  deep-rooteduess  of  man's  selfishness.  Herein  is  the  problem  of  man's  rejection 
of  the  truth  of  God  solved — herein  is  the  mystery  of  oar  unbelief  and  hardness  of 
heart  explained.  It  was  selfishness  that  made  a  wreck  of  Dives.  He  lived  for  him- 
self, q,Dd  in  that  life  overlooked  the  claims  of  God  and  man ;  he  lived  for  "  the  good 
things  "  of  the  world,  and  closed  out  from  his  conceptions  and  practical  living  the 
"  good  things  "  of  God.  {W.  D.  Horwood.)  Do  we  need  a  new  revelation  ? — I. 
The  Divine  messaqe  of  the  Bible  is  sufficient  fob  its  pubpose.  1.  The  purposa 
of  revelation  is  moral  and  active.  2.  Jesus  Christ  believed  and  taught  the  sufii- 
«iency  of  revelation  for  this  purpose.  II.  No  supebnatubal  mabvel  will  accouplisb 
THIS  POBPOSB  MOBE  EFFICIENTLY.  1.  The  great  difi&culty  to  be  overcome  is  not 
intellectual,  but  moraL  2.  The  active  and  moral  purpose  of  revelation  cannot  be 
effected  by  any  external  supernatural  event.  (1)  Do  not  place  great  reliance  on  the 
bomiletical  effect  of  lurid  pictures  of  hell.  They  may  deaden  conscience  while  they 
rouse  fear.  Dante  is  not  sufficient  without  Moses  and  Christ.  (2)  Do  not  expect 
too  maoh  from  the  curative  effects  of  future  punishment.  (3)  Do  not  regret  tha 
loss  of  miracles.  Spiritualism  has  not  proved  itself  to  be  a  gospel  of  salvation  for 
character.  (4)  No  longer  wilfully  refuse  to  obey  the  truth,  which  is  able  to  make 
us  wise  unto  salvation.  (W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Impotent  desires  in  hell : — Is  there 
love  in  hell  ?  Do  the  spirits  of  the  lost  remember  still  those  whom  they  have  left 
behind  ?  And  can  they  feel  indeed  an  interest  about  their. spiritual  welfare  ?  Or, 
are  they  words  which  do  not  bear  upon  the  great  point  of  the  parable,  and  of  which« 
therefore,  we  are  not  to  look  for  any  parallel  in  the  things  of  life  ?  Or,  was  it  a 
mere  selfishness  still,  that  he  might  escape  his  brothers'  reproaches,  when  they 
flhonld  come  to  upbraid  him  for  his  bad  example,  that  Dives  said,  "  I  pray  thee 
therefore,  father,  that  thou  wouldest  send  him  to  my  father's  house :  for  I  have  five 
brethren,  that  he  may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  of 
torment."  I  incline  to  think  that  if  we  are  to  apply  the  words  to  ourselves  at  all, 
they  convey  to  ns  this  fact— that  in  that  wretched  world,  there  may  spring  up 
desires,  good  desires,  but  that  it  will  be  too  late.  For  ever  and  for  ever  tiiose 
desires  may  live,  but  never  to  be  gratified.  And  who  shall  say  what  an  amount  of 
torment  might  lie  in  an  eternity  of  impotent  and  unsatisfied  longings  ?  I  can  con- 
ceive of  nothing  more  horrible  than  to  have  continually  aspirations  after  something 
good,  yet  all  the  while  the  consciousness  that  that  good,  and  after  which  we  aspire, 
is  a  thing  utterly  and  eternally  impossible.  {J.  Vauglian,  M.A.)  The  request  of 
Dives  for  his  five  brethren: — I.  Now  it  is  admitted  by  this  lost  man  that  bepent- 
ANCE  is  necessaby.  1. 1  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  messenger  from  the  dead — 
that  is,  from  another  world — could  not  give  to  you  or  to  me,  or  to  any  one  else, 
information  more  distinct,  more  explicit,  more  comprehensive,  on  any  subject  that 
it  concerns  man  to  know  in  order  to  his  repentance  and  salvation,  than  the  sacred 
writings  have  already  furnished.  2.  Again,  such  a  messenger  could  not  aathenticat* 
his  mission  and  his  message  by  evidence  more  clear,  more  satisfactory,  more  con- 
vincing, than  that  by  which  the  Divine  authenticity  of  these  writings  are  sustained. 
3.  Besides,  that  disposition  of  heart,  which  prevents  your  repentance  under  the 
discoveries  and  the  motives  and  the  influences  of  revealed  truth,  would  render  you 
impeni  tent  still,  "  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  4..  Besides  these,  there  is 
another  consideration :  all  agents  and  instruments,  ordinary  or  extraordinaty,  can 
only  succeed  as  they  are  attended  by  the  Divine  blessing  and  influence.  5.  If,  how- 
ever, these  reasonings  fail  to  produce  conviction  in  any  mind  now  before  me,  then 
I  have  another  species  of  evidence  in  reserve — most  unbending ;  and  it  is  evidenca 
derived  from  fact.  The  request  has  been  granted  ;  the  thing  has  been  tried;  and 
it  has  utterly  failed.  U.  Now  what  abe  the  fbactical  conclusions  at  which  wa 
should  abbivb  fbom  this  subject  ?  1.  And  the  first  is — the  sufficiency  of  revealed 
truth  ;  so  that  if  persons  are  not  awakened  and  brought  to  repentance  and  conver- 
sion by  its  light  and  evidence  and  influence,  all  extraordinary  methods  and  agencies 
would  be  in  vain.  2.  Secondly,  on  the  admission  of  the  sutHciency  of  the  Divine 
revelation,  then  it  follows  that  it  is  as  unreasonable,  as  it  is  impious  and  ungrate- 
ful, to  desire  and  to  wish  for  more.    3.  Thirdly,  as  extraordinary  messengers  and 


270  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  xyv 

agents  would  be  useless,  I  infer  that  we  are  not  to  expect  them.  4.  Again :  I  draw 
another  conclusion — humbling,  admonitory,  and  it  is  this.  On  the  admission  that 
we  have  sufiBcient  means  of  instruction  and  of  repentance  and  of  salvation  fur- 
iiished,  then  how  inexcusable  the  folly  and  how  aggravated  the  guilt  of  those  who 
Btill  remain  impenitent !  5.  And  then  finally,  having  yourselves  experienced  the 
power  and  efiScacy  of  Divine  truth,  and  having  yourselves  experienced  repentance 
unto  life,  and  yourselves  richly  participating  in  the  blessings  of  grace  and  salvation, 
then  be  concerned  (as  it  is  meet  and  right  and  your  bounden  duty)  for  your  fellow- 
sinners,  that  they  may  be  brought  to  repentance ;  for  your  fellow-creatures,  that, 
they  may  be  partakers  with  you  of  ' '  like  precious  faith  "  and  love  and  life  and 
happiness  and  salvation.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  A  preacher  from  the  dead: — I. 
First,  it  is  thought  that  if  one  did  come  from  the  dead  to  preach,  there  would  be  h, 
CONFIRMATION  OF  THE  TRUTH  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  and  a  testimony  borne  at  which  jeering 
infidelity  would  stand  aghast  in  silence.  Stop,  we  will  see  about  that.  1.  If,  my 
friends,  the  testimony  of  one  man  who  had  been  raised  from  the  dead  were  of  any 
value  for  the  confirming  of  the  gospel,  would  not  God  have  used  it  before  now  ? 
Now,  God  knoweth  best ;  we  will  not  compare  our  surmises  to  Divine  decision.  H 
God  decided  that  resurrection  men  should  be  silent,  it  was  best  it  should  be ;  their 
testimony  would  have  been  of  little  worth  or  help  to  as,  or  else  it  would  have  been 
borne.  2.  But  again,  I  think  it  will  strike  our  minds  at  once,  that  if  this  very  day 
a  man  should  rise  from  his  tomb,  and  come  here  to  affirm  the  truth  of  the  gospel, 
the  infidel  world  would  be  no  more  near  believing  than  it  is  now.  Infidelity  would 
still  cry  for  something  more.  It  is  like  the  horse-leech ;  it  crieth,  ••  Give,  give  I " 
S.  And  besides,  my  friends,  if  men  will  not  believe  the  witness  of  God,  it  is  impoB- 
Bible  that  they  should  believe  the  witness  of  man.  II.  It  is  imagined,  however, 
that  if  one  of  "  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect "  would  come  to  earth,  even  if 
he  did  not  produce  a  most  satisfactory  testimony  to  the  minds  of  sceptics,  Ha 

WOULD    YBT    BE    ABLE   TO  GIVE   ABUNDANT   INFORMATION   CONCEBNINO  THE   KINGDOM   OF 

HEAVEN.  Surely  he  would  have  brought  down  with  him  some  handfuls  of  the 
clusters  of  Eshcol ;  he  would  have  been  able  to  tell  us  some  celestial  secrets,  which 
would  have  cheered  our  hearts,  and  nerved  us  to  run  the  heavenly  race,  and  put  a^ 
cheerful  courage  on.  Nothing  more  could  we  know  that  would  be  of  any  use. 
Tattlers,  idle  curiosity  people,  and  such  like,  would  be  mightily  delighted  with  such. 
a  man.  Ah  1  what  a  precious  preacher  he  would  be  to  them,  if  they  could  get  him. 
all  the  way  from  heaven,  and  get  him  to  tell  all  its  secrets  out  I  But  there  the 
matter  would  end.  It  would  be  merely  the  gratification  of  curiosity ;  there  would 
be  no  conferring  of  blessing ;  for  if  to  know  more  of  the  future  state  would  be  a 
blessing  for  us,  God  would  not  withhold  it ;  there  can  be  no  more  told  us.  If  what 
you  know  would  not  persuade  you,  "  Neither  would  you  be  persuaded  though  one 
rose  from  the  dead."  III.  Yet  some  say,  •*  Surely,  if  there  were  no  gain  i» 
MATTER,  TET  THERE  WOULD  BE  A  GAIN  IN  MANNER.  Oh,  if  such  a  Spirit  had  descended 
from  the  spheres,  how  would  he  preach  ?  What  eloquence  celestial  would  flow 
from  his  lips  1 "  I  do  believe  that  Lazarus  from  Abraham's  bosom  would  not  be 
80  good  a  preacher  as  a  man  who  has  not  died,  but  whose  lips  have  been  touched 
witii  a  live  coal  from  ofF  the  altar.  Instead  of  his  being  better,  I  cannot  see  thai 
he  wonld  be  quite  so  good.  Could  a  spirit  from  the  other  world  speak  to  you  more 
solemnly  than  Moses  and  the  prophets  have  spoken  ?  Or  could  they  speak  more 
solemnly  than  you  have  heard  the  word  spoken  to  you  at  divers  times  already  f 
Ah !  but  you  say,  you  want  some  one  to  preach  to  you  more  feelingly.  Then,  sir, 
yon  cannot  have  him  in  the  preacher  you  desire.  A  spirit  from  heaven  could  not 
be  a  feeling  preacher.  It  wonld  be  impossible  for  Lazarus,  who  had  been  in 
Abraham's  bosom,  to  preach  to  you  with  emotion.  Such  a  preacher  could  not  be  a 
powerful  preacher,  even  though  he  came  again  from  the  dead.  (<7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  sufficiency  oj  the  Bible  : — It  will  be  a  solemn  thought  to-night,  when,  in  your 
own  room,  you  open  that  holy  volume,  and  think,  "This  Bible,  that  is  being  now 
preached,  this  Bible  which  I  am  reading,  is  the  highest,  best,  last,  only  means  by 
which  God  undertakes  and  promises  absolutely  to  convert,  teach,  comfort,  edify, 
save  me.  What  then  7  If  the  hearing  and  reading  Godte  Word  have  not  turned 
my  heart,  then  the  resurrection  would  not  do  it  I  nothing  would  do  it  I  "  And  with 
this  conclusion,  I  am  confident  that  all  experience  will  agree.  Great  ^  events,  sur- 
prises, sorrows,  bereavements,  will,  by  God's  grace,  bring  a  man  to  his  Bible,  and 
then  his  Bible  will  bring  him  to  God ;  and  then  it  would  seem  as  if  those  eventa 
converted  him ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  God's  Word  did  the  work— the  rest  only 
brought  him  there.    But  let  as  understand  dearly  what  this  Book  is.     What  is  tha 


CHAT.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE.  271 

Bible  ?  It  is  the  likeness  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  tal?en  of  the  mind  of  Christ. 
And  what  is  Christ  ?  The  likeness  of  the  mind  of  the  Father.  Then  what  is  the 
Bible?  The  exact  and  perfect  transcript  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  Spirit  is  the  perfect 
transcript  of  Christ,  and  as  Christ  is  the  perfect  transcript  of  the  mind  of  God. 
That  is  the  Bible.  No  wonder  then  that  whatever  is  to  be  done,  it  is  this  which 
must  do  it.  But  now  we  are  directed  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Bible  is  to 
be  savingly  used.  "  If  they  hear  not " — that  is,  if  they  do  not  realize  it  even  as  if 
they  heard  a  voice — if  they  do  not  hear  and  obey — "  Moses  and  the  prophets,  then 
they  would  not  be  persuaded,  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Scripture-evidence  sufficient  to  make  men  religious  : — 1.  God  has  given  us  sufmoient 

EVrOENCB  TO  PBOVB  THE  TRUTH   OF   RELIGION,  AND   SUmCIENT   ARGUMENTS  TO  BNFORCB 

THE  PRACTICE  OF  IT.  God  has  givcn  US  all  that  evidence  to  prove  the  truth  of 
Christian  religion,  and  all  those  arguments  to  enforce  the  practice  of  it,  which  it 
was  agreeable  either  to  the  wisdom  of  God  to  give,  or  the  reason  of  men  to  expect. 
1.  As  to  the  intrinsic  evidence  from  the  excellency  of  the  nature  of  the  thing 
itself,  the  duties  which  Christian  religion  requires  are  such  as  are  plainly  most 
agreeable  to  our  natural  notions  of  God,  and  most  conducive  to  the  happiness  and 
wellbeing  of  men  ;  and  this  is  a  proof  which  might  alone  be  sufiScient  to  convince 
a  wise  man  that  his  religion  was  from  God.  2.  Besides  the  intrinsic  evidence  for 
the  truth  of  religion  from  the  excellency  of  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself,  it  is 
moreover  proved  to  be  taught  and  confirmed  of  God  by  the  most  credible  and  satis- 
factory testimony  that  was  ever  given  to  any  matter  of  fact  in  the  world.  II. 
The  second  general  proposition  I  designed  to  speak  to  is  that  such  men  as  will  not 
be  persuaded  to  be  sincerely  religious  by  that  evidence  and  those  arguments  which 
Goil  has  afforded  us,  would  not  be  persuaded  bt  ant  other  bvidencb  or  motivb 

OF   RELIGION    WHICH   THEIR    OWN    UNREASONABLE   FANCY   COULD    SUGGEST    TO    THEM    TO 

DESIRE.  III.  In  order  to  the  making  men  truly  religious,  it  is  not  necessary  that 
God  should  on  His  part  work  more  miracles  to  give  them  greater  convictions,  but 

only  THAT  THEY  ON  THEIR  OWN  PART  SHOULD  BECOME  BEASONABLB  PERSONS,  LAY 
ASIDE  THEIR  UNJUST  PREJUDICES,  AND  FORSAKE  THEIR  UNREASONABLE  LUSTS,  WHICH 
HINDER  THEM    FROM  CONSIDERING    THE  TRUE   FORCE    OF  THE    ARGUMENTS   OF    RELIGION. 

They  have  no  concern  for  the  interests  of  truth  and  virtue.  The  love  of  this 
present  world  has  blinded  their  eyes,  and  it  is  for  that  reason  only  that  they  receive 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  them  (I  Cor.  ii. 
14).     (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)       I.  First,  then,  let  us  consider  whether  thb  evidencb 

UPON  which  revelation  stands  BB  in  itself  greater  or  MORE  CONVINCING  THAN  THB 
EVIDENCB  OF  ONE  COMING  FROM  THB  DEAD  CAN  BE.  II.  ThAT  THB  OBJECTIONS  WHICH 
rNBELIEVERS  URGE  AGAINST  THE  AUTHORITY  OF  REVELATION  WILL  LIB  STRONGER  AGAINST 

THE  AUTHORITY  OF  ONE  COMING  FROM  THE  DEAD.  For,  first,  as  to  the  nature  of  this 
sort  of  evidence,  if  it  be  any  evidence  at  all,  it  is  a  revelation,  and  therefore, 
whatever  has  been  said  against  the  authority  of  revelation,  will  be  applicable  to 
this  kind  of  it.  And,  consequently,  those  who,  upon  the  foot  of  natural  religion, 
stand  out  against  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  would  much  more  stand  out  again<it 
the  authority  of  one  coming  from  the  dead.  And  whether  it  would  weigh  more 
with  the  atheist,  let  any  one  consider.  For  no  revelation  can  weigh  with  him ;  for 
the  Being  of  God,  which  he  disbelieves,  is  supported  with  greater  arguments  and 
greater  works  than  any  revelation  can  be.  And  therefore,  standing  out  against  the 
evidence  of  all  nature,  speaking  in  the  wonderful  works  of  the  creation,  he  can 
never  reasonably  submit  to  a  less  evidence.  Let,  then,  one  from  the  dead  appear 
to  him,  and  he  will,  and  certainly  may,  as  easily  account  for  one  dead  man's 
recovering  life  and  motion,  as  he  does  for  the  life  and  motion  of  so  many  men, 
whom  he  sees  every  day.  But,  further,  let  us  suppose  a  man  free  from  all  these  pre- 
judices, and  then  see  what  we  can  make  of  this  evidence.  If  a  dead  man  should  come 
to  you,  you  must  suppose  either  that  he  speaks  from  himself,  and  that  his  errand  to 
you  is  the  effect  of  his  own  private  affection  for  you,  or  that  he  comes  by  commission 
and  authority  from  God.  As  to  the  first  case,  you  have  but  the  word  of  a  man  for  all 
you  hear,  and  how  will  you  prove  that  a  dead  man  is  incaj/able  of  practising  a 
eheat  upon  you  ?  Or,  allowing  the  appearance  to  be  real,  and  the  design  honest, 
do  you  think  every  dead  man  knows  the  counsels  of  God,  and  His  will  with 
respect  to  His  creatures  here  on  earth  ?  If  you  do  not  think  this,  and  I  cannot  see 
possibly  how  you  should  think  it,  what  use  will  you  make  of  this  kind  of  revela- 
tion ?  Should  he  tell  you  that  the  Christian  faith  is  the  true  faith,  the  way  to 
heaven  and  happiness,  and  that  God  will  reward  all  true  believers,  you  would  hay* 
much  less  reason  to  believe  him  than  now  yoa  have  to  believe  Christ  and  Hia 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  rrw 

apostles.  Bat,  on  the  other  side,  should  yoa  sappose  this  man  tc  come  by  tha 
partioalar  order  and  appointment  of  God,  and  conseqaently  that  what  he  says  is  tha 
word  and  command  of  God,  you  must  then  be  prepared  to  answer  such  objections  aa 
you  are  now  ready  to  make  against  the  mission  and  authority  of  Christ  and  His 
apostles.  First,  then,  we  ask.  How  this  commission  appears  ?  If  you  say  because 
he  comes  from  the  dead,  we  cannot  rest  here,  because  it  is  not  self-evident  that 
all  who  come  from  the  dead  are  inspired.  And  yet  farther  than  this  you  cannot 
go,  for  it  is  not  supposed  that  your  man  from  the  dead  works  miracles.  The  mis- 
sion of  Christ  we  prove  by  prophecies  and  their  completion  ;  by  the  signs  and  wonders 
He  wrought  by  the  hand  of  God  ;  by  His  resurrection,  which  includes  both  kinds, 
being  in  itself  a  great  miracle  and  likewise  the  completion  of  a  prophecy.  III.  By 
considering  the  temper  of  infidelity.  For  where  unbelief  proceeds,  as  generally  it 
does,  from  a  vitiated  and  corrupted  mind,  which  hates  to  be  refcrmed,  which  reiects 
the  evidence  because  it  will  not  admit  the  doctrine,  not  the  doctrine  beoauiie  it 
cannot  admit  the  evidence ;  in  this  case  all  proofs  will  be  alike,  and  it  will  be 
lost  labour  to  ply  such  a  man  with  reason  or  new  evidence,  since  it  is  not  want  o( 
reason  or  evidence  that  makes  him  an  unbeliever.  (T.  Sherlock,  D.D.)  A 
standing  revelation  the  best  meant  of  conviction  : — I.  To  state  and  limit  thk  dob 

aXTBNT  OF  IT.      II.    To   CONFIRM    THE    TRUTH,  SO   STATED,    BY  TABIOUS  ARGUMENTS  AND 

BEFiiSCTioNS.  After  which  I  shall — III.  Deduce  some  inferences  from  it.  As  to  the 
extent  of  this  assertion,  we  may  observe — I.  1.  That  it  is  evidently  to  be  under- 
stood of  such  persons  only  as  are  placed  in  the  same  circumstances  with  the  five 
brethren  in  the  parable ;  such,  consequently,  as  have  been  bom,  where  the  trua 
religion  is  professed,  and  bred  up  in  the  belief  of  it ;  have  had  all  the  early  pre- 
judices of  education  on  the  side  of  truth,  and  all  manner  of  opportunities  and 
advantages  towards  acquainting  themselves  with  the  grounds  of  it ;  and  yet,  not- 
withstanding all  these  advantages,  have  shut  their  eyes  against  it,  and  withstood 
its  force.  2.  Neither  is  the  assertion  to  be  rigorously  extended  to  all  those  who 
have  been  educated  under  the  influence  of  a  Divine  revelation,  and  yet  lived  in 
opposition  to  the  rules  of  it ;  for  there  is  great  reason  to  believe  that  there  ar« 
many  persons  who,  through  the  heat  of  their  lusts  and  passions,  through  tha 
contagion  of  ill  example,  or  too  deep  an  immersion  in  the  affairs  of  life,  swerve 
exceedingly  from  the  rules  of  their  holy  faith,  and  yet  would,  upon  such  an  extra- 
ordinary warning  as  is  mentioned  in  the  text,  be  brought  to  comply  with  them. 
3.  That  even  of  these  profiigate  creatures  themselves  it  is  not  said  that  so  astonish- 
ing a  scene  would  make  no  manner  of  impression,  would  have  no  present  influenoa 
upon  them  ;  but  only  that  it  would  not  produce  a  lasting  effect,  nor  work  an  entire 
conversion.  II.  Second  general  head  to  confirm  by  various  arguments  and  rbfleo- 
TiOMS.  And — 1.  We  will  suppose  that  such  a  message  from  the  dead  as  that  for  which 
the  rich  man  here  intercedes  is  really  in  itself  an  argument  of  greater  strength  and 
force  to  persuade  a  sinner  out  of  the  error  of  his  ways  than  any  standing  revela- 
tion, however  so  well  attested  and  confirmed.  I  wiU  show,  nevertheless,  that  it 
would  not  be  complied  with.  Because — (1)  It  is  not  for  want  of  strength  that  tha 
standing  ordinary  ways  of  proof  are  rejected,  but  for  want  of  sincerity,  and  a 
disinterested  mind  in  those  to  whom  they  are  proposed ;  and  the  same  want  of 
sincerity,  the  same  adhesion  to  vice  and  aversion  from  goodness,  will  be  equally  a 
reason  for  their  rejecting  any  proof  whatsoever.  (2)  A  motive,  however  stronger 
in  itself  than  another,  may  yet  make  a  weaker  impression  when  employed,  after 
that  the  motive  of  less  though  sufficient  strength  hath  been  already  resisted.  For 
the  mind  doth,  by  every  degree  of  affected  unbelief,  contract  more  and  more  of  a 
general  indisposition  towards  believing  ;  so  that  such  a  proof,  as  would  have  been 
closed  with  certainty  at  the  first,  shall  be  set  aside  easily  afterwards,  when  a  man 
hath  been  used  to  dispute  himself  out  of  plain  truths,  and  to  go  against  the  light 
of  his  own  understanding.  (3)  The  peculiar  strength  of  the  motive  may  of  itself, 
perhaps,  contribute  to  frustrate  the  efficacy  of  it,  rendering  it  liable  to  be  sus- 
pected by  him  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  He  is  conscious  how  little  he  hath  deserved 
80  extraordinary  a  privilege.  (4)  How  far  these  suspicions  of  his  will  be  improved 
and  heightened  by  the  raillery  and  laughter  he  will  be  sure  to  meet  with  on  this  head 
from  his  old  friends  and  companions.  (5)  Time  and  a  succession  of  other  objeota 
will  bring  it  about.  Every  day  the  impression  loses  somewhat  of  its  force,  and 
grows  weaker,  till  at  length  it  comes  to  lie  under  the  same  disadvantage  with  the 
standing  proofs  of  tiie  gospeL  Hitherto  I  have  supposed  that  the  evidence  of  one 
xisen  from  the  dead  hath  really  the  advantage,  in  point  of  force  and  efficacy,  of  any 
standing  revelation,  how  well  soever  attested  and  confirmed ;  and,  prooeeding  oa 


'.  XVI.]  ST.  LUKE,  27* 

that  sapposition,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  such  evidence,  however  in  itself 
forcible,  would  certainly  not  be  complied  with.  Bat  the  truth  is,  and,  upon  a  fair 
balance  of  the  advantages  on  either  side  it  will  appear  that  the  common  standing 
rules  of  the  gospel  are  a  more  probable  and  powerful  means  of  conviction  than 
anj  such  message  or  miracle : — 1.  For  this  plain  reason,  because  they  include 
in  them  that  very  kind  of  evidence  which  is  supposed  to  be  so  powerful,  and  do, 
withal,  afford  us  several  other  additional  proofs  of  great  force  and  clearness.  Among 
many  arguments  by  which  the  truth  of  our  religion  is  made  out  to  us,  this  is  but 
one,  that  the  promulgers  of  it — Jesus  Christ  and  His  apostles — did  that  very  thing 
which  is  required  to  be  done,  raised  men  and  women  from  the  dead,  not  once  only 
but  often,  in  an  indisputable  manner,  and  before  many  witnesses.  2.  Another 
great  advantage  which  the  standing  proofs  of  the  gospel  have  over  such  an  extra- 
ordinary appearance,  that  this  hath  all  its  force  at  once  upon  the  first  impression, 
and  is  ever  afterwards  in  a  declining  state,  so  that  the  longer  it  continues  upon  the 
mind,  and  the  oftener  it  is  thought  of,  the  more  it  loses ;  whereas  those,  on  the 
contrary,  gain  strength  and  ground  upon  us  by  degrees,  and  the  more  they  are 
considered  and  weighed  the  more  they  are  approved.  3.  That,  let  the  evidence  of 
eueh  a  particular  miracle  be  never  so  bright  and  clear,  yet  it  is  still  but  particular, 
and  must,  therefore,  want  that  kind  of  force,  that  degree  of  influence,  which 
accrues  to  a  standing  general  proof,  from  its  having  been  tried  and  approved,  and 
consented  to  by  men  of  all  ranks  and  capacities,  of  all  tempers  and  interests,  of 
all  ages  and  nations.  {Bishop  Atterbury.)  I.  1.  One  coming  from  the  dead,  angel 
or  man,  cannot  bring  a  doctrine  more  necessary,  there  being  in  the  Scriptures 
sufficient  direction  about  the  way  to  true  happiness,  for  which  we  have  not  only 
express  testimony,  but  apparent  reason  and  sensible  experience.  2.  Better  argu- 
msats  cannot  be  urged,  nor  more  persuasively.  The  gospel  is  "  the  wisdom  of 
God"  (1  Cor.  i.  24) ;  and  surely  God  knoweth  all  the  wards  of  the  lock,  and  what 
kind  of  keys  will  fit  the  heart  of  man.  What  do  we  need  more  to  move  us  ?  Shall 
Ood  pipe  to  you  in  a  sweeter  strain  than  that  of  gospel  grace  or  gospel  promises  ? 
Is  the  giving  Himself  and  His  Christ  a  price  too  cheap  to  purchase  your  hearts  ?  or 
must  He  thunder  to  you  in  a  more  dreadful  accent  than  the  horrors  of  everlasting 
darkness?  Oh  1  but  one  that  cometh  from  the  dead  is  supposed  to  testify  his  own 
sight  and  knowledge,  and  so  to  speak  more  feelingly.  And  have  not  God's  mes- 
sengers some  experience  ?  Cannot  they  say,  We  declare  to  you  the  things  which 
we  have  seen  and  heard  and  felt  ?  8.  It  is  not  because  he  could  propound  these 
truths  with  more  certainty,  for  these  things  are  already  propounded  to  our 
imderBtandings,  and  we  have  sensible  confirmation.  (1)  They  are  propounded  to 
our  understandings  with  a  fair  and  full  credibility.  The  holy  Scriptures  have  in 
themselves  a  self-evidencing  light,  by  which  they  make  it  out  to  the  consciences  of 
men  that  they  are  of  God.  (2)  We  have  sensible  confirmations.  We  are  wrought 
upon  by  sense.  Now  is  not  ordinarily  the  word  as  sensibly  confirmed  to  us  as  it 
would  be  by  a  vision  or  apparition  from  the  dead  ?  (a)  There  is  the  holiness  of 
professors  (1  Cor.  xiv.  25).  (b)  There  is  the  constancy  of  the  martyrs  that  have 
ratified  this  truth  with  the  loss  of  their  dearest  concernments  (Bev.  zii  11).  (c)< 
Then  there  is  the  inward  feeling  of  God's  children ;  they  find  a  power  in  the  wordy 
convincing,  changing,  comforting,  fortifying  their  hearts.  They  have  answerable 
impressions  on  their  hearts  (Heb.  viii.  10).  {d)  Those  that  have  no  experience  of 
this  have  a  secret  fear  of  the  power  of  the  word  (John  iii.  20).  («)  There  are  also 
outward  effects  of  the  power  of  the  word  ;  its  propagation  throughout  all  the  world 
within  thirty  years  or  thereabout.  (/)  Then  consider  the  many  sensible  effects  of 
the  word,  as  the  accomplishment  of  prophecies,  promises,  threatenings,  and 
answer  of  prayers.    God's  providence  is  a  conunent  upon  Scripture.     II.  Against 

it.       ThEBB  ABS   KOBE  BATIOMAIi  PREJUDICES  THAT   LIB  AGAINST  ANT  OTHBB   WAT  THAN 

THIS  WAT  THAT  OOD  HATH  TAKEN.  As  to  instance  in  the  matter  in  hand.  1.  It  is  no 
mean  scruple  about  the  lawfulness  of  hearkening  to  one  that  should  come  from  the 
dead,  since  they  are  out  of  the  sphere  of  our  commerce,  and  it  is  a  disparagement 
to  the  great  doctor  of  the  Church.  Against  consulting  with  the  dead,  see  Deut. 
zviii.  10-12,  with  14,  15.  2.  It  is  not  so  sure  a  way.  How  could  we  trust  or  believe 
any  one  that  should  bring  a  message  from  the  dead,  since  impostors  are  so  rife  ? 
Satan  can  turn  himself  into  an  angel  of  light.  3.  It  is  not  so  effectual  a  coarse  as 
some  think.  The  Jews  would  not  believe  Lazarus,  when,  after  he  had  been  four 
days  dead,  he  was  raised  up  again.  4.  It  is  not  so  familiar  a  way,  and  therefore 
not  BO  fit  to  instil  faith,  and  reduce  men  to  God's  purpose  by  degrees,  as 
the  written  Word,  to  which  we  may  have  reooorse  without  affrightment,  and 
VOL.  m.  18 


«74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHij.  m. 

that  at  all  times.  1.  That  man  is  apt  to  indent  with  God  abont  believing 
and  repenting  upon  terms  of  his  own  making  (Matt,  xxvii.  42).  God  wiU  not 
always  give  sensible  confirmation.  2.  There  lie  more  prejudices  by  far  against 
any  way  of  oar  devising  than  against  the  course  which  God  hath  instituted  for  the 
furthering  of  our  repentance.  Man  is  an  ill  caterer  for  himself.  All  God's  insti- 
tutions are  full  of  reason,  and  if  we  had  eyes  to  see  it  we  could  not  be  better  pro- 
vided for.  3.  God  in  giving  the  Scriptures  hath  done  more  for  us  than  we  could 
imagine,  yea,  better  than  we  could  wish  to  ourselves.  He  hath  certainly  done 
enough  to  leave  us  without  excuse.  Try  what  you  can  do  with  Moses  and  the 
prophets.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  have  a  rule  by  which  all  doctrines  are  to  be  tried, 
to  have  a  standard  and  measure  of  faith,  and  that  put  into  writing  to  preserve  it 
against  the  weakness  of  memory  and  the  treachery  of  evil  designs,  and  that  trans- 
lated into  all  languages.  4.  That  we  are  apt  to  betray  present  advantages  by 
wishes  of  another  dispensation,  as  that  we  may  have  oracles  and  miracles.  It  is 
but  a  shift  to  think  of  other  means  than  God  hath  provided.  Man  is  ever  at  odds 
with  the  present  dispensation.  It  is  a  sign  the  heart  is  out  of  order,  or  else  any 
doctrine  that  is  of  God  would  set  it  a-work.  5.  Those  that  like  not  the  message 
will  ever  quarrel  at  the  messenger ;  and  when  the  heart  is  wanting,  something  is 
wanting.  6.  How  credulous  we  are  to  fables,  and  how  incredulous  as  to  undoubted 
truths ;  spirits  and  apparitions,  these  things  are  regarded  by  as,  but  the  testimony 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  speaking  in  the  Scriptures  is  little  regarded.  IH.  How  to 
niPBovE  THE  SoBiPTUBES  TO  REPENTANCE.  1.  Belie vo  them  as  you  would  an  oracle 
or  one  from  the  dead.  Consider  the  authority  and  veracity  of  God.  The  autho- 
rity of  God :  God  commandeth  men  to  repent ;  charge  the  heart  in  the  name  of 
God,  as  it  will  answer  to  him  another  day.  2.  Urge  thy  heart  with  it ;  recollect 
yourselves :  "What  shall  we  then  say  to  these  things  ?  "  (Bom.  viii.  31).  {T,  Man- 
ton,  D.D.)  That  a  standing  revelation  of  God  is  evidence  sufficient  for  Divine 
things : — 1.  What  we  are  to  understand  by  a  Divine  revelation.  2.  For  the  several 
kinds  of  Divine  revelations.  That  they  were  various  the  apostle  to  the  Hebrews 
tells  as  (chap.  i.  1).  And,  therefore,  in  the  third  place,  to  show  yoa  what  advan- 
tages this  standing  revelation  of  the  Scripture  hath  above  private  revelations  made 
to  particular  persons,  and  frequently  repeated  and  renewed  in  several  ages — 1.  It 
is  a  more  certain  way  of  conveyance  of  things,  and  more  secure  and  free  from  im- 
posture. 2.  It  is  a  more  general  and  universal  way  of  conveyance,  which  is 
evident  from  the  common  experience  of  the  world,  who  have  pitched  upon  this 
way  of  writing  things  in  books,  as  that  which  doth  most  easily  convey  the  know- 
ledge and  notice  of  things  to  the  generahty  of  men.  3.  It  is  a  more  uniform  way 
of  conveyance — that  is,  things  that  are  once  written  and  propagated  that  way  lay 
equally  open  to  all,  and  come  in  a  manner  with  equal  credit  to  all,  it  being  not  morally 
possible  that  a  common  book  that  passeth  through  all  hands,  and  which  is  of  vast 
importance  and  concernment,  should  be  liable  to  any  material  corruption  without  a 
general  conspiracy  and  agreement,  which  cannot  be  bat  that  it  must  be  generally 
known.  4.  It  is  a  more  lasting  way  of  conveyance.  6.  It  is  a  more  human  way 
of  conveyance,  which  requires  less  of  miracle  and  supernatural  interposition  for 
the  preservation  of  it.  I  come  now  to  the  fourth  thing  I  proposed  to  be  con- 
sidered— namely,  that  there  is  sufficient  evidence  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Scriptures. 
Now  for  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  I  desire  but  these  two  things  to  be 
granted  to  me  at  first — 1.  That  all  were  written  by  those  persons  whose  names 
they  bear.  2.  That  those  who  wrote  those  books  were  men  of  integrity,  and 
did  not  wilfully  falsify  in  anything.  I  should  come  now  to  the  fifth  and  last 
thing — namely,  that  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  God  should  do  more  for 
our  conviction  than  to  afford  as  a  standing  revelation  of  His  mind  and  will, 
such  as  the  books  of  the  holy  Scriptures  are.  (Archbishop  Tillotson.)  OhosU 
do  not  deter  men  from  sin: — By  a  ghost  we  mean  the  spirit  of  man  stripped  of 
its  earthly  appendages — without  the  material  and  visible  conditions  which  dis- 
tinguish his  appearance  among  men.  Now,  it  is  not  necessary  for  a  man  to  go 
oat  of  the  world  to  realize  this  condition.  The  world  is  fall  of  such  ghosts.  They 
are  coming  forth  oat  of  the  depth  of  their  rain,  their  woe,  and  talking  to  as.  But 
who  heeds  them  ?  1.  See  the  ruined  rich  men — men  of  society,  stripped  of  every- 
thing that  marked  them  among  men.  They  are  but  ghosts  stalking  among  us. 
They  talk  to  us  of  the  folly,  the  vanity  of  riches,  of  the  bitterness  that  comes  with 
ill-gotten  gains.  They  speak  of  the  torment  at  the  end  of  every  such  course.  Who 
listens  to  these  gibbering  ghosts  f  Is  there  one  man  in  a  thousand  who  is  tamed 
from  his  ooarse  ky  what  they  say  ?    2.  Then  there  are  the  ghosts  of  those  who  hav* 


«■!».  XYi.]  ST.  LUKE.  275 

been  destroyed  by  intemperance.  Oh,  what  hideous  wrecks,  ghosts — what  testimony 
they  bear  1  They  are  dead,  yet  they  speak ;  but  who  listens  ?  The  young  man  sees, 
listens,  and  with  a  laugh  turns  to  his  glass.  3.  So  is  it  with  the  horrible  evil  of 
licentiousness.  We  see  all  around  us  the  haggard  ghosts  of  men  who  were  once 
respectable,  possessed  of  all  that  gives  grace  and  symmetry  and  manhood  to  men, 
now  but  a  mass  of  putrid  rottenness.  These  hideous  ghosts,  too,  tell  their  warning 
in  vain  in  the  ear  of  men.  If  one  will  not  hear  these,  who  come  forth  from  the 
dens  of  hell,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded.  He  reasons  from  a  wrong  principle, 
from  a  /alse  knowledge  of  human  nature,  whp  asserts  that  men  would  be  convinced 
by  the  testimony  of  the  dead.  4.  Look  at  the  criminal  classes.  It  has  been 
asserted  that  men  have  been  made  worse,  instead  of  better,  by  observing  the  punish- 
ment of  criminals.  Christ  continually  acted  upon  this  knowledge  of  human  nature . 
When  asked  for  a  sign,  something  occult.  He  refused,  saying  no  sign  but  that  of 
Jonah  should  be  given.  The  story  of  Jonah  teaches  simple  obedience.  In  con- 
clusion :  The  Word  is  sufficient — 1.  In  its  duties.  A  perfect  rule  of  life.  2.  In  its 
motives.  3.  In  its  promises.  {G,  F.  Kettell,  D.D.)  A  spectre  would  not  pro- 
duce conviction  in  sinners: — Yon  can  hardly  imagine  it  possible  that  the  most 
hardened  of  mankind  would  be  proof  against  warning  uttered  by  a  spectral  form, 
coming  mysteriously  in  the  stillness  of  midnight — the  form  of  a  friend  or  a  kinsman 
well  remembered,  though  long  ago  deceased — which  should  stand  at  your  bedside, 
and  declare,  in  unearthly  tones,  the  certain  doom  of  the  unrighteous ;  and  when 
yoQ  contrast  with  the  message  thus  fearfully  deUvered,  the  ordinary  summons  of  the 
gospel,  whether  as  read  or  preached,  you  feel  it,  perhaps,  little  more  than  an 
absurdity  to  contend  that  practically  there  is  as  much  of  power  in  the  latter  as  in 
the  former.  Yet  we  are  persuaded — we  are  certain,  that  the  parable  put  into  the 
mouth  of  Abraham  may  be  vindicated  by  the  most  cogent  yet  simple  reasoning. 
Just  consider  that  the  effect  of  a  messenger  threatening  us  with  punishment  unless 
we  repent,  depends  chiefly  on  our  assurance  that  it  is  actually  a  messenger  from 
God.  Now  tell  me  which  is  the  strongest — the  evidence  which  we  have  that  the 
Bible  is  God's  Word,  or  that  which  we  could  be  supposed  to  have  that  the  grave  haa 
given  up  its  tenant,  and  that  the  spectre  has  spoken  to  us  truth  ?  You  wUl  hardly 
say  that  there  is  room  here  for  dispute ;  you  will  hardly  say  that  man  could  have  a 
better  reason  for  believing  what  might  be  said  to  him  by  a  departed  friend  or  rela- 
tion, than  he  has  for  believing  what  is  written  in  the  Bible.  The  evidence  that  ths 
spectre  was  commissioned  by  God,  could  not  surely  be  greater  than  that  Christ  and 
the  apostles  were  commissioned  by  God ;  therefore  the  man  who  is  not  persuaded 
by  Christ  and  the  apostles,  might  be  expected  to  remain  unpersuaded  by  the  spectre. 
He  has  no  greater  amount  of  evidence  to  resist ;  why,  then,  is  he  more  likely  to 
yield?  But  you  may  say,  the  messenger  from  the  grave  may  not,  indeed,  have 
greater  credentials  than  Christ  and  His  apostles,  but  those  credentials  are  more 
forced  on  the  attention  ;  they  are  more  addressed  to  the  senses,  and  therefore,  are 
more  likely  to  excite  repentance.  Now  this  seems  very  plausible.  A  man  may  quite 
neglect  the  Bible ;  he  may  not  study  its  evidences  ;  and  thus,  whatever  their  strength, 
they  must  be  practically  ineffectual.  But  he  cannot  be  inattentive  to  the  spectre. 
The  shadowy  thing  stands  by  him,  causing  his  blood  to  run  cold,  and  his  knees  to 
tremble,  and  it  speaks  to  him  in  thrilling  accents,  to  which  he  cannot,  if  he  would, 
turn  a  deaf  ear.  We  admit  this,  but  we  cannot  admit  that  the  words  of  the  spectre 
are  more  likely  to  make  a  permanent  impression  than  of  a  living  preacher  speaking 
in  the  name  of  God  and  that  of  Christ.  The  spectre  speaks  to  me  to«day ;  addresses 
itself  to  my  senses,  and  thus  takes,  as  you  think  the  most  effectual  mode  of  pro- 
ducing an  impression.  But  what  evidence  shall  I  have  to-morrow  of  the  supernatural 
visitation  ?  There  will  be  nothing  but  the  memory  of  the  occurrence — there  will 
be  no  witness  but  my  own  recollection  to  which  to  appeal,  and  then  how  easy  to 
suspect  that  the  whole  was  a  delusion  1  How  natural  to  call  in  question,  whether 
it  has  been  more  than  a  dream,  more  than  the  coinage  of  a  disordered  and  over- 
wrought mind  1  I  have  historical  accumulated  proof  that  Christ  came  forth  from 
the  dead,  and  sent  me  a  message  which  bids  me  forsake  sin,  but  I  should  have  no 
such  proofs  in  regard  to  the  supposed  spectre ;  and,  therefore,  the  almost  certainty 
is  that  however  scared  and  agitated  I  might  be  at  the  moment  when  the  apparition 
stood  before  me,  I  should  soon  get  rid  of  the  impression  1  soon  persuade  myself  that  I 
had  been  acted  on  by  my  own  distempered  fancy ;  and,  perhaps,  laugh  at  my  own 
credulity.  If  I  can  despise  Christ,  who  returned  from  the  dead,  though  there  is 
given  me  irrefragable  evidence  of  His  return,  why  should  I  be  expected  to  give  heed 
to  Lazarus,  who  might  indeed  come  back  to  me  but  leave  no  lasting  proof  that  h» 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xti, 

had  deserted  the  grave  ?  No  I  no !  A  bnried  kinsman  might  come  and  preach  to 
yoQ,  but  you  would  not  give  heed,  if  you  could  be  deaf  to  the  voice  of  Moses  and  th« 
prophets.  Tou  have  as  good  grounds  to  believe  me,  while  I  am  now  speaking  the 
words  of  Christ,  as  you  would  have  if  I  re-appeared  after  death,  and  came,  in  my 
grave-clothes,  to  re-occupy  this  pulpit.  Let  it  be  so.  Let  there  be  re-enacted  the 
eoene  in  the  cave  of  the  Witch  of  Endor :  "  Call  me  up  Samuel,"  said  Saul,  to  thi» 
poor  woman,  and  "  an  old  man  cometh  up,  and  he  is  covered  with  a  mantle — " 
Call  up  whom  you  will ;  let  any  minister  wbom  you  have  been  long  accustomed  to 
hear,  and  whose  voice  has  long  been  silent  in  death,  Buddenly  ra-appear,  and  assume, 
for  a  moment,  the  office  of  a  teacher,  what  a  fearful  silence,  what  a  throbbing  of 
the  heart,  what  terror  of  the  spirit  I  He  speaks  in  well-known  accents ;  he  m^ea 
you  shudder,  and  you  can  scarcely  bo  control  your  agitation  as  to  listen  to  his  worda. 
But  what  could  he  say  which  you  had  not  already  heard  7  What  could  he  do  more 
than  make  the  attempt  to  tell  you  what  is  delineated  in  the  Bible  f  You  remember 
the  description  in  the  Book  of  Job  of  the  appearance  of  the  spectre — a  description* 
pronounced  by  one  of  the  greatest  writers  in  our  language,  "unequalled  in  fearful 
sublimities."  It  is  this :  *'  Then  a  spirit  passed  before  my  face  ;  the  hair  of  my 
flesh  stood  up ;  it  stood  still,  but  I  could  not  discern  the  form  thereof :  an  image 
was  before  mine  eyes;  there  was  silence,  audi  heard  a  voice,  saying," — ^What  did 
it  say  ?  With  what  marvellous  and  mighty  tidings  did  this  spectre  come  charged  t 
This  is  all  it  said :  "  Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just  than  God  ?  Shall  a  man  be 
more  pure  than  his  Maker  ?  "  Do  we  need  a  ghost  to  tell  us  that  ?  do  we  not  know 
that  already  7  Oh  !  the  spectre  might  come  ;  but  it  could  teU  you  nothing  to  make 
heaven  more  attractive,  or  hell  more  terrible,  than  is  delineated  in  the  Bible — 
nothing  to  make  it  more  certain  than  it  already  is,  that  unless  you  repent,  you  shall 
surely  perish.  Oh,  no ;  there  could  be  no  more  powerful  truth  uttered ;  no  more 
convincing  evidence  afforded  than  now  that  you  are  listening  to  me,  who  have  never 
entered  the  invisible  world.  It  would  give  a  solemnity — an  awful  onearthliness  to 
the  ministry  if  it  were  conducted  by  a  visitant  from  the  separate  state ;  but  the 
pleasures  and  the  business  of  life  would  produce  gradually  the  same  effect  as  now, 
obliterating  the  impressions  made  by  the  solemn  discourse.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
A  eommon  delusion  exposed : — It  is  not  necessary  that  these  men  snould  expect  some 
one  to  rise  from  the  dead  in  order  to  be  hke  Dives.  That  is  only  an  accident  of  the 
parable.  The  true  likeness  lies  here — in  thinking  that  God  will  deal  with  us  in 
some  new  way ;  in  a  man's  thinking  that  he  may  neglect  his  present  means  of 
serving  God,  and  of  growing  to  love  Him,  and  yet  that  in  some  way  or  other,  over 
and  above  these  ordinary  means,  he  shall  be  interfered  for,  and  that  work  done  in 
him  which  is  not  to  be  done  as  things  now  are.  One  of  the  most  common  forms  of 
this  delusion,  which  hes  lurking  in  the  heart  of  many  a  man,  is  to  expect  that  death 
will  do  it.  Perhaps  the  man  has  seen  death-beds ;  and  he  knows  very  well  that 
upon  a  death-bed  a  man  will  begin  to  cry  out,  and  that  there  will  be  a  sort  of  show 
of  change  sometimes  coming  from  the  man's  excited  feelings  at  such  a  time,  which 
is  very  often  nothing  more  than  his  trying  to  deceive  himself  by  putting  on  an 
appearance  of  religion  when  he  can  have  no  more  of  this  world.  For  the  experience 
of  many  death-beds  has  convinced  me,  as  I  believe  it  has  convinced  many  others 
who  attend  them,  that,  so  far  from  the  death-bed  being  the  place  where  you  will 
see  the  greatest  sincerity,  there  are  very  few  places  where  you  of tener  see  men 
hypocrites,  very  few  times  and  very  few  places,  where  men  are  more  desperately 
striving  to  deceive  themselves,  because  they  feel  that  now  it  is  almost  hopeless  to 
turn.  And  so  the  tempter  comes  to  them  with  this  deceit.  They  dare  not  look  the 
whole  matter  in  the  face  ;  they  dare  not  see  that  it  is  everything  which  needs  to  be 
changed  within  them  ;  and  so  they  go  on  in  a  vain  show  deceiving  themselves  even 
to  the  end.  And  yet  I  believe  that  Siis  is  lurking  in  the  heart  of  very  many  of  us 
at  this  moment — "  I  cannot,  so  long  as  common  life  and  its  temptations  are  round 
about  me,  I  cannot  shake  off  this  worldliness ;  but  it  will  be  altogether  a  different 
thing  when  I  come  to  the  great  reality  of  a  death-bed."  Another  very  common  form 
is,  that  men  believe  that  old  age  will  do  it  for  them.  They  say,  "  My  passions  are 
eo  strong  now  that  I  am  young ;  but  when  I  am  older,  when  I  have  passed  through 
all  this  burning  heat  of  life,  and  when  I  get  to  that  time  when  everything  fades 
upon  the  senses,  I  rfiall  find  it  comparatively  easy  to  turn  then,  and  then  I  will  turn." 
And  others  believe  that  some  sudden  sickness  will  do  it,  or  that  some  sudden  supply 
cf  serious  thoughts  will  do  it,  or  that  some  outward  thing  or  other  will  convert  them, 
tnm  them  to  God,  and  make  it  easy  for  them  to  begin  to  live  heartily  a  religious 
life.    Oh !  I  ask  you  as  reasonable  men,  do  not  these  deceits  aboand  amongst  as  f 


nur.  xvn.)  ST.  LUKE.  277 

Have  we  not  people  who  think,  and  who  do  not  mind  saying  to  themselves,  that  it 
is  their  children,  or  their  work,  or  their  particular  temper,  or  the  people  round  about 
jJiem,  or  the  necessity  of  conforming  to  this  or  that  evil  custom — that  it  is  some- 
thing accidental  which  makes  them  sin,  and  that  when  this  accident  is  removed, 
then  they  shall  begin  to  serve  God  in  truth  and  verity  ?  And  oh  1  have  we  not  on 
©very  side  of  us  delayers  of  repentance,  and  delayers  in  receiving  the  communion, 
and  delayers  in  leading  a  life  of  devotion — all  hoping  still  to  be  better,  all  thinking 
that  some  time  or  other  there  will  be  some  alteration  in  their  lives  which  will  make 
it  easy  for  them  to  repent,  and  that  then  they  too  shall  become  saints  and  be  saved  ? 
And,  even,  once  more,  in  those  who  in  the  main  are  leading  a  life  altogether  of  a 
different  diaracter  from  this,  in  those  who  are  striving  to  serve  God,  yet  are  not 
they  too  greatly  hindered  by  this  self-same  temptation  ?  I  ask  you,  have  you  not  too 
often  secretly  given  way  to  the  difficulties  which  prevent  you  from  forming  habits 
of  earnest  prayer,  which  prevent  you  from  leading  a  life  of  greater  devotedness  and 
zeal,  of  greater  self-denial  and  earnestness  ?  Are  you  not  perfectly  well  aware  that 
you  have  often  given  secretly  way  to  the  continuance  in  you  of  some  temptation, 
which  you  know  to  be  contrary  to  God's  will,  and  which  you  are  in  a  measure 
striving  against,  which  you  do  not  altogether  rule  over,  which  you  have  not  yet  cast 
out,  or  some  evil  habit,  or  some  worldly  desire  or  gratification  ?  And  yet,  how 
exactly  does  our  Lord's  reproof  apply  to  every  one  of  these  cases  I  That  reproof  is, 
as  I  have  shown  you,  that  they  have  proof  enough ;  that  they  have  the  means,  the 
means  which  the  wisdom  of  God  sees  to  be  fittest,  and  deems  to  be  sufficient ;  that 
what  they  want  is  not  more  help  from  God,  but  the  using  the  help  they  have  got ; 
that  if  they  had  more  help  from  G  jd,  it  would  only  expose  them  to  a  greater  con- 
demnation, for  that  those  who  do  not  yield  to  that  help  which  is  sufficient,  would 
not  yield  to  any  measure  of  help,  and  so  that  the  only  result  of  their  having  more 
help  would  be  that  they  would  incur  greater  condemnation  by  sinning  against 
greater  light,  and  being  lost  in  spite  of  greater  assistance.    {Bishoj^  S,  WiUter/oree.) 


CHAPTER  xvn. 


Tebs.  1-4.  It  l8  Impossible  but  that  offences  will  come. — Where  $in  oeeure,  Ood 
cannot  wisely  prevent  it : — The  doctrine  of  this  text  is  that  sin,  under  the  government 
of  God,  cannot  be  prevented.  1.  When  we  say  rr  is  rupossiBLS  to  prevent  sik 
DNDEB  THE  oovEBMMENT  07  Gk>D,  the  Statement  still  calls  for  another  inquiry,  viz. : 
"Where  does  this  impossibility  lie  f  Which  is  true :  that  the  sinner  cannot  possibly 
forbear  to  sin,  or  that  God  cannot  prevent  his  sinning  ?  The  first  supposition 
answers  itself,  for  it  could  not  be  sin  if  it  were  utterly  unavoidable.  It  might  be 
his  misfortune ;  but  nothing  could  be  more  tmjust  than  to  impute  it  to  him  as  his 
crime.  Let  as,  then,  consider  that  God's  government  over  men  is  moral,  and 
known  to  be  such  by  every  intelligent  being.  It  contemplates  mind  as  having 
intellect  to  understand  truth,  sensibility  to  appreciate  its  bearing  upon  happiness, 
conscience  to  judge  of  the  right,  and  a  will  to  determine  a  course  of  voluntary 
action  in  view  of  God's  claims.  So  God  governs  mind.  Not  so  does  He  govern 
matter.  The  planetary  worlds  are  controlled  by  quite  a  different  sort  of  agency. 
God  does  not  move  them  in  their  orbits  by  motives,  but  by  a  physical  agency.  I 
said,  all  men  know  this  government  to  be  moral  by  their  own  consciousness.  When 
its  precepts  and  its  penalties  come  before  their  minds,  they  are  conscious  that  an 
appeal  is  made  to  their  voluntary  powers.  They  are  never  conscious  of  any 
physical  agency  coercing  obedience.  Where  compulsion  begins,  moral  agency  ends. 
Persuasion  brought  to  bear  upon  mind,  is  always  such  in  its  nature  that  it  can  be 
resisted.  By  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  God's  creatures  must  have  power  to  resist 
any  amount  of  even  His  persuasion.  There  can  be  no  power  in  heaven  or  earth  to 
ooeroe  the  will,  as  matter  is  coerced.  The  nature  of  mind  forbids  its  possibility. 
God  is  infinitely  wise.  He  cannot  act  unwisely.  The  supposition  would  make 
Him  cease  to  be  perfect,  and  this  were  equivalent  to  ceasing  to  be  God.  Here, 
then,  is  the  ease.  A  sinner  is  about  to  fall  before  temptation,  or  in  more  correct 
language,  is  about  to  Txuh  into  some  new  sin.  God  cannot  wisely  prevent  his  doing 
ML    Now  what  shall  be  done  t    Bhall  He  let  that  sinner  rush  on  to  his  ehosen  sin 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRA.TOR.  [chap,  rm. 

and  self-wrought  ruin ;  or  shall  He  step  forward,  unwisely,  sin  Himself,  and  inoar 
all  the  frightful  consequences  of  such  a  step  ?  He  lets  the  sinner  bear  his  own 
responsibility.  Thus  the  impossibility  of  preventing  sin  lies  not  in  the  sinner,  but 
wholly  with  God.  Sin,  it  should  be  remembered,  is  nothing  else  than  an  act  of 
free  will,  always  committed  against  one's  conviction  of  right.  Indeed,  if  a  man  did 
not  know  that  selfishness  is  sin,  it  would  not  be  sin  in  his  case.  These  remarks 
will  suffice  to  show  that  sin  in  every  instance  of  its  commission  is  utterly  inezcas* 
able.  IL  We  are  next  to  notice  some  objections.  1.  "  If  God  is  infinitely  wise 
and  good,  why  need  we  pray  at  all  ?  If  He  will  surely  do  the  best  possible  thing 
always,  and  all  the  good  He  can  do,  why  need  we  pray  ?  "  Because  His  infinite 
goodness  and  wisdom  enjoin  it  upon  us.  2.  Objecting  again,  you  ask  why  we  should 
pray  to  God  to  prevent  sin,  if  He  cannot  prevent  it  ?  We  pray  for  the  very  purpose 
of  changing  the  circumstances.  If  we  step  forward  and  offer  fervent,  effectual 
prayer,  this  quite  changes  the  state  of  the  case,  3.  Yet  further  objecting,  you  ask 
— "  Why  did  God  create  moral  agents  at  all  if  He  foresaw  that  He  could  not 
prevent  their  sinning  ?  "  Because  He  saw  that  on  the  whole  it  was  better  to  do  so. 
Concluding  remarks :  1.  We  may  see  the  only  sense  in  which  God  could  have 
purposed  the  existence  of  sin.  It  is  simply  negative.  He  purposed  not  to  prevent 
it  in  any  case  where  it  does  actually  occur.  2.  The  existence  of  sin  does  not  prove 
that  it  is  the  necessary  means  of  the  greatest  good.  3.  The  human  conscience 
always  justifies  God.  This  is  an  undeniable  fact — a  fact  of  universal  consciousness. 
(C.  G.  Finney,  D.D.)  The  evil  and  danger  of  offences  : — 1.  The  first  is  a  time  of 
persecution.  Offences  wiU  abound  in  a  time  of  persecution  to  the  ruin  of  many 
professors.  2.  A  time  of  the  abounding  of  great  sins  is  a  time  of  giving  and  taking 
great  offence.  3.  When  there  is  a  decay  of  Churches,  when  they  grow  cold,  and 
are  under  decays,  it  is  a  time  of  the  abounding  of  offences.  Offences  are  of  two 
sorts.  I.  Such  as  abe  taken  only,  and  not  given.  The  great  offence  taken  was 
at  Jeens  Christ  Himself.  This  offence  taken,  and  not  given,  is  increased  by  the 
poverty  of  the  Church.  These  things  are  an  offence  taken  and  not  given. 
II.  Thbee  abb  onrENCES  given  and  taken.  1.  Offences  given:  and  they  are 
men's  public  sins,  and  the  miscarriages  of  professors  that  are  under  vows  and 
obligations  to  honourable  obedience.  Men  may  give  offence  by  errors,  and 
miscarriages  in  Churches,  and  by  immoralities  in  their  lives.  This  was  in 
the  sin  of  David ;  God  would  pass  by  everything  but  offence  given :  •'  Because 
thou  hast  made  My  name  to  be  blasphemed,"  therefore  I  wiU  deal  so  and  so.  So 
God  speaks  of  the  people  of  Israel :  these  were  My  people,  by  reason  of  you  My 
name  is  profaned  among  the  Gentiles.  These  are  the  people  of  the  Lord ;  see  now 
they  are  come  into  captivity,  what  a  vile  people  they  are.  Such  things  are  an 
offence  given.  2.  Offences  taken.  Now  offences  are  taken  two  ways.  (1)  As  they 
occasion  grief  (Eom.  xiv.).  See  that  by  thy  miscarriage  thou  "  grieve  not  thy 
brother."  Men's  offences  who  are  professors,  are  a  grief,  trouble,  and  burden  to 
those  who  are  concerned  in  the  same  course  of  profession.  "  Offences  will  come  "  ; 
and  therefore  let  us  remember,  that  God  can  sanctify  the  greatest  offences  to  our 
humiliation  and  recovery,  and  to  the  saving  of  our  Church.  Such  is  His  infinite 
wisdom.  (2)  Given  offences  occasion  sin.  But  offences  given  are  an  occasion  of 
sin,  even  among  professors  and  believers  themselves.  The  worst  way  whereby  a 
given  offence  is  thus  taken,  is,  when  men  countenance  themselves  in  private  sins 
by  others'  public  sins  ;  and  go  on  in  vices  because  they  see  such  and  such  commit 
greater.  Woe  nnto  us  if  we  so  take  offence.  Again,  a  given  offence  is  taken,  when 
onr  minds  are  provoked,  exasperated,  and  carried  off  from  a  spirit  of  love  and 
tenderness  towards  those  that  offend,  and  all  others,  and  when  we  are  discouraged 
and  despond,  as  though  the  ways  of  God  would  not  carry  us  out.  This  is  to  take 
offence  to  our  disadvantage.  I  shall  give  you  a  few  rules  from  hence,  and  so  con- 
clude, (a)  The  giving  offence  being  a  great  aggravation  of  sin,  let  this  rule  lie 
continually  in  your  hearts.  That  the  more  public  persons  are,  the  more  careful 
they  ought  to  be  that  they  give  no  offence  either  to  Jew  or  Gentile,  or  to  "  the 
Church  of  Christ."  (6)  If  what  I  have  laid  down  be  your  first  and  your  main 
rule,  I  doubt  where  this  is  neglected  there  is  want  of  sincerity;  bat  where  it 
is  your  principal  rule,  there  is  nothing  but  hypocrisy.  Men  may  walk  by  this 
rule,  and  have  corrupt  minds,  and  cherish  wickedness  in  their  hearts,  (c)  Be  not 
afraid  of  the  great  multiplication  of  offences  at  this  day  in  the  world.  The  truths 
of  the  gospel  and  holiness  have  broke  through  a  thousand  times  more  offences. 
(d)  Beg  of  Ood  wisdom  to  manage  yourselves  under  offences :  and  of  all  things 
take  heed  of  that  great  evil  which  professors  have  been  very  apt  to  run  into ;  I 


.  xvu,]  ST.  LUKE.  279 

mean,  to  receive  and  promote  reports  of  offence  among  themselves,  taking  hold  of 
the  least  colour  or  pretence  to  report  such  things  as  are  matter  of  offence,  and  give 
advantage  to  the  world.  Take  heed  of  this,  it  is  the  design  of  the  devil  to  load 
professors  with  false  reports.  (J.  Owen,  D.D.)  Of  the  necessity  of  offences 
arising  against  the  gospel : — I.  In  the  first  place,  it  will  be  proper  to  consider  what 

THB   PRINCIPAL  OF  THOSE    OFFENCES    ABB    WHICH   HINDER    THE    PROPAOATION   OF   THB 

oosPEL  OF  TBUTH.  And  though  everything  that  is  faulty  in  any  kind  does  in  its 
measure  and  degree  contribute  to  this  evil ;  yet  whoever  considers  the  state  of  the 
Christian  world,  and  the  history  of  the  Church  in  all  ages  from  the  beginning,  will 
find  that  the  great  offences  which  have  all  along  chiefly  hindered  the  progress  of 
true  Christianity,  are  these  which  follow.  1.  Corruption  of  doctrine.  The  Jewish 
believers,  even  in  the  apostles*  own  times,  contended  for  the  necessity  of  observing 
the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  law  of  Moses ;  and  this  gave  just  offence  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  deterred  them  from  readily  embracing  the  gospel.  After  this,  other 
offences  arose  from  among  the  Gentile  converts,  who  by  degrees  corrrtpting  them- 
selves after  the  similitude  of  the  heathen  worshippers,  introduced  saist^  inA  loiages, 
and  pompous  ceremonies  and  grandeur  into  the  Church,  instead  of  trjr  ^irtue  and 
righteousness  of  hfe.  2.  The  next  is  divisions,  contentions,  acd  animosities 
among  Christians,  arising  from  pride,  and  from  a  desire  of  dominioa,  and  from 
building  matters  of  an  uncertain  nature  and  of  human  invention  upon  the  founda- 
tion of  Christ.  The  great  offence,  I  say,  which  in  all  nationii  and  in  all  ages  t^s 
hindered  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  of  truth,  has  been  a  hypocritical  zeal  to 
secure  by  force  a  fictitious  uniformity  of  opinion,  which  is  indeed  impossible  in 
nature ;  instead  of  the  real  Christian  unity  of  sincerity,  charity,  and  mutual  for. 
bearance,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness.  3.  The  third  and  last  great  offence  I 
shall  mention,  by  which  the  propagation  of  true  religion  is  hindered,  is  the  vicious 
and  debauched  lives,  not  of  Christians,  for  that  is  a  contradiction,  but  of  those  who 
for  form's  sake  profess  themselves  to  be  so.  II.  Having  thus  at  large  explained 
what  is  meant  in  the  text  by  the  word  "  offences,"  I  proceed  in  the  second  place  to 
consider  in  what  sense  oub  Savioub  uust  be  understood  to  affirm  that  it  is 
IMPOSSIBLE  BUT  SUCH  OFFENCES  WILL  COME ;  Or,  Bs  it  is  expressed  in  St.  Matthew, 
that  it  must  "  needs  be  "  that  offences  come.  And  here  there  have  been  some  so 
absurdly  unreasonable  as  to  understand  this  of  a  proper  and  natural  necessity ;  as 
if  God  had  ordained  that  offences  should  come,  and  had  accordingly  predestinated 
particular  men  to  commit  them.  But  this  is  directly  charging  God  with  the  sins  of 
men,  and  making  ffim,  not  themselves,  the  author  of  evil.  The  plain  meaning  of 
our  Saviour,  when  He  affirms  it  to  be  impossible  but  that  offences  will  come,  is 
this  only — that,  considering  the  state  of  the  world,  the  number  of  temptations,  the 
freedom  of  men's  will,  the  frailty  of  their  nature,  the  perverseness  and  obstinacy  of 
their  affections ;  it  cannot  be  expected,  it  cannot  be  supposed,  it  cannot  be  hoped, 
but  that  offences  will  come ;  though  it  be  very  unreasonable  they  should  come. 
Men  need  not,  men  ought  not,  to  corrupt  the  doctrine  of  Christ ;  they  need  not 
dishonour  their  religion  by  unchristian  heats,  contentions,  and  animosities  among 
themselves  ;  much  less  is  there  any  necessity  that  they  should  Uve  contrary  to  it, 
by  vicious  and  debauched  practices ;  and  yet,  morally  speaking,  it  cannot  be  but 
that  all  these  things  will  happen.     III.  I  proposed  to  consider  in  the  third  place, 

WHT    A    PABTICCLAB    WOB    IB,   BY    WAY    OF    IMPHASIS    AND    DISTINCTION,     DENOUNCED 

AGAINST  THE  PERSONS  BY  WHOM  THESE  OFFENCES  COME.  Thus  it  appears  plainly 
in  general,  that  the  necessity  here  mentioned  of  offences  coming,  is  no  excuse  for 
those  by  whose  wickedness  they  come.  It  is  because  they  are  offences  of  an  ex> 
tensive  nature.  IV.  The  infebences  I  shall  dbaw  from  what  has  been  said, 
AJOB — 1.  From  the  explication  which  has  been  given  of  these  words  of  our  Saviour — 
••It  is  impossible  but  that  offences  will  come" — we  may  learn,  not  to  charge  God  with 
evil,  nor  to  ascribe  to  any  decree  of  His  the  wickedness  and  impieties  of  men.  2. 
Since  our  Saviour  has  forewarned  us  that  it  must  needs  be  that  such  offences  will 
come  as  may  prove  stumbling-blocks  to  the  weak  and  inattentive,  let  ns  take  care» 
since  we  have  received  this  warning,  not  to  stumble  or  be  offended  at  them.  3. 
And  above  all,  as  we  ought  not  to  take,  so  much  more  ought  we  to  be  careful  that 
we  never  give,  any  of  these  offences.  (S.  Clarke.)  On  the  vitiating  influence  of 
the  higher  upon  the  lower  orders  of  society : — If  this  text  were  thoroughly  pursued 
into  its  manifold  applications,  it  would  be  found  to  lay  a  weight  of  fearful  responsi- 
bility upon  as  alL  We  are  here  called  upon,  not  to  work  out  our  own  salvation,  but 
to  oompate  the  refiex  infiuence  of  all  our  works,  and  of  all  our  ways,  on  the  principles 
of  others.    And  when  one  thinks  of  the  mischief  which  this  influence  might  spread 


f80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xwa, 

aronnd  it,  even  from  Christians  of  chiefest  reputation ;  "when  one  thinks  of  th« 
readiness  of  man  to  take  shelter  in  the  example  of  an  ackno^fledged  superior ;  when 
one  thinks  that  some  inconsistency  of  oars  might  seduce  another  into  such  an 
imitation  as  oTerbears  the  reproaches  of  his  own  conscience ;  when  one  thinks  of 
himself  as  the  source  and  the  centre  of  a  contagion  which  might  bring  a  blight 
npon  the  graces  and  the  prospects  of  other  souls  beside  his  own — surely  this  is 
i-nough  to  supply  him  with  a  reason  why,  in  working  out  his  own  personal  salva- 
tion,  he  should  do  it  with  fear,  and  with  watchfulness,  and  with  much  trembling. 
But  we  are  now  upon  the  ground  of  a  higher  and  more  delicate  conscientiousness  than 
is  generally  to  be  met  with ;  whereas  our  object  at  present  is  to  expose  certain  of 
the  grosser  offences  which  abound  in  society,  and  which  spread  a  most  dangerous 
and  ensnaring  influence  among  the  individuals  who  compose  it.  Let  us  not  forget 
to  urge  on  every  one  sharer  in  this  work  of  moral  contamination,  that  never  does 
the  meek  and  gentle  Saviour  speak  in  terms  more  threatening  or  more  reproachful, 
than  when  He  speaks  of  the  enormity  of  such  misconduct.  There  cannot,  in  truth, 
be  a  grosser  outrage  committed  on  the  order  of  God's  administration,  than  that 
-which  he  is  in  the  habit  of  inflicting.  There  cannot,  surely,  be  a  directer  act  of 
rebellion,  than  that  which  multiplies  the  adherents  of  its  own  cause,  and  which 
swells  the  hosts  of  the  rebellions.  And,  before  we  conclude,  let  us,  if  possible,  try  to 
rebuke  the  wealthy  out  of  their  unfeeling  indifference  to  the  souls  of  the  poor,  by 
the  example  of  the  Saviour.  (T.  Chalmers,  D,D.)  Our  liability  to  cause  others  to 
offend : — A  father  tells  us  how  he  once  started  alone  to  climb  a  steep  and  perilous 
hiU,  purposely  choosing  a  time  when  his  children  were  at  play,  and  when  he  thought 
that  they  would  not  notice  his  absence.  He  was  climbing  a  precipitous  path  when 
he  was  startled  by  hearing  a  little  voice  shout,  "  Father,  take  the  safest  path,  for  I 
am  following  you."  On  looking  down,  he  saw  that  his  little  boy  had  followed  him, 
and  was  already  in  danger ;  and  he  trembled  lest  the  child's  feet  should  slip  before 
he  could  get  to  him,  and  grasp  his  warm  Uttle  hand.  "  Years  have  passed  since 
then,"  he  writes,  "  but  though  the  danger  has  passed,  the  little  fellow's  cry  has 
never  left  me.  It  taught  me  a  lesson,  the  full  force  of  which  I  had  never  known 
before.  It  showed  me  the  power  of  our  unconscious  influence,  and  I  saw  the 
terrible  possibility  of  our  leading  those  around  us  to  ruin,  without  intending  or 
knowing  it ;  and  the  lesson  I  learned  that  morning  I  am  anxious  to  impress  upon  all 
t«  whom  my  words  may  come."  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Cause  of  offence  to  the 
young : — The  owner  of  the  famous  Wedgwood  potteries,  in  the  beginning  of  thia 
century,  was  not  only  a  man  of  remarkable  mechanical  skill,  but  a  most  devout 
and  reverent  Christian.  On  one  occasion,  a  nobleman  of  dissolute  habits,  and  an 
avowed  atheist,  was  going  through  the  works,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Wedgwood,  and 

by  a  young  lad  who  was  employed  in  them,  the  son  of  pious  parents.    Lord  C 

sought  early  opportunity  to  speak  contemptuously  of  religion.  The  boy  at  first 
looked  amazed,  then  listened  with  interest,  and  at  last  burst  into  a  loud,  jeering 
laugh.  Mr.  Wedgwood  made  no  comment,  but  soon  found  occasion  to  show  his 
guest  the  process  of  making  a  flne  vase ;  how  with  inflnite  care  the  delicate  paste 
was  moulded  into  a  shape  of  rare  beauty  and  fragile  texture,  how  it  was  painted  by 
skilful  artists,  and  finally  passed  through  the  furnace,  coming  out  perfect  in  form 
and  pure  in  quality.  The  nobleman  declared  his  delight,  and  stretched  out  his 
hand  for  it,  but  the  potter  threw  it  on  the  ground,  shattering  it  into  a  thousand 

pieces.    "  That  was  unpardonable  carelessness  1 "  said  Lord  C ,  angrily.    "  I 

wished  to  take  that  cup  home  for  my  collection!  Nothing  can  restore  it  again." 
"  No.  Ton  forget,  my  lord,"  said  Mr.  Wedgwood,  "  that  the  soul  of  that  lad  who 
has  just  left  us  came  innocent  of  impiety  into  the  world ;  that  his  parents,  friends, 
all  good  influences,  have  been  at  work  during  his  whole  life  to  make  him  a  vessel 
fit  for  the  Master's  use ;  that  you,  with  your  touch,  have  undone  the  work  of  years. 

No  human  hand  can  bind  together  again  what  you  have  broken."    Lord  C , 

who  had  never  before  received  a  rebuke  from  an  inferior,  stared  at  him  in  silence  ; 
then  said,  "  Yon  are  an  honest  man,"  frankly  holding  out  his  hand.  "  I  never 
thought  of  the  effect  of  my  words."  There  is  no  subject  which  many  young  men 
are  more  fond  of  discussing  than  religion,  too  often  parading  the  crude,  half  com- 
prehended atheistic  arguments  which  they  have  heard  or  read  before  those  to  whom 

such  doubts  are  new.    Like  Lord  C ,  they  "do  not  think."    They  do  not, 

probably,  believe  these  arguments  themselves,  and  they  forget  that  they  are  in« 
fusing  poison  into  healthy  souls,  which  no  after-efforts  of  thciz*  ean  aver  rcmovok 
A  moment's  oarelessness  may  destroy  the  work  of  yean.    (ChritUam  Ag4.) 


CBA».  TTTL]  ST.  LUKE.  881 

Vers.  5,  6.  Increase  oar  fEdth. — Increated  faith  prayed  for: — 1.  Observe,  that 
faith  is  susceptible  of  being  increased.  2.  There  are  important  reasons  why  an 
increase  of  faith  shoald  be  desired.  (1)  An  increase  of  faith  is  connected  with  an 
increase  of  holiness.  (2)  The  increase  of  faith  is  connected  with  the  increase  of 
comfort.  (3)  The  increase  of  faith  is  connected  with  the  increase  of  nsefulness. 
(The  Preaehen'  Treasury.)  Prayer  for  increase  of  faith: — I.  Thb  disciples  ov 

Chbist  possess  rAiTH.  There  can  be  no  increase  where  there  is  no  possession, 
IL  An  incbeasb  of  tatch  is  possible.  This  will  appear  from — 1.  The  power  and 
goodness  of  its  Author.  2.  The  progressive  nature  of  religion.  3.  The  admonitions 
of  the  Bible.  4.  The  experience  of  the  saints.  III.  An  incbbask  op  faitb_  is 
OBXATLT  TO  BE  DESIBED.  We  infer  this — 1.  From  its  nature.  It  is  a  Divine  gift, 
and  its  existence  is  attributed  to  the  operation  of  God  (Col.  iL  12).  That  which 
God  works  in  us  must  be  desirable:  as  He  is  an  infinitely  good  Being,  His  works 
must  necessarily  bear  a  resemblance  to  Himself.  2.  From  its  effects.  These  refer 
— (1)  To  our  own  personal  salvation.  We  are  justified  by  faith — saved  by  faith — 
Christ  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith— we  stand  by  faith— live  by  faith — walk  by  faith 
— and  have  boldness  of  access  to  God  by  faith.  (2)  To  the  victories  we  gain  over 
our  enemies.  By  the  shield  of  faith  we  quench  the  fiery  darts,  &o.  (Eph.  vi.  16). 
We  conquer  the  world  by  faith  (1  John  v.  4).  The  ancient  worthies  by  faith 
*•  subdued  kingdoms,"  Ac.  (Heb.  xi.  33,  34).  (3)  To  the  moral  influence  of  out 
example.  IV.  Means  should  be  oskd  to  seodbb  an  increase  of  faith.  To 
accomplish  this  object — 1.  Study  the  character  of  its  Author.  Meditate  on  the 
power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Think  meanly  of  the 
Saviour,  and  you  will  have  little  confidence  in  Him ;  but  think  greatly  and  highly 
of  Him,  and  you  will  trust  in  Him  heartily,  and  believe  in  Him  fully.  2.  Get  a  more 
extensive  acquaintance  with  the  promises  of  God.  3.  Be  on  your  guard  against 
everything  that  will  deaden  or  damp  the  ardour  of  your  faith.  ^  Carnal  company, 
worldly  cares,  spiritual  supineness,  filthy  and  foolish  conversation — all  tend  to  sap 
the  foundation  of  your  faith,  and  destroy  your  dependence  upon  God.  In  conclu- 
sion, we  address  a  word — 1.  To  those  who  have  no  faith.  2.  To  those  whose  faith 
has  declined.  3.  To  those  whose  faith  remains  in  full  vigour.  (Theological  Sketch- 
took.)         Prayer  for  more  faith :— A  prayer  adapted  to  every  part  of  the  Christian 

life.        L     CONSIDSB    THE   GENERAL    lUPOBT   OF  THB   PBATER  :    "  LOBD,   INCBEASB   OUB 

rAiTH."  1.  Faith  has  respect  to  revealed  truth  as  its  immediate  object ;  and  in  the 
New  Testament  it  more  especially  relates  to  Christ  as  the  substance  of  all  the 
promises.  2.  In  praying  for  an  increase  of  this  principle,  the  apostles  acknowledged 
that  their  faith  was  weak.  3.  In  praying  for  more  faith,  they  also  acknowledged 
their  own  insufficiency  to  produce  it  (Eph.  ii.  8  ;  Phil.  ii.  13).  4.  In  directing  their 
prayer  to  Christ,  they  virtually  acknowledge  His  Divinity.  5.  This  prayer  might 
in  some  measure  be  answered  at  the  time,  but  was  more  especially  so  after  our 
Lord's  ascension.  II.  The  reasons  which  bbndbb  this  pbateb  buitablb  to  all 
Chbistians.  If  we  are  truly  the  followers  of  Christ,  yet  our  faith  is  weak  at  best, 
and  needs  to  be  increased,  and  that  for  various  reasons — 1.  On  account  of  its 
influence  in  obtaining  other  spiritual  blessings,  for  they  are  bestowed  according  to 
the  measure  of  faith.  2.  Its  influences  under  dark  and  trying  providences — Nothing 
bat  faith  can  snstain  as  under  them  (Psa.  xovii.  2).  3.  Its  influence  on  the  deep 
mysteries  of  Divine  tmth,  which  faith  only  can  receive  and  apply.  4.  The  influence 
of  faith  on  our  life  and  conduct  renders  this  prayer  peculiarly  suitable  and  im- 
portant. 5.  Our  spiritual  enjoyments,  as  they  are  derived  wholly  from  the  promises, 
are  proportioned  to  the  degree  of  faith.  6.  Its  importance  in  the  hour  of  death 
renders  it  unspeakably  desirable.  (Ihid.)  The  increase  of  faith : — I.  The  natubb 
OF  faith.  An  influential  belief  in  the  testimony  of  God.  This  necessarily  implies 
in  all  cases  the  absence  of  all  indifference  and  hostility  to  the  truth  which  is  its 
object,  and  also  a  state  of  heart  or  moral  sensibility  which  is  adapted  to  receive  its 
appropriate  influence.  It  is  easy  to  see  what  the  character  must  be,  formed  by  the 
power  of  such  a  principle.  Holiness,  perfect  holiness  in  man,  in  all  its  peace  and 
hopes  and  joys,  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  truths  of  the  gospel  carried  into 
effect  by  faith.  Let  there  be  the  impress  of  the  gospel  on  the  heart  and  life,  and 
what  dignity  and  perfection  of  character — what  noble  superiority  to  the  vanities  of 
the  world — what  lofty  conceptions  of  God  and  the  things  of  a  f utture  world — what  a 
lesemblance  to  the  Son  of  God  woald  be  furnished  by  such  a  man  1  Such  is  the 
natore  of  fai^  II.  Thb  heans  of  its  bxistenob.  I.  Prayer.  The  suppliant  a4 
Qod'i  throne  is  surrounded  by  Divine  realities.  Nor  is  there  a  spot  on  earth 
vksfe  the  tendencies  of  the  naart  to  depart  from  God  are   mora   «£teckQaUf 


882  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xvn. 

counteracted,  and  where  the  Bonl  comes  in  more  direct  contact  with  the  objecta 
of  faith,  than  the  closet.  Prayer  directly  leads  to  the  mortifying  of  unbelief 
in  its  very  root  and  element,  by  opening  a  direct  intercourse  with  heaven. 
2.  Our  faith  may  be  increased  by  examining  the  evidence  of  Divine  truth.  God 
always  deals  with  as  as  intelligent  beings.  3.  To  the  same  end  we  must 
cherish  a  deep  and  an  abiding  sense  of  the  mean  and  degrading  nature  of  earthly 
things.  4.  Closely  connected  with  this  subject  is  the  kindred  one  of  keeping 
death  and  eternity  continually  in  view.  5.  Another  means  of  increasing  faith 
is  its  repeated  exercise,  in  retirement  and  meditation,  as  well  as  in  the  businesa 
of  life.  6.  Important  to  the  same  end  are  just  views  of  the  truth  and  faithfulnesa 
of  God.  God  has  given  to  His  people  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  The 
only  ultimate  foundation  on  which  faith  can  rest  in  these  promises  is  the  un- 
changeable truth  of  God.  III.  Consider  the  desibableness  of  incbbasino 
ouK  FAITH.  This  appears — 1.  From  the  character  it  gives.  All  the  defects  and 
blemishes  of  Christian  character  may  be  traced  to  the  want  or  the  weakness  of  faith 
as  their  cause.  It  is  through  the  imperfection  of  this  principle  that  the  charactei 
of  man  is  formed  so  much  by  the  influence  of  objects  that  here  surround  him. 
Every  man  is  what  his  object  is.  2.  From  the  consolations  which  faith  imparts. 
It  is  not  only  the  prerogative  of  faith  that  it  adds  to  our  peace  and  our  joys  in  the 
prosperous  scenes  of  life.  Its  power  is  still  more  triumphant  in  scenes  of  affliction 
and  trial.  To  the  eye  of  faith  every  event  has  a  tendency  and  an  aim.  3.  From 
the  glory  for  which  ii  prepares.  Preparation  for  the  glory  that  shall  hereafter  be 
revealed  must  be  begun  in  this  world.  It  must  be  begun  in  that  character,  which 
is  the  only  true  appropriate  preparation  for  the  services  and  joys  of  heaven.  If  the 
character  be  formed  here  by  the  exclusive  influence  of  the  objects  of  sense,  if  all  the 
desires  and  affections  be  confined  to  these,  there  can  be  nothing  in  the  world  of 
spirits  to  meet  and  satisfy  a  single  desire  of  the  soul.  The  character,  then,  mast 
be  formed  by  other  objects — the  desires  and  affections  of  the  soul  mast  be  fixed  on 
things  above — it  must  thus  become  capable  of  heavenly  joys,  or  in  vain  were  it 
admitted  into  heaven  itself.  But  it  is  by  faith,  and  by  faith  only,  that  the  influence 
of  these  Divine  and  glorious  realities  can  be  felt  in  our  present  state.  [N.  W.  Taylor, 
D.D.)  The  necexsity  of  increased  faith  : — I.    The  object  of  the  apostles* 

BOLiciTUDB.  Their  "faith."  1.  We  ought,  my  friends,  to  be  extremely  careful  of 
our  faith — both  of  its  rightness  and  of  its  strength,  first  of  all — when  we  consider  the 
position  which  faith  occupies  in  salvation.  Faith  is  the  salvation-grace.  We  are 
not  saved  by  love ;  but  we  are  saved  by  grace,  and  we  are  saved  by  faith.  We  are 
not  saved  by  courage,  we  are  not  saved  by  patience ;  but  we  are  saved  by  faith. 
That  is  to  say,  God  gives  His  salvation  to  faith  and  not  to  any  other  virtue.  2. 
Be  anxious  about  your  faith,  for  all  your  graces  bang  upon  it.  Faith  is  the  root- 
grace  :  all  other  virtues  and  graces  spring  from  it.  3.  Take  heed  of  your  faith, 
because  Christ  thinks  much  of  it.  4.  Next,  Christian,  take  good  care  of  thy  faith, 
for  recollect  faith  is  the  only  way  whereby  thou  canst  obtain  blessings.  It  is  said 
of  Midas,  that  he  had  the  power  to  turn  everything  into  gold  by  the  touch  of  his 
hand  ;  and  it  is  true  of  faith — it  can  turn  everything  into  gold,  bat  destroy  faith,  we 
have  lost  our  all ;  we  are  miserably  poor  because  we  can  hold  no  fellowship  with 
the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  6.  Next,  my  friends,  take  care  of  your 
faith  perpetually,  because  of  your  enemies ;  for  if  you  do  not  want  faith  when  yott 
are  with  friends,  yon  wiU  require  it  when  you  have  to  deal  vrith  your  foes.  Faith 
has  quenched  the  violence  of  the  flames,  shut  the  mouths  of  lions,  and  out  of  weak- 
ness it  has  made  us  strong.  It  has  overcome  more  enemies  than  the  whole  host  of 
conquerors.  Tell  me  not  of  the  victories  of  Wellington  ;  mention  not  the  battles  of 
Napoleon  ;  tell  me  of  what  faith  has  done  1  Oh  1  if  we  rfiould  erect  a  monument  to 
the  honour  of  faith,  what  various  names  should  we  carve  on  the  mighty  pedestal  I 
6.  And  now  for  a  sixth  reason.  Take  care  of  your  faith,  because  otherwise  yoo 
cannot  well  perform  your  duty.  Faith  is  the  foot  of  the  soul  by  which  it  can  march 
along  the  road  of  the  commandments.  Love  can  make  the  feet  move  more 
swiftly,  but  faith  is  the  foot  which  carries  the  soul.  Faith  is  the  oil  enabling  the 
wheels  of  holy  devotion  and  of  earnest  piety  to  move  well,  bat  without  faith  the 
wheels  are  taken  from  the  chariot,  and  we  drag  along  heavily.  With  faith  I  can 
do  all  things,  without  faith  I  shall  neither  have  the  inclination  nor  the  power  to 
do  anything  in  the  service  of  God.  7.  Take  care  of  your  faith,  my  friends,  for 
it  is  very  often  so  weak  that  it  demands  all  your  attention.  II.  The  heabt's 
WsiBE  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  They  did  not  say,  "  Lord,  keep  our  faith  alive :  Lord, 
•nstain  it  as  it  is  at  present,"  but  "Increase  our  faith."     For  they  knew  verj  weU 


MUP.  xvn.]  ST.  LUKE.  883 

that  it  is  only  by  increase  that  the  Christian  keeps  alive  at  alL  Napoleon  once 
said,  "  I  must  fight  battles,  and  I  must  win  them  ;  conquest  has  made  me  what  I 
am,  and  conquest  must  maintain  me."  And  it  is  so  with  the  Christian.  It  is  not 
yesterday's  battle  that  will  save  me  to-day  ;  I  must  be  going  onwards.  1.  "  Increase 
our  faith  "  in  its  extent — the  extent  of  what  it  will  receive.  Increase  my  faith  and 
help  me  to  believe  a  little  more.  I  believe  I  have  only  just  begun  to  learn  the  ABO 
of  the  Scriptures  yet,  and  will  constantly  cry  to  the  Lord,  "Increase  my  faith," 
that  I  may  know  more  and  believe  more,  and  understand  Thy  Word  far  better. 
♦'  Increase  my  faith  "  in  its  extent.  2.  "  Increase  my  faith  "  in  its  intensity.  Faith 
needs  to  bo  increased  in  its  power  as  well  as  in  its  extent.  We  do  not  wish  to  act 
as  some  do  with  a  river,  when  they  break  the  banks,  to  let  it  spread  over  the  pasture, 
and  so  make  it  shallower ;  but  we  wish,  while  it  increases  in  surface,  that  it  may 
increase  likewise  in  its  depth.  III.  The  Person  to  whom  the  apostles  addressed 
THEiB  PBAYEB.  The  Lord.  They  went  to  the  right  Person.  Let  us  do  the  same. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Praying  for  an  increase  of  faith : — L  We  should  cbe  this 

FBATBB  FOR  THE  INCREASE  OF  spiRiruAL  KNOWLEDGE.  Let  any  Christian  examine 
his  own  heart  and  he  will  see  how  sadly  he  needs  this,  how  narrow  is  the  limit  of 
his  knowledge  of  Christ,  how  circumscribed  his  views  of  His  love,  His  sympathy. 
His  compassion,  His  excellency ;  how  mean  his  apprehension  of  His  power  and 
majesty  and  present  glory.  The  excellency  of  Christ  can  only  be  communicated 
now  to  the  soul  by  the  exercise  of  faith.  II.  And  not  only  for  the  enlargement  of 
spiritual  knowledge,  but  for  establishment  in  grace  as  well,  should  this  prayer  be 
used.  That  we  may  be  established  in  the  simplicity  and  fulness  of  the  gospel.  The 
fulfilment  of  this  prayer  will  bring  this  to  pass ;  it  is  included  in  the  gift  of  increased 
ffuth.  Increase  of  faith  brings  clear  views  of  the  mercy  of  the  gospel,  it  corrects 
the  natural  uprisings  of  pride  in  our  hearts,  it  checks  the  carnal  reasonings  of  our 
minds,  it  convinces  of  the  absolute  truth  of  all  that  the  Bible  teaches  about  our 
need  of  the  gospel.  It  will  lead  to  the  discovery  of  error,  the  detection  of  sophistry, 
the  avoidance  of  unscriptural  teaching,  however  specious  it  may  be.  III.  This 
prayer  should  also  be  used  in  order  that  our  perception  of  Satan's  temptations 
MA'S  BE  CLEAR.  It  is  in  proportion  as  our  faith  is  increased,  that  "  we  are  not  ignorant 
of  his  devices."  [H.  M.  Baker.)  The  increase  of  faith  .-—That  "  faith  "  is  "  a 
gift  of  God" — as  much  a  "  gift  "  as  any  other  sovereign  act  of  His  power — I  need 
not  stay  to  prove.  We  have  to  do  this  morning  with  another  thought — that  the 
growth  and  the  "  increase  "  of  '*  faith,"  at  every  successive  stage,  is  a  distinct  act 
of  Almighty  power.  We  know,  indeed,  that  everything  which  is  of  God  has  in  it 
essential  tendency,  nay,  an  absolute  necessity  in  itself  to  grow.  If  you  do  not 
wilfully  check  the  grace  of  God  that  is  in  you,  that  grace  will,  and  must,  in  obedience 
to  the  law  of  its  being,  increase.  We  lay  it  down,  then,  as  a  certainty  that  "faith" 
is  a  thing  of  degrees.  One  believer  never  reaches  the  same  degree  in  this  life  as 
another.  Each  believer  is  in  different  states  of  belief,  at  different  periods  of  his 
own  life.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  a  brother  who  is  "  weak  in  the  faith  " — St.  Stephen 
and  St.  Barnabas  are  commended  as  men  "  full  of  faith."  But  it  is  easy  for  us  to 
see  traces  of  "  increase  of  faith  "  in  the  lives  of  the  apostles  themselves.  Have 
not  we  seen  progress  in  the  mind  of  the  St.  Peter  in  the  Gospels  and  the  St.  Peter 
in  the  Epistles  7  In  St.  John  also,  from  the  time  when  he  could  call  fire  from 
heaven,  to  the  hour  when  he  could  stand  so  meekly  at  the  cross's  foot  7  You  will 
Bee  the  same  in  St.  Paul's  mind  if  you  compare  what  he  says  of  himself  in  his 
Epistles  to  the  Bomansand  the  Corinthians,  which  were  his  early  Epistles,  with  his 
triumphant  assurance  in  his  Epistles  to  Timothy,  which  were  his  last  Epistles.  If, 
then,  *'  faith  "  be  a  thing  capable  of  degrees,  every  man  must  be  responsible  for  the 
measure  of  his  attainment  of  that  grace  in  the  sight  of  God.  There  are  various 
"  degrees  of  faith  "  in  the  world ;  but  they  are  all  placed  in  their  various  degrees 
with  distinct  design.  It  is  intended,  in  the  Divine  economy  of  God's  Church,  that 
there  should  be  "  degrees  of  faith,"  to  answer  His  purpose ;  but  that  eternal  purpose 
of  God  is  still  coneistent  with  man's  responsibiUty  in  the  matter.  The  various 
degrees  make  that  beautiful  variety,  out  of  which  God  brings  His  own  unity.  They 
give  occasion  for  kind  judgment,  and  Christian  forbearance,  and  helpfulness  one  to 
another,  seeing  that  the  man  of  "  much  faith  "  must  not  despise,  but  must  recog- 
nize as  a  brother,  and  help  on,  the  man  who  is  said  to  be  a  man  of  "little  faith." 
One  man  has  '*  faith  "  sufficient  to  lead  him  to  entire  separation  from  the  world, 
and  to  undergo  great  mortification — another  has  not  got  so  far.  Let  the  halting, 
lingering  one — &e  soul  that  still  keeps  too  much  in  this  world — remember  what  the 
apostle  says,  that  it  is  "faitii "  which  "  overcomes  the  world,"  and  therefore  let 


S84  THE  BIBLICAl  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  xm. 

him  praj,  "  Lord,  increase  my  faith."  One  ean  carry  all  mysteries,  and  Ukeg 
mysteries — another  loses  his  "  faith  "  when  he  comes  to  mysteries.  Bat  he  who 
knows  his  own  heart  best,  that  man  knows  most  how  fitting  the  supplication  is, 
everywhere,  "  Lord,  increase  my  faith."  There  are  three  reasons  here  why  it  ia 
important  to  ask  this  petition.  If  any  one  of  yon  is  without  any  promised  blessing 
of  Ood,  it  is  simply  because  he  has  not  "  faith  "  about  the  matter.  Again,  God  has 
established  a  direct  proportion  between  a  man's  faith  and  a  man's  success :  "  accord- 
ing to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you."  And,  once  more,  remember,  there  are  degrees 
in  heaven ;  and,  according  aswereach  here  "  in  faith"  we  shall  reach  there  "in  glory.'* 
"  Lord,  increase  our  faith !  "  The  man  simply  says  it,  and  there  comes  over  his 
mind  such  a  sudden  sense  of  God's  amazing  love  to  him,  in  the  redemption  ot 
his  soul,  that  everything  else  looks  perfectly  insignificant,  in  the  thought  of 
his  own  acceptance  with  God.  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith  I  " — and  we  have  such 
communion  with  things  unseen,  that  death  has  no  power.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
The  victoriotu  power  of  faith : — Men  are  just  like  the  disciples.  They  hear  religion 
preached ;  they  believe  the  things  that  are  said  ;  and  at  times  the  truth  glances 
through  the  exterior  coating  and  strikes  their  moral  sense.  The  ideal  of  truth 
presented  to  them  seems  beautiful  and  sweet.  In  a  white  light  it  is  to  them. 
Thousands  and  thousands  ot  men  there  are  who  hear  the  gospel  preached  every 
Sunday,  and  think  there  is  nothing  more  beautiful  than  meekness,  nothing  more 
beautiful  than  humility,  as  tbey  are  presented  to  them.  These  are  excellent  qualities 
in  their  estimation.  They  believe  in  love.  They  believe  in  everything  that  is 
required  in  a  true  Christian  character.  It  meets  their  approval.  Their  reason 
approves  it.  Their  judgment  approves  it.  Their  taste  approves  it.  Their  moral 
sentiments  approve  it.  And  yet,  when  they  ask  themselves,  "  How  shall  I  practise 
it  ?  "  they  fall  off  instantly,  and  say,  "  It  is  not  possible  for  me.  I  never  can  do 
it  in  the  world."  Take  gentleness.  Here  is  a  great  rude-footed,  coarse-handed 
man,  gruff  and  impetuous,  and  careless  of  everybody,  who  sits  and  hears  a  discourse 
on  the  duty  of  being  gentle ;  and  as  the  various  figures  and  illustrations  are  pre- 
sented, he  says,  "  Oh,  how  beautiful  it  is  to  be  gentle  I  "  But  the  moment  he  gets 
out  of  the  church,  he  thinks,  "  The  idea  of  my  being  gentle !  I  gentle  ?  i gentle? 
Somebody  else  must  do  that  part  of  religion.  I  never  can.  It  is  not  my  nature  to 
be  gentle."  Men  have  an  ideal  of  what  is  right ;  and  they  believe  in  the  possibility 
of  its  realization  somewhere;  but  they  do  not  think  they  are  called  to  that  thing. 
They  do  not  believe  it  is  possible  for  them.  There  are  avaricious  men,  I  suppose, 
to  whom,  on  hearing  a  discourse  on  benevolence  in  a  church,  it  really  shines,  and 
who  say,  "Oh,  this  benevolence,  though  it  is  well-nigh  impossible — how  beautiful 
it  is  1 "  But  when  it  begins  to  come  home  to  them,  and  the  question  is,  "  WiU  yoo, 
from  this  time  forth,  order  your  life  according  to  the  law  of  benevolence  ?  "  they 
fall  off  from  that  and  say,  "  I  cannot ;  it  is  impossible."  And  if  Christ  were  present 
and  such  men  were  under  the  influence  of  His  teaching,  they  would  turn  to  TTim 
and  say,  "  Lord,  if  this  is  true,  it  is  true,  and  I  must  conform  to  it ;  but  you  must 
increase  my  faith.  I  most  have  some  higher  power.  I  cannot  do  it  without." 
And  Christ  would  encourage  them,  and  say  |not  rebukingly,  as  it  seems  in  tibe 
letter,  but  very  comfortingly),  "  Do  not  think  it  is  so  hard.  It  is  difficult,  but  not  ao 
diffioult  AS  you  suppose.  Do  not  think  it  to  be  so  impossible  that  I  must  work  a 
miracle  for  you  before  yon  can  accomplish  it."  If  you  have  faith,  if  yon  rouse  up 
those  spiritual  elements  that  are  in  you,  if  you  bring  them  under  the  illumination 
of  God's  own  soul,  and  they  are  inspired  by  the  Divine  influence,  there  is  that 
power  in  you  by  which  you  can  subdue  all  your  lower  nature,  and  can  gain  victories 
over  every  single  appetite  and  passion,  and  every  single  evil  inclination  and  bad 
habit.  Let  the  better  nature  in  man  once  more  come  into  communion  with  Ood, 
and  it  is  mightier  than  the  worse  nature  in  man,  and  can  subdue  it.  Tou  will  fail 
of  the  secret  and  real  spirit  of  this  passage,  if  you  do  not  consider  its  meaning  as 
not  only  an  interpretation,  but  as  an  interpretation  which  is  designed  to  give 
courage  and  hope  and  cheer  to  those  who  desire  to  break  away  from  bad  tenden- 
cies and  traits,  and  to  rise,  by  a  true  growth,  into  the  higher  forms  of  Christian 
experience.  Let  us  consider,  then,  the  practical  aspect  of  this  matter.  When  • 
strong  nature  is  snatched  from  worldliness,  and  begins  to  live  a  Christian  life, 
what  are  the  elements  of  his  experience,  reduced  to  some  sort  of  philosophical  ex- 
pression r  First,  the  soul  ia  brought  into  the  conscious  presence,  and  under  the 
recognized  power,  of  the  Divine  nature.  This  is  with  more  or  less  distinctness  in 
different  individuals.  Consider  how  men  are  brought  to  a  reUgious  life.  One  man 
hM  beaa  •  very  worldly  and  oarelesa  man,  until,  in  the  oniversal  whirl  of  aflain, 


CHAP.  XVII.]  ST.  LUKE.  285 

A  slap  of  bankruptcy,  like  the  stroke  of  waves  against  the  side  of  a  ship,  smashes 
into  his  concerns,  and  he  founders.  He  saves  himself,  but  all  his  property  goes  to 
the  bottom.  And  there  he  is,  humbled,  crushed,  mortified.  And  it  is  a  very 
solemn  thing  to  him.  But  he  never  had  any  preaching  before  that  gave  him  such 
a  sense  of  the  nnsatisfactoriness  of  this  life.  Others  come  into  a  religions  life  by 
the  power  of  sympathy.  They  are  drawn  toward  it  by  personal  influence.  They 
go  into  it  because  their  companions  are  going  in.  In  a  hundred  such  ways  as  these 
God's  providence  brings  people  into  the  beginnings  of  a  Christian  life.  Bat  when 
a  man  has  once  come  into  it,  his  very  first  experience,  usually,  whether  he  be 
exactly  conscious  of  it  or  not,  is  the  thought  that  he  is  brought  into  the  presence 
of  a  higher  Being — a  higher  Spirit — than  he  has  been  wont  to  think  was  near  him. 
Ood  begins  to  mean  something  to  him.  This  sense  of  God's  presence  is  that  which 
is  the  beginning  of  faith  in  him.  It  opens  the  door  for  the  Divine  power  to  in- 
flame his  soul ;  that  is,  for  the  Divine  mind  to  give  strength  and  inspiration  to  the 
nobler  and  higher  part  of  his  mind — to  his  reason ;  to  his  whole  moral  nature ;  to 
that  which  is  the  best  and  highest  in  him.  By  the  enlarging,  by  the  education,  by 
the  inspiration  of  a  man's  nature,  in  this  direction,  the  beginnings  of  victory  are 
planted.  And  now,  all  the  forces  of  a  man's  nature,  and  all  the  foregoing  habits 
of  his  life,  beginning  here,  will  soon  be  so  changed  as  to  come  into  agreement  with, 
his  higher  feelings  which  will  be  excited  by  the  insbining  of  God's  souL  Men 
think  it  is  mysterious ;  bat  it  is  not  mysterious.  Take  a  person  of  some  degree 
of  sensibility — a  young  woman,  for  instance — who  has  been  living  in  a  vicious 
cirde  of  people.  Her  father  and  mother — emigrants— died  on  landing.  She  was 
of  good  stock,  and  had  strong  moral  instincts ;  but  she  was  a  vagrant  child,  and 
was  soon  swept  into  the  swirl  of  poverty  and  vice.  Although  too  young  to  become 
herself  vicious,  yet  she  learned  to  lie,  and  steal,  and  swear — with  a  certain  inward 
compunction — until  by  and  by  some  kind  nature  brought  her  ont  of  the  street,  and 
out  of  the  den,  and  into  the  asylum.  And  then,  speedily,  some  childless  Christian 
woman,  wantiug  to  adopt  a  child,  sees  her,  and  likes  her  face  and  make,  and  brings 
her  home  to  her  house.  This  is  almost  the  first  time  she  has  had  any  direct  com- 
merce with  real  truth  and  real  refinement ;  and  at  first  she  has  an  impulse  of 
gratitude,  and  admiration,  and  wonder ;  and  in  the  main  she  is  inspired  by  a  sense 
of  gladness  and  of  thankfulness  to  her  benefactress.  But  as  she  lives  from  day 
to  day,  she  does  not  get  over  all  her  bad  tendencies.  Because  she  has  come  to  live 
with  and  to  be  the  daughter  of  this  woman,  she  does  not  get  over  the  love  of  lying, 
and  tricks,  and  dirtiness,  and  meanness,  and  littleness.  The  evil  does  not  die  ia 
an  instant  from  her  nature.  Yet  there  is  the  begirming  of  that  in  her  which  will 
by  and  by  overcome  it.  There  is  in  her  a  vague,  uninterpreted  sense  of  something 
higher  and  better  than  she  has  known  before.  And  it  is  all  embodied  in  her 
benefactress.  She  hears  her  sing,  and  hears  her  talk,  and  sees  what  kindnesses 
she  does  to  others,  and  how  she  denies  herself.  And  if  she  be,  as  I  have  supposed 
her  to  be,  a  child  of  strong,  origiual  moral  nature,  she  will,  in  the  course  of  a  year, 
be  almost  free  from  the  taint  of  corruption ;  almost  free  from  deceits ;  almost  free 
from  vices.  And  it  will  be  the  expulsive  power  of  new  love  in  her  soul  that  will 
have  driven  out  all  this  vermin  brood  of  passions.  As  long  as  she  is  in  the 
presence  of  this  benefactress,  she  will  feel  streaming  in  upon  her  nature  those 
influences  which  wake  up  her  higher  faculties,  and  give  them  power  over  her  lower 
faculties.  When  men  are  brought  into  the  Christian  life,  and  they  begin  to  come 
into  communion  with  God,  the  higher  part  of  their  nature  receives  such  a  stimulus 
that  it  has  power  to  dominate  the  lower  part — to  control  pride  ;  to  hold  in  restraint 
deceits ;  to  make  men  gentle,  and  mild,  and  sweet,  and  forgiving,  and  noble,  and 
ennobling.  The  direct  influence  which  the  spirit  of  God  has  upon  the  human 
soul,  is  to  develop  the  good  and  expel  the  evil  tendencies  that  are  in  it.  There 
will  be  a  change  in  our  outward  conformities  to  society ;  to  institutions ;  to  new 
duties.  There  will  be  the  acceptance  of  standards  of  morality  which  before  ^^e 
have  not  accepted.  But  important  as  these  things  Eire,  they  are  but  auxiliaries. 
There  is  this  one  work  which  the  new  life  begins  to  accomplish — namely,  the  read- 
justment of  the  forces  of  the  souL  It  changes  the  emphasis.  When,  therefore,  a  man 
enters  into  a  Christian  life,  not  only  does  he  come  into  communion  with  God,  bat 
his  nature  is  newly  directed.  He  begins  to  make  the  upper,  the  truly  spiritual,  the 
love-bearing  elements  in  him  dominate  over  the  others.  No  man  can  change  his 
faculties,  any  more  than  he  can  change  his  bodily  organization;  and  yet,  his 
disposition  may  be  changed  1  The  Lord  says,  "  If  you  have  faith  as  a  grain  of 
mostard-seed,  you  can  say  to  this  sycamine  tree,  Be  thoa  plucked  np  hj  the 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

roots,  and  cast  into  the  sea."  Hard  as  it  is  to  transplant  the  tree  of  your  soolr 
difficult  as  it  is  to  sever  the  roots  that  hold  it  down,  the  Master  says,  ' '  There  i& 
power  to  do  it."  However  many  faults  you  may  have,  that  branch  their  roots 
out  in  every  direction,  and  difficult  as  it  is  to  transplant  them  by  the  ordinary 
instrumentalities;  nevertheless,  faith  in  the  soul  will  give  you  power  to  pluck 
them  up  by  the  roots,  and  cast  them  from  you,  or  transplant  them  to  better 
soil,  where  they  will  grow  to  a  better  purpose.  I  preach,  not  simply  a  free  gospel, 
but  a  victorious  gospel.  I  preach  a  gospel  that  has  been  full  of  victories  and  noble 
achievements,  but  that  has  not  yet  begun  to  show  what  its  full  power  and  what  all 
its  fruits  of  victory  are  to  be.  No  one,  then,  who  has  been  trying  to  overcome 
his  faults,  need  despair.      (U.    W.  Beecher.)        Prayer  for  increate  of  faith: — 

COKSIDEB  THE   INXBEASE  OF  TAITH  AS   IT   REOABDS   ITS   PRINCIPLE.      Faith  may,  in  One 

respect,  be  considered  as  a  principle  of  grace  in  religion.  There  is  a  difference, 
you  know,  between  the  faculties  which  are  natural  and  a  principle  of  religion — 
such  as  faith,  or  love,  or  justice,  or  rectitude.  The  faculties,  of  course,  would  grow 
spontaneously  and  naturally,  though  they  may  be  encumbered  by  much  ignorance 
and  want  of  tuition;  yet  that  circumstance  will  not  extinguish  the  faculties,  and 
instruction  and  tuition  cannot  raise  them  above  their  proper  and  natural  level. 
This,  however,  is  not  the  case  with  religious  principle :  it  may  exist  or  it  may  not 
exist,  just  according  to  circumstances ;  and  it  may  exist,  unquestionably,  in  different 
degrees  of  vigour  and  power,  in  the  very  same  person,  under  different  circumstances 
and  at  different  periods  of  life.  1.  Faith,  as  a  principle,  must  have  means  of  exist- 
ence. But  that  faith  is,  in  one  view  of  the  case,  the  fruit  of  teaching,  is  evident 
from  this  single  fact — it  rests,  you  know,  upon  knowledge :  and  it  rests  upon  know- 
ledge not  the  growth  of  the  understanding  and  the  judgment  in  their  natural  exercise, 
but  knowledge  communicated  to  the  soul  by  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  in  the  reve- 
lations of  God.  Then,  if  the  teaching,  brethren,  on  which  faith  rests  is  imperfect, 
of  course  the  faith  itself  must  be  feeble  and  imperfect.  There  is  one  view,  indeed, 
in  which  the  truth  on  which  faith  terminates,  never  can  be  supposed  to  be  obscure, 
or  little,  or  imperfect  at  all,  but  another  in  which  it  may.  The  first  case  to  which 
I  refer — I  mean  the  first  mode  of  instruction — is  that  which  is  communicated  simply 
from  the  Bible  ;  and  the  second  case  to  which  I  refer  is  that  of  the  ministry.  But 
it  is  evident  that  you  may  have  a  very  clear  statement  of  the  truth ;  it  may  be  fully 
exhibited — exhibited  in  all  its  just  proportions,  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  there 
may  be  an  indisposition  on  the  part  of  the  hearer,  or  the  reader,  to  receive  that 
truth  which  is  thus  proposed.  There  are  two  parts  here  :  there  is  the  truth  as  it 
is  proposed  to  us,  and  the  recipient  of  the  truth.  Now,  if  the  objects  of  faith  are 
ever  so  clearly  and  ever  so  f  jlly  exhibited ;  if  God,  in  the  exercise  of  His  grace 
and  mercy — Christ,  in  His  Divine  and  atoning  character — and  you  do  not  receive 
these  truths,  it  follows  that  you  are  destitute  of  faith ;  and,  if  you  receive  these 
truths  but  partially,  you  can  have  but  a  very  partial  and  feeble  faith.  I  think  the 
reason  why  faith  is  feeble,  in  the  sense  to  which  I  have  referred,  and  from  this 

Particular  cause,  is  not  so  much  the  fault  of  the  understanding,  as  the  fault  of  the 
eart — it  is  not  an  intellectual,  but  it  is  a  moral  cause.  The  Bible  does  not  speak 
of  the  head  of  unbelief  wickedly  departing  from  the  living  God,  but  it  speaks  of 
the  heart  of  unbelief  wickedly  departing  from  God.  There  may  be  an  indisposition 
in  our  hearts  to  receive  the  truth.  Then  here  is  the  grand  cause,  I  think,  why 
teaching,  which  is  in  itself  adequate  and  perfect  and  true,  produces  very  little  faith 
through  an  indisposition  on  the  part  of  the  hearer  of  the  truth  to  receive  it — and 
its  fruits  caimot  consequently  be  borne.  Faith  may  be  considered  as  a  principle, 
in  another  view  of  the  subject,  as  the  fruit  and  consequence  of  persuasion  and  of 
promise ;  but  then  the  promise"  may  be  imperfectly  exhibited  to  us,  or  it  may  be 
imperfectly  entertained  by  us,  and  consequently,  the  faith  which  rests  on  promise 
will  be  feeble  on  these  accounts.  If  you  seek  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  of 
God  on  any  particular  point,  seeking  a  fitness  in  yourselves  for  their  fulfilment, 
and  take  your  fitness  to  the  promises,  you  may  be  assured  of  this — it  will  not  be 
accomphshed ;  but  if  you  look  to  Christ,  and  His  merit,  and  His  intercession,  and 
expect  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  of  God  in  the  fitness  of  the  Saviour's  merit, 
then  you  may  receive  those  promises  in  all  their  fulness.  When  a  mistake,  respecting 
the  accomplishment  of  any  promise  of  God  is  entertained — respecting  the  mode  of 
its  fulfilment,  the  mistake  generally  refers  to  the  sovereignty  of  God ;  and  we  are 
expecting,  I  think,  from  the  sovereignty  of  God  jast  what  God  expects  from  our 
own  faith.  I  do  not  here  speak  of  faith  as  a  moral  fitness ;  no,  bat  as  something 
else — simple  trast  in  the  grace  and  promised  provisions  of  the  gospel.    There  is  a 


mu-,  xvn.]  ST.  LUKE.  287 

connection  between  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  on  the  part  of  God  and  the 
exercise  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the  sinner.  I  shall  not  stop  to  reason  why  it  is  so 
in  the  gospel:  we  find  it  is  there.  Our  Saviour  could  not  do,  in  certain  circum- 
etances,  many  mighty  works,  because  of  the  unbelief  of  the  people :  our  Saviour 
cannot  do  now  for  us  any  of  those  great  and  mighty  works  which  He  hath  promised 
He  will  do,  because  of  our  unbelief.  Here  is  God,  in  all  the  fulness  and  plenitude 
of  His  affection — here  is  the  Saviour,  in  all  the  infinitude  of  His  merit — here  is 
the  promise  of  life,  in  all  its  length  and  breadth,  standing  out  to  our  view,  exciting 
oar  confidence,  winning  our  faith  ;  but,  after  all,  so  little  is  that  faith,  that  we  can 
receive  but  little ;  and  God  cannot,  in  the  sovereignty  of  His  mercy,  accomphsh 
what  He  is  infinitely  willing  to  do.  Faith,  as  a  principle,  in  another  view  of  the 
case,  may  be  considered  as  the  Holy  Spirit's  infiuence ;  but  then,  that  spiritual 
influence  may  be  but  imperfectly  submitted  to  on  our  part ;  and  if  so,  then  of 
course  our  faith  will  be  weak.  For,  as  faith  is  a  religious  principle,  and  a  very  high 
rehgious  principle,  of  difficult  exercise  and  difficult  existence,  it  will  follow,  that  it 
can  only  be  exercised  by  the  agency  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  resting 
upon  the  soul.  If  I  could  be  a  believer  naturally,  I  could  be  a  Christian  naturally 
— I  could  be  saved  naturally,  I  could  attain  to  holiness  naturally — I  could  enjoy 
the  highest  holiness  and  fehcity  naturally.  I  should  not  be  a  dependent  creature 
at  all,  if  I  could  believe  naturally.  No ;  it  is  by  various  manifestations  and — if 
you  wiU  allow  the  expression,  I  use  it  in  an  innocent  way — various  impulses  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  on  the  mind,  by  which  we  are  led  to  believe.  The  power  to  believe 
is  communicated  by  spiritual  agency  and  influence ;  the  act  of  believing  is  the  act 
of  the  person  who  receives  that  influence.  I  think  that  the  power  of  faith  may 
exist,  and  yet  not  be  exercised,  or,  if  exercised  at  all,  exercised  very  improperly; 
just  as  the  power  and  volition  of  the  limbs  are  distinct  one  from  the  other.  I  may 
have  the  power  of  volition,  and  yet  I  may  sit  perfectly  still  at  the  same  time.  I 
may  not  exercise  the  power  I  possess,  or  I  may  exercise  it.  You  know  there  i3 
a  difference  between  a  moral  agent  and  a  necessary  agent.  A  necessary  agent  will 
perform  his  actions  necessarily.  The  inferior  animals,  who  are  destitute  of  reason, 
of  judgment,  of  will,  of  choice,  why,  of  course,  they  are  just  what  they  are  by  the 
instincts  and  impulses  of  nature,  over  which  they  have  no  control  at  all.  But 
this  cannot  be  said  of  man :  man,  in  any  circumstances,  must  be  considered  a 
moral  agent;  therefore  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  grace  are  communicated, 
you  will  perceive,  to  aid  our  infirmities  and  give  us  power  to  believe ;  but  the  power 
may  exist,  and  yet  the  act  may  not  exist.  Is  it  not  true  that  many  minds  are 
visited  by  the  Spirit  of  God  with  His  illuminations  and  spiritual  influences,  and 
yet  faith  is  never  put  forth,  so  to  speak,  in  any  saving  form  ?  For  if  saving  faith 
grows  out  of  spiritual  influence,  it  will  follow  that  the  presence  of  that  spiritual 
influence  is  necessary,  in  order  to  the  exercise  of  faith ;  and  one  of  the  great 
reasons  why  our  faith  is  so  feeble — why  we  are  rather  shut  up  in  the  darkness  of 
unbelief  so  often — is,  that  we  do  not  lay  our  hearts  open  to  that  spiritual  influence 
which  is  promised  and  which  is  vouchsafed  to  us.  "  Increase  our  faith."  This  is 
the  prayer  of  the  text,  that  God  would  increase  our  faith ;  and  if  faith  cometh  by 
teaching — cometh  from  the  promise  of  God — cometh  from  the  spiritual  influence, 
let  us  receive  the  teaching  simply — let  us  receive  the  promise  as  it  is  exhibited  in 
the  Word — let  us  lay  our  hearts  open  to  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  and 
that  faith  which  appears  a  timid,  feeble,  cowardly  thing,  in  our  experience,  will 
grow  and  increase  till  it  comes  to  be  mighty  and  powerfvd.  2.  I  remark  that  the 
exercises  of  faith  may  not  be  equal  to  the  occasion  calling  for  those  exercises ;  and 
under  these  circumstances  the  faith  wiU  be  felt  as  feeble,  and  the  person  possessing 
it,  as  needing  influence.  Allow  me  to  remark  here,  that  many  of  the  duties  of 
religion  are,  properly  speaking,  duties  of  faith.  But  the  duty  depending  on  us,  on 
the  part  of  rehgion,  or,  if  you  please,  on  the  part  of  God,  mr.y  be  greater  than  the 
faith ;  and  if  it  be,  then,  of  course,  feebleness  will  be  felt  on  the  part  of  the 
Christian  who  has  to  do  the  duty.  Those  duties  which  I  call  duties  of  faith  may 
Tary ;  and,  in  passing  from  one  class  of  duties  to  another,  the  Christian  may  feel 
that  his  faith  and  his  grace,  which  were  adequate  and  sufficient  for  the  duties  of 
one  state,  are  found  not  to  be  adequate  or  sufficient  for  the  duties  of  another  state. 
Now  I  think  this  is  often  felt.  For  instance,  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful  and 
the  Mend  of  God,  dwelling  in  patriarchal  simplicity  in  the  bosom  of  a  happy  family 
— in  sweet,  hallowed,  and  sublime  communion  with  God,  having  received  the 
•ooomplishment  of  the  covenant  blessings  promised  to  him  at  various  times  and  ia 
wioos  oircamstances ;  and  Abraham,  offering  his  son  Isaac,  appears  in  very  difle* 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cBii.  xm. 

rent  circnmstances.  The  faith  which  was  found  sufficient  for  one  circumstance, 
would  not  be  sufficient  for  the  other.  Jacob,  dwelling  in  the  land  of  promise,  in 
the  midst  of  smiling  fields,  luxuriant  corn,  bleating  flocks,  flowing  streams,  and  i* 
smiling  sky ;  and  Jacob,  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  famine,  in  the  death  of  his  flocks, 
in  the  loss  of  Joseph  his  son,  would  be  a  man  in  very  different  circumstances.  The 
faith  which  would  support  Jacob's  mind  when  his  family  was  entire  and  happy 
would  scarcely  support  Jacob's  mind  when  his  favourite  son  was  gone.  Is  it  not 
just  BO  now  ?  Here  is  the  Christian  youth,  living  in  the  bosom  of  his  family, 
cheered  on  in  his  piety  by  the  advice,  counsels,  and  prayers  of  his  parents,  all 
zealous  to  make  him  happy,  to  make  him  secure,  to  make  him  useful,  to  make 
him  honourable :  and  the  Christian  youth  goes  out  into  the  world,  to  meet  its 
buffetings,  its  toils,  its  anxieties,  its  frowns.  There  is  a  great  difference  between 
that  youth  dwelling  in  the  bosom  of  a  happy  family,  and  that  man  in  the  mida't  of 
the  bUghting  crosses  of  the  world.  The  patience  which  would  preserve  that  youth, 
scarcely  will  preserve  that  man ;  the  faith  which  would  soothe  and  make  his  soul 
happy  in  favourable  circumstances,  will  scarcely  make  him  happy  in  the  midst  of 
unfavourable.  And  submissiveness  to  the  crosses  of  life  must  be  sustained  by 
faith ;  but  the  burden,  you  know,  may  be  greater  than  the  faith,  and  if  it  is  found 
to  be  80,  whatever  our  strength  may  be  in  other  circumstances,  still  you  will  find 
yourselves  feeble  then.  I  think  there  is  more  difficulty — much  more  difficulty — in 
attaining  to  a  quiet,  resigned,  patient  spirit,  in  the  midst  of  the  troubles  of  life,  than 
there  is  in  the  discharge  of  the  active  duties  of  life.  The  faith  which  enables  a 
man  to  pass  the  common  road  of  life  in  peace  and  happiness  will  scarcely  be  suffi- 
cient to  enable  him  to  pass  the  valley  and  shadow  of  death  without  fear.  We  must 
feel  the  touch  of  affliction,  and  the  touch  of  death ;  and,  perhaps,  the  prayer  of  the 
text  may  be  very  appropriate  to  us  when  we  change  circumstances,  and  we  may 
have  to  pray,  ♦•  Lord,  increase  our  faith  I "  3.  And  let  me,  thirdly  and  finally, 
remark  that  the  accidents  to  which  our  religious  feelings  and  experience  may  be 
exposed,  in  this  state  of  probation  and  trial,  may  tend  to  weaken  faith,  and  make 
the  prayer  of  the  text  necessary — "  Lord,  increase  our  faith  1 "  The  privilege  of 
justification  may  not  be  forfeited  by  the  loss,  we  think,  of  many  of  its  attendant 
and  accompanying  privileges  and  joys.  A  man  may  retain  his  acceptance  with 
God,  and  yet  he  may  lose  very  much  of  that  comfort,  peace,  joy,  love,  and  those 
excesses  of  feelings  which  he  enjoyed  before ;  for  all  these  blessings  flow  from  God, 
and  are  immutable,  in  that  respect,  above  all  accident ;  yet,  let  it  be  remembered, 
that  the  recipient  of  the  whole  is  the  human  heart ;  and  if  these  blessings  are  to 
dwell  in  a  sorrowful  soul,  they  will  receive  some  tint,  some  colouring,  I  think,  from 
the  character  of  the  soul  receiving  them.  Now  the  difficulty  of  attaining  confidence 
in  God,  in  the  decay  of  our  spiritual  joys,  will  be  evident  from  this  fact.  There 
will  be  a  great  difficulty  in  maintaining  that  kind  of  faith  in  the  promised  pro- 
visions of  the  grace  and  love  of  God,  the  death  of  Christ,  and  so  on,  necessary  even 
to  preserve  and  keep  the  soul  in  spiritual  life.  Now,  I  say,  the  difficulty  of  maintaining 
a  firm,  unshaken  trust  in  God,  in  the  midst  of  this  wreck,  though  necessary,  is  very 
difficult.  How  often  is  it  tiiat  the  Christian  feels  like  a  timid  seaman,  when  the 
ship  in  which  he  first  sails  begins  to  rock,  and  the  elements  to  howl,  and  the  waves 
to  dash !  Fears  arise,  though  the  storm  makes  it  necessary  that  he  should  have 
more  confidence,  more  courage,  fortitude,  calmness,  than  before.  Yet  so  it  is  with 
Christian  life.  It  is  extremely  difficult  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  midst  of  the 
storm,  though  that  confidence  is  more  necessary,  and  I  dare  say  you  will  feel  the 
necessity  of  offering  the  prayer  of  the  text,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith  I"  {J.  Dixon,D.p.) 
Increased  faith  the  strength  of  peace  principles : — It  was  not  for  tte  sake  of  working 
miracles  that  the  apostles  sought  increased  faith ;  it  was  not  in  order  to  bear  their 
present  or  future  trials ;  neither  was  it  to  enable  them  to  receive  some  mysterious 
article  of  the  faith ;  but  their  prayer  referred  to  a  common  everyday  duty  enjoined 
by  the  gospel — the  forgiving  those  who  do  us  wrong.  I.  Lkx  us  consider  the 
fhaysb  itself.  Notice  what  this  prayer  confesses.  1.  It  confesses  that  they  had 
faith.  2.  It  confesses  that  while  they  had  faith,  they  had  not  enough  of  it.  3. 
That  they  could  not  increase  their  own  faith.  4.  j?hat  the  Lord  Jesus  can  increase 
faith,  n.  I  want  to  show  how  the  increase  of  faith  bears  upon  our  poweb  to 
FOBOiTB  others.  1.  Faith  increases  our  confidence  in  Jesus,  so  that  we  shall  not 
suspect  Him  of  setting  us  an  impracticable  task.  2.  Between  faith  and  forgiveness 
a  very  close  connection  will  be  seen  if  we  inquire  what  is  the  foundation  of  faith. 
The  mercy  of  God.  3.  The  joy  of  faith  is  a  wonderful  help  to  forgiveness.  4.  A 
•pirit  of  rest  is  created  by  faith,  which  greatly  aids  the  gentle  spirit.    6.  Fkith, 


OHAP.  xvn.]  ST.  LUKE.  289 

when  it  is  strong,  has  a  high  expectancy  about  it,  which  helps  it  to  bear  with  the 
assaults  of  men  of  the  world.  A  man  readily  puts  up  with  the  inconvenience  of  the 
present,  when  he  has  great  joys  in  store  for  the  future.  III.  Notice  how  the  Lobjd 
jEstra  Chbist  amswebed  tbe  pbayeb  fob  incbeased  faith.  1.  By  assuring  them  that 
faith  can  do  anything.  2.  By  teaching  them  humility.  {C.  U.  Spurgeon.)  An 
increase  of  faith : — ^I.  We  pbat  fob  ak  rNCBEASE  of  faith  also  that  its  object 
UAT  become  uobb  beaij.  We  hold  spiritual  things  too  loosely.  II.  An  incbease  or 
FAITH  will  hakb  THE  GOSPEL  A  GBEATEB  powEB  IN  ouB  LIFE.  We  are  tried  by 
various  circumstances,  and  tempted  by  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  When 
we  see  Abraham  on  Moriah,  Job  on  tbe  top  of  the  heap,  Hezekiah  on  a  bed  of  sick- 
oess,  Jeremiah  in  the  dungeon,  tbe  three  Hebrew  youths  before  Nebuchadnezzar, 
Daniel  in  tbe  den,  Paul  fighting  with  wild  beasts  at  Ephesus,  and  the  martyrs  in 
the  fiames,  faith  demonstrates  the  power  and  grace  of  God.  Has  it  occurred  to  yoa 
that  trials  and  temptations  are  the  best  occasions  to  show  Christ  to  the  world  ?  In 
the  instances  we  have  named,  as  well  as  in  thousands  of  others,  God's  glory  shone 
brighter  than  in  the  temple  strain,  or  the  worship  of  the  synagogue.  III.  We  need 

A  8TBONOEB  FAITH  TO  PBEFABB  US  FOB  THE  UNKNOWN  FUTUBE.      (The  Weekly  PulpU.) 

Only  God  can  increase  faith: — Faith  is  not  a  weed  to  grow  upon  every  dunghill, 
without  care  or  culture :  it  is  a  plant  of  heavenly  growth,  and  requires  Divine 
watching  and  watering.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  6.  Faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed. — The  force  of  faith : — We  mast 
not  imagine  that  these  words  give  any  encouragement  to  an  idle  and  childish 
expectation  of  any  startling  and  ostentatious  outcome  of  a  true  faith  in  Jesus 
Clurist ;  as  though  God's  grace  could  ever  be  used  to  win  for  any  one  the  wonder 
and  admiration  of  His  fellow-men,  or  displayed  in  any  abrupt  and  fruitless 
miracle,  for  our  excitement  or  aggrandizement.  It  is  a  far  higher  and  nobler 
power  which  is  really  promised  by  our  Lord  even  to  the  least  measure  of  true  faith 
in  Him :  a  power  which  is  far  more  fruitful  and  more  mysterious  than  the  mere 
working  of  a  wonder  which  would  only  be  like  a  conjuring  trick  on  a  large  scale. 
For  what  He  really  here  teaches  us,  as  though  in  a  short  and  vivid  parable,  is  this : 
that  since  His  coming  upon  earth,  there  is  a  new  kind  of  force  astir  in  the  history 
and  in  the  souls  of  men — a  force  which  in  the  speed  and  certainty  of  its  action  can 
surpass  all  the  ordinary  means  by  which  men  scheme  and  work — a  force  which  is 
effective  far  beyond  all  likelihood  that  we  can  see  in  it,  so  that  even  its  least  germ 
is  able  to  achieve  results  of  inconceivable  difficulty  and  greatness :  and  for  the 
secret,  the  character,  of  this  new  force  He  points  us  to  the  one  spring  and  motive 
of  the  Christian  life — to  faith.  Now,  before  we  leave  the  outward  form  in  which 
this  truth  is  taught  us,  let  us  notice  one  point  in  it :  that  it  is  to  a  seed  that  our  Lord 
compares  the  beginning  of  faith  in  a  man's  heart :  to  a  grain  of  mustard  seed : 
which  indeed  is  the  least  of  all  seeds :  but  when  it  is  grown  it  is  the  greatest  amongst 
herbs,  and  becometh  a  tree,  &o.  He  seems  thus  to  teach  us  that  all  true  faith  is 
ever  and  everywhere  growing :  not  a  dead,  self-contained  thing,  but  a  seed,  filled 
with  an  almost  infinite  power  of  growth  in  strength  and  range  and  beauty.  However 
poor  and  mean  and  worthless  it  may  seem,  there  is  that  in  it  which  will  in  due 
time  and  with  due  care  force  its  way  into  the  light  and  strive  towards  heaven  itself, 
till  the  little  speck  of  hope  becomes  a  branching,  fruitful  wealth  of  life  and  beauty, 
a  resting-place  and  shelter  for  those  who  hover  round  its  boughs  and  find  refresh- 
ment and  protection  in  its  gentle  strength.  Now  I  ask  you  to  consider  whether  we 
ever  meet  with  any  character  which  does  thus  seem  to  escape  from  the  ordinary 
restrictions  of  cause  and  effect :  to  exert  a  force  far  beyond  all  the  likelihood  that 
we  can  discover :  and  to  achieve  results  which  sober  and  practical  men  woold  never 
have  expected  from  it  7  Is  there  any  temper  of  mind  and  will  which  makes  a  way 
through  insuperable  obstacles,  and  forces  mountainous  difficulties  to  yield  it  service 
and  obedience  ?  Well,  in  the  first  place,  do  we  not  see  a  strange  foreshadowing  of 
euch  supernatural  effectiveness,  and  a  wonderful  contrast  between  what  might 
reasonably  have  been  looked  for  and  what  is  actually  achieved,  in  the  life  and  work 
of  men  who  have  a  large  degree  of  faith  in  themselves  ?  Do  we  not  see  in  what  we 
know  of  history  and  politics,  and  in  our  own  experience  too,  that  the  men  who  do 
great  deeds,  who  leave  a  mark  behind  them,  who  bend  stubborn  circumstances  to 
their  will,  who  influence  other  men  (bearing  into  their  hearts  the  passions  or  the 
policy  which  they  have  themselves  conceived),  are  always  the  men  who  have  a  firm 
faith  in  their  own  judgment,  and  a  resolute  conviction  that  they  will  achieve  what 
they  have  set  themselves  to  do :  so  that  they  are  not  always  explaining  and  apolo* 

TOL.  m.  19  .   . 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rm. 

gizing  and  qnalifying  and  standing  on  the  defensive,  bnt  rather  going  straight 
forward  and  fearlessly  calling  upon  others  to  follow  them  ?  But,  secondly,  there  ia 
a  nearer  refleotion  of  that  which  the  text  means,  and  a  higher  and  more  mysterious 
efficacy,  in  the  power  which  some  can  wield  by  faith  in  their  fellow-men.  I  trust 
we  all  know  something  of  the  stange  influence  by  which  some  men  seem  able  to 
discover  and  dnw  out  and  strengthen  all  that  is  good  and  hopeful  in  those  with 
whom  they  have  to  do.  The  change  which  is  wrought  by  one  who  meets  his  fellows 
with  a  simple,  earnest  trust  and  hope  is  just  the  contrary  of  that  miserable  atmos- 
phere of  dingy  u>ivt  and  cold  in  which  a  cynic  lives  and  thinks  and  acts  :  distrusting 
and  depreciating  others  till  they  cease  to  show  him  anything  but  those  meaner, 
harsher  elements  ia  their  character  which  he  seems  resolute  and  glad  to  find.  There 
can  hardly  be  a  happier  or  more  fruitful  and  wonder-working  life  than  his  in  whose 
company  men  are  AiyrajB  stirred  to  brightness  and  unseliisbness  just  because  he 
always  believes  thai  they  are  purer  and  better  than  they  are :  by  whose  trustful 
expectation  they  are  f^minded  of  what  they  once  desired  and  hoped  to  be,  so  that 
the  long-forgotten  ideal  seems  again  to  come  within  their  reach,  and  they  live,  if 
only  for  a  while,  by  a  Slight  which  they  never  thought  to  see  again.  For  thus  this 
quickening  and  enlightening  power  of  faith  in  our  fellow-men  changes  the  whole 
air  and  aspect  of  a  life  :  and  he  who  is  thus  trustful  and  hopeful  draws  out  in  one 
man  the  timid  and  hlddon  germ  of  good,  and  engenders  in  another  the  grace  and 
warmth  which  his  faith  presumes  ;  and  the  dullest  heart  is  startled  into  sympathy 
with  the  charity  which  btd^eveth  all  things,  and  hopeth  all  things :  so  that  every, 
where  this  faith  is  greeteu  by  the  brightness  which  itself  calls  out,  as  the  son  ifl 
welcomed  by  the  glad  colouiv  which  sleep  until  he  comes.    (F.  Paget,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-10.  But  which  c^  you,  having  a  servant  plowing  or  feeding  cattle. — 
The  ploughing  servant ; — The  one  thing  on  which  our  Lord  wishes  to  concentrate 
our  attention  is  not  the  spirit  \a  which  God  deals  with  His  servants,  but  rather  the 
spirit  in  which  we  should  setv«  Qod — not  what  God  thinks  of  our  work,  but  rather 
how  we  should  regard  it  oursu^es.  The  Christian  belongs  to  God ;  therefore  God 
has  a  right  to  all  the  service  h«  can  render.  And,  when  he  has  rendered  it  all,  ha 
may  not  indulge  in  self-complacency  as  if  he  had  done  anything  extraordinary,  or 
had  deserved  any  special  commendation ;  for  even  at  the  best  he  has  done  no  mora 
than  he  ought  to  have  done,  since  soul,  body,  and  spirit,  in  all  places  and  in  all 
cases,  everywhere  and  at  all  tinue,  he  is  the  property  of  God.  I.  The  comtimuocs 
OBUGATioM  OF  THE  Chbistiai?  ufe.  The  Christian's  "  day  "  is  not  one  merely  of 
twelve  hours ;  but  throughout  thd  twenty-four  he  most  be  ready  for  any  emergency, 
and  must  meet  that  at  the  moment  when  it  rises.  Always  he  is  under  obligation 
to  his  Lord ;  and  "  without  haste,"  but  also  "  without  rest,"  he  must  hold  himself 
absolutely  at  the  disposal  of  his  Master.  AU  his  time  is  his  Lord's;  he  can  never 
have  "  a  day  off."  He  is  to  be  alvreys  waiting  and  watching  until  death.  IL  Thb 
gpiBiT  iM  WHICH  SUCH  DEMANDS  ocQHT  TO  BE  MET  BT  cs.  1.  We  must  meet  them 
with  patience.  No  murmuring  or  whimpering  over  our  lot,  as  if  it  were  tremen- 
dously hard,  and  as  if  we  were  undergoing  a  species  of  martyrdom.  2.  And  then, 
on  the  other  side,  we  are  not  to  stroke  ourselves  down  complacently  after  we  have 
met  the  demand  upon  us,  as  if  we  had  done  something  extraordinary.  Pride  after 
toil  ia  just  as  much  out  of  place  here  as  murmuring  under  toil.  3.  We  are  not  to 
think  about  ourselves  at  all,  but  of  Qod,  of  what  He  has  been  to  us  and  what  H& 
has  done  for  us,  and  of  what  we  owe  to  Him ;  and  then,  when  we  get  to  a  right  and 
proper  estimate  of  that,  our  most  arduous  efforts  and  our  most  costly  saciifices  will 
seem  so  small  in  comparison,  that  we  shall  be  ready  to  exclaim,  "  We  are  unprofit- 
able servants  1  All  that  we  have  done  does  not  begin  to  measure  the  greatness  of 
our  indebtedness  to  Him  for  whom  we  have  done  it ! "  4.  Thus,  in  order  to 
comply  with  the  exactions  of  the  Christian  life,  in  the  spirit  which  this  parable 
recommends,  we  have  to  become  reconciled  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  the 
sense  of  redemption  and  the  consciousness  of  regeneration  whereby  we  have 
become  no  longer  servants,  but  sons,  alone,  that  will  impel  us  to  reckon  ourselves 
as  not  oor  own,  and  to  do  without  a  murmur,  and  without  the  least  self -complacency, 
all  that  God  requires  at  our  hands.  When  the  life  of  a  beloved  son  is  hanging  ia 
the  balance,  no  one  can  persuade  his  mother  to  take  rest.  You  may  tell  her  that 
others  are  watching,  that  everything  is  being  done  that  can  be  done,  that  it  is  her 
"  duty  "  to  take  a  respite ;  but  you  might  as  well  speak  to  the  deaf,  for  she  is  his 
mother,  and  her  mother-love  will  not  let  her  be  content  with  less  than  her  own 
personal  ministry  to  her  boy.    Bnt  does  she  think  then  of  doing  merely  her  da^ 


«K&p.  xvn.]  ST.  LUKE.  291 

to  him?  Is  she  measuring  her  oondnct  then  hj  any  standard  of  rectitade* 
Nothing  of  the  kind  I  She  has  risen  above  all  standards  and  all  duty.  So  with 
ourselves  and  the  service  of  God.  Love  lifts  us  above  legalism.  (W.  M.  Taylor, 
If.L.)  The  parable  of  the  unprofitable  tervant : — I.  The  nature  of  the  sebvich 
<JoD  REQUiBEs.  That  we  do  His  bidding.  1.  This  He  has  revealed  in  His  Word. 
2.  For  this  He  has  given  us  the  capacity  and  powers  which  are  essential.  The 
obedience  He  claims  must  possess  the  following  characteristics,  (1)  It  must  be  the 
obedience  of  love.  (2)  It  must  be  spiritual.  (3)  It  must  have  respect  to  all  His 
commandments.  (4)  It  must  be  constant.  (5)  It  must  be  persevering  fidelity  unto 
death.  II.  The  suppobt  He  gives  in  it.  This  is  implied  in  His  sitting  down  to 
*•  eat  and  drink"  (vers.  7,  8).  Notice — 1.  God  gives  ability  for  the  service.  2.  Ha 
provides  daily  food  for  the  soul.  3.  He  gives  satisfaction  and  peace  in  the  service. 
ni.  The  Divine  independency  with  bespect  to  this  sebvice.  Doth  the  master 
"  thank  that  servant  because  he  did  the  things  that  were  commanded,"  Ac.  (ver.  9)  ? 
Now  the  force  of  this  will  be  seen  when  it  is  remembered — I.  That  no  man  can  go 
heyond  the  Divine  claims  in  his  obedience.  2.  God's  goodness  to  man  is  ever 
beyond  the  services  He  receives  from  him.  3.  That  man's  best  services  are,  in 
consequence  of  his  infirmities,  frail  and  imperfect.  Learn — 1.  How  necessary  is 
humility  even  to  the  most  ezalted  saints.  2.  In  all  our  obedience,  let  us  set  the 
glory  of  God  before  us.  3.  Those  who  refuse  to  obey  the  Lord  must  finally  perish. 
{J.  Burns,  D.D,)  Extra  service  : — Axe  these  indeed  the  words  of  Him  who  said, 
"  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants,  but  friends  "  ?  This  is  a  picture  of  a  hard, 
unlovely  side  of  life — a  slave's  life  and  a  slave's  service,  without  thanks  or  claim 
for  thanks.  We  ask,  I  repeat,  and  not  unnaturally,  where  such  a  representation  of 
Christian  service  fits  into  that  sweet  and  attractive  ideal  which  Christ  elsewhere 
gives  us  under  the  figure  of  the  family  relation — sons  of  God,  confidential  friends 
■ot  Christ.  We  hasten  to  say,  No ;  but  it  will  require  a  little  study  to  discover  why 
we  may  say  no,  and  to  fix  the  place  of  this  parable  in  relation  to  others  of  a 
happier  tone.  1.  Observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  is  not  unusual  for  our  Lord  to 
draw  a  disagreeable  picture  in  order  to  set  forth  His  own  love  and  grace.  [Unjust 
judge.  Churlish  man  refusing  bread  to  neighbour.]  We  must  not  be  repelled  by  a 
figure,  therefore.  Let  us  try  to  see  what  facts  and  conditions  of  Christian  service 
are  intended  to  be  expressed  by  this  parable.  The  parable  answers  to  the  fact  in 
being  a  picture  of  hard  work,  and  of  what  we  call  extra  work.  The  service  of 
God's  kingdom  is  laborious  service — service  crowded  with  work  and  burdens, 
Christ  nowhere  represents  it  as  easy.  No  Christian  can  shut  himself  up  to  a  little 
-routine  of  duty,  and  say,  I  will  do  so  much,  within  such  times,  and  no  more.  So 
long  as  a  man's  work  is  merely  the  carrying  out  of  another's  orders,  it  will  tend  to 
t»e  mechanical  and  methodical :  but  the  moment  the  man  becomes  identified  in 
spirit  with  his  work ;  the  moment  the  work  becomes  the  evolution  of  an  idea,  the 
expression  of  a  definite  and  cherished  purpose ;  the  moment  it  becomes  the  instru- 
ment of  individual  will,  sympathy,  affection ;  above  all,  the  moment  it  takes  on  the 
character  of  a  passion  or  an  enthusiasm — that  moment  it  overleaps  mechanical 
trammels.  The  lawyer  is  not  counting  the  number  of  hours  which  duty  compels 
him  to  work.  He  would  make  each  day  forty-eight  hours  long  if  he  could.  He 
iias  a  case  to  gain,  and  that  is  all  he  thinks  of.  Tiie  physician  who  should  refuse 
io  answer  a  summons  from  his  bed  at  the  dead  of  night,  or  to  visit  a  patient  after 
a  certain  hour  of  the  day,  would  soon  have  abundance  of  leisure.  Pain  wiU  not 
measure  its  intervals  by  the  clock,  fever  will  not  suspend  its  burning  heats  to  give 
the  weary  watcher  rest :  the  affliction  of  the  fatherless  and  widow  knocks  at  the 
doors  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion  at  untimely  hours.  Times  and  seasons,  in 
short,  must  be  swallowed  up  in  the  purpose  of  saving  Ufe  and  relieving  misery.  I 
need  not  carry  the  illustrations  farther.  You  see  that  the  lower  a  type  of  serrice, 
the  more  mechanical  and  methodical  it  is ;  and  that  the  higher  types  of  service 
develop  a  certain  exuberance,  and  refuse  to  be  limited  by  times  and  seasons.  2.  A 
second  point  at  which  the  fact  answers  to  the  parable,  is  the  matter  of  wages  ;  that 
is  to  say,  the  slave  and  the  servant  of  Christ  have  neither  of  them  any  right  to 
thanks  or  compensation.  What  God  may  do  for  His  servants  out  of  His  own  free 
grace  and  love,  what  privileges  He  may  grant  His  friends,  is  another  question  ;  but, 
on  the  hard  business  basis  of  value  received,  the  servant  of  God  has  no  case. 
What  he  does  in  God's  service  it  is  his  duty  to  do.  "  God,"  as  Bengal  remarks, 
"  can  do  without  our  usefulness."  God  has  no  necessary  men.  3.  Now,  then,  we 
teach  the  pith  of  the  parable.  It  is  spoken  from  the  slave's  point  of  view ;  it  dealt 
with  service  of  the  lower,  mechanical  type.    Now  the  moment  a  man  puts  himseli 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  icn^e.  »m 

on  that  lower  ground,  and  begins  to  measure  out  his  times  and  degrees  of  serrioe, 
and  to  reckon  what  is  due  to  himself,  that  moment  he  runs  sharply  against  this 
parable.  That  moment  Christ  meets  his  assertion  of  his  rights  with  this  unlovely 
picture.  The  parable  says  to  him,  in  effect,  "  If  you  put  the  matter  on  the  business 
basis,  on  the  ground  of  your  rights  and  merits,  I  meet  you  on  that  ground,  and 
challenge  you  to  make  good  your  claim.  I  made  you :  I  redeemed  you,  body  and 
8oul,  with  My  own  blood.  Everything  you  have  or  are,  you  owe  to  My  free  grace. 
What  are  your  rights  ?  "What  is  your  ground  for  refusing  any  claim  I  may  see  fit 
to  make  upon  you  ?  "What  claim  have  you  for  thanks  for  any  service  you  may 
render  Me  at  any  time  ?  "  And  the  man  cannot  complain  of  this  answer.  It  is 
indeed  the  master's  answer  to  a  slave ;  but  then,  the  man  has  put  himself  on  the 
slave's  ground.  To  the  servile  spirit  Christ  asserts  His  masterdom.  He  has  no 
word  of  thanks  for  the  grumbling  slave  who  grudges  the  service  at  his  table  after 
the  day's  ploughing ;  but  to  the  loving  disciple — the  friend  to  whom  His  service  is 
joy  and  reward  enough,  and  who  puts  self  and  all  its  belongings  at  his  disposal — 
it  is  strange,  wondrous  strange,  but  true,  nevertheless,  that  Christ  somehow  slips 
into  the  servant's  place.  Strange,  I  repeat ;  but  here  is  Christ's  own  word  for  it : 
"  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lights  burning."  Here  is  a  picture  ol 
night-work,  you  see.  "And  ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that  wait  for  their  lord, 
when  he  will  return  from  the  wedding ;  that  when  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they 
may  open  unto  him  immediately."  Here  are  the  servants,  weary,  no  doubt,  with 
the  day's  work,  but  waiting  and  watching  far  into  the  hours  of  rest  for  their 
master,  and  flying  with  cheerful  readiness  to  the  door  at  his  first  knock.  "What 
then  ?  "  Blessed  are  those  servants,  whom  the  master  when  he  cometh  shall  find 
watching  :  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  he  shall  gird  himself,  and  make  them  to  sit 
down  to  meat,  and  will  come  forth  and  serve  them."  The  amount  of  the  matter 
is,  that  for  him  who  gives  himself  without  reserve  to  Christ's  service,  Christ  pat» 
Himself  at  his  service.  "When  he  accepts  Christ's  right  over  him  with  his  whole 
heart,  not  as  a  sentence  to  servitude,  but  as  his  dearest  privilege,  counting  it  above 
all  price  to  be  bought  and  owned  by  such  a  Master,  he  finds  himself  a  possessor  as 
well  as  a  possession.  "  All  things  are  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's."  {M.  R.  Vincent, 
D.D.)  Tlie  Christian's  obligation  to  God  : — The  instruction  of  this  parable 
supposes — I.  That  the  masteb  hebe  descbibed  is  the  heavenly  Lord  and  Master 
or  va  ALL — THE  God  that  made  us  and  the  Eedeemeb  that  died  eob  us.    II.  Thb 

6EBVICES  WHICH  WE  ARE  TO   BENDEB   TO   THIS   DiVINE    LoRD.       1.    The  text  takeS  it  fof 

granted  that  we  are  engaged  spontaneously  and  habitually  in  serving  this  great  Master 
according  to  our  several  stations  in  His  household.  2.  But  besides  this  there  is  a 
further  idea  in  the  service  described  in  the  parable — that  of  duties  succeeding  each 
other  without  intermission.  3.  The  text  also  conveys  the  idea  that  the  good  servant 
postpones  personal  ease  or  indulgence  to  his  master's  command  and  interest.  HI. 
The  low  estimate  which  the  Christian  forms  of  himself  after  all  he  has  done  ob 
can  do  fob  his  heavenly  Lord.  Doth  your  goodness  extend  to  the  infinite  Creator  ? 
Do  your  minute  services  at  all  weigh  in  the  view  of  the  infinite  fulness  of  eternal 
glory,  and  the  majesty  of  Him  that  sits  upon  the  circle  of  the  heavens  ?  (D.  Wilson, 
M.  A.)  The  spirit  of  a  true  servant  of  God  : — "  People  talk  of  the  sacrifice  I  have 
made  in  spending  so  much  of  my  life  in  Africa.  Can  that  be  called  a  sacrifice  which 
is  simply  paid  back  as  a  small  part  of  a  great  debt  owing  to  our  God,  which  we  can 
never  repay  ?  Is  that  a  sacrifice  which  brings  its  own  blest  reward  in  healthful 
activity,  the  consciousness  of  doing  good,  peace  of  mind,  and  a  bright  hope  of  a 
glorious  destiny  hereafter  ?  Away  with  the  word  in  such  a  view  and  with  such  a 
thought  1  It  is  emphatically  no  sacrifice.  Say,  rather,  it  is  a  privilege.  Anxiety, 
sickness,  suffering,  or  danger,  now  and  then,  with  a  foregoing  of  the  common  con- 
▼eniences  and  charities  of  this  life,  may  make  us  pause,  and  cause  the  spirit  to  waver, 
and  the  soul  to  sink ;  bat  let  this  be  only  for  a  moment.  All  these  are  nothing 
when  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  hereafter  be  revealed  in  and  for  us.  I 
never  made  a  sacrifice.  Of  this  we  ought  not  to  talk,  when  we  remember  the  great 
sacrifice  which  He  made  who  left  His  Father's  throne  on  high  to  give  Himself  for 
us."  (Dr.  Livingstone.)  The  dutiful  servant : — "We  used  to  be  roused  and  stirred 
by  the  clarion  call  of  duty,  as  well  as  soothed  and  comforted  by  the  tender  breathing* 
of  love.  And  here  the  call  comes  to  us  loud  and  clear,  waxing  even  louder  as  we 
listen  and  reflect.  "  Do  your  duty ;  and  when  you  have  done  it,  however  laborious 
and  painful  it  may  be,  remember  that  you  have  only  done  your  duty.  Do  not  give 
yourselves  airs  of  complacency,  as  though  you  had  achieved  some  great  thing.  Do 
not  give  yourselves  air  of  martyrdom  as  though  some  strange  thing  had  happened 


CBAF.  rra.]  ST.  LUKE.  293 

to  yon.  Neither  pity  yourselves,  nor  plnme  yourselves  on  what  you  have  done  or 
borne.  Do  not  think  of  yourselves  at  all,  but  of  God,  and  of  the  duties  you  owe  to 
Him.  That  you  have  done  your  duty — let  this  be  your  comfort,  if  at  least  you  can 
honestly  take  it  And  if  you  are  tempted  to  a  dainty  aud  effeminate  self-pity  for 
the  hardships  you  have  borne,  or  to  a  dangerous  and  degrading  self-admiration  foi 
the  achievements  you  have  wrought,  let  this  be  your  safeguard,  that  you  have  dona 
no  more  than  your  duty."  It  is  in  this  strain  that  our  Lord  speaks  to  us  here.  1. 
And  is  it  not  a  most  wholesome  and  invigorating  strain,  a  strain  to  which  all  in  us 
that  is  worthy  of  the  name  of  man  instantly  and  strongly  responds  ?  The  very 
moment  we  grow  complacent  over  our  work,  our  work  spoils  in  our  hands.  Our 
energies  relax.  We  begin  to  think  of  ourselves  instead  of  our  work,  of  the  wonders 
we  have  achieved  instead  of  the  toils  which  yet  lie  before  us  and  of  how  me  may 
best  discharge  them.  So  soon  as  we  begin  to  complain  of  our  lot  and  task,  to 
murmor  as  though  our  burden  were  too  heavy,  or  as  though  we  were  called  to  bear 
it  in  our  own  strength,  we  unfit  ourselves  for  it,  our  nerves  and  courage  give  way  ; 
oar  task  looks  even  more  formidable  than  it  is,  and  we  become  incapable  even  of 
the  little  which,  but  for  our  repugnances  and  fears,  we  should  be  quite  competent  to 
do.  2.  And  then  how  bracing  is  the  sense  of  duty  discharged,  if  only  we  may  indulge 
in  it.  And  we  may  indulge  in  it.  Does  not  Christ  Himself  teach  us  to  say,  "  We 
have  done  that  which  it  was  our  duty  to  do  *'  ?  He  does  not  account  of  our  duty  as 
we  sometimes  account  of  it.  If  we  are  at  work  in  His  fields.  He  does  not  demand  of 
QB  that  we  should  plough  so  many  acres,  or  that  we  should  tend  so  many  heads  of 
cattle.  All  that  He  demands  of  us  is  that,  with  such  capacities  and  opportunities  as 
we  have,  we  should  do  our  best,  or  at  lowest  try  to  do  it.  Honesty  of  intention, 
purity  and  sincerity  of  motive,  the  diligence  and  cheerfulness  with  which  we  address 
ourselves  to  His  service,  count  for  more  with  Him  than  the  mere  amount  of  work  we 
get  through.  The  faithful  and  industrious  servant  is  approved  by  Him,  however 
feeble  his  powers,  however  limited  his  scope.  And  He  would  have  us  take  pleasure 
in  the  industry  and  fidelity  which  please  Him.  He  would  have  us  account,  as  He 
Himself  accounts,  that  we  have  done  our  duty  when  we  have  sincerely  and 
earnestly  endeavoured  to  do  it.  3,  We  need  not  fear  to  adapt  any  part  of  this 
parable  to  our  own  use,  if  only  we  take  to  ourselves  the  parable  as  a  whole.  For,  in 
that  case,  we  shall  not  only  add,  "  We  are  unprofitable  servants,"  so  often  as  we 
Bay,  "  We  have  done  that  which  it  was  our  duty  to  do  "  ;  we  shall  also  confess 
that  every  moment  brings  a  fresh  duty.  We  shall  not  rest  when  one  duty  is  dis- 
charged, as  though  our  service  had  come  to  an  end  ;  we  shall  be  content  to  pass 
from  duty  to  duty,  to  Jill  the  day  of  life  with  labour  to  its  very  close.  We  shall  not 
be  content  only,  but  proud  and  glad,  to  wait  at  our  Master's  table  after  we  have 
ploughed  the  soil  and  fed  the  cattle.  And  even  when  at  last  we  eat  and  drink,  we 
Bhall  do  even  that  to  His  glory — eating  our  bread  with  gladness  and  singleness  of 
heart,  not  for  enjoyment  alone,  but  that  we  may  gain  new  strength  for  serving  Him. 
(S.  Cox,  D.D.)  We  are  unprofitable  servants. — The  inevitable  itnperfectness  of 
human  works : — Life  is  a  work,  a  service.  Our  best  works  are  but  faulty.  This 
consideration  ought— I.  To  lead  tjb  to  humblino  views  of  all  otm  wobk.     II.  To 

OtJABD    VB  FBOM    DISCODKAOEMENT    IN   VIEW  OF  THE    FELT  FAULTINE88  OF  OUB  SEBVICE. 

III.  To  PBBVENT  V8  FBOM  TOO  GBEAT  CONFIDENCE  IN  THE  MEEIT  OF  OUB  PEEF0BMANCE8. 

IV.  To   BTIMCLATB    DB  TO   DILIOENCE,  SEEING  THAT  WHEN  WE  HAVE  DONE  THE  UTMOST 

otJB  WOBK  IS  TET  BUT  IMPERFECT.  Mark  the  great  claims  upon  us  for  labour.  1. 
From  the  great  Master  of  all,  the  doing  of  whose  will  is  necessary  for  the  welfare 
of  His  entire  household.  2.  From  the  world,  in  order  to  promote  its  benefit  by  onr 
culture,  instruction,  and  example.  3.  From  our  own  life,  that  its  best  interests 
and  happiness  may  be  secured.  {Ajion.)  The  Scripture-doctrine  of  the  un- 
profitableness  of  man's  best  performances,  an  argument  against  spirittuil  pride  ;  yet  no 
excuse  for  slackness  in  good  works  and  Christian  obedience  : — I.  I  propose  to  explain 

WHAT    THE  PHEA8E  OB  TITLE  OF  UNPBOFITABLE  BEBVANT8  HEBE  8TBICTLT  MEANS.       II.   I 

proceed  now,  secondly,  to  consider  how  much  it  conceens,  and  how  fitly  it  becomes, 
SUCH  unpbofitable  sbevantb  to  make  theib  humble  acknowledgments  befobe  God, 
or  THE  WOBTHLES8NESS  OF  ALL  TEEiB  8EBVICEB ;  worthless,  I  mean,  with  respect  to 
God,  not  otherwise :  for  they  are  not  worthless  with  respect  to  angels,  or  to  other 
men  ;  more  especially  not  to  our  own  souls,  but  that,  by  the  way,  only  to  prevent 
mistakes.    III.  I  proceed  now,  thirdly  and  lastly,  to  observe,  that  such  huhblb 

AOKNOWLBDOMENTS  AS  I  HAVE  BEEN  HEBE  MENTIONIKO,  MUST  NOT  HOWEVEB  BE  SO  0NDXK- 
STOOD  AS  TO  AFFOBO  ANT  EXCUSE  OB  COLOUB  FOB  BLACKNESS  IN   OUB  BOUDEN  DUTIES  ;    Ot 

4or  pleading  any  exemption  or  discharge  from  true  Christian  obedience.    ID' 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 


Waterland,  D.D.)        Reliance  on  reUgiout  observances  : — Now  of  course  there  is  a 
danger  of  persons  becoming  self-satisfied,  in  being  regular  and  exemplary   in 
devotional  exercises  ;  there  is  danger,  which  others  have  not,  of  their  bo  attending 
to  them  as  to  forget  that  tbey  have  other  duties  to  attend  to.     I  mean  the  danger, 
of  which  I  was  just  now  speaking,  of  having  their  attention  drawn  off  from  other 
duties  by  their  very  attention  to  this  duty  in  particular.    And  what  is  still  most 
likely  of  all,  persons  who  are  regular  in  their  devotions  may  be  visited  with  passing 
thoughts  every  now  and  then,  that  they  are  thereby  better  than  other  people ;  and 
these  occasional  thoughts  may  secretly  tend  to  make  them  self-satisfied,  without 
their  being  aware  of  it,  till  they  have  a  latent  habit  of  self-conceit  and  contempt 
of  others.    What  is  done  statedly  forces  itself  upon  the  mind,   impresses  the 
memory  and  imagination,  and  seems  to  be  a  substitute  for  other  duties  ;  and  what 
is  contained  in  definite  outward  acts  has  a  completeness  and  tangible  form  about  it, 
which  is  likely  to  satisfy  the  mind.    However,  I  do  not  think,  after  all,  that  there  is 
any  very  great  danger  to  a  serious  mind  in  the  frequent  use  of  these  great  privileges. 
Indeed,  it  were  a  strange  thing  to  say  that  the  simple  performance  of  what  God  has 
told  us  to  do  can  do  harm  to  any  but  those  who  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  their 
hearts,  and  to  such  persons  all  things  are  harmful :  they  pervert  everything  into  evil. 
1.  Now,  first,  the  evil  in  question  (supposing  it  to  exist)  is  singularly  adapted  to  be 
its  own  corrective.    It  can  only  do  us  injury  when  we  do  not  know  its  existence. 
When  a  man  knows  and  feels  the  intrusion  of  self-satisfied  and  self-complacent 
thoughts,  here  is  something  at  once  to  humble  him  and  destroy  that  complacency. 
To  know  of  a  weakness  is  always  humbling;  now  humility  is  the  very  grace  needed 
here.     Knowledge  of  our  indolence  does  not  encourage  us  to  exertion,  but  induces 
despondence;  but  to  know  we  are  self-satisfied  is  a  direct  blow  to  self-satisfaction. 
There  is  no  satisfaction  in  perceiving  that  we  are  self-satisfied.    Here  then  is  one 
great  safeguard  against  our  priding  ourselves  on  our  observances.    2.  But  again,  if 
religious  persons  are  troubled  with  proud  thoughts  about  their  own  excellence  and 
strictness,  I  think  it  is  only  when  they  are  young  in  their  religion,  and  that  the 
trial  will  wear  off ;  and  that  for  many  reasons.     Satisfaction  with  our  own  doings, 
as  I  have  said,  arises  from  fixing  the  mind  on  some  one  part  of  our  duty,  instead  of 
attempting  the  whole  of  it.     In  proportion  as  we  narrow  the  field  of  our  duties,  we 
become  able  to  compass  them.     Men  who  pursue  only  this  duty  or  only  on  that 
duty,  are  in  danger  of  self-righteousness ;  zealots,  bigots,  devotees,  men  of  the 
world,  sectarians,  are  for  this  reason  self-righteous.    For  itie  same  reason,  persons 
beginning  a  religious  course  are  self-righteous,  though  they  often  think  themselves 
just  the  reverse.     They  consider,  perhaps,  all  religion  to  lie  in  confessing  themselvea 
sinners,  and  having  warm  feelings  concerning  their  redemption  and  justification — 
and  all  because  they  have  so  very  contracted  a  notion  of  the  range  of  God's 
commandments,  of  the  rounds  of  that  ladder  which  reaches  from  earth  to  heaven. 
But  the  remedy  of  the  evil  is  obvious,  and  one  which,  since  it  will  surely  be 
applied  by  every  religious  person,  because  he  is  religious,  will,  under  God's  grace, 
effect  in  no  long  time  a  cure.     Try  to  do  your  whole  duty,  and  you  will  soon  cease 
to  be  well-pleased  with  your  religious  state.    3.  But  this  is  not  all.    Certainly  this 
objection,  that  devotional  practices,  such  as  prayer,  fasting,  and  communicating, 
tend  to  self-righteousness,  is  the  objection  of  those,  or  at  least  is  just  what  the 
objection  of  those  would  be,  who  never  attempted  them.     When,  then,  an  objector 
fears  lest  such  observances  should  make  him  self-righteous,  were  he  to  attempt 
them,  I  do  think  he  is  over-anxious,  over-confident  in  his  own  power  to  falfil  them ; 
he  trusts  too  much  in  his  own  strength  already,  and,  depend  on  it,  to  attempt  them 
woald  make  him  less  self-righteous,  not  more  so.    He  need  not  be  so  very  fearful  o( 
being  too  good  ;  he  may  assure  himself  that  the  smallest  of  his  Lord's  command  • 
ments  are  to  a  spiritual  mind  solemn,  arduous,  and  inexhaustible.    Is  it  an  easy 
thing  to  pray  ?    And  so  again  of  austerities ;  there  may  be  persons  so  constituted 
by  nature  as  to  take  pleasure  in  mortifications  for  their  own  sake,  and  to  be  able  to 
practise  them  adequately ;  and  they  certainly  are  in  danger  of  practising  them  for 
their  own  sakes,  not  through  faith,  and  of  becoming  spiritually  proud  in  con- 
sequence :  but  surely  it  is  idle  to  speak  of  this  as  an  ordinary  danger.  ^  And  so 
again  a  religious  mind  has  a  perpetual  source  of  humiliation  from  this  consciousness 
also,  viz.,  how  far  his  actual  conduct  in  the  world  falls  short  of  the  profession 
which  his  devotional  observances  involve.      4.  But,  after  all,  what  is  this  shrink- 
ing from  responsibility,  which  fears  to  be  obedient  lest  it  should  fail,  but  cowardice 
and  ingratitude  ?     What  is  it  bat  the  very  conduct  of  the  Israelites,  who,  whea 
Almighty  God  bade  them  encounter  their  enemies  and  so  gain  Canaan,  feared  th* 


«HAP.  ivn.]  ST.  LUKE.  895 

80DB  of  Anak,  because  they  were  giants  ?  To  fear  to  do  oar  daty  lest  we  should 
l)eoome  self-righteous  in  doing  it,  is  to  be  wiser  than  (Jod ;  it  is  to  distrust  Him ;  it 
is  to  do  and  to  feel  like  the  unprofitable  servant  who  hid  his  lord's  talent,  and 
then  laid  the  charge  of  his  sloth  on  his  lord,  as  being  a  hard  and  austere  man.  At 
best  we  are  unprofitable  servants  when  we  have  done  all ;  but  if  we  are  but  unprofit- 
able when  we  do  our  best  to  be  profitable,  what  are  we,  when  we  fear  to  do  our  best,  but 
-unworthy  to  be  His  servants  at  all  ?  No  1  to  fear  the  consequences  of  obedience  is  to  be 
■worldly-wise,  and  to  go  by  reason  when  we  are  bid  go  by  faith.  {J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.) 
Unprofitable  servants: — A  sentence  which  requires  thought.  At  first  sight  we 
might  be  inclined  to  say,  "If  a  servant  does  all  which  he  is  deputed  to  do,  can 
that  servant  in  any  way  be  an  unprofitable  servant  ?  "  But  look  at  the  matter  a 
little  more  closely,  and  see  how  the  balance  lies.  All  service  is  a  covenant  between 
two  parties.  The  servant  covenants  to  do  certain  works,  and  the  employer  cove- 
nants to  provide  for  his  servant  certain  wages,  food,  and  accommodation.  If  the 
Agreement  be  a  just  one,  and  if  both  do  their  duty  according  to  the  agreement, 
neither  can  truly  say  he  is  a  gainer  or  a  loser  in  respect  of  the  other.  What  the 
servant  gives  in  work  he  receives  back  in  money,  food,  and  accommodation.  What 
the  master  pays  he  receives  back  in  the  benefit  and  comfort  which  he  derives  from 
the  servant's  work.  Each  gets  back  what  he  gave;  his  own  in  another  shape. 
But  how  is  it  between  a  man  and  his  Creator  ?  Let  me  for  a  moment  suppose  a 
case — quite  impossible  I  fear — but  the  case  of  a  man  who  has  fulfilled  all  the  ends 
for  which  he  was  created.  How  does  the  case  now  stand  ?  God  has  endowed  that 
man  with  life,  and  all  its  powers  of  body,  mind,  and  soul;  with  all  its  influences 
and  opportunities  ;  and  God  has  watched  over  him  and  kept  him  and  blessed  him. 
Now  if  that  man  be  a  kind  and  useful  man  to  all  his  fellow-creatures  with  whom 
he  has  to  do,  and  if  he  uses  rightly  all  his  possessions,  and  if  he  honours  God  and 
loves  his  neighbour,  that  man  has  done  his  duty.  But  is  God  the  gainer  ?  He  has 
only  received  back  His  own.  It  is  all  His  own  property.  His  gift ;  it  is  but  His 
right.  The  creature  hath  done  his  duty  ;  but  the  Creator  has  not  benefitted.  How 
can  a  man  be  " profitable " to  his  Creator?  But  "profit"  is  to  have  your  own 
back  with  increase ;  and  if  that  be  profit,  there  is  no  profit  here.  The  man  is  still, 
in  reference  to  his  master,  "an  unprofitable  servant."  Now  let  us  look  at  it  as  a 
matter  of  fact.  So  far  are  we,  even  the  best  of  us,  from  having  "done  all  these 
things  "  which  are  commanded  of  us,  and  so  fulfilled  our  duty,  that  the  question  is. 
Have  we  realJy  kept  any  one  single  commandment  that  God  ever  gave  ?  Or  put  it 
in  another  way,  in  which  Christ  placed  it.  Is  there  a  person  in  the  world  to  whom 
your  conscience  will  tell  you  that  you  have  really  done  your  whole  duty  in  everything  ? 
{J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  defects  of  our  performances  an  argument  against  pre- 
sumption : — I.  Teos  utmost  we  can  do  is  no  moke  than  oub  bounden  duty.  Our 
creation  places  us  under  a  debt  which  our  most  accurate  services  can  never 
discharge.  Alas  1  all  we  do,  or  all  we  can  suffer  in  obedience  to  Him,  can  bear  no 
proportion  to  what  He  has  done  and  suffered  for  us.  And  if  our  best  services 
caimot  discount  His  past  favours,  much  less  can  we  plead  them  in  demand  of  Hia 
future.  And  therefore  whatever  farther  encoxiragement  He  is  pleased  to  annex  to 
our  obedience,  mast  be  acknowledged  as  a  pure  act  of  grace  and  bounty.  II.  Aiteb 
WB  BAvs  DONE  ALL,  WE  ABE  UNPBOFiTABLB.  God  is  a  being  infinitely  happy  in  the 
enjoyment  of  His  own  perfections,  and  needs  no  foreign  assistance  to  complete  His 
fruitions.  No — oar  observance  of  His  commands,  though  by  His  infinite  mercy  it 
be  a  means  of  advancing  our  own,  is  yet  no  addition  to  His  felicity,  which  is  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  and  consequently  our  most  dutiful  perform- 
ances cannot  lay  any  obligation  of  debt  on  our  Creator,  or  presume  upon  any 
intrinsic  value  which  His  justice  or  gratitude  is  bound  to  reward.     III.  The 

PEBFOEMANCB  ITSELF  CANNOT  BE  INSISTED  ON  AS  AN  ACT  STBICTLY  OUH  OWN,  BUT 
UU8T   BE   ASOBIBED   TO   THE   ASSISTANCE    OF   DiVINE    OBACE    WOEKINQ   IN   US ;    and  that 

all  the  value  of  it  is  derived  from  the  mediation  and  atonement  of  Christ.  It  is 
His  Holy  Spirit  that  kindles  devotion  in  our  breast,  infuses  into  us  good  desires,  and 
enables  us  to  execute  our  pious  resolutions.  This  single  reflection  should,  methinks, 
be  Buffioient  to  subdue  every  high  and  insolent  conceit  of  our  own  righteousness, 
that  in  our  best  performances  to  God  we  give  EUm  but  of  His  own,  and  that  even 
our  inclination  and  ability  to  serve  Him  we  receive  from  Him.  To  our  Redeemer 
only  belongs  the  merit  and  glory  of  our  services,  and  to  us  nothing  but  the  grati* 
tnde  and  humility  of  pardoned  rebels.  {J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  The  praise  of  service 
belongs  to  Ood : — Here  is  a  little  stream  trickling  down  the  mountain  side.  As  it 
proceeds,  other  streams  join  it  in  succession  from  the  right  and  left  until  it 


296  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xni. 

becomes  a  river.  Ever  flowing,  and  ever  increasing  as  it  flows,  it  thinks  it  will  make 
a  great  contribution  to  the  ocean  when  it  shall  reach  the  shore  at  length.  No, 
river,  you  are  an  unprofitable  servant ;  the  ocean  does  not  need  you ;  could 
do  as  well  and  be  as  full  without  you;  is  not  in  any  measure  made  up  by 
you.  True,  rejoins  the  river,  the  ocean  is  so  great  that  all  my  volume 
poured  into  it  makes  no  sensible  difference ;  but  still  I  contribute  bo  much, 
and  this,  as  far  as  it  goes,  increases  the  amount  of  the  ocean's  supply.  No :  this 
indeed  is  the  seeming  to  the  ignorant  observer  on  the  spot ;  but  whoever  obtains 
deeper  knowledge  and  a  wider  range,  will  discover  and  confess  that  the  river  is  an 
unprofitable  servant  to  the  sea — that  it  contributes  absolutely  nothing  to  the  sea'a 
store.  From  the  ocean  came  every  drop  of  water  that  rolls  down  in  that  river's 
bed,  alike  those  that  fell  into  it  in  rain  from  the  sky,  and  those  that  flowed  into  it 
from  tributary  rivers,  and  those  that  sprang  from  hidden  veins  in  the  earth.  Even 
although  it  should  restore  all,  it  gives  only  what  it  received.  It  could  not  flow,  it 
could  not  be,  without  the  free  gift  of  all  from  the  sea.  To  the  sea  it  owes  its  exist- 
ence and  power.  The  sea  owes  it  nothing ;  would  be  as  broad  and  deep  although 
this  river  had  never  been.  But  all  this  natural  process  goes  on,  sweetly  and 
beneficently,  notwithstanding  :  the  river  gets  and  gives ;  the  ocean  gives  and  gets. 
Thus  the  circle  goes  round,  beneficent  to  creation,  glorious  to  God.  Thus,  in  the 
spiritual  sphere — in  the  world  that  God  has  created  by  the  Spirit  of  His  Son — 
circulations  beautiful  and  beneficent  continually  play.  From  Him,  and  by  Him, 
and  to  Him  are  all  things.  To  the  saved  man  through  whom  God's  mercy  flows, 
the  activity  is  unspeakably  precious  :  to  him  the  profit,  but  to  God  the  praise.  {W. 
Arnot.)  The  creature  has  no  absolute  merit : — I.  In  the  first  place,  he  must  bo 
eay,  and  so  feel,  because  he  is  a  created  being.  Mere  dead  matter  cannot  exert 
any  living  functions.  The  saw  cannot  saw  the  sawyer.  The  axe  cannot  chop  the 
chopper.  They  are  lifeless  instruments  in  a  living  hand,  and  must  move  as  they 
are  moved.  It  is  impossible  that  by  any  independent  agency^  of  their  own  they 
should  act  upon  man,  and  make  him  the  passive  subject  of  their  operations.  But 
it  is  yet  more  impossible  for  a  creature  to  establish  himself  upon  an  independent 
position  in  reference  to  the  Creator.  Every  atom  and  element  in  his  body  and  BOnl 
is  originated,  and  kept  in  being,  by  the  steady  exertion  of  his  Maker's  power.  If 
this  were  relaxed  for  an  instant  he  would  cease  to  be.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be 
more  helpless  and  dependent  than  a  creature ;  and  no  relation  so  throws  a  man 
upon  the  bare  power  and  support  of  God  as  creaturely  relation.  II.  In  the  second 
place,  man  cannot  make  himself  "  profitable  "  unto  God,  and  lay  Him  under  obli- 
gation, because  he  is  constantly  sustained  and  upheld  by  God.  III.  In  the  third 
place,  man  cannot  be  "  profitable  "  to  God,  and  merit  His  thanks,  because  all  his 

GOOD    WOEKS     DEPEND    UPON    THB    OPEBATION    AND  ASSISTANCE   OF  THE   HoLT   SpIBIT. 

Our  Lord's  doctrine  of  human  merit  is  cognate  with  the  doctrine  of  Divine  grace. 
1.  In  the  first  place,  we  see  in  the  light  of  our  Lord's  theory  of  human  merit,  why 
it  is  impossible  for  a  creature  to  make  atonement  for  sin.  2.  In  the  second  place, 
we  see  in  the  light  of  this  subject  why  the  creature,  even  though  he  be  sinlessly 
perfect,  must  be  humble.  3.  And  this  leads  to  a  third  and  final  inference  from 
the  subject,  namely,  that  God  does  not  require  man  to  be  a  "profitable" 
servant,  but  to  be  a  faithful  servant.  Whoever  is  thus  faithful  will  be  re- 
warded with  as  great  a  reward  as  if  he  were  an  independent  and  self-sustain- 
ing agent.  Nay,  even  if  man  could  be  a  "  profitable "  servant,  and  could 
bring  God  under  obligation  to  him,  his  happiness  in  receiving  a  recompense 
tinder  such  circumstances  would  not  compare  with  that  under  the  present 
arrangement.  It  would  be  a  purely  mercantile  transaction  between  the  parties. 
There  would  be  no  love  in  the  service,  or  in  the  recompense.  The  creature 
would  calmly,  proudly,  do  his  work,  and  the  Creator  would  calmly  pay  him  his 
•wages.  And  the  transaction  would  end  there,  like  any  other  bargain.  But  now, 
there  is  affection  between  the  parties— filial  love  on  one  side,  and  paternal  love  on 
the  other ;  dependence,  and  weakness,  and  clinging  trust,  on  one  side,  and  grace, 
and  almighty  power,  and  infinite  fulness  on  the  other.  God  rewards  by  promise 
and  by  covenant,  and  not  because  of  an  absolute  and  original  indebtedness  to  the 
creature  of  His  power.  And  the  creature  feels  that  he  is  what  he  is,  because  ol 
the  grace  of  God.  {W.  O.  T.  SJiedd,  D.D.)  Unprofitable  servanU ;— Ai.O.E., 
in  "  Triumph  over  Midian,"  writes :  "  You  have  not  your  due,"  were  the  words 
which  a  wife  addressed  to  a  husband,  who  had  been  deprived  of  some  advantage 
which  she  considered  to  have  been  his  right.  "  May  God  be  praised  that  I  have 
»ot  my  due  I  "  he  replied.    "  What  is  my  due  as  a  sinner  before  God  ?    What  ii 


«BAP.  xvn.]  ST.  LUKE.  297 

my  due  from  a  world  which  I  have  renounced  for  His  sake  ?  Had  I  chosen  my 
portion  in  this  life,  then  only  might  I  complain  of  not  receiving  my  due."  Our 
Duty  : — The  faithful  performance  of  duty  in  our  station,  ennobles  that  station 
whatever  it  may  be.  There  is  a  beautiful  story  told  of  the  great  Spartan  Brasidas. 
When  he  complained  that  Sparta  was  a  small  state,  his  mother  said  to  him :  "  Son, 
Sparta  has  fallen  to  your  lot,  and  it  is  your  duty  to  adorn  it."  I  (the  Earl  of 
Shaftesbury)  would  only  say  to  all  workers,  everywhere,  in  all  positions  of  life, 
whatever  be  the  lot  in  which  you  are  cast,  it  is  your  duty  to  adorn  it. 

Vers.  11-19.  Ten  men  that  were  lepers. — The  ten  lepers: — I.  Theib  obiqinaii 
CONDITION.  Defiled.  Separated.  U.  Their  application  to  Christ.  1.  Observe 
the  distance  they  kept  from  His  person,  2.  The  earnestness  of  their  prayer.  3. 
The  unanimity  of  their  application.  4.  The  reverence  and  faith  they  evinced. 
III.  The  core  wrought.  IV.  The  thanks  rendered  by  the  Sajiaritan  and  thb 
INGRATITUDB  OE  THE  NINE.  1.  The  wiUiugness  and  power  of  Christ  to  heal.  2.  The 
application  to  be  made.  3.  The  return  He  demands  of  those  He  saves.  4.  The 
commonness  of  ingratitude.  (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  The  ten  lepers: — I.  The  stort 
■NoouBAOES  WORK  ON  FRONTIERS  AND  BORDERS.  Jesus  met  the  lepers  "  in  the  midst 
of" — that  is,  probably,  along  the  frontier  line  between—"  Samaria  and  Galilee," 
on  His  way  east  to  the  Jordan.  Their  common  misery  drew  these  natural  enemies, 
ths  Jews  and  the  Samaritans,  together.  The  national  prejudice  of  each  was 
destroyed.  Under  these  circumstances  the  border  was  a  favourable  retreat  for 
them.  The  border  population  is  always  freer  from  prejudice  and  more  open  to 
influence.  XL  The  stort  shows  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  impenitent  men 
CAN  PBAY.  The  lepers  prayed.  That  weak,  hoarse  cry  affectingly  expressed  their 
sense  of  need — one  characteristic  of  true  prayer.  Their  standing  afar  off  further 
expressed  their  sense  of  guilt — another  characteristic  of  acceptable  prayer.  Their 
disease  was  a  type  of  the  death  of  sin.  Their  isolation  expressed  the  exclusion  of 
the  polluted  and  abominable  from  the  city  of  God.  HI.  Tede  stort  shows  that 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  God  answers  the  praters  of  impenitent  men.  IV. 
The  stobt  shows  how  the  tobm  of  obedience  mat  exist  without  its  spirit.  V. 
The  stort  shows  us  that  a  degree  of  faith  mat  exist  without  love,  and  so 
without  saving  power.  There  was  a  weak  beginning  of  faith  in  all  the  ten.  It  is 
shown  in  their  setting  out  without  a  word,  though  as  yet  unclean sed,  for  Jerusalem. 
This  must  have  required  faith  of  a  high  order.  If  it  had  worked  by  love  all  would 
have  been  saved.  This  was  one  trouble  with  the  nine,  and  the  radical  one — they 
did  not  love.  Calvin  describes  their  case,  and  that  of  many  like  them.  "  Want 
and  hunger,"  he  says,  "  create  a  faith  which  gratification  kills."  It  is  real  faith, 
yet  hath  it  no  root.  VI.  The  stobt  shows  us  the  sin  of  ingbatitudb,  and  the 
PLACE  which  gratitude  FILLS  WITH  GoD.  The  Samaritan  was  the  only  one  who 
returned,  and  he  was  the  only  one  saved.  "  Birth  did  not  give  the  Jew  a  place  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  gratitude  gave  it  to  a  Samaritan."  Blessings  are  good,  but 
not  for  themselves.  They  are  to  draw  us  to  the  Giver,  they  are  tests  of  character. 
True  gratitude  to  God  involves  two  things,  both  of  which  were  found  in  the  leper, 
1.  He  was  humble ;  he  fell  at  Jesus'  feet.  He  remembered  what  he  had  been  when 
Jesus  found  him,  and  the  pit  whence  he  was  digged.  If  blessings  do  not  make  us 
humble,  they  are  lost  upon  us.  2.  Gratitude  involves,  also,  the  exaltation  of  God. 
The  leper  glorified  God.  A  German,  who  was  converted,  expressed  himself  afterward 
with  a  beautiful  spirit  of  humility  and  praise :  "  My  wife  is  rejoicing,"  he  said,  "  I 
am  rejoicing,  my  Saviour  is  rejoicing."  On  another  occasion  he  said,  ••  I  went 
this  evening  to  kiss  my  little  children  good-night.  As  I  was  standing  there  my 
wife  said  to  me,  '  Dear  husband,  you  love  these  our  children  very  dearly,  but  it  is 
not  a  thousandth  part  as  much  as  the  blessed  Saviour  loves  us.' "  What  spirit 
should  more  characterize  God's  creatures  than  gratitude  ?  What  should  we  more 
certainly  look  for  as  the  mark  of  a  Christian  ?  God  blesses  it.  He  blessed  the 
leper ;  He  cleansed  the  leprosy  deeper  than  that  in  his  flesh,  the  leprosy  of  sin. 
The  nine  went  on  their  way  with  bodies  healed,  but  with  a  more  loathsome  disease 
still  upon  them,  the  leprosy  of  ingratitude.  We  classify  sins.  "  We  may  find  by 
and  by  that  in  God's  sight  ingratitude  is  the  blackest  of  all."  There  is  an  applica- 
tion of  this  truth  to  Christians  which  we  should  not  miss.  Gratitude  gives  con- 
tinual access  to  higher  and  higher  blessings.  The  ungrateful  Christian  loses 
spiritual  blessings.  H  we  value  the  gift  above  the  Giver,  all  that  we  should  receive 
in  retoming  to  Him  we  lose.  {O.  R.  Leavitt.)  The  ten  lepers : — I.  The  blessim» 
VHIOH  THXT  ALL  BECBiYED.    1.  A  healthy  body.     2.  Restoration  to  society.    8.  B«- 


298  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

admission  to  the  sanctuary.     II.  The  behattoub  of  the  nine.    III.  The  losb 

BtlBTAlNED  BY  THE  NINE  IN  CONSEQUENCE  OE  THEIR  INGEATITUDE.      LcSSOnS 1.    Ill  the 

bestowment  of  His  grace,  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  2.  Our  Lord  regards 
moral  and  religious  obligations  as  more  important  than  those  which  are  positive 
and  ceremonial.  3.  Answers  to  prayer  should  be  received  with  thanksgiving. 
(F.  F.  Goe,  M.A.)  The  lepers: — Affliction  quickens  to  prayer;  but  those  who 
remember  God  in  their  distresses  often  forget  Him  in  their  deliverances.  1.  Observe 
the  condition  in  which  Jesus  found  the  applicants.  2.  Observe  the  state  in  which 
Jesus  left  them.  3.  Their  subsequent  conduct.  I.  The  great  evil  and  peevalenct 
CF  INGRATITUDE.  1.  It  is  &  sin  60  Very  common  that  not  one  in  ten  can  be 
found  that  is  not  guilty  of  it  in  a  very  flagrant  manner,  and  not  one  in  ten  thousand 
but  what  is  liable  to  the  charge  in  some  degree.  It  is  a  prevailing  vice  among  all 
lanks  and  conditions  in  society.  2.  Common  as  this  sin  is,  it  is  nevertheless  a  sin 
of  great  magnitude.  Should  not  the  patient  be  thankful  for  the  recovery  of  hig 
health,  especially  where  the  relief  has  been  gratuitously  afforded  ?  Should  not  the 
debtor  or  the  criminal  be  thankful  to  his  surety  or  his  prince,  who  freely  gave  him 
his  liberty  or  his  life  ?  (1)  It  is  a  sin  of  which  no  one  can  be  ignorant;  it  is  a  sin 
against  the  light  of  nature,  as  well  as  against  the  law  of  revelation.  (2)  Ingratitude 
carries  in  it  a  degree  of  injustice  towards  the  Author  of  all  our  mercies,  in  that  it 
denies  to  Him  the  glory  due  unto  His  name,  and  is  a  virtual  impeachment  of  His 
goodness.  (3)  Unthankfulness  brings  a  onrse  upon  the  blessings  we  enjoy,  and 
provokes  the  Giver  to  deprive  us  of  them.  11.  Consider  the  means  bt  which  this 
EVIL  MAT  BE  PREVENTED.  1.  Be  clothed  with  humility,  and  cherish  a  proper  sense  of 
your  own  meanness  and  nnworthiness.  2.  Give  every  mercy  its  full  weight.  Call 
no  sin  small,  and  no  mercy  small.  3.  Take  a  collective  view  of  all  your  mercies, 
and  you  will  see  perpetual  cause  for  thankfulness.  4.  Consider  your  mercies  in  a 
comparative  view.  Compare  them  with  your  deserts :  put  your  provocations  in 
one  scale,  and  Divine  indulgences  in  another,  and  see  which  preponderates. 
Compare  your  afflictions  with  your  mercies.  6.  Think  how  ornamental  to  religion 
is  a  grateful  and  humble  spirit.  6.  There  is  no  unthankfulness  in  heaven.  {B. 
Beddowe,  M.A.)  The  ten  lepert ; — 1.  The  first  thing  I  would  have  you  notice  is, 
that  the  ten  were  at  first  undistinguishable  in  their  misery.  That  there  were  dif- 
ferences of  character  among  them  we  know ;  that  there  were  differences  of  race,  of 
education,  and  training,  we  know  too,  for  one  at  least  was  a  Samaritan,  and  under 
no  other  circumstances,  perhaps,  would  his  companions  have  had  any  dealings 
with  him  ;  but  all  their  differences  were  obliterated,  their  natural  antipathies  were 
lost,  beneath  the  common  pressure  of  their  frightful  misery — their  very  voices  were 
blended  in  one  urgent  cry,  "  Jesus,  Master,  have  mercy  upon  us."  ••  One  touch  of 
nature,"  says  the  great  poet,  "  makes  the  whole  world  kin  " :  true,  and  alas  I  never 
so  true  as  when  that  touch  of  nature  is  the  sense  of  guilt.  This  is  the  great 
leveller,  not  only  of  the  highest  and  lowest,  but  of  the  best  and  worst,  effacing  all 
distinctions,  even  of  moral  character ;  for,  when  one  attempts  to  weigh  one's  sin 
and  count  it  up,  it  seems  impossible  to  establish  degrees  in  one's  own  favour — one 
feels  as  if  there  were  a  dreadful  equality  of  guilt  for  all,  and  one  was  no  better  than 
another.  2.  I  would  have  you  notice,  in  the  second  place,  the  apparent  tameness 
of  their  cure.  Our  Lord  neither  lays  His  finger  on  them,  nor  holds  any  conference, 
but  merely  tells  them  to  go  and  show  themselves  to  the  priests,  according  to  the 
letter  of  that  now  antiquated  and  perishing  law  of  Moses.  Never  was  so  great  a 
cure  worked  in  so  tame  a  fashion  since  the  time  of  Naaman  the  Syrian ;  well  for 
them  that  they  had  a  humbler  spirit  and  a  more  confiding  faith  than  he,  or  they, 
too,  would  have  gone  away  in  a  rage  and  been  never  the  better.  Now,  I  think  we 
may  see  in  this  a  striking  parable  of  how  our  Lord  evermore  deals  with  penitent 
sinners.  He  does  not,  as  a  rule,  make  any  wonderful  revelation  of  Himself  to  the 
soul  which  He  heals;  there  is  no  dramatic  "scene"  which  can  be  reported  to 
others.  There  is,  indeed,  often  something  very  commonplace,  and  therefore  disap- 
pointing, about  His  dealings  with  penitents.  He  remits  them  to  their  religious 
duties — to  those  things  which  men  account  as  outward  and  formal,  and  therefore 
feeble,  which  have  indeed  no  power  at  all  in  themselves  to  heal  the  leprosy  of  sin, 
such  as  the  means  of  grace,  the  ministry  of  reconciliation.  In  these  things  there 
is  no  excitement ;  they  do  not  carry  away  the  soul  with  a  rush  of  enthusiasm,  or 
fill  it  with  a  trembling  awe.  3.  And,  in  the  third  place,  I  would  have  you  notice 
the  unexpected  way  in  which  He  addressed  the  one  who  came  back  to  express  his 
heartfelt  gratitude.  •'  Arise,  go  thy  way,  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole."  Now, 
it  is  obvious  that  these  words  were  just  as  applicable  to  the  other  nine  as  to  him. 


CBAi,  xvnO  ST.  LUKE.  299 

for  they,  too,  had  been  made  whole,  and  made  whole  by  faith  ;  all  had  believed,  all 
had  started  ofif  obediently  to  show  themselves  to  the  priests,  and  all  alike  had  been 
cleansed  through  faith  as  they  went.  Does  it  not  seem  strange  that  He  took  no 
notice  of  the  gratitude  which  was  peculiar  to  the  one  to  whom  He  spake,  and  only 
made  mention  of  the  faith  which  was  common  to  them  all  ?  Did  He  not  do  it 
advisedly  ?  Did  He  not  intend  us  to  learn  a  lesson  thereby  ?  We  know  that  this 
story  sets  forth  as  a  parable  our  own  conduct  as  redeemed  and  pardoned  sinnere, 
We  know  that  the  great  bulk  of  Christians  are  ungrateful ;  that  they  are  far  more 
concerned  in  lamenting  the  petty  losses  and  securing  the  petty  gains  of  life,  than 
in  showing  their  thankfulness  to  God  for  His  inestimable  love.  What  about  them? 
Will  unthankful  Christians  also  receive  the  salvation  of  their  souls  7  I  suppose  so. 
I  think  this  story  teaches  us  so,  and  I  think  our  Lord's  words  to  the  one  that 
returned  are  meant  to  enforce  that  teaching.  All  were  cleansed,  though  only  one 
gave  glory  to  God ;  even  so  we  are  all  made  whole  by  faith,  though  scarcely  one  in 
ten  shows  any  gratitude  for  it.  The  ingratitude  of  Christian  people  may  indeed 
mar  very  grievously  the  work  of  grace,  but  it  cannot  undo  it.  "  Thy  faith  hath 
made  thee  whole  "  is  the  common  formula  which  includes  all  the  saved,  although 
amongst  them  be  found  differences  so  striking,  and  deficiencies  so  painful.  There 
are  that  use  religion  itself  selfishly,  thinking  only  of  the  personal  advantage  it 
will  be  to  themselves,  and  of  the  pleasure  it  brings  within  their  reach.  But  these 
are  certainly  not  the  happiest.  Vexed  with  every  trifle,  worried  about  every  diffi- 
culty, entangled  with  a  thousand  uncertainties,  if  all  things  go  well  they  just 
acquiesce  in  it,  as  if  they  had  a  right  to  expect  it ;  if  things  go  wrong  they  begin  at 
once  to  complain,  as  though  they  were  ill-used ;  if  they  become  worse,  then  they 
are  miserable,  as  though  aU  cause  for  rejoicing  were  gone.  Now,  I  need  not  remind 
you  how  fearfully  such  a  temper  dishonours  God-  When  He  has  freely  given  us 
an  eternal  inheritance  of  joy,  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  shaken,  an  immortality 
beyond  the  reach  of  sin  or  suffering,  it  is  simply  monstrous  that  we  should  murmur 
at  the  shadows  of  sorrow  which  fleck  our  sea  of  blessing,  it  should  seem  simply  in- 
credible that  we  do  not  continually  pour  out  our  very  souls  in  thanksgiving  unto  Him 
that  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us.  But  I  will  say  this,  that  our  ingratitude  is  the 
secret  of  our  Uttle  happiness  in  this  life.  Our  redeemed  lives  were  meant  to  be 
like  that  summer  sea  when  it  dances  and  sparkles  beneath  the  glorious  sun; 
instead  of  which  they  are  like  a  sullen,  muddy  pool  upon  a  cloudy  day,  which  gives 
back  nothing  but  the  changing  hues  of  gloom.  It  is  not  outward  circumstance,  it 
is  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  thankful  spirit  which  makes  all  the  difference  to 
our  lives.  Gratitude  to  God  is  the  sunshine  of  our  souls,  with  which  the  tamest 
scene  is  bright  and  the  wildest  beautiful,  without  which  the  fairest  landscape  is  but 
sombre.  (JR.  Winterbotham,  M.A.)  Fourteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity  : — Three 
impressive  and  instructive  pictures  are  described  in  this  gospel  I.  A  conqbeoation 
OF  BUTFEBEES,  whom  affliction  influenced  to  much  Beeming  goodness  and  piety. 
It  is  a  beautiful  and  comforting  truth,  that  there  is  no  depth  of  suffering,  or 
distance  from  the  pure  and  the  good  to  which  sin  may  banish  men  in  this  world, 
where  they  are  debarred  from  carrying  their  sorrows  and  griefs  in  prayer  to  God. 
A  man  may  be  guilty,  leprous,  cast  out,  cut  off,  given  up  as  irretrievably  lost ;  and 
yet,  if  he  will,  he  may  call  on  God  for  help,  and  the  genuine,  hearty,  earnest,  and 
real  cry  of  his  soul  wUl  reach  the  ear  of  God.  II.  A  mabvellous  intebfeeencb  of 
Divine  poweb  and  obacb  for  their  relief,  very  imsatisfactorily  acknowledged  and 
improved.  Dark-day  and  sick-bed  religion  is  apt  to  be  a  religion  of  mere  con- 
straint.  Take  the  pressure  off,  and  it  is  apt  to  be  like  the  morning  clond  and  the 
early  dew,  which  '*  goeth  away."  Give  me  a  man  who  has  learned  to  know  and 
fear  God  in  the  daytime,  and  I  shall  not  be  much  in  doubt  of  him  when  the  night 
comes.  But  the  piety  which  takes  its  existence  in  times  of  cloud  and  darkness, 
like  the  growths  common  to  such  seasons,  is  apt  to  be  as  speedy  in  its  decline  as  it 
is  quick  and  facile  in  its  rise.  There  are  mushrooms  in  the  field  of  grace,  as  well 
as  in  the  field  of  nature.  III.  An  ikstancb  of  IiOnelt  oBATrnmE,  resulting  in 
most  precious  blessings  superadded  to  the  miraculous  cure.  There  was  not 
only  a  faith  tc  get  the  bodily  cure,  but  a  faith  which  brought  oat  a  complete 
and  practical  discipleship ;  an  earnest  and  abiding  willingness,  in  prosperity 
as  well  as  in  adversity,  to  wear  the  Saviour's  yoke.  (J.  A,  Seits,  D.D.) 
Onlp  trutt  Him: — As  these  men  were  to  start  straight  away  to  the  priest  with  all 
their  leprosy  white  upon  them,  and  to  go  there  as  if  they  felt  they  were  already 
healed,  lo  are  yon,  with  all  your  sinnership  upon  yon,  and  your  sense  of  condemna- 
iion  heavy  on  yoor  sonl,  to  beliete  in  Jesus  Christ  jnst  as  yoo  are,  and  yon  shaU 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

find  everlasting  life  npon  the  spot.  I.  First,  then,  I  say  that  we  are  to  believe  in 
Jesus  Christ — to  trust  Him  to  heal  us  of  the  great  disease  of  sin — though  as  yet  wa 
laay  have  about  us  no  sign  or  token  that  He  has  wrought  any  good  work  upon  as. 
We  are  not  to  look  for  signs  and  evidences  within  ourselves  before  we  venture  oar 
eouls  upon  Jesus.  The  contrary  supposition  is  a  soal-destroying  error,  and  I  will 
try  to  expose  it  by  showing  what  abe  xhb  bioms  that  abs  couuonly  looebo  fob  bt 
V£N.  1.  One  of  the  most  frequent  is  a  oonscioasness  of  great  sin,  and  a  horrible 
dread  of  Divine  wrath,  leading  to  despair.  If  yea  say,  "  Lord,  I  cannot  trust  Thee 
unless  I  feel  this  or  that,"  then  you,  in  eSeot,  say,  *'I  can  trust  my  own  feelings, 
but  I  cannot  trust  God's  appointed  Saviour."  What  is  this  but  to  make  a  god  out 
of  your  feelings,  and  a  saviour  out  of  your  inward  griefs  ?  2.  Many  other  persons 
think  that  they  must,  before  they  can  trust  Christ,  experience  quite  a  blaze  of  joy. 
"  Why,"  you  say,  "must  I  not  be  happy  before  I  can  believe  in  Christ?"  Must 
you  needs  have  the  joy  before  yoa  exercise  the  faith  ?  How  unreasonable  I  8.  Wd 
have  known  others  who  have  expected  to  have  a  text  impressed  upon  their  minds. 
In  old  families  there  are  superstitions  about  white  birds  coming  to  a  window  before 
a  death,  and  I  regard  with  much  the  same  distrust  the  more  common  superstition 
that  if  a  text  continues  upon  your  mind  day  after  day  you  may  safely  conclude  tha: 
it  is  an  assurance  of  your  salvation.  The  Spirit  of  God  often  does  apply  Scriptura 
with  power  to  the  soul ;  but  this  fact  is  never  set  forth  as  the  rock  for  us  to  build 
upon.  4.  There  is  another  way  in  which  some  men  try  to  get  oft  believing  in  Christ, 
and  that  is,  they  expect  an  actual  conversion  to  be  manifest  in  them  before  they 
will  trust  the  Saviour.  Conversion  is  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  healing  power. 
But  you  are  not  to  have  this  before  yoa  trust  Him ;  you  are  to  trust  Him  for  this 
very  thing.  II.  And  now,  secondly,  I  want  to  bring  forward  what  thb  bbason 
la  fob  odb  believiko  in  Jesus  Cbbist.  No  warrant  whatever  within  ourself  need 
be  looked  for.  The  warrant  for  our  believing  Christ  lies  in  this — 1.  There  is  Qod'i 
witness  concerning  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  has  sec 
forth  Christ  "  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for 
the  sin  of  the  whole  world."  2.  The  next  warrant  for  our  believing  is  Jesui> 
Christ  Himself.  He  bears  witness  on  earth  as  well  as  the  Father,  and  His  witness 
is  true.  3.  I  dare  say  these  poor  lepers  believed  in  Jesus  because  they  had  heard 
of  other  lepers  whom  He  had  cleansed.  HL  What  is  thb  isscb  of  this  kind  or 
FAITH  THAT  I  HAVB  BBEN  PBEACHiMQ?  This  trusting  in  Jesus  withoot  marks, 
signs,  evidences,  tokens,  what  is  the  result  and  outcome  of  it  ?  1.  The  first  thing 
that  I  have  to  say  about  it  is  this — that  the  very  existence  of  snch  a  faith  aa 
that  in  the  soul  is  evidence  that  there  is  already  a  saving  change.  Every  man 
by  nature  kicks  against  simply  trusting  in  Christ;  and  when  at  last  he  yields 
to  the  Divine  method  of  mercy  it  is  a  virtual  surrender  of  his  own  will,  the 
ending  of  rebellion,  the  establishment  of  peace.  Faith  is  obedience.  2.  It  will 
be  an  evidence,  also,  that  you  are  humble;  for  it  is  pride  that  makes  men 
want  to  do  something,  or  to  be  something,  in  their  ovm  salvation,  or  to  be  saved 
in  some  wonderful  way.  3.  Again,  faith  in  Jesus  will  be  the  best  evidence  that 
yon  are  reconciled  to  God,  for  the  worst  evidence  of  year  enmity  to  God  is  that 
you  do  not  like  God's  way  of  salvation.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  ten  lepers: — L 
A  WBETCKED  coMFANT.  II.  A  soBPBiSED  OOMPANT.  1.  The  occBsion  of  the  surprise. 
(1)  They  suddenly  met  Jesus,  (a)  Life  is  full  of  surprises,  (b)  To  meet  Jesus  is 
the  best  of  all  life's  surprises.  2.  The  effects  of  this  surprise.  (1)  Hope  was  en- 
kindled within  them.  (2)  Prayer  for  mercy  broke  forth  from  them.  (3)  Healing  of 
their  dreadful  malady  was  experienced  by  them.  III.  An  UNOBATEFni.  coupant.  1. 
Consider  the  number  healed.  2.  The  cry  which  brought  the  healing.  8.  The 
simultaneousness  of  the  healing.  4.  The  ingratitude  of  the  healed.  (1)  Only  one 
returned  to  acknowledge  the  mercy.  (2)  This  one  a  stranger.  (3)  The  angratefal 
are  those  of  the  Master's  own  household.  (4)  Are  these  representative  facts?  5. 
Consider  the  special  blessing  bestowed  on  tne  grateful  sool.  (1)  Not  only  healed 
in  body,  but  also  in  soul.  (2)  Soul-healing  ever  requires  personal  faith.  (D.  C. 
Hughes,  M.A.)  The  ten  lepers : — I.  Theib  application.  It  was — 1.  Unanimotu. 
2.  Earnest.  3.  Eespectful  and  humble.  IL  Theib  cube.  1.  A  wonderful  manifes- 
tation of  Christ's  power.     He  is  a  rich  Saviour,  rich  in  mercy  and  rich  in  power. 

2.  Great  faith  and  obedience  exhibited  on  their  part.  III.  The  thankfdlnbbs 
MANIFESTED  BT  ONE  OF  THESE  HEALBO  HBN.    1.  Prompt.    2.  Warm,  hearty,  earnest. 

3.  Humble  and  reverential.  More  so,  observe,  than  even  his  prayer.  When  he 
eried  for  mercy,  he  stood ;  when  he  gives  thanks  for  mercy,  he  falls  down  on  his 
face.    The  thankfnlnesa  of  this  man  was  elevated  also.    It  was  acocmpanied  with 


«HAP.  XVII.J  ST.  LUKE.  801 

high  thoughts  of  God,  and  a  setting  forth,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  of  God's  glory. 
He  is  said  in  the  text  to  have  "  glorified  God."  And  observe  how  he  blends  together 
in  his  thankfulness  God  and  Christ.  He  glorifies  the  one,  and  at  the  same  time  ha 
falls  down  before  the  other,  giving  Him  thanks.  Did  he  then  look  on  our  Lord  in 
His  real  character,  as  God  7  Perhaps  he  did.  The  wonderful  cure  he  had  received 
in  his  body,  might  have  been  accompanied  with  as  wonderful  an  outpouring  of 
grace  and  light  into  his  mind.  God  and  Christ,  God's  glory  and  Christ's  mercy, 
were  so  blended  together  in  his  mind,  that  he  could  not  separate  them.  Neither, 
brethren,  can  yon  separate  them,  if  you  know  anything  aright  of  Christ  and  His 
mercy.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  ten  lepers: — 1.  Look  at  the  afflicted  objects.  2. 
Observe  the  direction  of  the  Divine  PhysicJfen.  The  Saviour,  by  sending  the  lepers 
to  the  priest,  not  only  honoured  the  law  which  bad  prescribed  this  conduct,  but 
secured  to  Himself  the  testimony  of  the  appointed  judge  and  witness  of  the  cure; 
for,  as  this  disease  was  considered  to  be  both  inflicted  and  cured  by  the  hand  of  God 
Himself,  and  as  He  had  cured  it,  He  thus  left  a  witness  in  the  conscience  of  the 
priest,  that  He  was  what  He  professed  to  be.  3.  Follow  these  men  on  the  road,  and 
behold  the  triumphant  success  of  Christ's  merciful  designs.  Christ's  cure  was  not 
only  effectual,  but  universal.  No  one  of  the  ten  is  excepted  as  too  diseased,  or  too 
unworthy;  but  among  all  these  men  there  is  only  one  that  we  look  at  with 
pleasure.  He  was  a  stranger.  4.  Contemplate  more  closely  the  grateful  Sama- 
ritan. What  a  lovely  object  is  gratitude  at  the  feet  of  Mercy  1  5.  But  what  a 
contrast  is  presented  by  the  ungrateful  Jews.  6.  Tet  how  gently  the  Saviour  rebukes 
their  unthankfulness.  He  might  have  said — "  What  1  so  absorbed  in  the  enjoyment 
of  health  as  to  forget  the  Giver !  Then  the  leprosy  which  I  healed  shall  return  to 
you,  and  cleave  to  you  for  ever."  But,  no;  He  only  asks — "Are  there  not  found 
any  that  returned  to  give  glory  to  God,  save  this  stranger?  "  And,  turning  to  the 
man  prostrate  in  the  dust  at  His  feet,  Jesus  said,  "  Arise,  go  to  thy  house,  thy  faith 
hath  made  thee  whole."  Concluding  lessons — 1.  This  subject  shows  the  compassion 
of  the  Saviour.  2.  Let  each  ask  himself,  "  Am  I  a  leper?  "  3.  See  the  hatefulness 
of  ingratitude.  {T.  Oibson,  M.A.)  Oratitude  for  Divine  favour t : — I.  Wk  abb  con- 
TiSTJAijiT  BECErviNO  FAVoxiKS  FBOM  GoD.  No  crcature  is  independent.  All  are  daily 
receiving  from  the  Father  of  lights,  from  whom  "cometh  every  good  and  perfect 
gift,"  and  "  vrith  whom  there  is  no  variableness,  nor  shadow  of  turning."  Our  bodies, 
with  all  their  powers ;  and  our  souls,  with  all  their  capacities,  are  derived  from  Him. 
But  whilst  the  beneficence  of  the  Supreme  Being  is,  in  one  sense,  general ;  it  is,  in 
another,  restricted.  Some  are  more  highly  favoured  than  others.  Some  have  ex- 
perienced remarkable  interpositions  of  Divine  providence.  Some  have  been  raised 
up  from  dangerous  illness.  Some  have  been  advanced  in  worldly  possessions.  Some 
are  the  partakers  of  distinguished  privileges.  Such  are  those  who  are  favoured 
<with  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel.  II.  That  these  favoubs  should  induce 
A  suiTABUt  BGTCBM.  1.  Gratitude  will  not  be  regarded  as  unsuitable.  We  always 
«xpect  this  from  our  fellow-creatures  who  participate  in  our  bounty.  2.  Com- 
mendation is  another  suitable  return.  Make  known  the  lovely  character  of  your 
merciful  Bedeemer  to  others.  3.  Service  is  another  suitable  return.  "  Wherefore, 
we  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved,  let  us  have  grace  whereby  we  may 
serve  God  acceptably,  with  reverence  and  with  godly  fear."  4.  Humiliation  is  a 
suitable  return.  This  Samaritan  prostrated  himself  before  his  Divine  Healer.  How 
unspeakable  is  the  felicity  of  that  man,  who,  deeply  humbled  uuder  a  sense  of  the 
manifold  mercies  of  God,  can  lift  up  his  eyes  to  the  great  Judge  of  quick  and  dead, 
and  say  in  sincerity,  '•  Lord,  my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  my  soul  lofty,  neither  do 
I  exercise  myself  in  great  matters,  nor  in  things  too  high  for  me ;  I  have  surely 
behaved  and  quieted  myself  as  a  child  that  is  weaned  of  its  mother :  my  soul  is  even 
as  a  weaned  child ! "  5.  Honour  is  a  suitable  return.  This  Samaritan  was  not, 
perhaps,  acquainted  with  our  Lord's  divinity ;  but  he  regarded  Him  as  some  extra- 
ordinary personage,  and,  as  was  customary  in  such  cases,  he  prostrated  himself 
before  Him,  as  a  token  of  great  respect  and  veneration.  Entertain  the  most  exalted 
conceptions  of  Him ;  you  cannot  raise  your  thoughts  too  high :  ••  He  is  God  over  aU, 
blessed  for  ever."  III.  That  this  betubn  is  too  cohuonlt  keolbctsd.  The 
cause  of  this  forgetfulness  is  to  be  traced,  in  general,  to  the  infiuence  of  inward 
depravity ;  and  nothing  is  a  clearer  proof  of  the  corruption  of  our  nature ;  but  there 
•re  other  causes,  co-operating  with  this,  of  which  we  may  mention  two.  First :  Worldly 
prosperity.  Honey  does  not  more  powerfully  attract  bees  than  affluence  generates 
danger.    Secondly :  Worldly  anxiety  is  another  cause  of  this  forgetfulness.    IV.  Wa 

MAT  0B8SBVB,  THAT  TO  MKOLKCT  A  BETOBM  Of  OBATITODS  TO  GoD  IB  HZOHLT  BBPBUOdl- 


809  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  mt 

BIBLE.  Nay,  it  is  exceedingly  sinful.  What  insensibility  does  it  argne,  and  whal 
criminality  does  it  involve  1  It  is  a  virtual  denial  of  the  Divine  providence.  {p>id.} 
The  earnestness  of  personal  necessity  : — One  fact  is  brought  most  powerfully  Defor» 
as  here,  and  that  is — 1.  The  personal  necessity  of  these  ten  men.  So  strong  was 
it  that  it  gained  a  victory  over  national  prejudices  of  the  fiercest  kind,  and  we  find 
the  Samaritan  in  company  with  the  Jew.  Amongst  men  not  conscious  of  a 
common  misery,  such  a  union  might  have  been  looked  for  but  in  vain ;  the  Jew 
would  have  loathed  the  Samaritan  and  the  Samaritan  would  have  scorned  the  Jew. 
And  there  is  too  much  reason  for  supposing  that  a  want  of  personal  religion  is  the 
canse  of  much  of  that  fierce  estrangement  which  characterizes  the  different  parties 
and  denominations  of  the  religious  world  in  the  present  day.  Did  men  realize 
their  common  sinfulness,  the  deep  necessity  which  enfolds  them  all,  we  can  well 
believe  that  much  of  the  energy  which  is  now  wasted  in  profitless  controversy  and 
angry  recrimination,  would  be  spent  in  united  supplication  to  the  One,  who  alone 
can  do  ought  for  the  sinner  in  his  need.  2.  Again  we  see  how  personal  necessity 
triumphs  over  national  prejudice,  in  the  fact  that  the  Samaritan  is  willing  to  caU 
upon  a  Jew  for  safety  and  for  help.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  he  would  have 
held  no  communion  with  Him  at  all,  but  the  fact  that  he  was  a  leper,  and  that 
Jesus  could  cure  him,  overcame  the  national  antipathy  and  he  joins  his  voice  with 
that  of  all  the  rest.  And  surely  thus  also  is  it  with  the  leper  of  the  spiritual  world ; 
when  he  has  been  brought  truly  to  know  his  state,  truly  to  smart  under  its  degra- 
dation and  its  pain,  truly  to  believe  that  there  is  One  at  hand  by  whom  he  can  be 
healed,  the  power  of  the  former  pride  and  prejudice  becomes  broken  down,  and  h& 
cries  out  in  earnest  to  the  long-despised  Jesus  for  the  needed  help.  8.  We  have 
now  seen  the  power  of  personal  necessity  in  overcoming  strongly-rooted  prejudice ; 
let  us  next  proceed  to  consider  it  as  productive  of  great  earnestness  in  supplication. 
The  supplication  of  these  men  was  loud  and  personal ;  they  lifted  np  their  voices^ 
and  fixed  on  one  alone  of  Jesu's  company  as  able  to  deliver  them,  and  that  one' 
•was  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  And  we  can  well  understand  how  this  plague-strickea 
family  united  their  energies  in  a  long,  earnest  cry  to  attract  the  attention  of  the 
One  that  alone  could  make  them  whole.  Theirs  was  no  feeble  whisper,  no  dull  and 
muffled  sound,  but  a  piteous,  an  agonizing  call  which  almost  startled  the  very  air 
as  it  rushed  along.  Nor  can  we  marvel  if  God  refuse  to  hear  the  cold,  dull  prayers 
which  for  the  most  part  fall  upon  His  ear ;  they  are  not  the  expressions  of  need, 
and  therefore  find  little  favour  at  His  hands  ;  they  come  to  Him  like  the  compli- 
ments which  men  pay  to  their  fellow-men,  and  meaning  nothing,  they  are  taken  for 
exactly  what  they  are  worth.  4.  And  mark,  how  by  the  loudness  of  their  cry  these 
unhappy  men  expose  their  miserable  state  to  Christ — the  one  absorbing  point  which 
they  wished  to  press  upon  His  notice  was  the  fact  that  they  were  all  lepers,  ten 
diseased  and  almost  despairing  men.  In  their  case  there  was  no  hiding  of  their 
woe,  they  wished  the  Lord  to  see  the  worst.  (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.'^  He  was  a 
Samaritan. — The  Samaritan's  gratitude: — It  is  necessary  to^  notice  the  saving 
element  in  this  man's  gratitude.  We  can  imagine  the  other  nine  saying  to  him  as 
he  turned  back,  "  We  are  as  grateful  to  God  as  you  are,  but  we  will  return  our 
thanks  in  the  temple  of  God.  There  are  certain  acts  of  worship,  certain  sacrifice* 
ordained  in  the  law  by  God  Himself.  In  the  due  performance  of  these  we  will 
thank  God  in  His  own  appointed  way.  He  who  healed  us  is  a  great  Prophet,  but 
it  is  the  great  power  of  God  alone  which  has  •leansed  us."  Now  the  Samaritan 
was  not  content  with  this.  His  faith  worked  by  love,  taking  the  form  of  thankful- 
ness. He  at  once  left  the  nine  to  their  journey,  and,  without  delay,  threw  himself 
at  the  feet  of  the  Lord.  He  felt  that  his  was  not  a  common  healing — not  a  healing 
in  the  way  of  nature,  by  the  disease  exhausting  itself  in  time.  It  was  a  super- 
natural healing,  through  the  intervention  of  a  particular  servant  of  God  ;  and  this 
servant  (or,  perhaps,  he  had  heard  that  Jesus  claimed  to  be  more  than  a  servant, 
even  the  Son  of  God)  must  be  thanked  and  glorified.  If  God  had  healed  him  in 
the  ordinary  course,  the  sacrifices  prescribed  for  such  healing  would  have  sufficed. 
But  God  had  healed  him  in  an  extraordinary  way— by  His  Son,  by  One  who  was 
far  greater  than  any  prophet ;  and  so,  if  God  was  to  be  glorified,  it  must  be  in 
connection  with  this  extraordinary  charmel  of  blessing,  this  Mediator.  {M.  F. 
Sadler.)  Gratitude  heightens  th'  power  of  erjjoyment : — Man's  gratitude  is,  I 
have  often  thought  and  said,  a  sixth  sense ;  for  it  always  heightens  the  power  ol 
enjoyment.  Suppose  a  man  to  walk  through  the  world  with  every  sense  excited  to 
its  utmost  nerve :  let  there  be  a  world  of  dainties  spread  before  him  and  around 
him,  and  the  aromas  of  all  precious  fragrances  steeping  his  seuFes  iu  delicious  and 


CHAP,  xm,]  ST.  LUKE.  808 

exquisite  enjoyment ;  let  the  eye  be  gladdened  and  brighten  over  the  knowledge, 
and  the  hand  tighten  over  the  grasp  of  present  and  actual  possession ;  yet  let  him 
be  a  man  in  whose  nature  there  wakes  no  keen  sensation  of  grateful  remembrance, 
and  I  say  that  yet  the  most  delightful  sensation  is  denied  him.  _  Grateful  thankful- 
ness is  allied  to — nay,  forms  an  ingredient  in — the  very   chief   of   our  deepest 
enjoyments;  and  purest  springs  of  blessedness.     Gratitude  gives  all  the  sweet  spice 
to  the  cup  of  contentment,  and  the  cup  of  discontent  derives  all  its  acid  from  an 
imgrateful  heart.     (E.  P.  Hood.)         Unexpected  piety  : — "  And  he  was  a  Samari- 
tan."   Thus  frequently,  in  like  manner,  have  we  been  surprised  at  the  finding  of 
gratitude  to  God  in  most  unexpected  places  and  persons.    We  have  often  seen  that 
it  is  by  no  means  in  proportion  to  the  apparent  munificence  of  the  Divine  bounty. 
It  is  proverbial  that  the  hymn  of  praise  rises  more  frequently  from  the  peasant's 
fireside  than  from  palace  gates — more   frequently  from    straitened    than   from 
abounding  circumstances.     "Wherefore  let  us  ourselves  adore  the  exalting  graces  of 
the  Divine  goodness,  which  makes  the  smallest  measure  of  God's  grace  to  outweigh 
the  mightiest  measure  of  circumstantial  happiness.    As  long  as  God  merely  gives^ 
the  gilded  shell — the  scaffolding  of  the  palace — He  gives  but  little  ;  and  it  has  been 
frequently  said  that  He  shows  His  disregard  of  riches  by  giving  them  to  the  worst 
of  men  frequently  ;  but  to  possess  a  sense  of  His  mercy  and  goodness,  that  exceeds 
them  all.     (Ibid. )        Ingratitude  fw  Divine  favours  : — The  Staubach  is  a  fall  of 
remarkable  magnificence,  seeming  to  leap  from  heaven ;  its  glorious  stream  remind* 
one  of  the  abounding  mercy  which  in  a  mighty  torrent  descends  from  above.    la 
the  winter,  when  the  cold  is  severe,  the  water  freezes  at  the  foot  of  the  fall,  and 
rises  up  in  huge  icicles  like  stalagmites,  until  it  reaches  the  fall  itself,  as  though  it 
sought  to  bind  it  in  the  same  icy  fetters.     How  like  this  is  to  the  common  ingrati- 
tude of  men  1     Earth's  ingratitude  rises  up  to  meet  heaven's  mercy ;  as  though  the 
very  goodness  of  God  helped  us  to  defy  Him.    Divine  favours,  frozen  by  human 
ingratitude,  are  proudly  lifted  in  rebellion  against  the  God  who  gave  them.     {C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        Where  are  the  nine  7 — Ingratitude  towards  God: — L  The  ionomint 
OF    iNGBATiTUDE.      1.   The  Ungrateful  Christian    acts  against  the  voice  of  hi» 
conscience.     (1)  Natural  reason  acknowledges  the  duty  of   gratitude.     (2)  The 
general  consent  of  mankind  brands  with  infamy  the  ungrateful.    2.  Ingratitude 
sinks  the  human  being  below  the  level  of  the  brute  creation.    3.  Ingratitude  is 
infinitely  ignominious,  because  directed  against  God.    (1)  God  exhorts  us  so  often 
to  be  grateful.     (2)  His  beneficence  is  unlimited.     (3)  All  His  benefits  are  gratuities. 
(4)  The  ungrateful  man  denies,  in  fact,  the  existence  of  God.    II.  Thb  pbbnicious 
CONSEQUENCES  OF  INGBATITUDE.     1.  Temporal  consequences.     (1)  God  threatens  to 
deprive  the  ungrateful  of  the  blessings  received  (Luke  ix.  26).     God  has  ever  been 
the  absolute  owner  of  whatever  He  gives  ;  and  He  gives  and  takes  according  to  Hia 
good  pleasure,     (a)  He  threatens  so  to  direct  events  that  His  gift  shall  become  a 
curse  instead  of  a  blessing  to  the  ungrateful  receiver,     (b)  To  refuse  whatever  he 
may  ask  for  in  future,     (c)  To  send  chastisements  upon  him  so  as  to  convince  him 
that  He  is  the  Lord.     (2)  God  fulfilled  His  threatenings  (a)  on  our  first  parents ; 
(6)  on  Israel ;  (c)  on  Nebuchadnezzar,     (d)  Your  ovm  life  and  the  life  of  your 
acquaintances  will  bear  similar  testimony.     2.  Everlasting  consequences.     If  the 
sinner  remain  ungrateful  to  the  end  of  his  earthly  life,  he  will  be  deprived  of  all 
Divine  gifts  for  all  eternity.    He  will  be  deprived— (1)  Of  the  Word  of  God,  instead 
of  which  he  will  incessantly  hear  only  the  words  of  Satan.    (2)  Of  the  celestial 
light  against  which  he  closed  his  eyes ;  in  punishment  of  which  he  will  be  buried 
in  everlasting  darkness.      (3)  Of  the  Beatific  Vision,  instead  of  which  he  will 
behold  only  the  vision  of  devilish  deformity.    (4)  Of  the  sacramental  means  of 
ealvation.    (5)  Of  heavenly  peace  and  joy.    (Horar.)        The  causes  of  ingratitude  : — 
"The  nine,  where?"     Thus  Christ  with  censure,  sadness,  surprise  inquires. 
There  are  more  than  nine  sources  of  ingratitude.    But  there  are  nine,  and  each  of 
these  men  may  represent  some  one.     I.  One  is  OAiiiiOUS.    He  did  not  feel  hi» 
misery  as  much  as  some,  nor  is  he  much  stirred  now  by  his  return  to  health. 
Sullen,  torpid,  stony  men  are  thankless.      Callousness  is  a  common  cause  of 
ingratitude.    II.  One  is  thoughtless.    He  is  more  like  shifting  sand  than  hard 
stone,  but  he  never  reflects,  never  introspects,  never  recollects.    The  unreflecting 
are  ungrateful.    III.  One  is  pboud.    He  has  not  had  more  than  bis  merit  in  being 
healed.     Why  should  he  be  thankful  for  what  his  respectability,  hia  station, 
deserved?    Only  the  humble-hearted  are  truly  grateful.      lY.  One  ia  envious. 
Though  healed  he  has  not  all  that  some  others  have.    They  are  younger,  o> 
BtroDger,  oz  have  more  friends  to  welcome  them.    He  is  envious.    Envy  turns  bou 


804  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHi».  rm, 

themilkofihankfuInesB.  V.  One  is  cowardly.  The  Healer  is  scorned,  persecuted, 
hated.  The  expression  of  gratitude  may  bring  some  of  such  hatred  on  himself. 
The  craven  is  always  a  mean  ingrate.  VI.  One  is  OALcnLATiNO  the  result  of 
acknowledging  the  benefit  received.  Perhaps  some  claim  may  arise  of  discipleship, 
or  gift.  VII.  One  is  worldly.  Already  he  has  purpose  of  business  in  Jerusalem, 
or  plan  of  pleasures  there,  that  fascinates  him  from  returning  to  give  thanks. 
VIII.  One  is  obeoabious.  He  would  have  expressed  gratitude  if  the  other  eight 
would,  but  he  has  no  independence,  no  individuaUty.  IX.  One  is  PRocRASTniATiNO. 
By  and  by.  Meanwhile  Christ  asks,  "  Where  are  the  nine  ?  "  {Vrijah  R.  Thonuu.) 
The  sin  of  ingratitude : — There  are,  speaking  broadly,  three  chief  reasons  fof 
onthankfulness  on  the  part  of  man  towards  Ood.  First,  an  indistinct  idea  or  an 
under-estimate  of  the  service  that  He  renders  ua ;  secondly,  a  disposition,  whether 
voluntary  or  not,  to  lose  sight  of  our  benefactor ;  thirdly,  the  notion  that  it  doea 
not  matter  much  to  Him  whether  we  acknowledge  His  benefits  or  not.  Let  us  take 
these  in  order.  I.  There  is,  first  of  all,  the  disposition  to  make  light  op  a 
BLESSINO  OB  BENEPiT  RECEIVED.  Of  this  the  nine  lepers  in  the  gospel  could  hardly 
have  been  guilty — at  any  rate,  at  the  moment  of  their  cure.  To  the  Jews  especially, 
as  in  a  lesser  degree  to  the  Eastern  world  at  large,  this  disease,  or  group  of  diseases, 
appeared  in  their  own  language  to  be  as  a  living  death.     The  nine  lepers  were  more 

Erobably  like  children  with  a  new  toy,  too  dehghted  with  their  restored  health  and 
onour  to  think  of  the  gracious  friend  to  whom  they  owed  it.  In  the  case  of  some 
temporal  blessings  it  is  thus  sometimes  with  us :  the  gift  obscures  the  giver  by  its 
very  wealth  and  profusion.  But  in  spiritual  things  we  are  more  likely  to  think 
chiefly  of  the  gift.  At  bottom  of  their  want  of  thankfulness  there  lies  a  radically 
imperfect  estimate  of  the  blessings  of  redemption,  and  until  this  is  reversed  they 
cannot  seriously  look  into  the  face  of  Christ  and  thank  Him  for  His  inestimable 
love.  II.  Thanklessness  is  due,  secondly,  to  losino  sight  op  our  benepactor,  and 
OP  THIS  THE  NINE  LEPERS  WERE  NO  DOUBT  GUILTY.  Such  a  thanklessness  as  this 
may  arise  from  carelessness,  or  it  may  be  partly  deliberate.  The  former  was 
probably  the  ease  with  the  nine  lepers.  The  powerful  and  benevolent  stranger  who 
had  told  them  to  go  to  the  priests  to  be  inspected  had  fallen  already  into  the  back- 
ground of  their  thought,  and  if  they  reasoned  upon  the  causes  of  their  cure  they 
probably  thought  of  some  natural  cause,  or  of  the  inherent  virtue  of  the  Mosaio 
ordinances.  For  a  sample  of  thanklessness  arising  from  a  careless  forge tfulnesa  of 
kindness  received,  look  at  the  bearing  of  many  children  in  the  present  day  towards 
their  parents.  How  often  in  place  of  a  loving  and  reverent  bearing  do  young  men 
and  women  assume  with  their  parents  a  footing  of  perfect  equality,  if  not  of  some- 
thing more,  as  if,  forsooth,  they  had  conferred  a  great  benefit  upon  their  fathers 
and  mothers  by  becoming  their  children,  and  giving  them  the  opportunity  of 
working  for  their  support  and  education.  This  does  not — I  fully  believe  it  does 
not — in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  imply  a  bad  heart  in  the  son  or  daughter.  It  is 
eimply  a  form  of  that  thanklessness  which  is  due  to  want  of  refection  on  the  real 
obligations  which  they  owe  to  the  human  authors  of  their  life.  III.  Thanklessness 
is  due,  thirdly,  to  the  utilitarian  spirit.  If  prayer  be  efficacious  the  use  of  it  is 
obvious ;  but  where,  men  ask,  is  the  use  of  thankfulness  ?  What  is  the  good  of 
thankfulness,  they  say,  at  any  rate  when  addressed  to  such  a  being  as  God  i  If 
man  does  us  a  service  and  we  repay  him,  that  is  intelligible:  he  needs  our  repay- 
ment. We  repay  him  in  kind  if  we  can,  or  if  we  cannot,  we  repay  him  with  our 
thanks,  which  gratify  his  sense  of  active  benevolence — perhaps  his  lower  sense  of 
self-importance.  But  what  benefit  can  God  get  by  receiving  the  thanks  of  creatures 
whom  He  has  made  and  whom  He  supports  ?  Now,  if  the  lepers  did  think  thus, 
our  Lord's  remark  shows  that  they  were  mistaken — not  in  supposing  that  a  Divine 
Benefactor  is  not  dependent  for  His  happiness  on  the  return  which  His  creatures 
may  make  to  Him — not  in  thinking  that  it  was  out  of  their  power  to  make  Him 
any  adequate  return  at  all — but  at  least  in  imagining  that  it  was  a  matter  of 
indifference  to  Him  whether  He  was  thanked  or  not.  If  not  for  His  own  sake,  yet 
for  theirs,  He  would  be  thanked.  To  thank  the  author  of  a  blessing  is  for  the 
receiver  of  the  blessing  to  place  himself  voluntarily  under  the  law  of  truth  by 
acknowledging  the  fact  that  he  has  been  blest.  To  do  this  is  a  matter  of  hard 
moral  obligation ;  it  is  also  a  condition  of  moral  force.  "  It  is  very  meet,  right, 
and  our  bounden  duty,  that  we  should  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  give  thanks 
unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  Holy  Father,  Ahnighty  Everlasting  God."  Why  meet  f  Why 
right  ?  Because  it  is  the  acknowledgment  of  a  hard  fact — the  fact  that  all  things 
some  of  Ood,  the  fa«t  that  ws  are  utterly  dependent  upon  Him,  the  fact  that  all 


CHAP,  xvu.]  ST.  LUKE.  80& 

existence,  all  life,  is  bnt  an  outflow  of  His  love ;  because  to  blink  this  fact  is  to  fall 
back  into  the  darkness  and  to  forfeit  that  strength  which  comes  always  and  every- 
'where  with  the  energetic  acknowledgment  of  truth.  Morally  speaking,  the  nine 
lepers  were  not  the  men  they  would  have  been  if,  at  the  cost  of  some  trouble,  they 
had  accompanied  the  one  who,  "  when  he  saw  that  he  was  healed,  turned  back, 
and  with  a  loud  voice  glorified  God,  giving  Him  thanks."  {Canon  Liddon.} 
Praite  neglected:—!.  The  sinquiaritt  of  thankfulness.  1.  Here  note — there 
are  more  who  receive  benefits  than  ever  give  praise  for  them.  Nine  persons  healed, 
one  person  glorifying  God ;  nine  persons  healed  of  leprosy,  mark  you,  and  only  one 
person  kneeling  down  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  thsmking  Him  for  it !  2.  But  there  is 
something  more  remarkable  than  this — the  number  of  those  who  pray  is  greater 
than  the  number  of  those  who  praise.  For  these  ten  men  that  were  lepers  all 
prayed.  But  when  they  came  to  the  Te  Deum,  magnifying  and  praising  God,  only 
one  of  them  took  up  the  note.  One  would  have  thought  that  all  who  prayed  would 
praise,  but  it  is  not  so.  Cases  have  been  where  a  whole  ship's  crew  in  time  of 
storm  has  prayed,  and  yet  none  of  that  crew  have  sung  the  praise  of  God  when  the 
storm  has  become  a  calm.  3.  Most  of  us  pray  more  than  we  praise.  Tet  prayer 
is  not  so  heavenly  an  exercise  as  praise.  Prayer  is  for  time ;  but  praise  is  for 
eternity.  4.  There  are  more  that  believe  than  there  are  that  praise.  It  is  real 
faith,  I  trust — it  is  not  for  me  to  judge  it,  but  it  is  faulty  in  result.  So  also  among 
ourselves,  there  are  men  who  get  benefits  from  Christ,  who  even  hope  that  they  are 
saved,  but  they  do  not  praise  Him.  Their  lives  are  spent  in  examining  their  own 
skins  to  see  whether  their  leprosy  is  gone.  Their  religious  life  reveals  itself  in  a 
constant  searching  of  themselves  to  see  if  they  are  really  healed.  This  is  a  poor 
way  of  spending  one's  energies,    n.  The  chabactebistics  of  true  thanej-ulmess.. 

1.  Living  praise  is  marked  by  individuaUty.  2.  Promptness.  Go  at  once, 
and  praise  the  Saviour.  3.  Spirituality.  4.  Intensity.  '•  With  a  loud  voice." 
5.  Humility.  6.  Worship.  7.  One  thing  more  about  this  man  I  want  to  notice  as 
to  his  thankfulness,  and  that  is,  his  silence  as  to  censuring  others.  When  the 
Saviour  said,  "  Where  are  the  nine  ?  "  I  notice  that  this  man  did  not  reply.  But 
^e  adoring  stranger  did  not  stand  up,  and  say,  "  0  Lord,  they  are  all  gone  off  to 
the  priests :  I  am  astonished  at  them  that  they  did  not  return  to  praise  Thee !  " 
O  brothers,  we  have  enough  to  do  to  mind  our  own  business,  when  we  feel  the  grace 
of  God  in  our  own  hearts !  UL  The  blessedness  of  thankfulness.  This  man 
was  more  blessed  by  far  than  the  nine.  They  were  healed,  bat  they  were  not 
blessed  as  he  was.  There  is  a  great  blessedness  in  thankfulness.  1.  Because  it  is 
right.  Should  not  Christ  be  praised?  2.  It  is. a  manifestation  of  personal  love. 
8.  It  has  clear  views.  4.  It  is  acceptable  to  Christ.  6.  It  receives  the  largest 
blessing.  In  conclusion :  1.  Let  us  learn  from  all  this  to  put  praise  in  a  high 
place.     Let  ns  think  it  as  great  a  sin  to  neglect  praise  as  to  restrain  prayer. 

2.  Next,  let  ns  pay  our  praise  to  Christ  Himself.  8.  Lastly,  if  we  work  for  Jesus, 
and  we  see  converts,  and  they  do  not  turn  out  as  we  expected,  do  not  let  us  be  cast 
down  about  it.  If  others  do  not  praise  our  Lord,  let  us  be  sorrowful,  but  let  us  not 
be  disappointed.  The  Saviour  had  to  say,  ••Where  are  the  nine?"  Ten  lepers 
were  healed,  but  only  one  praised  Him.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God  look*  after  "  the 
nine*': — I.  Christ  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  upon  whom  He  confers 

SPECIAL  OBAOB  AND  BLESSINO,  AND  A  PERFECT  BECOLLECTION  OF  THE  KIND  AND  HEA8UBB 
OF  His  BE8TOWMBNT8.  II.  WhILB  THE  80LITART  GRATEFUL  SOUL  WILL  BE  AHPLT 
BSWARDED  BT  JeSUS,  THE  MULTITUDE  OF  INQRATES  WILL  BE  INQUIRED  AFTER  AND  DEALT 

WITH  BY  Him.  {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  But  where  are  the  nine  f  : — I.  There  are 
many  men  even  now  who,  like  the  nine  thankless  lepers,  have  faith  enough  fob 
THE  health  or  the  body,  or  even  for  all  the  conditions  of  outward  comfort  and  suc- 
cess, but  have  not  faith  enough  to  secure  the  health  and  prosperity  of  the  soul. 
That  is  to  say,  there  are  many  who  believe  in  so  much  of  the  will  of  God  as  can  be 
expressed  in  sanitary  laws  and  in  the  conditions  of  commercial  success,  but  who  do 
not  believe  in  that  Will  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  laws  and  aims  of  the  spiritual  life. 
St.  John's  wish  for  his  friend  Gains  (3  John  2)  is  a  mystery  to  them  ;  and  it  may 
be  doubted  whether  they  woold  care  to  have  even  St.  John  for  a  friend  if  he  were 
constantly  beseeching  God  to  give  them  health  of  body  only  in  proportion  to  theii 
health  of  soul,  and  prosperity  in  business  only  in  proportion  to  their  growth  in  faith 
and  righteousness  and  charity.  IL  If  we  look  at  the  case  of  these  nine  lepers  a 
little  more  closely,  we  shall  find  only  too  much  in  ourselves  and  our  neighbonrs  to 
^TPT.ATn  THEiB  ingbatttude,  or,  at  least,  to  make  it  both  credible  and  admonitory  to 
na.  1.  They  may  have  thought  that  they  had  done  nothing  to  deserve  thdr 
fOL.  m.  20 


3W  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvo- 

horrible  fate,  or  nothing  more  than  many  of  their  neighbours,  who  yet  passed  them 
by  as  men  accursed  of  God;  and  that  therefore,  it  was  only  just  that  they  should 
be  restored  to  health.  2.  They  may  have  thought  that  they  would  at  least  make  sura 
of  their  restoration  to  health  before  they  gave  thanks  to  Him  who  had  healed  them. 

3.  They  may  have  put  obedience  before  love.      Tet  nothing  but  love  can  save. 

4.  The  nine  were  Jews,  the  tenth  a  Samaritan  ;  and  it  may  be  that  they  would  not 
go  back  just  because  he  did.  No  sooner  is  the  misery  which  had  brought  them 
together  removed,  than  the  old  enmity  flames  out  again,  and  the  Jews  take  one 
road,  the  Samaritan  another.  When  the  Stuarts  were  on  the  throne,  and  a  eted- 
fast  endeavour  was  made  to  impose  the  yoke  of  Bome  on  the  English  conscience. 
Churchmen  and  Nonconformists  forgot  their  differences  ;  and  as  they  laboured  in  s 
common  cause,  and  fought  against  a  common  foe,  they  confessed  that  they  were 
brethren,  and  vowed  that  they  would  never  be  parted  more.  But  when  the  danger 
was  past  these  vows  were  forgotten,  and  once  more  they  drew  apart,  and  remain 
apart  to  this  day.  5.  Finally,  the  nine  ungrateful,  because  unloving,  lepers  may 
have  said  within  themselves,  "  We  had  better  go  on  our  way  and  do  as  we  are  bid, 
for  we  can  be  just  as  thankful  to  the  kind  Master  in  our  hearts  without  saying  so 
to  Him ;  and  we  can  thank  God  anywhere — thank  Him  just  as  well  while  we  are 
on  our  way  to  the  priests,  or  out  here  on  the  road  and  among  the  fields,  as  if  we 
turned  back.  The  Master  has  other  work  to  do,  and  would  not  care  to  be  troubled  with 
our  thanks ;  and  as  for  God — God  is  everywhere,  here  as  well  as  there."  Now  it 
would  not  become  us,  who  also  believe  that  God  is  everywhere,  and  that  He  may  be 
most  truly  worshipped  both  in  the  silence  of  the  heart  and  amid  the  noise  and 
bustle  of  the  world,  to  deny  that  He  may  be  worshipped  in  the  fair  temple  of 
nature,  where  all  His  works  praise  Him.  It  would  not  become  us  to  deny  even  that 
some  men  may  find  Him  in  wood  and  field  as  they  do  not  find  Him  in  a  congrega- 
tion or  a  crowd.  But,  surely,  it  does  become  us  to  suggest  to  those  who  take  this 
tone  that,  just  as  we  ourselves  love  to  be  loved  and  to  know  that  we  are  loved,  so 
God  loves  our  love  to  become  vocal,  loves  that  we  should  acknowledge  our  love  for 
pirn  ;  and  that,  not  merely  because  He  cares  for  onr  praise,  but  because  our  love 
grows  as  we  show  and  confess  it,  and  because  we  can  only  become  •*  perfect  "  as  we 
become  perfect  in  love.  It  surely  does  not  become  us  to  remind  them  that  no  man 
can  truly  love  God  unless  he  love  his  brother  also ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  true 
lover  of  God  should  and  must  find  in  the  worship  of  brethren  whom  he  loves  hia 
best  aid  to  the'worship  of  their  common  Father.  He  who  finds  woods  and  fields 
more  helpful  to  him  than  man  is  not  himself  fully  a  man ;  he  is  not  perfect  in  the 
love  of  his  brother ;  and  is  not,  therefore,  perfect  in  the  love  of  God.  (S.  Cox, 
D.D.)  ImpedimenU  to  gratitude : — The  moment  when  a  man  gets  what  he  wants 
is  a  testing  one,  it  carries  a  trial  and  probation  with  it ;  or  if,  for  the  instant,  his 
feeling  is  excited,  the  after-time  is  a  trial.  There  is  a  sudden  reversion,  a  reaction 
in  the  posture  of  his  mind,  when  from  needing  something  greatly,  he  gets  it. 
Immediately  his  mind  can  receive  thoughts  which  it  could  not  entertain  before ; 
which  the  pressure  of  urgent  want  kept  out  altogether.  In  the  first  place,  hia 
benefactor  is  no  longer  necessary  to  him ;  that  makes  a  great  difference.  In  a 
certain  way  people's  hearts  are  warmed  by  a  state  of  vehement  desire  and  longing, 
and  anybody  who  can  reheve  it  appears  like  an  angel  to  them.  But  when  the 
necessity  is  past,  then  they  can  judge  their  benefactor — if  not  altogether  as  an 
indifferent  person,  if  they  would  feel  ashamed  of  this — still  in  a  way  very  dif- 
ferent from  what  they  did  before.  The  delivery  from  great  need  of  him  is  also  the 
removal  of  a  strong  bias  for  him.  Again,  they  can  think  of  themselves  immediately, 
and  their  rights,  and  what  they  ought  to  have,  till  even  a  sense  of  ill-usage,  arises 
that  the  good  conferred  has  been  withheld  so  long.  All  this  class  of  thoughts 
springs  np  in  a  man's  heart  as  soon  as  he  is  reheved  from  some  great  want.  While 
lie  was  suffering  the  want,  any  supplier  of  it  was  as  a  messenger  from  heaven. 
Now  he  is  only  one  through  whom  he  has  what  rightfully  belongs  to  him ;  his  bene- 
factor has  been  a  convenience  to  him,  but  no  more.  The  complaining  spirit,  or 
sense  of  grievance,  which  is  so  common  in  the  world,  is  a  potent  obstacle  to  the 
growth  of  the  spirit  of  gratitude  in  the  heart.  So  long  as  a  man  thinks  that  every 
\0BB  and  misfortune  he  has  suffered  was  an  ill-usage,  so  long  he  will  never  be 
-properly  impressed  by  the  kindness  which  relieves  Imn  from  it.  He  will  regard 
this  as  only  a  late  amends  made  to  him,  and  by  no  means  a  perfect  one  then. 
And  this  qnemlouB  temper,  which  chafes  at  all  the  calamities  and  deprivations  of 
life,  as  if  Uving  under  an  unjust  dispensation  in  being  under  the  rule  of  Providence, 
ia  mneh  too  prevalent  a  one.    Where  it  ia  not  openly  expressed  it  ia  often  secretlj 


aBAP.  rm.]  ST.  LUKE.  807 

fostered,  and  aflFects  the  habit  of  a  man's  mind.  Men  of  this  temper,  then,  are  not 
grateful ;  they  think  of  their  own  deserts,  not  of  others'  kindness.  They  are  jealous 
of  any  claim  on  their  gratitude,  because,  to  own  themselves  grateful  would  be,  they 
think,  to  acknowledge  that  this  or  that  is  not  their  right.  Nor  is  a  sullen  temper 
the  only  unthankful  recipient  of  benefits.  There  is  a  complacency  resulting  from 
too  high  a  self-estimate,  which  equally  prevents  a  man  from  entertaining  the  idea 
of  gratitude.  Those  who  are  possessed  with  the  notion  of  their  own  importance 
take  everything  as  if  it  was  their  due.  Gratitude  is  essentially  the  characteristic  of 
the  humble-minded,  of  those  who  are  not  prepossessed  with  the  notion  that  they 
deserve  more  than  any  one  can  give  them  ;  who  are  capable  of  regarding  a  service 
done  them  as  a  free  gift,  not  a  payment  or  tribute  which  their  own  claims  have 
extorted.  I  will  mention  another  failing  much  connected  with  the  last-named 
ones,  which  prevents  the  growth  of  a  grateful  spirit.  The  habit  of  taking  offence  at 
trifles  is  an  extreme  enemy  to  gratitude.  There  is  no  amount  of  benefits  received, 
no  length  of  time  that  a  person  has  been  a  benefactor,  which  is  not  forgotten  in  a 
moment  by  one  under  the  infiuence  of  this  habit.  The  slightest  apparent  offence, 
though  it  may  succeed  ever  so  long  a  course  of  good  and  kind  acts  from  another, 
obliterates  in  a  moment  the  kindnesses  of  years.  The  mind  broods  over  some  pass- 
ing inadvertence  or  fancied  neglect  till  it  assumes  gigantic  dimensions,  obscuring 
the  past.  Nothing  is  seen  but  the  act  which  has  displeased.  Everything  else  is 
put  aside.  Again,  how  does  the  mere  activity  of  life  and  business,  in  many  people, 
oust  almost  immediately  the  impression  of  any  kind  service  done  them.  They 
have  no  room  in  their  minds  for  such  recollections.  [Canon  Mozley .)  Gratitude 
is  a  self-rewarding  virtue : — How  superior,  how  much  stronger  his  delight  in  God's 
gift,  to  that  of  the  other  nine  who  slunk  away.  We  see  that  he  was  transported, 
and  that  he  was  filled  to  overflowing  with  joy  of  heart,  and  that  he  triumphed  in 
the  sense  of  the  Divine  goodness.  It  was  the  exultation  of  faith  ;  he  felt  there  was 
a  God  in  the  world,  and  that  God  was  good.  What  greater  joy  can  be  imparted  to 
the  heart  of  man  than  that  which  this  truth,  thoroughly  embraced,  imparts  ? 
Gratitude  is  thus  specially  a  self-rewarding  virtue  ;  it  makes  those  who  have  it  so 
far  happier  than  those  who  have  it  not.  It  inspires  the  mind  with  lively  impres- 
sions, and  when  it  is  habitual,  with  an  habitual  cheerfulness  and  content,  of  which 
those  who  are  without  it  have  no  experience  or  idea.  Can  the  sullen  and  torpid 
and  jealous  mind  have  feelings  at  all  equal  to  these  f  Can  those  who  excuse  them- 
eelves  the  sense  of  gratitude  upon  ever  so  plausible  considerations,  and  find  ever 
such  good  reasons  why  they  never  encounter  an  occasion  which  calls  for  the  exer- 
cise of  it,  hope  to  rise  to  anything  like  this  genuine  height  of  inward  happi- 
ness and  exultation  of  spirit  ?  They  cannot ;  their  lower  nature  depresses  them 
and  keeps  them  down  ;  they  lie  under  a  weight  which  makes  their  hearts  stagnate 
•nd  spirit  sink.  They  cannot  feel  true  joy.  They  are  under  the  dominion  of 
vexatious  and  petty  thoughts,  which  do  not  let  them  rise  to  any  large  and  inspiriting 
view  of  God,  or  their  neighbour,  or  themselves.  They  can  feel,  indeed,  the  eager- 
ness and  urgency  of  the  wish,  the  longing  for  a  deliverer  when  they  are  in  grief,  of 
a  healer  when  they  are  sick ;  but  how  great  the  pity  I  how  deep  the  perversity ! 
that  these  men,  as  it  were,  can  only  be  good  when  they  are  miserable,  and  can 
only  feel  when  they  are  crushed.  (Ibid.)  Instancet  of  ingratitude: — What 
then,  brethren,  is  the  conclusion  from  the  whole  subject?  Why,  that  the  man 
who  contents  himself  with  one  act  of  dedication  to  God's  service,  however  sincere, 
and  there  stops ;  one  who  is  content  with  a  few  proofs  of  obedience  and 
faith,  however  genuine,  with  a  few  tears  of  godly  sorrow,  however  penitent — 
content  with  such  things,  I  say,  and  there  stops ;  such  an  one  will  neither  have 
the  approval  of  his  Saviour  while  he  lives,  nor  the  comforts  of  his  reUgion 
when  he  comes  to  die.  Time  will  not  allow  me  to  enlarge  on  the  signs 
of  this  spiritual  declension,  too  often,  it  is  to  be  feared,  the  foreruimer  of  a  final 
faUing  away  from  God.  Of  such  perilous  condition  of  soul,  however,  I  could  not 
point  out  a  surer  sign  than  ingratitude.  Every  day  we  live  gives  back  to  activity 
and  life  some  who  had  been  walking  on  the  confines  of  the  eternal  world,  who  had 
well-nigh  closed  their  account  with  this  present  scene;  and  here  and  there  ws 
behold  one  resolving  to  perform  his  vows,  coming  back  to  glorify  God,  and  deter- 
mined henceforth  to  live  no  more  onto  himself,  but  imto  Him  that  died  and  rose 
again.  But  why  are  these  instances  of  a  holy  dedication  to  God's  service  after  a 
recovery  from  sickness  so  few  7  "  Were  there  not  ten  cleansed  ?  but  where  are  the 
nine  f  "  Again,  sometimes  we  witness  the  spectacle  of  a  highly  privileged  Ohristiau 
family.  In  the  life  of  the  parents  is  seen  a  holy  and  consistent  exhibition  of  Christiaa 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

character ;  the  incense  of  prayer  and  praise  bams  brightly  and  purely  on  the  family 
altar,  and  every  arrangement  of  the  household  seems  designed  to  remind  us  that 
God  is  there.  We  look  for  the  fruits  of  this.  The  parents  are  gone  to  rest ;  they 
are  safe  and  happy,  and  at  home  with  God ;  and  of  the  children,  perhaps,  there  are 
one  or  two  that  follow  their  steps,  viewing  religion  as  their  chief  concern,  making 
the  glory  of  God  the  aim  of  all  they  say  or  do,  and  the  promises  of  God  more  than 
their  necessary  food.  But  why  are  the  rest  of  the  children  living,  as  it  were,  on 
their  parents'  reputation,  content  with  reaching  a  certain  point  in  the  Christian 
race,  and  that  point  not  a  safe  one— one  which  leaves  them  to  be  saved  only  by  fire, 
only  rescued  as  brands  from  the  burning — ten  indeed  were  cleansed  ;  "  but  where 
are  the  nine  t "  Again,  we  look  upon  an  assembly  of  Christian  worshippers.  They 
listen  with  interested  and  sustained  attention ;  the  breath  from  heaven  seems  to 
inspire  their  worship ;  and  wings  from  heaven  seem  to  carry  the  message  home  : 
here  and  there  is  a  heart  touched,  a  reed  bruised,  a  torpid  conscience  quickened 
into  sensibility  and  life,  but  the  others  remain  as  before,  dead  to  all  spiritual 
enimation,  immortal  statues,  souls  on  canvas,  having  a  name  to  live  but  are  dead. 
Whence  this  difference  ?  They  confessed  to  the  same  leprosy,  they  cried  for  the 
same  mercy,  they  met  with  the  same  Saviour,  and  were  directed  to  the  same  cure, 
and  yet  how  few  returned  to  their  benefactor.  One,  two,  or  three  in  a  congregation 
may  come  and  fall  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  but  there  were  thousands  to  be  cleansed ; 
where  are  the  ninety  times  nine  ?  But  take  a  more  particular  illustration.  Once 
a  month,  at  least,  in  every  church,  passing  before  our  eyes,  we  look  upon  a  goodly 
company  of  worshippers ;  they  have  been  bowing  with  reverence  before  the  foot- 
stool of  the  Bedeemer  ;  they  have  been  singing  their  loud  anthems  to  the  praise  of 
the  great  Mediator;  they  have  been  listening  to  the  word  of  life  with  all  the 
earnestness  of  men  who  were  ignorant,  seeking  knowledge ;  guilty,  desiring  pardon  ; 
hungry,  wanting  food  ;  dying,  imploring  life ;  but,  mark  you,  when  the  invitations 
of  the  dying  Saviour  are  recited  in  their  ears,  when  the  commemorative  sacrifice  of 
Christian  faith  and  hope  is  offered  to  them,  when  mercy  in  tenderest  accents  pro- 
claims to  every  penitent  worshipper,  •*  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  are  weary  and 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest,"  then  many  who  seemed  to  be  in  earnest  are 
in  earnest  no  longer ;  the  memorials  of  the  Saviour's  death  and  passion  are  spread 
before  them  in  vain,  and  all  we  can  do  is  to  look  with  sorrow  on  the  retiring  throng 
and  exclaim,  "  There  were  ten  that  seemed  to  be  cleansed,  but  where  are  the  nine?  " 
(D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Thanksgiving : — Ingratitude  1 — there  is  a  fault  we  all  of  ua 
easily  recognize  and  heartily  condemn.  And  even  in  a  matter  where  it  would  seem 
almost  incredible,  even  in  a  matter  such  as  that  brought  before  us  by  the  miracle 
of  the  ten  lepers,  even  in  the  matter  of  recovered  health,  there  is  strange  room  for 
ingratitude.  Who  can  believe  it,  even  of  himself  ?  who  can  believe  the  quickness 
with  which  the  memory  of  sickness,  and  of  all  its  prayerful  longings,  can  be  wiped 
out  of  our  hearts  when  once  the  tide  of  returning  strength  has  swept  up  again  into 
our  veins  ?  It  is  the  natural  that  so  beguiles  us.  Health  is  our  natural  condition, 
and  there  is  a  strange  sway  exercised  over  our  imagination  and  our  mind  by  all 
that  is  natural.  The  natural  satisfies  and  calms  us  by  its  very  regularity.  Its 
response  to  our  expectations  seems  to  give  it  some  rational  validity.  It  is  right, 
for  it  is  customary ;  and  its  evenness  and  sequence  smother  all  need  of  inquiry.  It 
was  this  which  bewildered  us  in  sickness — that  it  had  wrenched  us  out  of  our 
known  and  habitual  environment ;  it  had  thrown  ns  into  uncertainty ;  we 
could  not  tell  what  the  next  minute  might  bring  ;  we  had  lost  standard,  and 
measure,  and  cue ;  we  had  no  custom  on  which  to  rely.  And  then,  in  our  distress 
and  in  onr  impotence,  we  learned  how  our  very  life  hung  on  the  breath  of  the  Most 
High,  in  whose  hands  it  lay  to  kUl  or  to  make  alive ;  then  we  knew  it,  in  that  awful 
hour  of  withdrawal.  Bat,  with  health,  the  normal  solidity  returns  to  the  fabric  of 
life ;  the  all-familiar  walls  range  themselves  around  us ;  the  all-famihar  ways 
stretch  themselves  out  in  front  of  our  feet ;  we  can  be  sure  of  to-morrow,  and  can 
count  and  can  calculate,  not  because  the  usual  is  the  less  wonderful,  but  smiply 
because  it  is  the  usual.  We  move  in  it  unalarmed,  unsurprised,  and  God  seems 
again  to  fade  away.  There  are  other  matters  which  occupy  their  attention  :  the 
wonder  of  the  feeling  of  new  life ;  the  sense  of  delicious  surprise ;  the  desire  to  see 
whether  it  is  all  true,  and  to  experiment,  and  to  test  it.  And,  then,  their  friends 
are  about  them,  their  friends  from  whom  they  have  been  parted  for  so  many  bitter 
years ;  they  are  being  welcomed  back  into  the  brotherhood  of  men,  into  the  warmtl» 
and  glow  of  companionship.  "  Oh,  come  with  us,"  many  voices  are  crying ;  "  wc- 
are  so  glad  to  have  you  once  more  among  as  1 "  It  is  not  said  in  the  stoiy  that  they 


CBXt.  xm.]  ST.  LUKE.  tOI 

did  not  feel  grateful :  grateful,  no  donbt,  with  that  vague,  general  gratitude  to  God 
the  good  Father,  with  which  we,  too,  pass  out  of  the  shadows  of  sickness  into  the 
recovered  life,  under  the  sun,  among  our  fellows.  They  may  well  have  felt  genial, 
grateful ;  only  they  did  nothing  with  their  gratitude,  only  it  laid  no  burden  of  duty 
upon  them ;  it  was  not  in  them  as  a  mastering  compulsion  which  would  suffer 
nothing  to  arrest  its  passionate  will  to  get  back  to  the  feet  of  Him  before  whom  it 
had  once  stood  and  cried,  "  Jesu,  Master — for  Thou  alone  canst — do  Thou  have 
mercy  on  me."  "When  He  smote  them  they  sought  Him."  It  aU  happens,  we 
know,  over  and  over  again  with  us.  We  are,  most  of  us,  eager  to  find  God  when 
we  are  sick,  when  the  normal  round  of  life  deserts  us,  and  by  its  desertion  frightens 
and  bewilders  us ;  but  so  very  few  of  as  can  retain  any  hold  on  God  in  health,  in... 
work,  in  the  daily  life  of  the  natural  and  the  constant.  And  by  this  we  bring  our 
faith  under  some  dangerous  taunts.  Who  does  not  know  them  ?  The  taunt  of  the 
young  and  the  strong :  "  I  feel  the  blood  running  free,  and  my  heart  leaps,  and  my 
brain  is  alive  with  hope ;  what  have  you  to  tell  me,  you  Christians,  with  your 
message  for  the  sick  and  for  the  dying  ?  I  have  in  me  powers,  capacities,  gifts  ; 
and  before  me  lies  an  earth  God  given  and  God  blessed ;  and  you  bring  me  the 
religion  of  the  maimed,  and  the  halt,  and  the  blind,  a  religion  of  the  outcast  and 
the  dif^aced,  a  religion  of  hospitals  and  gaols ;  what  is  all  this  to  me  7  "  And  the 
taunt  of  the  worker :  "  I  have  will,  patience,  endurance,  vigour  ;  by  this  I  can  win 
myself  bread,  can  build  myself  a  house,  can  make  my  way."  Those  taunts  are  very 
r^,  and  living,  and  pressing :  how  shall  we  face  them  f  First,  we  will  be  perfectly 
clear  that  for  no  taunts  from  the  young,  the  successful,  and  the  strong,  and  for  no 
demands  either  from  the  workers  or  the  wise,  can  we  for  one  moment  forget  or 
forego  the  memory  of  Him  who  was  sent  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  and  to  comfort 
the  weary  and  the  heavy-laden ;  and  who  laid  His  blessing  upon  the  poor,  and  the 
hungry,  and  the  unhappy.  No,  we  will  withdraw  nothing.  But  have  we  no  living 
message  for  the  strong  and  the  young,  for  the  happy  and  the  wise  ?  In  what  form, 
let  us  ask,  ought  religion  to  offer  itself  to  these  7  Thanksgiving  1  That  is  the  note 
of  faith  by  which  it  employs  and  sanctifies  not  only  the  poverty  and  the  penitence 
of  sinners,  but  also  the  gladness  of  work  and  the  glory  of  wisdom.  And  has  our 
Christian  faith,  then,  no  voice  of  thanksgiving  ?  Nay,  our  faith  is  thanksgiving. 
Thanksgiving  ! — this  is  our  worship,  and  in  the  form  of  thanksgiving  our  religion 
embraces  everything  that  life  on  earth  can  bring  before  it.  Here  is  the  religion  of 
youth,  the  religion  of  all  the  hope  that  is  in  ns.  Let  it,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  give 
thanks.  Union  with  Christ  empowers  it  to  make  a  thank-offering  of  itself;  to 
bring  into  its  worship  all  its  force,  its  hope,  its  youth,  and  its  vigour.  Youth  and 
hope — they  need  religion  just  as  much  as  weakness  needs  consolation,  and  as  sin 
needs  grace ;  they  need  it  to  forestall  their  own  defeat,  that  they  may  be  caught  in 
their  beauty  and  in  their  strength  before  they  pass  and  perish,  and  so  be  offered  as 
a  living  thank-offering ;  that  they  may  be  laid  up  as  treasures,  eternal  in  the  heaven, 
where  "rust  can  never  bite,  nor  moth  corrupt,  nor  any  thieves  creep  in  to  steaL" 
Thanksgiving  I  It  is  the  religion  for  wealth,  and  for  work,  and  for  the  present 
hour.  It  redeems  wealth  by  ridding  it  of  that  terrible  complacency  which  so 
stiffens  and  chokes  the  spiritual  channels  that,  at  last,  it  becomes  easier  for  a  camel 
to  get  through  a  needle's  eye  than  for  a  rich  man  to  find  his  way  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  And  it  redeems  work  by  purging  it  of  pride  and  of  selfishness,  and  by 
rescuing  it  from  dulness  and  harshness.  And,  again,  it  is  by  thanksgiving  that 
religion  closes  with  the  natural  and  the  normal,  and  the  necessary.  Thanksgiving 
asks  for  no  change,  it  looks  for  no  surprises,  it  takes  the  fact  just  as  it  stands,  as 
law  has  fashioned  it,  and  as  custom  has  fixed  it.  That  and  no  other  offering  is 
what  it  brings.  Are  you  fast  bound  in  misery  and  iron  ?  Give  thanks  to  God,  and 
you  are  free.  The  very  iron  of  necessity  is  transfigiured  by  this  strange  alchemy  of 
thanks  into  the  gold  of  freedom  and  gladness.  Nothing  is  impossible  to  the  spirit 
of  praise,  nothing  is  so  hard  that  Christ  cannot  uplift  it  for  us  before  God,  nothing 
BO  common  that  He  will  think  it  unworthy  of  ]^s  glory.  (Canon  Seott  Holland, 
M.A.)  Words  of  encouragement  to  disappointed  workers  : — '*  Oh,"  says  one, "  I  have 
had  so  little  success ;  I  have  had  only  one  soul  laved  I  "  That  is  more  than  you 
deserve.  If  I  were  to  fish  for  a  week,  and  only  catch  one  fish,  I  should  be  sorry ; 
but  if  that  happened  to  be  a  sturgeon,  a  royal  fish,  I  should  feel  that  the  quality 
made  op  for  lack  of  quantity.  When  yon  win  a  soul  it  is  a  great  prize.  One  soul 
brought  to  Christ— can  you  estimate  its  value?  If  one  be  saved,  you  should  ba 
grat^nl  to  your  Lord,  and  persevere.  Though  yon  wish  for  more  conversions  yet, 
yon  will  not  despond  so  long  as  even  a  few  are  saved ;  and,  above  all,  you  will  not 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xtu. 

be  angry  if  some  of  them  do  not  thank  you  personally,  nor  join  in  Church-fellowship 
with  you.  Ingratitude  is  common  towards  soul-winners.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Health  more  than  sickness  a  reason  for  gratitude  : — Ungrateful  to  God  ?  I  fear  so ; 
and  more  ungrateful,  I  fear,  than  those  ten  lepers.  For  which  of  the  two  is  better 
off,  the  man  who  loses  a  good  thing,  and  then  gets  it  back  again,  or  the  man  who 
never  loses  it  at  all,  but  enjoys  it  all  his  life  ?  Surely  the  man  who  never  loses  it 
at  all.  And  which  of  the  two  has  more  cause  to  thank  God  ?  Those  lepers  had 
been  through  a  very  miserable  time  ;  they  had  had  great  affliction ;  and  that,  they 
might  feel,  was  a  set-off  against  their  good  fortune  in  recovering  their  health. 
They  had  bad  years  to  balance  their  good  ones.  But  we — how  many  of  us  have 
had  nothing  but  good  years  ?  In  health,  safety,  and  prosperity  most  of  us  grow 
np  ;  forced,  it  is  true,  to  work  hard  :  but  that,  too,  is  a  blessing ;  for  what  better 
thing  for  a  man,  soul  and  body,  than  to  be  forced  to  work  hard?  In  health, 
safety,  and  prosperity ;  leaving  children  behind  us,  to  prosper  as  we  have  done. 
And  how  many  of  us  give  God  the  glory  or  Christ  the  thanks?  {C.Kingsley, 
M.A.)  Human  ingratitude  : — A  pious  clergyman,  for  more  than  twenty  years, 
kept  an  account  of  the  sick  persons  he  visited  during  that  period.  The  parish 
was  thickly  peopled,  and,  of  course,  many  of  his  parishioners,  during  hia 
residence,  were  carried  to  their  graves.  A  considerable  number,  however, 
recovered ;  and,  amongst  these,  two  thousand,  who,  in  immediate  prospect  of 
death,  gave  those  evidences  of  a  change  of  heart,  which,  in  the  judgment  of 
charity,  were  connected  with  everlasting  salvation  supposing  them  to  have  died 
under  the  circumstances  referred  to.  As,  however,  the  tree  is  best  known  by 
its  fruits,  the  sincerity  of  the  professed  repentance  was  yet  to  be  tried,  and  all 
the  promises  ai^d  vows  thus  made,  to  be  fulfilled.  Out  of  these  two  thou- 
sand persons  (who  were  evidently  at  the  point  of  death,  and  had  professed  true 
repentance) — out  of  these  two  thousand  persons  who  recovered,  two,  only  two  ; 
allow  me  to  repeat  it — two,  only  two — by  their  future  lives,  proved  that  their 
repentance  was  sincere,  and  their  conversion  genuine.  One  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  ninety-eight  returned  to  their  former  carelessness,  indifference,  and  sin- 
fulness ;  and  thus  showed  how  little  that  repentance  is  to  be  depended  upon,  which 
is  merely  extorted  by  the  rack  of  conscience  and  the  fear  of  death.  '•  Were  there 
not  ten  cleansed  7  but  wh«re  are  the  nine  ?  " 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  kingdom  of  God  Is  within  you, — The  kingdom  of  God  : — It  is  a 
kingdom  of  the  mind,  the  will,  the  feeling,  and  the  conduct.  "  My  kingdom  is  not 
of  this  world,"  formed  in  a  material  fashion,  resting  on  visible  forces,  but  within, 
seated  in  the  heart,  the  intellect,  and  feeling.  Give  over,  then,  straining  your  eyes 
investigating  the  heavens,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  among  you  ;  the  words  will  bear 
this  rendering,  being  almost  identical  in  meaning  with  the  words  found  in  John'a 
Gospel  (chap,  i.,  verse  26),  translated  thus — "  In  the  midst  of  you  standeth  One 
whom  ye  know  not."  The  laws  and  principles  of  the  kingdom  were  fully  incor- 
porated in  Christ,  they  evolved  out  of  His  Person  like  light  from  the  sun.  He 
informs  them  that  the  kingdom  is  already  present  with  them,  that  it  had  actually 
commenced  its  operations,  and  that  its  spiritual  vibrations  were  then  felt.  What, 
then,  is  this  kingdom?  1.  It  is  a  kinr^dom  of  new  convictions  producing  new 
conversions  and  outward  reforms.  It  deals  with  these  three  forces  of  the  human 
character — impulse,  will,  and  habit.  Once  it  gets  a  proper  hold  of  these  powers 
it  makes  the  character  an  irresistible  force.  When  religious  impulse  is  grasped 
by  the  will  and  transformed  into  life,  the  character  is  such  that  the  gates  of 
hell  cannot  prevail  against  it.  2.  It  is  the  kingdom  of  life,  or  a  living  kingdom 
here,  rather  than  an  earthly  kingdom  yonder.  It  is  new  life  kindling  new  ideas 
and  forming  fresh  habits.  Sometimes  it  steals  in  upon  the  mind  as  silently  as 
light.  Look  at  the  woman  of  Samaria,  how  natural,  the  new  ideas  were 
deposited  into  her  mind,  and  with  what  marvellous  rapidity  they  changed  the 
current  of  her  thoughts  and  the  habits  of  her  life.  3.  It  is  a  kingdom  of  new 
impressions  concerning  self,  God,  man,  life,  time,  and  eternity.  No  person  ever 
equalled  the  founder  of  Christianity  as  an  impression-maker,  impressions  of  the 
highest  and  purest  type  were  set  in  motion,  as  reconstructive  agencies  by  Him ; 
and  they  are  still  at  work  leavening  society,  and  they  are  divinely  destined  to 
continue  until  the  whole  universe  of  God  is  entirely  assimilated  with  the  Divine 
nature,  and  thus  cause  righteousness  and  holiness  to  shine  everlastingly  through- 
out God's  dominion.  4.  It  is  the  kingdom  of  love — love  revealed  in  the  light  of 
the  Fatherhood  of  God,  God  being  known  as  a  Father,  naturally  oreateg  a  filial 


«BAf .  XTII.J  ST.  LUKE.  811 

reverence  in  man,  which  at  once  becomes  the  mightiest  force  in  reclaiming  the 
lost.  Like  creates  like  is  a  recognized  principle  in  ancient  and  modem  philosophy, 
as  well  as  in  Christian  theology,  (J.  P.  Williams.)  The  kingdom  which  cometh 
not  with  observation : — These  words  of  our  Lord  open  to  ns  an  abiding  law  of  His 
kingdom ;  an  enduring  rule  of  that  dispensation  under  which  we  are.  1.  It  is  "  a 
kingdom  " ;  most  truly  and  really  a  kingdom.  Nay,  even  in  some  sort  a  visible 
kingdom  ;  and  yet  at  the  very  same  time  it  is — 2.  A  kingdom  "  which  cometh  not 
by  observation " ;  unseen  in  its  progress,  seen  in  its  conclusion ;  unheard  in  its' 
onward  march,  felt  in  its  results.  Let  us,  then,  follow  out  a  little  more  into  detail 
this  strange  combination  of  what  might  almost  seem  at  first  sight  direct  contra- 
dictions. I.  And  first  see  how  beuabeably  this  was  the  charactbb  of  its  openinq 
OM  this  babth.  It  was  then  manifestly  a  "  kingdom."  The  angels  bore  witness 
of  it.  Their  bright  squadrons  were  visible  upon  this  earth  hanging  on  the  out- 
skirts of  Messiah's  dominion.  They  proclaimed  its  coming :  ♦•  Unto  you  is  born  this 
day  in  the  city  of  David  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  Lord."  *•  Glory  to  God  in 
the  highest ;  peace  on  earth,  good-will  towards  men."  Nay,  the  world  felt  it  r 
*•  Herod  was  troubled,  and  all  Jerusalem  with  him."  The  instincts  of  the  unbelieving 
monarch  made  him  tremble  before  the  King  of  Saints.  It  was  "  a  kingdom " 
which  was  coming.  Yet  it  "  came  not  with  observation."  The  King  of  Israel  was 
born  obscurely.  Angels  appeared  to  herald  Him ;  yet  none  save  shepherds  saw 
them.  There  was  veil  enough  over  each  circumstance  of  His  life  to  make  the  dull 
eye  of  the  world  miss  the  true  meaning  of  characters  it  could  not  help  seeing.  And 
afterwards,  in  the  life  of  Christ,  it  was  the  same.  The  world  was  stirred,  troubled, 
uneasy,  perplexed.  It  felt  that  it  was  in  the  presence  of  a  strange  power.  An  unde- 
fined, unknown,  yet  real  presence  was  with  it.  But  it  knew  ffim  not.  It  was  as 
if  some  cloud  was  shed  round  Him  through  which  the  world  could  not  pierce. 
"  The  kingdom  "  was  even  now  amongst  men,  and  yet  its  coming  was  unseen.    II. 

And    so,    ATTKE  THE   DEATH  AOT)  ASCENSION    OF  ChBIBT,    "  THE    KINGDOM  "    WENT    ON. 

Still  it  came,  reaching  to  every  part  of  the  earth,  but  never  "with  observation." 
III.  Once  more ;  see  how  this  is  still  ik  each  heabt  the  law  of  its  estab- 
lishment. There  also  none  can  ever  trace  its  beginnings.  Some,  indeed,  may 
temember  when  first  they  felt  its  life  within  them,  when  first  they  were  inly  con- 
scious of  its  power — though  this  is  far  from  universally  the  case  where  it  is  most 
truly  planted — but  even  in  these  cases,  this  consciousness  was  not  its  true  beginning; 
any  more  than  the  first  faint  upgrowth  of  the  tender  blade  is  the  beginning  of 
its  life  ;  any  more  than  the  first  curling  of  the  water  is  the  breath  of  heaven 
which  it  shows:  no;  life  must  be,  before  it  is  able  to  look  back  into  itself  and 
perceive  that  it  does  live.  Being  must  precede  consciousness.  And  as  it  is  at 
first  given,  so  does  it  grow.  It  is  the  receiving  a  life,  a  being,  a  breath.  It  is 
the  passing  over  us  of  God's  hand,  the  in-breathing  of  His  Spirit.  This  is  its 
secret  history;  and  this  men  cannot  reach.  And  yet  it  is  "a  kingdom"  which 
is  thus  set  up.  Wheresoever  it  has  its  way,  there  it  will  be  supreme.  It  makes 
the  will  a  captive,  and  the  affections  its  ministers,  and  the  man  its  glad 
vassal.  Though  it  "  cometh  not  with  observation,"  yet  it  is  indeed  *' a  kingdom." 
Now,  from  this  it  behoves  us  to  gather  two  or  three  strictly  practical  conclusions — 1. 
This  is  a  thought  full  of  fear  to  all  ungodly  men.  Depend  upon  it  this  kingdom 
is  set  up.  It  is  in  vain  for  you  to  say  that  you  do  not  perceive  it,  that  you  see 
it  not,  nor  feel  it ;  this  does  not  affect  the  truth.  It  is  its  law  that  "  it  cometh 
not  with  observation  " ;  that  from  some  it  always  is  hidden.  Tour  soul  had — if 
you  be  not  altogether  reprobate,  it  still  has,  however  faintly  exercised — the  organs 
and  capacities  for  seeing  it.  But  you  are  deadening  them  within  yourself.  2.  This 
is  a  quickening  thought  to  all  who,  in  spite  of  all  the  weakness  of  their  faith, 
would  yet  fain  be  with  our  Lord.  Is  this  kingdom  round  about  ns  ?  Have  we 
places  in  it  7  How  like,  then,  are  we  to  His  disciples  of  old ;  trembling  and  crying 
out  for  fear  as  He  draws  nigh  to  us  I  How  like  are  we  to  those  whose  eyes  were 
holden,  who  deemed  Him  *'  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem "  1  How  do  we  need  His 
words  of  love ;  His  breaking  bread  and  blessing  it ;  His  making  known  Himself 
unto  ns ;  His  opening  our  eyes  1  How  should  we  pray  as  we  have  never  prayed 
before,  "  Thy  kingdom  come  I "  3.  Here  is  a  thought  of  comfort.  How  apt  are 
we  to  be  cast  down ;  to  doubt  our  own  sincerity,  to  doubt  His  working  in  us,  to 
doubt  the  end  of  all  these  tearS;  and  prayers,  and  watchingsl  Here,  then,  is 
eomfort  for  our  feeble  hearts.  Small  as  the  work  seems,  unobserved  as  is  its 
growth,  it  is  a  kingdom.  It  is  His  kingdom.  It  is  His  kingdom  in  us.  Only 
believe  in  Him,  and  wait  upon  Him ;  only  endure  His  time,  and  follow  after  Him, 


312  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ivn. 


and  to  you  too  it  shall  be  manifested.      {BisJiop   Samuel   Wilberforce.)  OocPi 

hingdom  without  observation : — 1.  The  manner  in  which  the  gospel  was  first  intro- 
duced was  without  external  show  and  ostentation.  Worldly  kingdoms  are  usually 
erected  and  supported  by  the  power  of  arms.  2.  The  external  dispensation  of 
Christ's  kingdom  is  without  ostentation.  His  laws  are  plain  and  easy  to  be  under- 
stood, and  delivered  in  language  level  to  common  apprehension.  The  motives  by 
which  obedience  is  urged  are  pure  and  spiritual,  taken  not  from  this,  but  the  future 
world.  His  institutions  are  few  and  simple,  adapted  to  our  condition,  and  suited 
to  warm  and  engage  the  heart.  3.  The  virtues  which  the  gospel  principally  incul- 
cates are  without  observation,  distant  from  worldly  show,  and  independent  of 
worldly  applause.  4.  As  the  temper  of  the  gospel,  so  also  the  operation  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  in  producing  this  temper,  is  without  observation.  It  is  not  a  tempest, 
an  earthquake,  or  fire  ;  but  a  small,  still  voice.  It  is  a  spirit  of  power,  but  yet  a 
spirit  of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind.  The  fruits  of  it,  like  its  nature,  are  kind  and 
benevolent.  They  are  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  meekness,  and 
goodness.  5.  The  blessings  of  God's  kingdom  are  chiefly  invisible,  and  without 
observation.  The  rewards  which  the  gospel  promises  are  not  earthly  and  temporal, 
but  heavenly  and  spiritual.  They  are  not  external  power,  wealth,  and  honour;  but 
inward  peace,  hope,  and  joy  here,  and  everlasting  felicity  hereafter.  We  will  now 
attend  to  the  reflections  and  instructions  which  our  subject  offers  to  us — 1.  If  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  now  among  us,  we  are  all  without  exception  bound  to  acknowledge 
it,  and  submit  to  it.  2.  We  learn  that  it  concerns  every  one,  not  only  to  submit  to 
God's  kingdom,  but  to  submit  to  it  immediately.  3.  We  are  here  taught  that  we 
have  no  occasion  to  run  from  place  to  place  in  order  to  find  the  grace  of  God,  for 
we  may  obtain  it  in  any  place  where  His  Providence  calls  us.  For  the  Spirit  is  not 
confined  to  certain  places,  its  influences  are  not  at  human  disposal,  nor  do  its 
operations  come  with  public  observation.  You  are  to  receive  the  spirit  in  the  hearing 
of  faith.  Its  influence  on  the  heart  is  not  like  an  overbearing  storm,  but  as  the 
gentle  rain  on  the  tender  herb,  and  the  dew  on  the  grass.  4.  We  leam  from  our 
subject  that  true  religion  is  not  ostentatious.  It  seeks  not  observation.  The  true 
Christian  is  exemplary,  but  not  vain.  He  is  careful  to  maintain  good  works,  but 
affects  not  an  unnecessary  show  of  them.  5.  It  appears  that  they  only  are  the  true 
subjects  of  God's  kingdom  who  have  experienced  its  power  on  their  hearts. 
6.  As  the  kingdom  of  God  comes  not  to  the  heart  \rith  observation,  we 
are  incompetent  judges  of  the  characters  of  others.  {J.  Lathrop,  D.D.) 
The  secret  workings  of  Divine  grace : — The  workings  of  God's  grace  are,  for  the 
most  part,  not  only  loeyond,  but  contrary  to  our  calculation.  It  is  not  said  that 
"  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  with  observation,"  but  •'  the  kingdom  of  God  cometh 
not  with  observation."  And  the  principle  is  this — that  the  greatest  and  plainest 
effects  are  produced  by  causes  which  are  themselves  unnoticeable.  God  is  mount- 
ing up  to  His  grand  design ;  but  we  cannot  see  the  steps  of  His  ascent.  If  yon 
pass  from  the  history  of  the  Church  to  any  other  province  in  God's  empire,  you  will 
find  them  aU  recognizing  the  same  law.  It  seems  to  be  the  general  rule  of  all  that 
is  sublime,  that  its  motions  shall  be  unseen.  Who  can  discern  the  movements  of 
the  planets — whose  evolutions  we  admire,  whose  courses  guide  our  path  ?  The  day 
breaks  and  the  day  sets  ;  but  who  can  fix  the  boundaries  of  the  night,  the  boundaries 
of  the  darkness  ?  You  may  watch  the  departing  of  summer  beauty — as  the  leaves 
are  swept  by  the  autumn  wind — but  can  the  eye  trace  its  movements  ?  Does  not 
everything — in  the  sky  and  in  the  earth — proclaim  it — as  all  nature  follows  its 
hidden  march — that  •'  the  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation  "  f  Or,  let 
any  man  amongst  you,  read  but  a  very  few  of  the  leading  passages  of  his  own  life, 
and  let  him  observe  what  have  been  the  great,  deciding  events  of  his  history — deter- 
mining, if  I  may  so  speak,  the  very  destinies  of  his  forces.  Were  they  those  he 
anticipated  ?  Did  his  great  joys  and  sorrows  rise  in  the  quarters  from  whence  he 
expected  them  to  rise?  Did  not  the  great  circumstances  of  his  life  arise  from 
events  quite  unexpected  ?  And  did  not  those  things  which  he  counted  little,  greatly 
rise  and  extend  themselves — for  evil  or  for  good  ?  And  what  does  all  this  attest-- 
in  providence  and  in  nature — but  that  "  the  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  obser- 
vation "  ?  But  we  are  now  led  to  expect,  by  what  we  have  read,  and  what  we  have 
seen,  and  what  we  have  felt,  in  outward  things,  that  we  shall  find  the  truth  of  the 
text,  also,  when  we  come  to  the  experience  of  a  man's  soul ;  and  that  the  '*  kingdom 
of  God  cometh  not  with  observation."  A  very  pious  mother  is  deeply  anxions  about 
the  soul  of  her  son.  Her  fond  affections,  her  holy  influences,  her  secret  prayers — 
have  all  been  bearing  to  that  one  point,  of  her  child's  conversion  to  God,  for  tokdj 


our.  xm.]  ST.  LUKE.  aii 

years.  But  have  that  mother's  prayers  died,  because  those  lips  are  hushed  ?  "  Has 
God  forgotten  to  be  gracious,"  when  man  ceases  to  expect  ?  Nay — in  Hia  own  way, 
and  in  His  own  hour, '« the  kingdom  "  oomes.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Quiet  growth, 
of  the  Church  :— In  his  other  work,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  St.  Luke  beautifully 
illustrates  these  words  of  our  Lord.  The  Book  of  the  Acts  gives  us  the  history  of 
the  early  Christian  Church  for  about  two-and-thirty  years  after  the  death  of  Christ. 
It  may  well  surprise  a  thoughtful  reader  of  this  book  to  remark  how  little  progress 
Christianity  seems  to  have  made  at  the  end  of  that  period,  so  far  as  the  outward 
life  of  man  was  concerned.  Nothing  amounting  to  a  great  social  change  is  here 
recorded.  The  Church  bad  not  put  down  heathen  sacrifice,  nor  demolished  a  single 
idol  temple.  Scarcely  yet  did  men's  public  and  social  life  show  any  traces  of  it. 
The  gospel  had  as  yeti  no  local  habitation ;  in  looking  down  upon  the  crowded 
dwellings  of  the  great  eitiea  of  the  empire,  you  would  not  as  yet  have  seen  a  spire. 
Nay,  nearly  three  centuries  elapsed  after  the  period  described  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  before  buildings  gave  any  note  of  the  great  moral  revolution  which  had 
taken  place  in  the  minds  of  men  ;  before  the  Basilica  was  diverted  from  its  original 
purpose  as  a  court  of  justice  to  the  great  end  of  Christian  worship,  and  in  the  semi- 
circular recess,  where  the  prastor  and  his  assessors  had  sat  to  lay  down  the  law  of 
the  empire,  now  the  bishop  and  his  attendant  presbyters  were  installed  around  the 
holy  table,  to  expound  the  higher  law  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  yet,  though 
the  visible  impression  made  by  Christianity  upon  human  life  and  manners  was  thus 
slight  during  the  period  referred  to,  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  the  gospel  was  then 
fermenting  with  peculiar  power  in  the  hearts  and  minds  of  men.  If  the  kingdom 
of  God  did  not  come  with  observation,  this  was  no  proof  at  all  that  it  was  not  within 
men — that  it  was  not  in  the  very  centre  of  their  inner  life.  If  the  powers  that  be, 
and  the  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  at  first  thought  it  beneath  their  notice ;  if  Trajaa 
and  Pliny  regarded  Christians  merely  in  the  hght  of  an  obstinate  and  eccentric  set 
of  fanatics ;  this  was  no  proof  that  a  great  social  revolution  was  not  preparing  in 
the  lower  strata  of  society,  and  eating  away,  like  subterraneous  volcanic  fire,  tha 
cmst  upon  which  existing  institutions  stood.  The  mustard-seed  had  been  cast  into 
the  earth,  and  it  was  swelling  and  bursting  beneath  the  soil.  The  leaven  had  been 
thrown  into  human  nature  ;  and  its  influences,  though  noiseless  and  unseen,  were 
aabtlely  and  extensively  diffusing  themselves  through  the  whole  lump.  Christ's 
religion  was  to  win  its  way  noiselessly,  like  Himself.  Because  its  blows  against 
existing  institutions  were  so  indirect,  because  they  were  aimed  so  completely  at  the 
inward  spirit  of  man,  the  great  men  and  the  wise  men  after  the  flesh  completely 
overlooked  them,  and  dreamt  not  how  they  were  undermining  the  whole  social  fabria 
of  heathenism.  The  scanty  notices  of  Christianity  by  authors  contemporary  with 
its  rise  have  been  thoughtlessly  made  a  ground  of  objection  against  it  by  sceptics. 
The  believer  will  rather  see  in  this  fact  a  confirmation  of  the  Lord's  profound  word. 
The  kingdom  of  God  was  not  to  come,  and  it  did  not  come,  with  observation.  {Bean 
Goulbum.)  Secrecy  of  Divine  visitations: — Such  has  ever  been  the  manner  of 
His  visitations,  in  the  destruction  of  His  enemies  as  well  as  in  the  deliverance  of 
His  own  people  ; — silent,  sudden,  unforeseen,  as  regards  the  world,  though  predicted 
in  the  face  of  all  men,  and  in  their  measure  comprehended  and  waited  for  by  Hit 
true  Church.  See  Luke  xvii.  27-29  ;  Exod.  xv.  19  ;  Isa.  xxxvii.  36  ;  Acts  xii.  23 ; 
Isa.  XXX.  13 ;  Luke  xvii.  35-36.  And  it  is  impossible  that  it  should  be  otherwise, 
in  spite  of  warnings  ever  so  clear,  considering  how  the  world  goes  on  in  every  age. 
Men,  who  are  plunged  in  the  pursuits  of  active  life,  are  no  judges  of  its  course  and 
tendency  on  the  whole.  They  confuse  great  events  with  little,  and  measure  the 
importance  of  objects,  as  in  perspective,  by  the  mere  standard  of  nearness  or 
remoteness.  It  is  only  at  a  distance  that  one  can  take  in  the  outlines  and  features 
a  whole  country.  It  is  but  holy  Daniel,  solitary  among  princes,  or  Elijah  the  recluse 
of  Mount  Carmel,  who  can  withstand  Baal,  or  forecast  the  time  of  God's  providences 
among  the  nations.  To  the  multitude  all  things  continue  to  the  end,  as  they  were 
from  iht  beginning  of  the  creation.  The  business  of  state  affairs,  the  movements 
of  society,  the  course  of  nature,  proceed  as  ever,  till  the  moment  of  Christ's  coming. 
**  The  snn  was  risen  npon  the  earth,"  bright  as  usual,  on  that  very  day  of  wrath  in 
which  Sodom  was  destroyed.  Men  cannot  believe  their  own  time  is  an  especially 
wicked  time ;  for,  with  Scripture  unstudied  and  hearts  untrained  in  holiness,  they 
have  no  standard  to  compare  it  with.  They  take  warning  from  no  troubles  or 
peiplexities,  which  rather  carry  them  away  to  search  out  the  earthly  causes  of  them, 
and  the  possible  remedies.  Pride  infatuates  many,  and  self-indulgence  and  luxury 
work  their  way  unseen, — like  some  smouldering  fire,  which  for  a  while  leaves  the 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

outward  form  of  things  unaltered.  At  length  the  decayed  mass  cannot  hold  together^ 
and  breaks  by  its  own  weight,  or  on  some  slight  and  accidental  external  violence. 
(J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  The  coming  of  the  kingdom  to  individuals  : — Truly,  at  a 
christening  we  may  well  reflect  that  the  kingdom  of  God  comes  "  not  with  observa- 
tion."  And  if  in  later  years,  as  too  generally  is  the  case,  the  precious  grace  thus 
given  is  lost  and  sinned  »way,  and  nothing  but  the  stump  or  socket  of  the  Divine 
gift  remains  without  its  informing,  spiritual,  vital  power,  then  another  change  ia 
assuredly  necessary,  which  we  call  conversion.  And  what  is  conversion?  Is  it 
always  a  something  that  can  be  appraised  and  registered  as  having  happened  at  this 
exact  hour  of  the  clock — as  having  been  attended  by  such  and  such  recognized 
eymptoms — as  announced  to  bystanders  by  these  or  those  conventional  or  indispen- 
sable ejaculations — as  achieved  and  carried  out  among  certain  invariable  and  easily 
described  experiences  ?  Most  assuredly  not.  A  conversion  may  have  its  vivid 
and  memorable  occasion,  its  striking,  its  visible  incident.  A  light  from  heaven 
above  the  brightness  of  the  sun  may  at  midday  during  a  country  ride  flash  upon 
the  soul  of  Saul  of  Tarsus ;  a  verse  of  Scripture,  suddenly  illuminated  with  new  and 
unsuspected  and  quite  constraining  meaning,  may  give  a  totally  new  direction  to 
the  will  and  the  genius  of  an  Augustine;  but,  in  truth,  the  type  of  the  process  oi 
conversion  is  just  as  various  as  the  souls  of  men.  The  one  thing  that  does  not  vary, 
since  it  is  the  very  essence  of  that  which  takes  place,  is  a  change,  a  deep  and  vital 
change,  in  the  direction  of  the  will.  Conversion  is  the  substitution  of  God's  will  as 
the  recognized  end  and  aim  of  life,  for  aU  other  aims  and  ends  whatever ;  and  thus, 
human  nature  being  what  it  is,  conversion  is  as  a  rule  a  turning  "  from  darkness  to 
light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,"  that  a  man  may  receive  forgiveness 
of  his  sins  and  an  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctifled.  And  this  great 
change  itself,  most  assuredly,  •'  cometh  not  with  observation."  The  after-effects, 
indeed,  appear — the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice,  the  unity  of  purpose  which  gives  meaning, 
solemnity,  force  to  life,  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit — love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  in  such  measure  as  belongs  to  the  requirements  of  the 
individual  character.  Certainly,  when  the  kingdom  of  God  has  come  into  a 
Boul  the  result  may  be  traced  easily  enough,  but  the  kingdom  of  God  cometh  in 
this  case,  too,  at  least,  as  a  general  rule,  "  not  with  observation."  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Religion  is  an  inward  principle,  and  cannot  he  forced : — Men  love  excitement,  and 
to  be  able  to  say,  "  Lo,  here  is  Christ  I  or,  lo,  there  1 "  and  they  will  eagerly  run  »fter 
the  preacher  who  can  best  minister  to  this  love  of  excitement.  But  religion  is  an 
inward  principle,  a  work  of  personal  self-denial  and  effort.  Vegetation  as  a 
general  rule,  is  more  advanced  by  the  gentle  dews  and  moderate  showers  than  by 
torrents  of  rain  or  the  bursting  of  water-spouts  ;  so  is  the  work  of  salvation,  by  the 
daily  dews  of  Divine  grace,  more  than  by  extraordinary  revivals.  Let  us  not  dis- 
parage revivals,  for  some  truly  deserve  the  name ;  but  let  us  be  assured  that  the 
work  of  God  is  not  confined  to  them,  and  we  fear  is  not  often  in  them  at  all — that 
churches  may  have  some  piety  which  have  no  great  annual  season  of  excitement — 
that  the  best  state  of  things  is,  where  no  communion  passes  without  the  adding  of 
faithful  souls — that  all  healthy  growth  in  nature  and  grace  is  gradual  and  from 
within — and  that  "  the  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation."  (W.  H. 
Lewis,  D.D.)  The  kingdom  within: — I.  Eeligion  is  an  inwabd  and  spibituaii 
PBiNciPLE.  It  is,  says  our  Saviour,  "  within  you."  This  is  a  representation  which 
differs  from  the  ordinary  opinion  of  men.  I!  it  be  within  us,  then — 1.  It  is  not 
determined  by  geographical  boundaries,  by  latitude  or  longitude.  2.  It  does  not 
consist  in  an  observance  of  ordinances.  This  is  a  representation  which  accords 
with  what  we  find  in  the  sacred  pages.  God  forms  His  estimate  of  the  characters  ol 
men,  not  by  their  actions,  or  their  language,  or  their  opinions,  or  by  anything  of  a 
merely  outward  nature ;  but  by  the  temper  and  frame  of  their  hearts.     II.  Tbdb 

RELIGION  SUBJECTS  THE   SOUL  TO  THE  AUTHOBITT  AND   BEI6N  OF  GoD.      1.    It  is  Spoken 

of  as  a  kingdom.  Now  a  kingdom  is  not  a  scene  of  anarchy  and  rebellion ;  it  is  dis- 
tinguished by  order  and  due  subordination.  2,  But  this  is  not  all.  Not  only  is 
there  subordination,  but  all  is  under  the  immediate  control  of  God.  (1)  God  is 
the  author  and  preserver  of  that  spiritual  and  Divine  principle  in  which  true 
religion  consists.  (2)  God  has  appointed  all  the  means  by  which  it  is  maintained. 
8.  Mere  necessary  submission  is  not  enough.  It  implies  a  voluntary  subjection  of 
the  heart  to  the  authority  of  God.  (Dr.  Harris. )  The  kingdom  of  God : — I.  The 
text  is  a  wabning  against  illusobt  views  of  beligion.  There  is  a  form  of  evil 
in  our  own  day  against  which  we  make  a  strong  protest.  There  are  men  in  our  midst 
vbo  say,  "  Lo  here ;  or,  lo  there."    At  last  the  trath  has  been  discovered.    Jacob  it 


•HAP.  xvn.]  8T.  LUKE.  815 

oome  to  Bethel,  and  has  dreamed  a  marvellous  dream.  We  speak  of  men  who  bow 
seeds  of  discord  through  pretended  light  and  holiness.  They  disturb  the  peace  of 
the  church,  and  lead  the  unwary  astray.  II.  The  great  truth  which  our  text  sug- 
gests is  THE  SPIRITUAL  KATUBE  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD,  yea,  the  rcign  of  God  in 
men's  hearts  and  lives.  The  Jews  expected  a  startling  demonstration  of  the  super- 
natural to  their  material  advantage ;  Christ  effected  a  moral  reformation,  and  laid  the 
foundation  for  a  spiritual  commonwealth.  We  quote  the  opening  sentences  of 
"Christus  Consummator,"  a  recent  work  of  great  beauty  by  Canon  Westcott: 
"  Gain  through  apparent  loss ;  victory  through  momentary  defeat ;  the  energy  of  a 
new  Ufe  through  pangs  of  travail — such  has  ever  been  the  law  of  spiritual  progress. 
This  law  has  been  fulfilled  in  every  crisis  of  reformation  ;  and  it  is  illustrated  for 
our  learning  in  every  page  of  the  New  Testament."  Such,  in  a  few  words,  is  the 
basis  of  that  empire  of  truth  which  the  Son  of  God  founded,  and  is  now  enlarging 
by  His  Word  and  Spirit.  III.  In  conclusion,  observe  how  emphatic  the  Saviour  is 
in  directing  the  attention  of  His  hearers  to  the  fact,  that  the  kinqdom  of  god  is 
MOT  AN  expectation,  bdt  A  BBAUTV  IN  THE  SOUL — "  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within 
you."  The  seat  of  the  government  is  in  the  heart.  {The  Weekly  Pulpit.)  The 
inner  heaven : — It  is  evident  that  a  ••  kingdom  "  necessarily  implies  a  ruling  power, 
and  entire  subordination  to  the  governing  principle.  But  many  minds  (might  I  not 
almost  say  most?)  have  not  even  this.  There  is  no  governing  principle  at  all,  unless 
it  be  to  please  self ;  and  a  kingless  heart  must  be  a  weak  and  miserable  thing  1 
There  is  sure  to  be  disorder,  and  confusion,  and  wretchedness — where  there  is 
anarchy;  and  a  man's  heart  is  of  that  character — so  impulsive,  bo  restless;  bo 
sensitive  to  influences  of  every  kind ;  so  capricious ;  so  many  coloured,  that  it 
actually  requires  a  controlling  rule  which  should  be  a  sovereign  over  it.  Nothing 
else  will  do.  A  multitude  of  rulers  could  not  answer  the  purpose.  They  would  only 
weaken  and  distract.  There  must  be  One,  and  that  One  supreme,  and  absolute, 
and  alone.  Now  it  is  Christ's  promise  that  He  will  come  into  every  heart  who  is 
willing  to  receive  TTim.  He  comes  a  King.  Now  see  what  follows.  Christ  was  a 
Saviour  before  He  was  a  King.  He  rose  from  His  cross  to  His  throne.  "  He 
humbled  Himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross. 
Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  which  is 
above  every  name.  He  enters  therefore  the  heart  a  Saviour- King.  What,  then,  is 
the  first  thing  which  He  brings  7  What  is  the  first  act  of  sovereignty— what  the 
ground  of  His  kingdom?  Pardon,  peace,  and  rest  to  the  soul.  It  cannot  be 
but  that  the  first  discovery,  and  on  every  fresh  realization  of  such  a  fact  as  that, 
there  must  be  great  joy.  "  Can  it  be  true  ?  0  what  a  happiness  I  What  perfect 
joy  1  He  is  mine  and  I  am  His,  and  nothing  shall  ever  divide  us."  So  peace  makes 
joy ;  and  joy  and  peace,  uniting,  make  love.  Oh  1  it  is  a  strangely-beautiful 
♦'  kingdom  "  where  love — love  in  high  authority — love  in  power — love  in  awe — 
issues  its  mandates ;  and  love,  love  in  expectation,  love  in  perfect  accord,  love 
eager  on  the  wing,  gives  constant  echo  to  every  will  of  His  Sovereign's  heart.  But 
are  there  no  laws  in  that  ••  kingdom  "  of  peace  and  love  ?  The  strictest.  No  man 
— such  is  the  constitution  of  our  nature — no  man  could  be  happy  who  is  not  ruled, 
and  ruled  with  a  very  firm  hand.  We  all  like,  we  all  require,  and  we  all  find  it 
essential  to  our  being  to  be  under  authority  and  restraint ;  and  the  more  imperative 
the  power,  so  it  be  just  and  good,  the  happier  we  are.  These  are  the  essentials,  the 
very  characteristics  of  the  inner  kingdom  which  is  now  in  every  believer's  soul ;  only, 
that  which  is  here,  is  only  the  dim  reflection  of  all  which  is  so  perfect  there  ;  stiU, 
it  is  the  same  heaven  in  both  worlds.  And  a  man  that  has  once  that  "  inner 
heaven  "  in  his  heart,  how  independent  he  is  of  all  accidents,  and  of  all  external 
circumstances.  Surely,  when  death  comes,  it  will  be  a  very  little  step  to  that 
"  kingdom  "  indeed,  and  to  his  kindred  above.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Where  f» 
tht  heavenly  kingdom: — If  you  ask  me  what  my  definition  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is,  if  you  ask  me  where  I  place  it,  I  will  tell  you.  Show  me  a  man  who  is  just,  who 
is  honest,  who  is  benevolent,  who  is  charitable,  who  loves  his  God,  who  loves  his 
fellow-men ;  show  me  such  a  man ;  yea,  bring  him  here,  stand  him  by  my  side, 
and  I  care  not  what  be  the  colour  of  skin,  nor  what  be  his  name,  or  the  name  of 
his  nation,  or  what  his  social  standing,  or  what  his  financial  position,  or  what  be 
the  degree  of  his  intellectual  development ;  I  will  point  my  finger  at  that  man's 
breast,  and  say:  "There,  within  this  man's  breast  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  If 
yoo  ask  me  again  to  show  you  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  I  will  say :  "  Bring  me  a 
woman  that  is  pure,  that  is  affectionate,  that  is  loyal  to  her  sense  of  duty,  that  is 
sympathetic  and  charitable  of  speech,  that  is  patient,  whose  bosom  is  full  of  love 


S16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  'cnAS.  Tva, 

for  the  Divine  Being  and  for  those  of  her  race  with  whom  she  ia  brought  in  oontaot ; 
yea,  bring  that  woman  here,  stand  her  by  my  side ;  and  I  care  not  whether  she  be 
Caucasian  or  African,  whether  she  be  of  this  nation  or  of  that,  care  nothing  aboat 
her  intellectual  development ;  and  I  will  tell  you  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ia 
within  that  woman's  soul."  Aye,  within  such  a  man  and  such  a  woman  is  a  kingdom 
boundless  in  extent,  perpetual  in  its  expression  of  power,  majestic  in  its  appear- 
ance, indefatigable  in  its  energy,  Divine  in  its  quality — a  kingdom  of  which  there 
can  be  but  one  king,  and  that  is  God  ;  a  kingdom  for  the  sovereignty  of  which  there 
is  bnt  one  being  fitted — the  Infinite  Spirit.  And  this,  as  I  understand  it,  is  tha 
glory  of  man  and  the  glory  of  woman  :  that  within  them  there  is  a  realm  of  capa- 
city, of  faculty,  of  sense,  of  aspiration,  of  sentiment,  of  feeling,  so  fine,  so  pure,  so 
noble,  so  majestic  and  holy,  that  its  natural  king  is  Infinite  Love.  It  was  to  intro- 
duce Himself  to  this  realm,  to  establish  Uis  throne  and  possess  it  in  this  kingdom, 
that  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  Man,  alike  conjoining  in  Himself  tha 
Divine  and  the  human  in  harmonious  conjunction,  representing  the  sympathy  of 
the  lower  and  the  majesty  of  the  higher  world,  descended  to  this  earth,  and  is  to- 
day seeking  through  the  operation  of  His  Spirit,  entrance  to  possession.  It  ia  over 
this  kingdom  within.  He  reigns,  if  He  reign  at  all.  It  is  within  this  kingdom  that 
He  energizes.  It  is  out  of  this  kingdom  that  His  glory  has  to  proceed.  Not  in  that 
which  is  nominal  and  technical ;  not  in  that  which  is  verbal  and  formal ;  not  in 
that  which  is  in  accordance  with  custom  and  tradition,  is  the  Saviour  present.  And 
they  who  look  for  Him  in  these  things  shall  not  find  Him ;  but  they  who  search 
to  discern  Him  in  spirit  and  life,  in  holy  expression  of  consecrated  faculty 
in  the  energy  of  capacities  dedicated  to  God,  shall  find  EUm,  and  they  shall  find  thak 
in  these  He  ia  all  in  alL     {W.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 

Vers.  22-24.  One  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man. — Mistaken  desires  for  Jesus : — L 

Jesus  foreshadows  a  chamge  of  feelino  on  the  past  of  His  discipIiBb  ih 
REFERENCE  TO  His  APPEARING.  They  wiU  desire  to  see  one  day  a  visible  appear- 
ance of  the  Son  of  Man.  If  you  have  the  spirit  of  Jesus,  if  He  has  come  to  you  so 
that  you  know  Him  to  be  your  Saviour  and  Friend,  you  cannot  be  free  from  such 
changes  of  feeling  in  reference  to  Him.  No.  There  come  to  you  times  in  which 
you  think,  "  Surely  my  life  in  Christ  is  not  pouring  on  me  so  clearly  and  warmly 
as  it  might  do."  You  are  inclined  to  murmur  out  such  plaints  as,  "I  cannot  see 
His  face,  though  I  have  eagerly  looked  for  it ;  waiting  to  catch  some  beams  of  the 
wondrous  glory  resting  on  it,  and  be  able  to  say,  '  It  is  the  Lord,'  I  want  to  feel  His 
strong  hand  holding  me  up  ;  but  I  do  not  grasp  it,  though  I  stretch  out  mine  before, 
behind,  on  each  side.  My  prayer  this  morning  was  that  I  might  find  to-day  to  be 
a  day  for  a  personal  and  new  contact  with  Jesus."  So  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
your  feeling  in  reference  to  Him  is  somewhat  changed.  The  day  has  come  "  when 
ye  desire  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man."  U.  Jesus  foreshadows  eebs 
THE  FAILURE  OF  SUCH  DESIRES  FOR  His  APPEARING.  **  Ye  shall  uot  See  it."  He  docs 
not  want  His  people  to  indulge  in  vain  dreamy  longings.  He  does  not  want  to 
frustrate  hopes  that  at  the  bottom  might  express  loyalty  to  Him,  but  are  mistaken 
as  to  the  way  in  which  their  purport  is  to  be  achieved.  He  could  not  grant  that 
which  would  not  be  for  the  honour  of  God ;  that  which  would  be  to  the  hurt  of 
those  who  desired  only  one  day  of  the  Son  of  Man.    HI.  Jesus  foreshadows  bbbb 

THAT  THERE   WILL  BB   FALSE  ANNOUNCBMBNTS  HADE  IN  RBFEBBNCB  TO   HiS  APPEARING. 

"  They  shall  say  to  you, '  See  here  1  or  see  there ! ' "  From  history  we  find  that  there 
has  hardly  ever  been  a  time  of  special  trouble  in  the  world,  hardly  ever  a  time  of 
formality  and  deadness  in  the  Church,  but  men  have  risen  up  to  declare  that  tho 
Son  of  Man  was  just  coming,  and  that  plans  should  be  adopted  to  meet  Him,  Bat 
that  is  not  the  kind  of  expectation  I  want  to  warn  you  against ;  it  is  not  the  one 
that  you  are  most  in  danger  of  succumbing  to.  But  is  there  not  a  tendency  to 
gather  religious  meetings  under  the  idea  that  because  you  thus  gather  together 
Jesus  will  manifest  Himself  ?  Is  there  not  a  tendency  to  believe  that,  if  voa  can 
get  up  a  great  organization  to  carry  out  a  Christian  purpose,  obtain  plenty  of 
money,  and  seem  to  succeed  outwardly,  Jesus  ia  there  ?  Is  that  not  saying,  "  See 
here,  see  there"  ?  Against  all  that  sort  of  thing  His  words  are  meant  to  bear.  You 
may  gather  meetings ;  you  don't  necessarily  gather  with  Christ.  You  may  get 
wealth  to  support  your  efforts ;  that  is  not  a  proof  that  Christ  approves  them.  Yoa 
may  find  numbers  to  sustain  certain  plans ;  that  is  no  pledge,  on  the  part  of  thoa« 
numbers,  that  they  are  moving  under  the  leading  of  Christ.  You  mast  learn  that 
there  is  no  power  of  life  in  those  things  by  themselve?.    I  do  not  despise  meetings, 


CHAP,  xvii.]  ST.  LUKE.  317 

wealth,  or  nntubera.  There  is  •  certain  value  to  be  attached  to  them ;  bat  that 
value  is  just  equivalent  to  any  number  of  cyphers,  good  for  something  when  you 
put  one,  two,  or  other  numeral  before  them.  So  gather  all  kinds  of  people,  money, 
and  meetings ;  but  until  you  put  Christ  into  them  they  are  of  no  real  value.  It  is 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  that  is  to  be  desired,  not  the  power 
of  external  agencies.  Pray  that  your  heart  may  be  brought  more  and  more  into 
sympathy  with  His,  and  that  you  may  more  and  more  clearly  know  that  you  are 
living  on  the  Son  of  God  by  faith.  Then  you  will  not  need  anybody  to  point  out 
the  Son  of  Man  to  you  when  He  comes.  You  do  not  need  anybody  to  tell  you  that 
there  is  light  in  this  place — you  know  it ;  and  when  Christ  appears.  His  servants 
vnll  know  it  without  going  by  the  reports  of  others,  without  following  any  one. 
We  shall  know  it  by  the  power  He  Himself  will  exert.  Meantime  we  have  to  walk 
by  faith,  and  not  by  sight.  (D.  G.  Watt,  M.A.)  And  why  not: — While  the  Lord 
was  yet  on  earth  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man  were  but  lightly  esteemed.  The 
Pharisees  spoke  of  them  with  a  sneer,  and  demanded  when  the  kingdom  of  God 
should  come.  "  Is  this  the  coming  of  Thy  promised  kingdom  ?  Are  these  fisher- 
men and  peasants  Thy  courtiers  ?  Are  these  the  days  for  which  prophets  and 
kings  waited  so  long ?  "  "  Yes,"  Jesus  teUs  them,  "  these  are  the  very  days.  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  set  up  within  men's  hearts,  and  is  among  you  even  now ;  and 
the  time  will  come  when  you  will  wish  for  these  days  back  again,  and  even  those 
who  best  appreciate  them  shall  ere  long  confess  that  they  thought  too  little  of  them, 
and  sigh  in  their  hearts  for  their  return."  1.  We  are  bad  judges  of  our  present 
experiences.  2.  We  seldom  value  our  mercies  till  we  lose  them.  I.  Consider  thb 
IMMEDIATE  iNTEBPBETATioN  of  the  text.  1.  Our  Lord  meant  that  His  disciples 
would  look  back  regretfully  upon  the  days  when  He  was  with  them.  In  a  short 
time  His  words  were  true  enough,  for  sorrows  came  thick  and  threefold.  At  first 
they  began  to  preach  with  uncommon  vigour,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  was  upon  them. 
But  by  and  by  the  love  of  many  waxed  cold,  and  their  first  zeal  decUned ;  persecu- 
tion increased  in  its  intensity,  and  the  timid  shrank  away  from  them ;  evil  doers 
and  evil  teachers  came  into  the  Church ;  heresies  and  schisms  began  to  divide  the 
body  of  Christ,  and  dark  days  of  lukewarmness  and  half-heartedness  covered  them. 
2.  These  disciples  would  look  forward  sometimes  with  anxious  expectation.  "  If 
we  cannot  go  back,"  they  would  say,  "  Oh  that  He  would  hurry  on  and  quickly 
bring  us  the  predicted  era  of  triumph  and  joy.  Oh  for  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son 
of  Man."  IL  An  adapted  intebpretation  bditablk  to  bblievebs  at  this  pbesenx. 
MOMENT.  1.  Days  of  holy  fellowship  with  Jesus  may  pass  away  to  our  deep  sorrow. 
While  the  Beloved  is  with  you,  hold  Him,  and  do  not  let  Him  go.  He  will  abide 
if  you  are  but  eager  for  His  company.  2.  Days  of  deUghtful  fellowship  with  one 
another.  Let  us  labour  in  love,  zeal,  humility ;  for  a  continuance  of  these  all  our 
life  long.  8.  Days  of  abundant  life  and  power  in  the  Church.  HI.  A  meaninq 
ADAPTED  TO  THE  UMCONVEBTED.  When  OH  your  death-bed  you  will  be  willing  to 
give  all  you  possess  to  be  able  once  again  to  hear  the  voice  of  God's  minister 
proclaiming  pardon  through  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Emotions  formerly  quenched  will 
not  come  back ;  you  resisted  the  Spirit,  and  He  will  leave  you  to  yourself ;  and  yeb 
there  will  be  enough,  perhaps,  of  conscience  left  to  make  you  wish  you  could  again 
feel  as  when  almost  persuaded  to  be  a  Christian.  (C.  H.  Spurgean.)  Days  of  holy 
privileges : — Two  kinds  and  sets  of  days  are  here  contrasted :  coming  days  and  days 
that  are  now.  The  general  thought  is  very  natural  and  very  human.  It  might  be 
•aid  to  almost  any  one  at  certain  periods  of  life,  that  he  will  one  day  be  looking  back 
npon  that  period  with  regretful  fondness,  even  though  it  may  not  be  entirely  bright 
or  altogether  enjoyable  while  it  is  passing.  Days  of  childhood,  though  many 
restrictions  have  fettered,  and  many  faults  may  have  saddened  them;  days  of 
school  life,  though  often  complained  of  at  the  time  as  days  of  burdensome  lessons, 
arbitrary  rules,  and  irritating  punishments ;  days  of  early  struggle,  and  hope  long 
deferred,  in  the  practice  of  a  profession ;  days  of  uncertain  health  or  variable 
spirits,  while  opinion,  faith,  and  habit,  are  anxiously  shaping  themselves,  and  the 
aspects  and  prospects  of  life  are  in  many  ways  both  gloomy  and  formidable ;  of  all 
these,  and  many  other  examples  might  be  added  to  them,  it  might  yet  be  said  with 
great  truth  by  an  experienced  looker-on  to  the  person  passing  through  them  :  ••  Days 
will  come  when  ye  will  be  desiring  to  see  one  of  these  days  over  again,  and  when, 
alas,  you  shall  not  see  it  1  Yes,  you  may  well  prize,  while  you  have  them,  the  days 
that  are  now,  though  they  may  be  very  far  from  perfect,  either  in  opportunity  or  in 

•ircomstance ;  for  assuredly  you  will  one  day  be  desiring  one  of  them  back no 

teats  and  no  prayers  of  yours  will  be  of  any  avail  to  recall  it."    When  oar  Lord 


81  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rvn. 

said  here  to  His  disciples :  "  The  days  will  come  when  ye  will  desire  to  see  one  ot 
these  days  " — "  days  of  the  Son  of  Man,"  He  calls  them — "  and  ye  shall  not  see  it/' 
there  was  a  solemnity  and  a  pathos  in  the  prediction  far  beyond  the  universal 
experience  of  which  we  have  spoken.  There  was  much  to  make  the  days  of  that 
time  far  from  enjoyable.  They  were  days  of  unrest ;  they  were  days  of  toil ;  they 
were  days  of  anxiety;  they  were  days  also  of  perplexity  and  bewilderment  ii* 
spiritual  things.  They  were  very  slowly  and  very  intermittently  realizing  very 
elementary  conceptions.  They  had  no  such  hold  of  great  hopes  or  great  faiths  as 
might  have  made  their  heaven  all  brightness,  whatever  their  earth  might  be. 
They  were  always  disappointing  their  Master  by  some  expression  which  betrayed 
ignorance,  or  by  some  proposal  which  threatened  inconsistency,  which  must  have 
made,  we  should  have  thought,  the  very  memory  of  those  days  of  the  Son  of  Man 
a  bitterness  rather  than  a  comfort.  Yet  it  is  quite  plain  that  our  Lord  looked  upon 
those  as  in  some  sense  happy  days  for  them.  "  The  days  will  come  when  ye  will 
desire  to  see  one  of  them,  and  sorrow  because  ye  cannot."  "  Can  ye  make  the 
children  of  the  bride-chamber  fast  while  the  bridegroom  is  with  them  ?  "  And  in 
that  last  clause  He  touches  the  one  point  which  makes  those  happy  days  for  them, 
whatsoever  their  drawbacks,  and  whatsoever  their  discomforts ;  it  was  the  personal 
presence  of  the  loved  and  trusted  Lord.  In  that  one  respect  they  would  be  losera 
even  by  the  accomplishment  of  redemption.  "  A  little  while,"  He  said,  as  the  end 
drew  on,  "  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  Bee  Me,  and  verily  I  say  unto  you,  thai 
then  ye  shall  weep  and  lament,  while  the  world  is  rejoicing,  then  ye  shall  be  sor- 
rowful, though  at  last  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy."  Yes ;  when  He  speaks 
of  a  sorrow  in  separation,  and  then  of  a  joy  growing  out  of  it,  He  combines  in  a 
wonderful  and  a  merciful  way  the  natural  and  the  spiritual,  recognizes  the  difficulty 
of  rising  into  the  higher  heaven  of  faith,  and  yet  points  us  thither  for  the  one  real 
and  one  abiding  satisfaction.  We  have  had  no  such  personal  experiences  as  these 
which  the  text  tells  of — none  of  those  company  ings  with  Jesus,  as  He  went  in  and  out 
among  the  disciples.  It  is  only  from  afar  off  that  we  can  contemplate  that  living 
companionship.  It  is  only  by  a  remote  emulation  that  we  can  desire  one  of  those 
days  of  the  Son  of  Man.  In  the  hope  of  catching  some  distant  ray  of  that  glory 
travellers  have  sometimes  sought  the  land  of  Christ's  earthly  sojourn,  if  so  be  they 
might  live  themselves  back  into  the  days  of  His  ministry  and  of  His  humanity. 
But  others,  with  a  truer  and  a  deeper  insight,  have  sought  their  inspiration  in  the 
holy  Gospels,  have  read  and  pondered  those  four  sacred  biographies  till  they  could 
see  and  hear  Him  in  them,  without  those  distractions  of  surrounding  imagery  and 
scenery  which  can  but  divert  the  soul  from  that  heavenlier  wisdom.  •'  He  is  risen ; 
He  is  not  here."  It  is  not  in  hallowed  ground,  any  more  than  in  imaginative 
dreaming,  that  we  shall  find,  in  this  far-off  century  of  the  gospel,  the  best  and 
most  life-like  conception  of  what  the  text  calls  "  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man." 
Bather  shall  we  seek  to  frame  our  idea  of  them — first,  in  the  most  human  and 
personal  contact  with  such  wants  and  woes  as  He  came  to  seek  out  and  to  minister 
to  ;  and,  secondly,  in  the  diligent  study  and  imitation,  so  far  as  we  may,  of  those 
characteristics  and  those  ministries  which,  in  our  own  day  and  generation,  make 
the  nearest  approach,  however  distant  it  must  be,  to  the  character  and  ministry 
below  of  the  Divine  Son  Himself.  To  acquaint  ourselves,  not  as  unooncemed 
hearers,  but  as  sorrowing  sympathizers,  with  the  actual  condition  at  our  very  door» 
of  the  toilers  and  sufferers  by  whose  labour — alas  1  too  often  by  whose  sacrifice — 
tbs  wealth  and  luxury,  nay,  the  comforts  and  conveniences  of  the  higher  English 
life,  are  made  what  they  are ;  not  to  shrink  from  the  contemplation  with  a  senti- 
mental repugnance,  but  to  compel  ourselves  to  take  notice  of  it,  and  to  encourage 
by  word  and  deed,  by  giving  and  feeling,  all  the  serious  enterprises  by  which 
English  manliness,  and  EngUsh  philanthropy,  and  English  Christianity,  late  or 
early  seek  and  strive  to  grapple  with  it.  Thus,  on  the  one  side,  we  shall  be  realiz- 
ing the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man.  For  this  was  the  earth  which  He  came  to  save, 
and  this  was  the  man  whom  He  took  upon  Him  to  deliver.  True,  He  did  not 
become  Himself  the  denizen  of  an  overgrown  city.  He  did  not  take  our  flesh  in 
the  midst  of  that  swarming  hive  of  humanity,  imperial  Bome.  He  did  not  wait 
for  that  latest  age  which  should  develop  into  its  gigantic  proportions  such  a  metro- 
polis as  this  London.  But  no  monstrous  growth  and  no  uttermost  corruption  was 
out  of  the  ken  and  scope  of  His  incarnation.  The  days  of  the  Son  of  Man  are 
wherever  Christ  and  misery  stand  face  to  face.  Whosoever  tries  to  bring  Jesoi 
Christ  into  one  lodging-house  or  one  alley  of  sinning,  suffering  London,  is  doing: 
more  to  realiie  to  himself,  and  to  others,  the  ministry  of  the  Saviour,  than  if  Ha 


HHAT  XTU.]  ST.  LUKE.  81S 

tried  to  track  His  earthly  footsteps  through  Palestine,  or  to  picture  in  vivid  imagi- 
nation the  very  occupations  and  employments  of  the  days  of  His  flesh.  (Dean 
Vaugban.) 

VerB.  26,  27.  As  It  was  in  the  days  of  Noe. — WTierein  are  we  endangered  by  things 
lawful  f — I.  When  do  lawful  things  become  sin  to  us  ?  1.  When  they  become 
hindrances  in  our  way  to  heaven,  instead  of  helps  as  they  were  intended  to  be.  2. 
When  our  hearts  are  wrapped  up  in  them.  11.  How  we  huli  jddge  of  oub  heabts, 
and  know  when  they  miscabbt  and  offend  in  the  pdksuit,  use,  and  bnjoyment  of 
LAWFUL  THINGS.  1.  When  our  desire  of,  and  endeavours  after,  worldly  things  grow 
strong  and  vehement  and  very  eager  and  impatient.  2.  When  you  have  raised 
expectations  and  hopes  of  great  contentment  and  satisfaction  from  your  comforts. 
3.  When  the  obedience  and  willing  submission  of  the  soul  is  brought  off  to  any 
worldly  comfort,  and  the  soul  stoops  to  its  sceptre,  and  the  faculties,  like  the 
centurion's  servants,  do  as  they  are  bid.  Such  comforts  which  are  slavishly  obeyed 
are  sinfully  enjoyed.  4.  When  the  soul  groweth  very  tender  and  compassionate 
towards  such  a  comfort,  and  begins  to  spare  that  above  other  things ;  then  that 
becomes  a  lust,  and  lust  is  very  tender  and  delicate,  and  must  be  tenderly  used.  5. 
When  the  care,  anxiety,  and  solicitude  of  the  soul  runs  out  after  the  comforts  of 
this  life,  saying,  "  What  shall  I  eat?  what  shall  I  drink?  How  shall  I  live  and 
maintain  my  wife  and  children  ?  what  shall  I  do  to  get,  to  keep  such  or  such  a 
fthing  ?  "  6.  That  comfort  which  thou  art  not  dead  unto,  neither  is  that  dead  to 
thee,  thou  wilt  hardly  enjoy  with  safety  to  thyself,  or  thou  wilt  part  withal  but  upon 
severe  terms.  7.  If,  after  God  hath  been  weaning  us  in  a  more  special  manner  by 
His  word  and  rod,  and  taking  off  our  hearts  from  our  worldly  comforts,  yet  the  strong 
bent  of  the  soul  is  towards  them,  it  argues  much  carnal  love  to  them  that  we  are 
not  crucified  to  those    comforts.      HI.   What  abb  the   sins  that  attend  the 

IMMODEBATE  SINFUL  USE  OB  ABUSE  OF  LAWFUL  COMFORTS  ?      I  wiU  COnfiuC  mySClf  tO  the 

sins  in  the  text.  1.  The  first  sin  in  their  eating  and  drinking,  etc.,  was  sensuality. 
2.  Pride,  ease,  and  idleness  generally  go  together.  3.  Security  follows.  (H. 
Wilkinson,  D.D.)  The  revelation  of  the  Son  of  Man : — The  revelation  of  the  Son 
of  Man  is  an  event  which  takes  more  shapes  than  one  in  this  passage.  1.  First 
our  Lord  indicates  that  it  implies  a  period  of  danger  in  one  place  and  of  the 
possibility  of  escape  in  another  place — of  safety  in  the  field  and  not  in  the  house,  of 
pafety  without,  but  not  within.  The  revelation  of  the  Son  of  Man  thus  takes  the 
shape  of  a  critical  period,  such  as  might  happen  during  a  siege,  or  the  destruction 
of  a  dwelling  or  of  a  whole  city — where  life  would  be  in  peril  within  the  walls,  but 
might  be  saved  beyond  the  walls,  and  where  safety  lay  only  in  immediate  flight : 
lingering  would  be  ruin,  a  quick  departure  from  the  doomed  city  the  only  way  of 
escape.  That  is  one  aspect  of  the  revelation  of  the  Son  of  Man.  And  Christ  exhorts 
His  disciples,  and  all  who  hear  Him,  to  escape  with  their  lives — to  escape  with  the 
higher  life,  the  better  life.  Let  not  the  love  of  property  interfere  with  the  love  of 
life ;  lose  all  rather  than  lose  hfe ;  and  let  not  the  love  of  the  lower  life  interfere 
veith  the  preservation  of  the  higher  life — the  life  of  the  spirit,  the  true  life  of  man. 
Lose  life  itself  rather  than  lose  that ;  for  in  preserving  that,  all  is  preserved.  2, 
Then  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  day  of  the  Son  of  Man — or,  altering  the  phraseology, 
of  the  night  of  the  Son  of  Man — when  He  is  revealed.  In  that  night  there  shall  be 
two  in  one  bed — the  one  taken  and  the  other  left ;  two  women  grinding  at  the  mill — 
the  one  taken  and  the  other  left ;  two  men  in  the  field — the  one  taken  and  the  other 
left.  It  is  a  time  of  separation  which  is  indicated  ;  the  figure  of  the  siege 
disappears,  and  new  figures  take  its  place.  It  is  a  time,  though  not  of  apparent 
outward  danger,  yet  of  judgment ;  but  on  what  principle  the  judgment  takes  place, 
these  words  do  not  of  themselves  determine.  For  aught  that  appears,  it  may  be  a 
separation  of  accident  or  of  caprice ;  it  is  a  separation,  anr!  that  is  all  we  know. 
But  when  the  disciples  say  further,  "  Where,  Lord  ?  "  He  utters  a  proverb  which 
casts  light  on  the  judgment  and  also  on  the  siege  and  separation :  "  Wheresoever 
the  body  is,  thither  wiU  the  eagles  be  gathered  together,"  a  parable  that  may  have 
been  old  or  new,  it  matters  not ;  the  meaning  is  plain,  and  it  is  twofold.  (1)  It 
evidently  means  that  the  judgment  is  one  which  is  trae  to  nature.  Oar  Lord  gives' 
the  principles  on  which  the  judgment  or  separation  proceeds.  It  is  the  dead 
carcass  on  which  the  eagles  prey.  It  is  the  corrupt  city,  the  corrupt  State,  the 
corrupt  heart,  on  which  judgment  is  pronounced :  the  judgment  is  not  one  of 
accident  or  caprice,  but  of  truth,  of  righteousness.  That  is  the  principle  ot 
separation  and  jud^ent     And  (2)  in  answer  to  the  question  "Where,  Lordf  ** 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (.chap,  xth, 

JesuB  gives,  I  think,  another  lesson  on  this  matter, — viz. ,  that  this  revelation  of  the 
Son  of  Man  is  not  a  single  and  solitary  act  of  judgment  at  some  future  and 
far-distant  day,  but  that  it  is  a  revelation  often  made — made,  now  on  a  country,  now 
on  a  people,  now  on  a  Church,  now  on  a  system.  The  revelation  of  the  Son  of 
Man  is  not  a  thing  of  time  and  place,  it  is  an  eternal  law  in  the  dispensation  of 
Ood.  The  judgment  of  God  is  proceeding  every  day ;  it  is  proceeding  quietly  and 
onseen.  It  is  only  now  and  then  that  men's  eyes  are  open  to  behold  it,  and  then 
the  judgment  is  revealed.  But  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  God's  judgment  proceeds 
day  by  day,  whether  it  is  seen  and  revealed  or  not.  Corruption  shall  bring  about 
its  own  recompense — not  at  a  particular  time  or  place;  not  in  some  one  notable 
instance  years  or  centuries  hence,  but  wheresoever  the  oaroass  ia,  there  will  the 
eagles  be  gathered  together.    (A.  Watson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  32.  Remember  Lot's  wife. — Almost  tared,  yet  lost: — ^Lot's  wife — a  name- 
less sinner  in  a  half -forgotten  agel  I.  What  is  tbbbb  to  beueivibeb  in  tioi 
CASK  OF  lot's  wife?  See  Gen.  xix.  26.  So  soon  and  so  sudden  is  her  dis- 
appearance from  the  stage  of  history.  She  only  appears  long  enough  to  disappear 
again.  She  is  like  a  spectre,  rising  from  the  earth,  moving  slowly  across  our 
field  of  vision,  and  then  vanishing  away.  Hence  her  history  is  all  concentred 
in  a  single  point,  and  that  the  last.  It  has  no  beginning,  and  no  middle,  but  an 
end — a  fearful  end.  Its  course  is  like  that  of  the  black  and  silent  train,  to  which 
the  match  is  at  last  applied,  and  it  ends  in  a  fash  and  an  explosion.  1.  The  first 
distinctive  feature  in  the  case  of  Lot's  wife  is,  that  she  was  almost  saved.  The 
burning  city  was  behind ;  she  had  been  thrust  out  from  it  by  angelic  hands,  her 
husband  and  her  children  at  her  side ;  the  chosen  refuge  not  far  off,  perhaps  in 
sight ;  the  voice  of  the  avenger  and  deliverer  still  ringing  in  her  ears.  2.  But, 
though  almost  saved,  she  perished  after  all.  What  I  want  you  to  observe  is  not  the 
bare  fact  that  she  perished,  as  have  millions  both  before  and  since,  but  that  she 
perished  as  she  did,  and  where  she  did.  Perdition  is  indeed  perdition,  come  as  it 
may,  and  there  is  no  need  of  fathoming  the  various  depths  of  an  abyss,  of  what  is 
bottomless.  But  to  the  eye  of  the  spectator,  and  it  may  be  to  the  memory  of  the 
lost,  there  is  an  awful  aggravation  of  what  seems  to  be  incapable  of  variation  or 
increase  in  the  preceding  and  accompanying  circumstances  of  the  final  plunge.  He 
who  sinks  in  the  sea  without  the  hope  or  opportunity  of  rescue  may  be  sooner 
drowned  than  he  who  for  a  moment  enjoys  both ;  but  to  the  heart  of  an  observer 
bow  much  more  sickeuing  and  appalling  is  the  end  of  him  who  disappears  with  the 
rope  or  plank  of  safety  within  reach,  or  in  his  very  hand,  or  of  him  who  slips  into 
the  bubbling  waters  from  the  surface  of  the  rock  which,  with  his  failing  strength, 
he  had  just  reached,  and  on  which  for  a  moment  of  delicious  delusion  he  had  wept 
to  imagine  himself  safe  at  last  1  3.  Another  distinctive  feature  in  the  case  of  Lot's 
-wife  is,  that  her  destruction  was  so  ordered  as  to  make  her  a  memorial  and  a 
warning  to  all  others.  The  pillar  of  salt  may  have  vanished  from  the  shore  of  the 
Dead  Sea,  but  it  is  standing  on  the  field  of  sacred  history.  The  Old  and  New 
Testaments  both  give  it  place  ;  and  as  it  once  spoke  to  the  eye  of  the  affrighted 
Canaanite  or  Hebrew,  who  revisited  the  scene  of  desolation,  so  it  now  speaks  to  the 
memory  and  conscience  of  the  countless  multitudes  who  read  or  hear  the  law  and 
gospel.  II.  Of  what  use  can  the  beoollegtion  bb  to  tjs  ?  1.  We,  like  Lot's  wife, 
may  be  almost  saved.  This  is  true  in  a  twofold  sense.  It  is  true  of  outward 
opportunities.  It  is  also  true  of  inward  exercises.  2.  Those  who  are  almost  saved 
.may  perish — fearfully  perish — finally  perish — perish  in  reach,  in  sight  of  heaven — 
yes,  at  the  very  threshold  of  salvation.  Whatever  "looking  back"  may  have 
denoted  in  the  type,  we  know  full  well  what  may  answer  to  it  in  the  antitype. 
Whatever  may  have  tempted  Lot's  wife  to  look  back,  we  know  the  multiplied 
temptations  which  lead  sinners  to  do  likewise.  And  this  terrible  example  cries 
aloud  to  those  who  are  assailed  by  lingering  desires  for  enjoyments  once  abandoned, 
or  Dy  sceptical  misgivings,  or  by  evil  habits  unsubdued,  or  by  disgust  at  the 
restraints  of  a  religious  life,  or  by  an  impious  desperation  such  as  sometimes  urges 
us  to  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die  ; — to  all  such  this  terrible  example  cries 
aloud,  "  Remember  Lot's  wife  " — her  escape  and  her  destruction.  3.  They  who 
are,  like  Lot's  wife,  almost  saved,  may  not  only,  like  her,  be  destroyed  in  the  very 
tmoment  of  deliverance  but,  like  her,  so  destroyed  as  to  afford  a  monumental 
warning  to  all  others  that  the  patience  and  long-suffering  of  God  are  not  etemaL 
God  has  made  all  things  for  Himself,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil.  They 
who  will  not,  as  "  vessels  of  meroy,"  glorify  His  wisdom  and  His  goodness,  moat 


eHAP.  XTn.]  ST,  LUKE.  821 

and  will  "  show  His  wrath  and  make  His  power  known,"  as  "  vessels  of  wrath  fitted 
to  destruction."  They  who  will  not  consent  to  glorify  Him  willingly  must  be 
content  to  glorify  Him  by  compulsion.  This  is  true  of  all  who  perish,  and  who, 
therefore,  may  be  said  to  become  •'  pillars  of  salt,"  standing,  like  milestones,  all  along 
the  broad  road  that  leadeth  to  destruction,  solemn  though  speechless  monitors  of 
those  who  throng  it,  and  planted  even  on  the  margin  of  that  great  gulf  which  is 
£xed  for  ever  between  heaven  and  hell.  Bat  in  another  and  a  more  affecting 
cense,  it  may  be  said  that  they  who  perish  with  the  very  foretaste  of  salvation  on 
their  lips,  become  "pillars  of  salt"  to  their  successors.  What  a  thought  is  this 
— that  of  all  the  tears  which  some  have  shed  in  seasons  of  awakening,  and  of  all 
their  prayers  and  vows  and  resolutions,  all  their  spiritual  conflicts  and  apparent 
triumphs  over  self  and  sin,  the  only  ultimate  effect  will  be  to  leave  them  standing 
by  the  wayside  as  "  pillars  of  salt,"  memorials  of  man's  weakness  and  corruption, 
and  of  God  most  righteous  retributions.  Are  you  willing  to  live,  and,  what  is  more, 
to  die,  for  such  an  end  as  this?  {J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  LoVa  wife: — I.  Heb 
ADVANTAQES.  1.  She  had  a  pious  husband.  2.  She  had  heavenly  visitors.  3.  She 
had  Divine  warning.  4.  She  had  seen  the  wicked  punished.  II.  Heb  offence. 
1.  She  acted  under  the  impulse  of  feeling.  2.  She  acted  under  the  impulse  of 
unbelief.  3.  She  acted  under  a  disregard  of  law.  4.  She  acted  in  contempt  of 
warning.  IH.  Heb  pdnishment.  She  was  punished — 1.  Suddenly.  3.  Seasonably. 
8.  Bighteonsly.  4.  Exemplarily.  IV.  The  wabninq  administered.  "Eemember" — 
1.  Not  to  delay.  Flee  at  once.  2.  Not  to  hesitate.  Look  not  back.  3.  Not  to 
draw  back.  Danger  is  behind.  In  conclusion :  1.  See  here  a  monument  of  Divine 
wrath.  2.  See  here  a  beacon  to  warn  coming  generations.  {A.  Macfarlane.} 
Seasonable  truths  in  evil  times  : — I.  What  aee  we  to  remember  about  Lot's  wife  ? 
Her  sin,  and  her  punishment.  A  sudden  and  a  deadly  stroke  was  dealt  her,  for  her 
ein  of  apostasy.  II.  Why  abb  we  to  bemeubeb  Lot's  wife  ?  1.  Because  her 
example  is  recorded  for  that  purpose.  2.  For  our  warning.  3.  That  we  fall  not 
into  the  same  condemnation.  HI.  How  abe  we  to  bbmembeb  Lot's  wife?  1. 
Eeflectively.  2.  Meditatively.  3.  With  holy  fear,  reverence,  and  adoration.  IV, 
What  and  when  is  the  bpeciu:  time  that  Lot's  wife  is  to  be  remembered  bt  us  f 
It  is  good  to  remember  her  frequently ;  but  we  are  in  a  special  manner  to  remember 
Lot's  wife  in  the  time  of  declining,  in  declining  times  remember  her  that  you  do  not 
decline.  Thus  our  Saviour  Christ  brings  her  in  for  to  be  remembered  by  us,  that 
we  do  not  look  back,  as  she  looked  back.  We  are  to  remember  her  in  times  of 
security,  of  great  security.  She  is  to  be  remembered  by  us  also,  in  time  when  God 
doth  call  upon  His  people  by  His  dispensations  to  go  out  of  Sodom,  and  make  no 
delay  ;  for  so  our  Saviour  also  presses  it  to  you,  "  Let  not  him  that  is  on  the  house- 
top go  down,"  Ac,  but  •'  remember  Lot's  wife."  God  would  have  no  delay  then  : 
so  when  God  calls  upon  a  people  to  come  out  of  Sodom;  make  no  delay,  but 
"  remember  Lot's  wife."  Thus  we  see  what  the  time  is.  V.  What  good  shali.  wf 
GET  by  bememberinq  Lot's  WIFE  ?  Is  there  any  good  to  be  gotten  by  remembering 
Lot's  wife?  Yes,  much  every  way :  Something  in  a  way  of  instruction,  something 
in  a  way  of  caution.  1.  If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  do  live  in  our 
memory,  then,  why  should  not  we  stand  and  admire,  and  say,  Lord,  how  unsearch- 
able are  Thy  judgments,  and  Thy  ways  past  finding  out  ?  Here  are  four,  and  but 
four  that  came  out  of  Sodom,  and  yet  one  of  the  four  were  destroyed.  God  may 
deliver  our  family  in  the  time  of  common  calamity,  and  yet  some  of  our  house  may 
suffer.  God  in  thfe  mid&t  of  judgment  doth  remember  mercy ;  in  the  midst  of 
mercy  He  remembers  judgment.  2.  If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  do  live 
in  our  memory,  then  here  we  may  learn  by  way  of  instruction,  and  see  how  far  a 
man  or  woman  may  go  in  religion,  and  yet  come  short  at  the  last.  3.  If  this  story 
of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  do  Ufe  in  our  memory  ;  then  you  may  learn  and  see  by 
way  of  instruction  }  that  the  best  relations  will  not  secure  from  the  hand  of  God, 
if  we  continue  evil.  4.  If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  do  indeed  live  in  our 
memory,  then  here  you  may  see  what  an  evil  thing  it  is  to  look  back  upon  that; 
which  God  hath  delivered  us  from.  5.  If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  live 
in  our  memory ;  here  we  may  learn  by  way  of  instruction,  that  former  deliverance 
will  not  secure  us  from  future  destruction :  she  was  delivered  with  a  great  deliver- 
ance, '«nd  yet  destroyed  with  a  great  destruction.  6.  If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be 
true,  and  live  in  our  memory,  then  here  we  may  learn  by  way  of  instruction :  it  is 
ill  sinning  when  God  is  punishing ;  it  is  good  begging  while  God  is  giving :  but  oh, 
it  is  ill  sinning  while  God  is  punishing.  7.  If  this  story  be  true,  and  live  in  your 
memory,  then  here  you  may  leai-n,  that  those  that  are  exemplary  in  sinning,  Ehall 
VOL.  ni.  21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tto. 

be  exemplary  in  punishing.  8.  If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be  trne,  and  do  live  in 
our  memory ;  then  here  we  may  see  what  an  evil  thing  it  ia  to  mischoose  in  our 
choosing  time.  9.  If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  do  live  in  our  memory  ; 
then  here  we  may  see  by  way  of  instruction,  that  though  God  will  lay  out  an 
hiding-place  for  ffia  people,  in  times  of  public  calamity ;  yet  if  they  sin  in  the  way, 
they  may  perish  or  miscarry  in  the  very  face  of  their  hiding-place.  10.  If  this 
story  of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  do  live  in  our  memory ;  then  here  we  may  learn  by 
way  of  instruction,  that  it  is  possible  that  a  religious  family  may  have  a  black 
mark  of  God's  indignation.  11.  And  the  main  of  all  is  this.  If  the  story  of  Lot's 
wife  be  true,  and  do  live  in  our  memory :  oh,  what  an  evil  thing  is  it  to  look  back, 
and  to  decline  in  declining  times.  How  quick  was  God  with  Lot's  wife  for  looking 
back.  She  never  sinned  this  sin  before  ;  it  was  the  first  sin  that  ever  in  this  kind 
she  committed ;  and  she  might  have  said :  "  Why,  Lord,  it  is  the  first  time  that  ever 
I  committed  it,  and  indeed  I  was  taken  before  I  was  aware  thus  to  look  back  :  I  did 
not  consider  well  of  what  I  did."  But  God  turned  her  presently  into  a  pillar  of 
salt ;  God  was  quick  with  her.  Why  ?  For  to  show  thus  much,  God  will  be  quick 
with  apostates.  And  thus  I  have  given  you  these  things  by  way  of  instruction. 
12.  As  many  I  might  give  you  in  a  way  of  caution,  but  to  instance  only  in  one. 
If  this  story  of  Lot's  wife  be  true,  and  do  live  in  our  remembrance ;  by  way  of 
caution,  why  should  we  not  all  take  heed  how  we  look  back  to  worldly  interests,  in 
the  day  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  revealed,  or  in  this  day  of  the  gospel  when  the 
Son  of  Man  is  revealed.  You  see  what  became  of  Lot's  wife  for  her  looking  back ; 
and  therefore  why  should  we  not  all  of  us  take  heed  how  we  look  back  or  decline, 
in  this  day  that  the  Son  of  Man  is  revealed  ?  VI.  You  will  say.  What  sham,  wb  do 
THAT  WB  MAY  NOT  DECLINE ;  what  shall  we  do  that  we  may  so  remember  Lot's  wife, 
that  we  may  not  decline,  or  look  back  in  declining  times  ?  1.  If  you  would  not 
look  back  in  declining  times,  shut  your  eyes  and  your  ears  against  all  the  allurements 
andthreatenings  of  the  world.  2.  If  you  would  not  look  back  in  declining  times, 
consider,  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  what  an  evil  thing  it  ia  to  look  back.  Thereby 
you  lose  all  you  have  wrought,  thereby  you  will  lose  all  your  losses.  There  is  much 
gain  in  losing  for  Jesus  Christ.  By  looking  back  you  will  lose  all  the  losses  and  the 
gain  thereby.  Thereby  you  will  lose  the  testimony  of  your  own  integrity.  Yet, 
saith  God,  Job  held  fast  his  integrity.  Thereby,  also,  you  will  lose  the  comfort  of 
those  glorious  times  that  are  to  come.  (W.  Bridge}.  Remember  Lot's  wife  : — 
I.  What  cikcbmstances  in  the  conduct  of  Lot's  wife  to  live  in  ouk  remembrance  ? 

1.  Her  sin.  (1)  Inordinate  worldly  attachment.  (2)  Carelessness.  (3)  Ingratitude. 
(4)  Disobedience.  2.  Her  punishment.  (1)  Immediate.  (2)  Aggravated.  Better 
for  her  to  have  perished  in  Sodom  than  on  liie  way  to  Zoar.  (3)  Signal.  A  monu- 
ment before  the  world  of  God's  power  and  faithfulness,  and  His  righteous  dis- 
pleasure  against  apostasy.  II.  Let  us  draw  near  and  read  the  inscription  on  this 
MOHUMENT.  1.  The  danger  of  apostasy.  2.  Past  and  present  mercies  are  no 
security  for  future  safety,  unless  suitably  improved.  3.  The  evil  of  worldly  attach- 
ments, in.  With  what  sentiments  ought  we  to  remember  Lot's  wife  ?  1.  With 
gratitude  for  our  own  preservation  though  we  have  acted  a  similar,  nay,  a  more 
guilty  part.  (1)  She  was  warned  once ;  we  have  been  warned  a  thousand  times. 
(2)  She  looked  back ;  but  have  not  we  turned  back  ?  (3)  She  looked  back  once ; 
we  have  both  looked  and  turned  back  over  and  over  again.  (4)  We  have  looked 
back  and  turned  back,  although  we  had  her  example  of  warning  before  our  eyes. 

2.  To  increase  our  salutary  fears.  {W.  Atherton.)  A  woman  to  be  remembered : — 
L  Thb  religious  privileges  which  Lot's  wife  enjoyed.  The  mere  possession  of 
religious  privileges  will  save  no  one's  soul.  Men  need  besides,  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  II.  The  sin  which  Lot's  wife  committed.  *•  She  looked  back." 
That  look  was  a  little  thing,  but  it  revealed  the  true  character  of  Lot's  wife.  Little 
things  will  often  show  the  state  of  a  man's  mind  even  better  than  great  ones,  and 
little  symptoms  are  often  the  signs  of  deadly  and  incurable  diseases.  A  straw  may 
show  which  way  the  wind  blows,  and  one  look  may  show  the  rotten  condition  of  a 
sinner's  heart  (Matt.  v.  28).  2.  That  look  was  a  little  thing,  but  it  told  of  dis- 
obedience in  Lot's  wife.  When  God  speaks  plainly  by  His  Word,  or  by  His 
messengers,  man's  duty  is  clear.  8.  That  look  was  a  little  thing,  but  it  told  of 
proud  unbelief  in  Lot's  wife.  She  seemed  to  doubt  whether  God  was  really  going 
to  destroy  Sodom :  she  appeared  not  to  beheve  there  was  any  danger,  or  any  need 
for  such  a  hasty  flight.  But  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God.  4.  That 
look  was  a  little  thing,  but  it  told  of  secret  love  of  the  world  in  Lot's  wife.  Her 
heart  was  in  Sodom,  though  her  body  was  outside.    She  had  left  her  affectiona 


iiHAi.  xni.]  ST.  LUKE.  823 

^behind  when  she  fled  from  her  home.     Her  eye  tamed  to  the  place  where  her 
treasure  was,  as  the  compass- needle  tarns  to  the  pole.    And  this  was  the  crowning 
point  of  her  sin.    III.  The  punishment  which  Goo  initjctei)  on  Lot's  wife.     1.  A 
learfal  end.    2.  A  hopeless  end.    Conclusion :  Suffer  me  to  wind  up  all  by  a  few 
direct  appeals  to  your  own  heart.    In  a  day  of  much  light,  and  knowledge,  and 
profession,  I  desire  to  set  up  a  beacon  to  preserve  souls  from  shipwreck.     I  would 
fain  moor  a  buoy  in  the  channel  of  all  spiritual  voyagers,  and  paint  upon  it, 
"  £emember  Lot's  wife."     (1)  Are  you  careless  about  the  second  Advent  of  Christ  ? 
Alas,  many  are !     They  live  like  the  men  of  Sodom,  and  the  men  of  Noah's  day  : 
they  eat,  and  drink,  and  plant,  and  build,  and  marry,  and  are  given  in  marriage, 
and  behave  as  if  Christ  was  never  going  to  return.     If  you  are  such  an  one,  I  say  to 
you  this  day.  Take  care:  "Remember  Lot's  wife."    (2)  Are  you  lukewarm,  and 
cold  in  your  Christianity  ?    Alas,  many  are  1    They  try  to  serve  two  masters :  they 
labour  to  keep  friends  both  with  God  and  mammon.    If  you  are  such  an  one,  I  say 
to  you  this  day,  Take  care :  "  Remember  Lot's  wife."    (3)  Are  you  halting  between 
two  opinions,  and  disposed  to  go  back  to  the  world  ?    Alas,  many  are  I    They  are 
afraid  of  the  cross :  they  secretly  dislike  the  trouble  and  reproach   of  decided 
rehgion.     They  are  weary  of  the  wilderness  and  the  manna,  and  woald  fain  return 
to  Egypt,  if  they  could.    If  yoa  are  such  an  one,  I  say  to  you  this  day,  Take  care : 
"Remember  Lot's  wife."     (4)  Are  you  secretly  cherishing  some  besetting  sin? 
Alas,  many  are  1  they  go  far  in  a  profession  of  religion ;  they  do  many  things  that 
■are  right,  and  are  very  like  the  people  of  God.    But  there  is  always  some  darling 
evil  habit,  which  they  cannot  tear  from  their  heart.      BUdden  worldliness,   or 
«ovetousness,  or  lust,  sticks  to  them  like  their  skin.     They  are  willing  to  see  all 
their  idols  broken,  but  this  one.  If  you  are  such  an  one,  I  say  to  yoa  this  day.  Take 
care:  *•  Remember  Lot's  wife."    (5)  Are  you  trifling  with  little  sins  ?    Alas,  many 
are  1    They  hold  the  great  essential  doctrines  of  the  gospel.    They  keep  clear  of  ail 
.gross  profligacy,  or  open  breach  of  God's  law ;  but  they  are  painfully  careless  about 
Uttle  inconsistencies,  and  painfully  ready  to  make  excuses  for  them.     "  It  is  only 
«  httle  temper,  or  a  little  levity,  or  a  little  thoughtlessness,  or  a  little  forge tfulness." 
U  you  are  such  an  one,  I  say  to  you  this  day,  "Take  care:  'Remember  Lot's  wife.'  " 
iBisliop  Ryle.)        A  solemn  warning  : — 1.  It  is  a  solemn  warning,  when  we  think  of 
the  person  Jesus  names.    He  does  not  bid  us  remember  Abraham,  or  Isaac,  or 
Jacob,  or  Sarah,  or  Hannah,  or  Ruth.     No :  He  singles  out  one  whose  soul  was  lost 
for  ever.    He  cries  to  us,  "Remember  Lot's  wife."    2.  It  is  a  solemn  warning, 
when  we  consider  the  subject  Jesus  is  upon.  He  is  speaking  of  His  own  second  coming 
to  judge  the  world :  He  is  describing  the  awful  state  of  unreadiness  in  whichmany  will 
be  found.  The  last  days  are  on  His  mind,  when  He  says,  "Remember  Lot's  wife." 
3.  It  is  a  solemn  warning,  when  we  think  of  the  person  who  gives  it.  The  Lord  Jesua 
is  full  of  love,  mercy,  and  comparison :  He  is  one  who  wiU  not  break  the  bruised 
jeed  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax.    He  could  weep  over  unbelieving  Jerusalem,  and 
pray  for  the  men  that  crucified  Him ;  yet  even  He  thinks  it  good  to  remind  us  of 
lost  souls.    Even  He  says,  "  Remember  Lot's  wife."    4.  It  is  a  solemn  warning, 
when  we  think  of  the  persons  to  whom  it  was  first  given.     The  Lord  Jesus  was 
speaking  to  His  disciples  :  He  was  not  addressing  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  who 
hated  Him,  but  Peter,  James,  and  John,  and  many  others  who  loved  ELim ;  yet  even 
to  them  He  thinks  it  good  to  address  a  caution.    Even  to  them  He  says,  "  Bemem- 
her  Lot's  wife."    5.  It  is  a  solemn  warning,  when  we  consider  the  manner  in  which 
it  was  given.     He  does  not  merely  say,  "  Beware  of  following — take  heed  of  imita- 
ting— do  not  be  like  Lot's  wife."     He  uses  a  different  word  :  He  says,  "  Remember." 
He  speaks  as  if  we  were  all  in  danger  of  forgetting  the  subject ;  He  stirs  up  our  lazy 
memories;  He  bids  us  keep  the  case  before  our  minds.    He  cries,  "Remember 
Lot's  wife."      [Ibid.)         Remember  Lot's  vaije: — I.  Remembbb  Lot's  wipe,  and 
LEABN  THE  PEBiLS  OF  WORLDLINESS.    How  terrible  her  fate  1  What  could  be  more 
awful?    1.  It  was  dreadful  physically.     She  lost  her  life.      2.  It  was  dreadful 
socially.  Her  husband  was  made  a  widower,  her  daughters  orphans.  3.  It  was  dread- 
ful spiritually.     She  died  in  the  very  act  of  disobedience.     Worldiness  was  at  the 
root  of  her  sin.     She  looked  back  with  regret  at  the  valuable  possessions  that  were 
t)eing  abandoned.    Let  us  beware.    Prosperity  is  perilous.    Gain  and  godliness  are 
irequently  divorced.     U.  Reueubeb  Lot's  wife,  and  see  how  possible  it  is  to 
BEGIN  WELL  AND  END  ILL.     Some  are  like  certain  African  rivers  of  which  we  have 
read.    Rising  in  some  secluded  and  rocky  upland,  they  increase  in  volume  and 
beautj  as  they  flow  along.     Their  course  is  marked  by  fertility  on  either  aide.   Bat 
instead  of  rolling  on  till  they  reach  the  ocean  and  help  to  swell  its  waters,  the/ 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xtii, 

gradually  sink  and  are  lost  in  the  sand  of  the  desert.  Esau ;  Saul ;  Solomon ; 
Judas.  Let  us  not  be  high-minded,  but  fear.  Let  us  watch  and  be  sober.  III. 
Kemembkb  Lot's  wife,  and  behold  the  folly  and  sin  op  delay.  She  lingered 
and  perished.  Had  she  not  hesitated,  she  had  not  been  destroyed.  Decision  ia 
essential  to  success  in  all  departments  of  hfe.  "  Despatch  is  the  soul  of  business.'^ 
A  wealthy  man  was  once  asked  the  secret  of  his  prosperity.  His  answer  was  signi- 
ficant :  "  I  always  recollect  what  my  father  said  to  me  when  I  was  a  boy — If  yoo 
have  a  thing  to  do,  go  and  do  it."  No  doubt  this  had  much  to  do  with  his  accumu- 
lation  of  riches.  So,  too,  salvation  must  be  gone  about  at  once.  It  is  no  matter 
for  delay.  •'  No  hurry  "  is  Satan's  masterpiece.  It  is  the  almost  universal  sin. 
Hear  the  confession  of  an  old  man: — "When  I  was  young,  I  said  to  myself,  '  I 
cannot  give  up  the  world  now,  but  I  will  do  it  by  and  by.  When  I  have  passed  the 
meridian  of  life,  then  I  shall  be  ready  to  attend  to  the  concerns  of  my  soul.'  But 
here  I  am,  an  old  man.  I  feel  no  readiness  nor  disposition  to  enter  upon  the  work 
of  my  salvation.  In  looking  back  I  often  feel  that  I  would  give  worlds  if  I  could 
be  placed  where  I  was  when  I  was  twenty  years  old.  There  were  not  half  as  many 
difiBculties  in  my  path  then  as  there  are  now."  An  artist  once  requested  that  he 
might  be  allowed  to  take  the  Queen's  likeness.  Time  and  place  were  fixed.  Her 
Majesty  was  there  to  the  moment.  He  was  not.  When  he  came  he  found,  instead 
of  the  royal  lady,  her  message.  She  left  word  that  she  had  been,  gone,  and  should 
not  return.  The  King  of  kings  offers  to  give  us  His  image.  He  wishes  us  to 
resemble  Him.  The  Incarnate  One  says,  "  Follow  Me."  But  He  has  appointed  the 
period  and  the  locality  in  which  we  are  to  obtain  this  Divine  likeness — the  present 
world  and  the  present  time.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found."  (T.  R. 
Stevenson.)  The  doom  of  the  lingerer  ; — I.  With  begabd  to  her  sin,  the  stat© 
of  mind  discovered,  and  the  aggravations  with  which  it  was  attended.  Thus,  w© 
cannot  fail  to  see  in  it  a  low  and  debased  degree  of  earthly-mindedness,  a  heart 
fixed  and  bent  on  getting  its  worldly  stuff — ready  to  incur  difficulty  for  it,  danger  for 
it — ay,  and  the  anger  of  God  for  it.  In  this  particular  connection,  the  warning  of 
her  example  seems  to  be  proposed  in  the  text  In  that  day,  when  the  signs  of  an 
advent  Saviour  are  upon  you,  be  not  anxious  about  your  worldly  possessions.  Let 
the  things  that  are  in  the  house  remain  in  the  house,  the  things  that  are  left  in  th© 
field  be  left  in  the  field.  "  Remember  Lot's  wife."  Again,  there  was  in  this  sin  of 
Lot's  wife  the  crime  of  disobedience,  with  all  its  actual  accompaniments  of  defiant 
rebellion  and  contemptuous  unbelief.  She  had  been  especially  charged  that  she  must 
not  look  back,  and  she  did  look  back  ;  she  had  been  told  she  must  escape  for  her  life, 
and  she  loitered  even  behind  her  husband.  See  how  many  things  meet  here — th© 
authority  of  God  is  spurned,  the  word  of  the  angel  is  disbelieved,  the  wisdom  or  ne- 
cessity of  the  command  is  questioned,  and  the  impious  prerogative  laid  claim  to — 
"  Our  eyes  are  our  own ;  we  may  look  on  what  we  will  :  who  is  Lord  over  us  ?  "  Now 
it  is  easy  to  see  what  gives  to  those  offences  against  a  positive  precept  their  character 
of  deep  offending.  In  the  case  of  offences  against  the  principle  or  spirit  of  a  law,  a 
treacherous  and  facile  conscience  will  raise  a  cavil,  and  even  make  for  itself  excus© 
to  the  conscience,  as  not  able  to  do  this,  when  command  takes  the  form  of  "  Do  this  " 
or  •'  Refrain  from  that. "  We  are  then  made  to  feel  that  we  are  brought  face  to  face 
with  God ;  we  are  confronted  with  the  broad,  plain  letter  of  His  written  law.  Room 
for  mistake  or  cavil  or  misinterpretation,  there  is  none  ;  we  must  offend  with  our 
eyes  open,  and  cast  ourselves  headlong  into  the  depths  of  presumptuous  sin.  But 
once  more,  there  was  in  the  sin  of  the  woman  much  of  deep  and  signal 
ingratitude.  Her  life  had  been  one  of  marked  and  distinguishing  mercies. 
Solemn  warning  this,  to  all  of  us  who  have  been  brought  up  religiously ;  for 
those  who  have  in  early  hfe  enjoyed  great  spiritual  oijportunities :  it  seems  that 
when  such  people  fall,  none  fall  so  low  ;  the  light  that  was  in  them  becomes  darkness, 
and,  as  our  Lord  teaches,  there  is  no  darkness  so  thick  as  that.  It  is  like  being 
borne  away  to  perdition  on  the  wings  of  God's  mercy.  II.  On  the  awful  pcnish- 
UENT  with  which  the  wife  of  Lot  was  visited  I  will  only  insist  as  showing  how 
peculiarly  aggravated  in  God's  sight  must  have  been  the  nature  of  Her  sin.  Her  end 
was  marked  by  all  those  circumstances  of  anger  and  terror  which  seem  to  foreclose 
all  hope.  First,  it  was  that  which  we  pray  against  in  our  Litany  as  sudden  death  ; 
that  is,  not  sudden  in  the  sense  of  being  wholly  unlooked-for — that  may  be  a  great 
blessing — but  sudden  as  unprepared- for — sudden,  as  finding  us  with  nothing  ready 
for  our  meeting  with  God,  with  our  hearts  yet  in  the  world,  and  our  faoes  turned  that 
way.  III.  Now  to  gather  up  a  few  practical  lessons  from  our  subject.  1.  "  Remember 
Lot's  wife"  as  an  example  of  the  folly,  the  danger,  the  wickedness  of  trifiing  with  what 


CHAP  xvn.]  ST.  LUKE.  321 

yon  know  to  b«  wrong,  of  committing  little  sins,  breaking  little  precepts,  and  going 
on  to  Satan's  ground  only  a  very  little  way.  All  little  sins,  all  slight  tamperings 
with  conscience,  all  partial  returns  to  once  forsaken  evil,  all  compromises  with  a 
renounced  and  repented  habit,  are  as  first  steps  to  a  hopeless  and  disastrous  fall. 
Like  Lot's  wife,  we  may  only  intend  to  look  and  look,  and  then  turn  back  again. 
But  we  find  we  cannot  turn  back ;  the  witchcraft  of  an  evil  nature  is  at  work  within 
us ;  we  have  seven  wicked  spirits  to  contend  with  now,  where,  before,  we  had  but 
one,  and  bo  by  little  and  Uttle  we  are  led  within  the  charmed  circle  of  evil  till  there 
is  no  going  back  and  no  escaping.  2.  "  Remember  Lot's  wife"  as  an  example  of  the 
possibility  of  falling  from  the  most  hopeful  spiritual  condition.  How  confidently 
Bhould  we  have  argued  of  her  state  ;  how  confidently  might  she  have  argued  of  her 
own,  when,  of  four  persons  to  be  saved  out  of  those  vast  populations,  she  was 
chosen  as  one.  3.  "  Eemember  Lot's  wife  "  as  a  warning  to  us  that  there  must  be  no 
delays,  no  baitings,  no  slackened  diligence,  in  running  the  race  that  is  set  before 
as.  "Escape  for  thy  life" — life  spiritual,  life  temporal,  life  eternal — lose  one  and 
yoa  lose  all ;  and  you  may  lose  all  by  becoming  weary  and  faint  in  the  running. 
(D.  Moore,   M.A.)  Lot's  wife: — L  Consider,  in  the  first  place,  the    hopefci. 

OPPORTUNITY ;  or.  Lot's  wife  fleeing  from  Sodom.  It  has  been  thought — and 
there  is  considerable  reason  for  the  thought — that  she  was  a  native  of  Sodom. 
When  Lot  separated  from  Abraham  and  went  to  live  at  Sodom,  we  read 
nothing  of  his  having  a  wife  or  children ;  this  is  one  reason  for  conjecturing 
that  he  married  after  he  came  to  live  at  Sodom.  Another  is  her  evident  attach- 
ment to  Sodom,  which,  though  to  be  accounted  for  on  other  reasons,  may  have 
been  all  the  stronger,  if  that  were  the  place  of  her  nativity  and  early  life.  A 
third  reason  is,  that  Lot's  "  easily  besetting  "  sin,  which  was  covetousness  and  love 
of  the  world,  would  probably  have  tempted  him  to  form  such  a  connection  with  one 
of  the  daughters  of  Sodom,  on  account  of  some  supposed  worldly  advantage.  Oh ! 
let  not  Christians  despise  the  word  of  warning,  whispered  by  the  mere  probability 
that  Lot  married  a  native  of  Sodom — an  unconverted  and  worldly-minded  person. 
But  although  worldly-minded  herself,  her  husband  was  a  religious  person,  and  she 
had  many  opportunities  of  redeeming  her  character  and  turning  to  the  Lord.  Yet 
she  rejected  them.  When  the  testing-time  came,  she  preferred  the  world  to  God. 
IL  The  sebious  oftence  ;  or  Lot's  wife  looking  back.  The  world  is  the  great  clog 
upon  the  wheels  of  piety.  IIL  The  kemarkable  punishment.  {J.  Hambleton, 
M.A.)  Remember  Lot's  wife : — Separation  is  the  only  way  of  escape.  We  must 
flee  from  the  world,  or  perish  with  it.  I.  Remember  that  this  woman  was  Lot's 
WIFE.  1.  She  was  united  in  the  closest  possible  bonds  to  one  who,  with  all  his 
faults,  was  a  righteous  man ;  and  yet  she  perished.  0  ye  children  of  godly  parents, 
I  beseech  you  look  to  yourselves  that  ye  be  not  driven  down  to  hell  from  your 
mother's  side.  2.  Being  Lot's  wife,  remember  that  she  had  since  her  marriage 
shared  with  Lot  in  his  journeys  and  adventures  and  trials.  If  you  cling  to  the 
world  and  cast  your  eye  back  upon  it  you  must  perish  in  your  sin,  notwithstanding 
that  you  have  eaten  and  drank  with  the  people  of  God,  and  have  been  as  near  to 
them  in  relationship  as  wife  to  husband,  or  child  to  parent.  3.  Lot's  wife  had  also 
shared  her  husband's  privileges.  She  received  the  merciful  warning  to  escape  as 
well  as  her  husband,  and  she  was  urged  as  much  as  he  to  flee  from  the  wrath  so  near 
at  hand.     Thus  is  it  with  many  of  you  who  are  enjoying  all  sorts  of  Christian 

frivileges  and  are  yet  unsaved.  4.  Lot's  wife  had  shared  in  her  husband's  errors. 
t  was  a  great  mistake  on  his  part  to  abandon  the  outwardly  separated  life,  but  she 
had  kept  to  him  in  it,  and  perhaps  was  the  cause  of  his  so  doing.  I  suppose  he 
thought  he  could  live  above  the  world  spiritually,  and  yet  mingle  with  its  votaries. 
n.  "  Eemember  Lot's  wife,"  and  recollect  that  she  went  some  wat  towards  being 
8A.VED.  III.  Remember  that  though  she  went  some  way  towards  escape  shb  did 
actually  perish  through  bin.  1.  The  first  sin  that  she  committed  was  that  she 
lingered  behind.  2.  Having  slackened  her  pace,  the  next  thing  she  did  was  she 
disbelieved  what  had  been  told  her.  Faith  may  be  as  well  exhibited  by  not  looking 
as  by  looking.  Faith  is  a  look  at  Christ,  but  faith  is  a  not  looking  at  the  things 
which  are  behind.  She  saw  the  bright  dawning  and  everything  lit  up  with  it,  and 
it  came  across  her  mind — "  It  cannot  be  true,  the  city  is  not  being  destroyed.  What 
a  lovely  morning  I  Why  are  we  thus  running  away  from  house,  and  goods,  and 
friends,  and  everything  else  on  such  a  bright,  clear  morning  as  this  f  "  She  did  not 
truly  believe,  there  was  no  real  faith  in  her  heart,  and  therefore  she  disobeyed  the 
law  of  her  safety  and  turned  her  face  towards  Sodom.  3.  Having  got  so  far  a* 
lingering  and  doubting,  her  next  movement  was  a  direct  act  of  rebellion — she  tamed 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XTik 

her  head :  she  was  bidden  not  to  look,  but  she  dared  to  look.  Bebellion  is  as  maoh 
seen  in  the  breach  of  what  appears  to  be  a  little  command  as  in  the  violation 
of  a  great  precept.  You  will  be  judged  according  to  the  going  of  your  heart  II 
yonr  heart  goes  towards  the  mountain  to  escape,  and  if  you  hasten  to  be 
away  with  Christ  to  be  His  separated  follower,  you  shall  be  saved :  but  it 
your  heart  still  goes  after  evil  and  sin,  His  servants  ye  are  whom  ye  obey, 
and  from  your  evil  master  you  shall  get  your  black  reward.  IV.  Bemember 
that  HEB  DOOM  WAB  TEBBiBLB.  1.  Bemember  that  she  perished  with  the  same  doom 
as  that  which  happened  to  the  inhabitants  of  [Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  but  that 
doom  befell  her  at  the  gates  of  Zoar.  2.  The  worst  point,  perhaps,  about  the 
perishing  of  Lot's  wife  lay  in  this,  that  she  perished  in  the  very  act  of  sin,  and  had 
DO  space  for  repentance  given  her.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  die  in  the  very  act  of  sin, 
to  be  caught  away  by  the  justice  of  God  while  the  transgression  is  being  perpetrated. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Lot's  wife: — L  Of  heb  sin — she  looked  back.  "What 
fault  was  there  in  that  ?  you  will  say.  I  answer — 1.  There  was  disobedience  in  it, 
because  it  was  against  the  express  command  of  God,  given  by  an  angel,  '*  Look  not 
behind  thee  "  (Gen.  xix.  17).  2.  There  was  unbelief  in  it ;  not  believing  the  words 
of  the  angel,  God's  messenger,  who  had  assured  her  in  the  name  of  God  that  Ha 
would  destroy  Sodom,  "  Hasten  hence,  lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  of  the 
city  "  (Gen.  xix.  13).  Now  she  would  look  back,  to  see  whether  the  prediction  and 
warning  were  true.  An  unbelieving  heart  will  easily  be  perverted  and  enticed  into 
a  rebellion  against  God,  and  those  that  cannot  trust  God  will  not  be  true  to  Him. 
3.  There  was  worldliness  in  it,  or  an  hankering  of  mind  after  what  she  had  left  in 
Sodom  ;  and  so  this  looking  back  was  a  look  of  covetousness,  a  kind  of  repent- 
ance that  she  had  come  out  of  Sodom ;  for  people  are  wont  to  look  back  who  are 
moved  with  a  desire  and  remembrance  of  their  former  dwelling.  So  Lot's  wife 
looked  back  because  she  had  left  her  heart  behind  her.  There  were  her  kindred, 
and  friends,  and  country,  and  that  pleasant  place  which  was  as  the  garden  of  God 
(Gen.  xiii.  10).  From  thence  this  woman  came,  and  thither  she  would  fain  go 
again ;  as  if  she  had  said,  And  must  I  leave  thee,  Sodom,  and  part  for  ever  from 
thee  1  Affectation  of  worldly  things  draweth  ua  from  ready  obedience  unto  God 
(Phil.  iii.  8).  4.  There  was  ingratitude  for  her  deliverance  from  that  dreadful  and 
terrible  burning  which  God  was  bringing  upon  the  place  of  her  abode.  It  is  said, 
"  The  Lord  was  merciful  to  him  "  (Gen.  xix.  16).  He  could  not  pretend  to  it  out 
of  any  merit,  and  might  have  smarted,  for  his  choice  showed  weakness  in  not  rest- 
ing on  God's  word :  "  I  cannot  escape  to  the  mountain,  let  some  evil  take  me,  and  I 
die  "  (ver.  19).  Only  this  God  required  at  his  hands,  that  he  and  his  family  should 
make  haste  and  begone.  Now,  to  disobey  God  in  so  small  a  matter  was  in  her  great 
ingratitude.  The  sins  of  none  are  so  grievous  to  God  as  of  those  that  have  received 
much  mercy  from  Him  :  "  After  such  a  deliverance  as  this,  should  we  again  break 
Thy  commandments  ?  "  (Ezra  ix.  13,  14).  Oh  !  think  what  it  is  to  despise  the 
mercy  of  Christ,  who  came  from  heaven  to  deliver  us  ;  and  shall  it  be  slighted  ? 
II.  Of  heb  jcnouENT — she  was  turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt.  1.  It  was  sudden. 
Sometimes  God  is  quick  and  severe  upon  sinners,  surprising  them  in  the  very  act 
of  their  sin ;  as  Lot's  wife  was  presently  turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt.  So  Zimrl 
and  Cosbi  unladed  their  lives  and  their  lusts  together  (Numb.  xxv.  8) ;  and  Herod 
was  smitten  in  the  very  act  of  his  pride  (Acts  xii.  23) ;  "  The  same  hour  was  the  thing 
fulfilled  upon  Nebuchadnezzar"  (Dan.  iv.  33) ;  "In  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the 
king  of  the  Chaldeans  slain  "  (Dan.  v.  30).  Thus  many  times  judgment  overtaketh 
the  wicked  in  the  very  instant  of  their  sin ;  and  God  will  give  the  sinner  no  time. 
Therefore  we  should  not  tempt  and  presume  upon  His  patience.  Surely  it  is  the 
greatest  mercy  to  have  grace  to  repent ;  but  it  is  also  a  mercy  to  have  space  to  repent. 
But  God's  patience  must  not  be  wearied.  2.  It  was  strange.  For  here  a  woman  ia 
turned  into  a  pillar  of  salt.  Strange  sins  bring  on  strange  punishment.  The  stupid 
world  is  not  awakened  by  ordinary  judgments,  but  looks  upon  them  as  some  chance 
or  common  occurrence ;  and  therefore  God  is  forced  to  go  out  of  the  common  road, 
and  diversify  His  judgments,  that  by  some  eminent  circumstance  in  them  He  may 
alarm  the  drowsy  world  to  take  notice  of  His  hand.  3.  It  was  shameful ;  for  she  is 
made  a  public  and  lasting  monument  of  shame  to  herself,  but  of  instruction  to  os. 
I  must  show  how  profitable  it  is  for  as  to  meditate  on  this  instance,  even  for  all 
those  who  are  called  from  wrath  to  a  state  of  rest  and  glory.  1.  That  it  conoemeth 
Boch  not  only  to  consider  the  mercies  of  God,  but  also  riow  and  then  the  examples 
of  EUb  justice,  that  "we  may  serve  Him  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling" 
(Psa.  ii.  11).    We  are  in  a  mixed  estate,  and  therefore  mixed  affections  do  beslL 


amu  rra.]  ST.  LUKE.  82T 

As  we  are  to  cherish  the  spirit  or  better  part  with  promises  and  hopes  of  glory,  by 
which  the  inner  man  is  renewed  day  by  day,  so  we  are  to  weaken  the  pravity  cf  the 
flesh  by  the  remembrance  of  God's  judgments,  not  only  threatened,  but  also 
•ctually  inflicted;;  for  instances  do  much  enliven  things.  Now,  what  was  doae  to 
them  may  be  done  to  us — for  these  judgments  are  patterns  of  providence — and 
if  we  would  blow  off  the  dust  from  the  ancient  providences  of  God,  we  may  easily 
read  our  own  doom  or  desert  at  least.  The  desert  of  sin  is  still  the  same ;  and 
the  exactness  of  Divine  justice  is  still  the  same ;  what  hath  been  is  a  pledge  and 
instance  of  what  may  be.  2.  That  not  only  modem  and  present,  but  ancient  and 
old  judgments  are  of  great  use  to  us,  especially  when  like  sins  abound  in  the  age  we 
live  in,  or  we  are  in  danger  of  them  as  to  our  own  practice.  If  others  have  smarted 
for  disobeying  God,  why  not  we,  since  God  is  impartially  and  immutably  just, 
always  consonant  and  agreeable  unto  Himself  ?  His  power  is  the  same,  so  is  Hia 
justice  and  holiness.  3.  This  particular  judgment  is  monumental,  and  so  intended 
for  a  pattern  and  spectacle  to  after  ages  ;  and  it  is  also  here  recommended  by  the 
Lord  Himself— "Remember  Lot's  wife."  He  exciteth  ua  to  look  upon  this  pillar, 
and  therefore  certainly  it  will  yield  many  instructions  for  the  heavenly  life.  (1) 
This  seemeth  to  be  a  small  sin.  What  1  for  a  look,  for  a  glance  of  her  eye,  to  be  so 
suddenly  blasted  into  a  pillar  of  salt  I  This  seemeth  to  be  no  great  fault ;  but  it 
teaches  us  that  little  faults  in  appearance  many  times  meet  with  a  great  judgment. 
There  may  be  much  crookedness  in  a  small  line ;  and  the  matter  is  not  so  much  to 
be  regarded  as  the  majesty  and  authority  of  God  that  commandeth — as  in  garments 
the  dye  is  more  than  the  stuff.  But  that  I  may  at  once  vindicate  God's  dispensa- 
tion, and  enforce  the  caution,  I  shall  prove — (a)  That  sin  is  not  to  be  measured  by 
the  external  action,  but  by  the  circumstances,  (i)  This  woman's  sin  is  greater 
than  at  first  appeareth.  For  here  was — (i.)  A  preferring  her  own  will  before  the 
will  of  God.  God  said,  Look  not  back  ;  but  she  would  look  back,  (ii.)  There  was 
a  contempt  of  the  justice  and  wrath  of  God,  as  if  it  were  a  vain  scarecrow :  "Do 
we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy?  are  we  stronger  than  He?"  (1  Cor.  x.  22).  (iii.) 
Here  is  also  a  contempt  of  the  rewards  of  obedience,  as  in  all  sin  (Heb.  xii.  15, 16). 
(iv, )  There  was  an  abuseof  the  grace  offered  for  her  escape  and  deliverance  (Rom.  ii.  4). 
All  these  four  things  are  in  every  deliberate  sin,  seem  it  never  so  small,  (c)  Because 
we  think  we  may  preserve  the  smaller  sins  for  breed,  and  that  God  is  more  severe 
in  remembering  these  than  we  are  faulty  in  committing  them.  Therefore  think  of 
and  seriously  consider  that  small  sins  are  the  mother  of  great  sins,  and  the  grand- 
mother of  great  punishments.  As  little  sticks  set  the  great  ones  on  fire,  and  a  wisp 
of  straw  often  enkindleth  a  great  block  of  wood,  so  we  are  drawn  on  by  the  lesser 
evils  to  greater,  and  by  the  just  judgment  of  God  suffered  to  fall  into  them,  because 
we  made  no  conscience  of  lesser.  The  lesser  commandments  are  a  rail  about  the 
greater,  and  no  man  grows  downright  wicked  at  first,  but  rises  to  it  by  degrees. 
(2)  This  was  a  sin  conomitted  by  stealth.  As  she  followed  her  husband,  she  would 
eteal  a  glance,  and  look  towards  Sodom ;  for  it  is  said,  "  His  wife  looked  back  from 
behind  him  "  (Gen.  xix.  26).  God  can  find  us  out  in  our  secret  sins ;  and  therefore  we 
should  make  conscience,  as  not  to  sin  openly,  so  not  by  stealth.  In  short,  to  be  an 
open  and  bold  sinner  in  some  respects  is  worse  than  to  be  a  close  and  private 
sinner,  because  of  the  dishonour  done  to  God,  and  the  scandal  to  others,  and  the 
impudence  of  the  sinner  himself ;  but  in  other  respects  secret  sins  have  their  aggra- 
vations, (a)  Because  if  opens  sins  be  of  greater  infamy,  yet  secret  sins  are  more 
against  knowledge  and  conviction.  (6)  This  secret  sinning  puts  far  more  respect 
upon  men  than  God ;  and  this  is  palliated  atheism.  (3)  The  next  lesson  which  we 
learn  hence  is,  that  no  loss  of  earthly  things  should  make  us  repent  of  our  obe- 
dience to  God,  but  that  we  should  still  go  on  with  what  we  have  well  begun,  with- 
oat  looking  back.  "  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,  and  looking  back, 
is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (Luke  ix.  62).  From  the  whole — 1.  Remember  that 
in  getting  out  of  Sodom  we  must  make  haste.  The  least  delay  or  stop  in  the  course 
of  our  flight  may  be  pernicious  to  us.  2.  That  tiU  our  resolutions  be  firmly  set 
for  God  and  heaven,  and  there  be  a  thorough  bent  and  bias  upon  our  hearts,  and 
the  league  between  us  and  our  secret  lusts  broken,  after  we  have  seemed  to  make 
some  escape,  we  shall  be  looking  back  again — *'  For  where  our  treasure  is,  thei«  out 
heart  will  be  "  (Matt.  vi.  21).  3.  That  to  look  back,  after  we  have  seemed  to  escape, 
doth  involve  ns  in  the  greatest  sin  and  misery.  The  apostle  tells  as  (2  Peter  iL 
SO,  21).  4.  That  if  we  would  not  go  back,  we  must  not  look  back.  Evil  is  best 
stopped  at  first ;  tiie  first  breakings  off  from  God,  and  remitting  oar  seal  and 
watUkfaliMSS.    He  that  keeps  not  a  house  in  constant  repair  will  be  in  danger  of 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

having  it  fall  down  npon  him.     So,  if  we  grow  remiss  and  careless,  and  keep  not  • 
constant  watch,  temptations  will  increase  ppon  us.     (T.   Manton.)        Remember 
Lot's  wife : — 1.  Kemember  Lot's  wife,  in  the  hour  of  conviction  of  sin.    The  Holy 
Spirit  strives.     The  danger  of  damnation  is  seen  and  felt  as  never  before.     "  Up ! 
flee  for  your  life  !  "  is  the  voice  of  the  Spirit.     Delay,  hesitation,  casting  longing 
looks  back  on  a  life  of  sin,  then,  may  be  fatal.    You  may  lose  the  golden  oppor- 
tunity.    2.  Bemember  Lot's  wife  in  the  hour  of  fiery  temptation.     The  only  safety 
is  in  precipitate  flight.    Escape  from  the  presence  of  the  tempter.     To  parley,  to 
hesitate,  to  cast  a  look  at  the  proffered  bait,  is  all  but  certain  ruin.     3.  Bemember 
Lot's  wife,  when  any  question  of  duty  is  pressed  upon  you.     This  woman  had  no 
excuse  for  hesitation  or  reluctance.    A  clear.  Divine  call  to  duty  cannot  be  trifled 
with  without  incurring  fearful  risk,  if  not  of  the  loss  of  life  physical,  at  least  life 
spiritual.    4.  Bemember  Lot's  wife,  amid  the  assaults  of  unbelief.    5.  Note  what 
Christ  says  in  Luke  ix.  62,  "  No  man,  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,  and  look- 
ing back,"  Ac.     (1)  He  is  not  intent  on  the  work  in  hand.     (2)  His  earthly  ties  and 
interests  are  stronger  than  those  which  pertain  to  heavenly  things.     (3)  He  haa 
really   surrendered  himself  to   temptation.      (Anon.)        A   danger-signal: — Over 
sand-bars  and  hidden  rocks  in  the  sea  are  sometimes  placed  buoy-bells,  which  are 
rang  by  the  action  of  the  waves.     So  God  has  set  great  danger-signals  in  the  sea 
of  time.     Such  is  the  story  of  Sodom  and  Lot's  wife.    1.  Bemember  her  surround- 
ings.    Sin  is  often  seemingly  beautiful  and  attractive.      Beware  of  the  alluring 
power  of  evil  associations.     2.  Bemember  her  danger.   This  world  is  a  Sodom,  and 
against  it  has  been  declared  the  condemnation  of  God's  law.    3.  Bemember  her 
warning.    Sacrifice  everything.     Look  not  back  for   companions  or  possessions. 
Delay  not  for  a  better  opportunity,  for  greater  conviction,  <ftc.     Linger  not  in  the 
plains  of  a  professed  morality.     4.  Bemember  her  delay.    Procrastination  is  most 
perilous.     5.  Bemember  her  disobedience.     6.  Bemember  her  doom.    Disobedience 
develops  into  the  deadly  fruit  of  death.     {O.  Elliott.)        The  danger  of  looking 
back : — There  is  a  story  of  a  high  mountain  on  whose  top  was  a  palace  filled  with 
all  treasures,  gold,  gems,  singing  birds — a  paradise  of  pleasures.     Up  its  sides  men 
and  women  were  climbing  to  reach  the  top  ;  but  every  one  who  looked  back  wa8 
turned  into  stone.   And  yet  thousands  of  evil  spirits  were  around  them,  whispering, 
Bhouting,  flashing  their  treasures,  singing  love-songs  to  draw  their  eyes  from  the 
treasure  at  the  top,  and  to  make  them  look  back  ;  but  every  one  that  looked  back 
was  tmmed  into  stone.     So  is  every  one  who  is  seekmg  heavenly  treasures  tempted 
by  earthly  music  and  sinful  joys;  but  whosoever  yields  is  lost.    (JF.  Baxendale.) 
Punishment  of  LoVs  wife : — As  might  be  expected,  conjecture  haa  been  busy  aa  to 
the  manner  in  which  this  transformation  was  effected.    There  is  no  harm  in  anch 
epeculations,  if  they  are  not  allowed  to  go  farther  than  this,  that  they  only  seek  to 
account  for  a  result  by  natural  agents,  where  natural  agents  would  be  sufficient — 
that  they  acknowledge  the  interfering  hand  of  God  in  the  matter,  whether  He 
create  for  the  purpose  a  new  thing  in  the  earth,  or  merely  press  into  EUs  service 
the  means  and  agency  which  exist  already.    In  the  present  instance,  it  does  not 
eeem  an  impossible  tiling  that  judgment  upon  Lot's  wife  should  have  been  brought 
about  by  natural  causes ;  in  other  words,  that  in  consequence  of  her  standing  still 
too  long,  she  might  get  covered  with  the  sulphureous  matter  which  was  being 
rained  &om  heaven,  and  this,  congealing  and  encrusting  upon  her  person,  would 
make  her  appear  as  a  pillar  of  salt.    In  fact,  of  the  leading  features  of  the  pheno- 
menon, traces  remain  in  the  physical  geography  of  the  neighbourhood  to  this  day. 
Thus,  of  the  petrifying  qualities  of  the  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  we  have  many 
trustworthy  accounts ;  whilst,  as  illustrative  of  the  saline  property  of  the  waters, 
one  of  our  great  Eastern  travellers  tells  us,  that  after  bathing  in  them  he  found  a 
thin  crust  of  salt  upon  his  face,  and  a  similar  crust  left  npon  the  shore  wherever 
the  waters  had  overflowed.  By  natural  agents  or  by  a  miracle,  however,  it  is  certain 
that  Lot's  wife  has  been  made  to  stand  in  the  midst  of  that  awful  plain,  a  petrified 
monument  of  God's  displeasure  against  backsliders,  for  upwards  of  two  thousand 
years;  for,  "  I  have  seen  it,"  said  Josephus,  "and  it  remains  at  this  day."    The 
testimony  of  later  Christian  travellers  as  to  the  identity  of  the  scene  we  should 
have  to  receive  with  more  caution.     Stones  with  the  Jews,  we  know,  were  a  kind  of 
standing  revelation.    The  story  of  them  was  handed  down  from  father  to  son  with  a 
jealous  reverence ;  so  that  it  is  not  nnlikely  that  among  our  Lord's  hearers  were 
men  who,  in  common  with  Josephus,  had  visited  this  heaven-blighted  spot,  and  on 
whose  minds  these  words  would  tell  with  solemn  force—"  Bemember  Lot's  wife." 
(D.  Moore,  M.A.)  Bo  not  run  any  risk: — On  the  coast  of  Normandy,  where  Mont 


OTAP.  Tva.]  8T.  LUKE.  824 

St.  Michael  stands,  the  sea  goes  out  about  five  miles,  and  comes  in  like  a  race-horse. 
In  1875,  two  ladies  were  at  some  ruins  on  the  sands.  "  Come  away,"  said  the 
elder,  "  don't  run  any  risk."  "  Jast  let  me  finish  this  sketch,"  replied  the  other,  au 
English  young  lady.    While  she  sketched,  the  tide  rushed  in,  and  she  was  drowned. 

Ver.  33.  Shall  lose  it. — Life  through  death : — I.  It  ib  commonlt  beqijired  of  tjs  to 
SACBiFicB  A  LOWER  GOOD,  IN  ORDER  TO  GAIN  A  HIGHER.  Not  always,  but  almost  alwavs. 
The  good  things  of  this  world  are  of  several  sorts,  very  unlike  one  another.  Consider 
the  sensualist,  the  man  of  pleasure,  what  is  called  the  man  of  the  world.  Now  it  is 
idle  to  say,  that  the  pleasures  of  sense  are  not  real  pleasures.  Pleasure  is  not 
altogether  out  of  the  question  amongst  higher  things,  as  is  proved  by  such  examples 
as  those  of  Pericles,  Caesar,  and  Bonaparte ;  but  pleasure  supreme  is  simply  fatal  to 
a  great  career.  It  may  give  you  an  Alcibiades,  but  never  a  Leonidas.  So,  too,  of 
money.  Here  again  it  is  i^e  to  say  that  money  is  of  no  account.  All  that  is 
higher,  and  all  that  is  lower,  must  be  cheerfully  given  up.  Money  must  be  the  one 
thing  he  goes  for.  This,  indeed,  is  the  price  of  money,  as  of  everything  else ;  and 
he  must  pay  it.  But,  at  all  events,  he  must  give  up  the  lower  good.  He  must  not 
be  a  man  of  the  world.  He  must  be  abstemious  in  eating ;  temperate  in  drinking ; 
temperate  in  all  things.  He  must  rein  in  his  appetite.  Good  personal  habits — 
habits  of  self-restraint,  must  be  well  established.  And  so  of  fame.  But  neither 
the  scholar,  the  artist,  nor  the  orator,  must  be  idle,  or  avaricious.  The  love  of 
pleasure  and  the  love  of  money  are  both  of  them  fatal  to  these  higher  aims. 
Learning  grows  puny  and  trivial,  when  waited  on  by  sensual  delights  ;  while  the 
love  of  gain  eats  into  it  like  rust.  So,  too,  of  art.  Growing  either  voluptuous,  or 
sordid,  it  falls  like  an  angel  from  heaven.  And  so  of  eloquence.  It  flies  from  lips 
that  are  steeped  in  pleasure ;  it  will  not  quiver  in  fingers  that  clutch  at  gold.  The 
ambition  of  scholarship,  of  art,  of  eloquence,  is  a  lofty  ambition,  and  it  will  not 
tolerate  much  baseness.  The  scholars  of  antiquity  were,  for  the  most  part,  severe 
and  temperate  men.  The  scholars  of  the  Middle  Ages  were  the  cloistered  and 
ascetic  monks.  The  votaries  of  art,  too,  with  rare  exceptions,  have  wasted  away  in 
martyrdom  to  their  calling.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Temple  of  Fame  keeps  •  stem 
sentinel  standing  ever  at  her  gateway  of  Corinthian  brass.  And  every  comer  is 
challenged  with  such  questions  as  these  :  Canst  thou  live  on  bread  and  water  ?  Art 
thou  willing  to  be  poor  ?  If  not,  avaunt  1  And  so  of  all  sorts  of  earthly  good. 
Each  sort  has  its  price ;  and  may  be  taken  at  that  price.  But  two  or  more  sorts 
may  not  ordinarily  be  taken  by  one  and  the  same  purchaser.  The  lower  must  be 
sacrificed  to  the  higher.  The  coarser  must  give  place  to  the  finer.  Such  as  the 
well-established  method  of  our  ordinary  life.  Every  step  of  our  earthly  progress  is 
a  sacrifice.  We  gain  by  losing ;  grow  by  dwindling ;  live  by  dying.  Our  text,  it  is 
plain,  is  but  an  extension  of  this  well-established  method  to  the  entire  range  and 
circle  of  our  interests.  What  is  seen  to  be  true  of  earthly  advantages  considered 
in  reference  to  one  another,  is  here  declared  to  be  true  of  all  these  advantages 
together,  when  considered  in  relation  to  the  life  eternal.  This  world  and  the  next 
world  are  set  in  opposition  to  each  other.  Body  and  soul  are  put  at  variance.  And 
all  that  a  man  may  win  of  worldly  good,  it  is  taught,  he  must  be  ready  to  sacrifice. 
If  need  be,  in  order  to  save  his  soul.  You  may  call  the  demand  a  hard  one ;  but 
all  the  analogies  of  our  ordinary  life  endorse  and  favour  it.  In  many  dark  corners 
of  the  earth  are  sitting  men  to-day,  who  have  abandoned  almost  everything  for 
Christ.  And  their  feeling  is  that  they  have  barely  done  their  duty :  that  a  necessity 
is  laid  upon  them ;  that  they  must  suffer  for  Christ ;  and  by  and  by  die  for  Him. 
And  the  stern  warrant  for  it  all  is  in  our  text :  "  He  that  findeth  his  life,  shall  lose 
it ;  and  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  My  sake,  shall  find  it."  God  be  praised,  if  we, 
in  our  sphere,  are  spared  the  fullest  execution  of  this  warrant.  The  spirit  of  it, 
however,  we  may  never  wish  to  escape.  Our  hearts  are  to  hold  themselves  always 
ready  for  the  fiercest  discipline.  Personal  ease  and  comfort,  houses  and  lands, 
friends,  reputation,  and  even  life  itself,  are  to  be  reckoned  cheap.  We  are  to  hold 
them  in  low  esteem.  So  relaxed  must  be  our  grasp,  that  the  slightest  breath  of 
persecution  may  suffice  to  sweep  them  swiftly  and  clean  away.  II.  The  second  law 
referred  to,  and  the  counterpart  of  the  one  we  have  now  considered,  is  this  :  Bt 

FIRST  SECURING  THE  HIGHER  GOOD,  WE  ARE  PREPARED   PROPERLT  TO   EN  JOT  THE  LOWER, 

AND  ABE  MORE  LiBELT  TO  BECDRK  IT.  The  principle  is,  that  no  worldly  good  of  any 
sort  can  be  well  secured,  or  properly  enjoyed,  if  pursued  by  itself  and  for  its  own  sake. 
This  may  be  seen  in  our  most  ordinary  life.  The  man,  whose  aim  is  pleasure,  may 
indeed,  secure  it  for  a  while ;  but  only  for  a  while.  It  soon  palls  upon  his  genees,  disgusts 


830  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xth. 

and  wearies  him.  It  is  easy  of  proof,  that  more  is  really  enjoyed,  more  of  mere  pleasure 
is  there,  among  business  men,  in  the  brief  intervals  of  business,  than  among  those 
with  whom  pleasure  may  be  said  to  be  a  profession.  Pleasure,  in  a  word,  is  far 
sweeter  as  a  recreation  than  a  business.  And  so  of  gold.  The  man  who  strains 
all  his  energies  of  soul  and  body  to  the  acquisition  of  it,  never  properly  enjoys  it. 
He  enjoys  the  activity  which  the  chase  imposes  upon  him ;  but  not  the  gold 
itself.  He  best  enjoys  gold,  because  he  best  knows  the  uses  of  it,  who  is  occupied 
by  higher  thoughts  and  aims.  It  is  God's  decree,  that  gold  shining  useless  in  a 
miser's  coffers,  shall  never  gladden  the  one  who  gathered  it.  And  so  also  of  fame. 
If  pursued  for  its  own  sake,  the  chase  is  often  a  bootless  one.  Selfish  ambition 
almost  always  betrays  itself,  and  then  it  provokes  men  to  defeat  and  humble  it. 
General  Zachary  Taylor,  the  twelfth  President  of  the  United  States,  spent  forty  years 
of  his  life  in  comparatively  obscure,  but  very  faithful  service,  at  our  Western  out- 
posts ;  receiving  no  applause  from  the  country  at  large,  and  asking  for  none ;  intent 
only  upon  doing  promptly  and  efficiently  the  duties  laid  upon  him.  By  and  by 
events,  over  which  he  had  exercised  no  control,  called  him  into  notice  upon  a  broader 
theatre.  And  then  it  was  discovered  how  faithful  and  how  true  a  man  he  was.  The 
Republic,  grateful  for  such  a  series  of  self-denying  and  important  services,  snatched 
him  from  the  camp,  and  bore  him,  with  loud  acclaim,  to  her  proudest  place  of 
honour.  And  this  was  done  at  the  cost  of  bitterest  disappointment  to  more  than 
one,  whose  high  claims  to  this  distinction  were  not  denied,  but  who  had  been  known 
to  be  aspiring  to  the  exalted  seat.  And  so  through  our  whole  earthly  life — in  all 
its  spheres,  and  in  all  its  struggles.  To  lose  is  to  find ;  to  die  is  to  live.  It  is  so 
in  our  religion.  We  begin  by  abjuring  all;  we  end  by  enjo^ng  all.  Am  I  charged 
with  preaching  that  "  gain  is  godliness  "  ?  Not  so,  my  fnend.  But  godliness  is 
gain.  It  begins  by  denouncing  and  denying  all ;  it  ends  by  restoring  all.  First  it 
desolates ;  then  it  rebuilds.  Its  mien,  in  approaching  us,  is  stern  and  terrible. 
It  blights  onr  pleasures ;  strips  us  of  our  possessions ;  smites  our  friends ;  and  lays 
our  vaunted  honours  in  the  dust.  And  then,  when  all  is  done,  when  the  desolating 
work  is  finished,  when  our  very  lives  are  spent  and  worried  out  of  us,  the  scene 
changes  as  by  a  miracle,  and  all  is  given  us  anew.  God,  we  find,  is  not  merely  in 
all ;  but  He  includes  all,  is  all.  And  we  learn,  assuredly,  from  our  own  blessed 
experience,  that  "  no  good  thing  will  He  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly." 
Nay,  it  is  of  the  very  essence  of  our  religion  to  forget  and  deny  ourselves.  Two 
remarks  seem  to  grow  naturally  out  of  our  subject.  1.  We  may  learn  the  great 
mistake  committed  by  men  of  the  world  in  their  chase  after  worldly  good.  They 
make  it  an  end.  2.  We  may  learn  why  it  is  the  happiness  of  Christians  is  so  imperfeoL 
{B.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.) 

Yer.  84.  The  one  shall  he  taken,  and  the  other  shall  he  left — One  taken, 
and  the  other  left : — Every  great  act  of  God  has  the  effect  of  dividing,  separating, 
and  judging  men.  So  great  are  the  diversities  among  men,  so  various  their 
characters,  so  various  by  nature,  and  so  endlessly  varied  by  education  and  habit, 
that,  when  God  acteth  before  them  in  any  great  or  signal  way,  forthwith  those 
who  seemed  to  be  much  alike,  are  found  to  be  really  very  different.  The 
mercy  that  is  balm  to  one,  is  poison  to  his  next  neighbour ;  the  trial,  which  to  one 
is  easy  and  simple,  is  to  his  neighbour  destruction  and  inevitable  woe.  To  be  born 
in  a  Christian  country,  to  be  the  son  of  careful  and  godly  parents,  to  be  baptizea 
in  infancy,  to  be  trained  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  to  have  natural  abilities,  to  have 
education,  to  have  station,  or  wealth,  all  these  things  have  this  effect  of  dividing 
men,  and  trying  their  hearts.  To  those  who  are  obedient,  and  endeavour  to  please 
God,  all  these  things  are  high  blessings,  choice  gifts  of  God.  Each  of  them  enables 
a  man  to  render  God  better  service,  to  please  Him  better,  to  do  more  good,  and  to 
make  higher  attainments  of  holiness  and  happiness.  But  to  the  disobedient  they 
are  all  so  many  downfalls.  Every  such  thing  brings  out  more,  and  makes  more 
conspicuous  and  hopeless  the  inner  disobedience ;  each  one  of  them  exhibits  more 
strikingly  the  spirit  of  inward  rebellion,  which,  but  for  these  things,  might  have  been 
comparatively  unseen.  Illness  tries  ns ;  health  tries  ns ;  every  day,  as  it  passes, 
tries  us  in  innumerable  ways ;  tries,  and  trains  ns ;  tries  what  we  are  now,  and 
tries  whether  we  vrill  be  better ;  furnishes  matter  for  our  judginent,  and  gives  na 
the  means  of  improvement,  so  that  judgment  may  not  be  our  rain.  And  so  we  go 
on  being  tried,  being  balanced,  and  sifted,  and  searched,  thousands  of  times,  many 
times  more  than  we  suppose  or  conceive,  every  d&j  of  our  life.  We  think  of  the 
great  trials,  but  the  Uttle  ones,  which  we  do  not  tmnk  of,  try  ob  still  more.    It  is 


CHAP.  XTU.]  ST.  LUKE.  831 

very  observable  tVat,  in  the  account  given  of  the  judgment-day  by  our  Lord  in  the 
Gospel  of   St.   Matthew,   the   doom   of   the   righteous    and   wicked  is  made   to 
depend  on  grounds  wholly  unexpected  by  each.     They  are  alike  represented  as 
exclaiming,  in  astonishment  and  surprise,  "Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  anhungered, 
or  athirst,  or  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick,  or  in  prison  ?  "   Full  of  fears,  no  doubt, 
and  hopes  about  things  which  they  do  remember,  nothing  doubting  that  this  or  that 
great  act  (as  they  think  it),  is  to  be  the  one  on  which  everything  is  to  turn,  for  weal 
or  woe,  they  seem  alike  struck  with  astonishment  to  find  that  things  which  they 
have  wholly  forgotten,  which  they  neither  observed  when  they  happened,  nor  can 
recall  since,  have  been  laid  up  in  the  mind  of  the  Judge,  to  be  the  ground  of  their 
last  and  inevitable  doom.     "  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee  an  hungered,  or  athirst,  or 
sick,  or  in  prison,  and  ministered,  or  ministered  not  unto  Thee  ?  "  this,  I  say,  is 
one  of  the  striking  things  revealed  of  that  awful  time.    And  another  is,  the  altera- 
tion which  that  day  shall  make ;  when  last  shall  be  first,  and  first  last  ;  when  not 
only  the  ranks  of  the  earth  shall  be  in  many  instances  reversed,  but  when  the 
estimations  of  the  earth  shall  be  found  to  be  entirely  mistaken  ;  apparent  saints 
taking  their  place  among  the  hypocrites  departing  to  everlasting  fire ;  publicans 
and  sinners,  purified  by  repentance,  their  robes  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
entering,  among  the  blessed,  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord.    And  the  text  teaches  us 
a  third  and  different  lesson  still ;  how  those  who  have  been  side  by  side  upon  earth, 
alike  in  condition,  opportunity,  and  encouragement,  to  all  human  sight  much  alike 
in  mind  or  temper ;   not  much  unlike,  perhaps,  in   apparent   earnestness  and 
spiritual  attainment,  shall  then  be  found,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and  one  on  the  left 
hand  ;  one  be  taken,  taken  to  joy,  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  so  as  to 
be  ever  with  Him ;  and  the  other  left,  to  woe  and  despair  for  ever.  Children  of  one 
family,  bred  alike,  and  taught  alike,  who  have  learned  to  say  the  same  infantine 
prayers,  have  known  the  same  friends,  read  the  same  books,  loved  the  same  plea- 
sures ;  if  one  is  earnest  in  his  prayers,  and,  in  his  secret  obedience,  serves  God 
faithfully,  and  the  other  persists  in  unfaithfulness  and  disobedience, — shall  it  not 
surely  be  so  with  them,  that  one  shall  be  taken  in  that  day,  and  the  other  left  ? 
What,  then,  shall  we  do  ?    With  this  reality  of  trial  on  us,  and  this  reality  of  judg- 
ment before  ns,  the  one  more  searching  than  we  can  trace,  the  other  likely  to  be 
more  unexpected  than  we  can  foresee,  how  are  we  to  walk  to  be  safe  ?  how  to  pass 
through  the  present  trial,  how  to  meet  the  future  judgment  ?    Simply  by  turning 
with  all  oar  hearts  and  souls  to  our  duties,  and  our  prayers.     We  do  not  need  any 
particular  excitements  of  mind,  or  any  particular  glow  of  sentiments ;  we  want  to 
be  in  earnest,  and  the  good  Spirit  of  our  God,  by  which  we  were  sealed  in  baptism 
nnto  the  day  of  our  redemption,  will  help  us  to  our  safety.     (Bishop  Moberly.) 
The  great  divUion : — 1.  The  meaning  of  the  text  being  established,  we  have  next  to 
inquire  what  the  lessons  are  which  it  is  designed  to  teach  us.    When  it  is  con- 
sidered in  relation  to  its  context,  it  becomes  plain  that  the  primary  intention  of  the 
passage  is  to  denote  the  suddenness  with  which  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  upon 
the  iiSiabitants  of  the  earth.    '•  Of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the 
angels  of  heaven,  but  My  Father  only."     There  will  be  no  perceptible  check  or 
change  in  the  current  of  hmnan  affairs  to  warn  us  of  its  coming.     Men  will  be 
engaged  to  the  very  last  in  the  ordinary  occupations  of  life,  "as  in  the  days  of 
Noe"  and  "  as  in  the  days  of  Lot,"  "eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in 
marriage."    Nor  shall  the  great  and  final  partition  of  good  and  evil  be  preceded  or 
prefigured  by  any  partial  and  gradual  severance.     Men  and  women  shall  be  united 
in  their  daily  tasks,  and  even  in  the  most  familiar  intercourse  of  domestic  life, 
between  whom  there  shall  be  a  great  gulf  fixed  in  that  day.    2.  There  is  a  further 
lesson  which  may  be  derived  from  the  text,  and  which  it  is  also  without  doubt 
intended  to  convey.    It  is  one  which  is  set  forth  more  or  less  plainly  in  other 
places  of  Holy  Scripture.    The  children  of  this  world  and  the  children  of  light 
cannot  be  absolutely  distinguished,  so  long  as  we  see  through  a  glass,  darkly.    Our 
estimate  of  another's  character  is  after  all  nothing  better  than  an  inference  from 
phenomena,  and  our  powers  of  inference  are  at  least  as  fallible  in  this  as  in  all 
other  matters.    The  warmest  friendships,  the  most  endearing  ties,  can  afford  us  no 
unmistakable  guarantee  that  those  with  whom  we  are  thus  outwardly  united,  are 
both  almost  and  altogether  such  as  we  are.     3.  There  is,  however,  a  third  inference 
to  which  we  are  naturally  led  by  the  words  before  us,  and  to  which  I  desire  particu- 
larly to  direct  your  attention  at  present.    However  closely  and  undistinguishably 
men  are  mingled  together  in  this  world,  however  various,  minute,  and  delicate  art 
Hit  thftdet  of  character  by  which  they  are  severally  differenced,  however  hope* 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnf. 

Ies8  it  may  appear,  I  will  not  say  for  man,  but  for  Absolute  Wisdom  and  Absolut* 
Justice,  to  draw  a  broad  line  between  the  children  of  this  world  and  the  children  of 
light,  the  text  seems  to  imply,  what  we  are  elsewhere  taught,  that  they  will  ulti- 
mately be  divided  into  two  and  only  two  classes.  But  I  think  the  text  goes  beyond 
this,  at  all  events  in  the  way  of  implication.  For  it  not  only  tells  us  that  such  a 
sharp  line  as  I  have  described  will  ultimately  be  drawn  between  the  evil  and  the 
good,  but  it  seems  also  to  tell  us  that  the  line  exists  already,  although  we  may  be 
unable  to  discern  it.  For  inasmuch  as  it  represents  the  day  of  judgment  as  coming 
upon  men  unprepared,  discovering  them  in  the  midst  of  their  daily  avocations, 
finding  persons  of  the  most  opposite  characters  united  in  the  closest  intercourse 
without  a  suspicion  of  their  incompatibility,  and  then  at  once  awarding  to  every 
man  his  everlasting  doom ;  is  it  not  reasonable  to  infer  that  the  grounds  of  that 
award  exist  already,  although  they  are  not  in  every  instance  cognizable  by  us  ?  At 
this  point,  however,  we  are  met  by  a  difficulty.  Our  experience  of  the  world  and 
of  human  life  appears  to  teach  us  a  different  lesson.  No  doubt  there  are  good  men 
and  there  are  bad  men  on  the  face  of  the  earth — good  men  who  are  acknowledged 
to  be  BO  even  by  those  who  are  far  otherwise,  and  bad  men  who  are  confessed  to  be 
so  even  by  themselves.  But  the  great  mass  of  mankind  seems  to  belong  to  au 
intermediate  and  indifferent  body,  consisting  of  those  who  are  neither  saints  nor 
reprobates,  neither  fit  for  eternal  life  nor  deserving  of  eternal  death.  The  longer  th« 
world  lasts,  the  more  complicated  the  developments  of  society  become,  the  more 
does  this  appear  to  be  the  case.  The  visible  confusion  of  the  moral  world  may 
only  serve  to  cover  a  clear  and  well-defined  line  of  demarcation.  And,  as  much,  on 
the  one  hand,  that  is  outwardly  and  materially  honest,  and  just,  and  pure,  and 
lovely,  and  of  good  report,  when  traced  to  its  true  source  would  be  found  to  be  of 
the  earth,  earthy;  so  we  must  remember  that  *'the  Lord  knoweth  them  that 
are  His  " ;  that,  "  the  kingdom  of  God,"  which  ••  is  within  "  us,  "  cometh  not  with 
observation  " ;  and  that  as  "  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest 
the  sound  thereof,  bat  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  or  whither  it  goeth ;  so  is 
every  one  that  is  bom  of  the  Spirit."  But  we  shall  do  well  to  recollect,  in  addition, 
that  we  see  men  ordinarily  in  a  transitional  and  undeveloped  state.  The  good  oi 
the  evil  that  is  in  them  may  not  have  had  time  to  come  to  a  head,  or  may  be  over- 
shadowed by  old  habits  which  hang  about  a  man  like  parasites,  but  which  can 
hardly  be  said  to  form  a  part  of  his  proper  self.  But  as  each  man's  probation 
draws  near  its  close,  it  may  be  that  his  character  is  altogether  simplified  and 
stereotyped.  Then  it  is  that  the  awful  decree  goes  forth :  "  He  that  is  anjust,  let 
him  be  unjust  still."  Mere  experience,  then,  can  decide  nothing  against  the  teaching 
of  holy  Scripture  on  this  point,  although  it  may  not  actually  confirm  it.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  worthy  of  observation,  that  a  great  thinker,  whose  name  marks 
an  era  in  the  history  of  modem  philosophy,  in  endeavouring  to  frame  a  religious 
system  a  priori,  was  led  to  a  result  altogether  coincident  with  the  doctrine  uider 
consideration.  After  raising  the  two  following  questions :  first.  Whether  man  can 
be  neither  good  nor  evil  ?  and  then.  Whether  man  can  be  partly  good  and  partly 
evil  ?  he  decides  against  the  former,  in  opposition  (as  he  confesses)  to  the  prinid 
facie  dictates  of  experience,  upon  the  ground  that  moral  neutrality  in  any  voluntary 
act  is  an  impossible  conception  ;  and  he  disposes  of  the  latter,  by  observing  that  no 
act  has  any  intrinsic  moral  worth,  unless  it  spring  from  a  deliberate  adoption  of  the 
moral  law  as  oor  universal  principle  of  action.  I  have  cited  this  writer's  testimony 
mainly  because  he  cannot  be  accused  of  any  undue  partiality  towards  the  distinctive 
peculiarities  of  the  Christian  system.  But  it  is  not  difQcult  to  translate  his  argu- 
ments into  Scriptural  language.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  our  Lord  Himself  who 
proposes  the  dilemma,  "Either  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit  good;  or  else 
make  the  tree  corrupt,  and  his  fruit  conrupt " :  and,  on  the  other,  His  apostle  tells 
OS  that  "Whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  ofifend  in  one  point,  he  is 
guilty  of  all."  {W.  B.  Jones,  M.A.)  Divine  sovereignty  in  the  death  of  men  : — 
I.  What  is  implied  in  God's  acting  as  a  sotebeion.  1.  His  acting  as  a  sovereign 
implies  that  He  always  acts  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will,  without  consulting 
the  will,  or  pleasure,  or  counsel  of  any  other  being.  2.  His  acting  as  a  sovereign 
implies  that  He  always  acts  not  only  without  the  counsel,  but  without  the  control, 
of  any  created  beings.  II.  In  what  bkspects  He  acts  as  a  sovbbeion  in  taeino 
AWAY  THE  LIVES  OF  MEN.  Here  It  may  be  observed — 1.  That  He  acts  as  a  soTereign 
in  respect  to  appointing  the  time  of  every  one's  death.  2.  God  acts  as  a  sovereign  in 
determining  not  only  tixe  time,  bat  the  place  of  every  one's  deaith.  8.  Gk>d  acts  as 
a  sovereign  in  respect  to  the  means  of  death.    4.  God  acts  as  a  sovereign  in  regard 


flHAP.  xra.]  ST.  LUKE.  333 

to  the  circamstances  of  death.  He  takes  one,  and  leaves  another,  under  the  very 
same  circumstances.  He  takes  one,  and  leaves  another,  according  to  the  order  in 
which  He  has  been  pleased  to  place  their  names  in  death's  commission,  regardless 
of  all  exterior  circumstances  or  distinctions.  5.  God  acts  as  a  sovereign  in  calling 
men  oat  of  the  world,  whether  they  are  willing  or  unwilling  to  leave  it.  6.  God 
displays  His  awful  sovereignty  by  calling  men  out  of  time  into  eternity,  whether 
they  are  prepared  or  not  prepared  to  go  to  their  long  home.  HI.  Why  God  acts  as 
A  80VEBKIGN  IN  THIS  VEBT  IMPORTANT  CASE.  Several  plain  and  pertinent  reasono  may 
be  mentioned.  1.  Because  He  has  an  independent  right  to  act  as  a  sovereign  in 
taking  away  the  lives  of  men.  He  is  the  former  of  their  bodies,  and  Father  of  their 
spirits.  In  Him  they  hve,  and  move,  and  have  their  being.  2.  God  acts  as  a 
sovereign  in  the  article  of  death,  because  He  only  knows  when  and  where  to  put  a 
period  to  human  life.  8.  Another  reason  why  God  disposes  of  the  lives  of  men  as 
a  sovereign,  in  all  those  ref^pects  which  have  been  mentioned,  is  because  He  is 
under  indispensable  moral  obligations  to  dispose  of  His  own  creatures  in  the  wisest 
and  best  manner.  Application :  1.  If  God  acts  as  a  sovereign  in  taking  away  the 
lives  of  men,  then  the  aged  have  great  reason  of  gratitude  for  the  continuance  of 
life.  2.  If  God  acts  as  a  sovereign  in  taking  away  the  lives  of  men,  then  they  ought 
to  maintain  a  constant  and  realizing  sense  that  their  lives  are  uncertain.  3.  If  God 
acts  as  a  sovereign  in  taking  away  tiie  lives  of  men,  then  they  ought  to  avoid  every 
mode  of  conduct  which  tends  to  stupify  their  minds,  and  create  an  insensibility  to 
the  uncertainty  of  life.  4.  If  God  acts  as  a  sovereign  in  taking  away  the  lives  of 
men,  then  it  is  not  strange  that  He  causes  so  many  sudden  and  unexpected  deaths. 
6.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  that  there  is  a  solid  foundation  for  the  most 
cordial  and  unreserved  submission  under  the  heaviest  bereavements.  They  come 
from  the  hand  and  heart  of  a  holy,  wise,  and  benevolent  Sovereign,  who  has  a  right 
to  take  one,  and  leave  another,  and  who  never  afflicts  willingly,  or  grieves  the 
children  of  men.  {N.  Emmom,  D.D.)  Eternal  separation: — The  Bev.  Dr.  Wither- 
spoon,  formerly  president  of  Princeton  College,  America,  was  once  on  board  a 
packet-ship,  where,  among  other  passengers,  was  a  professed  atheist.  This  unhappy 
man  was  very  fond  of  troubling  every  one  with  his  peculiar  belief,  and  of  broaching 
the  subject  as  often  as  he  could  get  any  one  to  listen  to  him.  He  did  not  believe  in 
a  God  and  a  future  state,  not  he  1  By  and  by  there  came  on  a  terrible  storm,  and 
the  prospect  was  that  all  would  be  drowned.  There  was  much  consternation  on 
board,  but  not  one  was  so  greatly  frightened  as  the  professed  atheist.  In  this 
extremity  he  sought  out  the  clergyman,  and  found  him  in  the  cabin,  calm  and 
collected  in  the  midst  of  danger,  and  thus  addressed  him :  '•  Oh,  Doctor  Wither- 
spoon  !  Doctor  Witherspoon  I  we  are  all  going ;  we  have  but  a  short  time  to  stay. 
Oh  how  the  vessel  rocks!  We  are  all  going!  Don't  you  think  we  are,  doctor?" 
The  doctor  turned  to  him  with  a  solemn  look,  and  replied  in  broad  Scotch,  "  Nae 
doubt,  nae  doubt,  man,  we're  a'  ganging ;  but  yon  and  I  dinna  gang  the  same  way." 
{W.  Baxendale.) 

Ver.  87.  Wheresoever  the  tody  la. — GocCt  judgments : — The  twofold  inquiry 
tha*  always  greets  the  prophet  is  Where?  and  When?  These  two  questions 
are  prompted  by  curiosity  and  self-interest.  The  passionate  desires  of  human 
nature  to  know  the  future  are  testified  to  by  the  whole  history  of  superstition  and 
imposture.  Even  inspired  prophecy  has  been  treated  in  the  spirit  of  this  desire. 
Onr  Lord  teaches  ns  how  such  questions  should  be  answered,  and  how  such  a  spirit 
should  be  dealt  with.  He  does  not  answer  the  "  Where  "  and  "  When  " ;  not  even 
in  the  revelation  to  His  beloved  disciple  does  He  do  so.  I.  Observe  how  in  a  tebt 
REAL  SENSE  Hs  DOES  AMSWEB  THE  QUESTIONS.  The  auswer  in  effect  is  this :  My  judg- 
ment shall  come  upon  the  earth  as  come  the  vultures  upon  the  dead  by  an  unerring 
and  terrible  instinct.  So  truly  then  as  there  is  ripeness  for  judgment,  and  wherever 
there  is  that  ripeness,  there  shall  come  the  judgment  of  the  day  of  the  Lord.  XL 
Mark  what  these  wobds  tell  ns  concebnino  the  obeat  laws  or  God's  judohent. 
These  judgments  are  not  arbitrary  judgments,  but  are  joined  to  the  oSence  by  a 
natural  and  necessary  law.  Where  there  is  ripeness  for  them  there  is  no  escape 
from  them ;  but  they  only  fall  where  there  is  that  ripeness.  We  learn  also,  that 
before  the  last  and  crowning  judgment  there  must  be  many  lesser  and  preliminary 
days  of  judgment.  III.  Whebb  abe  we  to  look  fob  signs  of  oub  Lobo's 
coming  ?  Not  to  the  heavens  far  off,  but  at  the  dead  thing  which  lies,  it  may  be, 
St  your  very  feet.  Can  we  discern  here  and  there  the  corpse  that  calls  and  the 
«^agles  of  judgment  that  come  at  its  calling.     In  the  case  of  individuals  it  is  not 


8S4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caiT.  xvn, 

wise  to  judge ;  but  Tvith  families,  churches,  nations,  there  is  no  judgment  sound 
but  a  presentj'udgment.  The  practical  lesson  is,  "Judge  therefore,  yourselves^ 
brethren,  that  ye  be  not  judged  by  the  Lord."  {Bishop  Magee.)  The  carcat* 
and  the  eagles : — In  the  sphere  of  human  life,  that  which  is  the  life  of  things 
is  their  use.  When  that  is  spent,  all  things  else  conspire  to  have  them  not 
only  disabled  but  abolished.  On  sea  and  land  where  man  is  not,  it  may  be  only 
contingent,  though  usual,  that  where  the  carcass  is,  there  the  eagles  are  gathered 
together ;  but  where  man  is,  it  is  certain.  Steam  and  electricity  are  new  ideas, 
new  forces  by  which  man  has  extended  his  command  over  material  resources  indis- 
pensable for  his  existence.  As  surely  as  these  new  ideas  are  introduced,  there  i» 
found  to  be  implied  in  them  destruction  as  well  as  creation.  A  host  of  things  in 
which  there  was  life  because  there  was  use  become  refuse  and  old  lumber — hand- 
looms,  wooden  ships,  mail  coaches — and  with  regard  to  them  the  question  is  how 
they  are  to  be  got  rid  of.  A  new  gun  is  invented  in  America  or  in  England,  and  all 
the  stands  of  arms  in  all  places  of  arms  throughout  the  world  become  lumber  until 
they  have  undergone  a  process  of  conversion  which  is  a  process  of  destruction. 
Belshazzar's  feast  is  not  a  spectacle  pleasing  to  gods  or  men,  that  small  part  of 
mankind  excepted  for  whom  the  lights  flare  upon  rude  riot  and  excess.  It  may  b» 
a  product  of  civilization  and  of  national  struggles  and  aspirations.  It  is  noi 
exuberant  life,  but  rampant  disease  and  corruption,  and  as  such  it  is  marked  for 
dissolution  and  destruction.  Always  when  it  is  at  its  height  there  is  to  be  seen  the- 
handwriting  on  the  wall,  telling  that  tyranny  and  oppression  have  but  their  day, 
that  they  are  weighed  in  the  balance  and  found  wanting,  that  the  next  thing  to 
heedless  excess  is  destruction.  The  doctrine  of  constitutional  liberty  gains  a 
footing  in  a  country  ignorant  of  it  before — the  result,  if  not  at  once,  inevitably  is, 
that  institutions,  laws,  privileges,  class  distinctions,  offices  and  officers,  lose  what 
vitahty  they  had,  and  with  regard  to  them,  as  with  regard  to  all  that  is  dead,  the 
question  is,  what  is  the  swiftest  and  most  effectual  method  of  destruction.  la 
every  department  of  human  life  the  same  process  is  at  work,  that  which  lives  and 
grows  necessitating  the  dissolution  and  removal  of  that  which  is  useless  and 
corrupt.  In  this  view  of  it,  the  process  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Divine  order  on  the  side  of  progress  and  improvement.  It  is  beneficent.  Thai 
which  so  often  makes  it  seem  other  than  beneficent — and  this  too  has  to  be  recog- 
nized as  a  fact — is  the  redundance  of  vested  interests — it  is  that  in  so  many 
instances  the  interests  and  affections  of  men  and  nations  are  Unked  rather  with 
what  may  have  been  once  good  than  with  that  which  being  better  is  destined  to 
•iiiasolve  and  to  replace  it.  This  is  why  destruction  which  goes  along  with  creation 
ia  so  often  a  painful  and  terrible  experience.  It  is  not  unfortunate  or  unnecessary 
for  mankind  that  Belshazzar  and  his  courtiers  should  have  but  their  day,  or  rather 
their  night ;  but,  when  the  handwriting  on  the  wall  makes  its  appearance,  th» 
mighty  king  and  his  court  cannot  well  be  expected  to  welcome  it.  There  is 
comfort  and  satisfaction  for  a  benevolent  and  thoughtful  mind  in  the  reflection 
that  the  sanatory  arrangements  of  the  universe  are  as  wonderful  as  any  of  the  other 
arrangements  in  it ;  but  for  men  and  nations  whose  habits  and  feelings  are 
involved  in  the  existence  and  perpetuation  of  what  is  opposed  to  them  and  incon- 
sistent with  them,  these  arrangements  cannot  but  be  felt  to  act  often  in  a  harsh, 
peremptory,  ruthless,  unsparing  manner.  It  is  well,  however,  to  accustom  our- 
selves to  look  at  them  in  the  proper  light,  namely,  as  beneficent,  not  only  that  we 
may  not  miss  or  misread  a  great  deal  which  is  written  for  our  learning  in  the  pages 
of  history,  but  that  in  the  changing  fashions  of  our  theology  we  may  be  always 
mindful  of  one  thing,  to  recognize  God  as  not  a  God  of  the  dead  but  of  the  living. 
(J.  Service,  D.D.)  The  gathering  of  the  eagles : — It  will  be  necessary  here  to 
compare  the  ancient  and  modern  interpretations  of  the  verse — "  for  wheresoever 
the  carcass  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together."  1.  The  generally 
received  modern  interpretation  sees  here  the  great  law  of  Divine  judgment  con- 
densed into  one  terrible  image.  The  "  carcass,"  according  to  this,  is  the  putrid 
carrion  ;  the  "  eagles  "  are,  strictly  speaking,  vultures.  Thus,  to  the  modern  mind, 
we  have  here  the  condensed  image  of  the  continuous  judgment  of  God.  In  hot 
countries  God  has  so  moulded  the  instincts  of  the  winged  scavengers  of  cliff  and 
peak,  that  far  away,  as  they  wheel  and  circle  over  the  awful  depths  into  which  the 
traveller  looks  vdth  reeling  brain,  they  scent  the  slain  in  battle,  or  the  bodies  that 
taint  the  air.  So,  wherever  there  is  a  body  of  moral  and  spiritn^  death — something 
rotten  in  Church  or  State — the  vultures  of  judgment,  the  punishers  and  avenger* 
that  belong  to  it  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  come  mysteriously  from  their  placea. 


CHAP,  xvu.]  ST.  LUKE.  83S 

and  with  boding  voices,  deepening  npon  the  breezes,  gather  round  the  spoil.  So 
with  Jerusalem  falling  to  pieces  in  its  last  decomposition  and  self-dissolution.  Tha 
flap  of  avenging  wings  was  heard  overhead  by  prophetic  ears.  The  vultures  were 
■wheeling  on  the  steaming  air,  under  the  vault  of  the  Syrian  sky,  barking  in  the  far 
mountain  glens,  and  collecting  together  to  gorge  themselves  upon  the  "glittering 
rottenness."  This  view  is  not  only  rhetorically  powerful,  but  something  more  and 
higher.  2.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  ancient  interpretation  represents  more  truly 
the  Divine  thought  in  the  symbol  of  the  eagles  and  their  food.  And  so  this  image 
of  the  eagle  belongs  to  the  glorious  Lord  and  to  His  Christ.  And  His  people  are  as 
His  eaglets — nay,  themselves  eagles  of  God.  Is  it  not  written — "Ye  have  seen  how 
I  bare  yoa  on  eagles'  wings  "  t  And  more  fully — "  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest, 
fluttereth  over  her  young,  taketh  them,  beareth  them  on  her  wings :  so  the  Lord 
alone  did  bear  him."  Is  not  the  Church  the  woman  to  whom  were  given  "  the 
wings  of  the  eagle,  that  great  eagle,"  which  is  Christ?  Even  here  and  now, 
wherever  the  corpse  is,  wherever  Jesus  is  evidently  set  forth  crucified,  there, 
mysteriously  raised  above  earthly  things,  made  lofty  and  royal  in  their  graces, 
Christ's  eagles  "gather  round"  Him  who  is  the  spiritual  food  and  the  life  eternal 
of  all  such  eagles.  The  meaning,  then,  on  the  whole,  according  to  this  interpreta- 
tion, is  as  follows :  The  '•  carcass  " — the  corpse  of  Jesus  Christ  as  crucified — that 
is  the  meeting-point  of  human  souls,  the  centre  of  attraction  in  the  world  of  spirits. 
The  Lord  of  nature,  in  the  Book  of  Job,  says  of  the  eagle,  His  creature — "  she 
abideth  upon  the  rock,  .  .  .  from  thence  she  seeketh  the  prey ;  her  eyes  behold 
afar  off  .  .  .  where  the  slain  are,  there  is  she."  The  Lord  of  grace  adds  His  appli- 
cation— as  the  eaglets  gather  round  the  corpse,  so  the  souls  of  men,  and  especially 
of  the  elect,  gather  round  Jesus.  Ay,  and  round  Jesus,  not  always  as  the  eternal 
Word,  not  always  as  in  His  glory,  but  in  the  pathetic  beauty  of  His  weakness^ 
staggering  under  the  weight  of  His  cross.  Nay  more,  dying,  with  the  red  drops  of 
the  Passion  apon  His  brow ;  dead — nay,  fallen  in  His  sacred  helplessness.  There 
are  mysterious  instincts  in  every  heart  that  turn  to  Jesus  crucified.  Keen  and 
swift  as  eagles  for  the  prey  are  Christians  for  the  Lord  who  died.  It  is  the  same 
underlying  thought  with  that  noble  utterance  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  St.  John. 
There  the  few  Greeks  are  to  that  prophetic  eye  the  first  shoreward  ripple  of  the 
great  springtide  of  humanity  which  is  to  break  in  thunder  at  His  feet.  Ths 
lifting  up  a  few  feet  above  the  soil  of  Golgotha  becomes,  by  a  majestic  irony,  the 
elevation  above  the  earth,  the  centre  of  attraction  for  uncounted  souls.  "  I,  if  I 
be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  So  He  seems  to  promise 
— •'  I,  if  I  be  fallen  upon  the  earth,  the  helpless,  lifeless,  ruined  thing  which  men 
call  a  corpse,  will  yet  gather  round  Me  every  eagle  that  clasps  the  crag,  or  soars 
upward  with  the  sunlight  in  his  glorious  eye."  {Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  The 
gathering  of  the  eagles : — 1.  These  words  have  many  meanings  for  us.  First  we  may 
think  of  them  as  referring  to  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  There  indeed  was  the  body, 
the  dead  corrupt  body  of  the  Jews,  who  had  refused  to  hear  the  message  of  salva- 
tion, and  had  taken  and  slain  the  Son  of  God  outside  the  wall  of  their  fated  city. 
And  where  the  body  was,  there  were  the  eagles  gathered  together.  That  enemy,  of 
which  the  prophets  had  spoken  long  ago,  had  come,  and  encompassed  Jerusalem  in 
on  every  side.  The  Boman  eagles  glittered  upon  their  helmeis,  and  flashed  upon 
their  standards.  They  set  up  their  banners  for  tokens,  even  within  the  sacred 
courts  of  the  temple,  and  so  was  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  the  "  abomination  of 
desolation  standing  in  the  holy  place."  2.  Again,  we  take  the  words  of  the  text  as 
applying  to  the  hour  of  death,  and  first  of  the  death  of  the  body.  Whoever  has 
stood  at  a  good  man's  death-bed  must  feel  that  the  dying  man  is  not  alone,  nor 
allowed  in  that  last  hour  for  any  pains  of  death  to  fall  from  God.  Where  that 
poor  woni-ont  body  Mes,  there  are  the  eagles  of  God's  host  gathered  together, 
strengthening,  comforting  the  dying  man,  ready  to  bear  his  soul  as  swift  as  on 
eagles'  wings  to  Paradise.  There  is  a  beautiful  fancy  of  the  East  which  makes 
Asrael,  the  angel  of  death,  speak  thuS'  to  a  dying  saint : — 

**  *  Thon  blessed  one,'  the  angel  said,  *  I  bring  thy  time  of  peace. 
When  I  have  touched  thee  on  the  eyes,  life's  latest  ache  will  cease ; 
God  bade  me  come  as  I  am  seen  amid  the  heavenly  host, — 
No  enemy  of  awful  mould,  but  he  who  loveth  most.' " 

So  looks  the  Christian  on  death,  as  being  a  fair  and  gracious  messenger  from  God, 
bringing  to  the  captive  liberty,  and  to  the  weary  rest     '  Wheresoever  the  body  ist 


836  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvns, 

thither  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together."  8.  Theae  words  are  terribly  true  of  Qim 
death  of  the  godless  and  impenitent.  Jalian,  the  apostate  emperor,  took  for  his  creat 
an  eagle  pierced  through  the  heart  by  an  arrow  feathered  from  his  own  wing,  and  aa 
a  motto  the  words,  "  Our  death  flies  to  us  with  our  own  feather."  So  every  sinner 
who  dies  impenitent  knows  that  the  arrow  of  remorse  which  pierces  him  is  of  his 
own  making,  that  the  dark  spectres,  which  are  gathered  like  eagles  around  him,  are 
of  his  own  inviting.  4.  Once  more,  and  in  another  and  brighter  sense,  we  will  take 
the  text  as  applying  to  the  Blessed  Sacrament  of  the  altar ;  so  it  has  always  been 
understood  by  the  old  writers  of  the  Church.     One  of  them  says — 

"  Where  the  sacred  body  lieth,  eagle  souls  together  speed ; 
There  the  saints  and  there  the  angels  find  refreshment  in  their  need. 
And  the  sons  of  earth  and  heaven  on  that  one  Bread  ever  feed." 

When  we  kneel  at  that  altar  and  receive  the  Body  of  our  Lord,  we  are  not  alone. 
The  very  word  "Communion  "  teaches  us  that  we  are  encompassed  by  a  great  cloud 
of  witnesses.  Not  only  are  we  in  that  Sacrament  made  one  with  Christ,  and  with 
all  true  members  of  His  Church,  but  we  join  in  the  work  of  saints  and  angels,  and 
they  take  part  with  us.  Thus  we  say,  "  With  angels  and  archangels,  and  all  the 
company  of  heaven,  we  laud  and  magnify  Thy  glorious  name."  *'  Wheresover  the 
body  is,"  wheresoever  the  Body  of  Jesus  Christ  is  present  in  the  Sacrament,  there 
will  the  faithful  worshippers  be  gathered  together  Uke  eagles,  and  there  too  will  be 
high  and  holy  ones  present,  although  unseen  by  us,  making  the  altar  a  ladder 
between  earth  and  heaven,  and  the  angels  oX  God  asoending  and  descending  upon 
it.     (H.  J.  Wiltnot  Buxton,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XVm. 


Ybbb.  1-8.  Men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint— TR*  itrange  weapon — 
All-prayer  : — While  Christian  was  in  the  Palace  Beautiful,  they  showed  him  all  the 
remarkable  objects  in  the  armory,  from  the  ox-goad  of  Shamgar  to  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit.  And  amongst  the  arms  he  saw,  and  with  some  of  which  he  was  arrayed 
as  he  left  the  place,  was  a  single  weapon  with  a  strange,  new  name — "  All-prayer." 
When  I  was  a  child,  I  used  to  wonder  much  what  this  could  have  been — its  shape, 
its  use.  I  imagine  I  know  something  more  about  it  in  these  later  years.  At  any 
rate,  I  think  Bunyan  found  his  name  for  it  in  one  of  the  New  Testament  Epistles : 
•'  Fraying  always  with  all  prayer  and  supphcation  in  the  Spirit "  (Eph.  vi.  18).  It 
BO  happens,  also,  that  we  have  two  parables  of  our  Lord  given  us  in  the 
eighteenth  chapter  of  Luke  to  one  end,  "  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and 
not  to  faint."  One  of  these  parables  teaches  the  lesson  of  importunity,  the 
other  teaches  the  lesson  of  sincerity.  And  it  does  not  need  that  we  draw  from 
this  collocation  the  subtle  suggestion  that  want  of  importunity  and  want  of 
sincerity  are  what  weaken  the  weapon  of  all-prayer,  and  render  faint  the  heart  of 
the  Christian  who  wields  it.  We  know  that  we  do  not  pray  always,  and  that  we  do 
not  always  pray.  I.  Let  us  take  up  this  matter  of  imfobtunity  in  the  outset.  At 
first  sight  it  gives  perplexity  to  some  students  of  the  Bible.  We  must  notice  that 
Christ  does  not  identify  His  Father,  the  "  Hearer  of  Prayer,"  with  this  judge  in  the 
parable  in  any  sense  whatsoever.  The  very  point  of  the  illustration  turns  upon 
his  superiority.  God  is  just,  and  this  man  was  unjust.  This  petitioner  was  a 
lonely  widow  and  a  stranger ;  God  was  dealing  with  EQs  own  elect.  The  woman 
came  uninvited;  Christians  are  pressed  with  invitations  to  ask,  and  knock,  and 
seek.  The  unjust  judge  never  agreed  to  listen  to  the  widow ;  God  has  promised, 
over  and  over  again,  that  it  shall  be  granted  to  those  that  ask.  The  judge  may 
have  had  relations  with  this  woman's  adversary  which  would  complicate,  and,  in 
some  way,  commit  him  to  an  onnecessary  quarrel  in  her  behalf,  if  his  office  should 
be  exercised  in  defence ;  God  is  in  open  and  declared  conflict,  on  His  own  account, 
with  our  adversary,  and  rejoices  to  defeat  his  machinations,  and  avenge  His  own 
chosen  speedily.  Hence,  the  whole  teaching  of  the  story  is  directed  towards  out 
enoouragement  thai:  If   we  would  persist  with  a  wicked  judge  that  regarded 


«HA».  xvin.]  ST.  LUKE.  837 

nobody,  God  nor  man,  then  turely  we  would  press  our  prayers  with  God.  What  is 
the  duty  then?  Simply,  go  on  praying.  II.  Let  us  move  on  to  consider,  in  the 
second  place,  this  matter  of  sincebitt  in  prayer,  suggested  by  the  other  parable. 
To  men  of  the  world  it  must  be  a  subject  of  real  wonder  and  surprise,  to  use  no 
more  disrespectful  terms,  why  so  many  petitions  offered  by  the  people  of  God  prove 
fruitless.  To  all  this,  Christiana  ought  to  be  able  to  reply  that  prayer  follows  laws 
and  respects  intelligent  conditions,  just  as  every  other  part  of  God's  plan  of 
redemption  does.  We  are  accustomed  to  say  to  each  other  that  God  always  hears 
prayer.  No,  He  does  not.  The  wisest  man  that  was  ever  inspired  says  distinctly, 
"  He  that  turneth  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer  shall  be 
abomination."  And  in  the  New  Testament  the  apostle  explains  the  whole  anomaly 
of  failure  thus :  "  Ye  ask  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss."  For  one  thing, 
celf-conceit  destroys  all  sincerity  in  prayer.  For  another  thing,  spite  against  others 
destroys  all  sincerity  in  prayer.  Listen  to  the  Pharisee's  preposterous  com- 
parison of  himself  in  the  matter  of  money  and  merit  with  the  publican  almost 
out  of  sight  there  in  the  corner.  Inconsistencies  in  life  also  destroy  sincerity  in 
prayer.  Purity  from  evil  is  a  prime  condition  of  success.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
The  duty  of  persevering  in  prayer : — I.  Oob  duty.  That  which  is  here  inculcated 
impUes  that  we  pray — 1.  Statedly.  2.  Occasionally.  There  are  many  particular 
occasions  which  require  us  to  pray.  (1)  Prosperity,  that  God  may  counteract  its 
evil  tendency  (Prov.  xxx.  9).  (2)  Adversity,  that  we  may  be  supported  under  it 
(James  v.  13).  (3)  Times  of  public  distress  or  danger,  to  avert  the  calamity 
(2  Chron.  vii.  14).  3.  Habitually.  We  should  maintain  a  spiritual  frame  of  mind. 
To  pray  thus  is  our  duty ;  "  We  ought,"  <fec.  (1)  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  God.  He, 
our  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Redeemer,  has  commanded  it.  (2)  We  owe  it  also  to 
our  neighbour.  The  edification  of  Christ's  mystical  body  depends,  not  only  on  the 
union  of  every  part  with  the  head,  but  on  the  whole  being  fitly  framed  together, 
and  on  every  joint  supplying  its  proper  nourishment  {Eph.  iv.  16:  Col.  ii.  19). 
But  if  we  be  remiss  in  prayer,  we  shall  be  incapable  of  administering  that  benefit, 
which  other  members  have  a  right  to  expect  from  us.  (3)  We  owe  it  to  ourselves. 
A  "  spirit  of  supplication  "  is  as  necessary  to  the  soul,  as  food  to  the  body.  Nor 
can  we  feel  any  regard  for  our  souls,  if  we  do  not  cultivate  it.  U.  Thb  niFFicuLTrES 
THAT  ATTEKD  IT.  When  We  Set  ourselves  to  the  performance  of  it,  we  shall  find 
difficulties — 1.  Before  we  begin  to  pray.  Worldly  business  may  indispose  our 
minds  for  this  employment,  i'amily  cares  may  distract  and  dissipate  our  thoughts. 
Lassitude  of  body  may  unfit  us  for  the  necessary  exertions.  We  may  be  disabled 
by  an  invincible  hardness  of  heart.  A  want  of  utterance  may  also  operate  as  a 
heavy  discouragement.  2.  While  we  are  engaged  in  prayer.  The  world  is  never 
more  troublesome  than  at  such  seasons.  The  fiesh  also,  with  its  vilest  imaginations, 
will  solicit  our  attention.  Nor  will  Satan  be  backward  to  interrupt  our  devotions. 
3.  After  we  have  concluded  prayer.  When  we  have  prayed,  we  should  expect  an 
answer.  But  worldliness  may  again  induce  a  forgetfulness  of  God.  Impatience  to 
receive  the  desired  blessings  may  deject  us.  Ignorance  of  the  method  in  which 
God  answers  prayer  may  cause  us  to  disquiet  ourselves  with  many  ungrounded 
apprehensions.  UnbeUef  may  rob  us  of  the  benefits  we  might  have  received 
(James  i.  6,  7).  Whatever  obstructs  God's  answers  to  prayer,  disqualifies  us  for 
the  future  discharge  of  that  duty.  (Theological  Sketch-book.)  The  nature  and 
duty  of  prayer : — I.  Thb  natube  of  pbateb.  1.  An  expression  of  our  sense  of 
Ood's  infinite  superiority.  2.  An  expression  of  our  dependence  upon  God.  3.  A 
declaration  of  our  obligation  to  God.  4.  A  declaration  of  our  faith  in  God's  ability 
to  grant  us  anything  our  circumstances  may  require.  There  are  several  things 
necessary  to  constitute  true  prayer,  and  which  form  its  constituent  parts.  (1)  Faith 
is  one  essential.  (2)  Sincerity  is  another  ingredient  in  true  prayer.  (3)  Humility. 
II.  We  notice  thb  duty  of  pbaybb.  Prayer  is  a  duty,  if  we  consider  it — 1.  As  a 
Divine  injunction.  2.  It  appears  a  duty,  if  we  consider  God  as  a  prayer-hearing 
God.  3.  It  is  a  duty,  if  we  consider  the  beneficial  effects  of  prayer.  {1)  Prayer 
brings  great  benefits  to  ourselves.  It  brings  ua  into  closer  communion  with  Christ. 
(2)  Prayer  is  a  powerful  antidote  to,  and  one  of  the  most  effectual  safeguards 
against,  worldly-mindedness.  (3)  By  prayer  we  get  divinely  enlightened.  (4)  Prayer 
brings  with  it  advancement  in  personal  holiness.  (5)  Prayer  is  a  powerful  stimulant 
to  every  Christian  grace.  He  who  lives  in  the  habitual  exercise  of  sincere  and 
earnest  prayer  cannot  remain  in  a  lukewarm,  inactive,  lethargic  state.  {Essea 
Remembrancer.)  Men  ought  always  to  pray  : — Why  ?  1.  Because  the  King  wills 
it.  Because  it  is  an  edict  of  eternal  wisdom  and  truth,  the  command  of  absolute 
VOL.  lu.  22 


S38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip  xvm. 

righteousness  and  justice,  the  direction  of  infinite  goodness  and  love.  2.  Becaas« 
it  is  an  instinct  and  faculty  of  our  nature,  part  and  parcel  of  our  mental  manhood; 
and  as  the  all-wise  Creator  has  endowed  us  with  the  power,  and  not  only  the 
power,  but  the  tendency  to  pray,  we  cannot  and  do  not  fulfil  His  will,  or  rightly  use 
our  capabilities,  unless  we  pray.  3.  Because  it  is  a  privilege,  a  precious  privilege 
conferred.  The  maker  of  the  machine  can  mend  and  manage  it ;  and  He  who 
created  us — body,  mind,  and  spirit — invites  us  to  bring  our  bodily  needs,  hunger, 
thirst,  aches,  pains,  and  infirmities ;  our  mental  cares,  griefs,  doubts,  perplexities, 
and  depressions ;  our  spiritual  wants,  fears,  forebodings,  sins,  and  wealmess — to 
Him  in  prayer.  4.  Because  our  state  and  condition  is  one  of  perpetual  peril,  and 
weakness,  and  need.  The  sin  on  our  conscience  condemns  us,  and  we  cannot  undo 
it.  We  all  get  the  heartache,  and  we  cannot  cure  it.  We  can  neither  condone  our 
offences,  nor  lighten  our  conscience,  nor  carry  our  sorrows,  nor  hush  our  com* 
plainings,  nor  dry  our  tears  I  5.  Because  in  the  infinite  love  and  mercy  of  Qod  to 
poor  sinners  a  new  and  living  way  hath  been  opened  for  as  into  the  presence  of 
God,  so  that  not  only  doth  the  sinner  gain  a  hearing,  bat  he  has  an  infinite 
guarantee  that  his  prayers  shall  prosper,  and  his  petitions  shall  be  fulfilled. 

6.  Because  our  needs,  our  perils,  our  personal  insufiiciency,  are  "always"  with  ns  ; 
because  the  throne  of  prayer  is  always  accessible,  and  the  Hearer  of  prayer  is  always 
willing ;  and  because  the  power  and  privilege  of  prayer  has  a  direct  connection 
with  the  whole  sphere  of  our  daily  life,  and  the  whole  circle  of  our  daily  needs. 

7.  Because  no  really  earnest  and  reliant  prayers  can  possibly  be  in  vain.  We  are 
apt  to  faint  in  our  petitionings  if  the  gift  we  seek  is  long  delayed.  (J.  J.  Wray.) 
Prayer: — The  "  ought"  of  Christ  outweighs  all  the  objections  of  infidelity,  and  is 
stronger  than  the  adverse  conclusions  of  a  material  science.  1.  Prayer  should  be 
constant.  "  Can  we,  indeed,"  says  Augustine,  *'  without  ceasing  bend  the  knee, 
bow  the  body,  or  lift  up  the  hands  7"  If  the  attitude  and  the  language  of  prayer 
were  essential  to  its  being  truly  offered,  the  command  of  Christ  would  seem  to  b; 
exaggerated.  But  understand  it  as  the  sonl's  attitude  to  God,  and  it  is  no 
exaggeration.  "  That  soul,"  says  Dr.  Donne,  ♦•  which  is  ever  turned  toward  God, 
prays  sometimes  when  it  does  not  know  that  it  prays."  The  testimony  of  the 
Christian  father  accords  with  this.  After  admitting  that  formal,  oral  prayer  must 
have  its  pauses  and  intermissions,  Augustine  says,  "  There  is  another  interior 
prayer  without  intermission,  and  that  is  the  longing  of  the  heart.  Whatever  else 
thou  mayest  be  doing,  if  thou  longest  after  the  Sabbath  of  God,  thou  dost  not 
intermit  to  pray."  Thus  the  whole  life  becomes,  what  Origen  conceived  the  life  of 
the  Christian  should  be,  "one  great  connected  prayer."  The  importance  of 
constancy  in  it  arises  from  the  place  it  holds  in  man's  spiritual  life.  Prayer  is  to 
the  soul  what  the  nerves  of  the  body  are  to  the  mind — its  medium  of  communication 
with  a  world  that  else  were  unperceived  and  unrealized.  2.  Prayer  should  be  earnest. 
There  is  danger  of  our  prayer  degenerating  into  a  dead  form,  or  perfunctory  service — 
worse  than  no  praying  at  all.  The  simple  remedy  is  to  deepen  the  desire  or  sense  of 
need  which  prompts  to  prayer,  and  is  the  essence  of  prayer.  "  If  thou  wishest  not  to 
intermit  to  pray," says  one  of  the  Christian  fathers,  "see  that  thou  do  not  intermit 
to  desire.  The  coldness  of  love  is  the  silence  of  the  heart ;  the  fervency  of  love 
is  the  cry  of  the  heart."  This  warmth  of  desire  is  the  product  of  a  clear  persuasion 
of  the  value  of  prayer  as  a  means  of  help  and  strength.  8.  Another  quality  of 
true  prayer  is,  patient  confidence  in  God.  "  Shall  not  God  avenge  His  own  elect 
•which  cry  day  and  night  unto  Him,  though  He  bear  long  with  them."  There  are 
two  sure  and  solid  grounds  of  confidence.  One  is  found  in  God's  righteous 
character,  by  which  He  is  constrained  to  rectify  wrong  and  establish  the  right ; 
and  the  other  is  found  in  His  positive  love  for  the  suppliant.  4.  One  other 
quality  should  mark  true  prayer,  namely,  humility.  {A.  H.  Currier.) 
The  necessity  of  praying  always,  and  not  fainting : — Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
kindly  intimated  to  all  that  have  business  at  the  court  of  heaven  the  necessity  of 
so  managing  themselves  that  they  still  hang  on  there,  and  not  faint,  whatever 
entertainment  they  meet  with  during  the  dependence  of  their  process.  I.  The  first 
thing  to  be  considered,  is,  odb  Lobd's  kind  intimation  or  this  way  of  His  Fatheb's 
430DRT.  1.  I  shaU  show  the  import  of  Christ's  making  this  intimation  to  petitioners 
at  EUs  Father's  court.  (1)  The  darkness  that  is  naturally  on  the  minds  of  poor 
einners,  with  respect  to  heaven's  management  about  them.  We  may  say,  as 
Jer.  V.  4,  "  Surely  these  are  poor,  they  are  foolish ;  for  they  know  not  the  way 
of  the  Lord,  nor  the  judgment  of  their  God."  (2)  Christ's  good-will  to  the  sinner'g 
business  going  right  there  (Exod.  zxviii.  29).    (3)  That  our  Lord  sees  sinners  ar* 


«HiP.  xvni.]  ST.  LUKE.  83f 

in  hasaxd  of  fainting  from  the  entertainment  they  may  meet  with  daring  the 
dependence  of  their  process  (Heb.  xii.  3).  (4)  That  they  that  shall  hang  on,  and  not 
faint,  shall  certainly  come  speed  at  length.  2.  The  weight  and  moment  of  this 
intimation.  This  will  appear,  if  it  is  considered  in  a  fourfold  light.  (1)  Jesos 
Christ,  who  makes  it,  has  experienced  it  in  EUs  own  case.  Now,  if  this  was  the 
manner  with  the  great  Petitioner,  how  can  we  expect  it  should  fare  otherwise  with 
us  ?  (2)  He  is  the  great  Prophet  of  heaven,  whose  office  it  is  to  reveal  the  manner 
of  the  court  to  poor  sinners.  (3)  He  is  the  only  Intercessor  there,  the  Father's 
Secretary,  the  Solicitor  for  poor  sinners  there.  II.  The  second  thing  to  be  con- 
sidered, is,  THB  WAY  or  THE  COOBT  OF  BEATEN,  IN  TBTSTIHa  PETITI0NEB8  WITH 
BOWa   HABDSHIPS,   DUBINO   THE   DEPENDENCE   OF  TBEIB    PBOCESS.       Here   I   shall    givO 

you — 1.  A  swatch  of  that  way ;  and — 2.  Some  reasons  of  that  way,  whereby  to 
account  for  it  in  a  suitableness  to  the  Divine  perfections.  1.  (1)  Oft-times  there  is 
deep  silence  from  the  throne  (Matt.  xv.  23).  (2)  Oft-times  they  get  a  very  angry- 
like  answer.  The  woman  of  Canaan  got  a  couple  of  them,  one  on  the  back  of 
another :  '*  But  He  answered  and  said,  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel.  It  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread,  and  to  cast  it  to  dogs  " 
(Matt.  XV.  24,  26).  (3)  Disappointed  expectations  are  a  piece  of  very  ordinary  enter- 
tainment there :  "  We  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good  came :  and  for  a  time  of  health, 
and  behold  trouble  "  (Jer.  viii.  16).  (4)  Many  a  time,  looking  for  an  answer. 
Providence  drives  a  course  apparently  just  contrary  to  the  granting  of  their  petition ; 
60  is  fulfilled  that  Psa.  Ixv.  5,  "By  terrible  things  in  righteousness  wilt  Thou 
answer  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation."  (5)  Oft-times  the  Lord,  instead  of  easing  the 
petitioner,  lays  new  burdens  on  him  :  "  We  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good  came  ; 
and  for  a  time  of  health,  and  behold  trouble"  (Jer.  viii.  15).  Instead  of  curing  the 
old  wound,  there  are  new  ones  given.  2.  (1)  This  way  is  taken  with  petitioners  in 
the  court  of  heaven ;  for  thereby  God  is  glorified,  and  His  attributes  more  illustrated 
than  otherwise  they  would  be.  In  this  view  of  it,  Paul  welcomes  it  in  his  own 
case,  though  it  was  hard  to  sense :  "  And  He  said  unto  me.  My  grace  is  sufficient 
for  thee :  for  My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness.  Most  gladly,  therefore,  will 
I  rather  glory  in  my  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  me  " 
(2  Cor.  xii.  9).  (2)  Hereby  the  state  of  petitioners  is  tried,  and  a  plain  difference  con- 
stituted between  hypocrites  and  the  sincere :  "  He  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end, 
the  same  shall  be  saved  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  13).  (3)  Hereby  the  graces  of  believing  peti- 
tioners are  tried,  both  as  to  the  reality  and  strength  of  them ;  particularly  tiieir 
faith  and  patience  (1  Pet.  i.  6,  7).  (4)  Hereby  believers  are  humbled,  and  taught 
that  they  hold  of  free  grace.  The  exalting  of  grace  is  the  great  design  of  the  whole 
contrivance  of  the  gospel.  (5)  This  way  is  taken  for  honour  of  the  word: 
*•  Thou  hast  magnified  Thy  word  above  all  Thy  name  "  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  2).  (6)  It 
is  taken  to  make  them  long  to  be  home.    UI.  The  third  thing  to  be  considered,  is, 

THE   DUTY  OF  THB    PETITION  EBS    TO    HANG    ON,    AND    NOT    TO    FAINT,    WHATEVER  THEY 

MEET  WITH.  We  may  view  it  in  these  things  following,  1.  They  must  never  lift 
their  process  from  the  court  of  heaven :  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  hast 
the  words  of  eternal  life  "  (John  vi.  67,  68).  2.  They  must  never  give  over  praying, 
bat  "  pray  always."  And  Satan  sometimes  plies  distressed  souls  to  give  up  with  it, 
as  what  they  may  see  they  will  do  no  good  with,  for  that  God  will  not  hear  them. 
But  that  is  a  deceit  of  hell  which  ye  must  never  yield  to.  3.  They  must  carry  all 
their  incident  needs  in  new  petitions  to  the  same  throne  of  grace,  where  the  former 
petition  may  have  been  long  lying,  and  still  unanswered;  and  so  pursue  all 
together.  The  latter  must  not  drive  out  the  former,  nor  the  former  keep  back  the 
latter.  It  is  one  of  the  ways  how  the  Lord  keeps  His  people  hanging  about  His 
hand  without  fainting,  by  sending  them  several  loads  above  their  burden ;  which 
loads  He  takes  oft  soon  at  their  request ;  and  so  makes  them  go  under  their  burden 
the  more  easily.  These  short  incident  processes,  that  get  a  speedy  answer,  confirm 
their  faith  and  hope  in  waiting  on  for  the  answer  of  the  main.  4.  They  must 
continue  in  the  faith  of  the  promise,  never  quit  the  gripe  of  it ;  but  trust  and 
believe  that  it  shall  certainly  be  accomplished,  though  the  wheels  of  providence 
should  seem  to  drive  oat  over  it  and  in  over  it  (Bom.  iv.  19,  20).  Consider — 
1.  If  ye  faint  and  give  over,  your  suit  is  lost,  ye  have  given  up  with  it.  2.  He  is 
well  worth  the  waiting  on.  (1)  Though  He  is  infinitely  above  us.  He  has  waited 
long  on  us.  (2)  The  longer  you  are  called  to  wait  for  a  mercy,  ye  will  readily  find 
it  the  more  valuable  when  it  comes.  (3)  His  time  will  be  found  the  due  time 
(Gal.  vi.  9) ;  the  best  chosen  time  for  the  mercy's  coming ;  witness  the  time  of 
Isaac's  birth.    (4)  Ye  shall  be  sure  of  some  blessed  offallings,  while  ye  wait  oa 


840  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {chap,  rmu 

(Psa.  xxvii.  14).  4.  They  have  waited  long,  that  have  lest  all,  by  not  having 
patience  to  wait  a  little  longer  (Exod.  zxxii. ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  8,  10).  Therefore  "  lei 
patience  have  her  perfect  work,  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing  " 
(JameB  i.  4)  ;  •'  for  in  due  season  ye  shall  reap,  if  ye  faint  not  "  (Gal.  vi.  9).  (T. 
Boston,  D.D.)  Petitioners  at  the  court  of  heaven  encouraged  ;  or,  the  happy  issue 
of  praying  always,  and  not  fainting  : — I.  First,  I  shall  show  what  is  that  tbbat- 

MENT    PETITIONEBS    MAX    MKET   WITH   AX   THE   CODBT   OF   HEAVEN,  TTNDEB   WHICH   THET 

WILL  BE  IN  HAZABD  OF  FAINTING.  I  mentioned  several  particulars  at  another  occa- 
sion ;  I  offer  now  only  three  things  in  general.  1.  The  weight  and  pressure  of 
their  heavy  case  itself,  whatever  it  is,  may  be  long  continued,  notwithstanding  all 
their  addresses  for  help.  2.  There  may  be  no  appearance  of  relief  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  9). 
8.  They  may  get  incident  weights  laid  on  them,  as  a  load  above  their  burden 
(Psa.  Ixix.  26).  These  are  like  drops  poured  into  a  full  cup,  ready  to  cause  it  run 
over ;  like  smart  touches  on  a  broken  leg,  inclining  one  readily  to  faint.  II.  The 
second  thing  to  be  spoke  to,  is,  wht  petitionees  abe  in  hazabd  of  fainting  fbou 
SUCH  treatment  at  THE  couBT  OF  HEAVEN.  1.  Natural  weakness.  "  All  flesh  i» 
grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field  "  (Isa.  zL  6).  On  this 
very  view  the  Lord  "pities  His  children"  (Psa.  ciii.  13,  14).  2.  Conscience  of 
guilt :  "  My  wounds  stink,  and  are  corrupt ;  because  of  my  foolishness "  (Psa. 
xxxviii.  6,  6).  Guilt  is  a  mother  of  fears,  and  fears  cause  fainting.  3.  Un> 
acquaintedness  with  the  methods  of  sovereignty  :  "  Thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  Thy^ 
path  in  the  great  waters,  and  Thy  footsteps  are  not  known "  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  19). 
4.  A  strong  bias  to  unbelief  and  walking  by  sense,  quite  contrary  to  our  duty  and 
interest  (2  Cor.  v.  7).  We  are  apt  to  be  impressed  more  with  what  we  see  and  feel 
in  Providence,  than  what  we  hear  from  the  Word.  III.  The  third  thing  to  be  con- 
sidered is,  WHEBEFORE  THE  LoBD  GIVES  SUCH   TBEATMENT  TO  ANY  OF  HiS   PETITIONEBS. 

Negatively.  1.  It  is  not  for  mere  will  and  pleasure.  Satan  will  be  ready  to  suggest 
this,  and  pose  the  party  with  such  questions  as  these.  For  what  use  is  all  thift 
delay  f  2.  It  is  not  because  He  has  no  pity  on  you,  nor  concern  for  you  under 
your  burden.  3.  It  is  not  to  signify  to  you  that  you  should  give  it  over,  and 
trouble  Him  no  more  with  your  petition  ;  as  the  hasty  unbelieving  heart  is  ready 
to  take  it,  and  to  give  over  duty  because  there  is  no  sensible  appearance  of  success: 
"  I  said  I  will  not  make  mention  of  Him  nor  speak  any  more  in  His  name"  (Jer. 
XX.  9).  4.  Lastly,  It  is  not  because  He  is  resolved  not  to  hear  you  at  any  rate,  cry 
as  long  as  ye  will.  But  positively,  in  general,  it  is  for  holy,  wise,  becoming  ends; 
it  is  necessary  for  His  glory  and  your  case.  But  particularly — 1.  It  is  for  the 
honour  of  the  man  Christ.  It  contributes  to  it — (1)  In  that  thereby  the  petitioners 
are  conformed  to  His  image,  in  the  suffering  part  thereof.  (2)  Thereby  He  gets 
the  more  employment  as  the  great  Intercessor,  and  is  more  earnestly  applied  to 
than  otherwise  He  would  be.  Longsome  pleas  give  the  advocates  much  ado  ;  and 
longsome  processes  at  the  court  of  heaven  bring  much  business  to  the  Mediator, 
and  so  much  honour.  (3)  It  affords  Him  the  most  signal  occasion  of  displaying 
His  power  in  combating  with  and  baffling  the  old  serpent,  next  to  that  He  had  on 
the  cross  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  2.  To  magnify  the  promise.  3.  To  keep  up  the  mercy, 
till  that  time  come,  that,  all  things  considered,  will  be  the  absolutely  best  time  for 
bestowing  it  (John  xi.  14,  15).  IV.  The  fourth  thing  to  be  spoke  to  is,  What  i» 
THE  iMPOBT  OF  THIS  INTIMATION  MADE  FOB  THIS  END  ?  It  imports — 1.  That  sinners 
are  ready  to  take  delays  at  the  court  of  heaven  for  denials.  2.  That  importunity 
and  resolute  hanging  on,  and  repeated  addresses  for  the  supply  of  the  same  need, 
are  very  welcome  and  acceptable  to  Christ  and  His  Father.  There  is  no  fear  of 
excess  here  ;  the  oftener  ye  come,  the  more  resolute  ye  are  in  your  hanging  on,  the 
more  welcome.  3.  That  the  faith  of  being  heard  at  length,  is  necessary  to  keep 
one  hanging  on  without  fainting  (Psa.  xxvii.  13).  4.  That  th^  hearing  to  be  got  at 
length  at  the  court  of  heaven  is  well  worth  the  waiting  on,  be  it  ever  so  long.  It 
will  more  than  counterbalance  all  the  fatigue  of  the  process,  that  is  kept  longest  in 
cepejidciice.  V.  The  fifth  thing  in  the  method  is,  the  ceetaintt  of  bdch  peti- 
TioNEBS  BEING  HEABD  AT  LENGTH.  1.  They  Bic  doubtlcss  God's  owu  children, 
elect  believers,  whatever  they  think  of  themselves  (Luke  xvii.  7).  2.  The  nature, 
name,  and  promise  of  God,  joins  to  insure  it.  He  is  good  and  gracious  in  His 
nature  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6-9).  3.  Such  prayers  are  the  product  of  His  own  Spirit  in 
them,  and  therefore  He  cannot  miss  to  be  heard  (James  v.  16).  4.  Our  Lord  Jesna 
has  given  His  word  on  it,  and  so  has  impawned  His  honour  they  shall  be  heard : 
••  I  tell  you  that  He  will  avenge  them  speedily."  VI.  Sixthly,  How  they  shall  bs 
BXABD  TO  theib  heabt's  CONTENT.     1.  They  shall  at  length  see  that  their  prayers 


CHAP,  ivm.]  ST.  LUKE.  841 

have  been  accepted.  I  do  not  say  they  shall  at  length  be  accepted,  but  they  shall 
Bee  they  have  been  so.  2.  They  shall  get  an  answer  of  their  petitions  to  their 
heart's  satisfaction  (Matt.  xv.  28).  "  The  needy  shall  not  always  be  forgotten  :  the 
expectation  of  the  poor  shall  not  perish  for  ever  "  (Psa.  ix.  18).  3.  They  shall  be 
fuUy  satisfied  as  to  the  long  delay,  and  the  whole  steps  of  the  procedure,  however 
perplexing  they  were  before  (Kev.  xv.  3).  4.  They  shall  get  it  with  increase 
according  to  the  time  they  waited  on,  and  the  hardships  they  sustained  during  the 
dependence  of  the  process.  The  fruit  of  the  promise,  the  longer  it  is  a-ripening, 
the  more  bulky  it  is.  6.  Lastly,  their  spiritual  enemies  that  flew  thick  and  strdng 
about  them  in  the  time  of  the  darkness,  shall  be  scattered  at  the  appearance  of  this 
light  (1  Sam.  ii.  6).  VII.  Seventhly,  How  it  shall  be  speedily,  notwithstanding 
THE  LONG  DELAY.  1.  It  shaU  be  speedily  in  respect  of  the  weight  and  value  of  it 
when  it  comes :  so  that  the  believer  looking  on  the  return  of  his  petition,  with  an 
eye  of  faith  perceiving  the  worth  of  it,  may  wonder  it  is  come  upon  so  short  ou- 
waiting  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  2.  It  shall  come  in  the  most  seasonable  nick  of  time  it 
can  come  in  {Gal.  vi.  9),  when  it  may  come  to  the  best  advantage  for  the  honour 
of  God  and  their  good :  and  that  which  comes  in  the  best  season,  comes  speedily. 
To  everything  there  is  a  season ;  so  fools'  haste  is  no  speed.  3.  It  shall  come  as 
soon  as  they  are  prepared  for  it  (Psa.  x.  17).  4.  It  shall  not  tarry  one  moment 
beyond  the  due  and  appointed  time  (Hab.  ii.  3).  6.  Lastly,  it  will  be  surprising, 
as  a  glaring  light  to  one  brought  out  of  a  dungeon,  though  he  was  expecting  it. 
{Ibid.)        The  necessity  of  prayer : — I.  With  regard  to  the  necessity  of  prayer,  the 

GERM   OF   THIS  AS  OF  OTHEB  BEVEALBD  DOCTBINES,  IS  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  ODB  NATDBE,  and 

affords  one  illustration  of  the  truth  of  that  profound  exclamation,  "  0  testimony  of  a 
Boul,  by  nature  Christian  1 "  Of  moral  truth  there  is  an  inward  engraving,  a  light, 
which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world.  "  The  virtues,"  says  a 
modem  writer,  "  were  like  plants  half  developed  in  some  gloomy  shade,  till  Christ 
poured  His  sunshine  upon  them,  and  made  them  flourish  with  luxuriance."  It  is 
important,  then,  to  ground  the  necessity  of  prayer  on  the  dictates  of  nature  as  well 
as  on  the  teaching  of  Bevelation,  thereby  resting  it  on  a  double  authority,  each  of 
which  lends  support  to  the  other.  For  anything  to  be  original  in  our  nature,  it 
must  possess  certain  properties ;  in  looking  back  to  the  beginning  of  our  race  it 
will  present  itself  without  any  external  origin,  and  it  will  continue  to  exist  under 
conditions  most  diverse  and  at  all  times.  We  examine,  then,  the  history  of  the 
past,  we  take  up  the  book  which  contains  the  first  records  of  our  race  in  order  to 
discover  whether  this  communing  with  God  existed  from  the  first — to  see  what  the 
first  human  souls  did.  All  the  elements  of  prayer  were  present  in  Adam's  inter- 
course with  his  Maker ;  man,  rational  and  dependent ;  God,  Almighty,  Omniscient, 
and  Good ;  and — communications  between  the  two.  We  trace  the  instinct  of 
prayer  continuing  in  faUen  man,  else  it  might  have  been  supposed  that  it  was  a 
part  of  his  supernatural  equipment,  and  had  no  foundation  in  his  natural  Ufe.  In 
Adam's  sons  this  instinct  survived ;  Cain  and  Abel  offered  sacrifices,  and  sacrifices 
are  the  outward  expression  of  prayer ;  there  was  an  ascent  of  the  mind  to  God,  a 
real  ascent  at  least  in  one  case,  for  "  by  faith  Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more 
excellent  sacrifice  than  Cain."  In  an  unfallen  state,  the  instinct  of  the  soul  was  to 
turn  to  the  Author  of  its  life,  with  joy  and  thankfulness ;  in  a  fallen  state,  (he 
instinct  of  the  soul  is  to  turn  to  Him  through  its  need  of  pardon  and  its  sense  of 
weakness ;  but  in  both  states  there  is  the  instinct  to  turn  to  Him,  though  the 
leading  reasons  for  doing  so  may  be  different.  Looking  back,  then,  into  the  past 
by  the  light  of  the  only  record  which  can  safely  guide  us,  we  find  the  practice  of 
prayer  from  the  first  without  any  external  command  or  origin,  and  therefore  it 
preserves  one  mark  of  an  instinct  of  nature.  But  an  instinct  to  be  acknowledged 
must  not  only  be  able  to  claim  antiquity  on  its  side  but  also  miiversality.  That 
which  is  a  genuine  part  of  human  nature  will  always  be  a  part  of  human  nature. 
Ii  that  which  marked  human  life  in  its  earlier  stages,  disappears  in  times  of 
advanced  civilization  and  culture,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  was  a  pure  instinct 
of  our  nature,  and  be  attributed  either  on  the  one  side  to  an  original  revelation  or 
on  the  other  to  a  defective  or  barbarous  condition.  It  must,  however,  be  admitted 
that  in  matters  of  religion,  the  mark  of  antiquity  in  an  instinct  has  a  special  value  ; 
we  can  see  in  it  "  natural  religion  "  before  it  has  been  tampered  with.  If  we  want 
to  learn  the  habits  of  an  animal,  we  must  see  it  in  its  native  freedom,  and  not  only 
after  it  has  been  trained  and  domesticated.  The  instinct  of  prayer,  however,  doea 
not  lack  the  second  property,  Qniversality ;  we  find  it  both  in  the  highest  and 
lowest  atatea  of  civilization,  in  places  and  races  widely  sundered  both  in  poaitioa 


843  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  lynt. 

and  circnmstance.  If  we  examine  the  practices  of  barbarous  nations ;  if  we  torn 
to  the  ancient  religions  of  the  East ;  if  we  look  at  Greece  and  Rome  in  the  pleni- 
tude of  their  intellectual  power,  we  find  that  in  some  fonn  or  shape  the  necessity  of 
prayer  and  homage  to  a  superior  Power  is  admitted,  and  in  no  nation  is  the  instinct 
entirely  obliterated.  In  the  root  of  human  nature  there  is  a  sense  of  dependency, 
and  a  sense  of  guilt ;  natural  religion  is  based  on  these  two,  the  correlativeo  of 
which  are  prayer  and  atonement — the  actions  respectively  proper  to  the  frail,  and 
to  the  sinful.  It  is  useless  to  speak  of  th.e  instinct  of  prayer  as  of  something 
imported  into  our  nature :  that  which  is  simply  imported  does  not  make  its  home 
so  fixed  and  sure,  that  no  lapse  of  time  or  change  of  circumstances  has  the  power  to 
dislodge  it.  I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  the  instinctive  character  of  prayer, 
because  on  it  I  first  ground  its  obligation ;  we  ought  to  pray  out  of  deference  to  an 
instinct  with  which  God  has  endowed  us,  for  by  our  higher  intuitions  and  instincts 
He  expresses  His  will,  and  to  neglect  to  act  in  accordance  with  them,  is  to  disobey 
His  voice  within  us.  Moreover,  this  instinct  of  prayer  is  an  imperious  one ;  it  ia 
one  which  will  assert  itself,  even  when  it  has  been  set  aside,  and  its  presence 
denied.  There  are  moments  in  life  when  men  are  superior  to  their  own  principles, 
and  human  systems  fail  to  silence  the  deep  cry  of  the  heart ;  when  men  pray  who 
have  denied  the  power  of  prayer.  "  That  men  ought  always  to  pray,"  then,  is  the 
teaching  of  nature,  and  prayer  as  a  matter  of  natural  religion  is  an  express  duty. 
II.  We  pass  now  from  the  sphere  of  the  natural  to  the  super-natural,  from  nature 
to  grace,  to  find  anotheb  basis  foe  the  necessity  of  prateb.  Prayer  meets  us  with  a 
two-fold  claim  in  the  domain  of  revealed  religion  ;  it  is  necessary  as  a  means  of 
grace,  it  is  necessary  also  as  a  fulfilment  of  an  express  command  of  God ;  these  are 
two  sides,  the  one  objective,  the  other  subjective,  of  the  same  truth.  It  will  be 
observed,  that  the  necessity  of  prayer  viewed  in  this  connection  is  derived  from  the 
prior  necessity  of  grace.  •'  Every  man  is  held  to  pray  in  order  to  obtain  spiritual 
goods,  which  are  not  given,  except  from  heaven ;  wherefore  they  are  not  able  to  be 
procured  in  any  other  way  but  by  being  thus  sought  for."  In  the  New  Testament, 
that  grace  is  a  necessity  for  the  supernatural  life  is  an  elemental  truth.  Grace  ia 
to  that  life  what  the  water  is  to  the  life  of  the  fish,  or  the  air  to  our  natural  life — 
something  absolutely  indispensable.  "  Being  justified  freely  by  His  grace."  "  By 
grace  ye  are  saved."  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am  ;  and  His  grace  which 
was  bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain."  "  Grow  in  grace."  "  He  which  hath 
begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it."  In  following  the  operations  of  grace 
from  the  commencement  of  the  spiritual  life  to  its  end,  five  effects  have  been 
enumerated — it  heals  the  soul,  it  produces  a  good  will,  it  enables  the  good  which 
was  willed  to  be  brought  about  in  action,  it  makes  perseverance  in  good  possible,  it 
leads  to  glory.  Thus  grace  is,  from  first  to  last,  the  invisible  nonrishment  of  the 
soal'B  life,  and  prayer  is  the  means  in  man's  own  power  of  gaining  grace ;  it  is 
through  prayer  that  the  different  effects  of  grace  are  wrought  in  us.  We  ask  God 
for  spiritual  healing — *'  Heal  my  soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against  Thee."  "  0  cleanse 
Thou  me  from  my  secret  faults."  We  need  Divine  help  for  resisting  temptations — 
"  When  Christ  was  baptized  and  prayed,  the  heavens  were  opened,  showing  that 
after  Baptism  pra\er  is  necessary  to  man  in  two  ways,  to  overcome  the  inward 
proneness  to  evil)  and  the  outward  enticements  of  the  world  and  the  devil." 
Temptations  to  be  resisted  with  sanctifying  effect  must  be  resisted  in  the  power  of 
prayer ;  slight  temptations  may  perhaps  be  vanquished  by  natural  effort,  or  over- 
thrown by  an  opposite  vice,  but  such  victories  are  not  registered  in  heaven.  Again, 
in  order  to  advance  in  the  spiritual  hfe,  in  the  development  of  virtues,  prayer  is  a 
necessity — the  apostles  prayed,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith."  The  increase  of  the 
interior  life  simply  consists  in  the  growth  of  different  virtues  and  graces,  and  these 
virtues  are  formed  by  the  combined  action  of  grace  and  free-will ;  these  are  the  two 
factors,  the  raw  material  so  to  speak,  from  which  the  fabric  is  manufactured.  A 
continaal  supply  of  grace  is  needed  for  the  increase  of  each  virtue,  and  therefore 
prayer  is  needed,  not  only  in  general,  but  also  with  definite  reference  to  the  support 
of  the  virtue  which  we  have  to  exercise,  or  in  which  we  are  most  conscious  of 
defect.  He  says  "  prayer  and  grace  are  of  the  same  necessity ;  grace  is  necessary 
for  salvation,  hence  it  ought  to  follow  that  prayer  also  is  necessary ;  but  why  should 
prayer  be  ordained  in  relation  to  eternity,  unless  it  be  for  the  sake  of  obtaining 
grace  ?  "  There  are,  however,  two  limits  to  the  power  of  prayer  which  we  must  not 
forget  in  its  relation  to  grace.  Prayer  is  itself  dependent  on  grace  in  the  spiritual 
hfe,  and  an  act  of  prayer  for  grace  is  a  correspondence  with  a  grace  which  has 
been  already  given.     "The  Spirit,"  St.  Paol  says,  "also  helpeth  our  infirmities: 


«HAP.  snn.J  ST.  LUKE.  841 

for  we  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought."  •'  Grace,"  St.  Chrysostom 
asserts,  "  precedes  our  prayers  always."  The  good  thought  or  desire  is  a  touch  from 
another  world ;  the  angels  of  God  descended  as  well  as  ascended  on  "  Bethel's 
Stair."  The  beginnings  of  life,  whether  natural  or  supernatural,  are  from  God ; 
but  the  continuation  and  increase  of  life  depend  also  on  human  co-operation. 
Again,  prayer  as  a  means  of  grace  must  not  take  the  place  of  Sacraments.  The 
revelation  which  proclaims  the  necessity  of  the  one,  also  asserts  the  obligation  of 
the  other.  Prayer  is  the  respiration  of  the  soul ;  Sacraments,  its  medicine  and 
food;  both  alike  necessary,  though  the  one  constantly,  the  other  occasionally. 
III.  The  obligation  to  pray  is  not,  however,  to  be  viewed  sijiply  in  reference  to 
GOB  OWN  BENEFIT.  Prayer  is  also  an  act  of  religion,  an  act  of  obedience  to  a  Divine 
precept  which  we  should  be  bound  to  perform,  even  if  no  gi-ace  came  to  us  from  its 
performance.  This  objective  view  of  the  necessity  of  prayer  is  one  less  familiar, 
but  hardly  less  important.  Now  from  this  doctrine  flow  two  results.  The  omission 
and  neglect  of  prayer  involve  not  only  a  loss  of  grace,  but  constitute  a  distinct  sin ; 
it  is  a  sin  against  religion,  and  against  charity.  Religion  is  a  moral  virtue,  whose 
province  it  is  to  show  due  honour  and  reverence  to  Almighty  God ;  to  cease  to  pray 
therefore,  is  to  fail  to  exercise  a  moral  virtue,  and  that  the  highest.  What  justice 
is  towards  the  creature,  religion  is  towards  God — that  by  which  we  seek  to  give  Him 
His  due.  To  neglect  prayer,  is  also  to  sin  against  charity.  Charity  presents  three 
objects — God,  ourselves,  others — all  of  whom  are  to  be  loved  :  but  when  prayer  is 
omitted  we  fail  in  the  exercise  of  the  love  of  God,  for  we  desire  to  hold  converse 
with  those  whom  we  love ;  the  love  of  our  neighbour  we  fail  in  also,  for  he  needs 
our  prayers ;  and  the  love  of  our  soul  we  fail  in,  by  the  neglect  of  a  duty  upon 
which  our  spiritual  life  depends.  It  remains  for  us  to  notice  when  this  precept  of 
prayer  is  binding,  so  that  the  omission  of  it  becomes  a  sin.  When  Christ  says, 
••  men  ought  always  to  pray,"  it  is  evident  that  He  does  not  mean  that  no  other 
duty  shoiSd  be  fulfilled ;  but  that  at  all  times,  whatever  we  are  doing,  the  spirit  of 
prayer  should  be  preserved.  IV.  We  have  now  to  view  the  necessity  of  prater  kb  a. 
TBANSFORMiNo  INFLUENCE.  Those  who  do  not  admit  that  prayer  has  power  with  God, 
yet  acknowledge  that  it  has  power  with  us,  and  allow  that  it  possesses  a  reflex 
influence  on  those  who  use  it.  The  soul  by  communing  with  God  becomes  like 
God,  receives  from  His  perfections  supplies  of  light,  of  power,  and  love  according 
to  its  needs.  The  subjective  effects  of  prayer  are  as  manifold  as  the  Divine  per- 
fections. It  is  said  that  constant  intercourse  between  creatures  causes  them  to 
resemble  one  another,  not  only  in  disposition  and  habits,  but  even  in  features.  _  Old 
painters  always  made  St.  John  like  unto  his  Master  in  face.  They  instinctively 
imagined,  that  closeness  of  communion  between  the  beloved  disciple  and  his  Lord 
had  occasioned  a  hkeness  in  features  and  expression.  The  flrst  basis  of  its  obliga- 
tion will  remind  us  that  we  must  not  regard  oar  nature  as  entirely  corrupt,  and  its 
voice  as  always  misleading,  but  that  in  it,  fallen  as  it  is,  there  are  vestiges  of  its 
original  greatness,  and  intuitions  and  instincts  which  are  to  as  an  inward  revelation 
of  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  The  second  reason  for  the  necessity  of  prayer,  will 
explain  perhaps  the  cause  of  weakness  in  the  hoar  of  temptation — our  lack  of 
grace.  Farther,  we  mast  be  careful  to  regard  prayer  not  only  as  a  means  of  grace 
bat  as  a  duty,  and  thus  folfil  it  without  reference  to  oar  own  deUght  or  profit  in  the 
act.  If,  again,  we  complain  of  oar  earthliness  and  worldliness,  and  the  difficulty 
which  we  have  in  fetching  our  motives  of  action  from  a  higher  sphere,  may  it  not 
be  that  we  have  failed  to  realize  the  importance  of  prayer  in  its  subjective  effect 
npon  character,  and  have  thought  to  gain  a  ray  of  heavenly  brightness  without  the 
habitual  oommnning  with  God  upon  the  Mount?  (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.) 
Necetiity  of  prayer : — Prayer  is  natural  to  men.  The  knowledge  of  our  own 
weabaesa  is  soon  forced  upon  as,  but  with  this  conviction  there  comes  another,  the 
sense  of  dependence  on  One — great,  loving,  and  wise.  Out  of  these  springs  the 
necessity  of  prayer,  which  is  the  language  of  the  frail  to  the  mighty — the  confession 
of  need,  and  the  instinct  of  trust.  Every  known  religion  attests  this  irresistible 
impulse  to  pray.  Men,  indeed,  will  be  found  to  deny,  or  to  undervalue  the  evidence 
of  this  instinct  of  prayer ;  but  there  are  times  which  wring  prayer  from  prayerless 
lips ;  times  of  danger,  when  all  classes  find  prayer  the  most  appropriate  and  natural 
utterance  of  their  lips ;  times  of  heart-fear,  when  the  whole  spirit  sends  up  from 
the  depths  of  confusion  and  darkness  an  exceeding  bitter  cry,  wherein  terror  and 
doubt  mingle  with  the  unquenchable  instinct  of  prayer;  times  when,  perhaps, 
death  is  approaching,  and  the  dark,  unexplored  confines  of  the  other  world  begin 
to  loom  vast  and  vague  upon  on  awakening  conscience,  and  the  firm  citadel  ot 


E44  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  xvm. 

Btoutly  maintained  unbelief  is  swept  away,  and  prayer  rushes  forth  in  such  • 
despairing  shriek  as  burst  from  the  lips  of  Thistlewood — "  0  God,  if  there  be  a 
God,  save  my  soul,  if  I  have  a  soul  1 "  It  is  not  the  approach  of  danger  or  the 
feeling  of  fear  only  which  calls  forth  prayer.  The  irresistible  disposition  it 
experienced  under  the  influence  of  feelings  widely  different  from  fear.  The  con- 
templation of  the  universe,  and  the  incomprehensible  Being  who  embraces  all 
things,  so  wrought  upon  the  mind  of  Bousseau  that,  in  the  restlessness  of  his 
transports,  he  would  exclaim,  "  0  great  Being  1  O  great  Being  I  "  The  majesty 
and  splendour  of  nature,  brightening  and  kindling  under  the  beams  of  the  sun, 
rising  upon  the  rocky  heights  of  Jura,  and  circling  the  sky  with  flame,  filled  the 
Boul  of  Voltaire  with  such  awe  that  he  uncovered  his  head,  and,  kneeling,  he  cried, 
"  I  believe — I  believe  in  Thee !  O  mighty  God,  I  believe  1 "  If  the  language  of 
prayer  is  thus  natural  to  all  men,  and  forced  at  times  from  reluctant  lips,  it  is 
natural,  with  an  inexpressible  sweetness,  to  hearts  accustomed  to  communion  with 
God.  The  cultivated  instinct  becomes  a  rich  enjoyment,  and  an  unutterable  relief. 
The  high  duty  becomes  the  highest  privilege.  (Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter.)  Times 
unfavourable  to  prayer: — There  are  times  when  prayer  is  natural  to  the  moat 
careless ;  but  there  are  also  times  when  all  things  tend  to  deaden  the  spirit  of 
prayer  in  the  most  thoughtful  and  prayerful  of  God's  children.  Such  times  are 
times  of  great  and  extensive  activity,  when  pleasure  is  busy,  and  even  enjoymenta 
are  full  of  toil.  In  the  ceaseless  industry  of  business  and  gaiety,  amusement 
becomes  hard  work.  Hard  work  brings  weariness,  and  weariness  is  followed  by 
an  indisposition  for  any  exertion  of  the  spirit.  Such,  too,  are  times  of  a  widespread 
feeling  of  uneasiness,  when  a  vague  apprehension  seems  to  have  seized  hold  upon 
th«  minds  of  all  classes,  and  a  strange  sense  of  insecurity  begets  an  unreasoning 
and  universally  felt  fear.  Such  are  times  of  noisy  religionism  and  demonstrative 
piety,  when  the  minds  of  men  are  galvanized  into  an  unnatural  activity  through 
the  spirit  of  an  unwholesome  rivalry ;  when  convictions  are  degraded  into  opinions, 
and  toil  dwindles  into  talk,  and  organized  Christian  effort  is  strangled  in  discussion ; 
when  an  impracticable  tenacity  of  trifles  and  a  stupendous  disregard  of  principles 
throws  the  appearance  of  vitality  over  a  degenerate  and  dead  pietism.  In  such 
times  the  lulling  influences  of  a  strained  activity,  an  undefined  terror  ;  and  a  self  • 
asserting,  heart-distracting  zealotism  steal  over  the  spirits  of  the  most  watchful  of 
Christ's  servants,  and  often  diminish  insensibly  their  vigilance  and  earnestness  in 
prayer.  A  convergence  of  such  times  into  one  period  Christ  described,  and  on  the 
description  He  founded  His  warning  that  "  men  ought  always  to  pray."  [Ibid.) 
Patient  prayer : — One  day,  returning  home  from  a  morning  meeting  of  the  Holiness 
Convention,  I  came  across  a  little  boy  standing  at  a  house  door,  and  crying  bitterly. 
I  tried  to  comfort  him,  but  he  only  cried  the  more.  Just  then  his  mother  came 
out,  and  when  I  inquired  what  was  wrong  with  him,  I  found  he  was  crying  because 
his  mother  would  not  give  him  his  breakfast  before  the  right  time.  Similarly,  we, 
as  God's  children,  often  make  bitter  repinings,  and  have  hard  thoughts  about  the 
Lord,  because  He  does  not  answer  our  prayers  at  the  time,  and  in  the  way  that  we 
expect.  His  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  is  His  time  always  our  time ;  but  that 
in  some  way  or  other,  and  in  the  right  way,  and  at  His  own  time — not  a  moment 
too  soon,  not  a  moment  too  late — He  will  perform  that  which  is  good  for  us  and 
to  His  glory.  {J.  G.  Forbes. )  Constant  exercise  in  prayer : — ^When  a  pump  is 
frequently  used,  but  little  pains  are  necessary  to  obtain  water ;  the  water  pours 
out  at  the  first  stroke,  because  it  is  high ;  but  if  the  pump  has  not  been  used  for 
a  long  time  the  water  gets  low,  and  when  you  want  it  you  must  pump  a  long  while, 
and  the  water  comes  only  after  great  efforts.  It  is  so  with  prayer.  If  we  are 
instant  in  prayer,  every  little  circumstance  awakens  the  disposition  to  pray,  and 
desire  and  words  are  always  ready.  But  if  we  neglect  prayer  it  is  difficult  for  ua 
to  pray.  Shall  we  pray,  or  shall  we  not  f — A  distinguished  man  of  science,  an 
Englishman,  was  reported  in  the  newspapers  the  other  day  to  have  said  to  an 
assembly  in  the  American  capital,  "  I  am  not  a  praying  man."  He  was  not 
bemoaning  himself,  or  making  confession  of  sin,  or  even  uttering  regret.  If  he 
did  not  speak  boastfully,  he  certainly  spoke  without  any  sense  of  shame,  and 
apparently  with  some  degree  of  superiority  over  the  commonplace  and  lag-behind 
people  who  still  think  it  right  to  pray.  Another  distinguished  man,  an  Englishman 
likewise,  not  a  man  of  science,  but  a  man  of  profound  thought,  was  asked  on  his 
deathbed  how  he  felt,  and  hia  reply  was,  "I  can  pray,  and  that's  a  great  thing." 
In  his  judgment  prayer  was  the  highest  service  to  which  a  whole  man  can  giva 
bimaelf :  not  something  to  be  left  to  the  ignorant  and  feeble,  but  to  be  risen  to. 


CHAP,  xnn.]  ST.  LUKE.  845 

and  aspired  after  by  the  greatest  intellect  and  the  most  illumined  mind.  Which 
of  the  two  was  right  ?  Which  of  them  possessed  the  truest  conception  of  the  whole 
duty  and  privilege  of  man  ?     I.  Let  us  see  what  may,  justifiably  ob  unjustitiablt, 

INDDCK   A    MAN    TO  TAKE  THE    POSITION  INTOLVED    IN    THE  AVOWAL,  "I  am  DOt  a  praying 

man."  1.  He  may  take  this  position  who  is  conscious  of  no  want  which  scientifia 
Btudy  and  material  good  cannot  satisfy.  But  what  shall  we  say  of  such  a  man  as 
this  ?  Ib  be  a  true  type  of  our  common  humanity,  or  of  our  most  educated 
humanity  ?  Or,  rather,  is  he  not  less  than  a  man — only  part  of  a  man  ?  The 
intellect  is  not  the  soul,  and  intellectual  pleasure  cannot  satisfy  the  soul,  or,  if 
there  be  some  souls  which  profess  to  be  satisfied  with  it,  it  only  proves  how  untrue 
Bonis  may  be  to  their  own  highest  capacities.  2.  He  may  take  this  position  who  is 
separated  from  mankind  by  the  non-possession  of  anything  of  the  nature  of  a 
religious  faculty.  An  old  Greek  said,  "  You  may  find  peoples  without  cities,  without 
arts,  without  theatres  ;  but  you  can  find  no  people  without  an  altar  and  a  God." 
An  Englishman,  not  a  believer  in  Christianity,  said  that  *'  upon  accurate  search, 
religion  and  faith  appear  the  only  ultimate  differences  of  man  " — those  which 
distinguish  him  from  a  brute.  3.  He  who  has  ascertained  that  God  cannot,  con- 
Bistently  with  His  own  laws,  or  will  not,  for  some  other  reason,  hear  prayer,  may 
take  the  position  implied  in  the  saying,  "  I  am  not  a  praying  man."  But  where 
is  such  a  man  to  be  found  ?  To  know  that  God  cannot  answer  prayer  consistently 
with  His  own  laws,  implies  a  knowledge  which  is  properly  Divine.  4.  He  who 
would  justify  his  position  must  be  conscious  that  he  has  no  sins  to  be  forgiven. 
And  if  any  one  should  aver  that  his  conscience  acquits  him,  we  should  say  (1  John 
i.  8,  10).  5.  The  man  who  would  justify  himself  in  saying,  "  I  am  not  a  praying 
man,"  must  have  already  attained  all  moral  excellence,  or  be  conscious  of  power 
to  attain  it  by  his  unaided  efforts.  In  this  matter  we  discern  the  blindness  that 
has  fallen  on  men.  They  can  see  very  clearly  the  power  that  is  needed  to  produce 
physioal  results,  but  not  that  which  is  needed  to  produce  moral.  And  in  this  they 
only  prove  how  much  sense  has  acquired  dominion  over  them.    II.  The  reasons 

FOB  NOT  PBAYINO  WHICH   MEN,  IP  HONEST  ABOUT   THEMSELVES,  WOULD  AVOW.      1.  Prayer 

la  distasteful  to  them.  They  have  no  heart  for  it.  This  is  a  sure  sign  of  being 
spiritually  out  of  health.  Seek  the  aid  of  the  Healer  of  souls.  2.  They  feel  that 
prayer  is  inconsistent  with  their  habits  of  life.  Then  change  those  habits.  "  Wash 
you,  make  you  clean."  {J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  Hindrances  to  prayer : — 1.  There 
is  the  objection  that,  God  having  infinite  wisdom  to  determine  what  is  best,  and 
Almighty  power  to  accomplish  His  decree,  there  is  nothing  for  His  creatures  to  do 
but  submit  with  reverence  and  trust.  If  prayer  cannot  change  His  mind,  it  is 
useless,  and,  moreover,  an  impertinence ;  if  it  could,  it  would  be  a  loss,  since  it 
would  involve  a  sacrifice  of  greater  wisdom  to  less — a  result  which  can  only  be  con- 
ceived of  as  a  punishment.  The  answer  to  this  is,  that  God  in  giving  human  beinga 
a  real  freedom,  a  power  to  choose  whether  certain  events  shall  be  one  way  or  the 
other,  has  really,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  for  wise  purposes,  limited  His  own.  In 
short,  there  is  a  margin  of  greater  or  less  good,  of  manageable  error,  of  permissible 
evil,  which  God  can  set  apart  for  our  freedom  to  exercise  itself  in,  without  the 
world  escaping  His  controL  The  premise,  therefore,  from  which  this  objection 
starts,  that  "  whatever  is,  is  best,"  is  not  true  in  the  large  sense  of  those  words. 
Whatever  is  is  best  under  all  the  circumstances,  under  the  circumstances  of  our 
crime,  negligence,  or  error,  but  not  the  best  that  might  have  been  had  we  reached 
forth  our  hand  to  take  what  lay  within  our  power.  It  may  be  better  if  we  do  not 
pray,  that  we  should  miss  some  blessings  God  has  in  reserve  for  those  who  seek 
Him  in  love  and  trust,  but  this  is  not  the  best  that  might  have  been.  It  is  the 
will  of  God  in  relation  to  our  negligence ;  but  our  trust  and  importunity  would 
have  called  into  action  a  higher  and  more  generous  law  of  His  loving  nature.  2. 
The  next  objection  is  that  of  the  imagination  filled  and  overpowered  by  the  thought 
of  the  vastness  of  the  material  universe.  "Do  yoo  suppose,"  men  ask,  "that  a 
petty,  individual  life,  a  worm  crawling  on  the  surface  of  one  of  His  smallest 
planets,  can  be  an  object  of  particular  consideration  and  interest  to  the  Almighty 
Creator  ?  "  Why  not  T  Is  the  Almighty  Ruler  compelled  to  distinguish  between 
imperial  and  provincial  cares  like  an  earthly  monarch  ?  Because  He  is  here  with 
some  suffering  infant,  taking  its  inarticulate  moan  into  His  mighty  and  pitiful 
heart,  is  He  less  in  the  planet  Neptune,  oris  His  power  withdrawn  from  the  glowing 
masses  of  future  worlds  ?  There  is  no  egotism  in  thinking  that  man — any  man — 
is  more  important  in  the  Divine  regard  than  a  mass  of  matter,  however  long  it  has 
lain  under  th«  Creator's  eye,  and  however  much  it  may  impose  upon  oar  imagination. 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [chap,  xntu 

3.  Practical  hindrances  to  prayer  are  found  where  the  speculative  barriers  we  have 
been  considering  do  not  exist.  Mental  indolence  is  one  of  the  greatest  of  these 
hindrances,  and  mental  indolence  is  a  much  more  prevalent  and  serious  fault  than 
bodily  indolence.  No  one  can  really  pray  without  using  his  understanding,  engaging 
his  affections,  and  making  an  effort  of  will.  Prayer  is  work,  and  hard  work.  We  must 
go  to  the  Saviour,  and  ask  His  aid.  "  Lord,  teach  as  to  pray."  (£.  W.  Shalders,  B.A.) 
Belief  in  prayer  the  outcome  of  need  realized: — As  to  the  so-called  scientific 
challenge  to  prove  the  efficacy  of  prayer  by  the  result  of  simultaneous  petition.  A 
God  that  should  fail  to  hear,  receive,  attend  to  one  single  prayer,  the  feeblest  or 
worst,  I  cannot  believe  in ;  but  a  God  that  would  grant  every  request  of  every  man 
or  every  company  of  men,  would  be  an  evil  God — that  is  no  God,  but  a  demon. 
That  God  should  hang  in  tbe  thought-atmosphere,  hke  a  windmill,  waiting  till  men 
enough  should  combine  and  send  out  prayer  in  sufficient  force  to  turn  His  outspread 
arms,  is  an  idea  too  absurd.  God  waits  to  be  gracious,  not  to  be  tempted.  "  But  if 
God  is  BO  good  as  you  represent  Him,  and  if  He  knows  all  that  we  need,  and  better 
far  than  we  do  ourselves,  why  should  it  be  necessary  to  ask  Him  for  anything  ?  "  I 
answer,  What  if  He  knows  prayer  to  be  the  thing  we  need  first  and  most  ?  What 
if  the  main  object  in  God's  idea  of  prayer  be  the  supplying  of  our  great,  our  endless 
need — the  need  of  Himself  ?  What  if  the  good  of  all  our  smaller  and  lower  needs 
lies  in  this,  that  they  help  to  drive  us  to  God  ?  Hunger  may  drive  the  runaway 
child  home,  and  he  may  or  may  not  be  fed  at  once,  but  he  needs  his  mother  more 
than  his  dinner.  Communion  with  God  is  the  one  need  of  the  soul  beyond  all  other 
need ;  prayer  is  the  beginning  of  that  communion,  and  some  need  is  the  motive  ol 
that  prayer.  Our  wants  are  for  the  sake  of  our  coming  into  communion  with  God, 
our  eternal  need.  In  regard,  however,  to  the  high  necessities  of  our  nature,  it  is  in 
order  that  He  may  be  able  to  give  that  God  requires  as  to  ask — requires  by  driving 
us  to  it — by  shutting  us  up  to  prayer.  For  how  can  He  give  into  the  soul  of  a  man 
what  it  needs,  while  that  soul  cannot  receive  it  ?  The  ripeness  for  receiving  is  the 
asking.  The  blossom-cup  of  the  soul,  to  be  filled  with  the  heavenly  dews,  is  its 
prayer.  When  the  soul  is  hungry  for  tiie  light,  for  the  truth — when  its  hunger  has 
waked  its  higher  energies,  thoroughly  roused  the  will,  and  brought  the  soul  into  its 
highest  condition,  that  of  action,  its  only  fitness  for  receiving  the  things  of  God, 
that  action  is  prayer.  Then  God  can  give  ;  then  He  can  be  as  He  would  towards 
the  man  ;  for  the  glory  of  God  is  to  give  Himself.  We  thank  thee,  Lord  Christ,  for 
by  Thy  pain  alone  do  we  rise  towards  the  knowledge  of  this  glory  of  Thy  Father  and 
our  Father.  (G.  Macdonald,LL.D.)  Tht  adaptability  of  nature  to  prayer: — A  water- 
fall is  a  scientific  object  only  in  a  very  rude  way.  But  when  every  drop  of  its  waters 
has  been  manipulated  and  controlled  by  the  human  will  till  the  mills  of  a  Lowell  or  a 
Lawrence  display  from  every  spindle  and  shuttle  the  presence  of  human  intelligence 
and  power,  then  the  untamed  river  begins  to  sparkle  with  the  brilliancy  of  science, 
and  to  murmur  its  praises  from  every  ripple.  That  is,  the  more  mind-power  is 
mingled  with  matter-power,  the  more  scientific  is  the  compound  result.  The  ani> 
formity  of  the  waterfall  is  far  less  scientific  than  the  diversity  of  the  waterwheel. 
Automatic  mechanisms,  machines  that  adjust  themselves  to  change,  throwing 
themselves  out  of  gear  at  the  least  obstacle  or  breakage,  ringing  a  bell  as  a  sign&I 
of  distress,  increasing  or  diminishing  combustion,  changing  position,  as  in  the  case 
of  a  lathe  to  meet  aU  the  convolutions  of  a  gan-stock,  have  a  far  higher  scientifio 
character  than  a  carpenter's  drawing-knife,  or  a  housewife's  spinning-wheel,  which 
display  less  of  diversity  and  more  of  uniformity.  It  was  once  supposed  that  the 
solar  system  is  so  balanced  that  the  loss  of  a  grain  of  weight,  or  tbe  slightest  change 
of  motion,  would  dislocate  and  destroy  the  whole  system.  It  was  a  higher  science, 
not  a  lower,  that  has  since  taught  as  that  exact  uniformity  is  by  no  means 
necessary  to  the  stability  of  the  system,  but  that  oscillation  and  change  are  fully 
provided  for  in  the  original  plan.  The  principle  holds  good  that  the  modifications 
of  a  mind-power  introduced  into  a  material  mechanism  advance  its  scientific  rank, 
and  increase  rather  than  diminish  the  proof  of  the  presence  of  law  and  order  in  its 
working.  I  was  riding,  a  few  years  since,  about  one  of  the  rural  cities  of  the  State 
of  New  York  with  one  of  the  most  distinguished  preachers  at  the  metropolis.  We 
were  speaking  of  the  curious  fallacies  involved  in  Tyndall's  famous  prayer-gauge 
eonandrom.  Just  then  we  drove  up  to  the  city  water-works.  I  told  him  that  if  h« 
would  go  in  with  me  I  thought  we  could  find  a  good  illustration  of  the  manner  in 
which  God  may  answer  prayer  without  interfering  with  any  of  the  laws  of  nature. 
The  point,  let  us  remember,  is,  that  the  power  of  an  intelligent  will  can  be  so 
introduced  among  the  forces  of  matter  as  to  have  perfect  uniformity  in  the  working 


OBAP.  rvra.]  8T.  LUKE.  S4T 

of  those  forces,  while  diversity  appears  in  their  results.  The  building  we  entered 
was  furnished  with  a  HoUey  engine.  As  we  stood  by  the  steam  gauge  we  observed 
constant  and  considerable  changes  in  the  amount  of  steam  produced.  As  there  waa 
no  cause  apparent  in  or  about  tbe  engine  itself,  we  asked  for  an  explanation. 
"  That,"  said  the  engineer,  "  is  done  by  the  people  in  the  city.  As  they  open  their 
faucets  to  draw  the  water  the  draft  upon  our  fires  is  increased.  As  they  close  them, 
it  is  diminished.  The  smallest  child  can  change  the  movements  of  our  engine 
according  to  his  will.  It  was  the  design  of  the  maker  to  adjust  his  engine  so  that 
it  should  respond  perfectly  to  tbe  needs  of  the  people,  be  they  great  or  small."  Just 
then  the  bell  rung,  the  furnace- drafts  flew  open,  the  steam  rose  rapidly  in  the  gauge, 
the  engineer  flew  to  his  post,  the  ponderous  machinery  accelerated  its  movement. 
We  heard  a  general  alarm  of  fire.  "  How  is  that?  "  we  asked.  "  That,"  he  said, 
"was  the  opening  of  some  great  fire-plug."  "  And  how  about  the  bell?  What  did 
that  ring  for  ?  "  "That,"  he  said,  "  was  to  pat  us  on  the  alert.  You  saw  that  the 
firemen  began  to  throw  on  coal  at  once.  A  thousand  things  have  to  be  looked  after 
wben  there  is  a  great  fire.  It  won't  do  to  leave  the  engine  to  itself  at  such  times." 
In  a  moment  there  came  a  lull.  The  great  pumps  moved  more  deliberately.  In 
another  minute  a  roar  of  steam  told  us  the  safety-valve  had  opened,  and  soon  the 
great  engine  had  returned  to  its  ordinary,  sleepy  motion.  •'  Wonderful,"  said  my 
friend  ;  "  the  whole  thing  seems  alive.  I  almost  thought  it  would  start  and  run  to 
the  fire  itself."  "  I  think  this  one  of  the  grandest  triumphs  of  science,"  said  the 
engineer,  as  he  bade  me  good-bye.  The  illustration  is  a  good  one,  but  others  of  the 
eame  sort  are  at  our  hand  on  every  side.  The  uniformity  of  nature  is,  in  fact,  one 
of  its  lesser  attributes.  Its  great  glory  is  in  its  wonderful  adaptability.  Its  greatest 
glory  is  its  unlimited  capacity  to  receive  mind-forces,  and  to  mingle  them  with  its 
matter-forces  in  perfect  harmony,  and  in  infinite  variety  of  combination.  If  human 
science  has  been  able  to  do  so  much  to  overcome  the  eventless  uniformity  of  nature 
in  its  wildness  and  crudenese,  shall  we  deny  to  the  Divine  omniscience  the  power 
to  effect  the  slightest  modifications  necessary  in  answering  the  prayers  of  His 
children  ?  Nay,  shall  we  deny  to  Him  the  power  so  to  adjust  the  original  mechanism 
o£  the  universe  that  prayer  with  its  appropriate  action  may  directly  modify  that 
mechanism,  as  the  child's  thirst  and  his  little  hand  can  open  a  faucet  and  change 
the  action  of  the  great  water-works  miles  away.  Or,  is  it  at  all  unscientific  to 
believe  that  other  intelligent  ageuts  may,  in  answer  to  prayer,  be  "  caused  to  fly 
Bwiftly,"  as  the  httle  bell  aroused  the  engineer.  Or  can  science  offer  any  valid 
objection  if  we  say  that  God  Himself  holds  the  forces  of  nature  in  His  own  hand, 
waiting,  for  high  moral  reasons,  **  to  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel  to  do 
these  things  for  them  "  ?  {Prof.  J.  P.  Gulliver.)  Prayer  answered  after  death : — 
Let  me  teU  you  that  if  any  of  you  should  die  with  your  prayers  unanswered,  you 
need  not  conclude  that  God  has  disappointed  you.  I  have  heard  that  a  certain 
godly  father  bad  the  nnhappiness  to  be  the  parent  of  some  five  or  six  most 
graceless  sons.  All  of  them  as  they  grew  up  imbibed  infidel  sentiments,  and 
led  a  libidinous  life.  The  father  who  had  been  constantly  praying  for  them, 
and  was  a  pattern  of  every  virtue,  hoped  at  least  that  in  his  death  he  might 
be  able  to  say  a  word  that  should  move  their  hearts.  He  gathered  them  to 
his  bedside,  but  his  nnhappiness  in  dying  was  extreme,  for  he  lost  the  light  of  God's 
countenance,  and  was  beset  with  doubts  and  fears,  and  the  last  black  thought  that 
haunted  him  was,  "  Instead  of  my  death  being  a  testimony  for  God,  which  will  win 
my  dear  sons,  I  die  in  such  darkness  and  gloom  that  I  fear  I  shall  confirm  them  in 
their  infidelity,  and  lead  them  to  think  that  there  is  nothing  in  Christianity  at  all." 
The  effect  was  the  reverse.  The  sons  came  round  the  grave  at  the  funeral,  and 
when  they  returned  to  the  house,  the  eldest  son  thus  addressed  his  brothers : — "  My 
brothers,  throughout  his  lifetime,  our  father  often  spoke  to  us  about  religion,  and 
we  have  always  despised  it,  but  what  a  sermon  his  deathbed  has  been  to  us  1  for  if  he 
who  served  God  so  well  and  lived  so  near  to  God  found  it  so  hard  a  thing  to  die,  what 
kind  of  death  may  we  expect  ours  to  be  who  have  lived  without  God  and  without 
hope  ? "  The  same  feeling  possessed  them  all,  and  thus  the  father's  death  had 
strangely  answered  the  prayers  of  his  life  through  the  grace  of  God.  You  cannot 
tell  but  what,  when  you  are  in  glory,  you  should  look  down  from  the  windows  of 
heaven  and  receive  a  double  heaven  in  beholding  yotu:  dear  sons  and  daughters  con- 
verted by  the  words  you  left  behind.  I  do  not  say  this  to  make  you  cease  pleading 
lor  their  immediate  conversion,  but  to  encourage  you.  Never  give  up  prayer,  never 
be  tempted  to  cease  from  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Prayer  u  vmnly  : — ••  Men  ought 
to  pray."    Let  none  misunderstand  as  when  we  lay  stress  on  the  word  **  men,"   01 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rvm, 

ooarse,  Christ  does  not  mean  one  sex  merely ;  He  immediately  afterwards  speaks  of 
"  a  certain  widow."  His  reference  is  to  the  human  race  at  large.  We  are  assared 
by  Paul  that  in  Him  there  is  "  neither  male  nor  female."  Nevertheless,  we  eagerly 
take  advantage  of  the  word  thus  used  by  oar  Saviour  that  we  may  affirm  and  main- 
tain the  manliness  of  prayer.  The  assertion  is  far  from  unnecessary,  and  every  one 
who  is  acquainted  with  public  opinion  will,  we  think,  agree  with  us.  Is  there  not 
a  notion  abroad  that  prayer  is  a  somewhat  feeble,  sentimental,  effeminate  pursuit  7 
Are  we  not  often  reminded  by  travellers  on  the  contii^ent  of  the  fact  that  churches 
and  cathedrals  are  chiefly  filled  by  women  ?  Sandy  Mackaye,  in  "  Alton  Locke," 
describes  a  certain  congregation  as  made  up  of  "  babies  and  bonnets,"  and  wa 
know  what  the  inference  is.  Dr.  J.  Martineaa  felicitously  speaks  of  those  who 
regard  it  "a  fond  superstition  and  womanly  weakness  to  ask  God  anything." 
Don't  we  all  recollect  the  account  given  of  Tom  Brown  when,  on  arriving  at  school, 
he  was  pelted,  chaffed,  and  ridiculed,  because  he  kneeled  beside  his  bedf 
Perhaps  the  last-named  incident  is  more  significant  than  any  or  the  whole  of  th« 
preceding  ones,  since  there  is  nothing  about  which  boys  are  so  ambitious  as  to  seem 
manly.  The  occurrence  is,  therefore,  a  feather  which,  as  it  flies,  shows  the  way 
of  the  wind.  The  idea  that  prayer  is  unworthy  of  us  as  men  is  utterly  unreason- 
able and  untrue.  Is  it  not  manly  to  do  right?  No  one  disputes  ii.  We  get 
our  word  virtue  from  the  Latin  vir,  a  man ;  to  be  moral  is  to  be  manly.  By 
parity  of  argimient,  to  do  right  generally  must  be  manly  ;  prayer  is  right, 
God  would  not  will  it  were  it  not;  therefore  it  is  manly.  (T.  R,  Stevenson.) 
Universal  prayer  : — Beiuemb»r,  you  can  pray  for  any  need — for  lengthened  life,  as 
Hezekiah  did ;  for  help,  as  Daniel  did ;  for  light,  as  Bartimeus  did ;  for  mercy,  as 
David  did ;  for  rain,  as  Elijah  did ;  for  a  son,  as  Hannah  did ;  for  grace,  as  Paul 
did.  You  can  pray,  too,  anywhere ;  in  the  deep,  like  Jonah ;  on  the  sea  or  the 
house-top,  like  Peter ;  on  your  bed,  like  Hezekiah ;  in  the  mountain,  like  Jesas ; 
in  the  wilderness,  Uke  Hagar ;  in  the  street,  like  Jairus ;  in  a  cave,  like  David ;  on 
the  cross,  like  the  dying  thief.  You  can  pray,  too,  anyhow ;  short,  like  Peter  and 
the  publican ;  long,  like  Moses  at  the  consecration  of  the  Tabernacle,  or  Solomoa 
at  the  dedication  of  the  Temple.  You  can  pray  in  silence,  as  Haimah  did  in  the 
Temple;  in  your  secret  thoughts,  as  Nehemiah  did  before  Darius ;  or  aloud,  like 
the  Syro-Phenician  woman;  in  tears,  like  Magdalen;  in  groans,  or  songs,  as  David 
did.  You  can  pray  any  time.  In  the  morning,  Uke  David ;  at  noon,  like  Daniel ; 
at  midnight,  Uke  Silas ;  in  childhood,  like  Samuel ;  in  youth,  like  Timothy ;  in 
manhood,  like  the  centurion ;  in  age,  like  Simeon ;  in  sickness,  like  Job ;  or  in 
death,  like  Jacob  and  the  dying  Christ.  And  all  of  them  were  heard  by  the  Hearer 
of  prayer.  I  pray  you,  learn  to  pray  1  Link  yourselves  to  the  throne  of  God. 
Prayer  will  stand  you  in  good  stead  every  day  of  your  mortal  life  I  will  make  you 
joyful  in  the  hour  of  death ;  and  by  the  power  of  prayer  yon  shall  scale  the  mount 
of  God  I  Pray  1  (J.  J.  Wray.)  Feneverance  in  prayer :  or^  ttrike  again : — 
>•  God's  seasons  are  not  at  your  beck.  If  the  first  stroke  of  the  flint  doth  not  bring 
forth  the  fire,  you  must  strike  again."  That  is  to  say,  God  will  hear  prayer,  but  He 
may  not  answer  it  at  the  time  which  we  in  our  own  minds  have  appointed ;  He  will 
reveal  Himself  to  our  seeking  hearts,  but  not  just  when  and  where  we  have  settled 
in  our  own  expectations.  Hence  the  need  of  perseverence  and  importunity  in 
supplication.  In  the  days  of  flint  and  steel  and  brimstone  matches  we  had  to 
strike  and  strike  again,  dozens  of  times,  before  we  could  get  a  spark  to  live  in  the 
tinder ;  and  we  were  thankful  enough  if  we  succeeded  at  last.  Shall  we  not  be  as 
persevering  and  hopeful  as  to  heavenly  things  ?  We  have  more  certainty  of  success 
in  this  business  than  we  had  with  our  fliut  and  steel,  for  we  have  God's  promise  at 
our  back.  Never  let  us  despair.  God's  time  for  mercy  will  come ;  yea,  it  has 
come,  if  our  time  for  believing  has  arrived.  Ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering ;  but 
never  cease  from  petitioning  because  the  king  delays  to  reply.  Strike  the  steel 
again.  Make  the  sparks  fly  and  have  your  tinder  ready :  you  will  get  a  light  before 
long.  Answers  to  prayer  : — In  reply  to  the  question,  "What  place  has  prayer  for 
temporal  blessings  in  your  system  of  natural  law  in  the  spiritual  world  ?  "  Professor 
Drummond,  as  reported,  said,  in  one  of  his  talks  at  Lakeview  : — A  large,  splendidly 
equipped  steamship  sailed  out  from  Liverpool  for  New  York.  Among  the  pas- 
sengers were  a  httle  boy  and  girl,  who  were  playing  about  the  deck,  when  the  boy 
lost  his  ball  overboard.  He  immediately  ran  to  the  captain  and  shouted,  "  Stop 
the  ship ;  my  bail  is  overboard  I  "  The  captain  smiled  pleasantly,  but  said,  "  Oh 
no,  my  boy ;  I  cannot  stop  the  ship,  with  all  these  people,  just  to  get  a  rubber  ball." 
The  boy  went  aw  ay  grumbling,  and  confided  to  the  httle  girl  that  it  was  his  opinion 


CHAP,  xvin.]  ST.  LUKE.  849 

the  captain  didn't  stop  the  ship  becaase  he  couldn't.  He  believed  the  ship  waa 
woond  up  some  way  in  Liverpool,  and  she  jast  had  to  ran,  day  and  night,  nntil 
she  ran  down.  A  day  or  so  afterward  the  children  were  playing  on  deck  again, 
when  the  little  girl  dropped  her  doll  down  into  the  engine-room,  and  she  supposed 
it,  too,  had  gone  overboard.  She  said,  "  I'll  run  and  ask  the  captain  to  stop  the 
ship  and  get  my  dolly."  "It's  no  use,"  said  the  boy  ;  "he  cannot  do  anything. 
I've  tried  him."  But  the  little  girl  ran  on  to  the  captain  with  her  story  and  appeal. 
The  captain  came  and  peeked  down  into  the  engine-room,  and,  seeing  the  doll, 
fiaid,  "  Just  wait  here  a  minute."  And,  while  the  ship  went  right  on,  he  ran  down 
the  stairway  and  brought  up  the  little  girl's  doll,  to  her  delight,  and  to  the  boy's 
amazement.  The  next  day  the  cry  rang  out,  '•  Man  overboard  1  "  and  immediately 
the  bell  rang  in  the  engine-room,  by  orders  from  the  lever  in  the  hands  of  the 
captain ;  the  great  ship  stood  still  until  boats  were  lowered  and  the  life  rescued. 
Then  she  steamed  on  nntil  she  reached  her  wharf  in  New  York.  As  soon  as  the 
ship  was  tied  up  the  captain  went  up  town  and  bought  the  boy  a  better  ball  than 
the  one  he  had  lost.  "  Now,"  said  the  professor,  "  each  of  the  three  prayers  was 
answered.  The  little  girl  received  her  request  without  stopping  the  ship ;  the  little 
boy  by  a  little  waiting  received  his  also ;  and  yet  for  sufficient  reason  the  ship  was 
stopped  by  a  part  of  the  machinery  itself,  not  an  afterthought,  but  something  put 
into  the  ship  when  it  was  made."  H<mr$  spent  in  prayer : — One  is  bowed  down 
with  shame  to  read  of  the  long  hours  spent  day  by  day  in  prayer  by  many  holy  men 
whose  lives  are  given  to  us.  Nor  is  it  less  humiliating  to  know  of  tne  extraordinary 
delight  experienced  by  some  good  men  in  these  long  hours  of  prayer.  It  is  related 
of  St.  Francis  de  Sales  that  in  a  day's  retreat,  in  which  he  continued  most  of  the 
day  in  prayer,  he  was  so  overwhelmed  with  the  joy  of  this  communion  with  God 
that  he  exclaimed,  "  Withdraw  Thyself,  O  Lord,  for  I  am  not  able  to  bear  the 
greatness  of  Thy  sweetness  !  "  and  the  saintly  Fletcher,  of  Madeley,  on  one  occasion 
prayed  for  less  delight  in  prayer,  fearing  it  would  become  more  of  an  indulgence 
than  of  a  duty.  There  was  In  a  city  a  Judge  which  feared  not  God,  neither 
regarded  man. — The  unjust  judge  and  the  importunate  widow : — 1.  There  are  points 
of  resemblance  between  God's  people  and  this  widow.  In  Satan,  have  not  we  also 
an  adversary  to  be  avenged  on  ?  Are  not  we  also  poor  and  needy  ?  She  had  known 
happy  days ;  and  so  also  had  man.  By  death  she  had  lost  her  husband ;  and  by 
sin  we  have  lost  our  God.  Poor  and  fnendless,  she  had  no  means  of  avenging,  of 
righting  herself ;  no  more  have  we — we  were  without  help  when  Christ  died  for  the 
nngodly.  '*  The  sons  of  Zeruiah,"  cried  David,  ' '  are  too  many  for  me  " ;  and  so 
are  sin  and  its  corruptions,  the  world  and  its  temptations,  the  devil  and  his  wiles, 
for  UB.  2.  There  are  likewise  some  points  of  resemblance  between  God  and  this 
unjust  judge.  Long  had  he  stood  by  and,  without  one  effort  on  her  behalf,  seen 
this  poor  woman  spumed  and  oppressed ;  and  long  also  God  seemed  to  stand  by 
when  His  people  were  ground  to  the  dust  in  Egypt ;  in  old  Pagan  and  in  mora 
modem  Popish  times,  when  their  cruel  enemies  shed  the  blood  of  His  saints  like 
water,  and,  immured  in  dungeons,  bleeding  on  scaffolds,  hiding  in  the  caves  of  our 
mountains,  His  elect  cried  to  Him  day  and  night,  and  the  Church,  helpless  as  a 
widow,  implored  Him,  saying,  "  Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary  1 "  And  this  is  true 
also  of  His  dealings  with  individual  believers.  How  long  in  their  corruption  are  the 
messengers  of  Satan  left  to  buffet  them  ?  Weary  of  the  struggle  with  some  beset- 
ting sin,  and  hating  it  as  a  slave  his  cruel  tyrant,  they  cry,  "  How  long,  0  Lord, 
how  long  ?  "  how  often,  all  but  despairing,  are  they  ready  to  exclaim  with  Paul, 
"  Who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  3.  But  there  are  important 
points  of  disparity  between  this  judge  and  our  God :  and  in  these  I  find  assurance 
of  final  victory,  and  the  highest  encouragements  to  instant,  constant,  urgent  prayer. 
A  bad  man,  with  a  heart  cold  as  ice  and  hard  as  iron,  was  he  moved  by  importunity 
to  redress  the  wrongs  of  one  for  whom  he  felt  no  regard,  whose  happiness  or  misery 
was  nothing  to  him  ? — how  much  more  will  God  be  importuned  to  grant  our  prayers  I 
Just,  and  more  than  just,  He  is  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering  and  slow  to 
wratii,  abundant  in  goodness  and  in  truth.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  importunate 
widow :  —  I.  First,  then,  consider  oub  Loan's  desiom  in  this  pakable — "  Men 
ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint."  1.  Our  Lord  meant  by  saying  men  ought 
always  to  pray,  that  they  ought  to  be  always  in  the  spirit  of  prayer,  always  ready 
to  pray.  Like  the  old  knights,  always  in  warfare,  not  always  on  their  steeds  dash- 
ing forward  with  their  lances  in  rest  to  unhorse  an  adversary,  but  always  wearing 
their  weapons  where  they  could  readily  reach  them,  and  always  ready  to  encounter 
wounds  or  death  for  the  sake  of  the  cause  which  they  championed.    Those  grim 


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xvnir 

warriors  often  slept  in  their  armour ;  bo  even  when  we  sleep,  we  are  still  to  be  iir 
the  spirit  of  prayer,  so  that  if  perchance  we  wake  in  the  night  we  may  still  be  witli 
God.  2.  Our  Lord  may  also  have  meant,  that  the  whole  life  of  the  Christian 
should  be  a  life  of  devotion  to  God,  Men  ought  always  to  pray.  It  means  that 
when  they  are  using  the  lapstone,  or  the  chisel,  when  the  hands  are  on  the  plough- 
handles,  or  on  the  spade,  when  they  are  measuring  out  the  goods,  when  they  are 
dealing  in  stocks,  whatever  they  are  doing,  they  are  to  tarn  all  these  things  into  a 
part  of  the  sacred  pursuit  of  God's  glory.  Their  common  garments  are  to  be  vest- 
ments, their  meals  are  to  be  sacraments,  their  ordinary  actions  are  to  be  sacrifices, 
and  they  themselves  a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people  zealous  for  good  works. 
3.  A  third  meaning  which  I  think  our  Lord  intended  to  convey  to  us  was  this : 
men  ought  always  to  pray,  that  is,  they  should  persevere  in  prayer.  4.  I  cannot 
leave  this  part  of  the  subject  without  observing  that  our  Lord  would  have  us  learn 
that  men  should  be  more  frequent  in  prayer.  Prayerf ulness  will  scarcely  be  kept 
up  long  unless  you  set  apart  times  and  seasons  for  prayer.  6.  Our  Lord  means, 
to  sum  up  the  whole,  that  believers  should  exercise  a  universality  of  supplication — 
we  ought  to  pray  at  all  times.  II.  In  enforcing  this  precept,  our  Lord  gives  us  a 
parable  in  which  there  are  two  actors,  the  characteristics  of  the  two  actors  being 
such  as  to  add  strength  to  His  precept.  In  the  first  verse  of  the  parable  there  is  a 
judge.  Now,  herein  is  the  great  advantage  to  us  in  prayer.  Brethren,  if  this  poor 
woman  prevailed  with  a  judge  whose  office  is  stem,  unbending,  untender,  how  much 
more  ought  you  and  I  to  be  instant  in  prayer  and  hopeful  of  success  when  we  have 
to  supplicate  a  Father  1  We  must,  however,  pass  on  now  to  notice  the  other  actor 
in  the  scene — the  widow ;  and  here  everything  tells  again  the  same  way,  to  induce- 
the  Church  of  God  to  be  importunate.  She  was  apparently  a  perfect  stranger  to 
the  judge.  She  appeared  before  him  as  an  individual  in  whom  he  took  no  interest. 
He  had  possibly  never  seen  her  before  ;  who  she  was  and  what  she  wanted  was  no 
concern  to  him.  But  when  the  Church  appears  before  God  she  comes  as  Christ's 
own  bride,  she  appears  before  the  Father  as  one  whom  He  has  loved  with  an  ever- 
lasting love.  And  shall  He  not  avenge  His  own  elect.  His  own  chosen.  His  own 
people  ?  Shall  not  their  prayers  prevail  with  Him,  when  a  stranger's  importunity 
won  a  suit  of  an  unwilling  judge  ?    III.  The  third  and  last  point :  the  powb& 

WHICH,    ACCOEDING    TO     THIS    PABABLE,    TRIUMPHED.        1.   This    pOWCr    WaS    HOt    the 

woman's  eloquence,  "  I  pray  thee  avenge  me  of  mine  adversary."  These  words  are 
very  few.  Just  eight  words.  Verbiage  is  generally  nothing  better  in  prayer  than 
a  miserable  fig-leaf  with  which  to  cover  the  nakedness  of  an  unawakened  soul.  2. 
Another  thing  is  quite  certain,  namely,  that  the  woman  did  not  prevail  through  the 
merits  of  her  case.  He  does  not  say,  "  She  has  a  good  case,  and  I  ought  to  listen 
to  it."  No,  he  was  too  bad  a  man  to  be  moved  by  such  a  motive — but  "  she  worries 
me,"  that  i«.  all,  "  I  will  attend  to  it."  So  in  our  suit— in  the  suit  of  a  sinner  with 
God,  it  is  not  the  merit  of  his  case  that  can  ever  prevail  with  God.  ^  If  thou  art  to 
win,  another's  merit  must  stand  instead  of  thine,  and  on  thy  part  it  must  not  be 
merit  but  misery ;  it  must  not  be  thy  righteousness  but  thy  importunity  that  is  to 
prevail  with  God.  However  unworthy  you  may  be,  continue  in  prayer.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Parable  of  the  importunate  widow  ; — I.  Consider  the  pabablb  itself. 
II.  Inquire,  what  is  meant  by  importunity  in  pbaveb.  1.  Attention.  2.  Ardour. 
8.  Frequency.  4.  Regularity.  III.  Let  us  next  consider  why  importunity  is  said 
TO  prevail  with  God.  1.  Because  it  consists  in  the  exercise  of  pious  and  amiable 
feelings.  2.  Because  the  frequent  exercise  of  such  feelings  has  a  tendency  to  form 
pious  and  virtuous  habits  ;  and  such  habits  are  qualifications  for  higher  society 
and  purer  happiness  than  this  world  affords.  3.  Because  the  frequent  excitement 
of  such  feelings  fits  us  for  receiving  the  blessings  we  ask.  IV.  We  may  shortly 
observe,  Uoks.  what  our  Saviour  has  said  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  verses,  that  Hb 

SEEMS   TO   INSINUATE    THAT    SOMETHING     LIKE    A    STATE     0»    PERSECUTION    WIMi  TAKB 

piiACE  ABOUT  THE  TIME  OF  HiB  SECOND  COMING.  For  why  should  the  elect  be 
represented  as  crying  to  God  day  and  night,  unless  they  were  in  a  suffering  state? 
1.  We  may  conclude  that  many  will  despond  and  cease  to  believe  that  God  will  in- 
terfere in  their  favour.  2.  It  also  necessarily  follows  that,  after  the  second  coming  of 
Jesus,  God  will  avenge  His  elect,  and  that  suddenly  and  completely.  (J.  Thomson, 
D.D.)  Pray  trithout  ceating  .'—How  can  the  conduct  of  this  selfish  tyrant  to  a  helpless 
sufferer  be  any  illustration  of  a  just  and  merciful  God's  dealing  with  "  His  own 
elect  ?  "  One  thing,  at  least,  is  certain,  that  in  this,  and,  by  parity  of  reasoning, 
in  all  like  cases,  it  does  not  follow,  because  two  things  are  compared  in  one  point, 
that  they  must  be  silike  in  every  other.    The  only  points  of  contact  are  the  mutual 


CHAP,  xvm.]  8T.  LUKE.  85i 

relation  of  the  parties  as  petitioner  and  sovereign,  the  withholding  of  the  thing 
requested  and  its  subsequent  bestowal.  In  all  the  rest  there  is,  there  can  be  no 
resemblance  ;  there  is  perfect  contrariety.  Why,  then,  was  this  unsuitable  image 
chosen  even  for  the  sake  of  illustration?  Why  was  not  the  Hearer  of  Prayer 
represented  by  a  creature  bearing  more  of  His  own  image  ?  Because  this  would  not 
have  answered  our  Lord's  purpose,  but  would  only  have  taught  feebly  by 
comparison  what  is  now  taught  mightily  by  contrast.  The  ground  of  confidence 
here  furnished  is  not  the  similitude  of  God  to  man,  but  their  infinite  disparity.  If 
even  such  a  character,  governed  by  such  motives,  may  be  rationally  expected  to 
take  a  certain  course,  however  alien  from  his  native  disposition  and  his  habits, 
there  can  be  no  risk  in  counting  on  a  like  result  where  all  these  adverse  circum- 
stances favour  it.  The  three  main  points  of  the  antithesis  are  these — the  character,, 
the  practice,  and  the  motive  of  the  judge— his  moral  character,  his  official  practice,, 
and  his  motive  for  acting  upon  this  occasion  in  a  manner  contrary  to  both.  His 
official  practice  is  intimated  by  the  word  "  unjust"  applied  to  him  near  the  conclasiom 
of  the  parable.  The  interior  source  of  this  exterior  conduct  is  then  described  in 
other  terms.  He  feared  not  God.  He  neither  reverenced  Him  as  a  sovereign,  nor 
dreaded  Him  as  an  avenger.  Among  the  motives  which  may  act  upon  this  principle^ 
not  the  least  potent  is  the  fear  of  man.  This  may  include  the  dread  of  his 
displeasure,  the  desire  of  his  applause,  and  an  instinctive  shrinking  even  from  his 
ecom.  Shame,  fear,  ambition,  all  may  contribute  to  produce  an  outward  goodness 
having  no  real  counterpart  within.  This  is  particularly  true  of  public  and  official 
acts.  They  can  consent  to  risk  their  souls,  but  not  to  jeopard  their  respectability. 
There  would  thus  seem  to  be  three  grounds  for  expecting  justice  and  fidelity  in; 
human  society,  and  especially  in  pubUc  trusts.  The  first  and  highest  is  the  fear 
ef  God,  including  all  religious  motives — then  the  fear  of  man  or  a  regard  to  public 
sentiment — and  last,  the  force  of  habit,  the  authority  of  precedent,  a  disposition 
to  do  that  which  has  been  done  before,  because  it  has  been  done  before.  These 
three  impulsive  forces  do  not  utterly  exclude  each  other.  They  may  co-exist  in  due 
subordination.  The  same  is  true  of  a  regard  to  settled  usage,  or  even  to  personal 
habit,  when  correctly  formed.  Indeed,  these  latter  motives  never  have  so  powerful 
an  infiuence  for  good,  as  when  they  act  in  due  subordination  to  the  fear  of  God, 
It  is  only  when  this  is  wanting,  and  they  undertake  to  fill  its  place,  that  they 
become  unlawful  or  objectionable.  And  even  then,  although  they  cannot  make 
good  the  deficiency  in  God's  sight,  they  may  make  it  good  in  man's.  Although  tha 
root  of  the  matter  is  not  in  them,  a  short-lived  verdure  may  be  brought  out  and 
maintained  by  artificial  means.  The  want  of  any  one  of  these  impulsive  forces 
may  detract  fzom  the  completeness  of  the  ultimate  effect.  How  mueh  more  the 
absence  of  them  alll  In  other  words,  how  utterly  unjust  must  that  judge  be  who 
neither  fears  God  nor  regards  man.  If  this  widow  has  not  the  means  of  appealing 
to  his  avarice,  how  clear  it  seems  that  his  refusal  to  avenge  her  is  a  final  one,  and 
that  continued  importunity  can  only  waste  time  and  provoke  him  to  new  insult. 
I  dwell  on  these  particulars  to  show  that,  in  their  aggregate,  they  are  intended  to 
convey  the  idea  of  a  hopeless  case.  She  hopes  against  hope.  An  indomitable 
instinct  triumphs  over  reason.  She  persists  in  her  entreaties.  The  conclusion 
which  we  have  already  reached  is,  that  the  widow  in  the  parable  did  right,  acted 
a  reasonable  part,  in  hoping  against  hope,  and  still  persisting  in  her  suit  when 
everything  combined  to  prove  it  hopeless.  She  would  have  had  no  right  to  sacrifice 
the  comfort  and  tranquillity,  much  less  the  life  or  the  salvation  of  her  children  to 
her  own  despondency  or  weariness  of  effort.  But  let  us  suppose  that  he  had  been 
an  upright,  conscientious,  faithful  judge,  whose  execution  of  his  office  was  delayed 
by  some  mistake  or  want  of  information.  How  much  less  excusable  would  she 
have  then  been  in  relinquishing  her  rights  or  those  of  others  in  despair  1  Suppose 
that,  instead  of  knowing  that  tiie  judge  was  in  principle  anrl  habit  unjust,  she  had 
known  him,  by  experience,  to  be  just  and  merciful,  as  well  as  eminently  wise. 
Suppose  that  she  had  been  protected  by  him,  and  her  wrongs  redressed  in  many 
other  cases.  How  easy  must  it  then  have  been  to  trust !  How  doubly  mad  and: 
wicked  to  despair  1  There  seems  to  be  room  for  only  one  more  supposition. 
Exclude  all  chance  of  intellectual  or  moral  wrong.  Enlarge  the  attributes  before 
supposed,  until  they  reach  infinity  or  absolute  perfection.  What,  then,  would  be 
left  as  the  foundation  or  the  pretext  of  a  doubt  ?  The  bare  fact  of  delay  f  If  she 
was  wise  in  hoping  against  hope,  what  must  we  be  in  despairing  against  evidence  ? 
If  she  was  right  in  trusting  to  the  selfish  love  of  ease  in  such  a  man,  bow  wrong 
must  we  be  in  distrusting  the  benevolence,  the  faithfulness,  the  truth  of  loch  s» 


853  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rrm. 

God  !  Every  point  of  dissimilitude  between  the  cases  does  bat  serve  to  make  oar 
own  still  worse  and  less  excusable,  by  bringing  into  shocking  contrast  men's 
dependence  on  the  worst  of  their  own  species,  with  their  want  of  confidence  in  God. 
{J.  A.  Alexander.)  Times  adverse  to  prayer : — There  is  a  rude  sense  of  right  in 
most  men's  breasts  ;  and  the  appeal  of  outraged  helplessness  is  not  often  made  in 
vain.  But  this  judge  was  in  his  very  nature  incapable  of  understanding  or  feeling 
the  force  of  such  an  appeal :  he  was  an  unjust  judge.  Again,  even  in  cases  where 
man  have  no  natural  and  conscientious  sympathy  with  righteousness,  the  instinct 
of  retribution  frequently  arouses  a  fear  of  God,  which  impels  them  to  acts  of 
justice;  but  in  the  case  of  the  unjust  judge  there  seemed  no  avenue  for  tho 
approach  of  such  a  feeling :  he  feared  not  God.  Nor  was  he  moved  by  that  which, 
as  a  last  motive,  is  powerful  in  the  most  debased  natures,  the  regard  for  the  opinion 
of  other  men.  He  was  of  that  cold,  hardened,  and  unaccommodating  character 
that  he  neither  feared  God  nor  regarded  man.  What  did  our  Master  intend  by  thua 
sketching  the  judge  ?  .  .  .  The  unjust  judge  is  not  the  portrait  of  what  God  is,  but 
of  what,  owing  to  circumstances  of  trial,  and  misrepresentations  of  unreasonable 
and  wicked  men,  the  suffering,  waiting  people  of  Christ  will  be  almost  tempted  to 
think  Him.  All  about  them  they  hear  a  language  which  haunts  them  with  hideous 
dread ;  the  voice  of  the  enemy  and  the  blasphemer  are  heard  whispering,  "  Is  there 
knowledge  in  the  Most  High  ?  He  will  never  regard  it " ;  or  deepening  into  tha 
hoarse  utterance  of  half  wish,  half  fear — "  There  is  no  God  I  "  Harassed  by 
doubts,  wounded  and  terrified  by  the  oft-reiterated  assaults  and  assertions  of  her 
enemies,  driven  to  despair  at  the  seeming  unbroken  stillness  of  the  unanswering 
heavens,  the  Church  of  Christ  is  as  the  lone  helpless  widow,  powerless  and  poverty- 
stricken.  Bat  she  is  mighty.  Though  this  hideous  portraiture  of  grim  and 
impassive  godhead  is  thrust  upon  her,  she  will  have  none  of  it.  She  will  not 
abandon  her  plea,  or  accept  the  description.  With  this  picture  of  hard,  inexorable 
justice  before  her,  she  will  not  abandon  her  plea.  If  it  be  so,  that  she  is  thus  weak 
and  poor,  and  dealing  with  one  whom  no  cries  for  pity,  or  claims  for  justice,  can 
arouse,  and  no  aspect  of  misery  touch  and  soften ;  then  nothing  remains  for  her 
but  the  might  of  her  weakness  in  its  unceasing  supplications,  which  will  take  no 
denial;  nothing  remains  but  to  weary  Him  out  into  compliance.  (Bishop  Boyd 
Carpenter.)  Oriental  judges: — "A  judge"  in  an  Oriental  city  must  not  be 
regarded  precisely  as  a  judge  among  us,  nowadays,  nor  yet  with  all  the  peculiar 
powers  and  duties  of  the  ancient  judges  of  Israel,  whose  powers  somewhat 
resembled  that  of  a  king.  Those  ancient  judges,  more  like  ancient  kings  than 
anything  else,  were  yet  officers  or  rulers  of  such  a  peculiar  sort,  that  the  Bomans 
transferred  the  name  of  their  dignity  into  Latin — at  least  of  their  Carthaginian 
counterparts.  Out  of  the  Shemitio  shofet  they  made  suffetes.  But  in  the  time  of 
Christ  the  judge,  where  not  a  Boman  official,  had  stiU  some  power  equivalent  to 
that  of  the  sheriffs  of  our  country.  He  was  head  judge  and  head  executioner  of 
his  sentences.  Never  till  our  own  times,  or  those  of  two  of  three  generations  ago, 
has  the  world  worked  out  the  problem  of  wholly  separating  the  legislative,  the 
judicial,  and  the  executive  functions.  Nor  is  it  always  accomplished  by  a  nominal 
separation ;  nor  can  that  separation  ever  be  entirely  actual,  even  as  much  so  aa 
required  by  theory.  As  long  as  the  legislative  or  judicial  power  has  anything  to 
do,  it  must  be  gifted  with  some  slight  executive  powers.  Bat  this  is  only  one 
instance  in  the  physical  and  metaphysical  universe  of  the  failure  of  human 
divisions  to  cover  all  that  the  one  Spirit  has  made  or  is  working.  The  prayer  of 
the  widow  to  the  unjust  judge — and  here  "  unrighteous  "  is  better ;  for  attention  is 
directed  not  very  closely  to  his  merely  judicial  function — regards  rather  hia 
executive  function  than  anything  else.  She  does  not  call — in  words  at  least — for 
a  hearing  of  her  cause,  but  for  an  order  of  enforcement.  In  modem  times  that 
would  be  by  sending  a  zabtieh  or  two,  soldier  police,  to  app)  7  the  necessary  force. 
This  might  be  done  even  without  hearing,  or  before  hearing,  the  case.  To  this  day, 
in  the  East,  it  is  necessary  for  poor  suitors  to  be  very  importunate.  It  would  be 
easy  to  give  examples ;  but  it  might  be  tedious.  A  woman  will  frequently  beg  and  beg 
a  judge  to  attend  to  her  case,  or  to  execute  a  decree  in  a  case  he  has  passed  upon  and 
rendered  judgment,  and  generally  promise  or  ask  to  kiss  the  judge's  feet.  But  a  little 
money  from  ihe  other  side  will  effectually  stop  the  judge's  ears.  (Prof.  Isaac  H.  Hall.) 
A  widow. — The  Church's  widowhood  : — This  parable  sets  before  us,  under  the  figure 
of  a  widow — a  feeble  and  injured  widow — the  true  character  and  standing  of  th« 
Church  of  God  on  earth,  daring  the  present  age.  In  numbers  she  is  few — a  mere 
election,  a  gathering  out,  no  more  ;  in  power,  slender  ;  in  honour,  little  set  by  ;  ia 


CHIP,  xvm.]  ST.  LVKE.  853 

alliances,  little  courted.  That  snch  ia  the  case,  nay,  that  such  must  be  the  case, 
appears  from  such  things  as  these:—!.  The  Father's  purpose  concerning  her. 
That  purpose  has  great  things  in  store  for  her,  in  the  ages  to  come ;  bnt  at  present 
her  lot  is  to  be  weakness,  poverty,  hardship,  and  the  endurance  of  wrong.  2.  Her 
conformity  to  her  Lord.  He  is  her  pattern,  not  merely  as  to  character,  but  as  to 
the  whole  course  of  life.  In  Him  she  learns  what  her  lot  on  earth  is  to  be.  He, 
the  rejected  one,  even  among  His  own,  she  must  be  rejected  too.  3.  Her  standing 
by  faith.  It  is  the  world's  xmbelief  that  so  specially  makes  it  the  world  ;  so  it  is 
the  Church's  faith  that  makes  her  what  she  is,  the  Church.  "  We  have  known 
and  believed  the  leva  that  Qod  hath  to  us."  4.  The  condition  of  the  world  oat  of 
whioh  she  is  called.  It  is  an  evil  world.  5.  Her  prospects.  She  is  an  heir  of  God, 
and  a  joint  heir  with  Christ  Jesus,  The  world  loves  not  the  faithful  widow,  and 
wonld  fain  seduce  her  to  a  second  marriage — a  marriage  with  itself.  Decked  in 
costly  array,  it  would  admire  her,  and  give  her  its  willing  fellowship.  But  dressed 
only  in  the  widow's  mournful  garb,  it  cannot  tolerate  her.  Her  faithfulness  to 
her  Lord  condemns  it.  Her  seclusion  and  separation  rebuke  it.  Her  con- 
tinuing in  supplication  and  prayers  night  and  day  it  cannot  away  with. 
The  widow's  cry  sorely  disturbs  the  world's  peace,  and,  ringing  riightly 
through  its  glittering  halls  of  pleasure,  turns  all  its  music  into  discord. 
Nor  less  does  Satan  dislike  the  widow's  weeds  and  the  widow's  cry.  For  they 
remind  him  that  his  day  is  short,  and  that  he  who  is  to  bind  him  in  chains,  and 
oast  him  oat  of  his  dominions,  will  soon  be  here.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  importu- 
nate widow  a  type  of  God't  elect  people : — I.  God  has  an  kleot  PEorLB  in  thb 
voBiJ),  scattered  ap  and  dovm  among  men  found  in  various  places,  and  in  almost 
all  communities,  as  his  chosen  ones.  Men  may  take  this  principle  in  a  light  which 
does  not  belong  to  it,  and  affirm  that  they  can  deduce  conclusions  from  it  which  in 
the  Bible  are  directly  and  distinctly  denied.  There  are,  I  might  observe,  two  things 
which  always  make  it  appear  to  me,  not  only  in  a  light  that  is  harmless,  but  in  a 
light  that  is  most  beneficial.  1.  The  one  is,  that  it  is  never  separated  from  its 
moral  influences.  "  Predestined  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son." 
*'  Chosen  that  we  may  be  blameless  and  harmless,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and 
perverse  generation."  And  here,  in  the  passage  before  us,  it  stands  allied  with^  a 
devotional  character  and  with  a  praying  habit  of  mind  :  and  we  are  sure  of  this, 
that,  practically  felt  in  the  mind,  it  does  humble,  prostrate,  purify,  inspire,  and 
awaken  within  the  lowest  gratitude,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  loftiest  and  the 
holiest  joy.  2.  The  other  thing  that  I  would  wish  to  remark  respecting  it  is,  that 
it  interferes  not  in  any  degree  with  the  universal  invitations  of  the  gospel.  II.  Thb 

ELECT  OF  God  abb  DISTINOCISHED   by   THEIB  devotional   CHABACTEB — THEIB   PBATDfO 

FBAME  op  uind.  "  Shall  not  God  avenge  His  own  elect  who  cry  day  and  night  before 
Him  ?  "  The  evidence  that  we  are  chosen  of  God,  called  into  His  Church,  made 
partakers  of  His  mercy,  is  in  this,  that  we  recognize  His  providence  ;  that  we  live 
in  daily  dependence  upon  His  bounty ;  that  we  lift  up  our  hearts  to  Him  in  suppli- 
cation ;  that  believing  we  pray,  and  that  praying  we  confide.  Then  I  would  add, 
that  an  elect  and  praying  people  are  beautiful  in  the  eyes  of  God,  and  His  ears  are 
ever  open  to  their  cry.     lU.  Their  prayers  particularly  regard  the  betbibution 

CPON   THE  BNBHT,  AND   THB    COMINO   OF  THE    EINaDOU.       "  Shall  DOt  God  aveUgO  His 

own  elect,  who  cry  day  and  night  imto  Him  ?  "  There  is  emphasis  on  the  word 
"cry."  Abel's  blood  did  cry  ;  there  was  a  shrill,  piercing,  importunate  voice  in  it. 
Just  before  God  came  down  to  deliver  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  on  account  of  their 
bondage  and  oppression,  it  is  said  they  did  "  sigh  and  cry  " :  and  we  find  the  Church, 
when  distressed  and  in  anguish  by  reason  of  the  enemy,  is  said  to  "  cry."  A  widow, 
a  desolate  person,  sustaining  injury,  bleeding  under  injustice,  cries,  and  asks  the 
judga  for  justice  ;  and  precisely  in  the  same  way  the  Church  is  said  to  cry  to  God 
for  justice.  And  against  whom  ?  The  answer  is,  against  Satan,  the  great  adver- 
sary, who  has  established  a  tyranny  and  an  usurpation  in  this  world,  who  has  built 
up  his  kingdom  amidst  darkness,  and  violence,  and  blood.  And  we  ask  for  justice 
upon  him,  and  pray  God  to  bruise  him  under  our  feet,  and  to  do  it  quickly.  The 
Son  of  God  was  manifested  that  He  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil ;  and  we 
call  on  the  Son  of  God  in  the  exercise  of  His  supremacy  to  do  His  work.     lY.  Thb 

PBATBB  OP  thb  ELECT  ChUBCH  FOB  JUSTICE    SHALL  BE  BEABD  AND  ANSWEBED  WHEN  THB 

LoBD  COMETH.  I  am  not  sure  that  the  word  "  avenge  "  here  is  the  right  one :  if  the 
widow  had  asked  vengeance  on  her  enemy,  peradventnre  the  judge  would  not  have 
granted  it ;  but  it  means  more  properly  "justice."  "  Though  He  bear  long  with 
ihfim,"  says  the  text.  A  very  learned  critic,  on  the  authority  of  many  andent 
VOL.  m.  23  


«54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xvm, 

mannscripts,  observes  it  ought  to  be  •'  though  He  compassionate  them  "  :  that  is, 
while  they  cry,  though  God  appeareth  not  to  attend  to  them,  yet  He  does  hear  them 
and  tenderly  compassionates  them.  If  we  take  it  as  being  correctly  "  avenge,"  1 
beg  to  remark  that  the  world  and  the  wicked  have  had  their  time  of  vengeance. 
Here  is  a  picture !  "  All  that  pass  by  clap  their  hands  at  Thee ;  they  niss  and  wag 
their  head  at  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  With  ferocious  face  they  clapped  their 
hands,  and  hissed,  and  wagged  their  heads,  "  saying,  Is  this  the  city  that  men  call 
the  perfection  of  beauty,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  ?  AH  Thine  enemies  have 
opened  their  mouth  against  Thee :  they  hiss  and  gnash  the  teeth  :  they  say,  We 
have  swallowed  her  up :  certainly  this  is  the  day  that  we  looked  for ;  we  have  found, 
we  have  seen  it."  Unholy  vengeance  I  Bevenge,  in  the  true  and  strict  sense  of 
the  expression,  awful  to  contemplate  I  That  was  jnan'a  day  ;  that  was  the  day  of 
the  adversary :  and  God  stood  silent  by.  But  God  has  His  day :  the  day  of  the 
Lord  Cometh  :  and  this  is  referred  to  in  the  text.  V.  We  come  to  the  last 
thing,  when  the  Lord  shall  come  to  execute  His  justice,  faith  will  bk  at  a  low  ebb 
ON  THE  EABTH.  "  Nevertheless  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh  shall  He  find  faith  on 
the  earth  ?  "  when  He  cometh  to  execute  justice.  It  is  very  observable  that  in 
almost  every  great  and  signal  instance  in  which  God  has  remarkably  come  for  a 
purpose  specified  in  the  passage,  it  has  been  suddenly,  in  a  moment,  and  whea 
there  is  no  belief  of  it.     {J,  Straiten.)        God  hears  tlie  prayers  of  Hit  elect : — I. 

OOD  HAS  AN  ELECT  PEOPLE  IN  THE  WOBLD,  WHO  ARE  A  PBAYINO  PEOPLE.    This  character 

of  a  praying  people  is  confined  to  them.  II.  "  God  will  avenge  His  own  elect, 
WHO  CBT  DAT  AND  NIGHT  cNTo  HiM."  Though  men  see  not.  He  is  in  the  world ; 
though  men  see  Him  not.  He  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us  ;  though  men  see  not 
His  work.  He  is  carrying  it  on  ;  He  has  been  building  up  His  Church,  and  estab* 
lishing  its  progress.  III.  The  strikino  rebuke  which  Christ  utters  :  •♦  When  the 
Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  He  find  faith  upon  the  earth  ?  "  What  a  thought ;  how 
we  ought  to  humble  ourselves  1  (I.  Saunders. )  God's  response  to  the  cry  of  the 
elect : — Alexander  Peden,  one  of  the  Scotch  covenanters,  with  some  others,  had 
been  at  one  time  hard  pursued  by  Claverhouse's  troops  for  a  considerable  way.  At 
last,  getting  some  little  height  between  them  and  their  pursuers,  he  stood  stUl  and 
said, "  Let  us  pray  here,  for  if  the  Lord  hear  not  our  prayer  and  save  us,  we  are  all 
dead  men. "  He  then  prayed,  saying,  "  0  Lord,  this  is  the  hour  and  the  power  of 
Thine  enemies  ;  they  may  not  be  idle.  But  hast  Thou  no  other  work  for  them  than 
to  send  them  after  us  ?  Send  them  after  them  to  whom  Thou  wilt  give  strength  to 
fiee,  for  our  strength  is  gone.  Twine  them  about  the  hill,  0  Lord,  and  cast  the  lap 
of  Thy  cloak  over  the  poor  old  folk  and  their  puir  things,  and  save  us  this  one  time, 
and  we  will  keep  it  in  remembrance,  and  tell  to  the  commendation  of  Thy  goodness, 
Thy  pity  and  compassion,  what  Thou  didst  for  us  at  sic  a  time."  And  in  this  he 
was  heard,  for  a  cloud  of  mist  immediately  intervened  between  them  and  their 
persecutors,  and  in  the  meantime  orders  came  to  go  in  quest  of  James  Benwick,  and 
a  great  company  with  him.  Shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  7 — The  faith  of  the 
■Church  : — I.  The  importance  attached  by  Christ  to  the  faith  of  His  people. 
The  faith  of  the  Church  is  important,  because  it  is  at  the  root  of  all  Christian 
activity  and  zeal.  What  wonder  is  it,  then,  that  Christ  attaches  such  importance 
to  the  faith  of  His  people  1    II.  Though  the  faith  of  the  Church  is  tried  bt  the 

DELAY  OF  the  DELIVERANCE,  YET  THERE   ABB   ABUNDANT  REASONS   WHY  IT  SHOULD  HOLD 

ON.  There  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  the  history  of  Christ  than  the  calm  faith 
which  He  had  in  His  own  mission — in  its  success  and  ultimate  triumph.  He  stood 
alone ;  and  to  be  alone  in  any  enterprise  or  sorrow  is  to  most  men  hard  and  trying. 
Truth  is  truth  if  only  embraced  by  one ;  truth  is  not  a  whit  more  true  when  ten 
thousand  believe  it.  But  we  like  sympathy.  No  one  in  the  wide  world  understood 
His  mission  ;  but  His  faith  never  wavered  for  a  moment.  He  was  not  careful  to 
engrave  His  words  on  stone,  or  write  them  on  parchment ;  He  simply  spoke.  A 
spoken  word — it  stirs  the  air,  it  is  like  a  pebble  thrown  into  the  ocean  of  air, 
causing  a  few  ripples  to  spread,  and  it  is  soon  lost  like  a  pebble.  Christ  fiung  Hia 
^words  into  the  air,  spoke  on  the  mountain,  by  the  sea-shore,  in  the  Temple,  in  th€ 
synagogue,  in  the  village,  by  the  grave  ;  and  He  knew  that  His  words  were  living, 
and  would  continue  to  live,  that  they  were  not  "  like  a  snow-flake  on  the  river,  a 
moment  white,  and  then  gone  for  ever,"  bat  that  they  were  destined  to  spread  and 
to  revolutionize  the  world.  We  learn,  however,  that  notwithstanding  His  unshaken 
faith,  He  could  see  clouds  in  the  future,  persecution,  corruption,  iniquity,  abound- 
ing, love  waxing  cold,  eras  of  apparent  retrogression  and  failure.  And  seeing  all  this, 
Se  askS]  "  When  the  Sou  of  Man  cometh,  shall  He  find  this  faith  on  the  earth?* 


UHAF.  xnn.]  ST.  LUKE.  S5« 

ni.  He  sapposea  that  the  Church  mat  become  weaby  of  the  delay.  (Jamet 
Otcen.)  The  search  far  faith: — Faithfuluess  is  established  in  the  very  heavens  : 
but  what  of  faithfulness  upon  the  earth  ?  I.I  notice  with  regard  to  our  text,  first, 
that  IT  IS  bemarkablx  it  wz  consider  the  person  mentioned  as  searching  fob 
iTAiTH  :  "  When  the  Son  of  Man  cometh,  shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth?  "  1. 
When  Jesus  comes  He  will  look  for  precious  faith.  He  has  more  regard  for  fa.-th 
than  for  all  else  that  earth  can  yield  Him.  Our  returning  Lord  will  care  notbing 
for  the  treasures  of  the  rich  or  the  honours  of  the  great.  He  will  not  look  for  the 
abilities  we  have  manifested,  nor  the  influence  we  have  acquired  ;  but  He  will  look 
for  our  faith.  It  is  His  glory  that  He  is  "  believed  on  in  the  world,"  and  to  that 
He  will  have  respect.  This  is  the  jewel  for  which  He  is  searching.  2.  When  our 
Lord  comes  and  looks  for  faith,  He  will  do  so  in  His  most  sympathetic  character. 
Our  text  saith  not.  When  the  Son  of  God  cometh,  but  "  When  the  Son  of  Man 
cometh,  will  He  find  faith  on  the  earth?  "  It  is  peculiarly  as  the  Son  of  Man  that 
Jesus  will  sit  as  a  refiner,  to  discover  whether  we  have  true  faith  or  not.  3.  Further, 
1  would  have  you  note  well  that  the  Son  of  Man  is  the  most  likely  person  to  dis- 
cover faith  if  it  is  to  be  found.  Not  a  grain  of  faith  exists  in  all  the  world  except 
that  which  He  has  Himself  created.  4.  Besides,  faith  always  looks  to  Christ. 
There  is  no  faith  in  the  world  worth  having,  but  what  looks  to  Him,  and  through 
Him  to  God,  for  everything.  On  the  other  hand,  Christ  always  looks  to  faith  ;  there 
never  yet  was  an  eye  of  faith  but  what  it  met  the  eve  of  Christ.  5.  The  Son  of  Man 
will  give  a  wise  and  generous  judgment  in  the  matter.  Some  brethren  judge  so 
harshly  that  they  would  tread  out  the  sparks  of  faith  ;  but  it  is  never  so  with  our 
gracious  Lord  ;  He  does  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  nor  despise  the  most 
trembling  faith.  The  tender  and  gentle  Saviour,  who  never  judges  too  severely^ 
when  He  comes,  shall  even  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  6.  Once  more,  I  want  to 
put  this  question  into  a  striking  light  by  dwelling  on  the  time  of  the  scrutiny. 
•*  When  the  Son  of  Man  cometh,"  &c.  I  know  not  how  long  this  dispensation  of 
longsuffering  will  last ;  but  certainly  the  longer  it  continues  the  more  wantonly 
wicked  does  unbelief  become.  7.  I  want  you  to  notice  the  breadth  of  the  region  of 
search.  He  does  not  say,  shall  He  find  faith  among  philosophers  ?  When  had 
they  any  ?  He  does  not  confine  His  scrutiny  to  an  ordained  ministry  or  a  visible 
Church  ;  but  He  takes  a  wider  sweep — '•  Shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  "  As  if 
He  would  search  from  throne  to  cottage,  among  the  learned  and  among  the  ignorant, 
among  public  men  and  obscure  individuals.  Alas,  poor  earth,  to  be  so  void  of  faith ! 
II.  Let  us  somewhat  change  the  run  of  our  thoughts :  having  introduced  the  ques- 
tion as  a  remarkable  one,  we  will  next  notice  that  it  is  exceedinoly  instbucttve 
IN  connection  with  the  parable  of  which  it  is  part.  When  the  Son  of  Man  cometh 
shall  He  find  upon  the  earth  the  faith  which  prays  importunately,  as  this  widow 
did  f  Now,  the  meaning  is  dawning  upon  us.  We  have  many  upon  the  earth  who 
pray ;  but  where  are  those  whose  continual  coming  is  sure  to  prevail  ?  Ill,  In  the 
next  place,  our  text  seems  to  me  to  be  suooestive  in  view  of  its  very  form.  It  is 
put  as  a  question  :  "  When  the  Son  of  Man  cometh,  shall  He  find  faith  on  the 
earth  ?  "  1.  I  think  it  warns  us  not  to  dogmatize  about  what  the  latter  days  will 
be.  Jesus  puts  it  as  a  question.  Shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth?  2.  This  ques- 
tion leads  us  to  much  holy  fear  as  to  the  matter  of  faith.  If  our  gracious  Lord 
raises  the  question,  the  question  ought  to  be  raised.  3.  As  far  as  my  observation 
goes,  it  is  a  question  which  might  suggest  itself  to  the  most  hopeful  persons  at  this 
time  ;  for  many  processes  are  in  vigorous  action  which  tend  to  destroy  faith.  The 
Scriptures  are  being  criticized  with  a  familiarity  which  shocks  all  reverence,  and 
their  very  foundation  is  being  assailed  by  persons  who  call  themselves  Christians. 
A  chilling  criticism  has  taken  the  place  of  a  warm,  childlike,  loving  confidence.  As 
one  has  truly  said,  '*  We  have  now  a  temple  without  a  sanctuary."  Mystery  is  dis- 
carded that  reason  may  reign.  4.  Do  you  not  think  that  this,  put  in  a  question  aa 
it  is,  invites  us  to  intense  watchfulness  over  ourselves  ?  Do  you  not  think  it  should 
set  us  scrutinizing  ourselves  as  our  Lord  will  scrutinize  us  when  He  comes  ?  Yon 
have  been  looking  for  a  great  many  things  in  yourself,  my  brother ;  let  me  entreat 
yon  to  look  to  your  faith.  What  if  love  grow  cold !  rv.  My  text  is  very 
iMFBBSBiTB  IN  RESPECT  TO  PERSONAL  DUTY.  "When  the  Sou  of  Man  cometh, 
shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  f  "  Let  faith  have  a  home  in  our  hearts,  if  it  la 
denied  a  lodging  everywhere  else.  If  we  do  not  trust  our  Lord,  and  trust  Him 
much  more  than  we  have  ever  done,  we  shall  deserve  His  gravest  displeasure.  {C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Chritt  looking  in  vain  for  faith : — If  I  venture  for  a  moment  to 
look  into  the  reasons  of  these  things,  perhaps  I  might  particularize  the  following  ; 


55«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvitt 

It  is  always  in  the  indolent  and  grosser  nature  of  man  to  prefer  the  present  and  th« 
visible,  to  the  future  and  the  unseen.  The  heart  gravitates  to  practical  materialism 
as  a  stone  gravitates  to  the  ground.  It  is  always  a  special  act  to  make  a  man 
feel  the  invisible,  live  in  the  invisible.  For  in  fact,  all  faith  is  miracle.  And  days 
of  great  science,  such  as  these,  are  always  likely  to  be  days  of  proportionate  un- 
belief— because  the  power  of  the  habit  of  finding  out  more  and  more  natural  causes, 
is  calculated,  unless  a  man  be  a  rehgious  man,  to  make  him  rest  in  the  cause  ha 
sees,  and  not  to  go  on  to  that  higher  cause  of  which  all  the  causes  in  this  world, 
are,  after  all,  only  effects.  And  familiarity,  too,  with  Divine  things — which  is  a 
particular  characteristic  of  our  age,  has  in  itself  a  tendency  to  sap  the  reverence, 
which  is  at  the  root  of  all  faith.  But  still  more,  the  character  of  the  age  we  live  in 
is  a  rushing  selfishness.  The  race  for  money  is  tremendous  ;  men  are  grown 
intensely  secular  ;  the  facilities  are  increased,  and  with  them,  the  covetousness. 
Tou  are  living  under  higher  and  higher  pressure,  and  everything  goes  into  extremes ; 
all  live  fast.  And  the  competition  of  business  is  overwhelming,  and  the  excitement 
of  fashion  intoxicating.  How  can  '•  faith,"  which  breathes  in  the  shade  of  prayer 
and  meditation — live  in  such  an  atmosphere  as  this  ?  Let  me  just  throw  out  one 
or  two  suggestions  to  you  about  faith.  Bemember  "  faith  "  is  a  moral  grace,  and 
not  an  intellectual  gift.  It  lives  among  the  affections ;  its  seat  is  the  heart.  A  soft 
and  tender  conscience  is  the  cradle  of  faith  ;  and  it  will  live  and  die  according  to 
the  life  you  lead.  If  you  would  have  "  faith,"  yon  must  settle  with  yourself  the 
authority,  the  supremacy,  and  the  sufficiency  of  the  Bible.  Then,  when  you  have 
done  that,  you  will  be  able  to  deal  with  promises.  Feed  upon  promises.  We  take 
the  spiritual  character  of  what  we  receive  into  our  minds,  just  as  the  body  assume* 
the  nature  of  the  food  it  eats.  Act  out  the  very  little  faith  you  have.  Faith  is  ft 
series  of  continual  progression,  and  each  fresh  step  is  accompanied  by  a  moral 
effort  which  reacts  to  make  another.  Take  care  that  you  are  a  man  of  meditative 
habit.  There  cannot  be  faith  without  daily,  calm,  quiet  seasons  of  thought.  (J. 
Vaughan,  M.A.)  Loss  of  faith  in  the  Christian  verities  : — I  cannot  but  think  that 
this  "  faith  "  is  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  the  faith  of  the  gospel,  and 
the  creeds — the  faith  in  Christ,  the  eternal  Son  of  God  Incarnate,  crucified,  risen, 
ascended,  and  returning.  This  faith  will  be  in  the  pages  of  Scripture,  and  in  the 
creeds  of  the  Church.  It  may  not,  perhaps,  be  denied,  but  it  will  not  be  held. 
And  yet  without  the  realization  of  these  great  eternal  verities  there  can  be  no  faith, 
in  the  New  Testament  sense  of  the  word.  Already  this  faith  grows  weaker  and 
weaker.  It  has  been  said  that  faith  is  "turned  inward,"  and  a  miserable  "turning" 
it  is  :  for  what  is  there  within  the  sinner  to  raise  him  up  to  God  and  unite  him  to 
the  Supreme  ?  It  is  the  exhibition  of  the  love  of  God  in  His  Son  which  breeda 
faith  in  the  soul.  It  is  the  same  exhibition  which  sustains  it,  and  the  same  which 
perfects  it.     (M.  F.  Sadler.) 

Vers.  9-14.  Two  men  went  up  Into  the  temple  to  pray. — Whom  the  Lord 
receives : — Observe,  from  the  parable — I.  How  God  looks  upon  the  heabt,  bathbb 
THAN  UPON  THB  OUTWARD  APFEABANCE.  It  is  not  the  spokcu  service  that  is  regarded, 
but  the  hidden  words  of  the  heart.    U.  The  inscfpicisiict  or  mam's  good  wobes  to 

OBTAIN  justification.  III.  ThB  WAT  OF  JUSTIFICATION  IS  SHOWN  IN  WHAT  WE  ABB 
TOLD   OF   THE   PUBLICAN.       IV.    We   SEE  WHAT   SPIRIT  GOD  BEQCIBES   OF  AND  APPBOVBS 

IN  UB.  Not  those  who  are  satisfied  with  themselves  are  commended  of  Him,  bat 
those  who  see  and  deplore  their  sinfulness.  As  a  bird  must  first  stoop  to  fly,  so 
must  the  soul  humble  itself  ere  it  finds  God.  "Behold  a  great  wonder,"  says 
Angnatine,  "  God  is  high ;  exalt  thyself,  He  flees  from  thee :  humble  thyself,  and 
He  stoops  to  thee."  Because,  as  the  Psalmist  says,  "  Though  high,  yet  hath  He 
respect  unto  the  lowly,  but  the  proud  He  knoweth  afar  off."  So  the  Pharisee 
returned  from  the  temple  as  poor  as  he  came,  while  the  publican,  whom  he  despised, 
wondering  how  he  dared  to  come,  returned  made  rich  by  God's  kiss  of  forgiveness 
and  peace.  Little  do  men  know  who  among  them  are  blessed.  God's  angels  of  joy 
do  not  always  enter  where  they  most  naturally  are  supposed  to  go.  {A.  H. 
Currier.)  Self-exaltation  and  self-abasement : — I.  Self-exaltation.  1.  Thie 
epirit  is  against  God,  on  whom  all  depend,  before  whom  all  men  are  dust  and 
uncleanness.  2.  Is  ignorance,  no  man  having  real  spiritual  knowledge  could  allow 
this  spirit  to  dwell  in  him.  3.  Is  guilty  ignorance,  for  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures 
expose  and  condemn  this  spirit  (Ezek.  xxi.  26 ;  Deut.  xvii.  20,  viii.  14  ;  Hab.  iL  4  ; 
Isa.  Ixv.  6).  4.  Is  pleasant  to  corrupt  human  nature,  flattering  to  natural  pride. 
6    is  contrary  to  the  mind  of  God.    6.  Is  B  sabtle,'  hjpooritical  spirit,  often 


esAP.  XYm.3  ST.  LUKE.  957 

appearing  as  religious.  7.  Deceives  the  heart  it  oconpies.  8.  Defeats  itself,  for  it 
ends  in  abasement  and  shame.  II.  Despising  others.  1.  This  spirit  is  but 
another  form  of  pride ;  others  are  despised  in  contrast  with  self,  which  is  exalted. 
2.  Is  against  God,  breaking  both  the  law  and  the  gospel,  which  enjoin  loving  neigh- 
bour as  self.  3.  Is  against  the  precepts  and  example  of  Jesus,  who  despised  not 
the  poorest  and  outcast,  the  fallen  and  foul.  III.  Self-abasement.  1.  Often 
branded  by  worldly  men  as  meanness  of  spirit  or  cowardice.  2.  Is  acceptable  to 
Ood,andaccordingtoChrist'sexample.  3.  May  bringonus  some  loss  or  inconvenience 
for  a  season,  that  must  be  borne  as  a  cross.  4.  Has  blessing  now,  and  recompense 
of  honour  hereafter.  5.  The  chief  example  of  self-abasement  being  blessed  thus, 
is  that  of  our  Lord  Himself  (Phil.  ii.  5-11).  6.  In  the  publican's  case,  the  blessing 
began  at  once.  Application :  1.  "  Every  one  "  marks  universal  rule  or  principle. 
2.  Warn  those  who  have  not  humbled  themselves  before  God  (Exod.  x.  3).  3.  No 
justification  possible  for  man,  but  by  eelf-abasement  in  repentance  and  faith.  4. 
The  Holy  Spirit  convinces  of  sin,  Ac.  5.  Encourage  the  first  thoughts  of  self- 
abasement  by  examples  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxi.  9),  and  Manasseh  (2  Chron.  xxxiii. 
12-19).  {Flavel  Cook.)  The  Plmrisee  and  tlie  publican: — I.  The  aim  of  the 
PABABLE.  1.  Stated  (ver.  9).  2.  Suggestive — (1)  That  self -righteousness  is  possible. 
(2)  That  self -righteousness  and  contempt  for  others  are  closely  aUied.  ^3)  That 
Eclf-righteonsness  grows  from  the  root  of  self-deception,  (a)  The  self-righteous 
calls  upon  a  heart-searching  God.  (5)  The  self-righteous  despise  men.  H. 
Noticeable  featubes  of  the  parable.  1.  The  contrasted  characters.  (1)  The 
prayer  of  the  Pharisee,  (o)  There  is  thanksgiving — but  is  it  gratitude  to  God? 
\b)  There  is  reference  to  personal  excellencies  before  God — but  is  it  in  humility  ? 
(c)  Thus  prayer  may  be  a  mockery,  and  therefore  a  sin.  (2)  The  prayer  of  l^e 
publican,  (a)  There  is  keen  remorse— bat  not  despair.  (&)  There  is  deep  awe  in 
God's  presence — but  an  appeal  to  His  mercy,  (c)  Thus,  the  most  agonizing  prayer 
may  be  heartfelt  and  believing.  III.  The  Lord's  comment  on  the  parable.  1.  The 
self-exalting  prayer  of  the  Pharisee  He  condemns.  2.  The  contrite  petition  of  the 
publican  He  approves.  3.  The  reality  of  answers  to  prayer  He  affirms.  4.  Christ 
here  enunciates  a  solemn  truth  (ver.  14).  Lessons :  1.  Conformity  to  religions 
forms  no  proof  of  true  piety.  2.  True  penitence  ever  seen  in  self-abasement.  (D.  C. 
Hughes,  M.A.)  The  Pharisee  and  the  publican : — Our  Saviour's  design  in  this 
parable  was — 1.  To  condemn  a  censorious  disposition,  a  groundless  contempt  and 
bad  opinion  of  others.  2.  To  correct  those  false  notions  of  religion  which  lead 
men  to  overlook  its  principal  duties.  3.  To  expose  and  reprove  that  part  of  self- 
love  which  makes  us  proud  of  our  righteousness.  4.  To  recommend  repentance 
and  humility  towards  God  as  the  first  step  to  amendment.  6.  Lastly,  to  caution  us 
against  all  pride  and  conceit  in  general.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  Bemarks  on  the 
parabte : — 1.  How  vain  must  be  the  hope  of  those  who  expect  heaven  because  they 
are  not  bo  wicked  as  others.  2.  Let  us  beware  how  by  comparing  ourselves  with 
others  wo  are  led  to  despise  them.  3.  No  sinner,  after  such  an  example  as  that  of 
the  pabhcan,  can  have  any  excuse  for  not  praying  right,  immediately.  4.  Every 
one  of  DS  must  be  humbled  before  God,  ii  we  would  partake  of  His  mercy.  (N.  W. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  Belief  in  the  virtues  of  others: — Who  does  not  believe  others 
virtuous,  would  be  found,  were  the  secrets  of  his  heart  and  life  known,  to  be  himself 
Ticious.  We  may  lay  it  down  as  an  axiom,  that  those  who  are  ready  to  suspect 
others  of  being  actuated  by  a  regard  to  self-interest,  are  themselves  selfish.  Thieves 
do  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  honesty;  nor  rakes  in  virtue;  nor  mercenary 
politicians  in  patriotism  ;  and  tbe  reason  why  worldhngs  regard  religious  people  as 
hypocrites  is  their  own  want  of  religion — knowing  that  were  they  to  profess  a  warm 
regard  for  Christ,  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  they  would  be  hypo- 
crites. {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Satisfaction  with  external  ceremonial  acts  : — Let  us  do 
this  Pharisee  justice.  He  put  in  a  claim  for  something  done,  as  well  as  something  left 
undone  :  "  I  fast  twice  in  the  week  ;  I  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess."  But  this 
was  ceremonial  goodness.  We  must  distinguish  :  moral  goodness  is  goodness 
always,  and  everywhere.  Justice,  mercy,  truth,  are  the  same  under  the  tropic  and 
at  the  pole,  in  the  year  4000  before  Cbrist  and  4000  after  Christ.  Sut  ceremonies 
are  only  good  at  certain  times,  and  under  certain  circumstances.  Fasting,  if  it 
make  a  man  peevish,  is  no  duty.  Tithes  are  a  way  of  supporting  God's  ministers  ; 
but  the  Church  or  the  State  may  provide  another  way,  and  then  tithes  cease  to  be 
duties.  Now  observe  why  Pharisaical  men  find  it  easier  to  be  content  with  cere- 
monial observances  than  with  moral  goodness.  They  are  definite  acts,  they  can  ba 
counted.    Twice  a  week  the  ceremony  is  done.     Go  over  my  fields ;  not  a  tenth 


86€  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ma, 

sheaf  or  shock  is  left  standing.  Search  vaj  stalls  :  not  a  tenth  colt  or  calf  is  kept 
back.  But  moral  goodness  is  more  a  state  of  heart  than  distinct  acts.  Take  tha 
law  of  love ;  you  cannot  at  night  connt  np,  and  say,  *'  It  is  all  done,"  for  love  haa 
no  number  of   aois.     {F.  W.  Robertson.)  The  Pharisee  and  the  publican: — 

Pharisee  and  publican,  they  both  went  up,  as  to  a  common  home,  to  the  great 
national  temple.  The  Pharisee  and  the  publican  had  this  in  common — they  under- 
stood that  prayer  is  a  serious  business — the  highest  business  of  man — that  it  is  the 
highest  and,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  most  noble,  the  most  remunerative  occupation  in 
which  a  human  being  can  possibly  engage.  Man  has  not  always  thus  understood 
the  real  capacity  of  his  soul — the  real  greatness  of  his  destiny.  There  are  thousands 
in  this  great  city  at  this  moment  who  do  not  understand  it.  Enervated  by  pleasure, 
or  distracted  by  pain,  absorbed  in  the  pursuit  of  material  objects,  driven  hither  and 
thither  by  gusts  of  passion,  slaves  of  the  lust  of  the  eyes  or  of  the  pride  of  life,  men 
forget  too  easily  why  they  are  here  at  all,  and  what  they  have  to  do  in  order  to 
fulfil  the  primal  object  of  existence.  When  once  a  man  has  these  fundamental 
truths  well  in  view,  the  importance  of  prayer  becomes  immediately  apparent. 
Prayer  to  something—  prayer  of  some  kind — is  the  higher  language  of  humanity  in 
all  places,  at  all  times.  Not  to  pray  is  to  fall  below  the  true  measure  of  human 
activity,  just  as  truly  as  not  to  think.  It  is  to  surrender  the  noblest  element  of  that 
prerogative  dignity  which  marks  men  oS  as  men  from  the  brutes.  Heathens  have 
felt  this ;  Deists  have  felt  it.  Jews  felt  it  with  an  intensity  all  their  own ;  and, 
therefore,  when  the  two  men,  the  Pharisee  and  the  pubUcan,  went  np  into  the 
temple  to  pray,  they  simply  obeyed  a  law  which  is  as  old  and  wide  as  human 
thought.  They  gave  expression  to  an  instinct  which  cannot  be  ignored  without 
wronging  that  which  is  noblest  and  best  in  our  common  humanity.  Not  to  pray  ia 
not  merely  godless :  it  is,  in  the  larger  sense  of  the  term,  inhuman.  They  both 
obeyed  this  common,  this  imperious  instinct ;  but  here  the  difference  begins.  It 
was  not  the  practice  of  the  Pharisee,  or  the  fact  of  his  thankfulness,  which  made 
him  less  justified  than  the  publican.  What  was  it?  My  brethren,  it  was  simply 
this — that  the  Pharisee  had  no  true  idea  at  all  present  to  his  mind,  impressed  udoi» 
his  heart,  of  what  it  is  that  makes  the  real,  the  awful  difference  between  God  and  Hm 
creatures.  It  is  not  chiefly  that  God  is  self-existent  while  man's  is  a  dependent 
form  of  life.  It  is  that  God  is,  in  Himself,  in  virtue  of  the  necessary  laws  of  His 
being,  that  which  we  are  not — that  He  is  perfectly,  essentially  holy.  Until  a  man 
sees  that  the  greatest  difference  of  all  between  himself  and  his  Creator  lies,  not  in 
metaphysical  unlikeness  of  being,  nor  yet  in  the  intellectual  interval  which  must 
separate  the  finite  from  the  infinite  mind,  but  pre-eminently  in  the  moral  chasm 
which  parts  a  sinfnl,  a  sinning  will,  from  the  one  all-holy,  he  does  not  know  what 
he  is  doing  in  approaching  God.  Practically,  for  such  a  man,  God  is  still  a  mer« 
symbol,  a  name,  whose  most  essential  characteristic  he  has  no  eye  for ;  and  thus, 
like  the  Pharisee  of  old,  he  struts  into  the  awful  presence,  as  if  it  were  the 
presence  of  some  moral  equal,  only  invested  with  larger  powers  and  with  a  wider 
knowledge  than  his  own.  While  the  angels  above  prostrate  themselves  eternally 
before  the  throne,  crying,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,"  proclaiming  by  that  unvaried  song 
the  deepest  difference  between  created  and  uncreated  life,  the  Pharisee  has  the 
heart  to  turn  in  upon  himself  an  eye  of  tranquil  self-approval — to  rejoice,  forsooth, 
that  he  is  not  as  others — to  recount  his  little  charities  and  his  petty  austerities — 
to  enwrap  himself  in  a  satisfaction  which  might  he  natural  if  a  revelation  of  the 
most  holy  had  never  been  made ;  for  observe,  that  the  Pharisee  does  two  things 
which  speak  volumes  as  to  the  real  state  of  his  soul.  1.  He  compares  himself 
approvingly  with  others.  "  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men,  or  even  as 
this  publican."  He  assumes  that  in  God's  sight  he  is  better  than  others.  Bot  I 
ask,  has  he  warrant  for  the  assumption  ?  He  supposes  that  sin  is  measured  solely 
by  its  quantity  and  weight,  and  not  by  the  opportunities  or  absence  of  opportunities 
in  the  sinner.  We  know — every  Uving  conscience  knows — that  it  is  otherwise.  If 
any  one  point  is  clear  in  our  Lord's  teaching  it  is  this — that  to  whom  much  is  given 
of  him  shall  mnch  be  required,  and,  as  a  consequence,  that  in  the  case  of  the  man 
to  whom  much  is  given  a  slight  offence  may  be  much  more  serious  than  a  graver 
crime  in  another,  at  least  in  the  eyes  of  the  Eternal  Justice.  This  consideration 
should  prevent  a  readiness  to  compare  ourselves  with  any  others.  We  know 
nothing  about  them.  We  know  not  what  they  might  have  been  had  they  enjoyed 
our  opportunitiea.  They  may  possibly  be  worse  than  we  are ;  they  may  be  better. 
2.  The  Pharisee  reflects  with  satisfaction  upon  himself.  He  may,  he  thinks, 
haT*  done  wrong  in  his  day.      Everybody,  he  observes,  does  so  more  or  less. 


mus.  xvin.]  -ST.  LUKE.  «5« 

He  is,  as  far  as  that  goes,  not  worse  than  other  people.  In  other  matters  he  flatters 
himself  that,  at  least  of  late  years,  he  is  conspicuously  better.  He  has  kept  out  of 
great  sins  which  the  law  condemns  and  punishes.  He  could  never  by  any  possibility 
have  been  taken  as  a  member  of  the  criminal  classes.  He  fasts  twice  a  week 
according  to  rule  :  he  pays  his  tithes  conscientiously :  he  is  fully  in  every  particular 
up  to  the  current  standard  of  religious  respectability.  Surely,  he  thinks  in  his 
fcecret  heart,  surely  God  cannot  but  feel  what  he  feels  himself — that  he  bears  a  very 
high  character — that  he  is  entitled  to  general  respect.  And  the  publican  has 
nothing  to  plead  on  his  own  behalf.  He  may  have  been  a  Zaccheus  ;  he  may  have 
been  a  legal  robber;  but  he  can  think  of  himself,  whatever  he  was,  in  one  light 
only — as  a  sinner  standing  before  one  Being  only,  the  holy,  the  everlasting  God. 
The  Pharisee  is  nothing  to  him,  not  because  he  is  indifferent,  but  because  he  is 
mentally  absorbed — prostrate  before  One  who  has  filled  his  whole  mind  and  heart 
with  a  sense  of  nnworthiness.  "  Out  of  the  deep  have  I  called  to  Thee,  O  Lord 
Lord,  hear  my  voice  I  Oh,  let  Thine  ears  consider  well  the  voice  of  my  oomplainL 
If  Thou,  Lord,  wilt  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss,  0  Lord,  who  may  abide 
it  ?  But  there  is  mercy  with  Thee."  That  is  his  cry.  That  cry  is  condensed  into 
the  blow  on  the  chest — into  the  "God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner."  (Canon 
Liddon.)  True  thoughts  of  oneself :— In  the  old  tombs  of  our  cathedrals — in  this 
cathedral  three  centuries  ago — there  were  frequently  two  figures  on  the  monuments, 
one  of  the  deceased  king,  or  knight,  or  bishop,  resting  above  in  his  full  robea  of 
state  as  he  wore  them  abroad  in  life,  and  another,  beneath,  of  a  thin,  emaciated 
skeleton,  which  recalled  to  the  eyes  of  the  beholder  the  realities  of  the  grave  below. 
It  is  well,  Christian  brethren,  to  have  in  thought  this  double  image  of  ourselves— 
what  we  are  before  the  world,  if  we  like,  but,  in  any  case,  what  we  are  before  our 
God.  It  was  the  Pharisee's  misery  that  he  thought  only  of  how  he  looked  to  others. 
It  was  the  publican's  blessing  that  he  cared  only  for  what  he  was  before  the  eyes  of 
God,  Let  us  struggle,  let  us  pray,  while  yet  we  may,  for  a  real  knowledge  of  our- 
eelves.  Let  us  endeavour  to  keep  an  account  of  that  inward  history  which  belongs 
to  each  one  of  us,  and  which  will  be  fully  unravelled  at  the  Judgment— to  which 
every  day  that  passes  adds  its  something — of  which  God  knows  all.  To  do  this 
may  take  trouble,  but  the  result  is  worth  a  vast  deal  of  trouble.  Anything  is  better, 
in  religious  matters,  than  that  which  St.  Paul  calls  "  beating  the  air  "—an  aimless 
religion  which  moves  perpetually  in  a  vicious  circle,  because  it  has  no  compass — 
because  it  has  no  object.  The  more  we  know  of  God,  the  more  we  shall  have  reason 
to  be  dissatisfied  with  self— the  more  earnest  will  be  our  cry  for  help  and  mercy  to 
Jesus  Christ,  who  took  our  nature  upon  Him,  and  who  died  upon  the  cross  that  He 
might  save  the  lost,  that  He  might  save  us.  There  is  no  real  reason  for  anxiety  if 
we  will  but  come  to  Him  simply  with  broken  hearts.  Now,  as  in  the  old  time, 
♦*  He  filleth  the  hungry  with  good  things,  but  the  rich  He  hath  sent  empty  away." 
The  Pharisee  and  the  publican  stand  before  Him  in  the  ranks  of  His  Church  from 
age  to  age.  They  are,  in  fact,  eternal  types  of  human  character,  and  to  the  end  of 
time,  the  world's  judgment  between  them  is  falsified,  and  this  man — the  publican — 
goes  down  to  that  last  home  which  awaits  us  all,  justified,  rather  than  the  other. 
Jlbid.)  The  Pharisee  and  the  publican:— SnBer  me  to  attempt  to  disabuse  your 
minds  of  some  of  the  misconceptions  which  have  grown  up  around  this  parable, 
and  which  prevent  (as  it  seems  to  me)  the  real  point  of  its  teaching  coming  home 
to  our  hearts.  1.  In  the  first  place,  I  think  that  we  generally  fail  to  understand 
the  respective  positions  of  the  two  men  in  regard  of  character.  There  ought,  I 
think,  to  be  no  mistake  about  it  that  the  Pharisee  was  the  better  man  of  the  two  in 
every  practical  sense.  Of  course  it  is  possible  that  this  Pharisee  was  a  mere  hypo- 
crite, Uke  many  of  his  class,  and  that  his  account  of  himself  was  false ;  but  there 
is  no  hint  of  such  a  thing,  and  it  would  be  a  perfectly  gratuitous  supposition. 
Taking  his  own  account  of  himself  as  substantially  true,  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
he  had  much  canse  to  give  thanks  to  God  for  what  he  was.  If  he  had  thanked 
God  with  humility  that  he  was  not  Uke  other  men,  remembering  that  his  compara> 
tive  innocence  was  due  to  God's  grace  and  to  the  advantages  of  his  position  and 
training,  he  would  have  done  well.  I  do  not  know  how  we  can  thank  God  too  much 
for  keeping  us  back  from  eviL  But  he  gave  thanks  that  he  was  not  even  as  that 
publican,  and  this  of  course  goes  against  him  in  our  estimation,  because  we  know 
(hat  the  publican  was  nearer  to  heaven  than  he  was.  And  yet,  if  he  had  humbly 
thanked  God  that  he  had  been  saved  from  the  bad  traditions  of  the  publican's 
business,  and  the  bad  surroundings  of  the  publican's  life,  we  could  not  have  blamed 
bim.    lliere  are  some  occupations,  some  ways  of  making  a  living,  so  beset  with. 


860  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xyih. 

temptations,  in  wbich  a  man  is  so  dependent  for  Boccess  npon  his  own  sharp  deal- 
tngs,  in  which  he  is  so  driven  to  take  advantage  of  the  follies  and  vices  of  others, 
that  we  may  well  thank  God  that  we  have  been  delivered  from  them.  It  is  indeed 
Bad  to  see  Christian  people  entangled  in  these  perilous  and  hurtful  pursuits,  obliged 
to  defend  themselves  from  the  accusations  of  conscience  by  building  up  false  and 
unchristian  principles  of  morality.  2.  Another  misconception  there  is  which  I  wish 
to  point  out  to  you,  and  that  is  the  mistaken  notion  (as  it  seems  to  me)  that  the 
publican  was  actually  justified  by  his  lowly  demeanour  and  self-condemning  words. 
Our  Lord  does  not  say  that.  He  says  the  publican  was  justified  rather  than  the 
other.  I  imagine  that  neither  was  truly  justified,  but  of  the  two  the  publican  was 
nearer  being  justified  than  the  Pharisee.  Far  as  he  yet  was  from  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  he  was  not  nearly  so  far  as  the  Pharisee,  for  he  was  in  the  right  way.  In 
his  humility  he  stood  as  it  were  on  the  threshold,  and  there  was  nothing  to  hinder 
his  entering  in  if  he  was  prepared  for  the  necessary  sacrifice ;  whereas  the  Pharisee 
had  missed  the  entrance  altogether,  and  was  getting  further  and  further  from  it. 
But  never  let  us  think  that  our  Saviour  meant  this  for  an  example  of  sufficient 
repentance.  If  the  publican  went  back,  as  so  many  do  after  the  same  outbreak  of 
self-reproach,  to  his  exactions  and  extortions,  to  hia  tricks  of  trade,  his  petty 
deceits,  and  his  unrighteous  gains — if  he  went  home  from  the  temple  to  cook  hie 
accounts  with  the  government,  or  to  sell  up  some  poor  wretch  who  could  not  meet 
his  demands  ;  do  you  think  that  his  beating  upon  his  breast  and  calling  himself  a 
miserable  sinner  would  avail  him  aught?  Nay,  it  would  but  increase  his 
condemnation,  because  it  would  show  that  his  conscience  was  alive  to  his  sin. 
What  our  Lord  means  to  impress  upon  us  in  this  parable  is  the  fatal  danger  of 
spiritual  pride,  which  made  the  Pharisee,  with  all  his  real  cause  for  thanksgiving, 
to  be  further  ofF  from  the  kingdom  and  righteousness  of  God  than  the  publican 
whom  he  despised.  The  spirit  of  self -righteousness  is  such  a  blinding  spirit ;  it 
warps  and  distorts  the  whole  spiritual  vision.  What  shonld  have  been  a  prayer  in 
the  mouth  of  the  self-righteous  Pharisee  was  turned  into  a  glorification  of  himself ; 
and  instead  of  asking  God  to  make  him  better,  he  told  God  how  good  he  was. 
And  this  brings  me  to  the  third  and  last  misconception  of  which  I  shall  speak.  It 
is  that  of  imagining  that  the  spirit  of  self-righteousness  must  always  take  the  same 
form  which  it  presents  in  the  parable ;  that  Pharisaism  must  always  be  the  proud 
relying  apon  ^e  outward  observances  of  religion ;  but,  in  fact,  as  a  very  little 
observation  will  show  ns,  it  has  as  many  different  forms  as  there  are  fashions  in 
religion.  The  modem  British  Pharisee  amongst  ourselves,  when  he  gave  thanks 
that  he  was  not  like  other  men,  would  never  think  of  speaking  Uke  the  Pharisee  is 
the  parable ;  he  would  more  probably  say  something  of  this  sort — "  God,  I  thank 
Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  priest-ridden,  idolaters,  superstitious,  or  even 
as  this  benighted  Ritualist.  I  never  fast,  I  never  think  of  giving  tithes,"  and  so 
on.  The  error  of  the  Pharisee  was  in  substance  this,  that  he  thanked  God  that  he 
punctually  performed  those  duties  which  came  quite  natural  to  him,  and  that  he 
sought  to  turn  God's  attention  to  other  people's  faults  by  way  of  exalting  his  own 
merits.  Now,  this  is  an  error  which  is  constantly  reappearing  under  one  guise  or 
other.  We  are  always  disposed  to  thank  God  that  we  are  not  as  this  Dissenter,  or 
as  that  Bomanist,  when  all  the  while  they  may  be  living  nearer  to  God  than  we  in 
honesty  of  intention  and  purity  of  heart.  We  are  always  apt  to  imagine  that  we 
can  commend  our  faith  by  protesting  against  other  people's  errors,  and  our  practice 
by  condemning  faults  to  which  we  are  not  tempted.  (R.  WitUerbotham,  M.A.) 
Acceptable  and  unacceptable  prayer  : — 1.  A  contrast  in  attitude  and  manner.  2.  A 
contrast  in  spirit.  3.  A  contrast  in  prayer.  4.  A  contrast  in  reception.  (J.  R. 
Thomson,  M.A.)  Tht purpose  of  the  parable: — From  the  introduction  it  might 
be  inferred  that  the  chief  purpose  for  which  the  parable  was  spoken  was  to  rebuke 
and  subdue  the  spirit  of  self-righteousness.  To  do  this  effectively  is  not  easy, 
though  that  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  attempted.  Another  service,  however, 
was  probably  also  kept  in  view  by  the  Speaker,  which  was  much  more  likely  to  be 
accomplished,  viz.,  to  revive  the  spirit  of  the  contrite,  and  embolden  them  to  hope 
in  God's  mercy.  This  is  a  service  which  contrite  souls  greatly  need  to  have 
rendered  them,  for  they  are  slow  to  believe  that  they  can  possibly  be  the  objects 
of  Divine  complacency.  Such  in  all  probability  was  the  publican's  state  of  mind, 
not  only  before  but  even  after  he  had  prayed.  He  went  down  to  his  house  justified 
in  God's  sight,  but  not,  we  think,  in  his  own.  He  had  not  "  found  peace,"  to  xu* 
a  eorrent  phrase.  In  technical  language,  we  might  speak  of  him  as  objectively,  but 
not  subjectively,  justified.    In  plain  English,  the  fact  was  so,  bat  he  was  not  aware 


CHIP,  xvin.]  8T,  LUKE.  361 

that  the  fact  was  so.  In  saying  this,  we  do  not  forget  that  there  is  an  instinct, 
call  it  rather  the  still  small  voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  tells  a  penitent,  "  there 
is  hope  in  God,"  "  there  is  forgiveness  with  Him,  that  He  may  be  feared  "  ;  "wait  for 
God,  as  they  that  wait  for  the  dawn."  But  a  man  who  beats  his  breast,  and  dares 
not  look  up,  and  stands  afar  off  in  an  attitude  which  seems  an  apology  for  existence, 
has  some  difficulty  in  trusting  this  instinct.  To  fear  and  despond  suits  his  mood 
rather  than  to  hope.  There  are  physical  reasons  for  this,  not  to  speak  of  spiritual 
ones.  The  whole  behaviour  of  the  publican  speaks  to  a  great  religious  crisis  going 
on  in  his  souL  For  that  beating  of  the  breast,  and  that  downcast  eye,  and  that 
timid  posture,  are  not  a  theatrical  performance  got  up  for  the  occasion.  They  bear 
witness  to  a  painful,  possibly  a  protracted,  soul-struggle.  But  one  who  passes 
through  such  a  crisis  suffers  in  body  as  well  as  in  mind.  His  nerves  are  sorely 
shaken,  and  in  this  physical  condition  he  is  apt  to  become  a  prey  to  fear  and 
depression.  He  starts  at  his  own  shadow,  dreads  the  postman,  trembles  when  he 
opens  a  letter  lest  it  should  contain  evil  tidings,  can  scarce  muster  courage  to  go 
into  a  dark  room,  or  to  put  out  the  light  when  he  goes  to  bed.  How  hard  for  a 
man  in  this  state  to  take  cheerful  views  of  his  spiritual  condition,  to  rejoice  in  the 
sunlight  of  Divine  grace.  In  the  expressive  phrase  of  Bunyan,  used  with  reference 
to  himself  when  he  was  in  a  similar  state,  such  an  one  is  prone  rather  to  "  take  the 
shady  side  of  the  street."  Is  it  improbable  that  one  object  Christ  had  in  view  iu 
uttering  this  parable  and  the  judgment  with  which  it  winds  up,  was  to  take  such 
contrite  and  fear-stricken  ones  by  the  hand  and  conduct  them  over  to  the  sunny 
side?  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.B.)  Forgiveness  most  needed: — A  friend  of  mine— a 
tnisBionary  preacher — being  once  called  upon  to  give  spiritual  consolation  to  a  sick 
man  on  the  point  of  death,  asked  him  what  he  could  do  for  him.  "  Pray  for  me," 
was  the  reply.  My  friend  said  that  he  would  do  so  most  willingly,  but  added,  "  For 
what  shall  I  ask?"  The  man  answered,  "You  know  best."  The  preacher  told 
him  that  this  was  not  so,  and  that  he,  himself,  could  alone  know  what  he  wanted. 
Still  the  dying  man  would  say  nothing  but,  "  You  know  best.  I  leave  it  to  you." 
At  length  my  friend  left  him,  promising  to  return  in  a  short  time,  and  hoping  that 
then  he  might  be  able  to  say  what  it  was  he  wanted  to  pray  for.  When  the  preacher 
returned,  the  man  directly  said,  "  I  have  been  a  great  sinner ;  I  want  forgiveness." 
{Bitliop  Waltham  How.)  After  confession  of  tin  comet  forgivenesi: — ^We  do  not 
always  know  that  we  are  forgiven ;  we  are  not  told  that  the  publican  knew  he  was 
pardoned,  althoagh  I  think  that  as  he  went  down  to  his  house  he  must  have 
had  some  sense  of  the  fact  that  he  was  accepted  of  God.  But  still  we  do  not 
always  know  of  our  forgiveness.  I  once  visited  a  canal  boatman  on  his  death-bed, 
and  I  never  remember  to  have  seen  a  man  more  affected  or  more  repentant  of 
his  sins.  Yet  he  could  not  grasp  the  fact  of  his  forgiveness.  I  tried  all  I  could 
to  bring  it  home  to  him,  but  unsuccessfully.  Yet  in  my  own  mind  I  have  no  doubt 
that  he  was  forgiven.  In  order  to  be  pardoned  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  have 
a  firm  conviction  that  we  are  pardoned.  In  fact,  it  is  logically  absurd  to  think  so. 
(Und.)  The  humble  prayer  the  best : — You  can  fill  an  empty  jug  with  clear  water 
from  the  spring  ;  bat  it  would  be  foolishness  to  bring  to  the  spring  a  jug  already 
full.  The  Lord  has  no  blessing  for  the  heart  that  is  full  of  haughtiness ;  tluit  He 
reserves  for  the  heart  emptied  of  self.  And  remember  that,  after  all,  it  is  the 
worthiest  who  are  the  most  humble.  It  is  the  best  filled  stalk  of  com  that 
bends  its  head  the  lowliest.  (Sunday  School  Timet.)  The  Church  it  a  place  for 
prayer: — These  two  men  went  up  to  the  temple  "to  pray" — not  to  meet  their 
friends,  nor  that  they  might  comply  with  a  respectable  custom,  nor  for  the  purpose 
of  agreeably  passing  away  an  hour  in  varying  the  ordinary  tedium  of  every-day 
engagements.  No,  but  to  pray.  And  surely,  this  should  be  our  great  object  when 
we  come  up  to  the  temple  of  God.  Many  seem  to  think,  that  to  hear  the  sermon 
is  the  great  end  they  have  in  view  when  they  enter  a  church  ;  but  God  has  said, , 
"  My  house  shall  be  called  an  house  of  prayer."  If  we  had  a  petition  to  present 
to  an  earthly  monarch,  our  great  endeavour  on  entering  the  presence  chamber 
would  be  to  approach  the  throne,  and  make  our  wants  and  desires  known.  We 
would  not  think  it  the  most  important  part  of  the  proceeding  to  have  a  little 
conversation  with  the  servants  or  attendants  that  stood  around,  nor  would  we  feel 
satisfied  by  their  giving  us  some  information  as  to  the  character  of  the  aagust 
personage  who  is  indeed  present  himself,  the  way  in  which  his  favour  may  be 
oonoiliated,  or  his  gifts  procured.  These  things  might  be  very  important,  bat  the 
king,  the  king  ia  Uie  absorbing  idea — the  servant  is  a  minor  consideration.  (A. 
QladweUt  B.A.)       The  Pharisee  stood  and  prayed  thoa  with  hi mnelt-— Lesiotif 


B62  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrot 

from  the  PJiarisee''t  prayer: — There  are  three  cantioDB  which  the  Pharisee  im. 
preBBeB  on  he  ;  "  for  these  things  were  written  for  onr  learning,"  "  he  being 
dead,  yet  cpeaketh."  And  in  the  first  place,  let  ns  beware  of  pride.  This 
is  the  great  lesson  the  parable  inculcates.  Spiritual  pride  incapacitates  a  man 
for  receiving  the  blessings  of  the  gospel ;  it  is  the  great  obstacle  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  to  straggle  with  and  overthrow.  Secondly,  let  as  beware 
of  formality  in  religion.  We  are  all  bom  Pharisees — more  anxious  to  appear 
than  to  be  Christians.  To  conclude,  let  as  beware  of  resting  in  anything  short 
of  the  atoning  blood  of  tbe  Lord  Jesns  Christ.  {A.  Gladwell,  B.A.)  Pharisaical 
prayers: — •'  God,  I  thank  Thee" — such  in  spirit,  and  almost  in  word,  was 
the  expression  of  the  great  Boman  historian,  Tacitus — "I  thank  Thee  I  am 
not  as  the  miserable  sect  called  by  the  infamous  name  of  Christians,  odious 
to  all  mankind."  *'  God,  we  thank  Thee,"  said  the  philosopher  of  France,  '•that 
we  are  not  like  those  benighted  men  who  converted  the  barbarous  tribes,  or  erected 
the  Gothic  cathedrals."  "  I  thank  Thee,"  said  the  splendid  Pope  Leo  X.,  "  that 
I  am  not  as  this  ignorant  monk,  Martin  Luther."  "God,  we  thank  Thee,"  said 
the  great  movers  of  the  political  and  social  revolutions  of  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries  in  England,  "that  we  are  not  as  those  fanatics,"  the  blind  poet 
of  Bunhill  Bow,  and  the  wandering  tinker  of  Bedford,  or  the  scrupulous  bishop 
who  could  not  accept  the  Act  of  Settlement,  or  the  Lincolnshire  pastor  who  spent 
his  long  life  in  itinerant  preaching;  and  yet  those  early  Christian  martyrs,  those 
medieeval  missionaries  and  monk  of  Wittenberg,  were  mightier  in  the  long  run 
even  than  Tacitus,  or  the  encyclopedists  of  France,  or  the  philosophers  of  the 
Benaissance.  And  those  wayward  Christians  in  England,  as  they  seemed  to  be, 
John  Milton,  the  author  of  "  Paradise  Lost,"  John  Banyan,  the  author  of  *•  The 
Pilgrim's  Progress, "  Bishop  Ken,  author  of  the  Morning  and  Evening  Hymns,  John 
Wesley,  the  author  of  the  religious  revival  in  England,  went  down  to  their  graves 
as  much  deserving  of  the  praise  of  true  statesmen  and  philosophers,  even  as 
Clarendon  and  Bolingbroke,  as  Walpole  and  Hume.  (Dean  Stanley.)  ^  The 
prayer  of  pride  : — When  Philip,  king  of  Macedonia,  laid  siege  to  the  fair  city  of 
Samos,  he  told  the  citizens  that  he  came  a-wooing  to  it ;  but  the  orator  well 
replied,  that  it  was  not  the  fashion  in  their  counky  to  come  a-wooing  with  a 
fife  and  a  drum :  so  here  we  may  behold  this  Pharisee  in  the  posture  of  a  beggar 
or  petitioner,  "  going  up  to  the  temple  to  pray,"  and  yet  telling  God  he  standetta 
in  no  need  of  Him  ;  as  if,  saith  Chrysostom,  a  beggar,  that  were  to  crave  an  alms, 
should  hide  his  ulcers,  and  load  himself  with  chains,  and  rings,  and  bracelets, 
and  cloUie  himself  in  rich  and  costly  apparel ;  as  if  a  beggar  should  ask  an  alma 
in  the  robes  of  a  king.  His  "  heart  did  flatter  him  in  secret,  and  with  his  month 
he  did  kiss  his  hands,"  as  Job  speaketh  (Job  zxxi.  27).  Coming  before  hia 
Physician,  he  hideth  his  sores,  and  showeth  his  sound  and  healthful  parts,  in  a 
dangerous  case ;  like  a  man  strack  in  a  vein,  that  voideth  his  best  blood,  and 
retaineth  his  worst.  And  this  is  against  the  very  nature  of  prayer ;  which  should 
lay  as  at  the  feet  of  God,  as  nothing  before  Him  ;  which  should  raise  itself  and 
take  its  flight  on  the  wings  of  humility  and  obedience ;  which  shoold  contract 
the  mind  in  itself,  and  secure  it  from  pride;  which  should  depress  the  soul 
in  itself,  and  defend  it  from  vainglory ;  which  should  so  fill  it  that  there  may 
be  no  room  for  hypocrisy.  Then  our  devotion  will  ascend  as  incense,  "pure  and 
holy  "  (Exod.  zxx.  35),  seasoned  with  the  admiration  of  God's  majesty,  and  the 
detestation  of  onrselves.  {R.  Farindon,  D.D.)  The  Pharisee's  mistake ; — The 
mistake  of  this  Pharisee  was,  that  he  compared  his  outward  life  with  the  lives  of 
disreputable  people,  and  so  took  to  himself  the  credit  of  exalted  superiority. 
He  should  have  looked  in  the  other  direction.  If  yon  would  come  to  a  just  estimate 
of  your  character,  look  at  those  better  than  you,  and  compare  yourself  with  them ; 
look  at  those  whom  God  has  set  for  onr  examples,  the  prophets,  the  apostles, 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  measure  yourself  by  them;  look  at  the  holy 
ten  commandments,  and  try  yourself  rigidly  by  their  requirements;  and  this 
Pharisaic  trust  and  pride  in  your  own  goodness  will  melt  away  like  ^ost  before 
the  sun.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  An  egotistical  utterance : — With  what  prominence 
and  frequency  he  flourishes  the  big  <'  1 1 "  <*  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as 
other  men."  "I  ftist  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess." 
The  whole  utterance  contains  thirty-three  words,  of  which  one  refers  to  God, 
five  are  "  I's,"  and  the  remaining  twenty-seven  are  either  commendations  of 
himself,  or  allusions  to  others  in  unfavourable  contrast  with  his  own  superiority. 
8eU— self— self — in  atmost  intensity  rons  throngh  the  whole  of  it.     There  is 


CHAP,  xnii.l  8T.  LUKE.  368 

not  a  trace  of  genoine  devotion  in  the  entire  piece.  There  is  a  marvelloua 
thrusting  forward  of  ego,  to  which  all  the  references  to  God,  the  temple,  aud  other 
people,  are  made  subservient.  {Ibid.)  The  fine  prayer: — The  celebrated  Pro- 
fessor Francke,  who  founded  the  great  Orphan  Asylum,  in  Halle,  was  walking 
one  day  in  the  fields  with  one  of  his  colleagues.  All  at  once  the  voice  of  a  person 
praying  drew  their  attention.  They  stopped,  and  on  looking  observed  behind 
a  bush  two  children  on  their  knees,  one  of  whom  was  praying  fervently  to  God. 
The  two  professors  listened,  and  were  edified  with  the  devotion  which  the  young 
Christians  seemed  to  possess.  When  the  prayer  was  ended,  the  children  rose. 
*'  Well,"  said  the  one  who  led  the  devotions,  with  a  self-complacent  air,  "  didn't 
I  make  a  fine  prayer  ?  "  This  last  remark  caused  Francke  and  his  companion 
a  painful  surprise.  But  after  a  moment's  reflection,  one  of  them  remarked : 
"  This  child  has  shown  openly  what  often  passes  in  our  minds.  How  often,  when 
God  has  disposed  us  to  pray  with  some  fervour  in  presence  of  our  brethren,  do 
we  rise  from  our  knees  with  a  secret  vanity  ;  and  if  shame  did  not  restrain  us,  we 
should  ask  with  this  child,  'have  not  I  made  a  fine  prayer?'"  The  poorest 
the  best : — Lucian,  in  one  of  his  dialogues,  relates  the  case  of  two  men  going  into 
the  theatre  to  play  on  the  harp :  one  harp  was  covered  with  gold  and  jewels, 
but  its  strings  broke,  and  the  admiration  of  the  spectators  was  changed  to 
contempt ;  the  harp  of  the  other  man  was  a  very  poor  and  common  one,  yet  it 
gave  out  the  sweetest  sound,  and  delighted  all.  The  former  harp  represents  the 
Pharisee,  who  plays  upon  his  outside  worth  and  fair  appearance ;  the  latter  harp 
resembles  the  poor  publican.  (Preacher^s  Promptuary.)  Need,  not  magnificence, 
the  best  aid  to  prayer : — When  Morales,  the  painter,  was  invited  by  Phflip  the 
Second  to  court,  he  came  in  such  a  magnificent  costume,  that  the  King,  in  anger, 
ordered  a  sum  of  money  to  be  paid  him,  and  so  dismissed  him.  The  next  time 
they  met  he  appeared  in  a  very  different  dress,  poor,  old,  and  hungry,  which  so 
touched  the  heart  of  the  King,  that  he  immediately  provided  him  with  a  revenue 
which  kept  him  in  comfort  for  all  the  future.  So  when  men  come  to  the  throne  of 
grace  it  is  not  their  magnificence  but  their  very  want  which  touches  the  heart  of 
God.  {W.  Baxendale.)  Self-praise  in  prayer  :—B.iB  prayer  is  like  the  pillar  of 
brass  which  Trajan  erected  to  himself  in  Bome,  and  which  he  covered  with  the 
record  of  his  own  triumphs.  His  prayer  is  a  sort  of  monument  over  the  tomb 
of  his  own  dead  heart,  upon  which  he  inscribes  his  fancied  virtues.  (J.  Wells.) 
God  be  merciftil  to  me  a  sinner.  Humility  of  prayer: — I.  When  do  wb  pbay 
WITH  HUMILITY?  Learn  this  from  the  publican.  It  is  when  we  acknowledge 
the  infinite  majesty  of  God  and  our  own  misery.  II.  Wht  must  wb  bb  htjmblb 
IN  otJB  PBATEBS?  1.  God  demands  that  we  should  pray  with  humility.  2. 
Reason  itself  teaches  the  same.  Who  would  pay  any  attention  to  a  proud 
beggar?  III.  What  wb  abb  to  do  in  obdeb  to  leaen  to  fbat  with  humilitj. 
A  humble  prayer  can  only  proceed  from  a  humble  heart.  Therefore  endeavour  to 
become  humble  of  heart,  by  employing  the  following  means :  1.  Being  convinced 
that  humility  is  a  grace  of  God,  pray  to  Him  that  He  may  give  you  this  beautiful 
virtue.  2.  Call  frequently  to  your  mind  what  you  are  in  real  truth.  (1)  What 
is  your  single  self  in  comparison  with  the  more  than  one  thousand  millions  of 
men?  You  seem  to  disappear  in  the  prodigious  multitude.  (2)  What  are 
you  relative  to  yonr  body  ?  Dust  and  ashes.  (3)  What  are  you  relative  to  your  soul? 
True,  your  soul  is  the  image  and  Ukeness  of  God ;  but  what  have  you  made  of 
this  Divine  image  by  your  sins  of  the  past  and  of  the  present?  And  as  to  the 
future,  when  you  reflect  on  your  sins,  have  you  not  every  reason  to  tremble  before 
the  severe  judgment  of  God?  3.  When  you  approach  God  in  prayer,  call  to  mind 
who  God  is  in  all  His  splendour  and  majesty,  and  who  you  are — a  wretched  sinner, 
a  beggar  sunk  into  the  greatest  misery,  a  culprit  sentenced  to  death.  And  then, 
overwhelmed  with  the  burden  of  your  misery,  speak  from  the  depth  of  jrour  heart 
to  Him  who  alone  is  able  to  deliver  you.  And  if  you  are  troubled  with  distractions 
during  your  prayer,  humble  yourself  again  before  your  Lord  and  Master,  and 
Implore  Him  that  He  may  not  suffer  you  to  commit  new  sins  by  neghgence ; 
bat  cease  not  praying  in  epite  of  distractions,  and  your  prayer  will  be  acceptable 
to  the  Lord.  {J.  Schmitt.)  The  publican's  prayer  .-—This  is  the  only  thought 
which  befits  a  living  man  in  the  presence  of  his  Creator.  What  other  link  can 
come  between  the  Ood  of  holiness  and  love,  and  the  sinner,  but  mercy  1  "  God 
be  mercifol."  I.  In  these  few  words  of  the  contrite  soul  there  is  an  aboumbnt 
VBioa  Oos  wnx  itbvbb  bejbct.  It  is  the  plea  God  loves.  "  GU>d  be  mereif ol 
te  me  because  I  am  a  sinner."    David  knew  that  blessed  argument  when  he  Mid : 


8ft4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [ohap.  xvm, 

'•L«rd  pardon  my  iniquity,  for  it  is  great."     God  has  made  a  book,  and  it  is  for 
sinners ;    God  has  filled  it  with  promises,  and  they  are  for  sinners.     He  haa 
given  His  own  Son,  and  it  is  only  for  sinners.    II.   Thb  way  to   obtain  thii 
FiTTiNO  CONDITION  OF  MIND.    It  Is  to  be  readied  in  the  same  way  as  the  pablioan 
attained  it.    His  whole  mind  appears  to  have  been  occupied  with  Qod,  the  rest 
vas  only  secondary.     Most  persons  when  they  try  to  cultivate  penitence,  look  into 
themselves.    It  is  the  study  of  God,  not  of  ourselves,  which  makes  the  penitent 
mind.  Nothing  makes  sin  seem  so  sinful  and  so  hateful  as  the  contemplation  of  the 
love  of   God.    in.    Whoevbb   wooid   be   tkult  a  penitent   must  havb   biobt 
VIEWS  of  mebct.    It  is  an  easy  thing  to  say  "  God  have  mercy  upon  me."    Upon 
the  just  apprehension  of  what  this  mercy  is  depends  the  whole  power  and  aeospt- 
ability  of  the  prayer.     If  God,  simply  by  an  a«t  of  sovereignty,  forgave  a  sia 
and  remitted  the   punishment,  it  would  not  be  mercy.     Before  God  can  show 
Himself  merciful  to  a  sinner  He  must  receive  a  satisfaction  and  an  equivalent 
That  satisfaction  is  Christ.     {J.  Vaughan,  3I.A.)        The  cry  that  opetis  heaven: — 
1.  When  I  come  to  analyze  this  prayer  of  the  publican,  I  find  in  it,  in  the  first 
place,  an  appreciation  of  his  sinfulness.     He  proved  himself  honourable,  and 
there  were  a  great  many  admirable  things  about  him,  and  yet  he  utters  this  cry  of 
self-abnegation.     What  was  the  matter  with  him  ?     Had  he  lost  his  reason  ? 
Had  some  low,  contemptible  cowardice  seized  upon  him  ?    O,  no.    For  the  first 
time  in  all  his  life  he  saw  himself.     He  saw  he  was  a  sinner  before  God,  utterly 
helpless  and  undone.    At  what  moment  that  discovery  fiashed  upon  him  I  know 
not ;    but   standing  there  in  the  court  of    the  temple,  surrounded  by  all  the 
demonstrations  of  holiness  and  power,  his  soul  has  extorted  from  it  the  anguish- 
bitten  cry  of  my  text.     2.  I  pursue  the  analysis  of  my  subject  still  further,  and 
I  find  in  this  publican's  prayer  the  fact  that  he  expected  nothing  except  mercy. 
He  might  have  said :  "  I  am  honest  in  all  my  dealings.    When  ten  dollars  are 
paid  to  me  for  tax,  I  hand  it  over  to  the  Government.     If  you  look  over  all  my 
books  you  will  find  them  right.     My  life  has  been  upright  and  respectable." 
He  made  no  such  plea.    He  comes  and  throws  himself  on  God's  mercy.    Are 
there  any  in  this  house  who  propose,  by  making  their  life  right,  to  commend 
themselves  to  God  ?    Do  you  really  think  you  can  break  off  your  bad  habits  f 
Where  then  are  we  to  be  saved  ?    Is  there  no  balm  for  this  mortal  wound  of  my 
soul  7    Is  there  no  light  for  this  Arctic  night  ?    Is  there  no  hope  for  a  lost  sinner  ? 
Yes ;  and  that  is  what  I  came  to  tell  you  about.    Mercy.    Free  mercy.    Pardoning 
mercy.     Suffering    mercy.      Infinite  mercy.     Omnipotent   mercy.     Everlasting 
mercy.    S.  I  push  this  analysis  of  my  text  one  step  further,  and  I  find  that  this 
man  saw  that  mercy  would  be  of  no  advantage  to  him  unless  he  pleaded  for  it. 
He  did  not  say :"  If  I  am  to  be  saved,  I  will  be  saved,  and  if  I  am  to  be  lost, 
I  will  be  lost.    There  is  nothing  for  me  to  do."    He  knew  that  a  thing  worth 
having  is  worth  asking  for,  and  therefore,  he  makes  the  agonizing  cry  of  my 
text.    Mark  you,  it  was  an  earnest  prayer,  and  if  you  look  through  this  Bible 
you  will  see  that  all  the  prayers  that  were  answered  were  earnest  prayers.     Bat, 
mark   you  this,  the  publican's  prayer  was    not  only  earnest,  it  was  humble. 
The  Pharisee  looked  up ;  the  publican  looked  down.    I  remark  further,^  there  was 
a  ringing  confidence  in  that  prayer.    He  knew  he  would  get  the  blessing  if  he  asked 
for  it ;  and  he  did  get  it.    (De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)       A  iinner  praying  for  mercy  : — 
I.  The  blessing  he  asks  is  mbbcy  :   "  God  be  merciful  to  me."      Did  you  ever 
ask  yourselves  what  mercy  is  ?    It  means,  in  common  language,  pity  shown  to  the 
miserable  for  pity's  sake.    Strictly  speaking,  it  ceases  to  be  mercy,  if  the  miserable 
have  any  claim  on  us.     It   takes   then  the  character  of  justice.    And  mercy 
has  exactly  the  same  meaning  in   Holy  Scripture.    It  signifies  God's  kindnea» 
extended  to  miserable  man  of  God's  own  pure  goodness.     XL  We  may  turn  now  to 
THE  CHAKACTEB  IN  WHICH  THIS  MAN  PBATS.     He  says,   "  God  be  merciful  to  me 
a  sinner."    He  prays  in  a  character  that  corresponds  exactly  with  the  temple- 
services,  and  also  with  the  blessing  he  supplicates.    There  at  the  altar  falls  the 
sacrifice,  and  who  needs  a  sacrifice  but  the  sinful  7    He  pleads  for  mercy,  and 
who  needs  mercy  but  the  guilty  ?    And  it  a  blessed  thing  for  a  sinful  man  to 
be  thus  wiUing  to  take  his  own  proper  ground  when  he  prays.    He  must  take 
it,  if  he  means  to  obtain  God's  mercy.    All  the  mercy  that  exists  in  God,  bound- 
less as  it  is,  is  mercy  for  sinners.     III.  Observe  now  the  mannxb  in  which  this 
woBSBippBB  PBATs.    And  here  again  all  is  in  harmony.    His  manner  accords  well 
with  his   character  and  his  petition.     1.  He  is  a  sinner,  and  consequently  he 
prays  most  humbly.    2.  This  publican  prayed  also  very  earnestly.    He  "  smote 


<5HAP.  xvni.]  ST.  LUKE.  3fl5 

«pon  his  breast,"  No  matter  what  led  him  to  do  so.  It  was  doubtless  a  mixtura 
of  feelings.  Indignation  against  himself,  a  sense  of  his  own  pollution  and 
misery,  a  thrilling  apprehension  of  coming  wrath — these  things  took  possession 
of  his  mind  ;  they  agitated  him ;  and  like  a  man  driven  to  extremities  he 
could  not  restrain  his  agitation,  he  smote  himself  as  he  cried  for  mercy. 
He  became  exceedingly  earnest  in  his  prayer  for  it.  He  prayed  for  nothing  else ; 
he  thought  of  nothing  else.  Mercy  is  everything  with  him.  IV.  There  is  yet  another 
circumstance  in  the  parable  to  be  noticed — the  success  op  this  man's  prateb.  1, 
It  was,  first,  abundant  success,  success  beyond  his  petition.  2.  His  success  was 
also  immediate.  {C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  ■publican's  prayer  : — I.  Observe  thk 
OBJECT  or  THB  PUBLicAu's  PBAYEB.  1.  The  light  of  nature  teaches  man  there  is  a 
<Tod,  a  supreme  Being,  and  Governor  of  the  world.  There  is  not  a  rational  creature 
to  be  found  upon  the  earth  but  admits  this  truth.  And,  hence,  all  attend  to 
fiome  kind  of  worship.  2.  Eevelation  makes  known  to  man  the  true  God  in 
Uis  nature  and  attributes,  and  exhibits  His  conduct  towards  the  children  of 
men.  3.  But  we  must  remember  that  God  is  never  savingly  known,  even 
by  those  who  have  the  Volume  of  Divine  revelation,  by  the  unassisted  powers 
of  nature.  Hence,  in  addition  to  Revelation,  it  is  necessary  that  the  naind  be 
enlightened,  in  order  to  its  perception  of  Divine  truth.  And  to  do  this  is  the 
exclusive  prerogative  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  II.  The  subject  or  his  petition— 
*'  mercy  "  ;  and  the  description  he  gives  of  himself — "  a  sinner."  "  God  be  merciful 
to  me  a  sinner  1 "  1.  On  the  part  of  man,  here  are  two  things  implied :  (1)  Misery. 
A  sense  of  deep  wretchedness,  as  being  sunk  in  iniquity — totally  depraved,  and  in 
every  part  polluted.  The  truly  awakened  sinner  feels  that  he  is  spiritually  diseased ; 
and  that,  "  from  the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  soul  of  his  foot,  he  is  wounds,  and 
bruises,  and  putrefying  sores."  (2)  A  deep  sense  of  unworthiness.  The  truly  con- 
trite soul  brings  no  qualifications ;  no  merit,  no  sacrifice  of  his  own ;  but  comes  as 
ft  sinner,  and  having  for  his  only  plea,  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  There 
«re  also  two  things,  in  the  exercise  of  mercy,  on  the  part  of  God,  which  the 
epiritually  enlightened  sinner  especially  regards.  (1)  Pity,  or  compassion.  When 
the  Holy  Spirit  brings  the  sinner  to  a  saving  knowledge  of  God,  He  enables  him  to 
look  up  to  his  heavenly  Father,  as  the  God  of  compassion.  (2)  Pardon,  or  forgive- 
ness. *•  I,  even  I,"  says  God,  "  am  He  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  transgression,  and 
sin."  The  Holy  Spirit  teaches  all  true  believers  that  the  justice  of  God  is  for  them, 
and  on  their  side,  as  well  as  His  mercy.  III.  What  this  pbayeb  iuplies,  when 
orFERED  TO  GoD  IN  A  PBOPEB  SPIRIT.  1.  True  humiliation  for  sin.  Even  after 
the  manifestation  of  forgiving  love,  the  man  who  enjoys  it  feels  deeply  humbled 
before  God.  2.  This  prayer,  when  offered  in  a  proper  spirit,  implies  evangelical 
repentance.  God  says  (Ezek.  xixvi.  31).  3.  This  prayer  implies  submission  to 
the  righteons  judgment  of  God.  In  conclusion,  we  learn  from  this  subject — 1. 
That  tile  ground  (or  cause)  of  a  sinner's  justification  is  out  of  himself.  2.  Learn 
that  no  outward  reformation,  even  though  accompanied  by  the  strictest  attention 
to  religious  duties,  can  save  the  soul.  3.  Learn  that  no  sensible  sinner,  no  humble 
{>enitent,  need  feel  discouraged  in  approaching  the  God  of  mercy  for  pardon.  4. 
Learn,  finally,  to  beware  lest  you  maJce  the  mercy  of  God  an  excuse  for  your  con- 
tinuance in  sin.  (T.  Gibson,  M.A.)  A  sermon  for  the  worst  man  on  earth: — I. 
The  FACT  OF  binnebsbip  IS  NO  REASON  FOB  DESPAiB.  1.  This  man  who  was  a 
sinner  yet  dared  to  approach  the  Lord.  Emphatically  he  applies  to  himself  the 
guilty  name.  He  takes  the  chief  place  in  condemnation,  and  yet  he  cries,  "  God  be 
merciful  to  me  the  sinner."  If  this  man  who  was  the  sinner  found  forgiveness, 
•0  also  shall  yon  if  you  seek  it  in  the  same  way.  2.  Next,  remember  that  you  may 
not  only  find  encouragement  in  looking  at  the  sinner  who  sought  his  God,  but  in 
the  God  whom  he  sought.  Sinner,  there  is  great  mercy  in  the  heart  of  God.  ^  3. 
Moreover,  the  conception  of  salvation  implies  hope  for  sinners.  That  salvation 
which  we  preach  to  yon  every  day  is  glad  tidings  for  the  guilty.  Salvation  by 
^ace  implies  that  men  are  guilty.  The  very  name  of  Jesus  tells  us  that  He  shall 
save  His  people  from  their  sins.  4.  Let  me  further  say  that,  inasmuch  as  that 
salvation  of  God  is  a  great  one,  it  mnst  have  been  intended  to  meet  great  sins. 
Think  you  God  would  have  given  His  dear  Son  to  die  as  a  mere  superfluity  ?  6.  If 
yon  will  think  of  it  again,  there  must  be  hope  for  sinners,  for  the  great  commands 
of  the  gospel  are  most  suitable  to  sinners.  6.  If  you  want  any  other  argument — 
«nd  I  hope  you  do  not — I  would  put  it  thus :  great  sinners  have  been  saved.  All 
sorts  of  sinners  are  being  saved  to-day.  II.  A  sense  of  binnebsbip  ooNntBS  ho 
mioHT  TO  KBBCK.    YoQ  wili  wondet  why  I  mention  this  self -evident  trath ;  bak  I 


866  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvm.. 


must  mention  it  because  of  a  common  error  which  does  great  mischief.  This  mait' 
was  yerv  sensible  of  his  sin  insomuch  that  he  called  himself  ihb  sinner  ;  bat  h» 
did  not  urge  his  sense  of  sin  as  any  reason  why  he  should  find  mercy.  I  want  you^ 
therefore,  to  learn  that  a  sense  of  sin  gives  no  man  a  right  to  grace.  III.  My  third 
observation  is  this:  the  knowledqe  of  thbib  sinmebship  odides  aibn  to  bioht 
ACTION.  When  a  man  has  learned  of  the  Hol^  Spirit  that  he  is  a  sinner,  then  by  ft. 
kind  of  instinct  of  the  new  life,  he  does  the  right  thing  in  the  right  way.  1.  Tiiis 
man  went  straight  to  God.  2.  He  went  with  a  full  confession  of  sin.  3.  Ha 
appealed  to  mercy  only.  FV.  The  beuevino  oontsssion  of  sinnbbship  is  the 
WAT  OF  PEACE.  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  was  the  prayer,  but  what  wa» 
the  answer?  Listen  to  this:  "This  man  went  down,''  &o.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  penitent's  prayer : — The  arrangement  of  these  words  is  perfect.  On  one  side  is 
Deity alone — without  an  attribute,  far  grander  in  that  soUtude  than  if  ten  thou- 
sand titles  had  been  added  to  His  name — "  God."^  On  the  other— thrown  into  the 
greatest  possible  distance— is  man ;  and  he,  too,  is  alone ;  and  his  whole  being  is 
put  into  one  single  expression — it  is  not  a  description,  it  is  a  synonymy—"  me,  &. 
eiimer."  And  between  these  two  extremes — spanning  the  distance,  and  uniting  the 
ends— is  one  link— simple— grand-sufficient — "  mercy,"  nothing  but  "  mercy  " — 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  I  may  mention,  for  the  sake  of  those  who  do 
not  happen  to  know  it,  that  there  are  three  points  in  the  original,  which  could  not 
well  be  rendered  in  our  version ;  but  which  make  this  strong  language  stronger 
still.  There  it  is,  "  the  God,"  and  "  the  sinner  "  ;  as  if  the  publican  wished  to  give 
the  greatest  possible  definiteness  to  all  his  expressions ; — "  the  God  " — the  good 

God "  be  merciful  to  me  " ;  as  though  he  were  the  only  man  on  the  face  of  th& 

earth  who  needed  the  forgiveness — no  comparisons,  no  distractions,  no  deductions ; 
the  mind  concentrated,  the  mind  absorbed,  upon  the  one  guilty  self,  "  Tfie  God  be^ 
merciful  to  me  the  sinner."  And  in  the  very  phrase  which  he  selects — "  be  merci- 
ful,"  there  is  rolled  up  atonement ;  it  is,  "  be  propitiate."    Doubtless  that  man 

had  been  taught  to  see  mercy  all  in  sacrifice ;  to  recognize  no  pardon  out  of  cove- 
nant, and  no  covenant  out  of  blood.  "  The  God  be  propitiate  to  me  the  sinner." 
I  think  you  will  see,  brethren,  that  there  is  great  force  in  tiat  distinction  of 
language.  Weakness  always  deals  in  generalities.  A  man  is  general  in  his 
thoughts  and  his  expressions  till  he  begins  to  be  in  earnest ;  and  the  very  moment 
he  begins  to  be  in  earnest,  he  is  individual.  Hear  men,  as  men  generally  speak 
about  God.  They  say,  "  the  Almighty  " ;  and  they  say,  "  the  Almighty  is  very  good," 
and,  "we  are  all  of  us  bad,"  and,  "none  of  us  are  as  good  as  we  ought  to  be  "  ;. 
that  is  the  language  of  natural  religion,  if,  indeed,  it  be  religion  at  all.  It  is  loose, 
because  it  cannot  afford  to  be  accurate ;  it  shuns  just  what  a  spiritual  man  loves — 
personality.  How  different  is  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost  1  The  soul  cannot 
be  particular  enough  ;  it  lives  in  exactnesses ;  it  individualizes  everything.  "  The 
God  be  propitiate  to  me  the  sinner."     To  make  true  prayer — or,  which  is  the  same 

thing to  make  true  peace,  two  things  are  wanted.     Some  persons,  to  a  certain 

extent,  attain  the  one,  and  some  the  other ;  while,  because  they  do  not,  at  the  same 
moment,  attain  both,  the  end  is  frustrated.  The  truth  lies  in  unity.  The  one 
thing  is  to  exalt  God  very  high ;  and  the  other,  to  demean  self  very  low.  If  yon 
lift  up  the  attributes  of  God,  and  do  not  proportionably  debase  yourself,  you  are  in, 
danger  of  running  into  presumption.  If  you  take  deep  views  of  your  sinfulness, 
and  do  not,  at  the  same  time,  magnify  the  grace  of  God,  you  will  run  into  despair. 
A  God  high  in  His  glory,  and  self  down  in  the  dust,  that  is  best ;  and  let  me  advise 
you  to  look  well  to  it  whether  you  are  doing  these  two  things  with  parallel  steps. 
tJ.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  ingredients  of^  real  mercy  ;— To  make  forgiveness— to 
make  real  "  mercy  " — four  things  are  required.  God  must  be  Himself  just  in  doing 
it.  The  forgiven  man  must  be  perfectly  sure  that  he  is  forgiven.  The  forgiveness 
must  not  inoUne  the  forgiven  man  to  go  and  sin  again,  but  it  must  stop  him.  And 
the  rest  of  mankind  must  see  no  encouragement  in  that  man's  pardon  to  go  and  do 
like  him,  but  rather  see  the  strongest  argument  not  to  do  it.  Now,  in  God's  way  of 
"  mercy  "  these  four  things  meet.  First,  God  is  just,  because  He  never  remits  a> 
penalty  till  He  has  received  an  equivalent ;  the  sinning  soul  has  died  in  its  cove- 
nant Head,  and  God  keeps  His  word ;  and  the  very  same  attribute  which  compel* 
God  to  punish  man  out  of  Christ,  in  Christ  obUges  God  to  pardon  Him.  Secondly, 
that  forgiven  man  can  never  doubt  his  acceptance,  because  he  knows  that  the  blood 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  outweighs  the  universe.  The  infinity  of  Christ  is  in  the 
ransom.  Either  he  is  perfectly  pardoned,  or  the  Son  of  God  has  died  in  vain. 
Thirdly,  that  pardoned  man  cannot  go  and  sin  again,  because,  unless  he  love* 


CHAP,  xvuul  ST,  LUKE.  Sff7 

Christ,  he  is  not  forgiven  ;  and  if  he  does  love  Christ,  he  cannot  love  the  sin  which 
crucified  Him  ;  he  cannot  go  and  do  lightly  again  that  which  grieves  and  wounds 
Him  whom  now  his  soul  holds  more  precious  than  all  the  world.    And,  fourthly,  the 
whole  world  in  that  man  has  seen  sin  in  its  greatest  possible  magnitude,  because  it 
has  seen  sin  drag  down  to  this  earth  and  crucify  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory ;  th« 
law  is  more  honourable  than  if  the  whole  world  had  perished ;  since,  sooner  than 
one  iota  of  that  law  should  be  set  aside,  the  Son  of  God  has  kept  that  law  by  His  life, 
and  satisfied  it  by  His  death ;  so  sin  is  made  viler  by  the  very  act  which  cancels  it; 
and  pardon  is  no  more  the  parent  of  peace,  than  peace  is  the  mother  of  holiness. 
That  is  mercy.     {Ibid.)        The publicaii's  prayer: — I.  The  substance  of  this  prayer 
evinces  deep  conviction  o»  mn.    II.  Hblplessness.    He  admits  the  righteousness 
of  his  condemnation,  and  sues  for  mercy.    III.  Faith.     He  took  hold  of  God's 
promises,  and  made  his  appeal.     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)        Earnestness  is  brief:— 
Earnestness  does  not  express  itself  in  long,  inflated,  pompous  sentences.    It  is 
brief ;  it  is  simple.    The  moment  has  arrived  when  victory,  long  doabtfal  as  the 
tide  of  success  ebbed  and  flowed,  may  be  won  by  one  splendid,  dashing,  daring 
attack — the  order  is  given  in  one  brief  word.  Charge !    On  the  distant  waves  a  flag 
is  seen,  now  sinking  in  the  trough  and  again  rising  on  the  crest  of  the  foaming 
billows ;  and  beneath  that  signal,  clinging  to  the  fragment  of  a  vessel  that  lies 
many  fathoms  down  in  the  depths  of  ocean,  are  two  human  forms — and  all  the  cry 
that  sounds  from  stem  to  stern  is,  "  A  wreck,  a  wreck  1 "  and  all  the  order,  "  Lower 
the  boat  1 "  words  hardly  uttered  when  she  drops  on  the  water,  and,  palled  by  stout 
rowers,  is  leaping  over  the  waves  to  the  rescue.    One  late  in  the  deserted  streets 
sees  the  smoke  creep,  and  the  flames  begin  to  flash  and  flicker  from  a  house  whoso 
tenants  are  buried  in  sleep ;  he  bounds  to  the  door  and  thunders  on  it — all  his  cry, 
•*  Fire,  fire  1 "    Peter  sinks  amid  the  boisterous  waves  of  Galilee  and  all  the  prayer 
of  lips  the  cold  water  kisses  is,  as  he  stretches  out  his  hand  to  Jesus,  "  Save  me,  I 
perish  I  "    And  with  the  brief,  urgent  earnestness  of  one  who  seeing  his  danger, 
knows  that  there  is  no  time,  and  believing  in  God's  great  mercy,  feels  that  there  ia 
no  need  for  long  prayers,  the  publican,  like  a  man  who  in  falling  over  a  crag  catches 
the  arm  of  a  friendly  tree,  throws  his  whole  soul  into  this  cry,  these  few,  blessed, 
accepted  words,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  I  "     {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)        Justi- 
fication as  the  result  of  prayer : — Brethren,  we  have  here  a  pregnant  word  as  to  the 
possibilities  and  capabilities  of  worship.    Two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to 
pray,  and  one  of  the  two  returned  to  his  house  justified.    What  is  it  to  be  justified  » 
All  true  doctrine  teaches  us  a  great  difference  between  being  justified  and  being 
sanctified.    Justification  is  an  act,  sanctification  is  a  process.    Both  are  of  God. 
But  whereas  the  one  may  be  the  act  of  a  moment,  restoring  the  sinner  to  the 
Divine  acceptance    by  a    simple  forgiveness  through  the    blood  of   Jesus,  the 
other  in  most  cases  is  the  work  of  a  lifetime,  consisting  in  the  gradual  formation  of 
a  new  character  by  the  daily  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  Grace.     There  are  other  uses 
of  the  word,  but  this  is  its  meaning  when  it  is  applied  accurately.    Now,  of  course, 
there  in  a  sense  in  which  justification  stands  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian 
course,  and  needs  not,  and  indeed  suffers  not  to  be  repeated.    When  a  man  comes 
to  himself  in  the  far  country,  and  says,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father,"  and 
when  he  not  only  says  but  does,  and  not  only  starts  for,  but  arrives  at,  the  home 
where  the  Father  dwells,  and  receives  from  Him  the  kiss  of  peace,  and  the  ring  of 
the  everlasting  covenant  then  and  there,  that  is  his  justification.    God  for  Christ's 
sake  freely  forgives,  bestows  upon  him  the  Holy  Spirit,  and,  unless  some  terrible 
thing  should  happen  afterwards,  sets  him  in  the  sure  way,  of  which  the  end  is 
heaven.    "  Therefore,  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    But  our  Lord  Himself  here  speaks  of  a  man  going  down 
to  his  house  from  a  particular  act  of  worship  either  justified  or  not  justified.    And 
this  seems  to  give  an  importance,  quite  beyond  our  common  estimate,  to  such  a 
service  as  this  in  which  we  are  now  engaged.     You  may  say,  indeed,  that  this 
particular  occasion  was  the  justification,  in  the  first  and  fullest  sense,  of  this  pub- 
lican.   Now  first,  you  may  say,  he  felt  himself  a  sinner,  now  first  he  sought  mercy, 
and  when  he  went  back  to  his  house  he  went  back  for  the  first  time,  and  for  ill 
time  a  pardoned  and  accepted  man.    But  this  idea  of  restriction  seems  to  have 
been  imported  into  the  parable.    Is  there  anything  in  our  Lord's  word^to  imply 
that  either  the  prayer  of  the  Pharisee  or  the  prayer  of  the  publican  wais  a  single 
and  isolated  one,  nevw  offered  before,  suggested  by  some  crisis  of  the  life,  sudden 
and  not  to  be  repeated  ?    Was  it  not  rather  the  habit  of  the  two  minds  thus  to 
express  themselves  ?    Would  the  Pharisee  be  a  different  man  to-morrow,  not  th« 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (ohai-.  rrnt 

exception,  and  not  the  perfection  that  he  now  thinks  himself  f  And  would  tha 
publican  when  he  came  again  to  the  temple  be  no  longer  the  sinner  of  sinjaera,  but 
an  improved,  and  altered,  and  sanctified  man  ?  Where  is  all  this  in  the  parable  T 
If  not,  then  the  justification  spoken  of  may  be  repeated  to-morrow,  and  we  have 
before  us  the  thought  of  the  issues  of  worship  rather  than  the  thought  of  the  issues 
of  a  fundamental  spiritual  change.  This  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified,  on 
this  particular  occasion,  rather  than  the  other.  The  justification  spoken  of  is  for* 
giveness,  or  absolution.  Brethren,  the  justified  man  wants  forgiveness ;  thb  man 
who  has  bathed  the  whole  body  needs  afterwards  to  wash  the  feet.  This  man  has 
bronght  his  load  of  sin  with  him  to  the  temple ;  he  has  come  guilty  and  burdened, 
conscience  accusing,  and  convicted.  He  has  left  undone  that  which  he  ought  to 
have  done  since  he  last  worshipped,  he  has  done  that  which  he  ought  not  to  have 
done  since  he  last  worshipped,  there  is  no  health  in  him ;  this  morning  he  has 
come,  jnst  as  he  is,  to  the  God  of  his  life ;  he  has  sought  no  intervention,  and  no 
intermediation  of  priest,  or  of  sacrifice ;  he  has  come  straight  to  God.  He  has 
taken  for  granted  God's  knowledge  of  each  of  his  transgressions,  as  well  as  of  thai 
root  and  spring  of  evil,  which  is  the  fallen  and  sinful  self ;  and  now,  pre-snpposing 
all  this,  he  has  simply  to  ask  for  mercy,  which  is,  being  interpreted,  kindness  to 
the  undeserving,  and  he  has  received  the  answer  of  peace,  and  so  now  he  goes  back 
to  his  house  justified.  What  of  the  other  ?  His  return  is  not  described  ;  it  is  left 
under  the  veil  of  a  parable.  The  publican  is  justified  beyond,  or  in  comparison 
with,  or  rather  tban,  the  Pharisee — such  is  the  Grsek.  Dare  we  suggest  on  the 
strength  of  this  reticence  two  kinds  or  two  degrees  of  justification,  one  the  higher 
and  more  complete,  but  the  other,  though  lower,  perhaps  sufficient  ?  Let  us  look 
at  the  prayer,  and  judge  by  it  of  the  answer,  "  God,  I  thank  thee  for  my  satisfactory 
condition,  for  my  exemplary  conduct,  for  my  exceptional,  my  unique  freedom  from 
the  otherwise  universal  wickedness  of  mankind."  What  is  there  here  to  suggest 
the  thought  of  a  justification,  of  which  tbe  other  name  is  absolution,  or  forgive^ 
ness  ?  What  is  there  here  to  be  forgiven  7  Not  having  asked,  he  surely  has  not 
received,  a  boon  which  is  only  acceptable,  and  only  appropriate  to  the  sinner. 
{Dean   Vaughan.)  Christian  humility  :  —  "  The  best  of    God's  people  have 

abhorred  themselves.  Like  the  spire  of  a  steeple,  minimus  in  summo,  we  are 
least  at  the  highest.  David,  a  king,  was  yet  like  a  weaned  child."  Manton  is  not 
very  clear  about  the  steeple,  but  he  means  that  the  higher  a  spire  rises  towards 
heaven  the  smaller  it  becomes,  and  thus  the  more  elevated  are  our  spirits  the  less 
«hall  we  be  in  our  own  esteem.  Great  thoughts  of  self  and  great  grace  never  go 
together.  Self-consciousness  is  a  sure  sign  that  there  is  not  much  depth  of  grace. 
He  who  over-values  himself  under-valnes  his  Saviour.  He  who  abounds  in  piety  is 
sure  to  be  filled  with  humility.  Light  things,  such  as  straws  and  feathers,  are  borne 
aloft ;  valuable  goods  keep  their  places,  aud  remain  below,  not  because  they  are 
chained  or  riveted  there,  but  by  virtue  of  their  own  weight.  When  we  begin  to 
talk  of  our  perfection,  our  imperfection  is  getting  the  upper  hand.  The  more  full 
we  become  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord  the  more  shall  we  sink  in  our  own  esteem, 
«ven  as  laden  vessels  sink  down  to  their  water-mark,  while  empty  ships  float  aloft. 
Xiord,  make  and  keep  me  humble.  Lift  me  nearer  and  nearer  to  heaven,  and  then 
I  shall  grow  less  and  less  in  my  own  esteem.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Sin  a  personal 
affront  to  Qod : — Sin  is  a  personal  affront,  whose  bitter  consequences  only  the  forgive- 
ness of  Ood  Himself  can  remove,  and  toward  which,  with  the  publican,  we  must 
implore  Him  to  be  merciful.  It  does  not  read,  "  Nature  be  merciful,"  nor  •'  Laws 
of  my  constitution  be  merciful,"  nor  **  Society  be  merciful,"  nor,  "  I  will  be  merci- 
ful to  myself,"  but,  "  God  be  merciful ; " — nor  yet,  "  God  be  merciful  to  sin  in 
general,"  but  "to  me  a  sinner."  {Bishop  Huntington.)  A  negro's  prayer : — My 
uncle,  the  £ev.  Dr.  Samuel  K.  Talmage,  of  Augusta,  Georgia,  was  passing  along 
the  street  one  day  and  he  met  a  black  man,  who  stepped  out  into  the  street,  leaving 
the  pavement,  took  his  hat  off,  and  bowed  very  lowly  in  the  presence  of  my  uncle. 
My  uncle  said  to  him :  "  My  dear  fellow,  why  do  you  stand  there  and  make  such  a 
low  bow  to  me?"  •'  Oh,"  he  replied,  "massa,  I  owe  you  more  than  any  one  on 
earth."  ♦♦  Why,"  inquired  my  uncle,  «'  what  do  you  mean  ?  "  "  Well,"  said  the 
man,  "  I  was  going  along  the  street  the  other  night,  and  I  had  a  heavy  burden  on 
my  back,  and  I  was  hungry  and  sick,  and  I  saw  your  church  was  lighted,  and  I 
thought  I  would  just  stand  at  the  door  a  minute  and  listen,  and  I  put  down  my 
burden  and  listened,  and  I  heard  you  say :  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.'  And 
you  said  that  any  poor  soul  that  oould  utter  that  prayer  from  the  heart  ooold  get 
to  heaven,  and  I  shooldered  my  burden  and  I  went  on  home,  and  I  went  in  th« 


€WAP.  xnn.]  ST.  LUKE.  SG9 

house,  and  I  sat  down,  and  I  folded  my  hands,  and  T  said  :  •  God  be  merciful  to  me 
ft  pinner,'  but  I  felt  no  better  ;  I  felt  worse.  And  then  I  got  down  on  my  knees, 
and  I  said  it  again  :  •  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.'  I  felt  no  better.  It  wa» 
darker  than  it  was  before.  And  then,  massa,  I  threw  myself  down  on  my  face  and 
cried  out :  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,'  and  I  kept  on  crying  that  until  after 
awhile  I  saw  a  light  a  good  ways  off,  and  it  came  nearer  to  me,  and  nearer  to  me, 
and  it  got  all  bright,  and  I  felt  very  happy,  and  I  thought  the  next  time  I  saw  you 
coming  down  the  street  I  would  bow  very  low  before  you,  and  I  would  stand  out  of 
your  way,  and  I  would  tell  you  how  much  I  owed  to  you."  (De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.} 
As  a  sinner : — When  the  late  Duke  of  Kent,  the  father  of  Queen  Victoria,  was 
expressing,  in  the  prospect  of  death,  some  concern  about  the  state  of  his  soul,  his 
physician  endeavoured  to  soothe  his  mind  by  referring  to  his  high  respectability, 
and  his  honourable  conduct  in  the  distinguished  situation  in  which  Providence  had 
placed  him,  when  he  stopped  him  short,  saying,  "  No ;  remember,  if  I  am  to  be 
saved,  it  is  not  as  a  prince,  but  as  a  sinner."  The  publican's  prayer  used  in 
death : — Many  well-known  Christians  have  died  with  the  publican's  prayer  on  their 
lips.  Archbishop  Usher  did  so.  William  Wilberforce,  the  liberator  of  the  slaves, 
said  when  dying,  "  With  regard  to  myself,  I  have  nothing  to  urge  but  the  poor 
publican's  plea,  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,' "  When  the  famous  Grotina 
was  a-dying  at  Rostock,  the  minister  reminded  him  of  the  publican's  prayer, 
"  That  publican,  Lord,  am  I,"  said  Grotius,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  and 
then  he  died.  {J.  Wells.)  The  nature  and  necessity  of  humility  : — I.  We  are  to 
consider  the  nature  op  humiutt.  There  is  the  more  occasion  for  describing  this 
gracious  exercipe  of  heart  with  peculiar  accuracy  and  precision,  beoause  mankind 
are  naturally  disposed  to  misunderstand  and  misrepresent  it.  Mr.  Hume  scrupled 
not  to  say,  that  "  humility  ought  to  be  struck  off  from  the  catalogue  of  virtues, 
and  placed  on  the  catalogue  of  vices."  This  must  have  been  owing  to  his  gross 
ignorance,  or  extreme  malignity.  The  most  charitable  supposition  is,  that  he 
really  mistook  a  mere  selfish  and  painful  sense  of  natural  inferiority  for  true 
humility.  This  leads  me  to  observe  that  a  man's  humbling  himself  is  something 
very  different  from  his  having  a  mistaken  and  reluctant  sense  of  his  own  inferiority 
in  relation  to  his  fellow  mortals.  Humility  is  likewise  different  from  submission, 
which  seems  to  resemble  it.  Submission  is  the  respect  which  an  inferior  justly 
owes  to  a  superior.  Furthermore,  humility  is  something  different  from  con- 
descension, which  is  the  part  of  a  superior,  and  consists  in  stooping  to  an  in- 
ferior. Thus  the  Creator  may  condescend  to  a  creature,  the  prince  to  a  subject,  the 
rich  to  the  poor,  and  the  aged  to  the  young.  But  though  condescension  stoops,, 
yet  it  is  by  no  means  degrading.  Real  condescension  always  displays  a  noble  and 
amiable  spirit.  I  may  now  safely  say  that  humility  essentially  consists  in  self- 
abasement,  which  is  self-degradation,  or  a  voluntary  sinking,  not  only  below  others,, 
bat  below  ourselves.  It  is,  therefore,  wholly  fonnded  in  guilt.  None  but  guilty 
creatures  have  any  cause  or  reason  for  abasing  themselves.  But  every  guilty 
creature  ought  to  abase  himself,  whether  he  is  wilUng  or  unwilling  to  perform  the 
mortifying  duty.  n.  Sinners  must  humble  themselves  before  God,  in  obdeb  to 
obtain  pabdonino  mercy.  1.  God  cannot  consistently  receive  them  into  His  favour, 
before  they  voluntarily  humble  themselves  for  their  transgressions  in  His  sight. 
2.  It  is  impossible  for  sinners  to  receive  Divine  mercy  before  they  take  their  proper 
places,  and  are  willing  to  sink  as  low  as  Divine  justice  can  sink  them.  Improve- 
ment :  1.  If  hamility  essentially  consist  in  self-abasement  for  sin,  then  we  va&y 
safely  suppose  that  neither  God  the  Father,  nor  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  ever  exer- 
cised any  affection  which  may  be  strictly  called  humility.  2.  If  humility  consists 
in  self-abasement,  we  may  clearly  see  how  low  sinners  must  lie  before  God,  in 
order  to  obtain  His  pardoning  mercy.  3.  If  humility  consists  in  a  free  and 
voluntary  self-abasement  for  sin,  then  it  is  the  most  amiable  and  shining  exercise 
of  a  holy  heart.  4.  Finally,  it  appears  from  this  whole  discourse  that  nothing^ 
short  of  real,  cordial  telf-abasement,  can  qualify  any  of  our  sinful  race  to  obtain 
and  enjoy  the  happiness  of  heaven.  (N,  Emmons,  D.D.)  Humility  : — An  old 
writer  of  the  Church  says  of  humility  that  '•  it  is  the  great  ornament  and  jewel  of 
the  Christian  rehgion.  AH  the  world,  all  that  we  are,  and  all  that  we  have,  our 
bodies  and  our  souls,  our  actions  and  our  sufferings,  our  conditions  at  home,  our 
accidents  ahroad,  our  many  sins  and  our  seldom  virtues,  are  as  so  many  arguments 
to  make  our  souls  dwell  low  in  the  deep  valley  of  humility."  A  moment's  thought 
will  convince  you  of  the  truth  of  this.  Of  what  are  you  proud,  of  your  holiness  T 
Think  of  the  many  shortcomings,  the  endless  sins,  great  and  small,  the  numberlear 
TOL.  m.  24 


870  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xtih. 

yieldings  to  temptation,  the  constant  infirmities  of  temper  which  have  marked  th« 
course  of  your  lives  during  the  last  year,  and  then  set  these  ofiE  against  the  good 
deeds  on  which  you  congratulate  yourselves,  have  you  much  to  be  proud  of? 
Are  you  proud  of  your  bodily  strength,  your  health,  your  beauty  t  Eemember  that 
a  sudden  cold  or  the  prick  of  a  lancet  will  banish  life  from  your  bodies,  that  a 
week's  sickness  will  mar  your  beauty  for  ever.  The  flowers  which  bloom  and  fade 
are  more  beautiful  than  the  loveliest  of  living  beings,  hundreds  of  animals  are 
stronger  and  more  long-lived  than  man ;  have  we  then  much  to  be  proud  of  here  ? 
Are  you  proud  of  your  intellect,  of  your  superiority  over  your  neighbours  in  know- 
ledge and  education  7  Brethren,  the  most  deeply  learned  knows  that  he  is  as  a 
child  amid  the  mysteries  of  nature ;  half  his  knowledge  is  but  a  groping  after  more 
light,  which  is  long  in  coming,  and  feeble  when  it  is  gained.  "Our  learning  is  best 
when  it  teaches  most  humility,  but  to  be  proud  of  learning  is  the  greatest  ignorance  in 
the  world."  {H.  J.  Wilmot-Biixton,  M.A.)  Justified  rather  than  the  other. — Justifi- 
cation:— I.  How  DO  WE  BECOME  JDST  WITH  GoD  ?  1.  Not  by  works  in  themselves,  but 
by  the  disposition  of  the  mind.  2.  Not  only  by  a  moral  disposition,  but  by  a  pioua 
disposition.  3.  Not  only  by  a  pious  disposition  in  general,  but  by  a  believing  dispo- 
sition in  the  merits  of  Christ.  Justification  is  God's  gift,  apart  from  any  desert  on 
our  part.  II.  What  bich  blessino  is  included  in  oub  justitication?  1.  Forgiveness 
of  sin.  2.  An  incentive  and  power  to  a  new  Ufe  in  repentance  and  satisfaction.  3. 
Always  free  access  now  to  God,  and  new  assurances  of  favour  and  a  sure  hope  of 
eternal  life.  {Heintzeler.)  Humility  and  self-reproach  rewarded : — I  recently 
met  with  an  account  of  a  prince,  the  son  of  a  king,  who  went  to  a  house  of 
correction  to  see  the  captives.  Meeting  there  so  many  people,  toiling  at  their  tasks, 
and  hobbling  in  their  chains,  his  heart  was  moved  with  pity,  and  he  resolved  to  give 
some  of  them  their  liberty.  But  he  must  first  find  out  which  of  them  deserved 
release.  To  satisfy  himseU  on  this  point,  he  went  from  one  to  the  other,  asking 
each  why  he  was  there.  According  to  the  answers  he  got,  all  were  brave,  proper, 
and  honourable  men;  one  had  simply  been  unfortunate;  another  had  done  no 
wrong ;  a  third  was  slandered ;  a  fourth  was  forced  against  his  will ;  each  pleading 
innocence,  and  entreating,  on  these  grounds,  to  be  released.  At  last  he  came  to  a 
young  man,  asking,  "  And  what  have  you  done,  that  has  brought  you  here  ?  " 
"  Gracious  sir,"  answered  the  man,  '*  I  am  here  because  I  deserve  it.  I  ran  away 
from  my  parents ;  I  led  an  idle  and  dissolute  life ;  I  committed  theft  and  forgery ; 
and  it  would  take  an  hour  to  tell  aU  the  bad  things  I  have  done.  And  this  is  what 
I  justly  deserve  for  my  evil  deeds."  The  prince  facetiously  remarked:  "  Indeed! 
and  how  does  it  happen  that  so  bad  a  man  ever  found  his  way  in  among  all  these 
virtuous  and  honourable  people?  Take  oS  his  chains,  open  the  gates,  and  let  him 
out,  lest  he  corrupt  and  spoil  these  good  innocent  men,  who  have  all  been  put  here 
without  a  cause."  He  meant  to  say,  that  this  was  the  only  honest-hearted  one 
among  them ;  that  the  rest  had  only  lied  and  dissembled ;  and  that  people  who 
have  no  sins  to  confess,  are  not  fit  to  have  their  punishments  remitted.  "  This 
young  man,"  said  he,  "  confesses  his  misdeeds ;  he  has  humbled  himself  before 
God  and  me ;  and  him  alone  I  deem  worthy  of  his  freedom.  Therefore  set  him  at 
Uberty."    {J.  A.  SeUi,  DJ).) 

Ver.  16.  Suffer  Uttle  children  to  come  onto  Me. — Chrit^s  favour  to  little 
children  displayed : — 1.  These  children  were  not  brought  to  Christ  to  be  taught, 
for  they  were  not  yet  capable  of  receiving  instruction ;  nor  could  they  profit  by  Hia 
-preaching,  or  put  any  questions  to  Him.  Those  who  are  grown  up  to  years  of 
understanding,  have  need  to  be  busy  in  getting  knowledge  now,  that  they  may 
redeem  tfae  time  they  lost,  through  the  invincible  incapacities  of  their  infancy.  2. 
Nor  were  they  brought  to  Christ  to  be  cured,  for  it  does  not  appear  that  they  needed 
it.  Little  children  are  indeed  liable  to  many  distempers,  painful,  mortal  ones.  The 
physicians  have  a  book  among  them,  "De  Morbis  Infantum  " — on  the  diseases  of 
infants.  Death  and  its  harbingers  reign  even  over  them  who  have  not  sinned  after 
the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression,  but  these  children  were  strong  and  healthful, 
and  we  do  not  find  that  anything  ailed  them.  3.  They  were  brought  to  Christ  to  be 
blessed ;  so  they  meant  when  they  desired  that  He  would  touch  them :  the  sign  is 
put  for  the  thing  signified.  I.  How  wb  must  bbino  oub  little  ohildben  to  Chbist. 
1.  By  sorrendering  them  to  Hi"*  in  Holy  Baptism.  2.  We  must  bring  them  to 
Christ,  by  seeking  to  Him  for  them,  as  those  who  are  sorrendered  to  Him.  They 
are  to  be  bat  once  baptized,  bat  the^  are  to  be  daily  prayed  for,  and  the  promisa 
sealed  to  them  in  their  baptism  pat  in  salt  and  pleaded  with  God  in  their  behalf. 


^AP.  xvra.]  ST.  LUKE.  871 

(1)  Be  constant  in  praying  for  yonr  children ;  pray  for  them  as  duly  as  for  your- 
telves,  as  St.  Paul  for  his  friends,  making  mention  of  them  always  in  every  prayer. 
^2)  Be  particular  in  praying  for  them ;  pray  for  each  particular  child,  as  holy  Job 
offered  bnmt-offerings  for  his  sons,  according  to  the  number  of  them  all ;  that  yoa 
may  be  able  to  say,  as  Hannah,  "  For  this  child  I  prayed  " :  pray  for  particular 
blessings  for  your  children,  according  as  you  see  their  case  requires,  for  that  grace 
which  you  observe  their  natural  temper  (or  distemper  rather)  calls  for.  3.  We 
must  bring  them  to  Christ,  by  submitting  them  to  the  disposal  of  His  Providence. 
I  have  read  of  a  good  man,  whose  son  being  disposed  of  in  the  world,  met  with 
great  affliction,  which  he  once  very  feelingly  complained  of  to  his  good  father,  who 
answered  (according  to  the  principle  I  am  now  upon),  "  Anything,  child,  to  bring 
thee  to  heaven."  4.  We  must  bring  them  to  Christ,  by  subjecting  them,  as  far  as 
we  can,  to  the  government  of  His  grace.  Having  laid  their  necks  under  the  yoke  of 
Christ  in  their  baptism,  we  must  teach  them  to  draw  in  it,  and  use  our  interest  in 
them,  and  authority  over  them,  to  keep  them  under  that  easy  yoke,  and  bring  them 
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  II.  How  Christ  will  rkceivb 
THE  cBiiiDBBK.  1.  He  took  thoso  children  up  in  His  arms ;  and  so  we  may  hope  He 
will  take  up  our  children  in  the  arms  of  His  power  and  providence,  and  of  His  pity 
and  grace.  2.  He  put  His  hands  upon  those  children.  (1)  If  He  set  us  and  ours  apart 
for  Himself,  as  His  own  peculiar  people,  we  may  say  He  puts  His  hand  upon  us  and 
ours :  as  the  buyer  lays  his  hand  on  the  goods  he  has  agreed  for,  they  are  now  hia 
own ;  as  Jacob  put  his  hand  on  the  head  of  Joseph's  sons,  to  signify  not  only  his 
hlessing  them,  but  his  adopting  them,  and  taking  them  for  his  own,  "  Let  my  name 
be  named  upon  them."  This  we  hope  Christ  does  for  our  children,  when  we  bring 
them  to  Him ;  He  owns  them  for  His ;  and  we  may  say  they  do  in  some  degree 
belong  to  Christ,  are  retainers  to  His  family.  (2)  If  He  give  His  Holy  Spirit  to  us 
and  ours,  it  may  truly  be  said.  He  pats  His  hand  upon  us  and  them.  The  Spirit  is 
sometimes  called  the  finger  of  God,  and  sometimes  the  hand  of  God,  so  that 
Christ's  putting  His  hand  upon  us,  not  only  puts  us  into  a  relation  to  Him,  but 
vrorks  a  real  change  in  us ;  lays  hold  on  the  soul  for  Him,  and  puts  His  image,  as 
well  as  superscription,  upon  it.  The  laying  on  of  hands  was  a  ceremony  used  in 
conferring  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  this  we  pray  for,  and  hope  for,  from  Christ,  for  our 
children,  when  we  bring  them  to  Him.  3.  He  blessed  them.  He  was  desired  to 
pray  for  a  blessing  for  them,  but  He  did  more.  He  commanded  the  blessing,  blessed 
with  authority ;  He  pronounced  them  blessed,  and  thereby  made  them  so ;  for  those 
whom  He  blesseth  are  blessed  indeed.  Christ  is  the  great  High  Priest,  whose  office 
it  is  to  bless  the  people  of  God,  and  all  theirs.  IH.  The  application.  1.  Let  me 
hence  address  myself  to  children,  to  little  children,  to  the  lambs  of  the  flock,  to  the 
youngest  who  can  hear  with  understanding :  will  not  you  be  glad  to  hear  this,  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  a  tender  concern  and  affection  for  you ;  and  that  He  has 
blessings  in  store  for  you,  if  you  apply  yourselves  to  Him,  according  to  your 
capacity  ?  Lay  yourselves  at  Christ's  feet,  and  He  will  take  you  up  in  His  arms. 
Give  yourselves  to  Him,  and  He  will  give  Himself  in  His  grace  and  comforts  to  you. 
Lie  in  His  way,  by  a  diligent  attendance  on  His  ordinances,  and  He  will  not  pass  by 
without  putting  His  hand  on  you.  And  if  you  value  His  blessings  aright,  and  be 
earnest  with  Him  for  His  blessings.  He  will  bless  you  with  the  best  of  blessings, 
such  as  will  make  you  eternally  blessed.  (1)  Let  us  then  still  bring  them  to  Him, 
by  faith  and  prayer,  according  as  their  case  requires.  (2)  Let  us  bring  them  up  for 
Him.  Let  not  your  children  rest  in  a  mere  natural  reUgion ;  that  is  good,  it  is 
necessary,  bat  it  is  not  enough.  Yon  must  make  them  sensible  of  their  need  of 
Christ,  of  their  lost  and  undone  condition  without  Him ;  must  endeavour  to  lead 
them  into  the  mysteries  of  our  reconciliation  to  God,  and  our  redemption  from  sin 
and  wrath,  by  a  Mediator;  and  0  that  they  may  experimentally  know  Him,  and 
the  power  of  His  resurrection  1  And  as  in  other  accomplishments  of  your  children, 
to  in  the  business  of  religion,  which  is  their  best  and  true  accomplishment,  yoa 
TQust,  as  they  come  to  be  capable,  put  them  on  to  advance.  3.  Let  this 
encourage  us,  who  are  parents,  concerning  our  children ;  and  enable  us  to 
think  of  them  with  comfort  and  hope,  in  the  midst  of  our  cares  about  them. 
When  we  wish  well  to  them,  we  would  willingly  hope  well ;  and  this  is  ground  of 
hope,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  has  expressed  so  much  favour  to  httle  children.  (1)  This 
may  comfort  and  encourage  the  tender  careful  mothers  in  nursing  them,  that  they 
are  carrying  those  in  their  arms  whom  Christ  has  taken  up  in  His.  (2)  This  may 
comfort  and  encourage  us  if  our  children  labour  under  any  bodily  weaknesses  and 
iixfirmities,  if  they  be  unhealthf ul  and  often  ailing,  which  is  an  allay  to  oar  comfort 


373  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xmi, 

in  them ;  let  this  serve  to  balance  that,  If  they  belong  to  Christ,  and  be  blessed  of 
Him,  they  are  blessed  indeed ;  and  nothing  amiss  of  that  kind  shall  be  any  prejudio« 
to  their  blessedness,  or  diminution  of  it,  but  may,  being  sanctified,  become  rather  a 
friend  and  furtherance  to  it.  Many  have  been  the  wiser  and  better,  the  more  humble 
and  heavenly,  for  their  having  borne  the  yoke  of  affliction  in  their  youth.  {Matthew 
Henry.)  A  motJier's  concern  for  her  children : — I  feel  a  sympathy  with  what  a 
woman  said  to  me.  I  was  told  to  come  to  her  dying  ooaoh,  and  administer  the  sacra- 
ment. I  went  with  an  elder.  She  said :  "  I  want  to  belong  to  the  Church.  I  am 
going  np  to  bs  a  member  of  the  Church  in  heaven ;  but  I  don't  want  to  go  until  I 
e,m  a  member  of  the  Church  on  earth."  So  I  gave  her  the  sacrament.  And  then 
she  said :  "  Now,  I  am  in  the  Church,  here  is  the  baby,  baptize  him ;  and  here  are 
all  the  children,  baptize  them  all.  I  want  to  leave  them  all  in  the  Church."  So  I 
baptized  them.  Some  years  after,  I  was  preaching  one  day  in  Chicago,  and  at  the 
close  of  the  service,  a  lad  came  upon  the  platform,  and  said :  "  You  don't  know  me, 
do  you?"  "No,"  said  I.  "My  name  is  George  Parish."  "Ah,"  said  1 ;  •' I 
remember,  I  baptized  you  by  your  mother's  dying  bed,  didn't  I  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  said  : 
"  You  baptized  aU  of  as  there,  and  I  came  up  to  tell  you  that  I  have  given  my  heart 
to  God.  I  thought  you  would  like  to  know  it."  "  I  am  very  glad,"  I  replied ;  "  but 
I  am  not  surprised.  You  had  a  good  mother ;  that  is  almost  sure  to  make  a  boy 
come  to  Ood  if  he  has  a  good  mother."  {De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  Christianity  ank 
the  destiny  of  children : — When  I  was  at  Dhoas,  writes  a  missionary's  wife,  my  hus- 
band opened  the  new  chapel,  which  holds  one  hundred  and  fifty  people.  Sixty-five 
persons  were  baptized ;  among  the  rest  several  women.  I  proposed  meeting  them 
alone  on  Tuesday  evening.  One  very  nice-looking  woman  had  a  sweet-looking  girl 
at  her  side,  about  ten  years  old.  I  said,  "  Amah,  would  you  like  me  to  teach  your 
daughter  T  "  With  an  indescribable  look  of  tenderness  she  drew  her  to  her  side,  and 
putting  her  arm  around  her,  said,  "  This  is  my  only  one."  "  Have  you  not  had 
more  children  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Ah  1  yes,  ma'am,  I  have  had  six ;  but  they  are  dead. 
Yes,  they  all  died,  five  of  them,  one  after  the  other ;  they  all  died."  "  And  you, 
poor  thing,  how  sorry  you  must  have  been  1  "  ••  Heigb-ho  !  how  sorry  1  Too  much 
trouble  I  took;  too  much  expense.  After  the  first  died  I  took  sacrifices  to  the 
temple,  and  made  worship  to  the  idol,  and  told  him  I  would  give  him  all  I  could  if 
my  second  might  live  ;  but  he  died.  Then  my  heart  was  very  sore  ;  and  when  my 
third  came,  I  went  to  a  guru,  and  took  a  cloth,  and  fowl,  and  rice ;  and  he  said 
muntrums,  and  made  pujah  (worship)  ;  but  no,  that  child,  he  died.  My  heart  was 
like  fire,  it  burned  so  with  sorrow.  I  was  almost  mad  ;  and  yet  I  tried  some  fresh 
ceremony  for  every  child."  "  What  did  you  think  had  become  of  the  spirits  of  your 
children  7  "  I  asked.  ♦•  You  knew  their  bodies  died,  but  did  you  think  much  of  their 
spirits  f  "  "  Ah  I  that  was  the  thing  that  almost  made  me  mad.  I  did  not  know. 
I  thought  perhaps  one  devil  took  one,  and  another  took  another ;  or  perhaps  they 
were  gone  into  some  bird,  or  beast,  or  something,  I  did  not  know ;  and  I  used  to 
think  and  think  till  my  heart  was  too  full  of  sorrow."  "But,  Amah,"  I  replied, 
"you  do  not  look  sorry  now."  With  a  look  almost  sublime,  she  said,  "  Sorry  now  1 
Oh,  no,  no  1  Why,  I  know  now  where  my  children  are.  They  are  with  Jesus.  T 
have  learned  that  Jesus  said,  '  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  Me.'  My  sorrow 
is  all  gone,  and  I  can  bear  their  not  being  with  me.  They  are  happy  with  Him, 
and,  after  a  little  while,  I  shall  go  to  Him  too,  and  this  Uttle  girl,  my  Julia,  and 
my  husband  too."  {A.  C,  Thomson^  D.D.)  Children  the  true  saints  of  Ood: — 
Mr.  Gray  had  not  been  long  minister  oi  the  parish  before  he  noticed  the  odd 
practice  of  the  grave-digger ;  and  one  day  when  he  came  upon  John  smoothing  and 
trimming  the  lonely  bed  ot  a  child  which  had  been  buried  a  few  days  before,  he 
asked  why  he  was  so  particular  in  dressing  and  keeping  the  graves  of  infants.  John 
paused  for  a  moment  at  his  work,  and  looking  up,  not  at  the  minister,  bat  at  the 
sky,  said,  "  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  "  And  on  this  accoimt  yoa  tend 
and  adorn  them  with  so  much  care,"  remarked  the  minister,  who  was  greatly  struck 
with  the  reply.  "  Surely,  sir,"  answered  John  ;  "  I  canna  make  ower  braw  and  fine 
the  bed-covering  o'  a  little  innocent  sleeper  that  is  waitin'  there  till  it  is  God's  time 
to  wanken  it  and  cover  it  with  white  robe,  and  waft  it  away  to  glory.  Where  sio 
grandeur  is  awaitin'  it  yonder,  it's  fit  it  should  be  decked  oot  here.  I  think  the 
Saviotir  will  like  to  see  white  clover  spread  abune  it ;  dae  ye  no  think  sae  tae,  air  ?  " 
"  But  why  not  thus  cover  larger  graves  ?  "  asked  the  minister,  hardly  able  to  sup 
press  his  emotions.  "  The  dust  of  all  His  saints  is  precious  in  the  Saviour's  sight." 
"  Very  true,  sir,"  responded  John,  with  great  solemnity,  "  but  I  canna  be  sure  wh» 
are  Hia  saints,  and  wha  are  no.    I  hope  thear  are  many  of  them  lyin'  in  thia  kirk- 


csif.  xvm.]  ST.  LUKE.  873 

yard ;  but  it  wad  be  great  presmnption  to  mark  them  oot.  There  are  some  that 
I'm  gey  sure  aboot,  and  I  keep  their  graves  as  nate  and  snod  as  I  can,  and  plant  a 
bit  floure  here  and  there  as  a  sign  of  my  hope,  but  dauma  gie  them  the  white  shirt," 
referring  to  the  white  clover.  "  It's  clean  different,  though,  wi'  the  bairns."  (Ibid.) 
The  biased  influence  of  children : — Children  are  the  salvation  of  the  race.  They 
purify,  they  elevate,  they  stir,  they  instruct,  they  console,  they  reconcile,  they 
gladden  ns.  They  are  the  ozone  of  human  life,  inspiring  us  with  hope,  rousing  us 
to  wholesome  sacrifice.  If,  in  the  faults  which  they  inherit,  they  show  us  the  worst 
of  ourselves,  and  so  move  us  to  a  salutary  repentance,  they  also  stimulate  our  finer 
qualities ;  they  cheat  us  of  weary  care  ;  they  preach  to  us,  not  so  much  by  their 
lips  as  by  their  innocence ;  their  questions  set  us  thinking,  and  to  better  purpose 
than  the  syllogisms  of  philosophers;  their  helplessness  makes  us  tender;  their 
loveliness  surprises  us  into  pure  joy.  ...  A  child  is  a  sunbeam  on  a  winter  sea,  a 
flower  in  a  prison  garden,  the  music  of  bells  over  the  noise  of  a  great  city,  a  fragrant 
odour  in  a  sick-room.  If  any  one  thinks  this  exaggerated,  I  am  sorry  for  him.  It 
is  literally  true  for  me,  and  for  tens  of  thousands  who  have  far  more  right  to  it. 
These  fingers  tingle  with  a  kind  of  happiness  while  I  am  writing  about  them  here. 
My  chilly  friend  need  not  have  my  joy  if  he  does  not  believe  in  it,  or  care  for  it ; 
I  will  not  force  it  on  him,  but  he  shall  not  take  mine  from  me.  {Bi$hop  of 
Roche$ter.)  I.  With  respect  to  thb  command  in  the  text.  Those  persons  may 
be  said  to  fulfil  it,  in  the  first  place,  who  afford  to  children  a  Christian  example. 
Now,  let  U8  consider  here,  what  features  of  character  may  be  best  exemplified,  so  as 
to  produce  a  good  effect.  One  peculiar  trait  in  the  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  was  His  consideration  of  human  infirmity.  "  We  have  not  an  high  priest 
which  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  2.  Not  only  should 
our  instructions  be  religious,  but  eminently  evangelical,  in  order  to  benefit  the 
young.  In  preaching,  it  is  found  that  the  preaching  of  mere  morality,  however 
luminous  and  explicit,  and  however  judiciously  and  powerfully  enforced,  produces 
but  very  little  effect.  3.  Eemember  that  all  human  instruction  needs  to  be 
frequently  repeated.  Even  adults,  whose  minds  are  not  volatile  as  those  of 
children,  need  "  line  upon  line,  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  precept  upon 
precept."  4.  Allow  me  to  call  yotxr  attention,  also,  to  another  very  important  fact, 
namely,  that  without  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  no  valuable  effect  can  be 
produced.  H.  In  the  text  there  is  an  allusion,  also,  to  the  character  of  the 
BNCOUKAGEMENT  we  may  derive  from  the  communication  of  such  instructions  : 
••  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God."  It  might,  indeed,  be  remarked  here,  that  there 
is  au  admirable  adaptation  between  what  is  taught,  and  the  end  you  wish  to  pro- 
duce— the  means  are  exactly  united  to  the  end  proposed.  But — 1.  Consider  how 
much  good  is  produced  by  the  influence  of  habit.  Now,  when  you  have  to  do 
with  children,  you  have  to  do  with  those  whose  minds  are  susceptible ;  and  you 
may  be  instnmaental  in  forming  their  habits,  and  in  putting  them  on  their  guard 
against  the  dangers  to  which  they  are  exposed.  2.  Many  to  whom  we  address  our- 
selves on  the  concerns  of  their  souls,  complain  of  want  of  time  and  of  the  distracting 
influence  of  the  things  of  the  world.  But  when  you  take  youthful  minds  into  your 
hands,  you  have  to  do  with  those  on  whom  worldly  cares  have  no  influence.  3. 
The  things  of  the  world  produce,  naturally,  a  kind  of  indurating  influence.  It  tends 
to  sink  them  down  to  that  very  situation  in  which  the  soul  naturally  wishes  to  be. 
And  not  only  is  there  in  the  minds  of  children  a  tenderness  of  feeling  for  the 
reception  of  these  great  and  important  truths,  but  also  a  freshness  and  vigour  for 
the  exhibition  of  these  truths,  and  for  the  exhibition  of  them  to  the  greatest 
advantage.     (E.  Treffry.)      Why  children  should  come  to  Jesus  : — L  The  children 

OP  TO-DAY     SHODLO     COME   TO    JeSUS    BECAUSE     THEY    NEED    JUST    SUCH    A    TeACHEE, 

Saviocb,  and  Friend.  I  remember  a  company  of  blind  children  from  an  asylum 
waiting  at  the  door  of  one  of  our  churches  for  some  one  from  within  to  lead  them  to 
their  place.  Parents  and  teachers  can  lead  a  child  to  the  door  of  a  good  life,  but 
Jesus  only  can  lead  into  goodness  and  heaven.    II.  Anothee  reason  why  children, 

AND   LITTLE   CHILDREN,   SHOULD   COME   TO  JeSUS  IS,  THAT  THEY  ARE   NOT  80   PAR  PKOM 

Him  as  those  who  have  grown  old  in  sin.  Every  child  is  bom  close  to  heaven's 
gate.  Children's  hearts  have  fresh  affections  that  turn  to  Jesus  almost  as  readily 
as  climbing  plants  in  June  wind  about  their  proper  support.  If  those  plants  lie 
along  the  ground  till  August  they  can  hardly  be  made  to  climb  at  all  so  late  in  their 
life.  m.  Another  reabom  pob  children  coming  to  Jesus  is  His  special  lots  pob 
THEM.  {W.  C.  C.  Wright.)  Children  taken  to  Christ: — Jesus  is  still  calling  little 
children  to  Him.     His  arms  are  ever  open  to  receive  them,  and  His  lips  parted  to 


874  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rms. 

bless  them.  He  loves  them  for  their  likeness  to  His  own  purity  and  gentleness. 
He  wonld  keep  them  gentle  and  pure,  that  He  may  present  them  perfect  to  His  own 
Father.  Let  us  beware  of  throwing  any  impediment  between  them  and  their 
Saviour ;  of  suffering  our  indifference  or  neglect,  our  flimsy  theories,  hard  doctrines, 
or  evil  examples,  to  prevent  these  little  ones  from  seeing  and  loving  the  Son  of 
Mary ;  from  being  folded  in  the  arms  of  His  grace,  and  being  blessed  by  the  influ- 
ences of  His  religion  and  life.  I.  Let  us  not  foebid  theib  comino  to  Him  in 
THE  BITE  of  BAPTISM.  If  this  is  One  of  the  calls  which  Jesus  makes  to  little 
children  ;  if  He  says  to  them,  by  a  fair  interpretation  of  the  language  of  this  rite, 
'•  Come  to  Me  through  the  consecrated  waters,"  let  us  suffer  them  to  go,  and  not 
stand  in  their  way  with  our  doubts,  our  fears,  or  our  apathy.  Let  that  heavenly 
dew  be  shed  on  the  opening  buds,  and  shed  early.  Say  not  that  they  are  without 
stain,  and  therefore  need  not  the  purifying  wave.  Jesus  Himself,  who  in  a  still 
higher  sense  was  stainless,  Jesus  Himself  was  baptized.  Say  not  that  they  do  not 
know  in  what  office  they  are  participating.  You  know  it,  and  feel  it ;  and  if  they 
know  it  not  now,  they  will  know  hereafter.  If  you  will  but  reflect  that  it  is  tha 
bringing  of  little  children  openly  to  Jesus,  placing  them  in  His  arms,  and  yielding 
them  to  His  blessing,  you  will  have  learned  the  whole  reason,  nature,  and  plan 
of  the  ordinance  at  once,  because  your  heart  has  been  your  teacher.  And  you  will 
gladly  suffer  little  children  to  go  in  this  way  to  their  Friend,  and  never  think  of 
forbidding  them.  II.  Suffer  them  to  go  to  Him,  secondly,  by  all  the  means  of 
A  TBTJLT  Cheistian  EDUCATION.  Continue  the  intimacy  which  was  commenced  at 
the  font.  Make  them  acquainted  with  every  expression  of  His  countenance,  with 
every  grace  and  sweetness  of  His  character.  We  forbid  their  going  to  Christ,  if  in 
any  way  we  make  them,  or  help  them  to  make  themselves  proud,  vain,  revengeful, 
cunning,  or  selflsh.  We  lead  them  to  Christ  by  teaching  them  to  know  and  love 
Him  entirely,  to  feel  the  whole  divinity  of  His  lowly  yet  lofty  virtues,  to  appreciate 
thoroughly  and  justly  the  glory  of  His  humihty,  the  dignity  of  His  meekness,  tha 
heroism  of  His  long-suffering,  the  harmonious  perfection  of  His  character,  with 
which  everything  worldly  is  in  necessary  discord.  HI.  We  can  habdly  teach 
THEM  this,  unless  WE  FEEL  IT  OURSELVES.  Let  US  lead  them,  then,  to  Jesus,  by 
the  hand  of  our  own  example.  Let  us  be  especially  cautious  that  our  own  selflsh 
interests,  bad  passions,  blind  excesses  are  not  placed  in  their  way,  to  be  stumbling- 
blocks  to  their  tender  feet.    lY.  Lastly,  it  may  be  that  oub  chelsben  must  de- 

PABT   BEFOBE   us  ON    THE    UNKNOWN    JOUENEY,   AND   WITHOUT   US.         We    mUSt    BUffeT 

them  to  go  to  the  arms  of  Jesus  in  the  world  of  spirits.  It  is  hard  to  part  with  them 
— but  by  the  effort  of  an  humble  resignation,  we  must  suffer  them  to  go.  It  may 
be  that  the  Saviour  hath  need  of  them.  We  may  know  that  there  also  He  will  love 
them,  and  watch  over  them,  and  lead  them ;  and  that  His  love,  presence,  and 
guidance  are  better  for  them  than  ours.  {F.  W,  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  My  fruit- 
tree  : — I  had  a  comely  fruit-tree  in  the  summer  season,  with  the  branches  of  it 
promising  plenteous  fruit;  the  stock  was  surrounded  with  seven  or  eight  little  shoots 
of  different  sizes,  that  grew  up  from  the  root  at  a  small  distance,  and  seemed  to 
compose  a  beautiful  defence  and  ornament  for  the  mother  tree ;  but  the  gardener, 
who  espied  their  growth,  knew  the  danger ;  he  cut  down  those  tender  suckers  one 
after  another,  and  laid  them  in  the  dust.  I  pitied  them  in  my  heart,  and  said, 
"  How  pretty  were  these  young  standards  I  How  much  like  the  parent  I  How 
elegantly  clothed  with  the  raiment  of  summer !  And  each  of  them  might  have 
grown  to  •  fruitful  tree."  But  they  stood  so  near  as  to  endanger  the  stock ;  they 
drew  away  the  sap,  the  heart  and  strength  of  it,  so  far  as  to  injure  the  fruit,  and 
darken  the  hopeful  prospects  of  autumn.  The  pruning-knife  appeared  unkind 
indeed,  but  the  gardener  was  wise ;  for  the  tree  flourished  more  sensibly,  the  fruit 
quickly  grew  fair  and  large,  and  the  ingathering  at  last  was  plenteous  and  joyfuL 
Will  you  give  me  leave,  Velina,  to  persuade  you  into  this  parable  1  Shall  I  compare 
you  to  this  tree  in  the  garden  of  God  ?  You  have  had  many  of  these  young  suckers 
springing  up  around  you  ;  they  stood  awhile  your  sweet  ornaments  and  your  joy, 
and  each  of  them  might  have  grown  up  1o  a  perfection  of  likeness,  and  each  might 
have  become  a  parent-tree  :  but  say.  Did  they  never  draw  your  heart  from  God  ? 
Did  you  never  feel  them  stealing  any  of  those  seasons  of  devotion,  or  those  warm 
affections  that  were  first  and  supremely  due  to  Him  that  made  you  7  Did  they  not 
stand  a  little  too  near  the  soul  ?  And  when  they  had  been  cat  off  successively,  and 
laid  one  after  another  in  the  dust,  have  you  not  found  your  heart  running  out  mora 
towards  God,  and  living  more  perpetually  upon  Him  ?  Are  you  not  now  devoting 
yourself  more  entirely  to  God  every  day,  since  the  last  Tas  taken  away  ?      Are  you 


CHAP.  xYin.]  ST.  LURE.  875 

not  aiming  at  some  greater  fruitfulness  and  service  than  in  times  past  ?  If  so,  then 
repine  not  at  the  pnming-knife ;  but  adore  the  conduct  of  the  heavenly  Husband- 
man, and  say,  "All  His  ways  are  wisdom  and  mercy."  But  I  have  not  yet  dona 
with  my  parable.  When  the  granary  was  well  stored  with  excellent  fruit,  and  before 
winter  came  upon  the  tree,  the  gardener  took  it  up  by  the  roots,  and  it  appeared  a3 
dead.  But  his  design  was  not  to  destroy  it  utterly  ;  for  he  removed  it  far  away  from 
the  spot  of  earth  where  it  had  stood,  and  planted  it  in  a  hill  of  richer  mould,  which 
■was  sufficient  to  nourish  it  with  all  its  attendants.  The  spring  appeared,  the  tree 
budded  into  life  again,  and  all  those  fair  little  standards  that  had  been  cut  off, 
broke  out  of  the  ground  afresh,  and  stood  up  around  it  (a  sweet  young  grove) 
flourishing  in  beauty  and  immortal  vigour.  You  know  not  where  you  are,  Velina, 
and  that  I  have  carried  you  to  the  hill  of  paradise,  to  the  blessed  hour  of  the  resur- 
rection. What  an  unknown  joy  it  will  be,  when  you  have  fulfilled  all  the  fruits  of 
righteousness  in  this  lower  world,  to  be  transplanted  to  that  heavenly  mountain ! 
What  a  Divine  rapture  and  surprise  of  blessedness,  to  see  all  your  little  offspring 
about  you  at  that  day,  springing  out  of  the  dust  at  once,  making  a  fairer  and  brighter 
appearance  in  that  upper  garden  of  God,  and  rejoicing  together  (a  sweet  company), 
all  partakers  with  you  of  the  same  happy  immortality ;  all  fitted  to  bear  heavenly 
fruit,  without  the  need  or  danger  of  a  pruning-knife.  Look  forward,  by  faith,  to  that 
glorious  morning,  and  admire  the  whole  scheme  of  providence  and  grace.  Give 
cheerful  honours  beforehand  to  your  Almighty  and  All-wise  Governor,  who  by  His 
onsearchable  counsels  has  fulfilled  your  best  wishes,  and  secured  your  dear  infants 
to  you  for  ever,  though  not  just  in  your  own  way  ;  that  blessed  hand  which  made 
the  painful  separation  on  earth  shall  join  you  and  your  babes  together  in  His  own 
heavenly  habitation,  never  to  be  divided  again,  though  the  method  may  be  painful 
to  flesh  and  blood.  Fathers  shall  not  hope  in  vain,  nor  "  mothers  bring  forth  for 
trouble :  they  are  the  seed  of  the  blessed  of  the  Lord,  and  their  offspring  with 
them*'  (Isa.  Ixv.  23).  Then  shall  you  say,  "Lord,  here  am  I,  and  the  children 
that  Thou  hast  given  me."  For  He  is  your  God,  and  the  God  of  your  seed  in  an 
everlasting  covenant.  Amen.  (Written  by  Dr.  Watts  to  a  lady  on  the  death  of 
several  young  children.)  Run  to  Jesus: — ^An  affectionate  mother,  when  reading 
this  passage  with  her  Uttle  girl,  said,  "  I  would  have  led  you  forward  to  Jesus. " 
"  You  would  not  have  needed,"  replied  the  child,  "  I  would  have  run." 

Ver.  17.  £ecelve  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child. — Receiving  the  kingdom 
of  Ood  as  a  little  child : — I.  To  begin  with,  let  me  deal  with  thb  bbcbet 
THOUGHT  OF  THB  DISCIPLES,  exprcssed  by  their  actions  though  not  spoken  in  words. 

1.  And,  flrst,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  the  disciples  thought  the  children  were  too  in- 
significant for  the  Lord's  time  to  be  taken  np  by  them.  2.  Again,  I  suppose  that 
these  grown-up  apostles  thought  that  the  children's  minds  were  too  trifling.  Despise 
not  children  for  trifling  when  the  whole  world  is  given  to  folly.  3.  "  Ay,"  say  they, 
*'  bat  if  we  should  let  the  children  come  to  Christ,  and  if  He  should  bless  them, 
they  will  soon  forget  it.  No  matter  how  loving  EUs  look  and  how  spiritual  His 
words,  they  will  go  back  to  their  play,  and  their  weak  memories  will  preserve  no 
trace  of  it  at  all."  This  objection  we  meet  in  the  same  manner  as  the  others.  Do  not 
men  forget  ?  4.  Perhaps,  too,  they  thought  that  children  had  not  sufficient  capacity. 
6.  To  put  the  thought  of  the  apostle  into  one  or  two  words :  they  thought  that  the 
children  must  not  come  to  Christ  because  they  were  not  like  themselves — they  were 
not  men  and  women.  The  child  must  not  come  to  the  Master  because  he  is  not  like 
the  man.  How  the  blessed  Saviour  turns  the  tables  and  says,  "  Say,  not,  the  child 
may  not  come  till  he  is  like  a  man,  but  know  that  you  cannot  come  till  you  are  like 
him.  It  is  no  difficulty  in  the  child's  way  that  he  is  not  like  you ;  the  difficulty  is 
with  you,  that  you  are  not  like  the  child."  Instead  of  the  child  needing  to  wait 
ontil  he  grows  up  and  becomes  a  man,  it  is  the  man  who  must  grow  down  and  become 
like  a  child.  II.  Now  we  pass  to  our  second  head,  namely,  the  open  declabation  of 
OUB  LoBD,  wherein  He  sets  forth  His  mind  upon  this  matter,  1.  Looking  at  it  care- 
fully, we  observe,  first,  that  He  tells  the  disciples  t^at  the  gospel  sets  up  a  Idngdom. 
Was  there  ever  a  kingdom  which  had  no  children  in  it  ?    How  then  could  it  grow  ? 

2.  Next,  our  Lord  tells  us  that  the  way  of  entering  the  kingdom  is  by  receiving. 
"  Whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child  shall  in  no  wise 
enter  therein."  We  do  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  by  working  ont  some 
deep  problem  and  arriving  at  its  solution ;  not  by  fetching  something  oat  of  oar> 
•elTee,  but  by  receiving  a  secret  something  into  ns.  We  come  into  the  kingdom  hj 
the  kingdom's  coming  into  os :  it  receives  as  by  oar  receiving  it.    Now,  if  thu 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvm. 

entrance  into  the  kingdom  depended  upon  something  to  be  fetched  out  of  the 
human  mind  by  study  and  deep  thought,  then  very  few  children  could  ever  enter 
it ;  but  it  depends  upon  something  to  be  received,  and  therefore  children  may  enter. 
3.  The  next  thing  in  the  text  is  that  if  we  receive  this  kingdom,  and  so  enter  into 
it,  we  must  receive  it  as  children  receive  it.  III.  Thb  obeat  bmcodbaoeuent 
given  by  our  Lord  in  the  text.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  18-30.  Good  Master,  what  shall  I  do  to  Inherit  eternal  Ufe  I—The  rich 
youth's  address  to  Christ : — I.  The  favoukablb  traits  of  chabactee  exhibited  im 
THE  QUESTION  PBOPOSED  BY  THIS  YODKG  MAN.  I.  The  qucstion  itsclf  was  of  suprcma 
importance.  2.  The  question  was  a  personal  one.  3.  The  question  was  put  at 
an  interesting  period  of  life.  4.  The  question  was  put  by  one  who  possessed  an 
abundance  of  riches.  5.  The  question  was  put  with  feelings  of  great  modesty  and 
respect.  6.  The  question  was  put  with  great  sincerity  and  earnestness  of  spirit.  II. 
The  defects  which  were  elicited  by  the  Savioub.  1.  He  evidently  expected  salva- 
tion by  the  works  of  the  law.  2.  He  was  held  in  bondage  by  one  reigning  idol.  3.  Ha 
was  unwilling  to  yield  to  the  extensive  requirements  of  the  Saviour.  HI.  The 
lessons  which  his  histoby  fdbnishes.  1.  The  exceeding  deceitfulness  of  earthly 
riches.  2.  That  we  may  go  far  in  religious  practices,  and  yet  not  be  saved.  3.  We 
are  in  great  danger  from  spiritual  deception.  4.  Eeligion  requires  a  total  surrender 
of  ourselves  to  God.  (tT".  Burns,  D.D.)  Thou  knowest  the  commandments. — 
Keep  the  commandvients  : — I.  Inquire  into  the  design  with  which  oub  Savioub 
BPOKH  these  words.  His  aim  was  to  expose  ignorance,  self-righteousness,  and  in- 
sincerity, in  one  whom  the  spectators  were  doubtless  admiring  for  his  apparent 
devotion.  1.  The  man  was  ignorant  of  Christ's  real  character.  2.  He  expected 
life  as  the  reward  of  his  own  merit.  3.  He  was  not  sincerely  willing  to  sacrifice 
anything  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake.    II.  Endeavoub  to  promote  a  similar 

LESION    BY   A   FAITHFUL  APPLICATION    OF   THEM   TO   OUESELVES.  "  If    thoU    wilt    enter 

into  life,  keep  the  commandments. "  These  words,  duly  considered,  may — 1.  Con- 
vince us  of  sin.  There  is  no  doubt,  that  we  ought  to  keep  the  commandments. 
But,  have  we  done  so  ?  2.  Drive  us  to  Christ  as  a  Eefuge.  3.  Guide  the  steps  of 
the  justified  believer.  The  curse  of  the  law  it  at  an  end — not  its  obligation.  {J, 
Jowett,  M.A.)  Yet  lackest  thou  one  thing. — One  weak  spot: — When  Jesus  tella 
us  that  we  cannot  bo  His  disciples  so  long  as  we  lack  one  thing,  does  He  mean  that 
we  must  have  supplied  every  moral  defect,  must  have  attained  every  grace,  must 
have  vanquished  every  spiritual  enemy,  and,  in  fact,  have  ceased  to  sin,  before  we 
can  be  His  disciples  ?  That  would  be  simply  saying  that  none  of  us  can  hope  to  be 
a  Christian  unless  he  is  morally  perfect ;  and  that  of  course  involves  the  converse, 
that  every  true  Christian  is  thus  morally  perfect.  The  shock  this  statement  gives  to 
our  common  sense,  and  its  manifest  contradiction  of  the  whole  drift  of  the  New 
Testament,  at  once  drives  ns  from  any  such  interpretation.  We  find  a  consistent 
meaning,  I  suppose,  if  we  understand  Him  as  declaring  that  no  heart  is  really 
Christianized,  or  converted,  so  long  as  there  is  any  one  conscious,  deliberate,  or 
intentional  reservation  from  entire  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  So  that  if  I  say, 
Here  is  one  particular  sin  which  I  must  continue  to  practise ;  all  the  rest  of  my 
conduct  I  freely  conform  to  God's  law,  but  this  known  wrong  I  must  continue  to  do 
— then  I  am  no  Christian.  If  you  single  out  some  one  chosen  indulgence,  however 
secret — a  dubious  custom  in  business,  a  fault  of  the  tongue  or  temper — and,  placing 
yourhand  over  that,  reply  to  the  all-searching  commandment  of  the  Most  High,  "This 
I  cannot  let  go  ;  this  is  too  sweet  to  me,  or  too  profitable  to  me,  or  too  tightly  inter- 
woven with  my  constitutional  predilections,  or  too  hard  to  be  put  off  " — then  the 
quality  of  a  disciple  is  not  in  you.  There  is  a  portion  of  your  being  which  you  do 
not  mean,  or  try,  to  consecrate  to  heaven.  And  that  single  persistent  offence 
vitiates  the  whole  character.  It  keeps  you,  as  a  man,  as  a  whole  man,  on  the  self- 
side  or  world-side,  and  away  from  Christ's  side.  For  it  not  only  shuts  off  right- 
eousness from  one  district  of  your  nature,  and  so  abridges  the  quantity  of  your  Ufe, 
but  it  infiicts  the  much  more  radical  damage  of  denying  the  supremacy  of  the  law  of 
righteousness,  and  thus  corrupts  the  quality.  It  practically  rejects  the  heavenly  rule 
when  that  rule  crosses  the  private  inclination.  And  that  is  the  essence  of  rebellion. 
{Bishop  F.  D.  Huntington.)  The  test-point : — ^When  Jesus  spoke  thus  of  one  thing 
fatally  lacking  to  the  Jewish  ruler.  He  spoke  to  us  alL  But  with  this  difference  : 
that  one  subtle  passion  which  spoils  the  whole  character  for  us  may  not  be  his 
passion.  With  him  it  seems  to  have  been  avarice  ;  he  could  not  bear  to  turn  his 
private  property  into  public  charity.     His  religion  broke  down  just  there :  in  other 


CHAP.  XTin.]  ST.  LUKE.  877 

respects  he  had  done  admirably ;  he  had  kept  other  commandments  to  the  letter — 
aye,  to  the  letter ;  not  perhaps  in  the  spirit,  for  all  true  obedience  has  one  spirit. 
But  so  far  his  literal,  formal  obedience  came,  and  there  gave  out.  But  then  you 
may  happen  to  be  so  constituted  that  such  an  abandonment  of  wealth  woald  be  a 
very  small  sacrifice — one  of  the  least  that  could  be  required  of  you ;  you  are  not 
naturally  sordid ;  you  are  more  inclined  to  be  prodigal ;  and  so  this  would  not  be  a 
test-point  with  you.  But  there  is  a  test-point  about  you  somewhere.  Perhaps  it  ia 
pride ;  you  cannot  bear  an  affront ;  you  will  not  confess  a  fault.  Perhaps  it  ia 
persontJ  vanity,  ready  to  sacrifice  everything  to  display.  Perhaps  it  is  a  sharp 
tongue.  Perhaps  it  is  some  sensual  appetite,  bent  on  its  unclean  gratification. 
Then  you  are  to  gather  up  your  moral  forces  just  here,  and  till  that  darling  sin  is 
brought  under  the  practical  law  of  Christ,  you  are  shut  out  from  Christ's  kingdom. 
I  have  no  right  to  love  anything  so  well  that  I  cannot  give  it  np  for  God.  God 
knows  where  the  trial  must  be  applied.  And  we  are  to  know  that  wherever  it  ia 
applied,  there  is  the  one  thing  lacking,  unless  we  can  say  "  Thy  will  be  done,"  and 
bear  it.  The  gospel  does  not  propose  itself  as  an  easy  system — easy  in  the  sense 
of  excusing  from  duty.  Were  we  not  right  then,  in  the  ground  taken  at  the  outset, 
that  the  power  of  Christianity  over  the  character  is  proved  by  the  thoroughness 
of  its  action  rather  than  by  the  extent  of  surface  over  which  its  action  spreads  ? 
It  displays  its  heavenly  energy  in  dislodging  the  one  cherished  sin,  in  breaking 
down  the  one  entrenched  fortress  that  disputes  its  sway.  At  the  battle  of  Borodino, 
Napoleon  saw  that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  victory  till  he  had  carried  the  great 
central  redoubt  on  the  Bussian  line.  Two  hundred  guns  and  the  choicest  of  hia 
battahons  were  poured  against  that  single  point,  and  when  the  plumes  of  his  veterans 
gleamed  through  the  smoke  on  the  highest  embrasures  of  that  volcano  of  shot,  ha 
knew  the  field  was  won.  It  matters  very  little  that  we  do  a  great  many  things  morally 
irreproachable,  so  long  as  there  is  one  ugly  disposition  that  hangs  obstinately  back. 
It  is  only  when  we  come  to  a  point  of  real  resistance  that  we  know  the  victory  of 
faith  overcoming  the  world.  Finally,  our  renewing  and  redeeming  religion  delights 
to  reach  down  to  the  roots  of  the  sin  that  curses  us,  and  spread  its  healing  eflScacy 
there.  It  yearns  to  yield  us  the  fulness  of  its  blessing  ;  and  this  it  knows  it  cannot  do 
tiU  it  brings  the  heart  under  the  completeness  of  its  gentle  captivity  to  Christ.  Sub- 
mission first ;  then  peace,  and  joy,  and  love.  "  Jesus  beholding  him,  loved  him  '' ; 
yet  sent  him  away  sorrowing.  How  tender,  and  yet  how  true  1  tender  in  the  sad 
affection — true  to  the  stern  unbending  sacrifice  of  the  Cross  I  It  is  because  He 
would  have  us  completely  happy  that  He  requires  a  complete  submission.  "  One 
thing "  must  not  be  left  lacking.  Whosoever  would  enter  into  the  full  strength 
and  joy  of  a  disciple  must  throw  his  whole  heart  upon  the  altar.  (Ibid.) 
How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter. — Tlie  clanger  of  riches : — Rather,  if 
one  asked,  What  peril  have  riches  ?  one  might  ask.  What  peril  have  they  not  ? 
First,  then,  they  are  wholly  contrary  to  the  life  of  Christ  and  His  passion.  That 
cannot  be  the  safe,  the  happy  lot,  which  is  in  all  things  most  opposite  to  His. 
Unlike  Him,  we  must  ever  here  be ;  for  we  are  sinners,  He  alone,  as  man,  was 
holy  ;  we  are  His  creatures,  He  our  God.  But  can  it  be  safe  not  to  be  aiming, 
herein  also,  to  be  less  unlike?  Can  it  be  safe  to  choose  that  which  in  all  its 
pomp  and  glory  was  brought  before  His  eye  as  man,  to  be  wholly  rejected  by  Him  ; 
to  choose  what  He  rejected,  and  shrink  back  from  what  He  chose  ?  This,  then,  is 
the  first  all-containing  peril  of  riches.  They  are,  in  themselves,  contrary  to  the 
Cross  of  Christ.  I  speak  not  now  of  what  they  may  be  made.  As  we,  being 
enemies,  were,  through  the  Cross,  made  friends,  so  may  all  things,  evil  and 
perilous  iu  themselves,  except  sin,  become  our  friends.  The  Cross  finds  us  in 
desolation,  and  they.  He  says,  *'have  received  their  consolation";  it  finds  us  in 
evil  things,  and  they  are  surrounded  by  their  good  things ;  it  comes  in  want,  and 
they  have  abundance ;  in  distress,  and  they  are  at  ease  ;  in  sorrow,  and  they  are 
ever  tempted  even  to  deaden  their  sorrows  in  this  world's  miserable  joys.  Happy 
ouly  iu  this,  that  He  who  chasteneth  whom  He  loveth,  sprinkles  His  own  healthful 
bitterness  over  life's  destructive  sweetness,  and  by  the  very  void  and  emptiness  of 
vanity  calls  forth  the  unsatisfied  soul  no  more  to  "  spend  money  on  that  which  ia 
not  bread,  or  its  labour  on  that  which  satisfieth  not."  But  if  it  be  so  hard  for  the 
rich  to  seek  to  bear  the  cross,  it  must  be  hard  for  them  truly  to  love  Him  who  bore 
it.  Love  longeth  to  liken  itself  to  that  it  loves.  It  is  an  awful  question,  my 
brethren  ;  but  how  can  we  love  our  Lord  if  we  suffer  not  with  Him  ?  2.  Then  it 
is  another  exceeding  peril  of  riches  and  ease  that  they  may  tend  to  make  oa  forget 
that  here  is  not  our  home.     Men  on  a  journey  through  a  stranger's,  mach  mors 


378  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xmhr 

an  enemy's,  land  linger  not.  Their  hearts  are  in  their  home ;  thither  are  their 
eyes  set ;  they  love  the  winds  which  have  hlown  over  it ;  they  love  the  very  hillg 
which  look  upon  it,  even  while  they  hide  it ;  days,  hours,  and  minutes  pass  quickly 
or  slowly  as  they  seem  to  bring  them  near  to  it;  distance,  time,  weariness,  strength, 
all  are  counted  only  with  a  view  to  this,  "  are  they  nearer  to  the  faces  they  love  T 
can  they,  when  shall  they  reach  it  ?  "  What  then,  my  brethren,  if  our  eyes  are 
not  set  upon  the  everlasting  "  hills,  whence  cometh  our  help  "  7  what  if  we  cherish 
not  those  inward  breathings  which  come  to  us  from  our  heavenly  home,  hushing, 
refreshing,  restoring,  lifting  up  our  hearts,  and  bidding  as  flee  away  and  be  at 
lest  ?  What  if  we  are  wholly  satisfied,  and  intent  on  things  present  ?  can  we  be 
longing  for  the  face  of  God  ?  or  can  we  love  Him  whom  we  long  not  for  ?  or  do  we 
long  for  Him,  if  we  say  not  daily,  "  When  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  the 
presence  of  God  ?  "  3.  Truly  there  is  not  one  part  of  the  Christian  character  which 
riches,  in  themselves,  do  not  tend  to  impair.  Our  Lord  placed  at  the  head  of 
evangelic  blessings,  poverty  of  spirit,  and,  as  a  help  to  it  and  image  of  it,  the  out- 
ward body  of  the  soul  of  true  poverty,  poverty  of  substance  too.  The  only 
"riches  "  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament,  except  as  a  woe,  are  the  unsearchable 
riches  of  the  glory  and  grace  of  Christ,  the  riches  of  the  goodness  of  God,  the 
depth  of  the  riches  of  His  wisdom,  or  the  riches  of  liberality,  whereto  deep  poverty 
abounded.  4.  Poverty  is,  at  least,  a  fostering  nurse  of  humility,  meekness, 
patience,  trust  in  God,  simplicity,  sympathy  with  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  or  of 
its  fellow  (for  it  knows  the  heart  of  those  who  suffer).  What  when  riches,  in  them- 
selves, hinder  the  very  grace  of  mercifulness  which  seems  their  especial  grace,  of 
which  they  are  the  very  means  ?  What  wonder  that  they  cherish  that  brood  of 
snakes,  pride,  arrogance,  self-pleasing,  self-indulgence,  self-satisfaction,  trust  in 
self,  forgetfulness  of  God,  sensuality,  luxury,  spiritual  sloth,  when  they  deaden  the 
heart  to  the  very  sorrows  they  should  relieve?  And  yet  it  is  difficult,  unless, 
through  self -discipline,  we  feel  some  diufiering,  to  sympathize  with  those  who  suffer. 
Fulness  of  bread  deadens  love.  As  a  rule,  the  poor  show  more  mercy  to  the  poor 
out  of  their  poverty,  than  the  rich  out  of  their  abundance.  But  if  it  be  a  peril  to 
have  riches,  much  more  is  it  to  seek  them.  To  have  them  is  a  trial  allotted  to  any 
of  us  by  God ;  to  seek  them  is  our  own.  Through  trials  which  He  has  given  as 
He  will  guide  os ;  but  where  has  He  promised  to  help  us  in  what  we  bring  upon 
ourselves  ?  In  all  this  I  have  not  spoken  of  any  grosser  sins  to  which  the  love  of 
money  gives  birth  ;  of  what  all  fair  men  would  condemn,  yet  which,  in  some  shape 
or  other,  so  many  practise.  Such  are,  hardness  to  the  poor  or  to  dependents ; 
using  a  brother's  services  for  almost  nought,  in  order  to  have  more  to  spend  in 
luxury ;  petty  or  more  grievous  frauds ;  falsehood,  hard  dealing,  taking  advantage 
one  of  another,  speaking  evil  of  one  another,  envying  one  another,  forgetting 
natural  affection.  And  yet  in  this  Christian  land  many  of  these  are  very  common. 
Holy  Scripture  warns  us  all  not  to  think  ourselves  out  of  danger  of  them.  (E.  B. 
Pusey,  D.D.)  The  deceitfulnesg  of  richet : — Notice  the  deceitfulness  of  all  kinds 
of  riches.  Biches  may  corrupt  the  very  simplest  of  you.  Take  care.  How  many 
men  have  received  hold  of  the  gallows  and  hanged  themselves  just  through  the 
deceitfulness  of  riches.  We  could  trace  the  history  of  many  a  man,  and  see  how 
he  died  in  the  bank,  that  great  mortuary.  The  man  began  simply,  and  was  a  right 
genial  soul.  He  brought  with  him  morning  light  and  fresh  air  wherever  he  came ; 
and  as  for  cases  of  poverty,  his  hand  knew  the  way  to  his  pocket  so  well  that  be 
could  find  that  pocket  in  the  dark.  As  for  religious  services,  he  was  there  before 
the  door  was  opened.  He  never  thought  the  Sabbath  day  too  long.  He  loved  the 
sanctuary,  and  was  impatient  until  the  gates  were  opened  onto  him.  He  even 
went  to  the  week-evening  services.  But  then  he  was  only  a  working  man,  and  only 
working  men  should  go  out  into  the  night  air  1  What  does  it  matter  about  a  few 
working  men  being  killed  by  the  east  wind?  The  man  whose  course  we  are 
tracing  doubled  his  income  and  multiplied  it  by  five,  and  then  doubled  it  again, 
and  then  found  that  he  must  give  up  the  prayer-meeting.  Certainly.  Then  he 
proceeded  to  double  his  income,  and  then  he  gave  up  the  Sunday  evening  service. 
There  was  a  draught  near  where  he  sat,  or  there  was  some  person  in  the  third  pew 
from  his  the  appearance  of  whom  he  could  not  bear.  How  dainty  my  lord  is 
becoming  1  Oh,  what  a  nostril  he  has  for  evil  savour!  He  will  leave  presently 
altogether.  Ee  will  not  abruptly  leave,  but  he  will  simply  not  come  back  again, 
which  really  means  practically  the  same  thing.  He  will  attend  in  the  morning, 
and  congratulate  the  poor  miserable  preacher  on  the  profit  of  the  service.  Did  h* 
mean  to  do  this  when  he  began  to  get  a  little  wealthier  t    Not  be.    Is  be  the  sams 


HEAP.  xvin.J  ST.  LUKE.  879 

man  he  nsed  to  be  !  No.  Is  he  nearer  Christ?  He  is  a  million  nniverses  away 
from  Christ.  He  is  killed  by  wealth.  He  trusted  in  it,  misunderstood,  misapplied 
it.  It  is  not  wealth  that  has  mined  him,  but  his  misconception  of  the  possible 
uses  of  wealth.  He  might  have  been  the  leader  of  the  Church.  There  was  a  lady, 
whose  husband's  personalty  was  sworn  at  millions,  who  was  unable  to  attend  one 
of  the  ladies'  meetings  organized  for  the  pui-pose  of  making  garments  for  the  poor, 
and  she  said  that  she  could  no  longer  attend,  and  therefore  her  subscription  would 
lapse.  Let  it  lapse.  If  it  were  a  case  in  connection  with  this  Church  I  would  not 
have  named  it.  It  is  because  distance  of  space  and  time  enable  me  to  refer  to  it 
■without  identification  that  I  point  the  moral,  and  say  that  where  such  wealth  is, 
or  Boch  use  of  wealth,  there  is  rottenness  of  soul.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  You  can- 
not take  your  riches  with  you  into  the  kingdom  if  you  are  going  to  trust  in  them : — 
If  you  are  going  to  offer  them  to  Christ  and  sanctify  them  to  His  use,  let  us  know 
of  it.  You  cannot  bring  your  intellectual  pride  with  you.  If  you  are  going  to 
consecrate  your  intellect  to  the  study  of  the  profoundest  mysteries,  if  you  are  going 
to  cultivate  the  child-like  spirit — for  the  greater  the  genias  the  greater  the  modesty 
— bring  it  all  1  You  can  bring  with  you  nothing  of  the  nature  of  patronage  to 
Christ.  It  is  because  He  has  so  little,  He  has  so  much ;  because  He  is  so  weak. 
He  ia  so  strong.  You  cannot  compliment  Him :  He  lies  beyond  the  range  of 
eulogy.  We  reach  Him  by  His  own  way— sacrifice,  self-immolation,  transforma- 
tion. A  great  mystery,  outside  of  words  and  all  their  crafty  uses,  but  a  blessed, 
conscious,  spiritual  experience.  Blessed  are  those  to  whom  that  experience 
is  a  reality.  {Ibid.)  Who,  then,  can  be  saved  ? — TTho,  thin,  can  be  saved  f 
— The  difficulties  of  salvation,  however,  do  not  arise  from  the  want  of  power 
in  God,  for  nothing  is  too  hard  for  Him ;  He  can  as  easily  save  a  world 
as  He  could  at  first  create  one.  Nor  does  it  arise  from  any  want  of  suffi- 
ciency in  Christ,  for  "He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come 
Tmto  God  by  Him  *' ;  yes,  to  the  uttermost  of  our  desires  and  necessities, 
and  in  the  last  extremity.  The  difficulties  therefore  arise  from  the  nature 
of   salvation  itself,  and  our  sinful   aversion  to  it.      L    Let  va   notice   mobb 

PABTICULABLT    SOME   OK   THE   DIFFICULTIES  IN   THE   WAY  OF   ODE   SALVATION.        1.     The 

truths  to  be  believed  are  some  of  them  very  mysterious,  and,  as  Peter  says,  "  Hard 
to  be  understood."  2.  The  sacrifices  to  be  made  are  also  in  some  degree  painful. 
That  which  cost  our  Saviour  so  much  must  surely  cost  us  something.  3.  The 
dispositions  to  be  exercised  are  such  as  are  contrary  to  the  natural  bias  of  our 
depraved  hearts.  4.  The  duties  to  be  performed.  Is  there  no  difficulty  more 
especially  in  renouncing  a  customary  or  constitutional  evil,  and  keeping  ourselves 
from  oor  own  iniquity  ?  5.  The  trouble  and  danger  to  which  religion  exposes  its 
professors.  H.  Attempt  to  answeb  the  inquiry  in  oue  text,  *'  Who,  then,  can 
be  saved  ?  "  If  men  were  left  to  themselves,  either  in  a  natural  or  renewed  state, 
and  if  God  were  not  to  work,  or  to  withhold  His  hand  after  He  had  begun  to  work, 
none  would  be  saved,  no,  not  one.  1.  Such  shall  be  saved  as  are  appointed  to  it. 
Of  some  it  is  said,  "  God  hath  chosen  them  to  salvation,  through  sanctification  of 
the  Spirit,  and  belief  of  the  truth."  2.  Those  shall  be  saved  who  are  truly 
desirous  of  it.  3.  Those  who  come  to  Christ  for  salvation  shall  be  sure  to  obtain 
it.  4.  Such  as  endure  to  the  end  shall  be  saved.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Lo,  we 
Iiave  left  aJl  and  followed  Thee. — The  happiness  of  self-denial : — I.  Self-denial  is 
TO  BB  explained.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  does  not  consist  in  giving  ap  one 
temporal  and  personal  good  for  a  greater  temporal  and  personal  good.  For  this  is 
self-gratifying  instead  of  self-denying.  Any  entirely  selfish  person  would  be 
willing  to  do  this.  One  man  will  sacrifice  his  property  to  gratify  his  ambition, 
which  he  esteems  a  greater  good.  Another  man  will  sacrifice  his  property  to 
gratify  his  appetite,  which  he  esteems  a  greater  good.  Another  will  sacrifice  his 
property  to  gratify  his  revenge,  which  he  esteems  a  greater  good.  Bat  none  of 
these  persons,  in  these  cases,  exercise  the  least  self-denial.  2.  Nor,  secondly,  does 
self-denial  consist  in  giving  up  a  less  temporal  and  personal  good  for  a  greater 
personal  and  eternal  good.  The  most  corrupt  and  selfish  men  in  the  world  are 
willing  to  give  up  any  or  all  their  temporal  and  personal  interests  for  the  sake  of 
obtaining  future  and  eternal  happiness.  3.  But,  thirdly  and  positively,  self-denial 
consists  in  giving  up  our  own  good  for  the  good  of  others.  Such  self-denial  stands 
in  direct  contrariety  to  selfishness.  II.  Tbue  self-denial  is  pboductitk  of  the 
highest  pbbsbnt  and  futhbb  happiness.  This  wiU  appear  if  we  consider — 1. 
The  nature  of  true  self-denial.  It  consists,  as  we  have  seen,  in  giving  np  a  lesa 
joivate  or  personal  good  for  a  greater  public  good  ;  or  in  giving  np  our  own  good 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Trm, 

for  the  greater  good  ot  others.  And  this  necessarily  implies  disinterested  benevo- 
lence, which  is  placing  our  own  happiness  in  the  greater  happiness  of  others. 
When  a  man  gives  up  his  own  happiness  to  promote  the  greater  happiness  of 
another,  he  does  it  freely  and  voluntarily,  because  he  takes  more  pleasure  in  the 
greater  good  of  another  than  in  a  less  good  of  bis  own.  2.  Those  who  have  denied 
themselves  the  most  have  found  the  greatest  happiness  resulting  from  their  self- 
denial.  3.  The  great  and  precious  promises  which  are  expressly  made  to  self- 
denial  by  Christ  Himself.  Conclusion :  1.  It  appears,  then,  that  self-denial  is 
necessarily  a  term  or  condition  of  salvation.  2.  It  appears,  also,  that  the  doctrine 
cannot  be  carried  too  far.  3.  If  Christianity  requires  men  to  exeroise  true  self- 
denial,  then  the  Christian  religion  is  not  a  gloomy,  but  a  joyful,  religion.  It 
affords  a  hundredfold  more  happiness  than  any  other  religion  can  afford.  4.  It 
appears  from  the  nature  of  that  self-denial  which  the  gospel  requires  that  the  more 
sinners  become  acquainted  with  the  gospel,  the  more  they  are  disposed  to  hate  it 
and  reject  it.  All  sinners  are  lovers  of  their  own  selves,  and  regard  their  own  good 
supremely  and  solely,  and  the  good  of  others  only  so  far  as  it  tends  to  promote 
their  own  private,  personal,  and  selfish  good.  6.  It  appears  from  the  nature 
of  that  self-denial  which  the  gospel  requires  why  sinners  are  more  willing 
to  embrace  any  false  scheme  of  religion  than  the  true.  {N.  Emmoru,  D.D.) 
Christian  discipleship  : — I.  To  be  the  followeks  of  the  Savioce,  is  to  sustain  a 
CHABACTF.R  OF  BiOH  AND  ESSENTIAL  IMPORTANCE.  1.  We  cauuot  hold  this  relation- 
ship to  the  Son  of  God  without  believing  the  testimony  given  concerning  Him,  in 
the  Scriptures.  2.  Believing  in  Christ,  we  must  be  excited  to  a  practical  obedience 
to  His  commands,  and  an  imitation  of  the  excellences  displayed  as  an  example  to 
man.  3.  That  same  principle  of  faith  will  excite  also  to  public  profession  of  the 
Saviour's  name,  and  active  exertion  in  His  cause.  4.  Combine  in  your  own 
characters  the  principles  and  the  conduct  to  which  we  have  now  adverted. 
Believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ;  give  an  obedience  to  His  perceptive  will,  and  imitate 
the  excellences  He  displayed ;  profess  publicly  that  you  will  be  His,  and  be  active 
and  zealous  in  the  promotion  of  His  designs;  and  then  vnU.  you  indeed  and 
honourably  be  among  those  who  "follow  Him."  IL  That  in  sustaining  this 
cBABACTEB,  PAINFUL  SACRIFICES  MUST  OFTEN  BE  MADE.  Sacrifices  for  the  name's 
sake  of  the  Son  of  God  are  justified  and  called  for,  by  reasons  which  might  be 
expanded  in  very  extensive  illustration.  Remember  for  whom  they  are  made.  For 
whom  ?  For  Him  who  built  the  fabric  of  the  universe,  and  over  whose  wondrous 
creation  the  "  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for 
joy."  For  whom  ?  For  Him  who  is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  His  person,"  in  whom  "  dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily. "  For  whom  ?  For  Him  who  ' '  was  rich,  but  for  your  sakes  became  poor,"  &c. 
Eemember  for  what  these  sacrifices  are  made.  They  are  made  for  the  enjoyment 
of  peace  of  conscience.  They  are  made  for  a  restoration  to  the  image  and  the 
friendship  of  God.  They  are  made  for  the  refinement  and  ennobling  of  the  nature. 
It  is  10  be  observed  again — III.  That  present  bacbifices  in  the  cause,  and  as 

THE   FOLLOWERS    OF    THE    SaVIOUB,   ABE    TO    ISSUE     IN   A   GLORIOUS   REWARD.      1.    The 

Saviour  promises  advantage  to  be  possessed  in  the  present  life.  In  following 
Christ,  we  are  blessed  with  repose  of  conscience  ;  we  are  exalted  to  fellowship  with 
God ;  we  are  endowed  with  capacities  for  improving  in  the  knowledge  of  mysteries, 
identified  with  the  highest  welfare  of  our  being ;  we  become  the  companions  of  the 
excellent  of  the  earth,  and  tbe  innumerable  company  of  angels ;  we  are  urged  to  a 
rapid  increase  in  the  graces  which  dignify  the  character,  and  are  a  pledge  of  the 
sublimity  of  the  final  destiny ;  we  are  supplied  with  strong  consolation  for  sorrow, 
and  firm  support  for  death  ;  and  prospects  are  opened  which  stretch  away  to  the 
immensities  of  immortality.  Are  not  these  '*  a  hundredfold  "  ?  Here  is  the 
"  pearl  of  great  price":  and  well  may  we  resolve  to  be  as  the  merchant,  and 
"  sell "  or  "  forsake  "  all  we  have,  and  buy  it  1  2.  The  Saviour  promises  advantage 
to  be  possessed  in  the  life  to  come.  It  is  a  wise  regulation  in  the  decisions  of 
Providence,  that  our  chief  reward  is  reserved  for  another  state  of  existence.  The 
Almighty  intends  that,  in  this  world,  our  lives  shall  be  those  of  trial ;  and  that 
the  stability  of  our  graces  should  be  proved,  by  the  rigid  and  sometimes  painful 
discipline  to  which  we  are  exposed.  (J.  Parsons.)  Christian  relationships : — 
Homes,  parents,  brethren,  wives,  children,  are  things  to  be  desired,  because  they 
call  forth  the  highest  and  purest  affections,  the  exercise  of  which  sheds  abroad  in 
the  heart  the  highest  and  sweetest  human  joy  and  satisfaction.  Now  a  man'9 
conversion  to  the  faith  of   Christ,  though  it   at  times,  perhaps  almost   alway-*. 


cmiT.  XTm.]  ST.  LUKE.  381 

estranged  him  from  a  heathen  home  and  family,  gave  him  another  home,  and  a 
far  wider  family,  attached  to  him  in  far  firmer  and  closer,  and  withal  more  holy 
bonds,  and  these  were  brethren  and  sisters,  fathers  and  mothers  in  Christ.  Tha 
exercise  of  purified  love  and  affection,  and,  we  may  add,  reverence  towards  these, 
would  diffuse  through  his  heart  a  far  holier  and  deeper  joy  than  he  had  ever 
experienced  in  his  former  unholy  heathen  state.  Take,  for  instance,  the  last 
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans ;  look  at  the  number  of  Christiana  to  whom 
the  apostle  sent  salutation.  In  no  one  case  were  these  salutations  a  mere  heartless 
form.  In  every  case  they  were  accompanied  by  the  overflow  of  Christian  love,  by 
memories  of  how  they  had  laboured  and  suffered  together  in  the  same  holy  cause  -• 
in  most  cases,  perhaps,  they  were  the  greetings  of  a  father  to  his  children  in  the 
faith.  What  a  sea  of  satisfaction  and  holy  joy  does  all  this  disclose  1  And  so  it 
was,  though,  of  course,  in  different  degrees,  and  under  various  forms,  with  every 
Christian  who  had  given  up  any  worldly  advantage  for  Christ's  sake.  (M.  F. 
Sadler.) 

Vers.  31-34.  Behold  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem. — The  entrance  into  the  Passion 
reason: — L  We  oaze  at  the  Lobd,  and  inquibe  how  He  entebed  the  seasoh 
or  passion.  1.  Not  unprepared,  but  with  a  full,  clear  consciousness — (1)  not  only 
of  His  sufferings  in  general,  but  also  in  all  their  particulars ;  and  (2)  of  the  relation 
between  His  sufferings  and  the  Divine  Word  and  will.  2.  His  consciousness 
afforded  Him  the  peace,  courage,  and  decision  to  endure  the  sufferings  willingly 
and  patiently.  II.  We  oazb  at  oubselves,  and  inquibe  how  we  should  bnteb 
THIS  SEASON  OF  THE  Chttbch  tbab.  1.  Not  like  the  world,  whose  custom  is  to 
celebrate  it  with  all  kinds  of  amusement  and  folly ;  but,  as  the  followers  of  Christ, 
let  us  get  ready  to  accompany  the  Lord  in  His  season  of  suffering.  2.  Tet  not 
like  the  twelve,  of  whom  we  read  that  they  understood  none  of  these  things.  We 
must  know  why  and  for  whom  the  Lord  suffered  and  died.  3.  The  blind  man  of 
Jericho  is  a  good  example  to  show  how  we  should  enter  in  with  the  Lord  as  He 
approaches  ]£s  sufferings.  (1)  He  appeals  again  and  again  for  mercy.  (2)  He 
concentrates  all  his  desires  into  one  plea — that  he  might  see.  And  the  Lord  opens 
his  eyes.  (Schaffer.)  A  study  for  a  doctrine  of  the  atonement: — I  shall  proceed, 
accordingly,  to  indicate  some  personal  ways  in  which  it  seems  to  me  we  may  learn 
to  enter,  in  some  degree,  into  Jesus'  consciousness  that  He  must  needs  suffer.  Tet 
only  in  some  degree,  and  in  no  full  measure,  can  we  hope  to  comprehend  in  our 
human  experience  the  mind  that  was  in  Jesus.  The  open  and  most  natural  way  of 
thought  for  us  to  take,  in  our  desire  to  understand  this  most  sacred  truth,  seems  to 
me  to  be  in  general  as  follows  :  Study  what  forgiveness  of  injuries  involves  to  the 
most  Christian  man  or  woman,  learn  what  forgiveness  of  wrong  may  cost  the  most 
Christlike  heart,  and  from  such  knowledge  gain  the  means  of  understanding  why 
the  Christ  from  God  must  needs  suffer  on  the  Cross.  If  we  have  not  been  com- 
pelled by  some  bitter  experience  of  our  own  to  learn  the  moral  necessities  of 
suffering  in  forgiving  sin,  let  us  search  with  reverent  sympathies  the  depth  of  the 
trouble  into  which  others  have  been  plunged  by  some  erring  one  to  whom  they  were 
bound  by  vital  ties ;  learn  how  father,  mother,  wife,  must  needs  suffer  in  the  con- 
tinued charity,  and  shielding  love,  and  ever  open  forgiveness  of  the  home  towards 
one  who  has  gone  forth  from  it,  unworthy  of  it,  and  been  lost  in  the  world.  Such 
in  general  is  the  vital  method,  the  personal  way,  in  which  we  may  study  the 
doctrine  of  the  atonement  of  Christ  for  the  sin  of  the  world.  Let  me  briefly 
indicate  several  more  definite  truths  which  we  may  find  in  such  study  of  the  Cross. 
First,  In  our  experience  of  forgiveness,  and  its  moral  necessities,  we  find  that  there 
must  be  penitence  or  confession  on  the  part  of  the  person  who  has  done  wrong. 
The  sense  of  justice  and  right  which  demands  confession  of  wrong  and  restitution 
is  as  human  and  as  Divine  as  the  love  which  would  forgive  an  offence,  and  accept 
another's  wiUingness  to  make  restitution.  Secondly,  Human  forgiveness  involves 
a  painful  knowledge  of  the  wrong  which  has  been  inflicted.  Forgiveness  is  always 
bom  of  suffering.  You  surely  cannot  forgive  a  friend  if  you  have  never  known  and 
felt  the  hurt  of  his  unkindness.  Some  suffering  for  the  injury  received  is  an  indis- 
pensable condition,  or  antecedent,  of  the  exercise  of  forgiveness.  Thirdly,  We 
approach  now  another  element  in  the  history  of  human  forgiveness,  which  is  of 
deep  moral  significance ;  viz.,  the  suffering  of  the  injured  person  must  be  so  dis* 
covered  to  the  wrong-doer  that  be  can  know  it,  and  have  some  appreciation  of  it, 
in  order  that  forgiveness  may  be  granted  and  received,  and  its  perfect  work  acoom» 
pliiihed.    but  J  uu  will  ask,  Is  it  not  the  glory  of  the  forgiving  spirit  to  hid*  its 


882  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  XJtxu 

senst  of  hurt  ?  And  the  human  forgiveness  is  never  more  than  •  polite  fiction,  if. 
there  is  not  in  the  hour  of  reconciliation  this  frank  declaration  and  acknowledge 
ment  of  the  wrong  done,  and  the  suffering  received  from  it.  One  thing  in  it  seems^ 
to  me  clear  as  conscience.  That  wronged  man  cannot  forgive  his  repentant  enemy 
by  treating  his  sin  as  though  it  had  been  nothing,  by  making  light  of  it  as  though 
it  had  not  cost  him  days  of  trouble,  by  hiding  it  in  his  good  nature  as  though  it 
were  not  an  evil  thing.  Somehow  that  sense  of  injustice  in  his  soul  must  find  vent 
and  barn  itself  out.  Somehow  that  sense  of  wrong  must  manifest  itself,  and  in 
some  pure  revelation  of  itself  pass  away.  It  cannot  pass  forever  away  except 
through  revelation,  as  the  fire  expires  through  the  flame.  Yet  in  forgiveness 
justice  must  be  a  self-revealing  flame,  and  not  a  consuming  fire.  Something  lik« 
this  has  been  the  process  of  all  genuine  human  reconciliations  which  I  have 
observed.  As  an  essential  element  of  the  reconciliation  there  was  some  revelation 
of  pure  justice.  There  was  no  hiding  of  the  wrong.  On  either  side  there  was  no 
behttling  the  injury.  There  was  no  trifling  with  it  as  though  a  sin  were  nothing. 
It  was  no  thoughtless  forgiveness  out  of  mere  good  nature,  in  which  the  heart's 
deeper  sense  of  righteousness  was  not  satisfied.  I  have  left  myself  time  only  to 
point  to  the  way  by  which  we  may  ascend  from  this  our  human  experience  of  for- 
giveness  to  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  the  necessity  for  it  in  the  love  of  God.  It  is  &■ 
part  of  the  penalty  of  sin  that  in  every  human  transgression  some  just  one  must 
needs  sufler  with  the  guilty.  This  is  a  natural  necessity  of  our  human,  or  organic, 
relationship.  And  because  we  are  so  bound  up  together  in  good  and  in  evil,  we  can- 
bear  one  another's  burdens,  suffer  helpfully  for  another,  and  to  a  certain  extent  save 
one  another  from  the  evil  of  the  world.  Now,  according  to  these  Gospels,  God  in 
Christ  puts  himself  into  this  human  relationship,  and,  as  one  with  man,  bears  his 
burden  and  suffers  under  the  sin  of  the  world.  The  Father  of  spirits  in  His  own 
eternal  blessedness  may  not  suffer  with  men;  but  in  Christ  God  has  humbled  Him- 
self to  our  consciousness  of  sin  and  death.  In  Christ  the  eternal  love  comes  under 
the  moral  law  of  suffering,  under  which  forgiveness  may  work  its  perfect  work. 
More  particularly,  in  the  life  and  death  of  Christ  these  several  elements  which  we 
have  found  belonging  essentially  to  our  experience  of  reconciliation  with  one 
another,  have  full  exercise  and  scope.  For  Christ,  identifying  Himself  with  our 
sinful  consciousness,  makes  a  perfect  repentance  for  sin  and  confession  of  it  unto 
the  Father.  Christ  experiences  our  sin  as  sinful,  and  confesses  it.  And  again, 
Christ  realizes  the  cost  of  the  sin  of  the  world.  His  loneliness  of  spirit,  the  cruel 
misunderstandings  of  Him  by  all  men.  His  Gethsemane,  His  Cross — all  realize  the 
cost  and  suffering  of  sin,  and  in  view  of  such  sufferings  of  the  Son  of  Man  sin 
never  can  be  regarded  as  a  light  and  trifling  thing.  And  still  further,  Christ  revealff 
to  the  world  what  its  sin  has  cost,  and  enables  man  who  would  be  forgiven  ta 
appreciate  it,  and  to  acknowledge  it.  {N.  Smyth,  D.D.)  The^  understood  none 
of  these  things.  Misunderstanding  Christ : — The  disciples'  failure  to  understand 
the  Master  suggests  an  alviays  timely  question  for  the  followers  of  Jesus:  What 
misunderstandings  of  Christ  may  still  be  lingering  in  Christianity  ?  The  question 
is  the  more  pertinent  and  the  more  necessary  because  one  reason  for  the  disniples' 
failure  to  perceive  the  things  that  were  said  by  Jesus  on  His  way  to  the  Cross,  was 
the  knowledge  of  Him  which  they  already  possessed.  Two  truths  in  particular 
which  they  had  learned  better  than  any  one  else  concerning  Jesus,  they 
allowed  to  stand  in  the  way  of  their  further  understanding  of  Him.  They  had 
been  taught  His  wonderful  power.  They  had  been  eye-witnesses  of  His  mighty 
works.  They  began  to  believe  that  Jesus  oould  do  anything.  This  truth  of  the 
power  of  the  Son  of  Man  they  were  ready  to  receive,  and  they  stopped  with  the 
knowledge  of  it.  He  who  had  power  from  God  could  not  be  taken  and  killed  by 
the  Pharisees.  So  they  grasped  with  eager  hope  the  truth  that  Jesus  was  the 
promised  Messiah  of  Israel,  and  missed  the  deeper  truth  of  His  character,  that 
God  so  loved  the  world.  Then  again  the  truth  which  they  had  learned  better  than 
any  others  of  Jesus'  wonderful  kindness,  and  justice,  and  humanity,  in  their  partial 
view  of  it,  may  have  hidden  from  their  eyes  the  full  revelation  which  He  would  have 
them  perceive  of  His  Divine  life.  How  could  He  who  had  power  over  death,  and 
who  had  so  pitied  two  sisters  that  He  had  restored  their  brother  to  them,  and  who 
had  enveloped  their  lives  in  a  friendship  of  wonderful  daily  thoughtfulness — ^how 
could  He,  having  all  power,  go  away  hrom  them,  leave  them  comfortless,  throw 
them  back  again  upon  the  world,  and  disappoint  their  high  hopes  of  Him  ?  No 
wonder  Peter  thought  it  was  impossible,  and  even  said  impulsively,  "  Be  it  far 
from  Thee,  Lord  1 "    The  truth  of  Christ's  friendship  which  they  did  know  pr«> 


CHAT.  XTin.]  ST.  LUKE.  889 

vented  them  from  understanding  the  diviner  secret  of  God's  sacrificial  love  for  the 
world,  which  they  might  have  learned.  So  they  who  knew  the  Lord  best,  mis* 
understood  Him  the  most ;  and  Jesus  went  before  His  disciples  in  a  deeper  purpose 
and  a  diviner  thought  than  they  perceived.  Our  text  reads  like  a  devout  apology 
of  the  disciples  for  their  singular  misunderstanding  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  provi- 
dence of  God  had  taught  them  their  mistake.  And  very  instructive  for  ns  is  the 
method  by  which  God  corrected  the  false  perception  of  the  disciples,  and  opened 
their  eyes  to  true  and  larger  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  They  overcame  their  mis- 
understanding, and  were  brought  to  better  understanding  of  Jesus  Christ,  through 
the  trial  and  the  task  of  their  faith.  These  two,  trials  and  tasks,  are  God's  waye 
of  correcting  men's  imperfect  faiths.  For  you  will  recall  how  those  disciples,  at 
the  time  of  the  crucifixion,  and  while  they  were  waiting  in  Jerusalem,  learned  in 
their  disenchantment,  and  were  taught  through  that  fearful  strain  and  trial  of  their 
faith,  as  they  had  never  been  before,  of  what  Spirit  Jesus  was,  and  what  His  real 
mission  to  this  world  was ;  and  thus  they  were  prepared  to  see  and  to  become 
apostles  of  the  risen  Lord.  That  trial  of  their  faith,  while  Jesus  was  mocked,  and 
scourged,  and  delivered  to  death,  and  crucified  between  two  thieves,  and  buried^ 
all  the  light  blotted  from  their  skies,  all  the  proud  ambition  broken  in  their  soul» 
— yet  in  His  death  a  new,  strange  expectancy  awakened  in  their  hearts,  and  on  the 
third  day  a  vision  seen  which  made  all  things  a  new  world  to  them — that  trial  of 
their  faith  was  the  Lord's  method  of  teaching  the  disciples  what  before  had 
remained  hidden  from  them  even  in  the  plainest  words  of  Jesus.  And  then  this 
knowledge  of  the  new,  larger  truth  of  Christ's  work  was  rounded  out,  and  filled  full 
of  a  steady,  clear  light  to  them,  by  the  task  immediately  given  them  to  do  in  the 
name  of  the  crucified  and  risen  Lord.  They  learned  at  Pentecost  what  Chris- 
tianity was  to  be.    {Ibid.) 

Vera.  35-43.  A  certain  blind  man  sat  by  the  wayside. — The  blind  marCtpertinacitxf 
and  cure : — This  teaches  us — I.  Tbk  impobtakce  of  the  ihuedutb  seizing  o» 

OPFOBTUNIXIES.      H.    ThE   IMPORTANCE   OF   PEBTIIIACITT,  IN    THB  ATFAIBS  OF  THE  SOUIm^ 

III.  The  boot  of  this  pbomptness  of  action — of  this  undaunted  pebtinacitt— ' 
WAS  FAITH.  IV.  The  bestoeed  sight  is  used  in  following  Chbist,  and  in  oloeify- 
INO  God.  (Anon.)  Blind  Bartimeu»  : — I.  Hindbanobs  which  beset  us  in  oomino^ 
TO  Chbist  fob  mbbct.  1.  Our  own  blindness.  2.  Impediments  that  others  cast  in 
the  way.  II.  Actions  of  encoubaoement  fob  oub  coming  to  Chbist.  1.  Jesu» 
stood  still.  2.  On  Jesus  showing  Himself  favourable,  then  at  once  did  multitude. 
S.  In  eagerness  to  go  to  Jesus,  man  left  garment  behind  (Mark  z.  50).  Must  cast 
off  custom  and  habit  of  sin.  Then,  going  to  the  Saviour  will  be  easy,  and  prayer 
will  be  heard  and  answered.  ILL  Blessing  eeceived  ;  effect  pboduced.  1.  What 
the  poor  man  willed,  the  Lord  granted.  2.  A  new  follower.  Application :  1.  Let 
no  worldly  hindrances  debar  from  Christ.  2.  Many  encouragements  to  go.  Go. 
3.  Having  gone,  truly,  wholly — surely  follow  Him.  {Clergyman's  Magazine.)  The 
souVs  crisis : — L  Now,  looking  stedfastly  that  this  may  be  the  case,  I  wish  to  speak 
very  pointedly  to  you  about  two  or  three  things.  First,  when  Jesus  passed  by  the- 
blind  man  it  was  to  that  mac  a  day  of  hope.  It  was  an  hour  of  hope  to  that  blind' 
man,  and  if  Jesus  passes  by  now  this  is  an  hour  of  hope  to  you.  But,  does  He  pass 
by  ?  I  answer — Yes.  There  are  different  respects  in  which  this  may  be  interpreted 
of  oar  Lord's  conduct.  In  a  certain  sense  He  has  been  passing  by  some  of  you 
ever  since  you  began  to  discern  right  from  wrong.  More  especially  is  it  a  time  o^ 
Christ's  passing  by  when  the  gospel  is  preached  with  power.  II.  Secondly,  as  it 
was  a  time  of  hope  to  that  poor  blind  man,  so  was  it  especially  a  time  of  activitt. 
Tou  that  anxiously  desire  salvation,  regard  attentively  these  words.  A  man  cannot 
be  saved  by  what  he  does ;  salvation  is  in  Christ,  yet  no  man  is  saved  except  as  he 
seeks  earnestly  after  Christ.  1.  This  man  hstened  attentively.  2.  He  inquired 
with  eagerness  what  it  meant.  3,  When  this  man  had  asked  the  question,  and  had 
been  told  in  reply  that  Jesns  of  Nazareth  passed  by,  notice  what  he  did  next,  he 
began  to  pray.  His  cry  was  a  prayer,  and  lus  prayer  was  a  cry.  4.  After  this  mao' 
had  thus  pleaded*  it  is  noteworthy  that  Jesus  stood  still  and  called  him.  That 
much-prized,  though  all  patched  and  filthy  garment,  he  throw  right  away ;  it  might 
have  made  him  a  minute  or  two  slower,  so  off  he  threw  it,  and  away  he  flung  it. 
Ah  1  and  it  is  a  great  mercy  when  a  poor  soul  feels  that  it  can  throw  away  anything- 
and  everything  to  get  to  Christ.  6.  Once  more.  When  this  man  had  come  to> 
JesDB,  and  Jesus  said  to  him,  "  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  7 "  the  mni^ 
^tozned  a  straightforward  and  intelligent  answer,  "  Lord,  that  I  might  reoeive  my- 


884  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnkv.  ma. 

eight."  6.  Still,  I  cannot  withhold  one  other  remark.  That  which  really  bronght 
salvation  to  this  blind  man  was  his  faith,  for  Christ  says,  "  Thy  faith  hath  saved 
thee."  Now,  here  is  the  greatest  point  of  all — faith  1  Faith ;  for  work  without 
faith  is  of  little  worth.  Faith  is  the  great  saving  grace ;  it  is  the  real  life-germ. 
III.  It  was  also  an  hotje  of  ceisis.  IV.  Lastly,  remember  that  this  hour  of  Jesua 
passing  by  is  an  houb  that  will  soon  be  gone.  Did  you  notice  that  word,  "  Jesua 
of  Nazareth  passeth  by  ?  "  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  passing  Christ  recognized :  — 
As  people  do  not  recognize  that  Christ  passeth  near  to  them  when  they  are  in 
health,  even  so  they  do  not  see  as  they  ought  His  band  in  their  sickness.  An 
invaUd  lamented  to  a  lady  who  came  to  see  her,  that  she  had  abused  her  health 
before  it  was  taken  from  her.  The  friend  replied,  "  I  hope  that  now  you  will  take 
care  not  to  abuse  your  sickness."  Assuredly  we  abuse  our  sickness  when  we  do  not 
see  the  hand  of  God  in  it,  and  do  not  allow  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  passeth  by  our 
bed,  to  bring  us  nearer  to  Himself.  {E.  J.  Hardy,  M.A.)  Enthiisiasm  rebuked : — 
Blind  Bartimeus  has  to  encounter  obstructionists ;  the  nnsympathizing  crowd 
interfered  to  silence  the  man.  "  Hold  thy  peace,  Bartimeus ;  have  done  with  all 
this  frenzied  excitement ;  Christ  has  other  things  to  do  than  listen  to  thee !  "  So 
long  ago  was  it  a  settled  matter  that  a  man  may  get  excited  about  anything  in  the 
wide  world  except  about  Christ  I  You  are  quite  at  liberty  to  get  excited  about  the 
latest  war  news,  about  politics,  about  the  race-course,  about  the  money-market, 
about  anything  you  like,  save  the  interests  of  your  soul.  Yes  ;  these  highly  respect- 
able people  of  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  have  left  a  numerous  progeny.  There 
are  always  plenty  of  persons  ready  to  give  good  advice  to  seeking  souls,  or  to  young 
Christians,  after  this  fashion:  "Keep  quiet,  my  friend;  don't  get  excited;  hush  ! 
don't  make  a  noise  about  such  things ;  whatever  you  do,  keep  calm,  and  don't  make 
a  fuss."  I  observe  that  the  devil  has  his  own  fire-brigade,  who  are  always  ready 
with  their  hose — waiting  to  throw  cold  water  on  any  little  flame  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
kindles,  and  to  offer  sedatives  to  any  startled  sinner  who  is  beginning  to  be  in 
earnest  about  his  soul.  These  excellent  people  will  tell  you  that  it  is  all  right  and 
proper  to  be  religious,  to  be  earnest  up  to  a  certain  point,  but  you  must  be  careful 
uot  to  go  beyond  this.  When  you  come  to  inquire  what  this  point  is,  you  make  the 
astonishing  discovery  that  it  is  just  the  point  at  which  religion  begins  to  do  one  any 
real  good  1  Be  earnest,  so  long  as  your  earnestness  does  not  bring  you  salvation  ; 
be  pious,  so  long  as  your  piety  fails  to  reveal  the  living  God  to  your  heart ;  but  be 
fiure  and  stop  short  of  receiving  God's  gift  of  everla'^ting  life,  or  you  vrill  be  going 
too  far  1  \w.  M.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  blind  sister  .-—A  year  ago  last  winter 
«n  affecting  scene  occurred  in  the  streets  of  Baltimore.  Two  little  sisters  were 
looking  through  a  large  store  window  at  the  toys  within,  and  trying  to  describe  what 
they  saw  to  a  little  blind  sister  who  was  with  them.  They  were  exhausting  their 
feeble  powers  of  description  to  bring  home  to  the  mind  of  their  blind  companion 
■what  they  saw,  although  she  listened  greedily.  But,  after  all,  they  failed  to  present 
anything  more  than  an  imperfect  representation.  The  gentleman  who  saw  the 
circumstance  said  that  it  was  extremely  touching,  that  they  tried  hard  to  describe 
the  collection  in  the  store,  but  they  could  not  do  it.  That  is  just  like  our  trying  to 
tell  you  of  Christ.  Opening  the  eyes  of  faith: — By  merely  opening  my  eyes  all 
the  glories  o!  light  burst  upon  me.  I  take  in  at  a  glance  the  human  face  or  the 
stretch  of  magnificent  scenery.  I  gaze  across  the  vast  ocean,  or,  looking  up  through 
the  night,  I  grasp  millions  of  worlds  and  embrace  infinitude.  What  an  amazing 
result  from  merely  opening  the  eyes  and  looking  up  1  How  often,  too,  a  single 
incident,  the  meeting  of  a  particular  friend  or  the  encountering  of  some  difficulty  or 
danger,  or  the  gaining  of  a  little  information,  colours  the  whole  of  a  man's  subse- 
quent life — indeed,  gives  him  an  entirely  different  direction  and  turn.  His  whole 
attitude  is  altered  by  what  occupied  but  a  moment.  It  is,  then,  quite  in  accordance 
with  God's  arrangement  and  man's  world  that  great  things  should  depend  on  Tery 
simple  matters.  And  the  belief  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  though  a  simple 
thing,  though  not  a  complex,  laborious,  lengthened  operation,  is  yet  the  very  act 
most  fitted  to  open  the  soul  for  God.  It  is  not  labour  that  is  required  for  the 
reception  of  God.  It  is  the  feeling  of  emptiness,  and  desire  to  receive.  It  is  trust 
in  God,  the  belief  in  His  great  love.  No  labour  will  enable  a  man  to  behold  the 
Sight  of  the  sun  or  the  multitude  of  the  stars,  but  opening  his  eyes  will.  Opening 
ithe  eyes  to  God's  great  love  in  Christ,  receiving  that  marvellous  display  of  God's 
inmost  heart,  that  opens  the  heart,  that  brings  into  true  accord  with  God,  that 
fiives  a  wholly  different  outlook  on  the  world,  that  alters  a  man's  entire  attitude. 
^.  Leekit,  D.D.)        The  cure  of  blind  Bartimeui  .-—Let  tu  therefore  review  raa 


•BAT.  xrm.]  ST.  LUKE.  888 

CIBCUMSTANCS8  ot  THK  HisTOST  BBroBK  US — and  endeavoor  to  derive  bomb  usefuii 
ADMONITIONS  FROM  IT.  One  of  the  characters  of  our  Savionr's  miracles  was  pablicity. 
Impostors  require  secrecy  and  darkness.  Thus  He  recovered  this  man  before  a 
multitude  in  the  highway,  and  close  to  the  city  of  Jerieho.  Several  of  our  Saviour's 
miracles  seem  to  have  been  unintentional.  Thus  it  is  said,  "  As  He  entered  a 
certain  village,  there  met  Him  ten  men,  that  were  lepers,  who  stood  afar  off."  Thus 
again  we  read,  that  "  when  He  came  nigh  to  the  gate  of  the  city  of  Nain,  behold, 
there  was  a  dead  man  carried  out,  the  only  son  of  his  mother,  and  she  was  a 
widow."  And  so  here  :  "  It  came  to  pass,  that  as  He  was  come  nigh  onto  Jericho, 
a  certain  blind  man  sat  by  the  way-side  begging."  You  may  ask  then,  Was  Hia 
finding  these  objects  accidental  or  designed  ?  Unquestionably,  designed.  He  was 
not  taKen  by  surprise.  He  saw  the  end  from  the  beginning.  His  plan  was  formed ; 
and  He  was  '*  working  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  wiU."  Our  Saviour 
>s  acquainted  with  all  our  sins,  but  He  requires  as  to  confess  them ;  He  understands 
all  our  wants,  but  He  commands  us  to  acknowledge  them ;  He  is  always  graciously 
affected  towards  our  case,  but  He  would  have  us  properly  affected  with  it  ourselves. 
He  knew  the  desire  of  this  man,  but  He  would  know  it  from  him  himself ;  and 
therefore,  when  he  was  come  near,  He  asked  him,  saying,  "  What  wilt  thou  that  I 
shall  do  unto  thee  ?  "  So  here :  as  soon  as  Bartimeus  received  sight  from  the  Lord 
Jesus,  "  he  followed  Him  in  the  way,  glorifying  God."  We  may  view  this  two  ways. 
It  was  first  an  evidence  of  the  reality  and  perfection  of  the  cure.  In  other  cases 
where  human  skill  has  removed  bliadness  by  couching,  the  restored  orbs  cannot  be 
immediately  used ;  light  is  admitted  into  them  by  degrees ;  the  man  cannot  measure 
distances,  nor  judge  with  accuracy;  and  he  is  not  fit  to  be  left  to  himself.  But  it 
is  said  our  Lord  "  did  all  things  well."  His  manner  distinguished  him — the  man 
saw  at  once  clearly ;  and  was  able  to  conduct  himself.  Secondly,  it  was  an  im- 
provement of  the  greatness  of  the  mercy.  "  I  can  never,"  says  he,  "  discharge  my 
obligations  to  such  a  gracious  and  almighty  Friend.  But  let  me  devote  myself  to 
His  service — let  me  continually  ask,  '  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  ' " 
From  the  narrative  thus  explained,  I  would  take  occasion  to  bring  forward  four 
admonitions.  1.  Be  fbbsuaded  that  you  abe  au.  spibituallt  in  thb  oonditioh 
or  Babtiubds— and  that  without  Divine  illumination,  you  are  no  more  qualified 
for  the  concerns  of  the  moral  world  than  a  blind  man  is  for  those  of  the  natural 
world.  2.  Bb  pebsdasbd  that,  with  beoabd  to  the  beuovaii  of  this  blindness, 
TOD  ABB  IN  AS  HOPETtiL  A  CONDITION  AS  THIS  FOOB  MAN.  In  all  these  miraclcs 
oar  blessed  Lord  holds  Himself  forth  as  the  all-sufficient  helper  of  sinners.  3. 
Bb  persuaded  to  imitate  the  impobtunity  or  this  blind  begoab,  in  cbyino 
roB  mercy.  And  especially  let  your  importunity,  like  this  poor  man's,  appear 
with  regard  to  two  things.  First,  like  him,  seize  the  present  moment.  Let  not 
the  opportunity  afforded  you  be  lost  by  delay.  Secondly,  like  him,  be  not  silenced 
by  discouragement  and  opposition.  4.  If  He  has  healed  you! — if  you  can  say, 
"One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see" — like  Babtimeus, 
BE  OABsruL  TO  FOLLOW  THE  Savioub.  This  is  the  best  way  to  evidence  your  cure. 
This  is  also  the  best  way  to  improve  your  deliverance.  Thus  you  will  "  show 
forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  His  mar- 
vellous light."  Follow  Him,  then,  as  an  imitator  of  His  example.  {W.  Jay.) 
What  wilt  thon  that  I  shall  do  unto  thee  7 — A  worshipper  questioned : — All  who 
oome  to  church  should  come  not  to  keep  up  an  ancient  form,  do  a  duty,  discharge 
an  obligation,  but  to  meet  with  Christ.  And  we  do  meet  with  Him  (Matt,  xviii.  20). 
And  He  asks  of  each  the  question  in  the  text.  Three  classes  of  replies.  1.  The 
reply  of  some  is,  ''  Let  us  alone — leave  us."  Diogenes  wished  Alexander,  as  the 
greatest  favour  he  could  bestow,  to  "stand  out  of  my  sunshine."  Christ  stands 
between  some  men  and  what  they  imagine  to  be  sunshine.  (1)  How  ungrateful  is 
SQch  a  reply.  What  pain  and  grief  it  must  give  Him  who  died  to  save  us.  (2)  How 
mad  it  is.  If  we  could  succeed  we  should  have  destroyed  our  only  hope — broken 
the  only  bridge  by  which  we  might  return.  2.  The  reply  of  others  is,  "  Lull  our 
consciences  to  rest."  They  want  ease,  but  not  holiness,  pardon  without  change  of 
heart.  (1)  How  vain  is  such  a  search.  Christ's  offers  are  always  coupled  with  require- 
ments (  Matt.  zi.  28-30 ;  v.  8).  (2)  How  utterly  worthless  it  would  be.  It  would 
be  a  sham,  and  we  should  know  it  and  despise  it.  3.  The  reply  of  others  is,  "  Cleanse, 
purify,  renew  us."  Like  this  man  they  ask  for  sight.  Like  the  leper  they  ask  to 
be  made  clean.  They  cry  m  their  doubts  and  fears,  "  I  believe ;  help  Thoa  mine 
unbelief."  And  such  never  come  in  vain.  Christ  meets  with  them,  and  though 
they  touch  but  the  hem  of  His  garment,  grants  their  requests  (Luke  iv.  la). 
TOL.   III.  25  _    


aae  the  biblical  illustrator.  [oh**,  xn. 

{J,  Ogle.)  Blindness  and  tJie  blind: — Much  as  blind  people  lose  by  not  having 
the  use  of  their  eyes,  they  have  often  made  themselves  not  only  useful,  but  even 
4istingaished.  Professor  Sanderson,  of  Cambridge,  England,  lost  his  sight  when 
only  a  year  old,  but  became  a  great  mathematician.  Dr.  Blackwood  was  master  of 
Oreak,  Latin,  Italian,  and  French,  and  a  poet  of  no  mean  degree.  Dr.  Henry  Moyea 
was  skilled  in  geometry,  optics,  and  astronomy,  and  he  could  judge  very  accarately 
of  the  size  of  any  room  in  which  he  happened  to  be  by  the  effects  of  his  voice. 
John  Metcalf,  an  Englishman,  was  employed  first  as  a  wagoner,  and  afterwards 
became  a  surveyor  of  highways.  By  the  help  of  a  long  staff,  he  would  traverse  the 
most  difficult  mountain  roads,  and  was  able  to  do  more  than  many  men  accomplish 
with  their  eyes  open.  William  Metcalf  laid  out  roads  and  built  bridges.  Euler,  the 
mathematician,  was  blind.  John  Qough,  who  was  an  accurate  botanist  and  zoolo- 
gist, was  also  blind.  Lord  Cranboume,  blind  from  his  childhood,  published  a 
history  of  France  for  the  young.  Huber,  who  has  written  such  an  interesting  book 
about  bees,  was  blind.  Homer  was  blind.  The  same  was  true  of  Ossian  and  Mil- 
ton. Zisca,  the  famous  Bohemian  general,  performed  great  acts  of  valour  after  the 
loss  of  his  sight.  The  Eev.  J.  Crosse,  vicar  of  Bradford,  England,  was  blind,  but 
as  he  knew  the  Church  service  by  heart,  he  was  able  to  conduct  public  worship  with 
impressiveness  and  solemnity,  only  requiring  the  help  of  another  person  to  read  the 
lessons  for  him.  {J.N.  Norton,  D.D.)  Spiritual  blindne$$  and  tight: — To  be 
vain  is  to  be  blind,  and  to  persist  in  blindness,  and  in  the  ignorance  of  one's  blind- 
ness, and  to  refuse  the  opportunities  of  sight.  To  be  worldly  is  to  be  blind ;  to 
grope  among  the  dusty  ways,  the  opaque  and  earthly  objects  of  this  lower  sphere, 
contented  with  their  darkness,  or  expecting  light  to  shine  out  from  it — is  to  be 
grossly  blind.  To  be  without  religion,  to  look  not  up  above  for  cheering  and  guiding 
light,  to  seek  not  the  rays  of  that  eternal  Sun,  which  alone  can  warm  and  invigorate 
the  soul — that  is  to  be  blind.  But  to  be  humble  is  to  see.  To  feel  that  we  are 
ignorant,  that  we  are  weak,  that  we  are  poor,  and  that  the  darkness  within  needs 
illumination  from  the  Light  above,  and  to  pray  for  that  illumination  is  to  have  our 
eyes  opened,  and  to  see.  To  receive  Jesus  as  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith, 
to  go  to  Him  for  the  precept  and  example,  the  doctrine  and  direction  which  we  so 
much  need,  and  which  we  can  obtain  ^om  no  one  but  from  Him  who  was  sent  to 
as  from  the  Father  of  lights,  is  to  be  cured  of  our  blindness,  and  to  receive  our 
eight.  To  foUow  His  blessed  steps,  to  write  His  instructions  on  the  tables  of  our 
hearts,  to  shun  all  allurements  and  pass  over  all  obstacles  which  interfere  with  the 
duty  of  discipleship,  is  to  walk  as  children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day.  (F.  W.  P. 
Greenwood,  DJ).) 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Ybbs.  1-10.  A  man  named  Zacchens. — Zaccheus  the  publican  ."—1.  Ths  aBAOiooa 
EMTBT.  II.  A  coMMBMDABLS  CDBiosiTT.  1.  This  curioslty  unusuaL  (1)  A  rich  man 
anxious  to  see  Jesus.  (2)  A  rich  man  overcoming  hindrance  that  he  might  gratify 
such  curiosity.  (3)  Are  there  any  here  anxious  to  see  Jesns  ?  (4)  Are  you  willing 
to  seek  Him  now  ?  III.  A  wonderful  subpbiss.  1.  In  the  unexpected  detection. 
2.  In  the  unexpected  summons  by  name.  3.  In  the  unexpected  declaration  of 
Jesus.  lY.  Am  dmusual  besfonsb.  1.  In  its  alacrity.  2.  In  its  obedience.  3.  In 
its  sincerity.  (1^  What  an  example  to  follow  1  (2)  What  blessedness  such 
obedience  ever  brings  1  V.  An  ungaiiLbd-fob  complaint.  1.  In  its  spirit.  2.  In 
its  argument.  TI.  A  oenuins  penitent.  1.  Shown  in  his  implied  confession.  2. 
In  his  sincere  reformation.  3.  In  the  fact  of  his  salvation.  YIl.  The  uission  and 
POBPOBX  or  Cbbist.  Practical  questions :  1.  Have  you  ever  desired  to  see  Jesus  T 
2.  Have  you  ever  truly  sought  to  find  Jesus  ?  3.  ELave  you  ever  believed  on  Jesus? 
4.  If  not,  will  you  now?  (D.  G.  Hughes,  M.A.)  The  Christian  not  of  the 
crowd : — Shall  we  have  no  interest  in  Him  ?  Shall  we  not  desire  to  see  of  Him  all 
that  we  can  T  We  cannot,  indeed,  with  all  our  endeavours  and  reaching  upward, 
see  His  countenance  and  person,  as  Zacchens  did,  by  mounting  into  a  tree ;  but  wa 
may  see  mnch  more  than  he  did,  who  saw  Him  but  in  the  fiesh,  not  yet  glorified. 
We  may  see  Him  in  spirit,  we  may  behold  Him  through  faith,  and  in  such  gbry  as 
Zaccheus  had  not  power  to  conceive.    We  may  have  in  our  hearts  the  tokens  ot 


«HA».  xnc]  ST.  LUKE.  887 

His  presence,  and  we  may  receive  from  Him  the  earnest  of  that  glory  with  which 
He  will  clothe  His  people,  that  they  may  be  like  unto  Him.  But  then,  again,  after 
they  have  begun  to  entertain  something  like  a  wish  and  desire,  do  not  many  desist, 
from  the  fear  of  being  thought  singular,  from  the  dread  of  appearing  unlike  other 
people  1  They  dare  not  make  themselves  so  conspicuous.  And  yet  what  rules  of 
modesty  will  not  people  break,  what  public  notice  will  they  not  brave,  when  some 
attractive  spectacle  of  this  world's  pomp  and  splendour  is  to  be  seen !  Then  the 
man  of  gravity,  then  the  female  of  delicacy,  are  seen  to  make  no  scruples  of 
mounting  up  above  the  heads  of  the  crowd  into  the  most  preposterous  and 
ludicrous  positions.  {R.  W.  Evans,  B.B.)  The  conversion  of  Zaccheus  : — I.  How 
DID  Zaccheus  happen  to  be  converted  ?  He  wanted  to  see  Jesus,  what  sort  of  a 
man  (rig  iffriv)  He  was — a  low  motive,  but  it  was  the  salvation  of  Zaccheus.  It  is 
surprising  that  he  should  never  have  seen  or  heard  Jesus,  when  Jericho  was  so  near 
Jerusalem,  and  Jesus  was  so  famous  a  prophet.  The  ignorance  of  intelligent  men 
<K>ncerning  religion  is  astonishing.  We  should  encourage  people  to  go  to  see  who 
Jesus  is,  pray  that  they  may  go,  from  curiosity  if  from  no  higher  motive.  Taking 
Zaccheus's  standpoint,  the  awakening  of  his  curiosity  probably  explains  how  he 
happened  to  be  converted.  From  Christ's  standpoint  we  get  a  different  view.  He 
had  Zaccheus  in  mind,  bo  it  appeared.  When  He  came  to  the  tree  and  called  his 
tiame  and  bade  him  come  down,  He  said,  "To-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house."  "I 
must."  This  was  among  the  events  in  the  fixed,  predetermined  order  of  those  last 
colemn  days.  "  To-day  "  the  seeking  sinner  and  the  seeking  Saviour  were  to  meet. 
*♦  We  see  from  the  story,"  says  Dr.  Brown,  "  that  we  may  look  for  unexpected  con- 
Tersions."  II.  What  converted  Zaccheus  ?  Suppose  he  had  been  asked  the 
question  that  evening.  He  would  have  given  different  answers.  He  would  have 
spoken  of  the  influence  of  Bartimeus,  or  of  Matthew.  Again,  he  would  speak  of  the 
«all  of  Jesus,  the  brief,  thrilling  words,  beginning  with  his  own  name.  Or,  in 
another  mood,  he  would  say,  "  It  was  because  I  heeded,  first  the  voice  within,  and 
then  that  voice  Divine.  I  converted  myself.  I  listened.  I  came  down.  I  received 
Him.  How  fortunate  that  I  took  that  resolution ! "  At  another  time  he  would 
emphasize  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  I  never  should  have  taken  the  first  step, 
the  thought  of  it  would  never  have  lodged  in  my  mind,  without  some  power  from 
without  moving  me.  It  was  not  like  me.  It  was  contrary  to  the  whole  course  of 
xny  life.  It  must  have  been  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  So  it  is  in  the  case  of 
every  convert.  Each  answer  would  contain  a  phase  of  the  truth.  IH.  When  was 
Zaccheus  converted  ?  "  Somewhere  between  the  limb  and  the  ground  " — Moody. 
The  prodigal  was  converted  when  he  said,  "I  will  arise,"  Zaccheus  when  he  said, 
•*I  will  go  down."  There  is  no  interval  between  surrender  and  conversion.  If 
Zaccheus  had  died  as  he  moved  to  descend,  he  would  have  been  saved.  God  does 
not  delay  us.  He  gives  when  we  take.  IV.  What  were  the  evidences  or  thb 
coNTERSioN  or  Zacchbus?  1.  He  received  Christ.  Notice  that  it  was  Zaccheus 
who  received  Christ.  We  must  receive  Him  before  He  can  receive  us  (John  i.  12). 
2.  Joyfulness.  He  received  Him  joyfully.  3.  Zaccheus  "  stood."  He  made,  that 
is,  an  open  confession.  It  was  harder  to  do  this  than  to  climb  the  tree.  This, 
every  true  convert  will  do  (Rom.  x.  &-10).  4.  Confession  and  reformation.  ((?.  R. 
Leavitt.)  The  seeker  sought : — I.  The  chabacteb  or  Zaccheus.  A  Hebrew  name 
with  a  Greek  termination,  signifying  "  pure."  A  man  may  have  a  noble  ancestry 
and  an  ignoble  calling — a  good  name  and  a  bad  reputation.  There  is  an  important 
difference  between  a  man's  reputation  and  a  man's  character.  Beputation  is  what 
:men  say  about  us,  character  is  what  a  man  is.  1-  We  may  learn  from  this  verse 
something  about  Zaccheus's  social  standing.  ''He  was  the  chief  among  the 
publicans."  Some  men  are  exposed  to  special  temptations  from  the  positions  they 
hold.  A  dishonest  calling  blunts  our  finest  sensibiUties,  hardens  our  heart,  and 
degrades  our  whole  nature.  2.  We  may  learn  from  this  verse  something  about 
Zaccheus's  secular  position.  **  And  he  was  rich."  II.  The  curiosity  or  Zaccheus. 
Cariosity,  which  is  commonly  regarded  as  a  dangerous  disposition,  is  natural  to 
man,  and  may  be  serviceable  in  the  most  sacred  pursuits.  It  excites  inquiry,  it 
Etimolates  research,  and  it  leads  to  the  solution  of  many  of  the  ^ark  problems  of 
Uie.  1.  In  this  case  curiosity  awakened  an  earnest  desire  to  see  Jesus.  2.  In  this 
case  cariosity  overcame  the  difficulties  that  were  in  the  way  of  seeing  Jesus.  TTT. 
The  oaUiINO  or  Zaccheus.  L  This  was  a  personal  call.  Christ  not  only  knew 
his  name,  bat  his  nature.  He  knew  the  place  he  occupied,  and  the  thoughts  ha 
ieh«rished.  2.  This  was  an  argent  call.  "  Zaccheus,  make  haste,  and  eoma 
down."    The  coming  of  Chzist  is  anexpected,  and  His  stay  brief.     He  is  passing 


S68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  jmm, 

to-day,  and  may  have  passed  to-morrow.  What  we  have  to  do  mast  be  don* 
quickly.  3.  This  was  an  effectual  call.  "  And  be  made  haste,  and  came  down." 
What  a  mighty  energy  there  is  in  the  word  of  Christ  I  At  His  word  the  blind 
received  their  sight,  and  the  dead  started  to  life  again.  lY.  Tbb  oonvebsiom  ov 
Zaccheub.  "  TluB  day  is  salvation  come  to  thy  house."  Personal  contact  with 
Christ  ensures  special  blessing  from  Christ.  When  Christ  is  present  with  us,  there 
will  be  light  in  the  eye,  music  in  the  voice,  and  gladness  in  the  heart.  1.  This  was 
a  present  salvation.  (1)  What  a  marvellous  change  was  wrought  in  his  character! 
The  dishonest  man  became  honest,  the  selfish  man  became  generous,  and  the  sinful 
man  became  righteous.  (2)  What  a  glorious  change  was  wrought  in  his  service  t 
Instead  of  living  for  self,  he  began  to  live  for  the  Saviour ;  instead  of  seeking 
the  things  of  time,  he  began  to  seek  the  things  of  eternity.  2.  This  was  a 
practical  salvation.  "  And  Zaccheus  stood,  and  said  unto  the  Lord,  Behold,  Lord, 
the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor."  This  is  a  splendid  liberality.  He  does 
not  give  a  tenth,  not  a  fifth,  but  the  half.  He  does  not  say  I  will  leave  at  my 
decease,  but  I  give  during  my  lifetime.  When  Christ  comes  to  abide  in  a  rich 
man's  house,  he  will  open  his  heart  to  give  to  the  poor.  {J.  T.  Woodhome,  MjL.) 
The  cliaracter  of  Zaccheus : — I.  The  man.  1.  His  nationality.  A  Jew.  2.  Hia 
ofGlcial  position.  Chief  among  the  publicans.  8.  Hia  financial  condition.  Bich. 
As  is  too  often  the  case,  Zaccheus,  perhaps,  owed  his  official  position  more  to  his 
purse  than  his  purity — more  to  what  he  had  than  to  what  he  was.  From  the 
view  I  get  of  Zaccheus,  I  am  not  surprised  that  "he  was  rich."  Those  who 
compass  chieftancy  and  riches  are  the  men  who  know  how  to  step  out  of  the 
beaten  track,  and  without  regard  to  sneers  or  criticism,  can  "run"  and  "climb,"  in 
order  to  accomplish  their  object.  He  possessed  certain  traits  of  character  which 
are  the  secret  of  success  in  every  department  of  human  endeavour,  1.  He  was 
self-reliant.  He  did  not  passively  rely  upon  others  for  his  inspiration  and  resolves. 
He  was  a  man  of  originality  of  thought  and  purpose — a  sort  of  genius  in  method 
and  movement.  2.  He  was  prompt  and  persevering.  Zaccheus  knew  how  to 
handle  an  opportunity.  An  old  Latin  maxim  says :  "  Opportunity  has  hair  in 
front,  but  behind  she  is  bald ;  if  you  seize  her  by  the  forelock,  you  may  hold  her ; 
but  if  Buffered  to  escape,  not  Jupiter  himselT  can  catch  her."  By  the  style  of  the 
man,  and  the  fact  that  his  ancestry  is  not  mentioned,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that 
Zaccheus  began  life  a  poor  boy.  The  majority  of  those  who  have  risen  to  riches 
and  honour,  have  come  up  through  the  rough  regions  of  toil  and  poverty,  and  were 
not  ashamed  afterwards  to  work  with  their  own  hands,  though  possessed  of 
thousands  of  this  world's  goods.  3.  His  purpose.  "  To  see  Jesus,  who  He  was." 
Why  so  anxious  to  "  see "  ?  why  not  be  content  with  hearing  f  There  were 
thousands  who  had  seen  Him  and  formed  their  opinions  as  to  "  who  He  was,"  and 
were  not  backward  in  telling  them.  The  Pharisee  would  have  told  him  :  "  He  ia  a 
devil  "  ;  the  scribe,  "  a  fanatic  "  ;  the  priest,  "  a  blasphemer  "  ;  the  Babbi,  "  a 
heretic"  ;  the  poor,  "  a  prophet  "  ;  the  many,  " an  impostor  "  ;  the  few,  a  "  God." 
Zaccheus  could  not  afford,  therefore,  to  trust  to  hearsay;  and  so,  like  a  wise  man, 
he  made  up  his  mind  to  see  for  himself.  He  was  a  good  judge  of  human  nature, 
and  could  form  a  pretty  correct  opinion  of  a  man,  by  getting  a  good  square  look  at 
him.  The  noblest  purpose  that  can  actuate  the  human  heart  is  expressed  in  these 
three  little  words:  "To  see  Jesus."  4.  His  failure.  "Could  not  for  the  press, 
becanse  he  was  little."  Here  is  a  man  earnestly  trying  "  to  see  Jesus,"  who  is 
opposed  and  defeated  by  obstacles  he  had  no  hand  in  producing,  and  over  which 
he  had  no  control.  (1)  "  The  press,"  and  (2)  "  Little  of  stature."  He  had  no 
hand  in  producing  either  of  these,  and  yet  they  defeated  him.  But,  was  that  fair? 
Has  Zaccheus  had  a  fair  chance  f  Whether  fair  or  not,  he  has  had  all  the  chance 
he  will  have,  unless  he  makes  another.  5.  His  determination.  "  He  ran  before  and 
climbed  into  a  sycamore."  Here  we  get  an  idea  of  the  force  and  fibre  of  the  man. 
He  did  not  waste  his  precious  time  in  upbraiding  himself  for  being  ••  little,"  ox 
finding  fault  with  his  surroundings.  He  simply  started  off  in  search  of  a  better 
vantage  ground.  No  time  is  more  unprofitably  spent  than  that  which  is  used  in 
finding  fault  with  our  instruments  and  surroundings.  Zaccheus  never  would  have 
been  "  chief  among  the  publicans,  and  rich,"  if  he  had  not  learned  to  make  a  virtue 
out  of  necessity,  and  turn  even  failure  into  a  pedestal  from  which  to  reach  a 
grander  snccess.  When  a  man's  conscious  littleness  compels  him  to  "  run  "  and 
"  climb,"  he  wiU  master  his  obstacles  and  get  a  better  knowledge  of  things  than 
the  men  who  think  they  can  see  all  there  is  to  be  seen  without  climbing.  In 
m  world   like    this,  where   we   are   all   "  little "   in   so  many  places,  no  man 


CBiP.  xnc]  ST.  LUKE.  889 

will  reach  the  highest  saccesB  onleBB  he  feels  hiB  littleness  and  knows  how 
to  •'  climb."  Learn  from  this  narrative  that  all  barriers  give  way  before 
the  man  who  has  made  np  his  mind  to  see  Jesns  Christ.  (T.  Kelly.) 
The  conversion  of  Zaccliexu : — Zacchens  was  undoubtedly,  np  to  this  time,  a 
worldly,  grasping,  wicked  man ;  who,  though  a  Hebrew  by  birth  and  education, 
had  so  far  forgotten  God,  and  allowed  the  love  of  money  to  master  him,  that  in 
his  business  relations  he  did  not  always  observe  the  laws  of  equity  or  the  principles 
of  righteousness.  The  impression  I  get  of  him  from  the  narrative  is,  that  he  was  a 
sharp,  shrewd,  business  man ;  a  man  whose  judgment  in  business  matters  was 
unusually  good,  and  who,  if  he  did  any  business  at  all,  would  be  sure  to  make 
money.  The  love  of  money,  and  the  conscious  power  to  make  it,  cannot  exist  in 
the  same  person  without  great  possibUities  of  evil.  Ambition,  Bivalry.  But  though 
Zaccheus  was  a  grasping,  selfish  man,  yet  I  am  profoundly  impressed  with  his 
independent  spirit  and  individuality  of  character.  He  is  a  striking  illustration  of 
the  fact  that  neither  riches  nor  worldly  position  can  satisfy  the  cravings  of  the 
human  soul ;  and  that  a  ready  response  is  accorded  to  gospel  overtures,  sometimes 
where  we  least  expect  it.  A  mere  surface  reading  of  the  narrative  can  give  as  no 
adequate  idea  of  the  force  of  character  it  required  to  face  the  tremendous  dis- 
couragements which  Zaccheus  had  to  meet  in  becoming  a  follower  of  Jesus  Christ. 
I  notice  just  two  of  these : — 1.  He  had  no  character  to  begin  with.  His  whole 
environment  tended  to  keep  him  as  he  was.  The  very  social  atmosphere  in  which 
he  lived  tended  to  blight  every  aspiration  and  hope  of  becoming  a  better  man. 
However  badly  he  might  act,  he  had  nothing  to  lose,  for  he  was  already  an  outcast 
from  society.  Another  serious  and  humiliating  fact  which  Zaccheus  had  to  face 
was — 2.  His  dishonest  business  transactions.  •*  If  I  have  taken  anything  of  any 
man  by  false  accusation,  I  restore  him  fourfold."  That  kind  of  restitution  would 
soon  seriously  impoverish  the  bank  accounts  of  some  people.  It  would  compel 
many  of  our  mushroom  aristocracy  and  sky-rocket  millionaires  to  go  to  the  alms- 
house, or  turn  their  hands  to  honest  labour,  and  "  earn  their  bread  by  the  sweat 
of  their  brow."  Zacchens  does  not  use  the  words,  "  If  I  have  taken  anything," 
as  though  he  were  in  doubt,  and  wished  to  leave  a  similar  doubt  on  the  mind  of 
others.  His  guilt  is  clearly  implied  in  his  own  words.  And  no  person  who  did  not 
carry  the  making  of  a  noble  Christian  character  would  have  made  such  a  declara- 
tion— would  have  deliberately  entered  upon  a  course  of  life  which,_  at  the  very 
outset,  involved  the  unearthing  of  a  life  of  fraud  and  dishonesty,  which  no  doubt 
no  person  could  have  proven,  and  perhaps  of  which  nobody  had  the  sHghtest 
suspicion.     Now  let  us  turn  to  the  incident  of  this  memorable  day.     Notice  here — 

I.    How  PUSH  AND  PEBSEVEKAKCE  TUEN    DEFEAT   INTO   VICTOBT.      A    feW  moments   agO 

he  was  completely  defeated — "  could  not  see  Jesus"  for  the  "  press."  Now  he  haa 
a  better  view  of  Him  than  any  man  in  the  crowd.  So  the  earnest  seeker  will 
always  find  that  the  very  "  press  "  of  isms  and  sects  and  critics  that  srrround  the 
Baviour,  and  which  compel  him  to  "  run  and  climb,"  to  think  and  act  for  himself, 
will  bd  the  means  of  securing  for  him  a  clearer  and  more  satisfactory  view  of  Jesus 
Chrii.J  than  he  could  have  possibly  obtained  on  the  ordinary  highway  of  common 
eSoTt.  1.  Observe  the  movements  of  Jesus.  (1)  "  He  came  to  the  place," — He 
always  does.  No  man  ever  yet  started  out  with  the  full  purpose  to  see  Jesus  Christ 
and  failed.  (2)  His  method.  He  "looked."  2.  Notice  the  order  and  significance 
of  the  descriptive  words  in  this  verse  :  "  When  Jesus  came  to  the  place,  He  looked 
.  .  .  and  $aw  .  .  .  and  said."  That  is  the  order  of  description  needed,  but,  alas, 
eadly  lacking  in  our  churches.  We  have  too  many  who  can  look  without  seeing ; 
they  possess  so  little  of  the  Master's  spirit  that  they  can  pass  along  the  highways 
of  Ufe,  and  through  orchards  of  sycamores,  and  never  set  eyes  on  a  sinner  anxious 
"  to  see  Jesus."  II.  That  peompt,  uk questioning  obedience  always  secueeb  the 
Dxthtb  appeoval  and  blessing.  1.  The  Saviour's  command.  "  Zaccheus,  come 
down."  This  command  was  both  startling  and  unexpected.  Zaccheus  had  no 
thought  of  being  addressed  personally  by  the  Saviour,  or  of  being  called  upon  to 
come  down  in  the  presence  of  the  crowd.  In  coming  in  vital  contact  with  Jesua 
Christ,  the  seeker  always  finds  new,  unexpected  things  happening;  and,  likt 
Naaman,  is  soon  made  to  see  that  God's  way  is  not  man's.  2.  The  Saviour's  perfect 
knowledge  of  the  seeker.  "  Zaccheus,  come  down."  There  is  something  un- 
Qtterably  precious  in  the  fact  that  God  is  intimately  acquainted  with  all  out 
names.  No  person  can  assume  any  attitude  of  service,  or  self-sacrifice,  or  suppli- 
cation before  God,  without  having  his  very  name  associated  with  the  act.  "  Zacchens, 
•ome  down."    Implying  that  his  character  and  wants  were  as  well  known  as  hii 


ago  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi*. 

name.  8.  The  prompt  obedience  of  Zaccheas.  The  conversion  of  Zaccheni 
reached  not  only  his  head  and  his  pocket,  but  it  also  reached  his  conscience.  No 
conversion,  however  loudly  proclaimed,  will  be  of  any  lasting  value  onlesa  it 
includes  and  practically  displays  a  New  Testament  conscience.  {T.  Kelly.) 
Zaccheus  a  type  of  the  Christ-seeker : — I.  How  to  seek  Christ,  as  illcstkatbo  by 
Zaccheus.  L  We  must  go  in  the  way  along  which  He  appoints  us  to  go.  (1) 
Christ's  way  is  that  of  the  sanctuary.  (2)  Christ's  way  is  that  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures.  (3)  Christ's  way  is  that  of  the  closet.  2.  We  must  go  with  earnest 
resolution.  Be  not  deterred  by  station,  connections,  business  occupation,  or  fear 
of  abuse  or  ridicule.  3.  We  must  go  in  time.  There  comes  a  last  opportunity  to 
each.  It  may  be  to-day.  II.  What  comes  of  such  seeking  of  Chbist?  1.  Christ 
stops  in  His  course  to  take  note  of  the  seeker.  2.  He  comes  to  such  homes  and 
blesses  them.  Where  Jesus  enters,  salvation  goes.  3.  He  makes  the  seeker's  heart 
just  and  tender.  4.  He  defends  us  against  persecution.  Conclusion — 1.  Have  yoa 
ever  thus  sought  Christ  ?  2.  What  effect  has  your  Christian  profession  had  on  your 
life?  (P.  C.  Croll.)  Lessons  from  this  passage: — From  an  attentive  considera- 
tion of  the  distinct  parts  of  this  passage  of  St.  Luke's  Gospel,  we  may  derive  many 
useful  truths  and  salutary  reflections.  1.  First,  let  us,  like  Zaccheus,  have  a  view 
to  the  improvement  of  our  minds  in  piety  and  virtue,  even  in  the  gratification  of 
curiosity.  Instead  of  flocking,  with  childish  folly,  to  such  trifling  amusements  as 
are  unworthy  of  a  rational  being,  we  should  endeavour  to  combine  pleasure  with 
instruction,  and  the  employment  of  time  with  advantage.  While  thousands  would 
have  crowded  with  joy  to  see  a  pageant,  a  triumph,  or  the  barbarous  spectacle  of 
Boman  games,  "  Zaccheus  ran  and  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore- tree  to  see  our  Lord 
pass  by  "  ;  and  when  He  honoured  him  so  far  as  to  take  up  His  abode  with  him 
for  that  day,  he  not  only  received  Him  joyfully,  but,  without  doubt,  listened  to  His 
conversation  with  reverence,  and  heard  the  glorious  truths  which  His  lips  revealed 
with  adoration  and  praise.  "  This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this  house."  2.  The 
hospitality  of  Zaccheus,  and  his  great  satisfaction  on  this  occasion,  may  direct  ua 
also  in  the  choice  and  entertainment  of  our  friends.  The  common  intercourses  of 
the  world  are  too  often  nothing  but  associations  of  pleasure  or  confederacies  of 
vice.  3.  We  may  further  learn  from  our  blessed  Lord's  conduct  towards  Zaccheus, 
to  banish  from  our  minds  those  uncharitable  prejudices  which  so  strongly  marked 
the  character  of  the  Jews.  (J.  Hewlett,  B.D.)  Lessons: — 1.  Let  the  desire  of 
all  of  you,  in  coming  up  to  the  house  of  God,  be,  like  that  of  Zaccheus,  to  see 
Jesus.  You  may  see  Him,  and  should  earnestly  desire  to  see  Him,  by  knowledge 
and  faith,  in  the  glories  of  His  person,  character,  and  redemption.  If  you  obtain 
a  sight  of  Him,  aud  come  to  know  who  He  is,  in  this  way,  you  will  be  like  Abraham, 
who  "  rejoiced,"  or  greatly  desired,  "  to  see  His  day,  and  saw  it,  and  was  glad  " ; 
and  the  words  will  then  be  applicable  to  you,  in  their  best  sense,  "  Blessed  are  yoor 
eyes,  for  they  see."  2.  See  that  those  of  you  who  profess  to  be  Christians  give  the 
same  evidences  of  conversion  as  Zaccheus.  Remember  that  repentance  is  to  be 
judged  of,  not  so  much  by  its  terror  at  the  time,  as  by  its  permanent  effects  on  the 
heart  and  life.  You  must,  like  Zaccheus,  "  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance." 
{Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)  He  sought  to  see  JesvLa.— Obstacles : — The  experience  of 

Zaccheus,  in  his  efforts  "  to  see  Jesus,"  is  a  striking  illustration  of  a  universal  fact 
in  human  history.  Men  are  constantly  opposed  and  thwarted,  in  their  efforts  to 
do  right,  by  obstacles  and  enemies  which  they  never  produced.  Satan,  for  instance, 
is  the  persistent  opposer  of  all  who  8«ek  "  to  see  Jesus  Christ."  But  man  had  no 
hand  in  producing  Satan  ;  he  was  here  before  man  came,  and,  for  aught  I  know, 
here  because  he  saw  man  coming.  You  may  start  out  to  see  Huxley,  or  Tyndaii, 
or  any  of  the  great  philosophers  or  scientists,  and  Satan  will  pay  no  attention  to 
you;  but  if  you  start  out  ''to  see  Jesus  Christ"  he  will  instantly  summon  his 
resources,  and  form  a  "  press  "  against  you.  How  persistently  he  follows  the  young 
Christian  with  the  fascinations  of  the  world  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  •'  press  "  of 
discouragements  on  the  other.  Then  the  laws  of  heredity  come  in  and  raise  up 
obstacles,  the  full  power  of  which  our  limited  knowledge  does  not  enable  us  to 
compute.  We  all  take  on  hereditary  damage,  of  one  kind  or  another,  from  our 
ancestry.  This,  of  course,  is  soon  rendered  vastly  more  serious  by  our  own  moral 
behaviour,  and  the  result  is  a  dwarfed,  squattish  spiritual  stature.  So  that  ths 
ordinary  "press  "  of  the  world's  cares  and  attractions  is  quite  sufficient  to  shut  ug 
out  from  God  and  a  saving  view  of  Jesue  Christ.  So  Zaccheus  found  himself 
defeated.  "Could  not."  Mark  the  descriptive  words  here:  "Chief,"  "Rich," 
••  Could  not."  Then  chieftancyand  riches  cannot  do  everything  for  a  man.   OfUcial 


«HAP.  xnc]  ST.  LUKE.  89X 

position  and  wealth  go  only  a  little  way  in  removing  the  distressing  and  annoying 
phases  of  life.  Human  power,  however  commanding  and  extensive,  soon  reaches 
the  solid  masonry  of  the  impossible,  upon  which  the  only  thing  it  can  scribble  is 
the  little  words,  '*  Could  not."  Let  us  add  another  descriptive  word,  and  we  shall 
see  how  it  was  that  Zaccheus  failed.  "  He  was  little."  The  words  "  little  "  and 
"  ooDld  not  "  are  closely  related  in  human  affairs.  Every  man  is  "  little  "  some- 
where— "  little "  in  spots.  No  man  is  fully  hemisphered  on  both  sides  of  his 
nature.  (T.  Kelly.)  Making  an  effort  to  see  Jes%i$  : — The  ants  are  a  little  people, 
but  they  are  exceeding  wise.  People  that  want  size  must  make  up  for  it  by  sagacity. 
A  short  man  up  in  a  tree  is  really  taller  than  the  tallest  man  who  only  stands  on 
the  ground.  Happily  for  little  men,  the  giants  have  seldom  any  great  wit.  Bigness 
is  not  greatness ;  and  yet  smallness  is  in  itself  no  blessing,  though  it  may  be  the 
occasion  of  a  man's  winning  one.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  see  every  one  about  yon  a 
bigger  person  than  yourself.  And  this  is  a  sight  many  do  see  who  are  not  dwarfs 
in  stature.  But  Zaccheus  was  a  dwarf  in  stature;  and,  notwithstanding,  had  become 
a  man  of  consideration.  But  they  called  him  "  Zacchy,"  or  even  "little  Zacchy  " 
sometimes  no  doubt ;  and,  rich  as  he  was,  and  firm  hold  as  he  had  on  many  people, 
he  was  far  from  happy.  Though  small,  he  was  strong  ;  but  then,  though  strong, 
he  was  sour.  He  despised  the  rehgious  people,  and  yet  did  not  Uke  to  be  despised 
by  them.  Many  men  knew  he  was  cleverer  than  they,  but  they  never  forgot  he  was 
shorter  1  This  man  could  not  come  at  Jesus  for  the  press.  Though  not  a  blind 
man,  he  had  his  difficulties  in  seeing.  But  he  would  very  much  like  to  see  Jesus, 
what  kind  of  man  He  was.  People  pointed  him  out,  and  said,  "  That's  Zaccheus ; 
isn't  he  a  Uttle  fellow  ?  "  The  short  man  felt  a  curiosity  as  to  the  personal  appear- 
ance of  the  famous  Prophet.  We  may  be  sure  Zaccheus  had  heard  good  things  of 
Jesus  Christ.  And  he  was  soon  to  hear  good  words  from  Him,  words  more  healing, 
more  fragrant,  thsm  the  Jericho  balsams.  Zaccheus  had  gone  on  before.  You  must 
get  at  your  tree  before  you  can  climb  it  1  He  makes  haste,  runs,  climbs,  for  he  ia 
very  eager  in  this  business ;  and  he  not  only  sees  Jesus,  but,  what  is  much  better, 
is  seen  by  Him.  If  a  man  looks  for  God,  God  knows  that  he  is  looking.  He  that 
fleeks  is  sought.  Take  trouble  to  win  a  blessing  harder  for  yoa  to  get  than  for 
others,  and  you  shall  have  one  bestowed  on  you  better  than  you  sought  for.  {T. 
T.  Lynch.)  Difficulties  overcome : — We  have  all  read  and  heard  of  the  "  pursuit 
of  knowledge  under  difficulties,"  and  of  the  remarkable  way  in  which  these  have 
often  been  overcome.  The  shepherd,  with  no  apparatus  save  his  thread  and  beads, 
has  lain  on  his  back  on  the  starry  night,  mapped  the  heavens,  and  unconsciously 
become  a  distinguished  astronomer.  The  peasant  boy,  with  no  tools  save  his  rude 
knife,  and  a  visit  now  and  then  to  a  neighbouring  town,  has  begun  his  scientifio 
education  by  producing  a  watch  that  could  mark  the  time.  The  blind  man, 
trampling  upon  impossibilities,  has  explored  the  economy  of  the  beehive,  and,  more 
wondrous  still,  lectured  on  the  laws  of  light.  The  timid  stammerer,  with  pebbles 
in  his  mouth,  and  the  roar  of  the  sea-surge  in  his  ear,  has  attained  the  correctest 
elocution,  and  swayed  as  one  man  the  changeful  tides  of  the  mighty  masses  of  the 
Athenian  democracy.  All  these  were  expedients  to  master  difficulties.  And  now 
notice  the  expedient  which  Zaccheus  adopts  to  overcome  his  difficulties.  Yonder, 
in  the  way  where  Jesus  is  to  pass,  is  a  sycamore-tree.  It  stands  by  the  wayside. 
Its  roots  are  thick  and  numerous,  its  girth  is  ample,  its  wide-spread  arms  may  be 
called  gigantic,  its  leaf  resembles  the  mulberry,  its  fruit  is  like  that  of  the  fig — 
indeed  it  is  a  member  of  the  fig  family.  An  itinerant  preacher  in  the  backwoods 
once  puEzled  himself  and  his  hearers  with  an  elaborate  criticism  about  this  tree. 
He  and  his  audience  were  familiar  only  with  the  sycamore  of  their  flat  river 
bottoms,  which  are  tall  as  a  steeple,  and  smooth  as  hypocrisy.  "  Why,"  said  the 
orator,  "  s  squirrel  can't  climb  them,"  and  the  conclusion  reached  was  that  the 
sycamore  must  have  been  a  mulberry  tree.  But  Dr.  Thomson,  who  retails  this 
anecdote,  assures  us  that  the  sycamore  is  every  way  adapted  to  the  purposes  for 
which  Zaccheus  used  it,  for  he  saw  one  in  which  were  a  score  of  boys  and  girls, 
who  could  easily  look  down  upon  any  crowd  passing  beneath.  Zaccheus  fixea  his 
eye  npon  the  sycamore  in  the  distance.  If  he  were  apon  one  of  its  branches  hia 
objeot  would  be  gained ;  but  then  he  is  noi  a  boy.  Besides,  he  is  a  rich  man, 
•nd  the  chief  amongst  the  publicans,  and  what  will  the  people  say  if  he  climbs  it  to 
tee  Jesos  of  Nazareth  ?  Yea,  what  will  the  boys  say  and  do,  who  are  perhaps  on 
the  tree  already?  There  ia  a  straggle  going  on  within  his  bosom,  but  there  is  not 
ft  single  moment  to  lose,  for  Jesus  is  coming.  Regardless  of  what  others  may  say,  ha 
teoomes  like  •  boy  sgain ;  he  runs  to  the  tree  and  climbs  it^    {Dr.  MeAu$Uuie.i 


B9a  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xix. 

Zacchens,  make  haste  and  come  down. — Our  Saviour^t  visit  to  Zaccheut :— Oar 
Saviour  for  the  first  time  invited  Himself  to  a  man's  house.  Thus  He  proved  the 
freeness  and  authority  of  His  grace.  "  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  Me  not " 
(Isa.  Ixv.  1.)  "We  ought  rather  to  invite  Him  to  our  houses.  We  should  at  leas! 
cheerfully  accept  His  offer  to  come  to  us.  Perhaps  at  this  hour  He  presses  Hims&lf 
upon  us.  Yet  we  may  feol  ourselves  quite  as  unlikely  to  entertain  our  Lord  ai 
Zaccheus  seemed  to  be.  He  was  a  man — 1.  In  a  despised  calling — a  publican,  or 
tax-collector.  2.  In  bad  odour  with  respectable  folk.  3.  Rich,  with  the  suspicion 
of  getting  his  wealth  wrongly,    4.  Eccentric,  for  else  he  had  hardly  climbed  a  tree. 

5.  Excommunicated  because  of  his  becoming  a  Boman  tax-gatherer.  6.  Not  at  all 
the  choice  of  society  in  any  respect.  To  such  a  man  Jesus  came ;  and  He  may 
come  to  us  even  if  we  are  similarly  tabooed  by  our  neighbours,  and  are  therefore 
disposed  to  fear  that  He  will  pass  us  by.    I.  Let  us  consider  the  necessity  whioh 

PBESSED  DP3N  THE  SavIOXJB  TO  ABIDE  IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  ZaCCHEUS.      Hb  felt   an  Urgent 

need  of — 1.  A  sinner  who  needed  and  would  accept  His  mercy.  2.  A  person  who 
would  illustrate  the  sovereignty  of  His  choice.  3.  A  character  whose  renewal  would 
magnify  His  grace.     4.  A  host  who  would  entertain  Him  with  hearty  hospitality. 

6.  A  case  which  would  advertise  His  gospel  (vers.  9  and  10).  II.  Lbt  us  inquibb 
whetheb  such  a  kecessitt  exists  in  eefeeenob  to  ourselves.  We  can  ascertain  this 
by  answering  the  following  questions,  which  are  suggested  by  the  behaviour  ot 
Zaccheus  to  our  Lord  : — 1.  Will  we  receive  Him  this  day  ?  •'  He  made  haste."  2. 
Will  we  receive  Him  heartily  ?  "  Received  Him  joyfully."  8.  Will  we  receive  Him 
whatever  others  say?  "  They  all  murmured."  4.  Will  we  receive  Him  as  Lord? 
••He  said.  Behold,  Lord,"  6.  Will  we  receive  Him  so  as  to  place  our  substance 
under  the  control  of  His  laws  ?  (Verse  8^  If  these  things  be  so,  Jesus  must  abide 
with  us.  He  cannot  fail  to  come  where  He  will  have  such  a  welcome,  lU.  Let  us 
FULLT  UNDERSTAND  WHAT  THAT  NECESSITY  INVOLVES,  If  the  Lord  Jcsus  comcs  to  abide 
in  our  house— 1.  We  must  be  ready  to  face  objections  at  home.  2.  We  must  get 
rid  of  all  in  our  house  which  would  be  objectionable  to  Him.  Perhaps  there  is 
much  there  which  He  would  never  tolerate.  3.  We  must  admit  none  who  would 
grieve  our  heavenly  Guest.  His  friendship  must  end  our  friendship  with  the 
world.  4.  We  must  let  Him  rule  the  house  and  ourselves,  vdthout  rival  or  reserre, 
henceforth  and  for  ever.  6.  We  must  let  Him  use  us  and  ours  as  instruments  for 
the  further  spread  of  His  kingdom.  (C  if.  Spurgeon.)  God  calls  men  dawn : — L 
Notice  bomb  of  the  heights  from  which  God's  people  are  fetched  down  bt  thb 
oosPKii.  1.  High  thoughts  of  self-importance  (2  Cor.  x.  4, 5).  2.  Natural  efforts,  or 
legal  endeavours  (Rom.  x.  8),  3.  From  the  basis  of  false  hopes  (Job  viii.  13).  4. 
From  carnal  confidence  (Jer.  ii.  37).  5.  From  vain  apologies  for  sin.  II.  Thbib 
benbations  IN  COMING  DOWN,  1.  In  Spiritual  consideration  (Psa.  oxix.  69).  2.  In 
deep  anxiety  for  salvation  (Acts  xvi  80).  3.  In  despair  of  salvation  but  by  God 
(Jer.  iii.  23).  4.  In  gracious  resolutions  (Luke  xv.  18).  5.  To  self-denying 
practices  (Matt.  xvi.  24).  6.  To  God's  righteousness  (Bom.  iiii.  21).  IIL  Somb 
bemabes  on  the  day  of  conversion.  1.  It  is  our  new  birth-day  (Isa.  xliiL  1),  3. 
A  day  of  despatch — "  Come  down"  (Heb.  iii.  15).  8.  Of  love  and  kindness  (Ezek. 
xvi.  6).  4.  Of  union  between  Christ  and  the  soul  (Hos.  iL  20).  IV.  Beasons  wot 
the  Lobd  calls  US  DOWN.  1.  Because  it  is  God's  design  in  the  Gospel  (Isa.  ii. 
11-17).  2.  Because  ascending  too  high  is  very  dangerous.  3.  That  free  grace  maybe 
exalted.  4.  That  we  may  meet  vrith  Christ  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  Inferences  : — 1.  How 
high  and  lofty  man  is  in  his  natural  state.  2.  Hence  God  humbles  him  for  his 
eternal  good.  3.  The  nature  of  true  faith  is  coming  down.  4.  Admire  the  riches 
of  God's  grace  towards  us.  (T.  B.  Baker.)  Christ's  words  to  Zaccrietis  : — ^I  shall 
give  you  a  division  which  you  will  not  be  able  to  forget,  or  if  you  do  forget  it,  you 
will  have  nothing  to  do  but  simply  to  turn  to  the  Bible,  and  look  at  the  text,  and 
the  punctuation  will  give  you  the  heads.  I.  Look,  then,  at  the  first  word, 
*'  Zaccheus."  Christ  addresses  this  man  by  name ;  He  saw  him  before  he  went  up 
into  the  sycamore,  and  he  had  not  been  long  there  when  He  called  out  to  him, 
"  Make  haste  and  come  dovm."  Oh  1  but  some  people  say  that  ministers  have  no 
business  to  be  so  personal.  Well,  my  friends,  they  are  very  unlike  their  Master, 
the  great  model  Preacher,  if  they  are  not  personal.  II.  Take  the  next  two  words 
for  our  second  head — "  make  haste."  We  are  told  in  the  sequel  that  Zaccheus  did 
not  halt  between  two  opinions,  but  came  down  quickly  and  received  Christ  joyfully. 
If  you,  my  unconverted  hearer,  will  listen  to  me,  what  I  wish  to  say  to  you  is  this — 
mf^e  haste  and  come  to  Jesus,  for  you  will  never  find  a  more  favourable  opportunity 
than  the  present.    Wait  ten  thousand  years,  and  your  sins  will  not  be  fewer ;  G«d'i 


OTAP.  xn.]  ST.  LUKE.  S9S 

mercy  will  not  be  greater.  The  fool  who,  wishing  to  cross  a  river,  lay  down  on  its 
bank  till  the  water  would  run  past,  is  only  a  faint  emblem  of  you,  if  you  delay. 
"  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time  ;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  That 
clock  says  ••  now  "  ;  this  pulse  says  "now  "  ;  this  heart  says  "  now."  The  glorified 
in  heaven  and  the  lost  in  hell,  the  one  by  their  songs,  the  other  by  their  wails, 
together  cry,  "Make  haste."  But,  once  more,  make  haste,  for  your  salvation  may 
soon  become  extremely  difficult.  Sin  is  like  a  fire,  it  may  soon  be  quenched  if  the 
cold  water  engines  are  brought  to  play  upon  it  in  time  ;  but  let  it  burn  on  a  few 
hours,  and  perhaps  a  city  is  laid  in  ashes.  Sin  is  like  a  river,  the  further  from  the 
fountain-head  the  greater  the  volume,  the  more  rapid  and  irresistible  the  current. 
Sin  is  like  a  tree  :  look  at  your  sapling,  your  infant's  arm  may  bend  it :  let  a  few 
years  pass  away,  a  few  summers  shine  upon  it,  and  a  few  winters  blow  upon  it,  auil 
that  tree  will  hurl  defiance  at  the  loudest  storm.  So  with  the^  sinner :  he  gets 
accustomed  to  all  the  appeals,  and  becomes  gospel  proof.  Again,  make  haste — 
your  salvation  may  become  extremely  difficult,  if  not  altogether  impossible.  Man 
is  a  bundle  of  habit,  and  habit  becomes  second  nature.  You  ask,  "  How  long  may 
•  man  live  on  in  sin,  and  yet  be  saved  ?  "  I  reply.  Do  not  try  the  experiment — it  is 
A  very  dangerous  one.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 
Make  haste,  and  learn  that  He  has  suffered  for  you  what  you  deserved  as  s  sinner, 
and  obeyed  for  you  what  you  owed  as  a  creature.  This  may  be  your  last  oppor- 
tunity. III.  Look,  now,  at  the  last  three  words,  and  you  will  find  our  third  head  : 
"  And  comb  down."  Zaccheus  was  upon  one  of  the  many  branches  of  the  sycamore  ; 
and  you,  my  unsaved  friend,  are  upon  one  of  the  many  branches  of  the  great, 
mighty-spreading,  world-embracing  tree  of  human  corruption,  and  I  call  upon  you 
in  the  name  of  my  Master  to  •'  come  down."  Now,  I  wish  to  be  charitable,  but  I  do 
solemnly  declare  that  I  cannot  find  the  branch  of  atheism,  even  on  the  tree  of  human 
corruption.  At  all  events,  if  there  be  such  a  branch,  I  hesitate  not  to  say  it  is  the 
rottenest  one  on  the  whole  tree.  Come  down  from  it!  Then  there  are  other  branches : 
scepticism,  drunkenness,  pride,  &o.  (W.  AndersonA  Effectual  calling : — 1.  Now, 
first,  effectual  calling  is  a  very  oracious  truth.  You  may  guess  this  from  the  fact 
that  Zaccheus  was  a  character  whom  we  should  suppose  the  last  to  be  saved.  He 
belonged  to  a  bad  city — Jericho — a  city  which  had  been  cursed,  and  no  one  would 
suspect  that  any  one  would  come  out  of  Jericho  to  be  saved.  Ah  1  my  brethren,  it 
matters  not  where  you  come  from :  you  may  come  from  one  of  the  dirtiest  streets, 
one  of  the  worst  back  slums  in  London,  but  if  effectual  grace  call  you,  it  is  an 
effectual  call,  which  knoweth  no  distinction  of  place.  But,  my  brethren,  grace 
knows  no  distinction  ;  it  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  but  God  calleth  whom  He  wills, 
and  He  called  this  worst  of  publicans,  in  the  worst  of  cities,  from  the  worst  of  trades. 
Ah  1  many  of  you  have  climbed  up  the  tree  of  your  own  good  works,  and  perched 
yourselves  in  the  branches  of  your  holy  actions,  and  are  trusting  in  the  free  will  of 
the  poor  creature,  or  resting  in  some  worldly  maxim  ;  nevertheless,  Christ  looks  up 
even  to  proud  sinners,  and  calls  them  down.  2.  Next  it  was  a  personal  call.  3. 
It  is  a  hastening  call — "  Zaccheus,  make  haste."  God's  grace  always  comes  with 
despatch ;  and  if  thou  art  drawn  by  God,  thou  wilt  run  after  God,  and  not  be  talk- 
ing about  delays.  4,  Next,  it  is  a  humbling  call.  "  Zaccheus,  make  haste  and 
come  down."  God  always  humbles  a  sinner.  Oh,  thou  that  dwellest  with  the 
eagle  on  the  craggy  rock,  thou  shalt  come  down  from  thy  elevation ;  thou  shalt  fall 
by  grace,  or  thou  shalt  fall  with  a  vengeance,  one  day.  He  *•  hath  cast  down  the 
mighty  from  their  seat,  and  hath  exalted  the  humble  and  meek."  6.  Next,  it  is  an 
affectionate  call.  "  To-day  I  must  abide  in  thy  house."  6.  Again,  it  was  not  only 
an  affectionate  call,  but  it  was  an  abiding  call.  "  To-day  I  must  abide  at  thy 
bouse."  When  Christ  speaks.  He  does  not  say,  "  Make  haste,  Zaccheus,  and  come 
down,  for  I  am  just  coming  to  look  in  "  ;  but  "  I  must  abide  in  thy  house ;  I  am 
coming  to  sit  down  to  eat  and  drink  with  thee  ;  I  am  coming  to  have  a  meal  with 
thee."  7.  It  was  also  a  necessary  call.  "  I  mutt  abide."  It  is  necessary  that  the  child 
of  God  should  be  saved.  I  don't  suppose  it ;  I  know  it  for  a  certainty.  If  God 
says  ••  I  must,"  there  is  no  standing  against  it.  Let  Him  say  "  must,"  and  it  must 
be.  8.  And,  now,  lastly,  this  call  was  an  effectual  one,  for  we  see  the  fruits 
it  brought  forth.  Open  was  Zaccheus's  door ;  spread  was  his  table ;  generous  was  his 
heart ;  washed  were  his  hands ;  unburdened  was  his  conscience  ;  joyful  was  his  soul. 
Sinner,  we  shall  know  whether  God  calls  you  by  this :  if  He  calls,  it  will  be  an 
effectual  call — not  a  call  which  you  hear,  and  then  forget,  but  one  which  produces 
good  works.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  He  was  gone  to  be  guest  with  a  man  that  Is  « 
■Inner. — The  tinner's  Saviour: — The  old  contempt  of  the  sinner's  Saviour  lingers  in 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  to, 

the  world  still.  In  one  way  or  other  the  charge  is  repeated,  that  Christianity  is  to« 
Anient  to  the  sinner,  that  it  tends  to  discourage  the  naturally  amiable  and 
virtuous,  and  looks  too  favourably  upon  the  vicious  and  disreputable,  &c.  How 
easily  coald  we  turn  the  tables  upon  these  slanderers,  for  usually  those  who  talk 
thus  have  but  a  scanty  supply  of  morals  and  virtues  themselves.  I.  We  aduii  thb 
TBOTH  OF  THE  CHABGE.  Jcsus  did  go  to  be  guest  to  a  man  that  was  a  sinner,  and 
did  80  not  only  once,  but  as  often  as  He  saw  need.  He  went  after  the  sheep  which 
had  gone  astray,  and  He  had  a  wonderful  attraction  for  the  disreputable  classes. 
1.  The  object  of  Christ,  and  the  design  of  the  gospel,  is  the  saving  of  sinners.  2. 
Our  Lord  does  actually  call  sinners  into  the  fellowship  of  the  gospel.  3.  The  man 
Christ  Jesus  does  very  readily  come  to  be  guest  with  a  man  who  is  a  sinner,  for  He 
stands  on  no  ceremony  with  sinners,  but  makes  Himself  at  home  with  them  at  once. 
4.  Our  Lord  goes  further,  for  He  not  only  stands  on  no  ceremony  with  sinners,  but 
within  a  very  Uttle  time  He  is  using  those  very  sinners  who  had  been  so  unfit  for  any 
holy  service — using  them  in  His  most  hallowed  work.  Note  how  He  makes 
Zaccheus  to  be  His  host.  5.  Ay,  and  the  Lord  favoured  Zaccheus,  the  sinner,  by 
granting  him  that  day  full  assurance  of  salvation.  II.  Wb  dbnt  the  insinuation 
WHICH  IS  COVERTLY  INTENDED  BT  THE  CHABGE  brought  agaiust  OUT  Lord.  Jesus  is  the 
friend  of  sinners,  but  not  the  friend  of  sin.  1.  Christ  was  guest  with  a  man  that 
was  a  sinner,  but  He  never  flattered  a  siimer  yet.  2.  Neither  does  the  Lord  Jesus 
screen  sinners  from  that  proper  and  wholesome  rebuke  which  virtue  must  always 
give  to  vice.  S.  Again,  it  is  not  true,  as  I  have  heard  some  say,  that  the  gospel 
makes  pardon  seem  such  a  very  easy  thing,  and  therefore  sin  is  thought  to  be  a 
small  matter.  4.  Nor,  though  Christ  be  the  friend  of  sinners,  is  it  true  that  He 
makes  men  think  lightly  of  personal  character.  6.  It  has  been  said  that  if  we  tell 
men  that  good  works  cannot  save  them,  but  that  Jesus  saves  the  guilty  who  believe 
in  Him,  we  take  away  all  motives  for  morality  and  holiness.  We  meet  that  again 
by  a  direct  denial :  it  is  not  so,  we  supply  the  grandest  motive  possible,  and  only 
remove  a  vicious  and  feeble  motive.  III.  We  bejoicb  in  the  vbbt  fact  which  has 
BEEN  OBJECTED  TO,  that  Jcsus  Christ  comes  to  be  guest  with  men  who  are  sinners. 
1.  We  rejoice  in  it,  because  it  aSords  hope  to  ourselves.  2.  We  rejoice  that  it  is 
true,  because  this  affords  us  hope  for  all  our  fellow-men.  8.  We  rejoice  that  this  is 
the  fact,  because  when  we  are  waiting  for  the  Lord  it  cheers  as  up  with  the  hope  of 
fine  recruits.  I  remember  a  sailor,  who  before  conversion  used  to  swear,  and  I 
warrant  you  he  would  rattle  it  out,  volley  after  volley.  He  became  converted,  and 
when  he  prayed  it  was  much  in  the  same  fashion.  How  he  woke  everybody  up 
the  first  time  he  opened  his  mouth  at  the  prayer-meeting !  The  conversion 
of  a  great  sinner  is  the  best  medicine  for  a  sick  Church.  {Ibid.)  The 
lialf  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor. — Gifts  to  the  poor: — He  gives  half  his 
goods  to  the  poor.  Was  he  under  any  obligation  to  do  so  f  are  we  7  Certainly 
not :  nor  to  give  half  our  time,  or  half  our  thought.  But  there  have  been  men  who 
have  given  the  chief  part  of  their  time  and  thought  to  the  poor :  and  as  there  are 
so  many  who  give  the  poor  none  of  their  time,  or  thought,  or  money,  is  it  not  well 
that  there  should  be  a  few  otherwise  minded  t  Is  money  more  precious  than  timd 
and  thought  that  a  man  should  not  give  that,  if  so  inclined  ?  Zaccheus  was  so 
inclined.  And  were  a  man  in  our  day  to  spend  half  his  fortune  in  promoting  the 
comfort,  education,  health,  virtue,  and  piety  of  the  poor,  would  not  his  name  be 
fragrant  both  in  earth  and  heaven  ?  But  there  are  very  many  people  who  cannot 
give  half  their  goods  to  the  poor,  for  they  have  not  as  yet  secured  half  enough  for 
the  wants  of  their  own  household.  Let  these,  then,  give  time  and  thought.  (T. 
T.  Lynch.)  Doing  good  promptly  : — Zaccheus  saith  not,  ••  I  have  given,"  as  an 
upbraider  of  God ;  or,  "  I  will  give,"  as  a  delayer  that  means  to  give  away  his  goods 
after  his  death,  when  he  can  keep  them  no  longer ;  but  he  saith,  "  I  give,"  to  signify 
that  his  wiU  is  his  deed,  and  that  he  meaneth  not  to  take  any  days  of  payment  for  the 
matter ;  for  as  before  he  ran  apace  to  see  Christ,  and  came  down  hastily  to  entertain 
Christ  in  his  own  person,  so  doth  he  here  give  quickly  to  relieve  Christ  in  his  needy 
members.  This  is  Zaccheus's  last  will  and  testament  that  he  maketh  before  his 
death,  and  seeth  the  same  proved  and  performed  before  his  eyes.  If,  therefore,  we 
desire  to  do  any  good  to  any  of  our  poor  brethren,  let  us  learn  of  Zaccheus  to  do  it 
quickly  while  we  are  ahve,  for  time  will  prevent  us,  and  death  will  prevent  us. 
{H.  Smith.)  I  restore  him  tovxfoU.—The  duty  of  restitution .— L  Thb  foundation 
OF  this  dutt.  1.  The  nature  of  justice,  which  consists  in  rendering  to  every  one 
what  belongs  to  him.  2.  Holy  Scripture  (Exod.  zxii. ;  Lev.  vi. ;  Nomb.  v.).  3. 
Beetitution  is  a  duty  so  indispensable,  that  without  it  there  is  no  salvation.    Tell 


CHAP,  ziz.]  8T.  LURE.  891 

me,  can  we  be  in  a  state  of  salvation,  when  we  have  no  love  to  God,  and  no  love  to 
onr  neighbour  ?  But  the  man  who  refuses  to  make  restitution  loves  not  God,  for 
be  despises  His  laws  and  tramples  npon  His  authority  ;  nor  does  he  love  his 
neighbour,  for  he  voluntarily  persists  in  wronging  him,  and  withholding  from  him 
his  rights.  U.  What  is  mscessabt  fob  the  pebfobmance  of  this  duty  ?  1.  We 
must  examine  with  care  whether  we  have  ever  wronged  our  neighbour,  and  in  how 
many  modes  we  have  done  it.  Allege  not  for  your  excuse,  example,  custom,  the 
necessity  of  acting  like  others.  All  this  is  of  no  avail  now  in  the  sight  of  the 
Omniscient — will  be  of  no  avail  hereafter  at  the  bar  of  God.  2.  Eestitution  should 
be  prompt.  "  I  will,  at  some  future  time,  make  restitution."  But  when  7  You  as 
yet  know  not  the  time,  and  perhaps  it  may  never  arrive.  3.  Bestitntion  must  be 
fall  and  entire.  Fearful  lest  he  should  not  fully  recompense  them,  his  generous 
heart  makes  the  resolution,  and  his  piety  is  ready  instantly  to  execute  it.  In  view 
of  this  subject  I  remark — 1.  How  small  is  the  number  of  those  who  are  saved  I  We 
know  that  thousands  of  frauds  are  daily  committed,  and  yet  how  few  acts  of 
restitution  do  we  witness  I  2.  What  great  discoveries  shall  be  made  at  the  day  of 
indgment.  8.  This  subject  teaches  ns  the  nature  of  true  religion.  It  consists  in 
benevolence  to  man  as  well  as  love  to  God,  and  assures  as  that  without  the  former 
we  can  never  exercise  the  latter.  4.  This  subject  should  lead  as  to  avoid  the  very 
beginning  of  sin,  and  to  pay  the  most  scrupulous  attention  to  the  duties  of  trath 
and  justice.  Thus  we  shall  be  prevented  from  defrauding  our  fellow-men ;  thns,  if 
necessity  ever  requires  it,  we  shall  be  able  easily  to  make  full  restitution.  5.  Show 
by  yonr  conduct,  ye  who  have  in  any  degree  defrauded  your  fellow-men,  that  you 
feel  the  force  of  conscience  and  the  truth  of  God ;  imitate  Zaccheus,  and  make 
restitution.  (S.  K.  Kolloch,  M.A.)  Restitution : — The  duty  which  the  Christian 
world  needs  to  learn  over  again,  jast  now,  is  the  duty  of  making  restitution  for 
wrong-doings.  Shame  is  not  enough ;  remorse  is  not  enough ;  confession  is  not 
enough  ;  there  must  also  be  restitution.  It  is  a  melancholy  and  mortifying  fact, 
that  we  often  meet  with  men  of  the  world,  making  no  claim  to  being  religious, 
whose  honour  and  integrity  pat  to  shame  the  hollow  pretensions  of  nominal 
Christians.  When  the  chief  councillor  of  Sultan  Selymns  advised  him  to  bestow 
the  marvellous  wealth  which  he  had  taken  from  the  Persian  merchants  upon  some 
charitable  hospital,  the  dying  Turk  answered  that  God  would  never  be  pleased  with 
such  an  offering,  and  commanded  that  the  spoils  should  be  restored  to  the  owners. 
I.  Restitution  should  be  pbomft.  Dr.  Finney,  in  his  interesting  autobiography, 
tells  of  a  young  woman,  the  only  child  of  a  widow,  who  once  came  to  him  in  great 
distress.  She  had  stolen,  whenever  she  could,  various  trinkets,  &c.,  from  her 
schoolmates,  and  desired  his  advice  as  to  what  she  ought  to  do.  He  told  her  that 
she  must  make  restitution,  and  also  confess  her  sin  to  those  whom  she  had  wronged. 
This,  of  coarse,  was  a  great  trial,  but  her  repentance  was  so  sincere,  that  she  began 
at  once  to  follow  his  advice.  As  she  went  on  with  the  mortifying  task,  she 
remembered  more  and  more  ;  some  persons  to  whom  she  made  restitution  saying, 
"  She  must  be  crazy,  or  a  fool,"  while  others  were  deeply  touched.  They  all  readily 
forgave  her.  The  unhappy  girl  had  stolen  a  shawl  from  Bishop  Hobart's  daughter, 
and  when  her  spiritual  adviser  insisted  on  its  being  returned,  she  folded  it  in  a 
paper,  rung  the  bell  at  the  bishop's  door,  and  handed  the  parcel  to  the  servant, 
without  a  word  of  explanation.  Conscience  whispered  that  she  had  not  done  her 
whole  duty,  and  that  somebody  might  be  wrongfully  suspected.  She  immediately 
went  back  to  the  house,  and  asked  for  the  bishop.  She  was  shown  into  his  study, 
and  told  him  all  the  truth.  The  good  bishop,  with  all  his  impulsiveness  and  warmth 
of  heart,  wept  aloud,  and  laying  his  hand  on  her  head,  prayed  God  to  forgive  her, 
as  he  did.  Eestitution  was  now  made,  and  her  peace  was  full  and  complete.  The 
young  woman  became  a  devout  Christian,  adorning  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour 
by  a  blameless,  useful  life,  and,  at  a  ripe  old  age,  entered  npon  her  everlasting 
inheritance.  II.  Bestitntion  should  not  only  be  prompt,  but  ruLL  and  entibb. 
Half-way  measures  will  serve  no  good  purpose.  It  woold  be  as  well  to  keep  back 
the  whole  of  ill-gotten  gains,  as  a  part.  (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  The  nature  oj 
restitution : — I.  For  the  act.  Bestitntion  is  nothing  else  but  the  making  reparation 
or  satisfaction  to  another  for  the  injuries  we  have  done  him.  It  is  to  restore  a  man 
to  the  good  condition  from  which,  contrary  to  right  and  to  our  doty,  we  have 
removed  him.  U.  For  the  latitude  and  extent  of  the  object,  as  I  may  call  it,  or 
TH>  matteb  aboct  WHICH  IT  IS  coMVEBSANT.  It  cxteuds  to  all  kind  of  injuries,  which 
may  be  reduced  to  these  two  heads ;  either  we  injure  a  person  with  or  without  his 
consent.    1.  Sume  injuries  are  done  to  persons  with  their  consent.     Sach  are  most 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  tit. 

of  those  injuries  which  are  done  to  the  souls  of  men,  when  we  command,  or  counsel, 
or  encourage  them  to  ein,  or  draw  them  in  by  our  example.  2.  Injuries  are  dona 
to  persons  without  their  consent.  And  these,  though  they  are  not  always  the 
greatest  mischiefs,  yet  they  are  the  greatest  injuries.  And  these  injuries  are  done 
either  by  fraud  and  cunning,  or  by  violence  and  oppression :  either  by  overreaching 
another  man  in  wit,  or  overbearing  him  by  power.  III.  As  to  the  manner  how 
RESTITUTION  IS  TO  BE  MADE.  1.  Thou  art  bound  to  do  it  voluntarily,  and  of  thy  own 
accord,  though  the  person  injured  do  not  know  who  it  was  that  did  him  the  injury, 
though  he  do  not  seek  reparation  by  law.  2.  Thou  must  do  it  in  kind,  if  the  thing 
be  capable  of  it,  and  the  injured  party  demand  it.  Thou  must  restore  the  very 
thing  which  thou  hadst  deprived  thy  neighbour  of,  if  it  be  such  a  thing  as  can  be 
restored,  and  be  still  in  thy  power,  unless  he  voluntarily  accept  of  some  other  thing 
in  exchange.  3.  If  thou  canst  not  restore  it  in  kind,  thou  art  bound  to  restore  it  in 
value,  in  something  that  is  as  good.  As  for  spiritual  injuries  done  to  the  souls  of 
men,  we  are  bound  to  make  such  reparation  and  compensation  as  we  can.  Those 
whom  we  have  drawn  into  sin,  and  engaged  in  wicked  courses,  by  our  influence  and 
example,  we  are  to  endeavour  by  our  instruction  and  counsel  to  reclaim  them  from 
those  sins  we  led  them  into,  and  "  to  recover  them  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil," 

IV.  As  to  THE  MEASURE  AND  PROPORTION  OF  THE  RESTITUTION  WB  ABB  TO  MAKX. 

Zaccheos  here  offers  fourfold,  which  was  much  beyond  what  any  law  required  in 
like  cases.  1.  Where  restitution  can  be  made  in  kind,  or  the  injury  can  be  certainly 
valued,  we  are  to  restore  the  thing  or  the  value.  2.  We  are  bound  to  restore  the  thing 
with  the  natural  increase  of  it ;  that  is,  to  satisfy  for  the  loss  sustained  in  the 
meantime,  and  the  gain  hindered.  3.  Where  the  thing  cannot  be  restored,  and  the 
value  of  it  is  not  certain,  we  are  to  give  reasonable  satisfaction,  that  is,  according 
to  a  middle  estimation  ;  not  the  highest  nor  the  lowest  of  things  of  the  kind. 
4.  We  are  at  least  to  give  by  way  of  restitution  what  the  law  would  give,  for  that  is 
generally  equal,  and  in  most  cases  rather  favourable  than  rigorous.  6.  A  man  is  not 
only  bound  to  restitution  for  the  injury  which  he  did,  but  for  all  that  directly  follows 
upon  his  injurious  act,  though  it  were  beyond  his  intention.  {Archbishop  Tillotson.) 
On  restitution : — I  shall  speak  to  you  at  large  concerning  the  necessity  of  restitu- 
tion, and  the  obligations  to  it ;  because  when  this  point  is  established,  the  perform- 
ance of  it  speedily  and  completely  will  appear  to  be  unquestionable  parts  of  this 
duty.  I  say  that  we  are  obliged  to  restitution — first,  as  we  are  men,  by  the  law 
of  nature.  It  is  an  original  law,  graven  on  the  hearts  of  all  men,  that  every  man 
ought  to  possess,  and  have  the  undisturbed  use  of  his  own  proper  goods.  Now, 
can  any  acquisition,  which  was  unjust  in  the  moment  wherein  it  was  made,  become 
just,  and  a  man's  rightful  property,  in  succeeding  moments  ?  Can  it  be  lawful  to 
keep  what  it  was  unlawful  to  take?  Therefore  restitution  is  the  only  method  by 
which  these  disoi  ders  can  be  repaired ;  and  it  is  indispensably  necessary  on  natural 
principles.  But  his  natural  honesty  was  further  instructed  on  this  point  by  the 
revealed  law.  Considered  as  a  Jew,  he  was  under  an  additional  obligation  by  the 
law  of  Moses.  For  the  Levitical  law  regulated  exactly  the  proportions  in  which 
restitution  was  to  be  made  in  different  cases  ;  as,  "five  oxen  for  an  ox,  and  four 
sheep  for  a  sheep."  To  this  argument  may  be  added  that  which  arises  from  the 
example  of  holy  men  under  the  Old  Covenant,  whose  conscience  would  not  suffer 
them  to  retain  goods  obtained  unjustly,  and  who  considered  the  law  of  restitution 
as  sacred  and  inviolable.  Among  which  examples,  that  of  Samuel  is  remarkable, 
in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  his  first  book:  "And  Samuel  said  unto  all  Israel, 
Behold,  I  am  old  and  grey-headed."  Zaccheus  thought  himself  bound  to  restitution 
on  a  third  principle — as  a  penitent,  by  the  conditions  of  repentance.  There  is, 
in  one  respect,  a  remarkable  difference  betwixt  robbery  and  most  other  sins.  The 
crime  of  the  latter  may  pass  away,  and  be  cancelled,  upon  our  sincere  repentance, 
and  prayers  for  the  Divine  forgiveness ;  but  the  crime  of  the  former  continues  as 
long  as  we  retain  the  fruits  of  it  in  our  hands.  Does  any  man  think  of  presenting 
his  robberies  to  God  and  to  His  Church  7  Many  persons,  I  fear  (in  former  times 
particularly),  have  sought  to  make  this  impious  exchange,  pretending  to  give  unto 
God  what  they  had  stolen  from  their  neighbour.  Besides  this  general  engagement 
to  make  restitution,  as  a  penitent,  by  the  conditions  of  repentance,  Zaccheus  found 
himself  under  a  fourth — and  that  a  particular  obligation,  derived  from  the  nature 
of  his  occupation,  as  a  publican ;  that  is,  a  collector  of  the  tribute  which  the  Jews 
paid  to  the  Bomans.  Thus  it  is,  that  a  reformed  Christian,  or  one  converted^  to 
Christianity,  must  begin  the  exercise  of  his  religion.  And  it  is  in  this  fifth  view 
that  I  consider  Zaccheus  making  restitution ;  namely,  as  a  proselyte,  or  convert  ta 


CKAP.  xn.]  ST.  LUKE.  897 

Jeans  Christ.  The  Divine  grace  had  now  touched  his  heart,  and  inspired  him  with 
ft  resolution  to  break  those  bonds  of  iniquity  in  which  he  had  been  holtlen,  and  to 
qualify  himself  for  that  forgiveness  which  Christ  offers  to  sinners  only  on  this 
condition.  Enough  has  been  said,  I  trust,  to  show  the  necessity  of  restitution.  A 
few  words  will  be  suiScient  to  show  that  it  ought  to  be  performed  speedily  and 
completely.  I  am  willing  (says  one)  to  restore  even  at  present ;  but  I  must  be  allowed 
to  compound  the  matter :  I  cannot  resign  the  whole,  but  I  am  ready  to  give  up  a 
part.  This  is  the  last  mistake  and  fault  which  the  example  of  Zaccheus  condemns 
and  corrects,  when  he  declares,  "  I  restore  fourfold."  Now,  this  surplus,  is  it 
justice,  or  liberality  ?  It  partakes  of  both.  For  it  is  just  to  restore  beyond  the  exact 
amount ;  because,  besides  the  lawful  interest  of  his  money  which  our  neighbour  baa 
been  deprived  of,  every  robbery  occasions  some  inconvenience  and  detriment  that 
cannot  be  completely  repaired  by  a  mere  restitution  of  the  things  taken.  It  is 
better,  therefore,  to  exceed  than  fall  short.  (S.  Partridge,  M.A.)  Restitution 
must  he  viade: — Hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars  have  been  sent  to  Washington 
during  the  past  few  years  as  "  conscience  money."  I  suppose  that  money  was  sent 
by  men  who  wanted  to  be  Christians,  but  found  they  could  not  imtil  they  made 
restitution.  There  is  no  need  of  our  trying  to  come  to  Christ  as  long  aa  we  keep 
fraudulently  a  dollar  or  a  farthing  in  our  possession  that  belongs  to  another. 
Suppose  yon  have  not  money  enough  to  pay  your  debts,  and,  for  the  sake  of  de- 
frauding your  creditors,  you  put  your  property  in  your  wife's  name.  You  might 
cry  untU  the  day  of  judgment  for  pardon,  but  you  would  not  get  it  without  first 
making  restitution.  In  times  of  prosperity  it  is  right,  against  a  rainy  day,  to 
assign  property  to  your  wife ;  but  if,  in  time  of  perplexity,  and  for  the  sake  of 
defrauding  your  creditors,  you  make  such  assignment,  you  become  a  culprit  before 
God,  and  may  as  well  stop  praying  until  you  have  made  restitution.  Or  suppose 
one  man  loans  another  money  on  bonds  and  mortgage,  with  the  understanding  that 
the  mortgage  can  lie  quiet  for  several  years,  but  as  soon  as  the  mortgage  is  given, 
commences  foreclosure — the  sheriff  mounts  the  auction-block,  and  the  property  is 
struck  down  at  half-price,  and  the  mortgagee  buys  it  in.  The  mortgagee  started 
to  get  the  property  at  half-price,  and  is  a  thief  and  a  robber.  UntU  he  makes 
restitution,  there  is  no  mercy  for  him.  Suppose  you  sell  goods  by  a  sample,  and 
then  afterward  send  to  your  customer  an  inferior  quality  of  goods.  You  have 
committed  a  fraud,  and  there  is  no  mercy  for  you  until  you  have  made  restitution. 
Suppose  yon  sell  a  man  a  handkerchief  for  silk,  telling  him  it  is  all  silk,  and  it  is 
part  cotton.  No  mercy  for  you  until  you  have  made  restitution.  Suppose  you  sell 
a  man  a  horse,  saying  he  is  sound,  and  he  afterward  turns  out  to  be  spavined  and 
balky.  No  mercy  for  you  until  you  have  made  restitution.  (De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.) 
Restitution: — The  Eev.  B.  Sawday  was  aboat  eighteen  years  since  in  the  well- 
known  establishment  of  Messrs.  Hitchcock,  St.  Paul's  Churchyard.  A  silver  watch 
was  stolen  from  his  bedroom,  and  no  trace  could  be  discovered  of  the  missing 
property.  Ten  years  passed  away.  About  four  years  since  he  preached  a  startling 
discourse  upon  repentance  and  restitution.  His  words  evidently  made  a  deep 
impression  upon  the  hearers.  During  the  ensuing  week  a  young  man  came  up  to 
Mr.  Sawday  requesting  an  interview.  In  a  few  words  the  young  man  said,  **  It  waa 
I  who  stole  your  watch,  some  years  since,  at  Messrs.  Hitchcock's.  I  am  very 
■orry,  and  I  am  deeply  anxious  to  settle  the  matter.  Here,  I'll  give  you  £10  to 
square  it.  I  was  passing  your  chapel  last  Sunday,  and  saw  your  name ;  I  thought 
I  would  go  in  and  hear  you,  and  your  sermon  broke  me  all  to  pieces ;  I  have  been 
wretched  and  miserable  ever  since."  **  Thank  God  1 "  said  Mr.  Sawday.  *•  No," 
fae  added,  "  I  cannot  take  £10 ;  the  watch  was  only  worth  £4 :  I'll  take  that ;  but 
I'm  far  more  anxious  that  you  should  confess  your  sin  to  God,  and  obtain  Hia 
pardon  and  grace."  "  That,"  quietly  added  the  man,  "I  have  sought,  and  I  believe 
obtained."  One  of  Mr.  Sawday'a  deacona  was  greatly  troubled  about  the  very 
plain  speech  of  the  pastor  in  regard  to  this  very  address,  and  expressed  his  fear 
that  such  preaching  would  drive  people  away  from  the  chapel.  The  good  man, 
however,  was  silenced  by  the  sequeL  (Henry  Varley.)  Restitution  necessary  to 
peace : — Some  years  ago,  in  the  north  of  England,  a  woman  came  to  one  of  the 
meetings,  and  appeared  to  be  very  anxious  about  her  soul.  For  some  time  she  did 
cot  seem  to  be  able  to  get  peace.  The  truth  was,  she  was  covering  up  one  thing 
she  was  not  willing  to  confess.  At  last  the  burden  was  too  great ;  and  she  said  to 
ft  worker,  **  I  never  go  down  on  my  knees  to  pray,  but  a  few  bottles  of  wine  keep 
eoming  ap  before  my  mind."  It  appeared  that,  years  before,  when  she  waa  honse- 
keeper,  die  had  taken  some  bottles  of  wine  belonging  to  her  employer.    The  workct 


898  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnu 

said :  "  Why  do  you  not  make  restitution  ?  "  The  woman  replied  that  the  maa 
was  dead ;  and  besides,  she  did  not  know  how  much  it  was  worth.  "  Are  ther» 
any  heirs  living  to  whom  you  can  make  restitution  7 "  She  said  there  was  a  son 
living  at  some  distance ;  but  she  thought  it  would  be  a  yery  humiliating  thing,  s» 
she  kept  back  for  some  time.  At  last  she  felt  as  if  she  must  have  a  clear  conacieno» 
at  any  cost ;  so  she  took  the  train,  and  went  to  the  place  where  the  son  of  her 
employer  resided.  She  took  five  pounds  with  her ;  she  did  not  know  exactly  whai 
the  wine  was  worth,  but  that  wotUd  cover  it,  at  any  rate.  The  man  said  he  did  not 
want  the  money ;  but  she  replied,  "  I  do  not  want  it ;  it  has  burnt  my  pocket  long 
enough."  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Evidences  of  true  conversion : — I.  When  the  gospel 
is  cordially  received  and  fully  embraced,  it  subdues  a  man's  ruling  sin.  II.  Evidence 
of  Christian  character  is  to  be  sought,  not  so  much  in  what  a  man  says,  as  in  what 
he  does.  III.  On  the  disposal  of  property,  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  th» 
opinions  of  men  and  the  instructions  of  Jesus  Christ.  {Chas.  Walker.)  Triumph 
over  hindrances : — I.  The  hindrances  of  Zaccheub  were  twofold:  partly  circum- 
stantial— partly  personal.  Partly  circumstantial,  arising  from  his  riches  and  his 
profession  of  a  pubUcan.  Now  the  publican's  profession  exposed  him  to  temptations 
in  these  three  ways.  First  of  all  in  the  way  of  opportunity.  A  publican  was  a 
gatherer  of  the  Roman  public  imposts.  Not,  however,  as  now,  when  all  is  fixed, 
and  the  government  pays  the  gatherer  of  the  taxes.  The  Boman  publican  paid  so 
much  to  the  government  for  the  privilege  of  collecting  them ;  and  then  indemnified 
himself,  and  appropriated  what  overplus  he  could,  from  the  taxes  which  he 
gathered.  There  was,  therefore,  evidently  a  temptation  to  overcharge,  and  a^ 
temptation  to  oppress.  To  overcharge,  because  the  only  redress  the  payer  of  the 
taxes  had  was  an  appeal  to  law,  in  which  his  chance  was  small  before  a  tribunal 
where  the  judge  was  a  Boman,  and  the  accuser  an  official  of  the  Boman  govern- 
ment. A  temptation  to  oppress,  because  the  threat  of  law  was  nearly  certain  to 
extort  a  bribe.  Besides  this,  most  of  us  must  have  remarked  that  a  certain 
harshness  of  manner  is  contracted  by  those  who  have  the  rule  over  the  poor. 
They  come  in  contact  with  human  souls  only  in  the  way  of  business.  They  have 
to  do  with  their  ignorance,  their  stupidity,  their  attempts  to  deceive ;  and  heuc» 
the  tenderest-hearted  men  become  impatient  and  apparently  unfeeling.  Another 
temptation  was  presented :  to  live  satisfied  with  a  low  morality.  The  standard 
of  right  and  wrong  is  eternal  in  the  heavens — unchangeably  one  and  the  same. 
But  here  on  earth  it  is  perpetually  variable — it  is  one  in  one  age  or  nation,  another 
in  another.  Every  profession  has  its  conventional  morality,  current  nowhere  else 
Among  publicans  the  standard  would  certainly  be  very  low.  Again,  Zaccheus  was 
tempted  to  that  hardness  in  evil  which  comes  from  having  no  character  to  support. 
The  personal  hindrance  to  a  religious  life  lay  in  the  recollection  of  past  guilt. 
Zaccheus  had  done  wrong,  and  no  fourfold  restitution  will  undo  that,  where  only 
remorse  exists.  II.  Pass  we  on  to  the  tbiumph  oveb  difficolties.  In  this  there 
is  man's  part,  and  God's  part.  Man's  part  in  Zaccheus'  case  was  exhibited  in  the 
discovery  ol  expedients.  The  Bedeemer  came  to  Jericho,  and  Zaccheus  desired  to 
see  that  blessed  Countenance,  whose  very  looks,  he  was  told,  shed  peace  upon 
restless  spirits  and  fevered  hearts.  But  Zaccheus  was  small  of  stature,  and  a 
crowd  surrounded  Him.  Therefore  he  ran  before,  and  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore* 
tree.  Yon  must  not  look  on  this  as  a  mere  act  of  curiosity.  They  who  thronged 
the  steps  of  Jesus  were  a  crowd  formed  of  different  materials  from  the  crowd  which 
would  have  been  found  in  the  amphitheatre.  He  was  there  as  a  religious  Teacher 
or  Prophet ;  and  they  who  took  pains  to  see  Him,  at  least  were  the  men  who  looked 
for  salvation  in  Israel.  This,  therefore,  was  a  religious  act.  Then  note  further, 
the  expedients  adopted  by  Zaccheus  after  he  had  seen  and  heard  Jesus.  The 
tendency  to  the  hardness  and  selfishness  of  riches  he  checked  by  a  rule  of  giving 
half  away.  The  tendency  to  extortion  he  met  by  fastening  on  himself  the 
recollection,  that  when  the  hot  moment  of  temptation  had  passed  away,  he  would 
be  severely  dealt  with  before  the  tribunal  of  his  own  conscience,  and  unrelentingly 
sentenced  to  restore  fourfold.  God's  part  in  this  triumph  over  difficulties  is 
exhibited  in  the  address  of  Jesns :  "  Zaccheus,  make  haste  and  come  down ;  for 
to-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house."  Two  things  we  note  here :  invitation  and 
sympathy.  Invitation—"  come  down."  Say  what  we  will  of  Zaccheus  seeking 
Jesus,  the  truth  is  Jesns  was  seeking  Zaccheus.  For  what  other  reason  bat  the 
will  of  God  had  Jesns  come  to  Jericho,  bat  to  seek  Zaccheus  and  each  as  he  ?  We 
do  not  seek  God — God  seeks  us.  There  is  a  Spirit  pervading  time  and  space  who 
«eek  tiie  souls  of  men.  At  last  the  seeking  becomes  reciprocal — the  Divine  Preseno» 


CKAP.  xn.]  ST.  LUKE,  899 

is  felt  afar,  and  the  soal  begins  to  tarn  towards  it.  Then  when  we  begin  to  seek 
God,  we  become  conscious  that  God  is  seeking  ns.  It  is  at  that  period  that  w& 
distinguish  the  voice  of  personal  invitation — "ZaccheusI"  Lastly,  the  Divine 
part  was  done  in  sympathy.  By  sympathy  we  commonly  mean  little  more  than 
condolence.  If  the  tear  start  readily  at  the  voice  of  grief,  and  the  parsO'Strings 
open  at  the  accents  of  distress,  we  talk  of  a  man's  having  great  sympathy.  To 
weep  with  those  who  weep — common  sympathy  does  not  mean  much  more.  The 
sympathy  of  Christ  was  something  different  from  this.  Sympathy  to  this  extent, 
no  doabt,  Zaccheus  oould  already  command.  If  Zacoheus  were  sick,  even  a 
Pharisee  would  have  given  him  medicine.  If  Zaccheus  had  been  in  need,  a  Jew 
would  not  have  scrupled  to  bestow  an  alms.  If  Zaccheus  had  been  bereaved,  many 
even  of  that  crowd  that  murmured  when  they  saw  him  treated  by  Christ  like  a  son 
of  Abraham,  would  have  given  to  his  sorrow  the  tribute  of  a  sigh.  The  sympathy 
of  Jesus  was  fellow-feeling  for  all  that  is  human.  He  did  not  condole  with 
Zaccheus  upon  his  trials — He  did  not  talk  to  him  "  about  his  soul,"  He  did  not 
preach  to  him  about  his  sins.  He  did  not  force  His  way  into  his  house  to  lecture 
him — He  simply  said,  •'  I  will  abide  at  thy  house : "  thereby  identifying  himself 
with  a  publican,  thereby  acknowledging  a  publican  for  a  brother.  Zaccheus  a> 
publican  ?  Zaccheus  a  sinner  7  Yes ;  but  Zaccheus  is  a  man.  His  heart  throbs 
at  cutting  words.  He  has  a  sense  of  human  honour.  He  feels  the  burning  shame 
of  the  world's  disgrace.  Lost  t  Tes,  but  the  Son  of  Man,  with  the  blood  of  the 
haman  race  in  His  veins,  is  a  Brother  to  the  lost.  (F.  W.  Robertscm,  M.A.y 
Conteience  money  : — A  remarkable  case  of  conscience  money,  which  has  just  come 
to  light,  is  just  now  puzzling  an  excellent  secular  contemporary.  It  appears  that 
fifteen  years  ago,  the  London  General  Omnibus  Company  had  in  their  employ  a 
conductor  who,  during  his  twelve  months'  service,  received  £10  more  than  he  paid 
in.  He  now  writes  to  the  company  stating  this,  and  that  his  conscience  now 
prompted  him  to  make  restitution,  together  with  interest  for  the  whole  intervening 
period — amounting  in  all  to  £13  15s.  Towards  this  he  sends  £5  on  account.  The 
point  that  troubles  our  contemporary  is  the  fact  that  conscience  should  slumber 
fifteen  years  "  and  then  wake  up  again ; "  but  we  have  no  doubt  that  many  of  our 
readers  will  find  a  solution  in  the  Scriptures.  No  doubt  the  Spirit  of  God  had 
been  at  work.  A  similar  case  was  that  of  Zaccheus,  and  how  many  years  back  he 
went  when  he  made  restitution,  who  can  tell  ?  Restitution : — ^A  little  Kaffir  girl  in 
South  Africa  came  one  day  to  the  missionary  and  brought  four  sixpences,  saying, 
"  This  money  is  yours."  "No,"  said  the  missionary,  •'  it  is  not  mine."  "  Yes," 
persisted  the  little  black  girl,  "  you  must  take  it.  At  the  examination  of  the  school 
you  gave  me  a  sixpence  as  a  prize  for  good  writing ;  but  the  writing  was  not  mine, 
I  got  some  one  else  to  do  it  for  me.  So  here  are  four  sixpences."  She  had  read 
the  story  of  Zaccheus  in  Luke  xix.,  and  "went  and  did  likewise."  How  much 
better  was  this  than  hiding  her  sin  would  have  been  1  After  a  searching  address 
by  Mr.  Moody,  he  next  day  received  a  check  for  £100,  being  fourfold  the  amount  of 
which  the  sender  had  wronged  an  individual.  Eestitution  a  fruit  of  faith : — A 
young  man  was  converted  at  a  meeting  in  an  opera-house  in  America.  He  there- 
upon confessed  that  he  had  been  a  professional  gambler,  and  that  he  was  then  a 
fugitive  from  justice  for  a  forgery.  When  he  found  Christ,  some,  who  saw  that  he 
was  a  man  of  more  than  ordinary  ability,  advised  him  to  take  part  publicly  in 
Christian  work;  but  he  replied  that  he  felt  work  of  a  different  kind  was  first 
required  from  him.  He  meant  restitution  of  the  monies  that  he  had  fraudulently 
obtained.  Finding  a  situation  with  a  Christian  employer,  he  told  him  all,  and 
willingly  undertook  hard  manual  labour,  to  which  he  was  quite  unaccustomed, 
until  his  fidelity  and  quickness  obtained  for  him  a  more  suitable  place.  Spending 
as  little  as  possible  upon  himself,  he  put  by  every  dollar  that  he  earned,  until,  after 
long  perseverance,  he  had  paid  back  the  large  sum  which  be  had  wrongfully  taken, 
with  the  legal  interest.  Years  afterwards  he  was  described  as  "  actively  engaged 
in  the  service  of  Christ  with  a  love  that  never  tires  and  a  zeal  that  never  fiags." 
Ee$titution  cu  proof  of  repentance : — An  extensive  hardware  merchant  in  one  of  the 
Fulton  Street  prayer-meetings  in  New  York  appealed  to  his  brother  merchants  to 
have  the  same  religion  for  "  down-town  "  as  they  had  for  "  up-town  " ;  for  the 
week-day  as  for  the  Sabbath ;  for  the  counting-house  as  for  the  communion-table. 
After  the  meeting  a  manufacturer  with  whom  he  had  dealt  largely  accosted  him. 
*•  You  did  not  know,"  said  he,  "  that  I  was  at  the  meeting  and  heard  your  remarks. 
1  have  for  the  last  five  years  been  in  the  habit  of  charging  you  more  for  goods  than 
other  pumhasers.    I  want  you  to  take  your  books,  and  charge  back  to  me  so  muolv 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xix, 

per  cent,  on  every  bill  of  goods  you  have  had  of  me  for  the  past  five  years."  A  few 
days  later  the  same  hardware  merchant  had  occasion  to  acknowledge  the  payment 
of  a  debt  of  several  hundred  dollars  which  had  been  due  for  twenty-eight  years 
from  a  man  who  could  as  easily  have  paid  it  twenty-four  years  before.  (Family 
Treatury.)  This  day  Is  salvation  come  to  this  house. — Zaccheus  »aved : — I.  We 
here  notice,  first  of  all,  the  seckkt  pubpose  of  the  Lokd  Jesus  Christ  towabub 
THE  P0BLICAN,  Zacchecs.  That  Christ  entertained  towards  him  a  secret  purpose 
of  mercy,  compassion,  and  love,  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever ;  the  salutation,  as 
well  as  the  event,  proved  it.  Electing  grace  had  reached  forth  the  golden  sceptre 
towards  the  publican,  long  before  "  Jesus  entered  and  passed  through  "  the  streets 
of  Jericho.  11.  The  narrative  suggests  to  us  another  important  particular,  and  it 
is  this :  that  with  thk  secret   purposes  or  Divime  grace  towards  Zaccheus, 

tTHEBB  WAS  CONNECTED  AN  OVERRULING  OF  CIRCUMSTANCES,  FAVOURING  THB  DEVELOP- 
MENT OF  THOSE  GRACIOUS  PURPOSES.  When  Jesus  arrived  at  Jericho,  Zaccheus 
might  have  been  elsewhere — might  have  been  far  distant,  and  out  of  the  reach  of 
that  voice  which  spake  so  tenderly,  and  away  from  the  glance  of  that  eye  which 
gazed  so  kindly  on  him.  Moreover,  even  if  present  with  the  multitudes,  he  might 
have  been  so  indifferent,  and  so  absorbed  by  other  objects  of  pursuit,  as  to 
entertain  no  desire  towards  the  stranger,  who  had  conceived  so  gracious  a  purpose 
towards  him.  But  as  Jesus  passed  through  Jericho,  Zaccheus  was  on  the  spot, 
anxious  to  see  Him,  and  ready  to  heed  His  words.  How  was  this  ?  No  such 
thing  as  accident.  God  was  working  out  His  own  purpose  toward  him  by  His  own 
secret  agency.  III.  There  remains  another  particular  in  the  narrative,  which  must 
not  be  lost  sight  of.  No  sooner  had  the  Lord  Jesus  said  to  him,  "  Zaccheus,  make 
haste  and  come  down,  for  to-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house";  than  "he  uadb 

SASTE,   AND   CAME   DOWN,  AND   RECEIVED   HiM   JOTFULLT."      DoCS  UOt  all   this   indicate 

preparedness  of  mind?  Is  not  the  fact  a  living  commentary  on  the  doctrine — 
■"  Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  Thy  power  "  ?  The  currents  of  Divine 
mercy,  grace,  and  love  were  then  opening  fully,  and  flowing  abundantly  towards 
him  ;  and  He,  in  whose  hands  are  the  hearts  of  all  living  men,  prepared  him  to 
receive  with  gladness,  as  an  honoured  guest,  that  mighty  One,  "  whose  own  arm 
brought  salvation,"  and  who  came  in  all  His  energy,  power,  and  love,  "  to  seek  and 
to  save  the  lost,"  even  the  lost  Zaccheus.  (6.  Fisk,  LL.B.)  The  conversion  of 
Zaccheut: — I.  We  think  that  it  must  be  obvious  that  impediments  lie  in  the  wax 
OF  every  man's  conversion — impediments  in  the  way  of  his  conversion,  and  yet 
impediments  that  are  perfectly  distinct  from  each  other :  as  distinct  as  men's 
circumstances  are  from  each  other.  You  shall  find  that  the  impediment  to  one 
man's  conversion  is  his  education  ;  you  shall  find  that  the  impediment  in  another 
man's  way  is  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed ;  you  shall  find  that 
the  impediment  to  a  third  man's  conversion  is  simply  a  natural  impediment ;  you 
shall  find  that  the  impediment  that  lies  in  the  way  of  another  man's  conversion 
is  simply  the  example  to  which  he  is  perpetually  subject.  All  these  things,  so  to 
speak,  put  the  different  individuals  in  a  false  position.  They  in  all  probabiUty 
wish  to  be  God's  servants,  nevertheless  things  there  are  which  prevent  them  from 
being  God's  servants,  and  it  is  by  the  steady  overcoming  of  these  difficulties  that 
<iod  for  ever  shows  the  omnipotence  of  His  grace.  Now  when  we  come  to  look  to 
the  immediate  history  before  us,  we  shall  find  that  these  impediments  were  of  a 
twofold  description.  The  first  of  these  impediments  arose  out  of  the  man's 
•circumstances,  and  the  second  of  these  impediments  arose  out  of  the  man's 
occupation.  II.  Consider  now  some  of  the  antecedents  to  his  conversion.  We 
may  have  oftentimes  observed,  at  least  if  we  have  proceeded  far  in  the  considera- 
tion of  human  character,  that  with  most  men  there  are  soft  spots  in  their  character. 
You  will  find  it,  indeed,  impossible  to  meet  with  any  character  that  is  not  accessible 
through  some  avenue  aad  approachable  by  some  peculiar  circumstance  in  that 
character.  It  is  not  the  fact  that  every  man  is  wrapped  up  in  induracy  and  in 
obduracy.  You  shall  find  that  now  and  again  there  will  come  back  out  of  the  deep 
darkness  that  which  tells  you  there  is  a  spot  there  if  you  only  knew  how  to  reach 
it.  It  is  like  standing  in  the  midst  of  some  of  those  volcanic  regions.  All  about 
you  looks  to  be  nothing  but  the  hardness  and  the  ruggedness  of  rock  itself, 
but  there  are  jets  of  flame  and  puffs  of  smoke  that  come  up  which  tell  you  that 
there  is  volcanic  action  underneath.  You  shall  find  in  most  men's  character  there 
is  something  of  this  kind — things  that  tell  you  this,  that  possibly,  if  only  means 
#ere  used,  they  are  not  irreclaimably  hopeless  ;  and  it  is  these  things  we  venture  to 
Mil  the  antecedents  of  a  man's  state  of  conversion.    Now  let  us  bring  this  explana 


BKAT,  nx.]  ST.  LUKE.  401 

tion  to  bear  npon  the  case  before  as,  and  ask  ourselves  what  antecedents  there  were 
in  the  case  of  Zaccheus  the  pnblican.  I  turn  your  attention,  in  the  first  place,  to 
the  marvellous  charity  of  the  man.  "  The  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor." 
I  conceive  it  to  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  this  is  expressed  as  being  the  fruit  oi 
the  man's  conversion.  We  hold  it  to  be  the  revelation  of  his  very  publican  life. 
It  is  a  sort  of  exculpation  of  himself  against  those  who  said,  •*  He  is  a  publican." 
He  was  one  of  those  men  that  could  not  see  his  brother  have  need  without  sharing 
his  means  with  him,  ay,  up  to  the  very  moiety  of  his  fortune — "  The  half  of  my 
goods  I  give  to  the  poor."  We  turn  to  another  feature  in  this  man's  antecedents. 
We  are  not  now  looking  to  his  temper  of  charity,  but  we  are  looking  to  his  temper 
of  equity.  ♦*  The  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  poor ;  and  if  I  have  takeiv 
anything  from  any  man  by  false  accusation,  I  restore  him  fourfold."  The  law  of 
Moses  simply  required  this  amount  of  restitution — the  restitution  of  the  principal, 
with  one-fiith  added  by  way  of  interest ;  but  this  man  transcended  this  rule.  "  If 
I  have  taken  anything ;from  any  man,  ...  I  restore  him  fourfold."  Why?  Not 
because  the  law  compelled  it ;  not  because  custom  compelled  it ;  not,  in  all 
probability,  because  ostentation  dictated  it ;  but  simply  because  there  was  a  high, 
strong  sense  of  equity  in  this  man's  soul,  that  compelled  him  to  this  restoring  or 
restituting  that  which  he  had  unjustly  taken.  Now,  we  hold  it  is  marvellous  to  find 
all  this  in  a  character,  and  in  the  midst  of  circumstances  such  as  the  publican's 
were  in  those  days — marvellous  to  find  charity  in  them — still  more  marvellous  to 
find  equity.  It  is  a  something,  because  it  is  a  something  telling  us  this — that  there 
is  a  soft  part  still  in  this  man's  soul — a  point  on  which  you  might  rest  your 
apparatus  for  effecting  this  man's  conversion.  There  was  a  deep  sense  of  charity, 
in  the  first  place,  and  there  was  the  ample  recognition  of  the  duty  of  equity  in  the 
second  place.  What  are  we  to  know  and  what  are  we  to  understand  in  this  ? 
Why,  we  ask  you  to  look  round  to  the  world  in  our  better  and  our  more  enlightened 
days.  Can  we  find  much  that  looks  like  a  parody  to  it  ?  You  shall  find  and  know 
something,  perhaps,  of  the  tricks  of  commerce,  and  of  the  ungodliness  of  trade ; 
but  you  seldom  hear  anything  of  the  fourfold  restitution.  You  shall  hear,  in  all 
probability,  of  hard  bargains  being  driven — of  the  simplicity  of  unwary  customers 
being  taken  advantage  of — of  the  adroitness  of  men  of  wealth  practising  upon  the 
ignorance  of  men  of  poverty ;  and  you  shall  find,  perhaps,  that  these  successful 
tacticians  wrap  themselves  in  the  congratulation  of  their  successful  doings ;  but 
you  shall  never  hear  of  the  fourfold  restitution.  No,  even  in  our  better  days  the 
privileged  Christian  is  beaten  by  the  despised  publican.  III.  We  have  but  one 
thought  more  to  throw  before  you.  We  have  looked  at  the  man's  impediments, 
and  we  have  looked  at  the  man's  antecedents ;  in  the  last  place,  we  have  to  look  to 

THB   MANNBB   OF   THE  CONVEESION  OF  ZaCCHKOS  THE  PUBLICAN.      NoW  there  is  nothing 

more  certain,  as  we  have  said  before,  than  that  none  of  these  antecedents  could 
have  been  the  parent  of  Zaccheus's  conversion.  There  may  be,  as  we  have  said 
before,  differences  of  experience  upon  the  road,  but  that  it  does  not  lead  to  the 
same  termination  is,  if  Scripture  be  true,  an  utter  impossibility.  The  Scripture 
has  said,  "  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Me."  The  Scripture  has  said  it, 
"  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  He  is  none  of  His."  The  Bible  has 
said  it,  •'  We  must  be  found  in  Him,  not  having  our  own  righteousness  which  is  of 
the  law,  but  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith."  And  none  of  these  up 
to  this  moment  had  Zaccheus  the  publican.  A  man  of  moral  propriety,  and  a 
man  of  promising  indications  he  may  have  been,  but  as  yet  outside  of  the  field  of 
conversion.  We  may,  then,  ask  ourselves  the  question,  how  it  is  that  this  missing 
element  was  to  be  supplied.  We  answer,  that  his  conversion  went  upon  these  two 
principles  :  that  Christ  sought  him,  and  that  Christ  spake  to  him  ;  and  that  those 
two  things  must  be  fulfilled  in  every  man  who  is  to  be  truly  a  believing  child  of 
Abraham — the  Saviour  must  come,  and  the  Saviour  must  speak  to  him.  {A.  Boyd.} 
A  household  blessing : — I.  The  blessing  of  salvation.  1.  Zaccheus  now  had 
heavenly  riches.  2.  Zaccheus  had  now  the  highest  distinction.  A  Christian. 
3.  The  home  of  Zaccheus  was  now  sanctified.  II.  The  authob  of  sal- 
tation. 1.  Salvation  is  Christ's  alone  to  give.  2.  The  guiltiest  are  sometimes 
the  first  to  be  saved.  (1)  This  is  for  our  warning.  Beware  of  pride,, 
self-righteousness,  assumed  morality,  ostentation,  carnal  wisdom,  and  deep 
rooted  prejudice.  These  are  the  offensive  things  that  make  him  pass  by  yonr 
door.  Bemove  them  quickly,  lest  you  perish  a  Christless  soul  1  (2)  This  visit 
to  the  guiltiest  is  also  for  our  encouragement.  Satan  has  two  grand  derices, 
presumption  and  despair.  Avoid  the  former,  and  do  not  be  crashed  by  the  Utter. 
VOL.  in.  26 


«L02  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap.  six. 


Thia  man  had  been  so  radically  bad,  but  was  saved.  Let  this  sustain  and 
strengthen  the  deep-stained  sinner  who  cries  for  mercy.  III.  The  means  of 
SALTATION.  1.  Zacchsus  used  the  likeliest  means  to  know  more  of  Christ.  2.  He 
strove  through  difficulties  to  obtain  the  object  of  his  desire.  IV.  The  signs  of 
SALVATION.  1.  Joy.  2.  Bectitude.  3.  Benevolence.  {The  Congregational  Pulpit.} 
Salvati07i  in  the  house : — I  want  you  to  learn  some  lessons  from  this  story  of 
2accheus.  1.  That  Jesus  will  come  home  with  you  and  bring  salvation  to  your 
house  if  you  are  anxious,  as  Zaccheus  was,  to  see  Him.  Zaccheus  was  a 
Email  man  among  many  great  men,  and  so  he  could  not  see  the  Lord  till  ha 
climbed ;  let  this  teach  you  not  to  be  discouraged  because  you  are  small  in  the 
-world's  eyes,  poor,  humble,  or  ignorant.  You,  like  the  publican,  must  climb  if  you 
•would  see  Jesus,  you  must  climb  by  prayer,  by  the  study  of  your  Bible,  by  Holy 
Communion,  by  conquest  of  yourselves — these  are  all  branches  of  the  Tree  of  Life  ; 
if  you  climb  by  these  you  will  see  Jesus.  Learn  also  that  Jesus  will  come  to  you 
and  bring  salvation  to  your  house,  however  poor  it  may  be.  He  who  lay  in  the 
manger  at  Bethlehem  does  not  look  for  soft  raiment  and  luxurious  bedding.  2. 
When  Jesus  comes  to  your  house  He  will  bring  gifts  with  Him :  He  wiU  work 
miracles  for  you.  It  has  been  said  that  the  age  of  miracles  is  gone,  it  has  in  one 
sense  only.  Jesus  will  work  miracles  of  mercy  in  your  house.  He  will  give  you, 
too,  a  new  name  when  He  comes  to  your  house.  You  kuow  that  old  families  are 
proud  of  the  name  which  their  ancestors  have  borne  for  generations,  but  after  all, 
the  best  of  names  is  that  which  your  Saviour  will  give  you,  the  name  of  a  son  of 
God,  a  child  of  Christ.  And  He  will  give  you  more  than  a  name.  He  will  give  you 
landed  property,  even  if  you  are  so  poor  that  a  back-yard  is  all  you  have  to  look 
out  upon.  He  will  give  you,  who  perhaps  never  heard  of  an  estate  in  fee-simple, 
or  knew  what  it  was  to  have  a  house  of  your  own,  an  inheritance,  a  place  of  many 
snansions,  a  house  eternal  in  heaven.  And  He  will  give  you  clothing,  the  very  best 
of  clothing.  To  every  one  of  you  who  have  Jesus  in  the  house,  and  who  have 
often  had  to  patch  and  cut  and  contrive  to  clothe  yourself  and  your  family.  He  will 
give  a  white  robe  of  righteousness.  {H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton,  M.A.)  Salvation  for 
Zaccheus  : — "  Salvation  I  How  ?  where  ?  "What  does  Christ  mean  when  He  says, 
*  Salvation  has  come  to  this  house  '  ?  Did  He  preach  '  the  way  of  salvation '  ?  If 
so,  we  should  like  to  hear  what  He  said."  Well,  He  said  this  : — That  the  Son  of 
Man  had  found  the  Son  of  Abraham,  acknowledged  him  as  such,  and  would  make 
at  well  with  him.  And  was  it  not  salvation  from  auger,  and  sorrow,  and  hardness 
of  heart,  to  be  thus  acknowledged  ?  Men  of  Jericho,  this  is  a  son  of  Abraham ; 
your  blessing  is  his.  Society  may  reject  him  ;  but  the  God  of  Abraham  accepts 
him.  The  sons  of  Abraham  may  ban  one  another  ;  but  the  Son  of  Man  will  blesa 
them  all.  "  Son  of  Man  "  is  a  wider  and  deeper  title  than  "  son  of  Abraham." 
The  Son  of  Man's  love  includes  all  Jews,  because  it  extends  beyond  them  all. 
Christ  acknowledged  Zaccheus  in  a  way  very  comforting  to  his  Jewish  and  hia 
human  heart.  But  this  was  the  salvation — the  creation  of  a  living  bond  of 
affection  between  Zaccheus  and  that  Holy  Love  in  whose  presence  he  stood.  In 
this  Presence  Zaccheus  felt  at  once  that  he  grew  purer,  happier,  stronger  for  good, 
forgiving  to  those  who  had  despised  him,  and  humble  and  thankful  in  that  sense  of 
forgiving  confidence  which  Christ's  whole  manner  towards  him  breathed.  When 
Christ  spoke  of  "  salvation,"  then,  He  was  Himself  the  salvation  of  which  He 
epoke.    (T.  T.  Lynch.)        To  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost. — The  seeking 

Saviour  : Good  news  from  a  far  country.     By  meditation  on  this  statement  we  are 

led  to  consider — I.  The  mission  of  Christ.  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  come."  Predicted 
in  the  oracles  of  God  by  Balaam,  Isaiah,  Zechariah,  &c.  II.  The  pubpcbt^  of  His 
'HissiON.  "  To  seek  and  to  save."  1.  It  was  not  an  experimental  gratification.  2. 
Ifot  to  gain  a  fair  reputation.  3.  Not  to  obtain  honour.  III.  The  object  op  Hia 
xovB.  "  That  which  was  lost."  The  whole  world.  Every  Son  of  Adam.  Appli- 
cation: The  text  displays — 1.  The  spirit  of  self-denial.  2.  The  spirit  of  love. 
(F.  G.  Davis.)  Redemption : — We  are  redeemed — 1.  From  the  power  of  the  grave. 
2.  From  the  power  of  sin.  3.  From  the  curse  of  the  law.  (E.  Hicks,  M.A.) 
ChrisVt  estimate  of  sin : — There  are  two  ways  of  looking  at  sin  : — One  is  the  severe 
^iew:  it  makes  no  allowance  for  frailty — it  will  not  hear  of  temptation,  nor 
.liistinguish  between  circumstances.  Men  who  judge  in  this  way  shut  their  eyes  to 
;all  but  two  objects — a  plain  law,  and  a  transgression  of  that  law.  There  is  no  more 
io  be  said :  let  the  law  take  its  course.  Now  if  this  be  the  right  view  of  sin,  there 
is  abundance  of  room  left  for  admiring  what  is  good  and  honourable  and  upright : 
there  is  positivelj  no  room  provided  for  restoration.     Happy  if  you  have  done  well ; 


CHAP.  XIX.]  ST.  LUKE.  403 

but  if  ill,  then  nothing  la  before  yon  but  judgment  and  fiery  indignation.  The 
other  view  is  one  of  laxity  and  false  liberalism.  When  such  men  speak,  prepare 
yourself  to  hear  liberal  judgments  and  lenient  ones:  a  great  deal  about  human 
weakness,  error  in  judgment,  mistakes,  an  unfortunate  constitution,  on  which  the 
chief  blame  of  sin  is  to  rest — a  good  heart.  All  well  if  we  wanted,  in  this 
mysterious  struggle  of  a  life,  only  consolation.  But  we  want  far  beyond  comfort — 
goodness ;  and  to  be  merely  made  easy  when  we  have  done  wrong  wiU  not  help  us 
to  that !  Distinct  from  both  of  these  was  Christ's  view  of  guilt.  His  standard  of 
right  was  high — higher  than  ever  man  had  placed  it  before.  Not  moral  excellence, 
but  heavenly.  He  demanded.  "  Except  your  righteousness  shall  exceed  the 
righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  Bead  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  It  tells  of  a  purity  as  of  snow 
resting  on  an  Alpine  pinnacle,  white  in  the  blue  holiness  of  heaven ;  and  yet  also. 
He  the  All-pure  had  tendem«3  for  what  was  not  pure.  He  who  stood  in  Divine 
uprightness  that  never  faltered,  felt  compassion  for  the  ruined,  and  infinite 
gentleness  for  human  fall.  Broken,  disappointed,  doubting  hearts,  in  dismay  and 
bewilderment,  never  looked  in  vain  to  Him.  Purity  attracting  evil :  that  was  the 
wonder.     I  see  here  three  peculiarities,  distinguishing  Christ  from  ordinary  men. 

I.   A  PECDLIAKITT   IN   THE   CONSTITUTION   OF   THE   BeDEEMER'S  MORAL  NATURE.       Maui- 

fested  in  that  peculiar  title  which  He  assumed — the  Son  of  Man.  Let  ns  see  what 
that  implies.  1.  It  implies  fairly  His  Divine  origin ;  for  it  is  an  emphatic  expression, 
and  as  we  may  so  say,  an  unnatural  one.  None  could  without  presumption  remind 
men  that  He  was  their  Brother  and  a  Son  of  Man,  except  One  who  was  also 
something  higher,  even  the  Son  of  God.  2.  It  implies  the  catholicity  of  Hist 
brotherhood.  He  is  emphatically  the  Son  of  Man.  Out  of  this  arose  two  powers 
of  His  sacred  humanity — the  universality  of  His  sympathies,  and  their  intense 
particular  personality.  What  was  His  mode  of  sympathy  with  men  ?  He  did  not 
sit  down  to  philosophize  about  the  progress  of  the  species,  or  dream  about  a  mil- 
lennium. He  gathered  round  Him  twelve  men.  He  formed  one  friendship,  special, 
concentrated,  deep.  He  did  not  give  Himself  out  as  the  leader  of  the  publican's 
«ause,  or  the  champion  of  the  rights  of  the  dangerous  classes ;  but  He  associated 
with  Himself  Matthew,  a  publican  called  from  the  detested  receipt  of  custom.  He 
went  into  the  house  of  Zaccheus,  and  treated  him  like  a  fellow-creature — a  brother, 
and  a  son  of  Abraham.  His  catholicity  or  philanthropy  was  not  an  abstraction, 
but  an  aggregate  of  personal  attachments.  II.  Peculiarity  in  the  objects  of 
Christ's  solicitude.  He  had  come  to  seek  and  to  save  the  "  lost."  The  world  is 
lost,  and  Christ  came  to  save  the  world.  But  by  the  lost  in  this  place  He  does  not 
mean  the  world ;  He  means  a  special  class,  lost  in  a  more  than  common  sense,  as 
sheep  are  lost  which  have  strayed  from  the  fiock,  and  wandered  far  beyond  all  their 
fellows  scattered  in  the  wilderness.  Not  half  a  century  ago  a  great  man  was  seen 
stooping  and  working  in  a  charnel-house  of  bones.  Uncouth,  nameless  fragments 
lay  around  him,  which  the  workmen  had  dug  up  and  thrown  aside  as  rubbish. 
They  belonged  to  some  far-back  age,  and  no  man  knew  what  they  were  or  whence. 
Few  men  cared.  The  world  was  merry  at  the  sight  of  a  philosopher  groping 
among  mouldy  bones.  But  when  that  creative  mind,  reverently  discerning  the 
fontal  types  of  living  being  in  diverse  shapes,  brought  together  those  strange 
fragments,  bone  to  bone,  and  rib  to  claw,  and  tooth  to  its  own  corresponding 
vertebrae,  recombining  the  wondrous  forms  of  past  ages,  and  presenting  each  to  the 
astonished  world  as  it  moved  and  lived  a  hundred  thousand  ages  back,  then  men 
began  to  perceive  that  a  new  science  had  begun  on  earth.  And  such  was  the  work 
of  Christ.  They  saw  Him  at  work  among  the  fragments  and  mouldering  wreck  of 
our  humanity  and  sneered.  But  He  took  the  dry  bones  such  as  Ezekiel  saw  in 
vision,  which  no  man  thought  could  live,  and  He  breathed  into  them  the  breath  of 
life.  Ill,  A  PECUiiiABiTT  in  His  mode  of  treatment.  How  were  these  lost  ones  to 
be  restored  f  The  human  plans  are  reducible  to  three — chastisement,  banishment, 
and  indiscriminate  lenity.  In  Christ's  treatment  of  guilt  we  find  three  peculiarities 
— sympathy,  holiness,  firmness.  1.  By  human  sympathy.  In  the  treatment  of 
Zaccheus  this  was  almost  alL  We  read  of  almost  nothing  else  as  the  instrument 
of  that  wonderful  reclamation,  One  thing  only,  Christ  went  to  his  house  self- 
invited.  But  that  one  was  everything.  2.  By  the  exhibition  of  Divine  holiness. 
The  holiness  of  Christ  differed  from  all  earthly,  common,  vulgar  holiness. 
Wherever  it  was,  it  elicited  a  sense  of  sinfulness  and  imperfection.  Just  as  the 
purest  cut  crystal  of  the  rock  looks  dim  beside  the  diamond,  so  the  best  men  felt  a 
sense  of  guilt  growing  distinct  upon  their  souls  (Luke  v.  8).     But  at  the  same  ^rnm. 


i04  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ttt. 

the  holiness  of  Christ  did  not  awe  men  away  from  Him,  nor  repel  them.  It 
inspired  them  with  hope.     .S.  By  firmness.     (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Christ 

seeking  and  saving  the  lost: — I.  Let  me  bring  before  you  the  interesting  state. 
MENT  OF  OUR  TEXT.  1.  The  "  lost,"  then,  are  the  objects  of  His  care  and  love. 
There  arc  two  ideas  comprehended  in  the  expression.  When  Christ  would 
illustrate  the  condition  of  those  who  were  lost,  on  one  occasion,  He  selected  three 
objects  :  a  sheep — money — and  a  prodigal  (Luke  xv.).  One  of  these  could  only  b« 
lost  in  the  sense  of  its  owner  being  deprived  of  its  use.  Having  no  consciousness, 
the  evil  of  its  being  mislaid  fell  upon  the  "  woman."  But  the  other  two  being  lost, 
suffered  or  were  exposed  to  evil  of  their  own,  as  well  as  occasioned  evil  to  those  to 
whom  they  belonged  or  were  related.  The  loss  of  the  "sheep"  included  danger 
and  trouble  to  itself,  as  well  as  anxiety  and  deprivation  to  its  possessor ;  the  loss 
of  the  "prodigal "  entailed  distrust  and  shame  upon  himself,  as  well  as  affliction  on 
his  "father's  house."  And  these  are  the  most  fitting  and  forcible  symbols  of  the 
sinner's  case.  Lost  to  God  and  lost  to  himself.  2.  Man,  thus  lost,  thus  spiritually 
lost — lost  to  God,  and  to  himself,  is  the  object  of  Christ's  care.  He  lovea  us  in  our 
weakness,  and  worldliness,  in  "  our  crimes  and  our  carnality."  He  proposes  our 
salvation :  to  bring  us  back  to  God,  to  bestow  His  knowledge,  love,  and  image. 
Let  it  be  remembered,  however,  that  Christ's  chief  aim  is  to  secure  inward  and 
individual  salvation.  Whatever  may  be  done  for  a  man  is  very  little  while  he  is 
lost,  in  reference  to  the  highest  things  ;  you  cannot  save  him,  unless  you  convert 
him.  3.  Christ  "  seeks  "  to  "  save."  He  goes  in  quest  of  men.  He  had  His  eye 
on  Zaccheus  when  he  visited  the  sycamore  tree — His  "  delights  were  "  at  the  work 
ere  His  charity  had  utterance  there.  He  knew  where  the  objects  of  His  pity  were 
to  be  found,  and  directed  His  course  and  shaped  His  plans  that  He  might  meet 
with  them.  4.  Once  more.  Christ  not  only  proposes  the  good  of  the  "  lost,"  even 
their  "salvation,"  and  "  seeks"  them  for  this  purpose,  but  "He  is  come"  to  do  it. 
What  He  did  on  earth — His  life  and  labours  and  sufferings  and  death ;  what  He  doea 
in  heaven,  by  the  agency  of  men,  the  ministry  of  Providence,  the  operations  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  are  all  to  be  considered  in  relation  to  His  coming  hither — the  fact,  the 
manner,  and  the  meaning  of  His  advent.  II.  Consider  some  important  bearing* 
OF  THE  STATEMENT  NOW  ILLUSTRATED.  1.  You  have  in  our  subject  an  evidence  of 
our  religion — the  religion  of  "  the  Son  of  man."  Think  of  His  object,  principle, 
and  method,  and  say  whether,  in  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  floey  do  not 
necessarily  indicate  one  come  from  God?  There  were  no  materials  in  xhat  "half- 
barbarous  nation  in  wholly  barbarous  times  "  out  of  which  could  have  been  formed 
the  living  "  Son  of  man,"  and  no  materials  out  of  which  His  image  could  have  been 
formed.  He  must  have  been,  or  none  could  have  conceived  of  Him  j  and  if  He 
were,  He  must  have  been  from  heaven.  2.  You  have  in  our  subject  a  beautiful 
model  of  Christian  life  and  labour.  What  Christ  was,  we  should  be.  3.  You  have 
in  our  subject  matter  for  the  serious  consideration  of  unconverted  men,  Christ 
came  to  seek  and  to  save  men — came  to  seek  and  to  save  you.  Are  you  conscious 
of  your  lost  condition  and  bitterly  bewailing  it  ?  It  will  be  always  true  that  salva- 
tion was  possible,  was  presented,  was  pressed  I  And  this  increases  your  doom. 
{A.  J.  Morris.)  Persistent  search : — Our  sympathies  are  already  aroused  when 
we  see  anything  that  is  lost.  Even  a  dog  that  has  wandered  away  from  its  master, 
we  feel  sorry  for ;  or  a  bird  that  has  escaped  from  its  owner,  we  say :  "  Poor 
thing  1 "  Going  down  the  street  near  nightfall,  in  the  teeth  of  the  sharp  north- 
vfest  wind,  you  feel  very  pitiful  for  one  who  has  to  be  out  to-night.  As  you  go 
along,  you  hear  the  affrighted  cry  of  a  child.  You  stop.  You  say :  "  What  is  the 
matter  ?  "  You  go  up  and  find  that  a  little  one  has  lost  its  way  from  home.  In  ita 
excitement  it  cannot  even  tell  its  name  or  its  residence.  The  group  of  people 
gathered  around  are  all  touched,  all  sympathetic,  all  helpful.  A  plain  body  comes 
up,  and  with  her  plaid  she  wraps  the  child,  and  says:  "  I'll  take  care  of  the  poor 
bairn  1 "  While  in  the  same  street,  but  a  little  way  off,  the  crier  goes  through  the 
city,  ringing  a  bell  and  uttering  in  a  voice  that  sounds  dolefully  through  all  the 
alleys  and  by-ways  of  the  city :  "  A  lost  child  1  three  years  of  age,  blue  eyes,  light 
hair.  Lost  child  !  "  Did  you  ever  hear  any  such  pathos  as  that  ringing  through 
the  darkness  ?  You  are  going  down  the  street  and  you  see  a  man  that  you  know 
very  well.  You  once  associated  with  him.  You  are  astonished  ae  you  see  him. 
"  Why,"  you  say,  "  he  is  all  covered  with  the  marks  of  sin.  He  must  be  in  the 
very  last  stages  of  wickedness."  And  then  you  think  of  his  lost  home,  and  say : 
"  God,  pity  his  wife  and  child  I  God,  pity  him,"  A  lost  man  I  Under  the  gas. 
light  you  Bee  a  painted  thing  floating  down  the  street — once  the  joy  of  a  Tillatrt 


CEiP,  XIX.-]  81.  LUKE.  405 

home — ber  laughter  ringing  horror  through  the  souls  of  the  pure,  and  rousing  up 
the  merriment  of  those  already  lost  like  herself.  She  has  forgotten  the  home  of 
her  youth  and  the  covenant  of  her  God.  A  lost  woman  !  But,  my  friend,  we  are 
all  lost.  1.  In  the  first  place,  I  remark  that  we  are  lost  to  holiness.  Are  you  not 
all  willing  to  take  the  Bible  announcement  that  our  nature  is  utterly  ruined  ?  Sin 
has  broken  in  at  every  part  of  the  castle.  One  would  think  that  we  got  enough  of 
it  from  our  parents  whether  they  were  pious  or  not ;  but  we  have  taken  the  capital 
of  sin  with  which  our  fathers  and  mothers  started  us,  and  we  have  by  accumula  - 
tion,  as  by  infernal  compound-interest,  made  it  enough  to  swamp  us  for  ever.  The 
ivory  palace  of  the  soul  polluted  with  the  filthy  feet  of  all  uncleanness.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  comes  to  bring  us  back  to  holiness.  He  comes  not  to  destroy  us,  but 
to  take  the  consequences  of  our  guilt.  2.  "We  are  lost  to  happiness,  and  Clirist 
comes  to  find  us.  A  caliph  said  :  "  I  have  been  fifty  years  a  caliph,  and  I  have 
had  all  honours  and  all  wealth,  and  yet  in  the  fifty  years  I  can  count  up  only 
fourteen  days  of  happiness."  How  many  there  are  in  this  audience  who  cannot 
count  fourteen  days  in  all  their  life  in  which  they  had  no  vexations  or  annoyances. 
We  aU  feel  a  capacity  for  happiness  that  has  never  been  tested.  There  are  inter- 
ludes of  bliss,  but  whose  entire  life  has  been  a  continuous  satisfaction  ?  Why  is  it 
that  most  of  the  fine  poems  of  the  world  are  somehow  descriptive  of  grief  ?  It  is 
because  men  know  more  about  sorrow  than  they  do  about  joy.  Oh,  ye  who  are 
struck  through  with  unrest,  Christ  comes  to-day  to  give  you  rest.  If  Christ  comes 
to  you,  you  will  be  independent  of  all  worldly  considerations.  It  was  so  with  the 
Christian  man  who  suffered  for  his  faith,  and  was  thrust  down  into  the  coal-hole 
of  the  Bishop  of  London.  He  said  :  "  We  have  had  fine  times  here,  singing  glad- 
some songs  the  night  long.  0  God,  forgive  me  for  being  so  unworthy  of  this  glory." 
More  joyful  in  the  hour  of  suffering  and  martyrdom  was  Eose  Allen.  When  the 
persecutor  put  a  candle  under  her  wrist,  and  held  it  there  until  the  sinews  snapped, 
she  said  :  "If  jou  see  fit  you  can  burn  my  feet  next,  and  then  also  my  head." 
Christ  once  having  taken  you  into  His  custody  and  guardianship,  you  can  laugh 
at  pain,  and  persecution,  and  trial.  Great  peace  for  all  those  whom  Christ  has 
found  and  who  have  found  Christ.  Jesus  comes  into  their  sick  room.  The  nurse 
may  have  fallen  asleep  in  the  latter  watches  of  the  night ;  but  Jesus  watches  with 
slumberless  eyes,  and  He  puts  His  gentle  hand  over  the  hot  brow  of  the  patient, 
and  says  :  "  You  wiU  not  always  be  sick.  I  will  not  leave  you.  There  is  a  land 
where  the  inhabitant  never  saith,  '  I  am  sick.'  Hush,  troubled  soul !  Peace !  " 
3.  Again,  I  remark  that  we  are  lost  to  heaven,  and  Christ  comes  to  take  us  there. 
Christ  comes  to  take  the  discord  out  of  your  soul  and  string  it  with  a  heavenly 
attuning.  He  comes  to  take  out  that  from  us  which  makes  us  unlike  heaven,  and 
substitute  that  which  assimilates  us.  In  conclusion :  You  may  hide  away  from 
Him  ;  but  there  are  some  things  which  will  find  you,  whether  Christ  by  His  grace 
finds  you  or  not.  Trouble  will  find  you  ;  temptation  will  find  you ;  sickness  will 
find  you ;  death  will  find  you;  the  judgment  will  find  you ;  eternity  will  find  you. 
(De  W.  Talmage,  D.D.)  Christ's  mission : — ^I.  These  precious  words  of  the  blessed 
Saviour  describe  an  Advent,  a  Coming,  as  accomplished.  He  has  come.  It  is  the 
statement  of  a  past  event,  an  event  which  has  changed  the  whole  current  of  human 
history.  Its  force  lay  in  the  great  purpose  for  which  it  was  undertaken.  He  did 
not  drop  into  the  world.  He  was  not  born  as  animals  are.  He  came.  He  chose 
to  come.  He  planned  a  coming,  which  He  executed.  All  that  philosophy  can 
perceive,  or  poetry  conceive,  of  grandeur  of  emprise,  of  Divine  philanthropy,  and 
of  glorious  endeavour,  are  in  the  enterprise  of  Jesus.  Consider  what  He  left  in 
order  to  endure  the  incarnation  necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  most 
transcendent  undertaking.  He  came  from  other  heavens  that  were  glorious  places, 
whose  population  was  not  lost,  where  the  kingdom  of  God  was  established,  and 
where  His  will  was  done.  No  moral  darkness  and  confusion  were  there.  Think  of 
the  world  to  which  He  came.  It  is  a  planet  of  wonderful  adaptabilities,  and  in- 
habited by  a  race  of  still  more  wonderful  capabilities.  As  king  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  to  Jesus  order  is  of  the  highest  consequence.  He  is  the  author  of  harmony. 
How  disorderly  was  the  world  to  which  He  came !  Every  man  and  woman  and 
child  frantically  or  persistently  struggling  to  break  themselves  from  the  moral  law, 
which  is  a  cord  of  love,  having  lost  much  of  what  would  seem  to  be  a  natural 
sense  of  the  beauty  of  holiness,  gone  so  far  as  to  give  the  name  of  virtue  to  that 
kind  of  brute  bravery  which  meets  a  wild  beast  in  an  amphitheatre  very  much  on 
the  beast's  own  level ;  a  world  full  of  sin,  and  full  of  the  anguish  and  degradation 
»f  sin,  where  He  could  not  turn  His  eyes  without  beholding  a  wrong  or  a  sufferer  ? 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

Above  all,  He  knew  that  He  was  coming  to  His  own,  and  that  His  own  would  not 
receive  Him.  It  was  a  plunge  out  of  supernal  light  into  the  heart  of  darkness. 
II.  We  are  never  to  forget,  as  a  most  charming  characteristic  of  the  coming  of 
Jesus,  that  it  was  wholly  voluntabt.  He  came.  He  was  not  brought.  He  was 
not  compelled  to  come.  No  law  of  justice  could  have  broken  His  consciousness  of 
holiness  and  greatness  if  He  had  not  come.  III.  Wht  should  He  have  comb  at 
ALL  ?  There  was  something  to  save,  something  precious  in  His  eyes,  whatever  it 
may  seem  in  ours.  Cold  criticism  would  ask  why  it  was  necessary,  whether  some 
other  expedient  might  not  have  been  devised;  but  love  is  swifter  than  reason. 
How  could  He  come  to  save  us  ?  is  the  question  of  reason  in  moments  when  it  ia 
unloving.  How  could  He  not  come  to  save  us  ?  is  the  qaestion  of  rational  love. 
IV.  His  incarnation  did  many  things  fob  us  which  wb  do  not  bee  could  be 
oTHEBWisE  DONE.  1.  It  was  a  manifestation  of  God :  "  God  was  manifest  in  the 
flesh."  The  visible  world  had  so  engrossed  us  that  our  race  was  going  down  into 
lowermost  materialism,  so  that  the  Roman  type  of  thought  was  "  earthly,"  the 
Grecian  "  sensual,"  and  the  barbarian  "  devilish."  And  on  one  of  these  types  all 
human  thought  would  have  formed  itself  for  ever.  But  the  Son  of  man  came,  and, 
by  His  words  and  deeds  and  spirit,  gave  such  evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  Personal 
God  and  a  spiritual  world  that  our  intellects  were  saved.  We  have  since  had 
certain  centre  and  blessed  attraction.  If  the  Son  of  man  had  not  come  long  before 
the  age  in  which  we  live,  the  intellect  of  the  race  would  have  been  utterly  lost  in 
the  deep  abyss  of  atheism,  toward  which  it  was  rushing.  2.  The  heart  and  head 
have  close  fellowship.  The  corruption  of  the  former  does  much  to  increase  the 
errors  of  the  latter,  and  the  mistakes  of  the  head  aggravate  the  sorrows  of  the 
heart.  The  Son  of  God  has  come  to  save  our  hearts,  as  well  as  our  intellects,  by 
making  the  interests  of  God  and  man  identical.  3.  Under  the  atheistic  errors  of 
the  intellect  and  the  desperation  of  the  heart,  how  manhood  was  sinking  away  I 
No  human  being  can  now  estimate  how  low  humanity  would  have  sunk  before  our 
times  if  the  Son  of  man  had  not  come.  All  sublime  and  beautiful  Uving  is  of  the 
inspiration  of  His  history.  4.  He  died  for  us  that  He  might  save  our  souls.  The 
saving  of  oar  souls  is  the  great  object  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man. 
(C.  F.  Deems,  LL.D.)  The  lost  are  found:— 1.  "The  Son  of  man."  (1)  Hia 
humanity.  When  the  fulness  of  time  was  come,  "  God  sent  His  Son,  made  of  a 
woman  "  (Gal.  iv.  4).  As  the  flowers  are  said  to  have  solem  in  calo  patrem,  solum 
in  terra  matrem  ;  so  Christ  hath  a  Father  in  heaven  without  a  mother,  a  mother  on 
earth  without  a  father.  Here  is  then  the  wonder  of  His  humanity.  The  "  Ever- 
lasting Father  "  (Isa.  ix.  6)  is  become  a  little  child.  The  Son  of  God  calls  Himself 
the  Son  of  man.  (2)  His  humility.  If  your  understandings  can  reach  the  depth 
of  this  bottom,  take  it  at  one  view.  The  Son  of  God  calls  Himself  the  Son  of 
man.  The  omnipotent  Creator  becomes  an  impotent  creature.  So  greater 
humility  never  was  than  this,  that  God  should  be  made  man.  It  is  the  voice  of 
pride  in  man,  "  I  will  be  like  God  "  (Isa.  xiv.  14) ;  but  the  action  of  humility  in 
God,  "  I  will  be  man."  (1)  Esteem  we  not  the  worse  but  the  better  of  Christ,  that 
He  made  Himself  the  Son  of  man.  Let  Him  not  lose  any  part  of  His  honour 
because  He  abased  Himself  for  us.  He  that  took  our  flesh  "is  also  over  all,  God 
blessed  for  ever,  Amen  "  (Rom.  ix.  5).  (2)  The  other  use  is  St.  Paul's :  "  Let  the 
same  mind  be  in  you  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  ii.  5).  What  mind  is  that  ? 
Humility.  2.  "Is  come."  We  understand  the  person,  let  us  come  to  His  coming. 
And  herein,  ecce  r«rttotcm— behold  His  truth.  Did  God  promise  a  son  of  a  virgin  ; 
Emmanuel,  a  Saviour?  He  is  as  good  as  His  word;  venit,  "He  is  come."_  Did 
the  sacriflced  blood  of  so  many  bulls,  goats,  and  lambs,  prefigure  the  expiatory- 
blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God  to  be  shed  ?  Ecce  Agnus  Dei—"  Behold  that  Lamb  of 
God,  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  3.  "To  seek."  He  is  come;  to 
what  purpose  7  Ecce  compassionem — "  to  seek."  All  the  days  of  His  flesh  upon 
earth  He  went  about  seeking  souls.  When  the  sun  shines,  every  bird  comesr 
forth;  only  the  owl  will  not  be  found.  These  birds  of  darkness  cannot  abide 
the  light,  "because  their  deeds  are  evil"  (John  iiL  19).  Thus  they  play  at 
all-hid  with  God,  but  how  foohshlyl  Like  that  beast  that  having  tirust  his 
head  in  a  bush,  and  seeing  nobody,  thinks  nobody  sees  him.  But  they  shall 
find  at  last  that  not  holes  of  mountains  or  caves  of  rocks  can  conceal  them 
(Rev.  vL  16).  Secondly,  others  play  at  fast  and  loose  with  God;  as  a  man 
behind  a  tree,  one  while  seen,  another  while  hid.  In  the  day  of  pros- 
perity they  are  hidden;  only  in  affliction  they  come  out  of  their  holes. 
Thirdly,  others  being  lost,  and  hearing  the  seeker's  voice,  go  further  from  Him. 


CHAP.  ITS.]  8T.  LUKE.  40T 

The  nearer  salvation  comes  to  them,  the  further  they  run  from  it.  4.  "  To  save." 
Ecce  pietatem,  behold  His  goodness.  Herod  sought  Christ  ad  interitum,  to  kill 
Him  ;  Christ  seeks  us  ad  salutem,  to  save  us.  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  " 
(1  Tim.  i.  15).  5.  "The  lost."  There  ecce potestatevi,  heholi  His -povrer.  He  i4 
that  "strongest  man"  that  unbound  us  from  the  fetters  of  sin  and  Satan. 
"  Lost!  "  But  where  was  man  lost  ?  There  are  diverse  losing-places.  (T.  Adamn, 
D.D.)  Christ  seeking  and  saving  the  lost: — I.  In  what  sense  we  are  said 
TO  BE  LOST.  1.  Really  and  indeed  ;  so  we  are  lost  to  God  and  lost  to  ourselves. 
As  to  God,  He  hath  no  glory,  love,  and  service  from  us,  and  so  is  deprived  and 
robbed  of  the  honour  of  His  creation.  2.  Some  are  lost  and  undone  in  their  own 
sense  and  feeling.  All  by  reason  of  sin  are  in  a  lost  state,  but  some  are  appre- 
hensive of  it.  Now  such  a  sense  is  necessary  to  prepare  us  for  a  more  broken- 
hearted and  thankful  acceptance  of  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  II.  In  what  sensk 
Chbist  is  said  to  seek  and  save  S€ch.  Here  is  a  double  work — seeking  and 
saving.  1.  What  is  His  seeking  ?  It  implieth — (1)  His  pity  to  us  in  our  lost 
estate,  and  providing  means  for  us,  in  that  He  doth  not  leave  us  to  our  wanderings, 
or  our  own  heart's  counsels,  but  taketh  care  that  we  be  brought  back  again  to  God 
{John  X.  16).  (2)  His  seeking  implieth  His  diligence  and  pains  to  reduce  them 
{Luke  XV.  4).  It  requireth  time  and  pains  to  find  them,  and  gain  their  consent.  A 
lost  soul  is  not  so  easily  recovered  and  reduced  from  his  straying  ;  there  is  many  a 
warning  slighted,  many  a  conviction  smothered,  and  tenders  of  grace  made  in  vain. 
I  evidence  this  two  ways — (1)  Christ  is  said  to  seek  after  us  by  His  word  and  Spirit. 
{a)  By  His  word,  He  cometh  as  a  teacher  from  heaven,  to  recall  sinners  from 
their  wanderings,  {b)  By  His  Spirit  striving  against  and  overcoming  the 
obstinacy  and  contradiction  of  our  souls.  By  His  call  in  the  word  He  inviteth  us 
to  holiness,  but  by  His  powerful  grace  He  inclineth  us.  (2)  This  seeking  is 
absolutely  necessary  :  if  He  did  not  seek  them,  they  would  never  seek  Him.  2. 
To  save  them.  Two  ways  is  Christ  a  Saviour — merito  et  efficacia,  by  merit  and  by 
power.  We  are  sometimes  said  to  be  saved  by  His  death,  and  sometimes  to  ba 
saved  by  His  life  (Rom.  v.  10).  Here  I  shall  do  two  things — (1)  I  shall  show  why 
it  is  so  ;  (2)  I  shall  prove  that  this  was  Christ's  great  end  and  business.  First, 
Why  it  is  so.  1.  With  respect  to  the  parties  concerned.  In  saving  lost  creatures, 
Christ  hath  to  do  with  three  parties — God,  man,  and  Satan.  2.  With  respect  to 
the  parts  of  salvation.  There  is  redemption  and  conversion,  the  one  by  way  of 
impetration,  to  other  by  way  of  application.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  are  re- 
deemed, that  is  done  without  us  upon  the  cross ;  but  we  must  also  be  converted, 
that  is  real  redemption  applied  to  us.  3.  With  respect  to  eternal  salvation,  which 
is  the  result  of  all,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  the  effect  of  Christ's  merit  and  of  our  re- 
generation ;  for  in  regeneration  that  life  is  begun  in  us  which  is  perfected  in 
heaven.  Secondly,  I  am  to  prove  that  this  was  Christ's  great  end  and  business.  1. 
It  is  certain  that  Christ  was  sent  to  man  in  a  lapsed  and  fallen  estate,  not  to 
preserve  us  as  innocent,  but  to  recover  us  as  fallen.  2.  Out  of  this  misery  man  is 
nnable  to  deliver  and  recover  himself.  3.  We  being  utterly  unable,  God,  in  pity 
to  OS,  that  the  creation  of  man  for  His  glory  might  not  be  frustrated,  hath  sent  us 
Christ.  Arguments  to  press  yon  to  accept  of  this  grace.  1.  Consider  the  misery 
of  a  lost  condition.  2.  Think  of  the  excellency  and  reahty  of  salvation  by  Christ 
(1  Tim.  i.  15).  3.  You  have  the  means  ;  you  have  the  offer  made  to  you  (Isa.  xxvii. 
13).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  The  lost  and  sought -for  smil: — I.  The  obigin  of  the 
sonii.  It  is  from  above.  The  ancient  legends  of  a  distant  state  of  ancestral  bliss, 
from  which  we  have  come,  and  which  we  have  only  in  part  forgotten,  are  woven 
out  of  the  universal  heart-experience.  Dimly  we  remember  Paradise  ;  amidst  the 
darkness  we  are  groping  our  way  back  to  the  Tree  of  Life.  II.  The  pbbsent 
STATE  op  THE  SOUL.  An  exile  and  a  wanderer.  "I  also  am  from  God  a  wander- 
ing exile,"  said  the  Greek  philosopher,  Empedocles — a  thought  that  was  taken  up 
and  made  the  foundation  of  systems  among  some  of  the  early  Christian  sects. 
They  said  that  the  parables  in  the  Gospel  of  the  lost  piece  of  money,  the  lost 
sheep,  the  wandering  and  prodigal  son,  were  all  variations  of  this  theme  of  the 
soul.  There  has  come  down  to  us  a  Gnostic  hymn  from  very  early  times,  in  which 
the  same  spiritual  theme  is  clothed  in  geographical  details.  A  Parthian  king's  son 
comes  from  the  bright  realm  of  the  East,  and  wanders  through  Babylonia  to  Egypt 
to  seek  a  precious  pearl  which  is  there  guarded  by  a  serpent.  Parthia  stands,  in 
reaJity,  for  the  bright  kingdom  of  light  above,  from  which  the  soul  has  fallen. 
Egypt  means  the  lower  or  material  world,  and  Babylonia  appears  to  denote  som* 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zn. 


intermediate  state.     There  is  a  father  and  a  mother  by  whom  are  meant  an  ideal 

first  pair  of  parents  of  the  living ;  and  a  brother  who  appears  to  Bignifj-  the  second 

Adam  or  Son  of  Man.     The  great  serpent  surrounding  the  sea  is  the  soul  of  the 

present  evil,  or  material  world,  ever  an  enemy  to  the  human  race.     '*  Somehow," 

the  hymn  says,  "  they  in  Egypt  found  out  that  I  was  not  their  countryman,  and 

they  cunningly  gave  me  their  food  to  eat.     I  forgot  that  I  was  a  prince,  and  I 

served  their  kings,  and  I  forgot  the  pearl  for  which  my  parents  had  sent  me,  and  I 

fell  into  a  deep  sleep.    But  my  parents  saw  me  afar  off,  and  they  devised  a  plan 

for  my  good.     They  wrote  me  a  letter,  which  ran :  •'  From  thy  father,  the  king  of 

kings,  and  thy  mother,  the  lady  of  the  East,  and  thy  brother,  our  second  one,  to 

thee  our  son  in  Egypt,  greeting  I     Eouse  up,  and  rise  from  thy  sleep,  listen  to  the 

words  of   our  letter.     Consider  that  thou  art  a  son  of  kings.     See  into  whoso 

slavery  thou  hast  fallen.    Bemember  the  pearl,  for  the  sake  of  which  thou  wast 

sent  to  Egypt.    Think  of  the  garment,  remember  the  splendid  toga,  which  thou 

shalt  wear — for  thy  name  is  written  in  the  list  of  the  brave — and  that  thou,  with 

thy  brother,  our  vicegerent,  shalt  come  into  our  kingdom."    The  letter,  sealed  by 

the  right  hand  of  the  king,  was  brought  to  me  by  the  king  of  birds.     I  awoke,  and 

broke  the  seal,  and  read,  and  the  words  agreed  with  those  that  were  stamped  upon 

my  heart.     I  recollected  that  I  was  a  son  of  royal  parents,  and  my  excellent  birth 

maintained  its  nature."    And  so  he  proceeds  to  the  quest  of  the  pearl,  which 

eeems  to  be  an  allegory  of  the  spark  of  celestial  light  and  truth,  which  is  still  to 

be  found,  even  amidst  the  debasement  of  earth,  by  every  earnest  seeking  soul. 

And  the  letter  stands  for  a  higher  revelation,  and  the  splendid  garment  for  the 

glorious  spiritual  body  which  +iie  returned  king's  son  is  to  wear  in  the  presence  of 

the  King  of  kings.     Such  is  a    lief  account  of  this  Pilgrim's  Progress  of  the  olden 

time.    This  world  is  a  goodly  place,  this  body  is  a  pleasant  house  to  dwell  in. 

And  it  may  be  that  we  are  often  tempted  to  say,  If  it  be  a  prison,  it  is  more 

splendid  than  a  palace,  and  we  are  well  content  to  be  prisoners  and  exiles  under 

such  conditions.    But  there  are  moments  of  revelation,  flashes  of  memory  and 

insight  which  tell  us  otherwise.     Away  I  this  is  not  your  rest  1     A  despatch  has 

eome  from  our  heavenly  Father ;  its  contents  speak  of  what  our  heart  had  already 

spoken.    And  so  we  arise  and  still  go  on  our  quest  of  the  pearl  of  great  price, 

heedless  of  those  smiling  Egyptians,  who  would  feed  us  on  lotus,  and  bid  us  plunge 

into  oblivion  of  our  native  home.    No  1  we  are  sojourners  only,  nor  can  we  rest 

until  we  have  found  what  we  were  sent  to  find,  and,  holding  it  fast,  come  back  to 

Him  who  sent  us,  and  who  is  watching  for  our  return.     III.    The  becovery  of 

THE  soul.     One  is  seeking  us  ;  One  wills  that  we  should  be  saved  and  come  to  the 

knowledge  of  the  truth.    His  kindly  light  has  not  yet,  and  will  not,  we  trust,  ever 

desert    us.     (E.  Johnson,  M.A.)         Christ   seeking  and  saving    those  who    were 

lost : — I.  What  is  implied  in  our  being  lost  ?    II.  How  does  Christ  seek  and  save 

those  that  are  lost  ?    1.  Christ  seeks  those  that  are  lost.    (1)  By  His  word.     (2) 

By  His  providence.     (3)  By  His  Spirit.     2.  Christ  saves  those  that  are  lost — (1) 

By  purchase.     (2)  By  power.    Conclusion :  1.  From  this  subject,  in  the  first  place, 

we  learn  the  wonderful  generosity  and  kindness  of  Christ.    2.  Let  us  also  admua 

the  power,  as  well  as  adore  the  grace,  of  the  Saviour.     {S.  Lavington.)    Good  news 

for  the  lost: — The  promises  of  God  are  like  stars;  there  is  not  one  of  them  but 

has  in  its  turn  guided  tempest-tossed  souls  to  their  desired  haven.     But,  as  among 

the  stars  which  stud  the  midnight  sky,  there  are  constellations  which  above  all 

others  attract  the  mariner's  gaze,  and  are  helpful  to  the  steersman,  so  there  are 

certain  passages  in  Scripture  which  have  not  only  directed  a  few  wise  men  to  Jesus, 

but  have  been  guiding  stars  to  myriads  of  simple  minds  who  have  through  their 

help  found  the  port  of  peace.    The  text  is  one  of  these  notable  stars,  or  rather, 

its  words  form  a  wonderful  constellation  of  Divine  love,  a  very  Pleiades  of  mercy. 

But  as  stars  are  of  small  service  when  the  sky  is  beclouded,  or  the  air  dense  with 

fog,  so  it  may  be  even  with  such  a  bright  gospel  light  as  our  text  will  not  yield 

comfort  to  souls  surrounded  with  the  clinging  mists  of  doubts  and  fears.     At  such 

times  mariners  cry  for  fair  weather,  and  ask  that  they  may  be  able  to  see  the  stars 

^ain :  so  let  us  pray  the  Holy  Spirit  to  sweep  away  with  His  Divine  wind  the 

clouds  of  our  unbelief,  and  enable  each  earnest  eye  in  the  light  of  God  to  see  the 

light  of  peace.    L    How  the  objects   op  mebcy  are   herb   described.    "  That 

which  was  lost."    A  term  large  enough  to  embrace  even  the  very  worst.     1.  We 

are  all  lost  by  nature.    2.  Apart  from  Divine  grace,  we  are  lost  by  oor  own  actions. 

8.  We  are  lost  because  our  actual  sin  and  our  natural  depravity  have  co-worked  to 

produce  in  us  an  inability  to  restore  onrselves  from  oor  fallen  condition.    Not  only 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  ^UKE.  409 

wanderers,  bat  having  no  will  to  come  home.  4.  We  are  lost  by  the  condemnation 
which  our  sin  has  brought  upon  us.  5.  Some  of  us  are  lost  to  society,  to  resp-Kt, 
and  perhaps  to  decency.  That  was  the  case  with  Zaccheus.  Now,  the  Son  of 
Man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  those  whom  the  world  puts  outside  its  camp. 
The  sweep  of  Divine  compassion  is  not  limited  by  the  customs  of  mankind :  the 
boundaries  of  Jesu's  love  are  not  to  be  fixed  by  Pharisaical  self-righteousness.  IL 
How  THE  Saviour  is  heke  described.  "The  Son  of  man."  1.  Note  here  Hia 
Deity.  No  prophet  or  apostle  needed  to  call  himself  by  way  of  distinction  the  son 
of  man.  This  would  be  an  affectation  of  condescension  supremely  absurd. 
Therefore,  when  we  hear  our  Lord  particularly  and  especially  calling  Himself  by 
this  name,  we  are  compelled  to  think  of  it  as  contrasted  with  His  higher  nature, 
and  we  see  a  deep  condescension  in  His  choosing  to  be  called  the  Son  of  man, 
when  He  might  have  been  called  the  Son  of  God.  2.  In  speaking  of  Himself  as 
the  Son  of  man,  our  Lord  shows  us  that  He  has  come  to  us  in  a  condescending  charac- 
ter. 3.  He  has,  moreover,  come  in  His  mediatorial  character.  4.  And  He  has  come 
in  His  representative  character.  IlL  How  odr  Lord's  past  action  is  described. 
Not  "  shall  come,"  but  "  is  come."  His  coming  is  a  fact  accomplished.  That  part 
of  the  salvation  of  a  sinner  which  is  yet  to  be  done  is  not  at  all  so  hard  to  be 
believed  as  that  which  the  Lord  has  already  accomplished.  The  state  of  the  case 
since  Jesus  has  come  may  be  illustrated  thus :  Certain  of  our  fellow-countrymen 
were  the  prisoners  of  the  Emperor  Theodore  in  Abyssinia,  and  I  will  suppose 
myself  among  them.  As  a  captive,  I  hear  that  the  British  Parliament  is  stirring 
in  the  direction  of  an  expedition  for  my  deliverance,  and  I  feel  some  kind  of  com- 
fort, but  I  am  very  anxious,  for  I  know  that  amidst  party  strifes  in  the  House  of 
Commons  many  good  measures  are  shipwrecked.  Days  and  months  pass  wearily 
on,  but  at  last  I  hear  that  Sir  Kobert  Napier  has  landed  with  a  delivering  army. 
Now  my  heart  leaps  for  joy.  I  am  shut  up  within  the  walls  of  Magdala,  but  in  my 
dungeon  I  hear  the  sound  of  the  British  bugle,  and  I  know  that  the  deliverer  is 
come.  Now  I  am  full  of  confidence,  and  am  sure  of  liberty.  If  the  general  is 
already  come,  my  rescue  is  certain.  Mark  well,  then,  0  ye  prisoners  of  hope,  that 
Jesus  is  come.  IV.  There  is  much  of  deepest  comfort  in  the  description  which 
18  here  given  of  our  Lord's  work.  "  To  seek  and  to  save."  The  enterprise  is* 
one,  but  has  two  branches.  1.  Jesus  is  come  to  seek  the  lost.  (1)  Personally.  (2) 
In  His  providence.  (3)  By  His  Word.  2.  Whom  Jesus  seeks,  He  saves.  (1)  By 
pardoning.  (2)  By  bestowing  another  nature.  Conclusion  :  Let  us  who  are  saved 
seek  the  lost  ones.  Jesus  did  it :  0  follower  of  Jesus,  do  likewise.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  mission  of  the  Son  of  Man : — I.  I  lay  it  down  as  a  self-evident  truth,  that 

whatever  WAS  THE  INTENTION  OF  ChRIBT  IN  HiS  COMING  INTO  THE  WORLD,  THAT  INTEN- 
TION MOST  CERTAINLY  SHALL  NEVER  BE  FRUSTRATED.  In  the  fiist  place,  it  seems  to  be 
inconsistent  with  the  very  idea  of  God  that  He  should  ever  intend  anything  which 
should  not  be  accomplished.  But  again,  we  have  before  us  the  fact,  that  hitherto 
all  the  works  of  God  have  accomplished  their  purpose.  I  might  use  a  hundred 
other  arguments.  I  might  show  that  every  attribute  of  Christ  declares  that  His 
purpose  must  be  accomplished.  He  certainly  has  love  enough  to  accomplish  His 
design  of  saving  the  lost ;  for  He  has  a  love  that  is  bottomless  and  fathomless,  even 
as  the  abyss  itself.  And  certainly  the  Lord  cannot  fail  for  want  of  power,  for 
where  we  have  omnipotence  there  can  be  no  deficiency  of  strength.  Nor,  again,  can 
the  design  be  unaccomplished  because  it  was  unwise,  for  God's  designs  cannot  be 
onwise.  II.  I  have  thus  started  the  first  thought  that  the  intention  of  Christ's  death 
cannot  be  frustrated.  And  now  methinks  every  one  will  anxiously  listen,  and  every 
ear  will  be  attentive,  and  the  question  will  arise  from  every  heart,  "  What  then 

WAB  THE   INTENTION   OF  THE  SaVIOUB'S  DEATH  ?      AnD  IS   IT  POSSIBLE  THAT  I  CAN  HAVE 

A  PORTION  IN  IT  ?  "  For  whom,  then,  did  the  Saviour  die — and  is  there  the  shghtesft 
probability  that  I  have  some  lot  or  portion  in  that  great  atonement  which  He  has 
offered  ?  I  must  now  endeavour  to  pick  out  the  objects  of  the  Saviour's  atonement. 
He  came  "  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  We  know  that  all  men  are 
lost  in  Adam.  Again,  we  are  all  lost  by  practice.  No  sooner  does  the  child  become 
capable  of  knowing  right  and  wrong,  than  yon  discover  that  he  chooses  the  evil 
vjid  abhors  the  good.  Early  passions  soon  break  out,  like  weeds  immediately  after 
the  shower  of  rain ;  speedily  the  hidden  depravity  of  the  heart  makes  itself  mani- 
fest, and  we  grow  up  to  sin,  and  so  we  become  lost  by  practice.  Then  there  b« 
Mome  who  go  farther  still.  The  deadly  tree  of  sin  grows  taller  and  taller  ;  soma 
become  lost  to  the  Church.  Now  I  will  tell  you  the  people  whom  Christ  will  save 
— they  are  those  who  are  lost  to  themselves.    UI.  Notice  the  objects  or  jam 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

DEATH  OF  Chkist — He  Came  "to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  (Ibid.) 
Saving  the  lost : — John  Wesley  says  in  his  Journal :  "  On  the  20th  of  December, 
1778,  I  buried  what  was  mortal  of  honest  Silas.Todd.  For  many  years  he  attended 
the  malefactors  in  Newgate  without  fee  or  reward,  and  I  suppose  no  man  for  this 
hundred  years  has  been  so  successful  in  that  melancholy  office.  God  had  given  him 
pecuhar  talents  for  it,  and  he  had  amazing  success  therein.  The  greatest  part  of 
those  whom  he  attended  died  in  peace,  and  many  of  them  in  the  triumph  of  faith." 
Tholuck's  personal  effort  for  individual  souls  : — The  German,  Tholuck,  a  household 
name  in  the  world's  Christian  homes,  standing  on  the  borders  of  the  grave  and 
looking  back  on  the  fifty  fruitful  years  of  preaching,  teaching,  and  writing, 
exclaimed  :  "  I  value  it  all  less  than  the  love  that  seeks  and  follows,"  by  which  he 
had  been  inspired  from  the  year  of  his  conversion.  Personal  effort  for  individual 
souls !  "  This  is  a  work  of  which  the  world  knows  little,  but  of  which  the  Lord 
knows  much."  Not  only  seeking,  but  following !  Here  is  a  single  illustration.  A 
student  at  Halle  was  brought  near  to  his  heart  by  a  godly  mother.  He  fell  into  sin 
and  vice.  He  was  ofttimes  visited  by  his  loving  teacher,  late  at  night  or  in  the 
early  morning,  after  a  night's  debauch — sometimes  in  prison.  Good  promises  were 
repeatedly  made,  and  as  repeatedly  broken.  Another  sacred  promise  ;  the  following 
day,  late  at  night,  came  a  card  from  him  :  "  Tholuck  sighs  ;  Tholuck  prays;  but 
we  will  have  our  drink  out."  Eelying  upon  the  co-working  Spirit,  still  the  saintly 
Tholuck  followed.  And  the  giddy  youth  became  pastor  of  a  well-known  church  in 
Berlin.  Seeking  the  lost : — I  was  returning  home  towards  the  evening  of  a  miser- 
ably wet  day.  As  I  passed  along  I  met  a  lady  whom  I  knew.  Though  the  rain  fell 
thick  and  fast,  she  had  no  umbrella  nor  shawl,  cloak,  nor  upper  covering  of  any  kind. 
My  first  thought  was  that  reason  had  fled.  But  no — she  had  lost  her  child.  A  fine 
little  boy  had  gone  out  with  the  servant,  and  while  standing  in  a  shop  she  had 
suddenly  missed  him.  Of  course  I  joined  in  the  anxious  search.  As  I  went 
along  beside  that  mother,  I  was  struck  with  the  contrast  between  her  eager 
look,  intense  emotion,  and  restless  energy,  and  the  dull,  listless  apathy  of  the  other 
by-passers  in  the  busy  streets.  She  had  lost  a  son  ;  that  was  the  secret  of  it  all. 
She  could  take  no  rest  but  in  seeking.  I  could  sympathize  with  her,  but  no  more. 
I  had  not  lost  a  son.  I  could  not  seek  as  she.  (Family  Magazine.)  Jesus  finds 
the  sinner : — A  Chinaman  applied  to  a  minister  to  be  allowed  to  join  his  Church. 
The  minister  asked  him  some  questions  to  find  out  whether  he  understood  what  it 
is  to  be  a  Christian,  and  how  we  are  to  be  saved.  Among  other  thing  he  asked  him 
— "  How  did  you  find  Jesus  ?  "  In  his  broken  English  the  poor  man  replied :  "  Me 
no  find  Jesus  at  all.  Jesus  Him  find  me."  Christ  seeks  all : — Between  t<he  hours 
of  ten  and  twelve,  for  many  nights,  a  poor  woman  might  have  been  seen  making  her 
way  through  the  streets  of  London.  A  year  had  passed  since  her  only  daughter 
left  home,  and  entered  service  in  the  metropolis.  There  she  became  acquainted 
with  gay  companions,  and  she  was  now  living  a  life  of  open  sin.  The  mother 
learned  that  her  daughter  might  be  seen  every  night  in  a  certain  part  of  the  town. 
After  many  nights  of  watching,  she  was  about  to  despair,  when  she  saw  a  figure 
closely  resembling  that  of  her  daughter.  She  eagerly  approached,  and  was  about 
to  stretch  out  her  arms  to  embrace  it,  when  the  light  of  the  lamp  showed  that  it 
was  not  her  child.  In  an  agony  of  grief  she  exclaimed,  "  Ah !  it  is  not  she.  I  was 
looking  for  my  daughter ;  but,  no,  you  are  not  my  child."  The  poor  girl  burst  into 
tears,  saying,  "  I  have  no  mother — I  wish  I  had  ;  I  wish  some  one  would  look  for 
me.  I  wish  some  one  would  look  for  me."  Alas !  there  are  multitudes  who  in  the 
bitterness  of  their  souls  cry  out,  "  I  wish  some  one  would  look  for  me  1 "  Father- 
less, motherless,  homeless,  they  tread  their  darkened  course,  and  in  the  anguish  of 
their  stricken  spirits  cry  out,  '*  No  man  careth  for  my  soul  1 "  Thanks  be  to  God, 
there  is  One  who  is  higher  than  all,  whose  tender  mercies  fail  not,  and  who  lookg 
with  pitying  eye  on  those  upon  whom  others  look  with  hate  and  scorn.  And  let  us 
follow  the  example  of  Him  whose  mission  here  was  to  seek  the  ruined,  and  to 
save  those  that  are  lost.     (Christian  Herald.) 

Verg.  11-27.  A  certain  noWeman  went  Into  a  far  coxmtry.— Parable  of  the 
pounds  : — I.  Chkist's  absence  is  a  period  or  pbobation.  U.  The  nature  or 
THE  pbobation  IS  TWOFOLD.  1.  The  obligation  to  loyalty  involved  in  Christ's  king- 
ship and  our  citizenship.  2.  The  obligation  to  fidelity  involved  in  Christ's  lord- 
ship, and  our  service  and  trust.  III.  Christ's  return  will  be  the  occasion  ow 
ACCOUNT  AND  RECOMPENSE.     (J.  R.  Tkomton,  M.A.)  Parable  of  the  pounds  ;— 

I.  In  Christ's  jlingdom  the  cbabacteristic  feature  is  service.  Instead  of  fostering 


«EAP.  XIX.]  ST.  LUKE.  411 

a  spirit  of  self-seeking,  Christ  represents  Himself  as  placing  in  the  hands  of  each 
o^  His  subjects  a  small  sum, — a  "pound  "  only,  a  Greek  mina.  What  a  rebuke  to 
ambitious  schemes  I  There  is  nothing  suggestive  of  display,  nothing  to  awaken 
pride.  All  that  is  asked  or  expected  is  fidelity  to  a  small  trust,  a  conscientious  use 
of  a  little  sum  committed  to  each  for  keeping.  This  is  made  the  condition  and  test 
of  membership  in  Messiah's  kingdom.  II.  In  Chkist's  kingdom  beevice,  howeveb 
SLIGHT,  IS  8UBE  OF  REWARD.  The  faithful  use  of  one  pound  brought  large  return. 
Christ  asks  that  there  be  employed  for  Him  only  what  has  been  received  from  Him. 
Augustine  prayed,  "  Give  what  Thou  requirest,  and  require  what  Thou  wilt." 
"  Natural  gifts,"  says  Trench,  "  are  as  the  vessel  which  may  be  large  or  small,  and 
which  receives  according  to  its  capacity,  but  which  in  each  case  is  filled :  so  that 
we  are  not  to  think  of  him  who  received  the  two  talents  as  incompletely  furnished 
in  comparison  with  him  who  received  the  five,  any  more  than  we  should  aflSrm  a 
small  circle  incomplete  as  compared  with  a  large.  Unfitted  he  might  be  for  so  wide  a 
sphere  of  labour,  but  altogether  as  perfectly  equipped  for  that  to  which  he  was 
destined."  The  parable  sets  before  us  the  contrasted  results  of  using,  or  failing  to 
Tjse  for  Christ,  a  small  bestowment.  When  this  is  faithfully  employed,  the  reward, 
though  delayed,  is  sure.  IH.  In  Christ's  kingdom,  failure  to  serve,  results  in 
liOSS  OF  faculties  to  serve.  One  servant  neglected  to  use  his  pound,  and,  on  the 
king's  return,  the  unused  gift  was  taken  from  him.  This  denotes  no  arbitrary 
enactment.  The  heart  that  refuses  to  love  and  serve  Christ  loses  by  degrees  the 
capacity  for  such  love  and  service.  This  is  the  soul's  death,  the  dying  and  decaying 
of  its  noblest  faculties,  its  heaven-born  instincts  and  aspirations.  IV.  In  Christ's 
kingdom,  service,  or  neglect  of  service,  grows  out  of  love,  or  the  want  of 
lote,  to  Christ.  The  citizens  "  hated  the  king,  and  would  not  have  him  to  rule  over 
them."  The  idle  servant  "  knew  that  he  was  an  austere  man."  In  neither  case  was 
there  love,  and  hence  in  neither  case  service.  Love  to  Christ  is  indispensable  to  serving 
Him.  (P.  B.  Davis.)  Trading  for  Christ : — I.  Evert  Christian  is  endowed  by 
HIS  Bedeemeb.  All  that  a  man  hath,  that  is  worth  possessing,  all  that  he  lawfully 
holds,  partakes  of  the  nature  of  a  Divine  endowment ;  even  every  natural  faculty,  and 
every  lawful  acquisition  and  attainment.  II.  Of  the  things  Christ  has  given  us, 
WE  ABB  STEWARDS.  Now  Stewardship  involves  what  ?  It  involves  responsibility  to 
another.  We  are  not  proprietors.  III.  In  our  use  of  what  Christ  has  com- 
mitted TO  us,  He  expects  us  to  keep  Himself  and  His  objects  ever  in  view. 
What  we  do,  is  to  be  done  for  His  sake.  If  we  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  a  dis- 
ciple, it  is  to  be  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  it  is  to  be  given  for  Jesus'  sake.  Whatever 
we  do  is  to  be  done  as  to  Him.  If  we  regard  a  day  as  sacred,  we  must  regard  it  unto 
the  Lord.  If  we  refuse  to  regard  a  particular  day  as  sacred,  that  refusal  is  to  be  as 
unto  the  Lord.  If  we  eat,  we  are  to  eat  to  the  Lord.  If  we  refuse  to  eat,  that 
refusal,  again,  is  to  be  as  unto  the  Lord.  Brethren,  we  have  not  yet  entered 
sufEciently  into  the  idea  of  servitude,  and  yet  the  position  of  servitude  is  our  posi- 
tion. Towards  Christ  we  are  not  only  pupils — we  are  not  only  learners — we  are  as 
servants.  We  have  a  distinct  and  positive  vocation.  IV.  This  passage  reminds 
US  that  THB  Savioub  will  come,  and  call  us  to  account  for  the  use  of  all 

THAT   Hb   BAB   COMMITTED    TO  US.        V.    ACTIVITY     IN     THE     PAST    WILL    NOT    JUSTIFY 

INEETNESB  IN  THE  PRESENT.  (S.  Martin,  D.D.)  Parable  of  the  pounds  : — Notice 
the  following  points :  1.  The  "  pound  "  had  been  kept  in  a  napkin — to  show  some- 
times, as  people  keep  a  Bible  in  their  house  to  let  us  see  how  religious  they  are. 
But  the  very  brightness  of  the  Book  proves  how  little  it  is  read.  It  is  kept  for  the 
respectability  of  it,  not  used  for  the  love  of  it.  The  anxious  faithless  keeper  of  the 
pound  had  perhaps  sometimes  talked  of  his  fellow-servants  "  risking  their  pounds  in 
thatway";  adding  "Itakecareof  mine."  But  spending  is  better  than  hoarding ;  and 
the  risksof  a  trade  sure  to  be  on  the  whole  gainful  are  better  than  the  formal  guardian, 
ship  of  that  which,  kept  to  the  last,  is  then  lost,  and  which,  while  kept,  is  of  no  nse. 
2.  The  pound  is  taken  away  from  the  unfaithful  servant,  and  given  to  the  ablest 
of  the  group.  Let  the  man  who  is  ablest  have  what  has  been  wasted.  Let 
all,  in  their  proportion,  receive  to  their  care  the  advantages  which  have  been 
neglected,  and  employ  these  for  themselves  and  for  ns.  3.  Notice  next,  how 
it  fares  with  the  different  servants  when  the  king  and  the  master  return.  Those 
who  had  been  faithful  are  all  commended  and  rewarded.  The  king  shares  his 
kingdom  with  those  who  had  been  faithful  to  him  in  his  poverty.  They  have 
gained  pounds,  and  they  receive  cities.  The  master  receives  those  into  happiest 
intimacy  with  himself,  who,  in  his  absence,  have  been  faithfully  industrious  for 
him.    These  good  men  enter  into  his  joy.     He  delayed  his  coming ;   but  they 


tU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  nx. 

continued  tbeir  labours.  They  said  not,  "  He  will  never  come  to  reckon  with  ug; 
let  us  make  bis  goods  our  own ;  we  have  been  busy,  let  us  uow  be  merry." 
"Outer  darkness!"  How  expressively  do  the  words  represent  both  the  st&t« 
of  man  before  bii  soul's  good  is  gained,  and  his  state  when  that  good  has  been 
lost  1  Who  that  has  gained  shelter,  and  is  one  of  the  many  whose  hope,  whose 
interests  are  one,  who  have  light  and  warmth  and  sometimes  festive  music,  would 
be  cast  forth  again  into  the  cold,  dark,  lonely  night  ?  4.  There  are  for  each 
man  two  ways  of  gain — the  direct  and  the  indirect,  increase  and  interest.  How 
comes  increase  ?  It  comes  by  the  plenty  of  nature,  which  enables  us  to  add  one 
thing  to  anotber,  as  gold  to  iron  aud  wood;  by  the  productiveness  of  nature, 
which  out  of  one  seed  yields  many  ;  by  the  application  of  skill  to  nature,  through 
which  we  extract,  connect,  and  adapt  nature's  gifts,  and,  first  fashioning  tools, 
then  fashion  many  things.  But  all  were  to  little  purpose  without  combination. 
And  whatever  of  ours  another  uses,  paying  us  for  the  use,  yields  ns  interest. 
We  depend  for  the  increase  of  our  possessions  on  our  connection  with  others,  our 
combination  with  them.  And  we  can  always  employ  our  "  talent "  indirectly, 
if  we  cannot  directly  ;  usually,  we  can  do  both.  We  can  both  sow  a  field  an^ 
lend  money  to  a  farmer.  We  can  attend  to  work  of  our  own,  and  sustain  the 
work  of  others.  We  can  teach,  and  help,  and  comfort ;  and  we  can  subscribe  in 
aid  of  those  who  do  such  work  of  this  kind  as  we  cannot  ourselves  perform. 
(T.  T.  Lynch.)  The  servants  and  the  pounds  : — I.  There  abe  heee  two  sets 
OF  PERSONS.  We  see  the  enemies  who  would  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over 
them,  and  the  servants  who  had  to  trade  with  his  money.  You  are  all  either 
enemies  or  servants  of  Jesus.  II.  We  now  advance  a  step  further,  and  notice 
THE  ENGAGEMENTS  OF  THESE  SERVANTS.  Their  lord  was  goiug  away,  and  he  left 
his  ten  servants  in  charge  with  a  little  capital,  with  which  they  were  to  trade 
for  him  till  he  returned.  1.  Notice,  first,  that  this  was  honourable  work.  They 
were  not  entrusted  with  large  funds,  but  the  amount  was  enough  to  serve  aa 
a  test.  It  put  ttiem  upon  their  honour.  2.  It  was  work  for  which  he  gave  them 
capital.  He  gave  to  each  of  them  a  pound.  "Not  much,"  you  will  say.  No, 
he  did  not  intend  it  to  be  much.  They  were  not  capable  of  managing  very 
much.  If  he  found  them  faithful  in  "  a  very  Uttle  "  he  could  then  raise  them 
to  a  higher  responsibility.  He  did  not  expect  them  to  make  more  than  the  pound 
would  fairly  bring  in ;  for  after  all,  he  was  not  "  an  austere  man."  Thus  he 
gave  them  a  sufficient  capital  for  his  purpose.  3.  What  they  had  to  do  vrith  the 
pound  was  prescribed  in  general  terms.  They  were  to  trade  with  it,  not  to  play 
with  it.  (1)  The  work  which  he  prescribed  was  one  that  would  bring  them  out. 
The  man  that  is  to  succeed  in  trade  in  these  times  must  have  confidence,  look 
alive,  keep  his  eyes  open,  and  be  all  there.  (2)  Trading,  if  it  be  successfully 
carried  on,  is  an  engrossing  concern,  calling  out  the  whole  man.  It  is  a 
continuous  toil,  a  varied  trial,  a  remarkable  test,  a  valuable  discipline,  and  this 
is  why  the  nobleman  put  his  bondsmen  to  it,  that  he  might  afterwards  use  them 
in  still  higher  service.  (3)  At  the  same  time,  let  us  notice  that  it  was  work 
suitable  to  their  capacity.  Small  as  the  capital  was,  it  was  enough  for  them ; 
for  they  were  no  more  than  bondsmen,  not  of  a  high  grade  of  rank  or  education. 
III.  Thirdly,  to  understand  this  parable,  we  must  remember  the  expectancy 
WHICH  WAS  AiiWATS  TO  INFLUENCE  THEM.  They  Were  left  as  trusted  servants  till 
he  should  return,  but  that  return  was  a  main  item  in  the  matter.  1.  They  were 
to  believe  that  he  would  return,  and  that  he  would  return  a  king.  2.  They  were 
to  regard  their  absent  master  as  already  king,  and  tbey  were  bo  to  trade  among 
his  enemies  that  tbey  should  never  compromise  their  own  loyalty.  3.  I  find 
that  the  original  would  suggest  to  any  one  carefully  reading  it,  that  they  were 
to  regard  their  master  as  already  returning.  This  should  be  our  view  of  our 
Lord's  Advent  ?  He  is  even  now  on  His  way  hither.  IV.  Now  comes  the  sweet 
part  of  the  subject.  Note  well  the  secret  design  of  the  Lord.  Did  it  ever 
strike  you  that  this  nobleman  had  a  very  kindly  design  towaids  his  servants? 
Did  this  nobleman  give  these  men  one  pound  each  with  the  sole  design  that 
they  should  make  money  for  him  ?  It  would  be  absurd  to  think  so.  A  few  pounds 
would  be  no  item  to  oue  who  was  made  a  king.  No,  no  I  it  was,  as  Mr.  Bruoa 
says,  "  he  was  not  money  making,  but  character  making."  His  design  was  not 
to  gain  by  them,  but  to  educate  them.  1.  First,  their  being  entrusted  with  a 
pound  each  was  a  test.  The  test  was  only  a  pound,  and  tbey  could  not  make 
much  mischief  out  of  that ;  but  it  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  try  their  capacity 
and  fidelity,  for  he  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least  will  be  faithful  also  in 


«HAP.  XIX, J  ST.  LUKE.  413 

mnoh.  They  did  not  all  endure  the  test,  but  by  ita  means  he  revealed  their 
characters.  2.  It  was  also  a  preparation  of  them  for  future  service.  He  would  lift 
them  up  from  being  servants  to  become  rulers.  3.  Besides  this,  I  think  he  was  giving 
them  a  little  anticipation  of  their  future  honours.  He  was  about  to  make  them 
rulers  over  cities,  and  so  he  first  made  them  rulers  over  pounds.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Accountability  and  reward  : — 1.  We  may  learn  that  Christians  have  received 
Bpecial  advantages,  and  that  every  one  is  accountable  to  God  for  the  use  or 
abuse  of  them.  2.  From  this  parable  we  may  learn  that  no  man  is  so  obscure 
or  contemptible  as  to  escape  the  penetrating  eye  of  the  Judge  of  the  world ;  either 
because  he  has  done  nothing  but  evil,  or  done  no  good.  No  man  is  so  mean,  or 
poor,  or  wicked,  as  to  be  over-looked  or  forgotten.  No  man  is  so  insignificant 
nor  so  feeble  as  not  to  have  duties  to  perform.  3.  From  this  parable  also  we 
infer  that  all  who  shall  improve  will  be  rewarded ;  and  that  the  reward  will  be  in 
proportion  to  the  improvement.  4.  The  advantages  which  God  bestows,  when 
improved,  shall  be  increased,  so  as  to  form  additional  means  of  progress; 
while  he  who  misimproves  his  present  means  and  opportunities  shall  be  deprived 
of  them.  5.  Those  who  reject  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  punished  in  the  most 
exemplary  manner  (verse  27).  (/.  Thomson,  D.D.)  Lessons; — 1.  That  our 
Lord's  absence,  here  attributed  to  His  having  gone  to  receive  a  kingdom,  does 
not  confiict  with  other  representations  of  the  reason  of  such  absence,  viz.,  to  send 
forth  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  "  to  make  intercession  for  us."  2.  That  the  period 
of  our  Lord's  absence  is  definite  in  its  duration,  "  until  the  times  of  restitution 
of  all  things"  (Acts  iii.  21),  and  also  onder  the  absolute  authority  of  the  Father 
(Acts  L  7).  3.  That  our  duty  is  not  to  be  prying  into  the  mysteries  of  oar  Lord's 
coming,  or  spending  precious  time  in  making  useless  calculations  in  respect 
to  the  time  when  He  will  come,  but  to  ••  occupy "  till  He  come.  (D.  C.  Hughes, 
M.A.)  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom: — I.  The  proper  nature  of  the  kingdom. 
1.  The  Son  of  God  from  heaven  is  King.  2.  He  has  received  the  kingdom  in 
heaven.  He  will  give  full  manifestation  of  it  from  heaven;  and  return.  II. 
Thb  pbesbnt  stats  of  the  einqdou.  Although  a  heavenly  kingdom,  it  yet 
stretches  over  the  whole  human  race  upon  earth  ;  for  on  earth  He  has — 1. 
Servants,  as  stewards  of  entrusted  gifts.  2.  Enemies,  who  grudge  His  heavenly 
glory.  III.  The  rnTURB  manifestation  of  the  einodom  shows  it  to  be  a 
HEATENLY  ONE,  from  the  manner  in  which  rewards  and  punishments  are  to  be 
distributed ;  which  is — 1.  Righteous  and  beneficent  in  the  gracious  apportionment 
of  reward  to  those  of  approved  fidelity.  2.  Just  and  righteous  in  the  punishment 
— (1)  of  the  faithless;  (2)  of  avowed  enemies.  (F.  G.  Lisco.)  Parable  of  tlie 
l^nds : — L  The  oesion  of  this  PARABiiS.  1.  It  corrects  false  notions  about  tha 
immediate  appearance  of  God's  kingdom  as  temporal  and  visible.  2.  It  teachea 
that  Christ  would  take  His  departure  from  earth,  and  delay  His  return.  3.  It 
enforces  the  need  of  present  fidelity  to  oar  trust.  4.  It  illustrates  the  folly  of 
expecting  good  from  the  future  if  the  present  be  neglected.  5.  It  contains  the 
promise  of  our  Lord's  return.  IL  When  will  He  comb  to  us  indftidcallt  ? 
1.  Either  at  our  death.  2.  Or,  at  the  last  day  to  institute  judgment.  3.  The 
time  for  either,  for  both,  is  unknown  to  as.  III.  Classes  passed  upon  in  jttdq- 
MBNT  AS  hxrb  FORESHADOWED.  1.  This  parable  contains  no  reference  to  the 
heathen.  2.  Those  who  improved  their  pounds  were  approved  and  rewarded 
according  to  the  measure  of  their  fidehty.  3.  He  that  knew  his  master's  will 
and  neglected  his  trust  was  reproved  and  deprived  of  his  pound.  4.  The  Lord's 
enemies,  who  would  not  have  Him  to  reign  over  them,  were  punished  with  tha 
severity  their  hate  and  wicked  opposition  merited.    IV.  Some  lessons.     1.  Our 

Lord's  return  has  already  been  delayed  18 years.    2.  We  are  not  to  infer  from 

this  that  He  never  will  return.  3.  He  that  is  faithful  only  in  the  visible  presence 
of  bis  master,  is  not  entirely  trustworthy.  4.  Each  one  of  the  ten  servants 
reoeived  ten  pounds.  The  outward  circumstances  of  none  are  so  meagre  that  in 
them  each  one  may  not  equally  serve  his  Lord.  5.  If  the  parable  of  the  talents 
refers  to  inward  gifts,  which  are  equally  distributed,  then  the  parable  of  the 
pounds  refer  to  our  opportunities  for  doing  good,  which  to  all  are  alike.  6.  Improved 
opportunities  increase  our  capacity  to  do  and  get  good.  They  are  like  money  at 
interest.  After  Girard  had  saved  his  first  thousand,  it  was  the  same,  he  said, 
us  if  he  had  a  man  to  work  for  him  all  the  time.  7.  Neglected  opportunities 
never  return.  You  cannot  put  your  hand  into  yesterday  to  do  what  was  then 
neglected,  or  sow  the  seeds  of  future  harvests.  8.  Even  if  we  knew  that  the  Lord 
would  return  to-morrow,  to-day's  work  should  not  be  neglected.     "Trade  j» 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xix, 

herewith,  till  I  come."  {L.  0.  Thompson.)  The  pounds: — 1.  The  departar» 
of  the  nobleman  to  the  far  country,  and  his  Bojonm  there  until  he  should  receive 
his  kingdom,  intimate  that  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord  was  not  to  bo 
immediate.  2.  The  true  preparation  for  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom  of  tho 
Lord,  is  that  of  character.  The  "pound"  given  to  each,  is  the  common. 
blessing  of  the  gospel  and  its  opportunities.  I.  The  good  and  faithfui. 
8EBVAKT  WHO  UADE  BIS  ONE  POUND  INTO  TEN.  SymboUzlng  the  conduct  and 
blessedness  of  those  who  make  the  most  of  their  enjoyment  of  the  gospel  bless- 
ings. They  do  not  despise  the  day  of  small  things.  They  do  not  trifle  away  their 
time  in  idleness,  or  waste  it  in  sin ;  but  finding  salvation  in  the  gospel,  through 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  they  set  themselves  to  turn  every  occupation  in  which  they 
are  engaged,  and  every  providential  dispensation  through  which  they  may  be 
brought,  to  the  highest  account,  for  the  development  in  them  of  the  Christian 
character.  IL  Another  way  of  dealing  with  the  common  blessing  of  the  oospeii 
IB  illustbated  in  the  case  op  him  who  had  increased  his  pound  to  five.  He  had 
been  a  real  servant ;  but  his  diligence  had  been  less  ardent,  his  devotion  less 
thorough,  his  activity  less  constant,  and  so  the  Lord  simply  said  to  him,  "  Be  thcu 
also  over  five  cities."  The  representative  of  the  easy-going  disciple.  There  are 
some  who  will  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire,  and  others  who  shall  have  salvation  in 
fulness  ;  some  who  shall  have  little  personal  holiness  on  which  to  graft  the  life  of 
the  future,  and  who  shall  thus  be  in  a  lower  place  in  heaven  for  evermore,  enjoying 
its  blessedness  as  thoroughly  as  they  are  competent  to  do,  yet  having  there  a  posi- 
tion analogous  it  may  be,  though  of  course  not  at  all  identical,  with  that  occupied 
by  the  Gideonites  of  old  in  the  promised  land.     III.  The  servant  who  hid  his 

POUND   IN   THE    EARTH,   AFTEB    HE    HAD     CAREFULLY   BOUGHT   TO   KEEP   IT   FROM   BEING 

rNJDEED,  BY  WRAPPING  IT  IN  A  NAPKIN.  He  lost  everything  by  an  unbelieving  anxiety 
to  lose  nothing.  He  was  so  afraid  of  doing  anything  amiss,  that  he  did  nothing  at 
all.  The  representative  of  the  great  multitude  of  hearers  of  the  gospel,  who 
simply  do  nothing  whatever  about  it.  They  do  not  oppose  it ;  they  do  not  laugh  at 
it ;  they  do  not  argue  against  it ;  their  worst  enemies  would  not  call  them  immoral ; 
but  they  "  neglect  the  great  salvation,"  and  think  that  because,  as  they  phrase  it, 
they  have  done  no  harm,  therefore  they  are  in  no  danger.  But  Christ  requires 
positive  improvement  of  the  privileges  which  He  bestows.    IV.  The  conduct  of 

THOSE   CITIZENS   WHO   HATED   THE   NOBLEMAN,   AND   SAID,    "  We  wiU   not,"   &C.      Open 

enemies.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Occupy  till  I  come. — The  traffic  of  the  kingdom: 
— Our  Lord  leads  us  into  the  great  mart,  and  cries,  "  Occupy  till  I  come."  L  The 
Lord  gives  every  man  a  fair  start  in  this  business,  and  old  obligations  are  paid. 
II.  The  Lord  backs  all  the  just  and  legal  promissory  notes  of  His  merchantmen^ 
"  I  am  with  you."  III.  The  Christian  trader  has  influential  partnership.  "  Co- 
workers with  God."  IV.  Success  in  this  business  requires  extensive  advertise- 
ment. 1.  By  expression  of  word.  2.  By  expression  of  deportment.  V.  Diplomacy 
is  essential.  When  to  expend,  when  recruit.  VI.  True  effort  and  success  will  flow 
from  intense  earnestness.  VII.  In  this  business  nothing  succeeds  like  success. 
His  talents — are  we  improving  them?  (B.D.Moore.)  Occupation: — I.  Lifb 
OUGHT  TO  BE  ONE  OF  OCCUPATION.  World  a  great  workshop.  II.  Work  should  bk 
RECEIVED  AS  FROM  Chbist.  He  says,  "Occupy."  We  must  make  sure  that  our 
occupation,  or  any  part  of  it,  is  not  in  opposition  to  His  wilL     III.  Work  tbult 

PERFORMED    LEADS   TO    AND    PREPARES   FOR    HIGHER    WORK.      '*  OcCUpy   till   I    COme." 

When  He  came  it  was  to  give  kingdoms  instead  of  pounds.  The  schoolboy  does 
not  need  costly  books.  The  young  apprentice  has  his  hand  and  eye  trained  by 
working  on  cheap  materials.  Every  duty  faithfully  discharged  is  a  step  on  God's 
ladder  of  promotion.  Do  not  wait  for  some  great  opportunity.  The  born  artist 
makes  his  first  pictures  with  a  bit  of  chalk  or  burnt  stick.    IV.  The  whole  lifb 

SHOULD  BE  SOLEMNIZED  AND  GUIDED  BY  THE  THOUGHT  OF  ChRIST'S  COMING.      "  OcCUpy 

till  I  come. "  The  irrational  creatures  instinctively  and  necessarily  perform  their 
parts.  The  earth  was  kept  by  them  till  the  householder,  man,  appeared.  But  the 
thought  of  Christ'B  coming,  the  thought  of  meeting  Him  to  give  in  our  account,  is 
necessary  for  man's  right  living  here.  Some  say  that  men  are  simply  to  act  their 
part,  without  thinking  of  a  future.  But  a  man  cannot  do  this.  Ab  the  sailor,^  the 
traveller,  knows  whither  he  is  going  before  he  sets  out,  and  makes  his  preparations 
and  steers  his  course  accordingly,  so  must  we.  A  ship  simply  set  adrift — a 
traveller  merely  wandering  on — is  most  unlikely  to  reach  any  happy  haven.  We 
most  give  account.  We  are  moving  on  to  the  Judgment-seat  of  Christ.  Duties 
done  or  neglected,  opportunities  improved  or  wasted,  will  meet  as  there.     {E.  F\ 


«HAP.  xix.]  ST.  LUKE.  ilB 

Scott.)  We  will  not  liaye  this  man  to  reign  over  us. — Christ's  spiritual  kingdom 
and  its  rejection  by  men : — 1.  That  Chkist  hath  a  spieitcal  kingdom  ;  for  all 
things  concur  here  which  belong  to  a  kingdom  ;  here  is  a  monarch,  which  is  Christ ; 
a  law,  which  is  the  gospel;  subjects,  which  are  penitent  believers;  rewards  and 
punishments,  eternal  life  and  eternal  torment.  1.  Here  is  a  monarch,  the  mediator, 
■whose  kingdom  it  is.  Originally  it  belongeth  to  God  as  God,  but  derivatively  to 
Christ  as  Mediator  (Psa.  ii.  6 ;  Phil.  ii.  10,  11).  2.  There  are  subjects.  Before  I 
tell  you  who  they  are,  I  must  premise  that  there  is  a  double  consideration  of 
subjects.  Some  are  subjects  by  the  grant  of  God,  others  are  subjects  not  only  by 
.he  grant  of  God,  but  their  own  consent.  3.  The  law  of  commerce  between  this 
sovereign  and  these  subjects  (for  all  kingdoms  are  governed  by  laws).  4. 
Eewards  and  punishments.  (1)  For  punishments.  Though  tbe  proper  intent 
and  business  of  the  gospel  is  to  bless,  and  not  to  curse,  yet,  if  men  vdlfully  refuse 
the  benefit  of  this  dispensation,  they  are  involved  in  the  greatest  curse  that  can  be 
thought  of  (John  iii.  19).  (2)  Eewards.  The  privileges  of  Christ's  kingdom  are 
exceeding  great,  (a)  For  the  present,  pardon  and  peace,  (b)  Hereafter  eternal 
happiness,  II,  That  in  all  reason  this  kingdom  should  be  submitted  unto — 1^ 
Because  of  the  right  which  Christ  hath  to  govern.  He  hath  an  unquestionable 
title  by  the  grant  of  God  (Acts  ii.  36).  And  His  ovra  merit  of  purchase  (Rom. 
xiv.  9).  2.  This  new  right  and  title  is  comfortable  and  beneficial  to  us.  3.  It  is 
by  His  kingly  office  that  all  Christ's  benefits  are  applied  to  us.  As  a  Priest,  He 
purchased  them  for  us ;  as  a  Prophet,  He  giveth  us  the  knowledge  of  these 
mysteries  ;  but  as  a  King,  He  conveyeth  them  to  us,  overcoming  our  enemies,, 
changing  our  natures,  and  inclining  us  to  believe  in  Him,  love  Him,  and  obey  Himi 
(Acts  V.  31).  4.  Our  actual  personal  title  to  all  the  benefits  intended  to  us  is 
mainly  evidenced  by  our  subjection  to  His  regal  authority.  5.  We  shall  be  unwil- 
lingly subject  to  His  kingdom  of  power  if  we  be  not  willingly  subject  to  His 
kingdom  of  grace.  6,  This  government,  which  we  so  much  stick  at,  is  a  blessed 
government.  Christ  Himself  pleadeth  this  (Matt.  xi.  30),  "  My  yoke  is  easy,  and 
My  burden  is  hght."  It  is  sweet  in  itself,  and  sweet  in  the  issue.  III.  What 
moveth  and  inuuoeth  men  so  much  to  dislike  Chbist's  eeign  and  government. 

1.  The  evil  constitution  of  men's  souls.  This  government  is  contrary  to  men's 
carnal  and  brutish  affections.  It  comes  from  an  affectation  of  liberty.  Men 
would  be  at  their  own  dispose,  and  do  whatsoever  pleaseth  them,  without  any- 
to  call  them  to  an  account  (Psa.  xii.  4).  3.  It  proceeds  from  the  nature* 
of  Christ's  laws.  (1)  They  are  spiritual.  (2)  They  require  self-denial.  Informa- 
tion. 1.  It  showeth  us  whence  all  the  contentions  arise  which  are  raised  about . 
religion  in  the  world.     All  the  corrupt  part  of  the  world  oppose  His  kingly  office.. 

2.  It  informeth  us  how  much  they  disserve  Christianity  that  will  hear  of  no  injunc- 
tions of  duty,  or  mention  of  the  law  of  faith,  or  of  tbe  new  covenant  as  a  law. . 
Besides  that  they  take  part  with  the  carnal  world,  who  cannot  endure  Christ's  - 
reign  and  government,  they  blot  out  all  religion  with  one  dash.  If  there  be  no  • 
law,  there  is  no  government,  nor  governor,  no  duty,  no  sin,  no  punishment  nor 
reward  ;  for  these  things  necessarily  infer  one  another.  3.  It  informeth  us  wh&( 
a  difficult  thing  it  is  to  seat  Christ  in  His  spiritual  throne,  namely,  in  the  hearts 
of  all  faithful  Christians.  4.  It  informeth  us  of  the  reason  why  so  many 
nations  shut  the  door  against  Christ,  or  else  grow  weary  of  Him.  6.  It  in- 
formeth us  how  ill  they  deal  with  Christ  who  have  only  notional  opinions  about  Hia^ 
authority,  but  never  practically  submit  to  it.  Exhortation.  If  we  would  diff- 
tmguish  ourselves  from  the  carnal  world,  let  us  resolve  upon  a  thorough  course  of 
Christianity,  owning  Christ's  authority  in  all  things.  1.  If  we  be  to  begin,  and 
have  hitherto  stood  against  Christ,  oh  !  let  us  repent  and  reform,  and  return  to  our 
obedience  (Matt,  xviii.  3).  2.  Eemember  that  faiih  is  a  great  part  of  your  works 
from  first  to  last  (John  vi.  27).  3.  Tour  obedience  must  be  cTclightful,  and  such  as 
Cometh  from  love  (1  John  v.  3).  4.  Tour  obedience  must  be  very  circumspect  and 
accurate  (Heb.  xii.  28).  5.  It  is  a  considerable  part  of  our  work  to  look  for  our 
wages,  or  expect  the  endless  blessedness  to  which  we  are  appointed  (Titus  ii.  13)» 
(T.  Manton,  D.D.)  When  He  was  returned. — The  Lord's  return : — Some  weeks 
ago  a  great  procession  was  in  Chicago.  On  Sunday  evening  before,  the  park 
was  filled  with  tents  and  people,  in  preparation  for  the  display  on  Tuesday. 
Passing  down  the  avenue,  a  lad  said,  as  we  crossed  the  railway  track :  "  Did 
you  see  that  long  train  of  cars,  sir  ?  They  are  going  after  the  knights."  "  Tes,  i 
Baw  them,"  was  the  reply.  "  My  cousin  is  one  of  them,  sir  ;  he  is  a  sir-knight.. 
1  wish  I  was  one,"  said  the  boy.    "  Why  7  "  said  the  gentleman.    "  Oh  1  thej  loom 


4M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mx. 

BO  pretty,  and  they'll  have  a  big  time,  sir."  "  Yes,"  said  the  man,  "  but  it  is  a 
great  expense — one  or  two  millions,  and  the  interest  of  the  money  would  support 
all  the  poor  in  the  city."  •'  I  never  thought  of  that,"  said  the  boy;  "  and  we  ara 
poor."  Having  asked  his  age,  residence,  and  place  of  work,  the  gentleman  said, 
"  Do  you  go  to  church  and  Sunday-school?"  "Yes,"  said  the  boy.  "Did  yoa 
ever  hear  of  Jesus  ?  "  "  Yes,  indeed."  "  Do  you  know  He  will  come  again — come 
in  glory,  with  all  the  angels,  with  all  the  prophets,  kings,  martyrs,  holy  men,  and 
children,  and  with  all  the  babies  that  have  ever  died? "  "  W-e-1-1,"  said  the  boy, 
"  I  don't  believe  this  procession,  big  as  it  is,  will  be  a  flea-bite  to  that  one,  do  you. 
sir  ?  "  '*  No,  indeed,"  said  the  man  ;  ♦'  and  remember,  also,  that  when  He  comes 
in  glory  He  will  give  places  to  every  one  who  has  been  faithful  to  Him  ;  even  a  boy 
may  shine  in  that  great  company."  "Well,  sir,"  said  the  lad,  **I  will  tell  you 
what  I  think.  I  had  rather  be  at  the  tail-end  of  Jesus'  procession  than  to  be  at 
the  head  of  this  one.  Wouldn't  you,  sir  ?  "  Even  so  it  will  be.  But  His  enemies, 
what  of  them  ?  Slain  before  Him.  There  are  His  servants.  His  family,  and  His 
enemies ;  there  is  glory,  reward,  and  judgment.  Which  for  you  and  me  ?  Three 
ways  of  treating  God's  gifts : — There  are  three  ways  in  which  we  may  treat  God's 
gifts  ;  we  may  misuse  them,  neglect  them,  or  use  them  to  good  purpose.  A  tool- 
chest  is  a  very  handy  thing.  The  boy  who  has  one  can  do  good  work  with  it,  if  he 
wishes.  But  if  he  uses  the  chisel  to  chip  the  noses  of  statuettes,  or  the  hammer 
to  drive  nails  into  choice  pictures,  or  the  hatchet  to  out  and  hack  the  young  trees 
in  the  orchard,  that  tool-chest  becomes  anything  but  a  valuable  acquisition  to  the 
family.  A  sharp  knife  is  a  good  thing,  but  in  the  hand  of  a  madman  it  may  do 
untold  damage.  So  education  and  natural  talent  are  good  things  when  rightly 
used ;  but  there  is  no  rogue  so  dangerous  as  the  educated  or  talented  rogue. 
Neglect,  too,  destroys.  The  sharpest  tool  will  by  and  by  rust,  if  left  unused.  The 
bread  for  our  nourishment,  if  unused,  will  soon  change  into  a  corrupt  mass.  The 
untended  garden  will  be  quickly  overrun  with  weeds.  The  sword  that  is  never 
drawn  at  last  holds  fast  to  the  scabbard.  And  so  the  learning  and  the  talents  tbat 
lie  idle  soon  begin  to  deteriorate.  An  Eastern  story  tells  of  a  merchant  who  gave 
to  each  of  two  friends  a  sack  of  grain  to  keep  till  he  should  call  for  it.  Years 
passed ;  and  at  last  he  claimed  his  own  again.  One  led  him  to  a  field  of  waving 
com,  and  said,  "  This  is  all  yours."  The  other  took  him  to  a  granary,  and  pointed 
out  to  him  as  his  a  rotten  sack  fall  of  wasted  grain.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
proper  use  of  talents  brings  its  own  reward.  Cast  forth  the  seed,  and  the  harvest 
is  sure.  The  sculptor's  chisel  carves  out  the  statue.  Beneath  the  hand  of  man 
great  palaces  grow  up.  And  beyond  and  above  all,  there  is  the  consciousness  that 
every  good  use  of  a  talent,  every  noble  act  done,  is  adding  a  stone  to  the  stately 
temple  that  shall  be  revealed  hereafter.  (Sunday  School  Times.)  Thou  hast  been 
falthfol  In  a  very  little. — Faithfulness  in  little  things  : — There  is  a  principle  in  this 
award  which  regulates  God's  dealings  with  us  in  either  world.  And  it  is  this — the 
ground  and  secret  of  all  increase  is  "  faithfulness. "  And  we  may  all  rejoice  that 
this  is  the  rale  of  God's  moral  gifts — for  had  anything  else  except  "  faithfulness  " 
been  made  the  condition,  many  would  have  been  unable,  or  at  least,  would  have 
thought  themselves  unable,  to  advance  at  aU.  I  should  have  no  hesitation  in 
placing  first  "  faithfulness "  to  convictions.  So  long  as  a  man  has  not  silenced 
them  by  sin,  the  heart  is  full  of  '*  still  small  voices,"'  speaking  to  him  everywhere. 
There  is  a  duty  which  has  long  lain  neglected,  and  almost  forgotten.  Suddenly, 
there  wakes  up  in  your  mind  a  memory  of  that  forgotten  duty.  It  is  a  very  httle 
thing  that,  by  some  association,  woke  the  memory.  An  old  sin  presents  itself  to 
your  mind  in  a  new  light.  A  thought  comes  to  you  in  the  early  morning,  "  Get 
up."  Presently,  another  thought  says,  "You  are  leaving  your  room  without  any 
real  communion  with  God."  Those  are  convictions.  Everybody  has  them — they 
are  the  movings  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  a  man — they  are  the  scintillations  of  an 
inner  life  which  is  struggling  with  the  darkness.  But,  be  "  faithful "  to  them  ;  for 
if  vou  are  unfaithful,  they  will  get  weaker  and  weaker,  and  fewer  and  fewer,  till 
they  go  oat.  But  if  you  are  "  faithful "  to  them,  there  will  be  an  increase — 
stronger,  more  frequent,  loftier,  more  spiritual,  they  will  grow — till  it  is  as  if  your 
whole  being  were  penetrated  with  the  mind  of  God ;  and  everything  within  you  and 
around  you  will  be  a  message,  and  the  whole  world  will  be  vocal  to  you  of  Christ. 
Next  to  this  "  faithfulness  "  to  convictions,  I  should  place  '•  faithfulness  in  little 
things  "  to  men—  and  this  of  two  kinds.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  yoa 
be  sorupuloasly  accurate  and  just  in  all  your  most  trivial  transactions  of  honour 
and  boainesa  with  yoar  fellow-creatorea.    And,  secondly,  every  one  of  us  haa,  at 


CKAP.  xu.]  ST.  LUKE.  417 

might  have,  iniJuence  with  somebody.  The  acquisition  and  the  use  of  that  influence 
ere  great  matters  of  "  faithfulness,"  {J.  Vaugluin,  M.A.)  Soul-growth  dependx  on 
fidelity ;— To  employ  well  the  present,  is  to  command  the  future.  And  that  for 
two  reasons.  One,  the  natural  law,  which  pervades  all  nature,  rational  and  irra- 
tional, that  growth  is  the  offspring  of  exercise.  And  the  other,  the  sovereign  will 
of  a  just  God  to  increase  the  gifts  of  those  who  use  them.  But  whence  "  faithful- 
ness "  ?  How  shall  we  cultivate  it  ?  First,  think  a  great  deal  of  God's  faithfulness 
— how  very  "  faithful "  He  has  been  to  you — how  "  faithful  "  in  all  the  little  events 
of  your  life,  and  in  all  the  secret  passages  of  your  soul.  Steep  your  mind  in  the 
thought  of  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  you,  in  all  your  little  things,  till  you  catch 
its  savour.  Look  at  it  till  the  finest  traits  reflect  themselves  upon  your  heart.  And, 
secondly,  go,  and  do  to-day  some  one  "  faithful "  thing.  Do  it  for  Christ.  Be 
"faithful"  where  your  conscience  tells  you  you  have  been  faithless.  (Ibid.) 
Faithful  in  little : — A  Persian  king  when  hunting  wished  to  eat  venison  in  the  field. 
Some  of  his  attendants  thereupon  went  into  a  village  near,  and  helped  themselves 
to  a  quantity  of  salt  for  their  master.  The  king,  suspecting  what  they  had  done, 
made  them  go  back  and  pay  for  it,  with  the  remark,  "  If  I  cannot  make  my  people 
just  in  small  things,  I  can  at  least  show  them  that  it  is  possible  to  be  so."  The 
joy  of  faithful  work : — There  comes  over  to  our  shores  a  poor  stonecutter.  The 
times  are  so  bad  at  home  that  he  is  scarcely  able  to  earn  bread  enough  to  eat :  and 
by  a  whole  year's  stinting  economy  he  manages  to  get  together  just  enough  to  pay 
for  a  steerage  passage  to  this  country.  He  comes,  homeless  and  acquaintanceless, 
and  lands  in  New  York,  and  wanders  over  to  Brooklyn  and  seeks  employment.  He 
is  ashamed  to  beg  bread  ;  and  yet  he  is  hungry.  The  yards  are  all  full ;  but  still 
as  he  is  an  expert  stonecutter,  a  man,  out  of  charity,  says,  "  Well,  I  will  give  yon 
a  Httle  work — enough  to  enable  you  to  pay  for  your  board."  And  he  shows  him  a 
block  of  stone  to  work  on.  What  is  it  ?  One  of  many  parts  which  are  to  form 
eome  ornament.  Here  is  just  a  querl  or  fern,  and  there  is  a  branch  of  what  is  pro- 
bably to  be  a  flower.  He  goes  to  work  on  this  stone,  and  most  patiently  shapes  it. 
He  carves  that  bit  of  a  fern,  putting  all  his  skill  and  taste  into  it.  And  by  and  by 
the  master  says,  "Well  done,"  and  takes  it  away,  and  gives  him  another  block,  and 
tells  him  to  work  on  that.  And  so  he  works  on  that,  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  till 
the  going  down  of  the  same,  and  he  only  knows  that  he  is  earning  his  bread.  And 
he  continues  to  put  all  his  skill  and  taste  into  his  work.  He  has  no  idea  what  use 
will  be  made  of  those  few  stems  which  he  has  been  carving,  until  afterwards,  when, 
one  day,  walking  along  the  street,  and  looking  up  at  the  front  of  the  Art  Gallery,  he 
eees  the  stones  upon  which  he  has  worked.  He  did  not  know  what  they  were  for  ; 
bat  the  architect  did.  And  as  he  stands  looking  at  his  work  on  that  structure 
which  is  the  beauty  of  the  whole  street  the  tears  drop  down  from  his  eyes,  and  he 
says,  "  I  am  glad  I  did  it  well."  And  every  day,  as  he  passes  that  way,  he  says  to 
himself  exultingly,  "  I  did  it  well."  He  did  not  draw  the  design  nor  plan  the 
building,  and  he  knew  nothing  of  what  use  was  to  be  made  of  his  work  ;  but  he 
took  pains  in  cutting  those  stems ;  and  when  he  saw  that  they  were  a  part  of 
that  magnificent  structure  his  soul  rejoiced.  Dear  brethren,  though  the  work  which 
you  are  doing  seems  small,  put  your  heart  in  it ;  do  the  best  yon  can  wherever  you 
are ;  and  by  and  by  God  will  show  you  where  He  has  put  ihai  work.  And  when 
JOQ  see  it  stand  in  that  great  structure  which  He  is  building  you  will  rejoice  in 
every  single  moment  of  fidelity  with  which  you  wrought.  Do  not  let  the 
seeming  littleness  of  what  you  are  doing  now  damp  your  fidelity.  {H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Laid  up  in  a  napkin. — Laziness  in  the  Church: — This  part  of  the  parable  is  meant 
to  teach  the  necessity  of  developing  our  forces,  and  bringing  them  into  use  in  Chris- 
tian life.  The  duty  of  the  development  of  power  in  one's  self  as  a  part  of  hib 
allegiance  to  Christ  is  the  main  thought.  So,  also,  is  it  wrong  for  one  affecting  to 
be  a  Christian  to  confine  his  development  and  increase  simply  to  things  that 
enrround  him  and  that  strengthen  him  from  the  exterior.  It  is  not  wrong  for  a 
man  to  seek  wealth  in  appropriate  methods  and  in  due  measure  ;  it  is  not  wrong 
for  a  man  to  build  up  around  himself  the  household,  the  gallery,  the  Ubrary ;  it  is 
not  wrong  for  a  man  to  make  himself  strong  on  the  earthward  side ;  but  to  make 
himself  strong  only  on  that  side  is  wrong.  Every  man  is  bound  to  build  within. 
Indeed,  the  very  one  of  the  moral  functions  which  inheres  in  all  religious  industries 
is  that,  while  a  man  is  building  himself  exteriorly  according  to  the  laws  of  nature 
and  society  and  of  moral  insight,  he  is  by  that  very  process  building  himself 
inwardly.  He  is  building  himself  in  patience,  in  foresight,  in  self-denial,  in 
liberalities  ;  for  often  generosity  and  libprality  are  in  the  straggle  of  men  in  Uto 
VOL.  ra.  27  -  — 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ax, 

what  oil  is  in  the  machine,  that  make  the  friction  less  and  the  movement  easier. 
So  it  is  wrong  for  men  to  build  themselves  up  simply  for  the  sake  of  deriving  more 
pleasure  from  reason,  from  poetic  sensibility,  and  from  all  SBsthetio  elements ;  but 
it  is  not  wrong  for  them  to  render  themselves,  through  education,  susceptible  to 
£ner  and  higher  pleasures.  Not  only  this,  but  we  learn  from  a  fair  interpretation 
of  this  parable  that  men  are  not  to  be  content  with  their  birthright  state.  It  is  not 
enough  that  a  man  has  simply  the  uneducated  qualities  that  are  given  to  him. 
Life  educates  us  so  far  as  the  gift  of  the  hand  and  the  foot  is  concerned.  In  so  far 
«s  secular  relations  are  concerned,  the  necessities  of  business  and  the  sweep  of 
pnbUc  sentiment  are  tending  constantly  to  educate  men  to  bring  out  all  that  there 
is  in  them.  In  the  higher  spiritual  life  it  is  not  always  the  case.  Men  are  content 
with  about  the  moral  sense  that  they  have,  if  it  averages  the  moral  sense  of  the 
community ;  about  the  amount  of  faith  that  comes  to  them  without  seeking  or 
education ;  about  the  amount  of  personal  and  moral  influence  that  exists  in  social 
relations.  But  the  law  of  the  gospel  is  :  Develop.  No  man  has  a  right  to  die  with 
ills  faculties  in  about  the  state  that  they  were  when  he  came  to  his  manhood. 
There  should  be  growth,  growth.  Going  on  is  the  condition  of  life  in  the  Church 
or  in  the  community  just  as  much  as  in  the  orchard  or  in  the  garden.  When  a  tree 
is  "  bound  "  and  won't  grow,  we  know  that  it  is  very  near  to  its  end ;  and  a  tree 
that  will  not  grow  becomes  a  harbour  of  all  manner  of  venomous  insects.  Men  go 
and  look  under  the  bark,  and  seeing  them  consorting  here  and  there  and  every- 
where, say :  "  That  is  the  reason  the  tree  did  not  grow."  No,  it  was  the  not 
growing  that  brought  them  there.  And  so  all  sorts  of  errors  and  mistakes  cluster 
under  the  bark  of  men  that  stand  still  and  do  not  unfold — do  not  develop.  This 
being  the  doctrine,  I  remark,  in  the  first  place,  that  one  may  be  free  from  all  vioes 
and  from  great  sins,  and  yet  break  God's  whole  law.  That  law  is  love.  Many  say 
to  themselves,  "  What  wrong  do  I  do  ?  "  The  question  is,  What  right  do  you  do  ? 
An  empty  grape-vine  might  say,  "  Why,  what  harm  do  I  do  ?  "  Tes,  but  what 
clusters  do  you  produce?  Vitality  should  be  fruitful.  Men  are  content  if  they 
can  eat,  and  drink,  and  be  clothed,  and  keep  warm,  and  go  on  thus  from  year  to 
year ;  because  they  say,  "  I  cheat  no  one ;  I  do  not  lie  or  steal,  nor  am  I  drunk.  I 
pay  my  debts,  and  what  lack  I  yet  ?  "  A  man  that  can  only  do  that  is  very  poorly 
furnished  within.  And  in  no  land  in  the  world  are  men  so  culpable  who  stand 
etill  as  in  this  land  of  Christian  light  and  privileges.  Yon  are  not  saved  because 
you  do  not  do  harm.  In  our  age — in  no  land  so  much  as  in  ours — not  doing  ia 
criminal.  The  means  of  education,  the  sources  of  knowledge,  the  duties  of  citizen- 
ship, in  this  land,  are  such  that  to  be  born  here  is — I  had  almost  said  to  take  the 
oath — to  fulfil  these  things.  You  cannot  find  in  the  New  Testament  anything  that 
covers  in  detail  each  one  of  these  particulars  ;  and  yet  the  spirit  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment is — Grow,  develop  according  to  the  measure  of  opportunity.  That  being  so, 
there  never  was  an  age  in  which  we  had  so  much  right  to  call  upon  men  for  fulness 
of  influence  and  for  the  pouring  out  of  their  special  and  various  talents  in  every 
sphere  of  duty.  There  never  was  a  time,  I  think,  in  which  it  was  so  well  worth  a 
tnan's  while  to  live.  In  former  days  a  man  might  say :  "  I  know  nothing  of  all 
these  things ;  how  can  I  be  blamed  ?  "  but  no  man  can  say  that  to-day.  No  man 
that  works  at  the  blacksmith's  forge  can  say :  "  Well,  I  was  a  blacksmith."  A  man 
may  be  a  blacksmith,  and  yet  educate  himself.  No  man  can  say :  "  I  am  a  carpenter; 
how  should  I  be  suspected  of  knowledge  7  "  If  you  do  not  have  knowledge,  you  are 
act  fit  to  be  a  carpenter.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  man  should  increase  his  refine- 
ment; he  is  to  increase  it  under  the  law:  "It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to 
xeceive."  It  is  not  enough  that  a  man  should  pursue,  ploughing  deeply  and 
nncovering  continually,  the  truths  of  economy ;  he  should  seek  for  those  truths 
that  he  may  have  that  with  which  to  enlighten  and  strengthen  other  men. 
(Ibid.)  The  natural  heart  unveiled  in  the  great  account: — I.  First,  lying  at 
the  bottom  of  all  here,  in  the  character  of  the  natural  mind,  there  comes  out  "  the 
«vil  heart  of  unbelief" — a  fatal  misjudquent  or  thb  adobablb  God — an  entire 
lieart-ignorance  of  God,  estrangement  from  God,  believing  of  the  devil's  lie  concern- 
ing God,  in  place  of  God's  blessed  revelation  concerning  Himself — "  Thou  art  an 
Austere  man,"  a  hard  master,  very  difficult  to  please.  Still,  still,  the  natural 
conscience  will  bear  stem  witness  to  the  reality  of  a  Divine  judgment  and  law. 
And  so,  as  often  as  the  fallen  heart  is  forced  into  near  contact  with  God,  this  is 
its  language — scarce  uttered  consciously  even  to  itself,  and  much  less  uttered 
Audibly  to  others — "Thou  art  an  austere  man,"  a  hard  master,  demanding  things 
•nreasonable,  impossible  for  as  weak  creatures !    Need  I  say  that  it  is  a  lie  of  tha 


<MAF.  nx.]  ST.  LUKE.  419 

deyil,  a  foul  calumny  on  the  blessed  God?  A  hard  master?  Oh,  ••  God  ia  love." 
II.  Second,  and  inseparably  connected  with  this  first  feature  in  the  character,  sea 
a  second — k  dabe,  jealous  dread  or  soch  a  God,  prompting  the  wish  to  be  away 
from  Him — "  I  feared  Thee,  because  Thou  art  an  austere  man,"  a  hard  master  I 
The  fear  is  obviously  that  of  dark  distrust,  jealousy,  suspicion.  It  is  the  opposite 
of  confidence,  affection,  love.  How,  in  fact,  can  such  a  God  be  loved  ?  III.  And 
now,  connected  inseparably  with  these  two  features  of  character,  even  as  the  second 
with  the  first,  see  the  third  feature  in  the  character — completing  it — even  an  otibb 
indisposition  for  all  cheerful,  active  service  of  God,  "  For  I  feared  Thee — 
Lord,  behold,  here  is  Thy  pound,  which  I  have  kept  laid  up  in  a  napkin ;  for  I 
feared  Thee,  because  Thou  art  an  austere  man."  Impossible  to  serve  such  a  God 
— impossible,  first,  to  love  Him ;  and,  next,  impossible  to  serve  a  God  unloved.  Oh, 
love  is  the  spring  of  service;  distrust,  jealousy,  suspicion,  are  the  death  of  it.  But 
this  man  thinks  he  has  served  God  tolerably  well.  "Lord,  behold,  here  is  Thy 
pound  "  1  In  the  exceeding  deceitfulness  of  the  natural  heart,  does  he  contrive  to 
persuade  himself  that  he  has  given  God  no  serious  cause  of  offence  with  him.  It 
is  the  more  strange  he  should  be  able  so  to  persuade  himself,  inasmuch  as  in  hia 
own  word,  "thy  pound,"  he  confesses  that  it  was  the  property  of  another — of  a 
Master  who  had  lent  it  to  him  for  a  purpose,  which,  assuredly,  was  not  that  of 
keeping  it  laid  uselessly  up.  "  And  He  called  His  ten  servants  and  delivered  them 
ten  pounds,  and  said  unto  them,  *  Occupy  till  I  come '  " — "  occupy,"  that  is,  traffio 
diligently,  trade,  "  till  I  come."  Oh,  what  is  thus  the  whole  Christian  life  but  a 
busy  commerce — a  trading  for  God,  for  the  good  of  all  around  us,  for  eternity  7 
Fain  I  would  have  you  to  note  —  although  it  belongs  less  to  my  main 
theme — that,  if  you  take  the  three  features  of  character  which  we  have  seen 
in  the  text,  and  simply  reverse  them  one  by  one,  you  shall  have  the  whole 
character  of  God's  regenerated  child — of  the  renewed  heart — that  heart  of 
which  it  is  written,  "  A  new  heart  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I 
put  within  you ;  and  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and 
I  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh."  Thus,  1.  First,  substitute  for  that  word  of  the 
apostle,  "  The  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  them  which  believe  not, 
lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should 
shine  into  them,"  the  one  which  follows  it,  "  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to 
shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  For  the  mournful  entire  heart- 
ignorance  of  God,  substitute  the  blessed  promise  fulfilled,  "  I  will  give  them  a  heart 
to  know  Me,  that  I  am  the  Lord."  For  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  crediting  the 
devil's  lie  concerning  God,  substitute  that  heaven-bom  faith,  "  We  believe  and  are 
sure  that  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  " — "  We  have  known  and 
believed  the  love  that  God  hath  unto  us."  And  you  have  the  foundation  of  the 
^hole  character  of  the  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Secondly,  for  that  fear  of 
dark  and  jealous  dread  which  springs  of  unbelief,  substitute  the  love  that  springs 
of  faith,  "  We  love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us" — "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I 
am  His  " — and  you  have  the  new  heart  in  its  very  souL  3.  And  thus,  thirdly,  for 
the  utter  indisposition  to  God's  cheerful  service,  substitute  that  heart  for  all  service, 
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  7  "  A  practical  inference  or  two  before  I 
close.  (1)  First,  there  is  to  be  a  judgment  day.  Do  you  believe  it?  (2)  Second, 
how  worthless,  in  that  day,  will  be  all  merely  negative  religion — "  Lord,  behold, 
here  is  Thy  pound,  which  I  have  kept  laid  up  in  a  napkin  I  "  And  as  for  all  attempts 
to  occupy  neutral  ground  in  the  kingdom  of  Cluist,  what  dreams  they  are !  (3) 
But,  thirdly,  be  it  carefully  noted  that  this,  properly  speaking,  is  not  yet  the  Judge, 
bat  the  Prophet,  telling  beforehand  of  the  Judge,  and  of  the  judgment  to  come. 
■{C.  J.  Brown,  D.D. )  "  Out  of  thy  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee  "; — Now  the  general 
truth  that  I  would  deduce  from  this  narrative,  and  endeavour  to  establish,  may  be 
«xpressed  in  these  terms.  That  insensibility  and  inaction  with  which  mankind 
are  to  so  great  an  extent  chargeable,  as  touching  religion,  »re  indefensible  on  every 
ground,  unsusceptible  of  apology  from  any  quarter,  and  incapable  of  being  justified 
on  any  principles  whatsoever,  being  inconsistent  with  what  is  enjoined  by  every 
man's  belief,  however  loose  and  erroneous  it  may  be.  1.  It  is  a  principle  univer- 
sally admitted  among  men  that  every  subject  should  receive  a  degree  of  attention 
proportioned  to  its  intrinsic  magnitude  and  our  personal  in  terest  in  it ;  and  in 
things  purely  secular  they  endeavour  to  carry  this  principle  into  practice.  But  not 
to  dwell  too  long  on  this,  I  pass  to  another  principle  of  common  life— 2.  Which  is 
sinned  against  in  religion,  Uiat  of  employing  the  present  for  the  advantage  of  tha 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xo. 

fntare.  What  man  of  yon  is  there  whose  schemes  do  not  contemplate  the  future, 
and  whose  labours  do  not  look  to  that  which  is  to  come  ?  3.  And  here  I  am 
reminded  of  another  inconsistency  into  which  many  fall.  I  refer  to  the  unjustifiable 
and  unauthorized  use  which  they  make  of  the  fact  of  the  Divine  benevolence  in  their 
speculations  upon  religion.  A  use  which  they  would  blush  to  make  of  it  in  refer- 
ence to  any  other  subject.  What  would  you  think  of  the  man  who  should  found 
ail  his  expectations  of  health,  and  affluence,  and  happiness,  on  the  simple  fact  of 
the  Divine  benignity,  and  should  infer  from  the  truth  that  God  is  good,  that  he 
shall  never  know  want  or  feel  painf  4.  There  is  another  common  principle 
unhesitatingly  admitted  among  men,  on  which  I  would  remark  in  this  connection, 
as  being  denied  a  place  among  the  first  truths  of  religion — the  principle  of  not 
expecting  any  acquisition  of  considerable  value  without  much  precedent  labour 
and  pains  taken  for  it.  5.  There  is  yet  one  other  principle  of  common  life, 
which,  we  have  to  complain,  is  not  acted  npon  in  religion.  It  is  that  of 
adopting  always  the  safer  course.  (W.  Nevins,  D.D.)  Unto  every  one  which 
hath  shall  be  given. — The  law  of  use: — The  idea  is  that  having  is  something 
quite  other  than  mere  passive  possession — the  upturned,  nerveless  palm  of 
beggary.  Having,  real  having,  is  eager,  instant,  active  possession,  the  sinewy 
grip.  Having  is  using.  Anything  not  used  is  already  the  same  as  lost.  It  will 
be  lost  by  and  by.  In  this  sense  of  having,  the  more  we  have,  the  more  we 
get ;  the  less  we  have,  the  less  we  get.  This  is  law,  universal  law.  I.  This  law  or 
nsB  IS  PHYSicAii  IU.W.  Muscular  force  gains  nothing  by  being  husbanded.  Having 
is  using.  And  to  him  that  hath,  shall  be  given.  He  shall  grow  stronger  and 
stronger.  What  is  difficult,  perhaps  impossible  to-day,  shall  be  easy  to-morrow. 
He  that  keeps  on  day  by  day  lifting  the  calf,  shall  lift  the  bullock  by  and  by.  More 
than  this.  Only  he  that  uses  shall  even  so  much  as  keep.  Ucemplcyed  strength 
steadily  diminishes.  The  sluggard's  arm  grows  soft  and  flabby.  II.  This  law  ov 
USE  IS  coMMEBciAL  LAW.  Beal  possesslou  is  muscular.  The  toil,  care,  sagacity, 
and  self-denial  required  in  getting  property,  are  precisely  the  toil,  care,  sagacity, 
and  self-denial  required  in  keeping  it.  Nay,  keeping  is  harder  than  getting,  a  great 
deal  harder.  Wise  investments  often  require  a  genius  Hke  that  of  great  generalBhip. 
Charles  Lamb,  in  one  of  his  essays,  expresses  pity  for  the  poor,  dull,  thriftless 
fellow  who  wrapped  his  pound  up  in  a  napkin.  But  the  poor  fellow  was  also  to  be 
blamed.  Those  ten  servants,  who  had  the  ten  pounds  given  them,  were  commanded 
to  trade  therewith  till  the  master  came.  HI.  This  law  of  use  is  mental  law. 
Even  knowledge,  like  the  manna  of  old,  must  needs  be  fresh.  It  will  not  keep. 
The  successful  teacher  is  always  the  diligent  and  eager  learner.  Just  when  he  has 
nothing  new  to  say,  just  then  his  authority  begins  to  wane.  Much  more  is  mental 
activity  essential  to  mental  force.  It  is  related  of  Thorwaldsen  that  when  at  last 
he  finished  a  statue  that  satisfied  him,  he  told  his  friends  that  his  genius  was 
leaving  him.  Having  reached  a  point  beyond  which  he  could  push  no  further,  his 
instinct  told  him  that  he  had  already  begun  to  fail.  So  it  proved.  The  summit 
of  his  fame  was  no  broad  plateau,  but  a  sbarp  Alpine  ridge.  The  last  step  up  had 
to  be  quickly  followed  by  the  first  step  down.  It  is  so  in  everything.  Ceasing  to 
gain,  we  begin  to  lose.  Ceasing  to  advance,  we  begin  to  retrograde.  IV.  Thm 
LAW  or  USB  is  ALSO  MORAL  LAW.  Here  lies  the  secret  of  character.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  standing  stilL  There  is  no  such  thing  as  merely  holding  one's  own. 
Only  the  swimmer  floats.  Only  the  conqueror  is  unconquered.  Character  is  not 
inheritance,  nor  happy  accident,  but  hardest  battle  and  victory.  The  fact  is,  evil 
never  abdicates,  never  goes  off  on  a  vacation,  never  sleeps.  Every  day  every  one 
of  ns  is  ambushed  and  assaulted ;  and  what  we  become,  is  simply  our  defeat  or 
victory.  Not  to  be  crowned  victor,  is  to  pass  under  the  yoke.  It  prayer  be,  what 
Tertullian  has  pictured  it,  the  watch-oiy  of  a  soldier  onder  arms,  guarding  the  tent 
and  standard  of  his  general,  then  the  habit  of  it  ought  to  be  growing  on  as.  For 
the  night  is  round  about  us,  and,  though  the  stars  are  ont,  onr  enemies  are  not 
asleep.  If  the  Bible  be  what  we  say  it  is,  we  should  know  it  better  and  better. 
Written  by  men,  still  it  has  God  for  its  Author,  unfathomable  depths  of  wisdom  for 
its  contents,  and  for  its  shining  goal  the  battlements  and  towers  of  the  New  Jem- 
salem.  So  of  all  the  virtues  and  graces.  They  will  not  take  care  of  themselves. 
Beal  goodness  is  as  much  an  industry,  as  much  a  business,  as  any  profession,  trade, 
or  pursuit  of  men.      (R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.)         Spiritual  investment) : — I.  Lai 

VB  SEEK  TO  OrVZ   rXTLL  STATEMENT  TO  THE  PBIMOIPLB   HEBE  AMMOUMCBD,   BKFOBB   WS 

AtTBMPT  TO  SHOW  ITS  PBACTicAL  BEACH.    1.  The  meaning  of  our  Lord's  words  is 
•ertainly  clear.     Consider  that  the  pounds  represent  any  sort  of  gift  or  endowment 


OUT.  xtx.]  ST.  LUKE.  421 

for  asefulness — any  capacity,  resource,  instrument,  or  opportunity  for  doing  good 
to  our  fellow  men.  He  does  not  really  possess  anything  ;  he  only  "  occupies"  it ;  it 
is  actually  lent  money,  and  belongs  to  his  Lord.  2.  The  illustrations  which  suggest 
themselves  in  ordinaiy  experience  will  make  the  whole  matter  our  own .  We  are 
simply  reminded  once  more  of  the  working  of  the  universal  law  of  exercise.  ^  Our 
bodily  members  and  our  intelluctual  faculties  are  skilled  and  invigorated  by  activity, 
and  injured  seriously  by  persistent  disuse.  An  interesting  example  of  cultivating 
alertness  of  observation  is  related  in  the  life  of  Kobert  Houdin,  the  famous  magician. 
Knowing  the  need  of  a  swift  mastery  and  a  retentive  memory  of  arbitrarily  chosen 
objects  in  the  great  trick  of  second-sight,  he  took  his  son  through  the  crowded 
streets,  then  required  him  to  repeat  the  names  of  all  the  things  he  had  seen.  He  often 
led  the  lad  into  a  gentleman's  library  for  just  a  passing  moment,  and  then  afterwards 
questioned  him  as  to  the  colour  and  places  of  the  books  on  the  shelves  and  table. 
Thus  be  taught  him  to  observe  with  amazing  rapidity,  and  hold  what  he  gained, 
till  that  pale  child  baffled  the  wise  world  that  watched  his  performances.  But, 
highest  of  all,  our  spiritual  life  comes  in  for  an  illustration.  Here  we  find  that, 
in  what  is  truly  the  most  subtle  part  of  our  human  organization,  we  are  quite  as 
remarkable  as  elsewhere.  Even  in  our  intercourse  with  God,  we  bend  to  natural 
law.  He  prays  best  who  is  in  the  habit  of  prayer.  His  very  fervour  and  spirituality, 
as  well  as  his  fluency,  are  increased  by  constant  practice.  Thus  it  is  with  studious 
reading  of  the  Scriptures.  Thus  it  is  with  the  constant  and  devout  reference  of 
one's  life  to  God's  overruling  providence.  And  thus  it  is  with  preparedness  for 
heaven.  Piety  altogether  is  as  capable  of  growth  as  any  possession  we  have.  He 
who  has,  gains  more ;  he  who  leaves  unused  what  he  has,  loses  it.  II.  A  few 
PLAIN  APPLICATIONS  OF  THIS  PRINCIPLE.  1.  Begin  with  the  duty  of  Christian 
beneficence.  Any  pastor  of  a  Church,  any  leader  of  a  difficult  enterprise,  is 
acquainted  with  the  fact  that  the  best  persons  to  ask  for  a  contribution,  with  a 
sublime  faith  and  a  most  cheerful  expectation  of  success,  are  those  who  have  just 
been  giving  largely,  those  who  aU  along  have  been  giving  the  most.  Such  Christians 
are  prospered  by  the  exercise.  Their  hearts  and  their  purses  alike  are  distended 
with  the  grace  and  the  gold.  2.  Take  also  the  duty  of  teaching  God's  truth  to  those 
who  always  need  it.  Does  a  wise  man  lose  his  learning  by  communicating  it  freely? 
Kather,  are  not  those  the  best  scholars  who  do  hardest  work  in  teaching  the  dullest 
pupils  with  the  most  patience  7  3.  Again,  take  our  consistency  of  demeanour.  This, 
if  anything,  would  seem  most  personal  and  most  incommunicable.  A  Christian 
who  cares  nothing  for  what  people  say  of  him  deteriorates  in  fidelity.  He  who  tries 
hardest  to  disarm  criticism  by  a  godly  demeanour  will  grow  in  correctness  and 
satisfaction.  He  need  not  become  more  rigid  and  so  more  unamiable.  4.  Just  so, 
once  more,  take  into  consideration  all  kinds  of  ordinary  Church  activity.  Those 
efficient  believers,  who  are  generally  in  the  lead  when  each  charitable  and  energetic 
work  is  in  its  turn  on  hand,  are  not  so  prominent  just  because  they  are  ambitious 
and  officious,  nor  because  they  love  conspicuousness  ;  but  because  being  in  one  sort 
of  earnest  labour,  they  learn  to  love  all  labour  for  Christ.  Most  naturally,  they 
grow  unconsciously  zealous  for  Him.  III.  This  is  going  far  enough  now  :  we  reach 
in  proper  order  some  of  the  many  lessons  which  abb  sdggested  by  the 
PRINCIPLE.  1.  It  is  high  time  that  Christians  should  begin  to  apply  business  maxims 
to  their  spiritual  investments.  2.  Think  joyously  of  the  irresistible  working  of  all 
these  Divine  laws  of  increase,  if  only  we  are  found  faithful.  3.  Just  here  also  we 
begin  to  understand  what  our  Lord  means  when  He  tells  us  that  "  a  man's  life 
consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth  "  (Luke  xii.  15). 
We  have  no  doubt  that  such  a  man  as  that  in  the  parable,  who  hid  his  pound  in 
the  napkin,  was  far  more  disturbed  over  the  care  of  it  than  either  of  those  who  had 
their  ten  or  five  pounds  hard  at  work.  Unemployed  wealth,  unimproved  property, 
is  but  a  perplexity,  and  generally  enslaves  the  man  who  sits  down  to  watch  it.  What 
we  put  to  use — of  our  heart  as  well  as  of  our  money — is  what  we  own;  the  rest  owns 
ns.  4.  Finally,  mark  the  sad  reverse  of  all  we  have  been  dwelling  upon.  Observe 
that  the  pound  taken  away  from  this  man  was  not  his  profit,  but  his  capital.  Hence, 
he  had  no  further  chance ;  the  very  opportunity  of  retrieval  was  gone.  (C.  S. 
JRobinson,  D.D.)  The  napkin  of  secret  doubt : — *'  Dost  thou  believe  this  doctrine 

that  I  ask  thee  of  ?  Dost  thou  hold  it  firmly  ?  "  "  Indeed  I  do,  sir.  I  keep  it 
most  carefully."  "  Keep  it  carefully  1  What  dost  thou  mean  ?  "  "  I  have  it,  sir, 
folded  away  in  a  napkin."  '*  A  napkin  I  What  is  the  name  of  that  napkin?  " 
"  It  is  called  secret  doubt."  "  And  why  dost  thou  keep  the  truth  in  the  napkin  ol 
■ecret  daubt?  "      "They  tell  me  that  if  exposed  to  the  air  of  inquiry  it  will  dis« 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<MtAP. 


appear;  so,  when  asked  for  it,  I  shall  not  have  it,  and  shall  perish."  "Thoa  art 
foolish,  and  they  that  have  told  thee  this  are  foolish.  Truth  is  com,  and  thoa  wilt 
not  be  asked  for  the  corn  first  given  thee,  but  for  sheaves.  Thou  art  as  if  keeping 
thy  corn  in  the  sack  of  unbelief.  The  corn  shall  bo  taken  from  thee  if  thou  use  it 
not,  and  thyself  put  in  thy  sack  of  unbelief,  and  drowned  in  the  deep,  as  evil-doers 
were  punished  in  old  times."  (Thomas  T.  Lyiich.)  Destroyed  through  disme : — 
The  following  extract  from  Mr.  Darwin's  recently  published  life  will,  perhaps, 
explain  the  cause  of  his  rejection  of  Christianity.  The  words  are  his  own  :  "I  can- 
not endure  to  read  a  line  of  poetry  :  I  have  tried  lately  to  read  Shakespeare  and 
found  it  so  intolerably  dull  that  it  nauseated  me.  I  have  also  almost  lost  my  taste 
for  pictures  or  music.  .  .  .  My  mind  seems  to  have  become  a  kind  of  machine  for 
grinding  general  laws  out  of  large  collections  of  facts,  but  why  this  should  have 
caused  the  atrophy  of  that  part  of  the  brain  alone  on  which  the  higher  tastes  depend 
I  cannot  conceive.  ...  If  I  had  to  live  my  life  again,  I  would  have  made  a  rule 
to  read  some  poetry,  and  listen  to  some  music  at  least  once  a  week :  for  perhaps 
the  parts  of  my  brain  now  atrophied  would  then  have  kept  alive  through  use."  "  It 
is  an  accursed  evil  to  a  man,"  he  writes  in  1858,  *'  to  become  so  absorbed  in  any 
subject  as  I  am  in  mine."  We  cannot  be  accused  either  of  want  of  sympathy  or 
want  of  charity  if,  in  the  light  of  what  Darwin  has  told  us  of  his  religious  history, 
we  sum  up  his  scepticism  in  those  words  which  we  have  italicized — "  atrophy  of 
the  brain."  The  law  of  increase: — "  The  Times,"  speaking  of  the  Exhibition  of  the 
Royal  Academy,  says,  "  No  doubt  people  ought  to  bring  to  a  collection  of  pictures, 
or  other  works  of  art,  as  much  knowledge  as  possible,  according  to  the  old  saying 
that  if  we  expect  to  bring  back  the  wealth  of  the  Indies,  we  must  take  the  wealth  of 
the  Indies  out  with  us.  Learning  and  progress  are  continual  accretions."  This 
witness  is  true.  He  who  studies  the  works  of  art  in  an  exhibition  of  paintings, 
being  himself  already  educated  in  such  matters,  adds  greatly  to  his  knowledge,  and 
derives  the  utmost  pleasure  from  the  genius  displayed.  On  the  other  hand,  he  who 
knows  nothing  at  all  about  the  matter,  and  yet  pretends  to  be  a  critic,  simply 
exhibits  his  own  ignorance  and  self-conceit,  and  misses  that  measure  of  enjoyment 
which  an  entirely  unsophisticated  and  unpretending  spectator  would  have  received. 
We  must  bring  taste  and  information  to  art,  or  she  will  not  deign  to  reveal  her 
choicest  charms.  It  is  so  with  all  the  higher  forms  of  knowledge.  We  were  once 
in  the  fine  museum  of  geology  and  mineralogy  in  Paris,  and  we  noticed  two  or  three 
enthusiastic  gentlemen  in  perfect  rapture  over  the  specimens  preserved  in  the  cases  ; 
they  paused  lovingly  here  and  there,  used  their  glasses,  and  discoursed  with  delighted 
gesticulations  concerning  the  various  objects  of  interest ;  they  were  evidently 
increasing  their  stores  of  information ;  they  had,  and  to  them  more  was  given- 
Money  makes  money,  and  knowledge  increases  knowledge.  A  few  minutes  after 
we  noticed  one  of  our  own  countrymen,  who  appeared  to  be  a  man  of  more  wealth 
than  education.  He  looked  around  him  for  a  minute  or  two,  walked  along  a  line  of 
cases,  and  then  expressed  the  utmost  disgust  with  the  whole  concern:  "  There  was 
nothing  there,"  he  said,  "  except  a  lot  of  old  bones  and  stones,  and  bits  of  marble." 
He  was  persuaded  to  look  a  little  further,  at  a  fine  collection  of  fossil  fishes,  but  the 
total  result  was  a  fuller  manifestation  of  his  ignorance  upon  the  subjects  so  abun- 
dantly illustrated,  and  a  declaration  of  his  desire  to  remain  in  ignorance,  for  he 
remarked  that  "  He  did  not  care  a  rap  for  such  rubbish,  and  would  not  give  three 
half-crowns  for  a  waggon -load  of  it."  Truly,  in  the  matter  of  knowledge,  "To  him 
that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  abundance  ;  and  from  him  that  hath 
not  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath."    (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  28-40.  Ascending  np  to  Jerusalem. — Christ  journeying  to  Jervsalem:—L 
The  uaiinbb  in  which  He  went.  The  only  occasion  on  which  we  find  Him  riding. 
Fulfilment  of  a  prophecy.     II.  The  beception  He  met  with.    III.  Thb  sobkow 

OF  WHICH  He  was   thb   subject,  notwithstanding   the   AiJClAMATIONS  He   beceived. 

1.  A  benevolent  wish.  2.  An  alarming  sentence.  3.  A  melancholy  prediction. 
Conclusion:  Let  us  remember  for  our  warning,  that  gospel  opportunities  when 
slighted  will  not  be  long  continued.  (Expository  Outlines.)  "  He  went  before": — 
These  are  some  of  the  thoughts  which  are  suggested  to  our  minds,  as  we  see  Jesus 
in  the  Scripture  before  us,  taking  the  first  place  in  the  progress  to  Jerusalem  and 
death.  The  position  was  emblematical  as  well  as  actual ;  and  it  suggests  some  teach- 
ings for  us  which  are  very  calculated  to  bring  comfort  to  our  souls.  Let  us  glance, 
first  of  all,  for  a  moment,  at  the  motion  and  position  in  itself.  See  the  alacrity  and 
willingness  of  Jesos  to  enter  on  suffering  for  us.     And  what  do  we  learn  here,  but 


CHAP,  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  42i 

that  His  heart  was  in  the  sad  work  which  He  had  undertaken  to  io.  _  The  thorough- 
ness of  Christ's  love  is  brought  before  us  here.  He  was  thorough  in  love.  Mark, 
too,  Christ's  assumption  of  the  position  of  a  leader.  He  knew  the  place  that  had 
been  assigned  to  Him  by  the  Father ;  it  was  headship  in  suffering,  as  well  as  in 
glory ;  He  took  up  at  once,  in  that  last  journey,  His  rightful  place.  See,  too,  how 
our  blessed  Lord  takes  up  a  double  position.  He  is  at  once  leader  and  companion ; 
His  little  company  were  one  with  Him ;  He  with  them ;  but  yet  a  little  before  them. 
He  talks  with  us,  while  He  goes  on  before ;  He  does  not  separate  the  leader  and  the 
companion ;  His  lordship  over  us  is  so  sweet,  that  He  heads  us  as  friends ;  having 
a  common  interest  in  all  He  does.  And  now,  there  is  great  teaching  and  comfort- 
ing for  us  in  all  this.  In  the  first  place,  we  who  follow  Christ  have  to  exploie  no 
untried,  untrodden  way.  It  is  thus  our  comfort  that  we  have  always  one  to  look  to. 
Ours  is  no  interminable  road,  no  lonely,  solitary  path.  Jesus,  if  only  we  can  see 
aright,  is  never  very  far  ahead.  The  mowers  who  mow  in  line,  have  much  more  heart 
during  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  when  their  scythes  sweep  through  the  grass, 
keeping  time  to  the  stroke  of  a  fellow-workman  in  front.  The  steadfastness  of 
Christ's  purpose  is  also  forcibly  suggested  to  us  here.  Firmly  and  intelligently, 
with  a  full  knowledge  of  the  indignity  and  death  before  Him,  our  Lord  started 
forth,  and  took  the  headship  of  His  little  band  on  His  way  to  Jerusalem.  That 
steadfastness  is  of  immense  importance  to  us.  Were  there  the  least  wavering  ia 
Christ's  character,  we  were  undone.  And  we  hold  on  to  this  steadfastness  now. 
We  believe  Him  to  be  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  we  see  Him 
now  acting  from  the  cross,  in  the  same  spirit  wherewith  He  journeyed  to  it.  And 
now,  let  us  in  our  trial-times  see  how  Jesus  has  "  gone  before  "  in  all.  Is  the  path 
of  weariness  the  one  marked  out  for  us  ;  behold  upon  it  the  One  who  sat  wearied 
upon  Jacob's  well ;  no  longer  weary,  it  is  true,  but  remembering  weU  all  earth's 
wearinesses  of  body  and  spirit ;  and  offering  us  His  company  on  the  trying  path. 
Or,  ii  it  that  of  rejection  ?  No  thornier  road  is  there  on  earth  than  that  of  biting 
poverty— poverty,  with  all  its  temptations  and  stings ;  well  1  Jesus  was  poor,  an 
himgered  and  athirst,  and  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head.  Before  the  poor ;  right 
on  upon  this  path,  is  the  figure  of  the  Lord ;  let  them  but  feel  that  He  is  their 
Lord,  and  they  shall  no  longer  be  distressed  at  being  the  world's  casts-off ;  our 
being  a  cast-off  of  the  world  will  not  much  matter,  if  we  be  companions  of  the  Son 
of  God.  Then  comes  death  itself — the  last  journey ;  the  way  from  which  human 
nature  shrinks  ;  the  one  which,  despite  rank  or  wealth,  it  must  surely  tread.  Here, 
if  we  be  inclined  to  faint,  Jesus  can  be  seen  by  His  people,  if  only  they  believe.  (P. 
B.  Power,  M.A.)  The  Lord  hath  need  of  him. — The  Lord's  need: — This  trifling 
incident  contains  big  principles.  I.  It  gives  us  an  idea  of  Providencb.  Tendency 
of  the  age  is  to  the  seen.  But  mind  kicks  against  it.  Mind  is  like  a  bird,  which 
pines  in  a  cage.  Here  is  hope  for  religion — the  mind  kicks  against  artificial  con- 
ditionings. If  you  like  you  may  say  the  mind  likes,  like  a  bird,  to  make  its  nest. 
True  1  but  it  wants  above  it  not  a  ceiling  but  a  sky.  You  can't  cramp  mind  in 
your  nutshell  organizations.  Shut  it  behind  walls — and  then  it  will  ask,  Who  is  on 
the  other  side  of  the  wall?  Providence  involves  two  things.  First — idea  of  God 
preserving,  guarding  our  being  and  well-being.  He  preserves,  though  we  don't  see 
the  way.  How  did  Christ  know  that  the  colt  was  to  be  found  at  this  stated 
moment?  and  that  the  owner  would  part  with  his  property?  Similarly,  wemust 
allow  for  the  knowledge  of  God.  The  second  thing  involved  in  Providence  is  the 
idea  of  government.  H.  In  Providence  attention  is  given  to  ltttlb  iraNOS  as 
WELL  AS  GREAT.  "  A  colt  tied."  It  is  demeaning  God's  economy — some  will  say. 
That  all  depends  on  your  conception  of  God's  economy.  He  numbers  the  hairs  of 
our  head.  He  sees  when  the  sparrow  falls.  HI.  God  holds  every  creaturb 
BESPONSiBLE  TO  SHOW  iTSELP  WHEN  WANTED.  Everything,  in  God's  order,  has  its 
time,  and  is  not  itself  till  that  time  reveals  it.  Sea-wrack  on  the  sea-beach  is  ugly, 
slimy,  hideous.  But  the  same  sea-wrack  in  a  pool?  How  it  spreads  itself  and 
zn&kes  every  tiny  filament  beautiful  I  So  prophecy  in  human  history  needs  to  be 
corroborated  by  the  event,  before  it  can  fairly  be  understood.  Apparently  little 
events — what  worlds  of  good  or  erU  may  turn  on  them  I  IV.  Solution  of  thb 
MTSTERiEs  OF  LIFE.  They  go  to  the  man  for  the  colt.  Would  not  common  sense 
ask.  What  have  you  to  do  with  the  colt  ?  Simply, "  The  Master  hath  need  of  hip." 
You  have  a  favourite  daughter.  One  day  she  is  not  well — only  a  cold,  you  think. 
But  she  grows  feverish,  and  you  call  in  the  doctor.  Doctor  prescribes,  but  still  the 
■weet  one  sickens ;  and  one  day  in  his  solemn  look  the  mother  reads  the  hard 
•entenoe — her  child  must  die.    Why  is  it  ?    "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  it."    {J.  B. 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  \a 

Meharry,  B.A.)  One  Lord  : — "  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord,"  bo  there  may  b« 
no  debate  about  the  direction  of  our  worship,  about  the  Owner  of  our  powers,  about 
the  Eedeemer  of  our  souls.  See  how  this  operates  in  practical  life.  The  disciples 
might  naturally  feel  some  little  difficulty  about  going  to  take  another's  man's  pro- 
perty ;  so  the  Lord  said  unto  them,  "  If  any  man  say  ought  unto  you,  ye  shall  say 
the  Lord  hath  need  of  them,  and  straightway  he  will  send  them."  But  suppoe* 
there  had  been  a  thousand  lords,  the  question  would  have  arisen,  which  of  them  ? 
But  there  is  one  Lord,  and  His  name  is  the  key  which  opens  every  lock ;  His  name 
is  the  mighty  power  which  beats  down  every  mountain  and  every  wall,  and  makes 
the  rough  places  plain.  What  poetry  there  is  here  I  Why,  this  is  the  very  poetry 
of  faith.  It  is  not  mere  faith ;  it  is  faith  in  flower,  faith  in  blossom,  faith  in 
victory !  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  fulfilment  of  minute  prophecies  : — Not  the  fulfil- 
naent  of  sublime  predictions,  so  called ;  but  the  fulfilment  of  little,  specific,  minute, 
detailed  prophecies.  God  does  nothing  unnecessarily,  speaks  nothing  that  seems 
exaggeration  or  superabundance.  There  is  a  meaning  in  the  most  delicate  tint  with 
which  He  hath  varied  any  leaf ;  there  is  a  significance  in  the  tiniest  drop  of  dew 
which  ever  sphered  itself  in  beauty  on  the  eyelids  of  the  morning.  And  that  Christ 
should  go  into  Jerusalem  upon  an  ass,  and  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass  1  That  is  not 
decorative  talk  ;  that  is  not  mere  flowery  prophecy,  or  incidental  or  tributary  fore- 
telling. In  all  that  we  should  account  little  and  of  inconsequential  moment  i& 
fulfilled  to  the  letter.  What  then  ?  If  God  be  careful  of  such  crumbs  of  prophecy, 
such  little  detailed  lines  of  prediction,  what  of  the  life  of  His  children,  the  redeemed 
life  of  His  Church  ?  If  not  one  tittle  could  fall  to  the  ground  respecting  things  of 
this  kind — matters  of  order,  arrangement,  sequence — is  He  unrighteous  to  forget 
the  greater  when  He  remembers  the  less  ?  Will  He  count  the  hairs  upon  your 
head,  and  let  the  head  itself  be  bruised  ?  Will  He  paint  the  grass,  and  let  the  man 
fall  to  decay  ?  Is  He  careful  about  birds  floating  in  the  air,  and  careless  about  lives 
redeemed  by  the  sacrificial  blood  of  His  Son  ?  (Ibid. )  Ownership : — A  nobleman  who 
had  a  magnificent  garden  was  ill  in  bed,  and  ordered  his  butler  to  go  into  the  hot-house 
and  bring  him  the  finest  bunch  of  grapes  he  could  find.  He  came  to  the  hot-house, 
he  opened  the  door,  he  examined  all  the  clusters — he  fixed  on  the  best — he  brought 
out  his  knife  and  cut  it.  Just  as  he  did  so,  a  cry  was  raised,  "  There's  a  man  in 
the  hot-house  !  there's  a  man  in  the  hot-house  1  "  The  gardeners,  young  and  old, 
dropped  their  spades  and  water-pots,  and  ran  to  the  hot-house.  As  they  glanced 
through  the  glass,  sure  enough,  there  stood  the  man,  and  in  his  hand  the  Queen 
Cluster — the  very  one  which  they  had  been  watching  for  months — the  one  which 
was  to  take  the  prize  at  the  Horticultural  Show  1  They  were  furious — they  were 
ready  to  kill  him — they  rushed  in  and  seized  him  by  the  collar,  "  What  are  you 
about!"  they  said,  "How  dare  you! — you  thief! — you  rascal! — you  vagabond !  " 
Why  does  not  he  turn  pale  ? — why  does  he  keep  so  cool  ? — why  does  he  smile  ?  He 
says  something — the  gardeners  are  silent  in  a  moment — they  hang  their  heads — 
they  look  ashamed — they  ask  his  pardon — they  go  back  to  their  work.  What  did 
he  say  to  make  such  a  sudden  change  ?  Simply  this — "  Men  1  my  lord  bade  me 
come  here  and  cut  him  the  very  finest  bunch  of  grapes  I  could  find."  That  was  it  I 
The  gardeners  felt  that  the  hot-house,  the  vine,  and  every  cluster  on  it  was  his. 
They  might  call  it  theirs,  and  propose  to  do  this  and  that  with  it — but  really  and 
truly  it  was  his  who  built  the  house,  and  bought  the  vine,  and  paid  them  for 
attending  to  it.  Just  so,  dear  children,  the  Lord  has  a  claim  on  all  we  possess ;  our 
souls,  our  bodies,  our  tongues,  our  time,  our  talents,  our  memories,  our  money,  our 
influence,  our  beloved  relatives.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own  "  ;  and  whenever  He  has 
need  of  anything  we  must  let  it  go  " — we  must  learn  to  yield  it  up  to  Him  as  cheer- 
fully as  the  owner  yielded  up  his  colt.     (J.  Bolton,  B.A.)        Why  we  are  needful  to 

God: — "Why  was  it?"  asked  Mrs.  N of  her  own  heart  as  she  was  walking 

homewards  from  the  communion-table.  "  Why  was  it  ?  "  she  almost  unconsciously 
exclaimed  aloud.  ••  Oh,  I  wish  somebody  could  tell  me ! "  "  Could  tell  you 
what?  "  said  a  pleasant  voice  behind  her,  and  looking  around,  she  saw  her  pastor 
and  his  wife  approaching.  "  Could  you  tell  me,"  said  she,  "why  the  Saviour  died 
for  us  ?  I  have  never  heard  it  answered  to  my  satisfaction.  You  will  say  it  was 
because  He  loved  ss;  but  why  was  that  love?  He  certainly  did  not  need  us,  and 
in  our  sinful  state  there  was  nothing  in  us  to  attract  His  love."     "  I  may  suppose, 

Mrs.  N ,"  said  her  pastor,  "  that  it  would  be  no  loss  for  you  to  lose  your 

deformed  little  babe.  You  have  a  large  circle  of  friends,  you  have  other  children, 
and  a  kind  husband  You  do  not  need  the  deformed  child  ;  and  »  hat  use  is  it  ♦  " 
"  Oh,  sir,"  said  Mrs.  N ,  "  I  could  not  part  with  my  poor  child.     I  do  need  him* 


CBir.  xn.]  ST.  LUKE.  42S 

I  need  his  love.  I  would  rather  die  than  fail  of  receiving  it."  "Well,"  said  her 
pastor,  "does  God  love  His  children  les8  than  earthly,  sinful  parents  do?"    "I 

never  looked  upon  it  in  that  way  before,"  said   Mrs.   N .     {Christian  Age.) 

Every  good  man  is  needful  to  complete  God's  design: — Aji  expert  mechanician  con- 
structs a  certain  axle,  tempered  and  burnished,  to  fit  the  hub  of  a  certain  wheel, 
which  again  he  fashions  as  elaborately  to  fit  the  axle,  so  that  a  microscope  detects 
no  flaw;  and  now  nothing  can  take  the  place  of  either  but  itself;  and  each  is  labour 
lost  without  the  other.  True,  they  are  only  an  axle  and  a  wheel,  each  a  single  one, 
a  minute  one,  a  fragile  one ;  not  costly  in  material,  nor  remarkable  in  structure  ; 
but  in  the  absence  of  either,  the  {chronometer  which  should  decide  the  arrival  of 
England's  fleet  at  Trafalgar  must  hang  motionless.  Every  good  man  is  such  a 
fragmentary  and  related  instrument  in  the  hands  of  God.  He  is  never  for  an  hour 
an  isolated  thing.  He  belongs  to  a  system  of  things  in  which  everything  is 
dovetailed  to  another  thing.  Yet  no  two  are  duplicates.  Nothing  can  ever  be 
spared  from  it.  The  system  has  no  holidays.  Through  man's  most  dream- 
less slumbers  it  moves  on,  without  waiting  for  delinquents.  (Austin  Phelps.) 
Blessed  be  the  King  that  cometh.  Jesus  our  meek  and  humble  King  : — I.  Cub  Kino 
IN  HTTMiUTY.  1.  Jesus  is  our  King.  (1)  The  prophecies  announce  Him  as  such. 
{Isa.  iz.  6;  Zech.  ix.  9.)  (2)  He  avowed  Himself  a  King.  (Matt.  zi.  27;  John 
zviii.  37. )  (3)  He  proved  by  the  power  of  His  will  that  He  was  a  King.  (Matt. 
zzL  3.)  2.  Jesus  is  our  humble  King.  (1)  He  refused  royal  honours.  (John  vi.  15.) 
(2)  In  opposition  to  the  presumption  of  the  Jews,  He  would  never  act  nor  appear  as 
King.  (John  xviii.  36.)  (2)  He  debased  Himself  in  all  humility.  3.  Follow  Him 
in  His  humility.  (1)  By  contrition  and  a  sincere  confession  of  your  sins.  (2)  By 
resignation  in  adversities.  (3)  By  humility  in  earthly  happiness.  H.  Oub  meek 
King.  This  may  be  seen — 1.  From  the  purpose  of  His  coming — of  His  Incarna- 
tion. He  comes  as  a  Friend  and  Saviour ;  and  wants  to  be  loved,  not  feared.  2. 
From  His  earthly  life.  (1)  He  was  full  of  love  and  mercy  towards  the  suffering, 
whom  He  invited  to  come  to  Him.  (2)  He  was  full  of  mercy  and  tenderness  towards 
sinners  and  His  own  enemies.  3.  From  the  experience  of  your  own  life.  Jesus 
came  to  you  as  a  meek  King — (1)  In  your  afflictions,  to  console  you.  (2)  In  your 
sins,  which  He  bore  in  patience.  (3)  In  your  conversion,  the  work  of  His  mercy. 
Strip  yourself  of  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  as  the  Jews  stripped  themselves  of 
their  garments,  and  let  Jesus  walk  over  your  former  self.  4.  Learn  of  your  King 
to  be  meek  of  heart  also.  (Matt.  zi.  29.)  (1)  As  a  superior  towards  your  subjects. 
(2)  Towards  sinners  and  your  enemies.  (3)  In  tribulations  and  afflictions.  [Stauss. ) 
Praise  thy  God,  O  Zion: — I.  First,  we  snail  observe  here  delightful  praise.  In 
the  thirty-seventh  verse  every  word  is  significant,  and  deserves  the  careful  notice  of 
all  who  would  learn  aright  the  lesson  of  how  to  magnify  the  Saviour.  1.  To  begin 
with,  the  praise  rendered  to  Christ  was  speedy  praise.  The  happy  choristers  did 
not  wait  till  He  had  entered  the  city,  but  "  when  He  was  come  nigh,  even  now,  at 
the  descent  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  they  began  to  rejoice."  It  is  well  to  have  a 
quick  eye  to  perceive  occasions  for  gratitude.  2.  It  strikes  us  at  once,  also,  that 
this  was  unanimous  praise.  Observe,  not  only  the  multitude,  but  the  whole  multi- 
tude of  the  disciples  rejoiced,  and  praised  Him  ;  not  one  silent  tongue  among  the 
disciples — not  one  who  withheld  his  song.  And  yet,  I  suppose,  those  disciples  had 
their  trials  as  we  have  ours.  3.  Next,  it  was  multitudinous.  '*  The  whole  multi- 
tude." There  is  something  most  inspiriting  and  exhilarating  in  the  noise  of  a 
multitude  singing  God's  praises.  4.  Still  it  is  worthy  of  observation  that,  while 
the  praise  was  multitudinous,  it  was  quite  select.  It  was  the  whole  multitude  "  of 
the  disciples."  The  Pharisees  did  not  praise  Him — they  were  murmuring.  All 
true  praise  must  come  from  true  hearts.  If  thou  dost  not  learn  of  Christ,  thou 
canst  not  render  to  Him  acceptable  song.  5.  Then,  in  the  next  place,  you  will 
observe  that  the  praise  they  rendered  was  joyful  praise.  ♦'  The  whole  multitude  of 
the  disciples  began  to  rejoice."  I  hope  the  doctrine  that  Christians  ought  to  be 
gloomy  will  soon  be  driven  out  of  the  universe.  6.  The  next  point  we  must  men- 
tion is,  that  it  was  demonstrative  praise.  They  praised  Him  with  their  voices,  and 
with  a  loud  voice.  If  not  with  loud  voices  actually  in  sound,  yet  we  would  make 
the  praise  of  God  loud  by  our  actions,  which  speak  louder  than  any  words ;  we 
would  extol  Him  by  great  deeds  of  kindness,  and  love,  and  self-denial,  and  zeal, 
that  so  onr  actions  may  assist  our  words.  7.  The  praise  rendered,  however,  though 
very  demonstrative,  was  very  reasonable ;  the  reason  is  given — "  for  all  the  mighty 
works  that  they  had  seen."  We  have  seen  many  mighty  works  which  Christ  has 
done.    8.  With  another  remark,  I  shall  close  this  first  head — the  reason  for  their 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zix. 

joy  was  a  personal  oce.  There  is  no  praise  to  God  so  sweet  as  that  which  fiowt 
from  the  man  who  has  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  II.  I  shall  now  lead  yon 
on  to  the  second  point — their  praise  found  vent  for  itself  in  an  appbopriatb  song. 
*'  Blessed  be  the  King  that  comethin  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Peace  in  heaven,  and 
glory  in  the  highest."  1.  It  was  an  appropriate  song,  if  you  will  remember  that 
it  had  Christ  for  its  subject.  2.  This  was  an  appropriate  song,  in  the  next  place, 
because  it  had  God  for  its  object;  they  extolled  God,  God  in  Christ,  when  they  thus 
lifted  up  their  voices,  3.  An  appropriate  song,  because  it  had  the  universe  for  its 
scope.  The  multitude  sung  of  peace  in  heaven,  as  though  the  angels  were  esta- 
blished in  their  peaceful  seats  by  the  Saviour,  as  though  the  war  which  God  had 
waged  with  sin  was  over  now,  because  the  conquering  King  was  come.  Oh,  let  ua 
seek  after  music  which  shall  be  fitted  for  other  spheres  1  I  would  begin  the  musio 
here,  and  so  my  soul  should  rise.  Oh,  for  some  heavenly  notes'to  bear  my  passions 
to  the  skies  !  It  was  appropriate  to  the  occasion,  because  the  universe  was  its 
sphere.  4.  And  it  seems  also  to  have  been  most  appropriate,  because  it  had  grati- 
tude for  its  spirit.  III.  Thirdly,  and  very  briefly — for  I  am  not  going  to  give  much 
time  to  these  men — we  have  intrtjsivk  objections.  "  Master,  rebuke  Thy  disciples." 
But  why  did  these  Pharisees  object  ?  1.  I  suppose  it  was,  first  of  all,  because  they 
thought  there  would  be  no  praise  for  them.  2.  They  were  jealous  of  the  people. 
3.  They  were  jealous  of  Jesus.  IV.  We  come  now  to  the  last  point,  which  is  this 
— An  tjnanswekable  abgdment.  He  said,  "  If  these  should  hold  their  peace,  the 
very  stones  would  cry  out."  Brethren,  I  think  that  is  very  much  our  case;  if  we 
were  not  to  praise  God,  the  very  stones  might  cry  out  against  us.  We  must  praise 
the  Lord.  Woe  is  unto  us  if  we  do  not  1  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  hold  oar 
tongues.  Saved  from  hell  and  be  silent  I  Secure  of  heaven  and  be  ungrateful  t 
Bought  with  precious  blood,  and  hold  our  tongues !  Filled  with  the  Spirit  and  not 
speak!  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  triumphal  entry  : — Christ's  triumphal  entrance 
into  Jerusalem  is  one  of  the  most  noted  scenes  in  gospel  story.  It  is  a  sun-burst 
in  the  life  of  the  Son  of  Man.  It  is  a  typal  coronation.  It  is  a  fore-gleam  of  that 
coming  day  when  Jesus  shall  be  enthroned  by  the  voice  of  the  universe.  I.  Thb 
SCENE.  II.  The  chief  lesson  inculcated  bt  the  scene  :  Enthususm  should 
BE  CONSECRATED  TO  THE  SERVICE  OF  Chkist.  There  was  feeling  and  thrill  and  deep 
life  and  outbursting  emotion  in  the  triumphal  entry  of  Jesus  into  Jerusalem,  and 
He  approved  it  aU.  I  argue  for  the  equipment  of  enthusiasm  in  the  service  of 
Christ.  There  should  be  a  fervency  of  spirit  that  will  radiate  both  light  and  heat. 
The  faculties  should  be  on  fire.  There  are  higher  moods  and  lower  moods  in  the 
Christian  life,  just  as  there  are  higher  moods  and  lower  moods  in  the  intellectual 
life.  Every  scholar  knows  that  there  are  such  things  as  inspirational  moods,  when 
all  the  faculties  awaken  and  kindle  and  glow  ;  when  the  heart  burns  within ;  when 
the  mind  is  automatic,  and  works  without  a  spur  ;  when  the  mental  life  is  intense  • 
when  all  things  seem  possible ;  when  the  very  best  in  the  man  puts  itself  into  tne 
product  of  his  pen  ;  when  the  judgment  is  quick  and  active,  the  reason  clear  and 
far-seeing,  and  the  conscience  keen  and  sensitive.  These  are  the  moods  in  which 
we  glory.  These  are  the  moods  which  give  the  world  its  long-lived  masterpieces. 
These  are  the  moods  which  we  wish  to  enthrone  in  the  memories  of  our  friends. 
Tou  remember  Charles  Dickens's  charming  story,  "  David  Copperfield."  In  it  there 
is  pictured  the  parting  that  took  place  between  the  two  young  men,  Steerforth  and 
Copperfield.  Young  Steerforth,  putting  both  hands  upon  Copperfield's  shoulders, 
says :  "  Let  us  make  this  bargain  1  If  circumstances  should  separate  us,  and  you 
should  see  me  no  more,  remember  me  at  my  best."  Steerforth  is  only  a  type  of  as 
all.  Every  one  of  us  wishes  to  be  remembered  at  his  best.  I  argue  for  man's  best 
in  the  rehgious  life.  Man  is  at  his  best  only  when  he  is  enthusiastic.  Enthusiasm 
is  power.  It  is  the  locomotive  so  f uU  of  steam  that  it  hisses  at  every  crack  and 
crevice  and  joint.  Such  a  locomotive  carries  the  train  with  the  speed  of  wind 
through  hiU  and  over  valley.  It  has  been  enthusiasm  that  has  carried  the  Christian 
Church  through  the  attainments  of  ages.  By  enthusiasm,  when  it  is  in  an 
eminent  degree,  men  propagate  themselves  upon  others  in  matters  of  taste,  of 
affection,  and  of  religion.  Iron  cannot  be  wielded  at  a  low  temperature.  There 
must  be  heat,  and  then  you  can  weld  iron  to  iron.  So  you  cannot  weld  natures  to 
each  other  when  they  are  at  a  low  temperature.  Mind  cannot  take  hold  ^  of  mind 
nor  faculty  of  faculty,  when  they  are  not  in  a  glow.  But  when  they  are  in  a  glow 
they  can.  We  see  this  exemplified  in  society.  Hundreds  and  hundreds  of  men, 
who  are  rich  in  learning,  ponderous  in  mental  equipment,  ample  in  philosophical 
power,  who  are  low  in  degree  of  temperature,  and  who  labour  all  their  life,  achieve 


tXAP.  xnt.]  ST.  LUKE.  437 

but  little.  Ton  eee  right  by  the  side  of  these  men,  men  who  have  no  comparison 
•with  them  in  native  power  or  in  culture,  but  who  have  simplicity,  straightforward- 
ness, and,  above  all,  intensity,  and  what  of  them  ?  "Why,  this :  they  are  eminent 
in  accomplishing  results.  There  are  people,  I  know,  who  have  an  antipathy  to 
enthusiasm  and  emotion  in  religion.  They  object  that  we  cannot  rely  upon 
enthusiasm.  They  forgot  that  if  it  spring  from  the  grace  of  God  it  has  an  inex- 
haustible fountain.  One  hour  enthusiastic  people  cry  "  Hosanna  "  ;  but  the  next 
hour  they  cry  "  Crucify."  I  deny  that  the  hosanna  people  of  Jerusalem  ever  cried 
"  crucify."  The  charge  that  they  did  is  without  a  single  line  of  Scripture  as  a 
basis.  Peter  and  James  and  John,  and  men  of  that  class,  did  they  cry  •'  crucify  "  ? 
Yet  the  hosanna  people  were  made  up  of  such.  In  a  city  in  which  there  were 
gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  nation  not  less  than  two  millions,  there  were  certainly 
enough  people  of  diverse  minds  to  create  two  parties  diametrically  opposed,  without 
requiring  us  to  slander  the  grace  of  enthusiasm,  and  circulate  false  reports  about 
the  hosanna  people.  I  stand  by  the  hosanna  people,  and  fearlessly  assert  that 
there  is  no  proof  against  their  integrity.  Enthusiasm  1  That  is  what  the  Church 
needs.  It  is  only  the  enthusiast  who  succeeds.  Enter  the  history  of  the  cause  of 
Christ,  and  there  also  will  you  find  the  statement  borne  out.  What  was  Paul,  the 
chief  of  Christian  workers,  but  an  enthusiast  ?  Eob  Paul  of  his  enthusiasm, 
and  you  blot  out  of  existence  the  churches  of  Corinth  and  EphesuB  and  Galatia 
and  Thessalonica  and  Troas.  Rob  him  of  his  enthusiasm  and  you  annihilate 
the  Epistles  to  the  Eomans,  Corinthians,  Ephesians,  and  the  Pastoral  Epistles. 
This  day  of  palm  branches  has  been  duplicated  and  reduplicated  ever  since  the 
triumphal  entrance  of  Jesus  into  Jerusalem,  and  this  reduplication  will  continue 
until  Jesus  is  ultimately  and  for  ever  crowned  on  the  great  day  of  final  consum- 
mation. The  world  is  full  of  hosannas  to  the  Son  of  David.  The  humble  Chris- 
tian school  of  the  missionary  in  foreign  lands  is  a  hosanna  sounding  through 
the  darkness  of  heathendom.  The  philanthropic  institution  that  rises  into  sight 
all  over  Christendom  is  a  hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  echoing  through  civiliza- 
tion. The  gorgeous  cathedral,  standing  like  a  mountain  of  beauty,  is  a  hosanna 
to  the  Son  of  David  worked  into  stone  and  echoing  itself  in  the  realm  of  art. 
The  holy  hfe  of  every  disciple,  which  is  seen  on  every  continent  of  the  earth,  is  a 
hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  ringing  throughout  all  humanity.  These  hosannas  shall 
be  kept  until  the  end  come,  and  then  all  the  universe  of  God's  redeemed  will  peal 
forth  the  grand  Hallel  in  the  hearing  of  eternity.  {David  Gregg.)  Enthusiasm  in 
religion: — What  is  your  religion  if  it  have  no  enthusiasm  in  it?  Who  wants  a 
wooden  Christianity  or  a  logical  Christianity  only  ?  Christianity  loses  its  power 
when  it  loses  its  pathos.  Every  religion  goes  downward  when  it  loses  the  power  of 
exciting  the  highest,  most  intelligent,  and  most  courageous  enthusiasm.  Some  of 
US  have  need  to  be  cautioned  against  decorum.  Alas  1  there  are  some  Christian 
professors  who  do  not  know  what  it  is  to  have  a  moment  of  transport  and  ecstasy, 
unutterable  emotion — who  never,  never  go  away  upon  the  wings  of  light  and  hope, 
bat  are  always  standing,  almost  shivering — eating  up  tbeir  dry  logic,  and  never 
knowing  where  the  blossom,  the  poetry,  and  the  ecstasy  may  be  found.  Christianity 
ehould  excite  our  emotion  and  make  as  sometimes  talk  rapturously,  and  give  qs, 
sometimes  at  least,  moments  of  inspiration,  self-deliverance,  and  victory.  It  was 
eo  in  the  case  before  us.  The  whole  city  was  moved.  There  was  passion,  there 
was  excitement  on  every  hand.  But,  then,  am  I  advocating  nothing  but  emotioSv 
sensibility,  enthusiasm  ?  Far  from  it.  First  of  all,  let  there  be  intelligent  appre- 
hension, and  profound  conviction  respecting  truth.  Let  ns  see  that  our  foundations, 
theological  and  ethical,  are  deep,  broad,  immovable.  Then  let  us  carry  up  the 
building  until  it  breaks  out  into  glittering  points,  far-flashing  pinnacles,  and 
becomes  broken  into  beauty.    {Ihid.)        The  coming  King : — I.   The  estimate 

rOBMED    OF    0T7B    LoBD    BY    THE    CBOWD.        "  King."        U.     HiS    CBEDENTIALS.        "  In 

the  name  of  the  Lord."  Divine  commission  attested.  1.  By  His  words. 
2.  By  His  works.  III.  The  blesbinob  which  come  with  the  xiko.  "  Peace  " 
and  "  glory."  IV.  These  blessingb  accompant  eyebt  advent  o»  "  the  King 
that  COMETH  IN  THE  NAME  OF  THE  LoBD."  1.  It  was  SO  at  His  first  coming. 
2.  It  shall  be  so  at  His  second  coming.  It  is  so  when  the  King  comes  to  reign 
in  the  sinner's  heart.  {J.  Treanor,  B.A.)  Hosannas  to  Jesus : — I.  That  which 
HAXXB  HEN  tLLUSTBious,  AND  woBTHT  OF  DISTINCTION — lofty  genius,  heroism,  ex- 
pansive benevolence,  mighty  achievements — all  that  intensified  and  sublimely 
illastrated  to  a  degree  infiuuitely  beyond  what  is  possible  to  attainment  by  ordinary 

mortals,   DIBTINGITISHES  THE    LOBO   JeSUS,  AND    ENTITLES  HiM   TO  OUB   HOMAGE   ANB 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xH, 

PBAI8E.  Take — 1.  Genius.  What  is  genius  ?  Genius  originates,  invents,  creates. 
Talent  reproduces  that  which  has  been,  and  still  is.  The  spindles  in  our  mills,  the 
locomotives  in  our  shops  represent  genius.  Theswift  play  of  the  one,  and  the  majestio 
tread  of  the  other  across  the  continents  on  paths  of  steel,  is  genius  in  motion.  Nov 
turn  the  light  of  these  definitions  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  see  if  He  has  not 
genius  worthy  of  our  best  praise.  It  were  folly  to  deny  creative  genius  to  Him,  by 
whose  word  the  worlds  sprang  into  being,  and  by  whose  power  they  continue  to 
exist.  It  were  folly  to  deny  originality  to  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  mind  and 
matter,  life  and  spirit.  Folly  again  to  deny  superior  intellectual  acumen  to  Him, 
who  is  the  light  of  all  intellect,  the  inspirer  of  all  right  thought,  the  incentive  to  all 
noble  action.  The  blind  saw,  and  the  deaf  heard,  and  the  dumb  spake,  and  the  dead 
awoke.  As  to  the  modifying  influence  which  Coleridge  says  is  implied  in  the 
highest  type  of  genius,  it  has  been  truly  affirmed  :  "  The  genius  of  Christ,  exerted 
through  His  gospel  in  which  His  Spirit  presides,  has  made  itself  felt  in  all  the 
different  relations  and  modifications  of  life.  Take  the  next  element  of  distinction 
that  men  applaud.  2.  Heroism.  Spontaneous  is  the  homage  paid  to  heroes. 
In  some  lands  they  aie  deified  and  worshipped.  Heroism  1  Produce  another 
example,  such  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  from  the  long  list  of  the  world's  iUustrioas ! 
Take  the  next  quality  in  lofty  manhood  that  men  extol — 3.  Benevolence.  Of 
this  Jesus  was  the  perfect  personification.  4.  Wonderful  achievement  receives 
applause  from  men.  The  multitude  praised  God  '*  for  all  the  mighty  works  that 
they  had  seen."  Our  works  may  be  good,  Christ's  are  mighty  as  well  as  good.  We 
visit  the  siok,  Christ  cures  them.    II.  Hia  pbaises  have  been  bono  in  all  aoes, 

ON     ACCOUNT     OF     HiS    WORTHINESS     OF    ALL     HOMAOE     IN    HEAVEN    AND       IN      EABTH. 

Abraham,  the  representative  of  the  patriarchal  age,  looked  forward  to  His  day 
with  glad  anticipations,  and  praised  the  promised  seed.  Jacob,  in  his  dying 
predictions,  sang  of  the  Shiloh,  and  waited  for  His  salvation.  Moses  chose  for  the 
subject  of  his  eulogy  the  Prophet  like  unto  himself,  unto  whom  the  people  should 
hearken.  David  in  exalted  strains  sang  of  His  character  and  works,  His  trials  and 
triumphs.  His  kingdom  and  glory,  and  died  exulting,  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  from  everlasting  and  to  everlasting.  Let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  His 
glory.  Amen  and  Amen."  The  prophets  all  rejoiced  in  Zion's  delivery  and 
Judah's  King.  At  His  birth,  angels  and  shepherds  and  sages  sang  His  praises. 
As  in  some  of  the  old  monasteries  one  choir  of  monks  relieved  another  choir  in 
order  that  the  service  of  praise  might  not  cease,  so  as  one  generation  of  the  children 
of  God  has  retired  to  its  rest,  another  has  caught  up  the  glad  strains  of  hosannas  to 
Christ,  and  in  this  way  they  have  been  perpetuated  down  the  centuries.    III. 

ThEBE   abb    those,  HOWEVER,  WHO  WOULD   INTERRUPT  THE    PRAISES  OF  God'S  PEOPLE  : 

TEA,  WORSE,  SUPPRESS  THEU  ALTOGETHER.  We  learn  from  our  text  that  this  was  the 
desire  of  the  Pharisees  on  this  occasion.  Thus,  the  wicked  and  unbelieving  now 
would  stop  all  ascriptions  of  praise  to  Christ.  They  would  quench  the  flames  of 
devotion  that  the  Holy  Ghost  kindles  in  the  hearts  of  beUevers.  "  Praise  Nature  ! 
Sing  odes  to  the  landscape  I  Worship  the  beautiful  in  what  your  eyes  see,  the 
tangible,  that  of  which  you  have  positive  knowledge  through  the  certification  of 
your  senses  1  Don't  be  wasting  your  devotion  on  the  unseen,  the  unknowable,  thb 
mythical,  the  intangible !  " —  so  says  the  Agnostic.  "Do  homage  to  Beason  I  Let 
Keason  be  the  object  of  -your  worship  ;  its  cultivation  the  effort  of  your  life  I 
What  wonders  it  has  accomplished  in  science  and  philosophy  1" — so  says  the 
Eationalist.  "  Sing  of  wine,  feasting,  sensuality  1  Bacchus  is  our  god.  Praise 
him !  Worship  him  1 "  says  the  Profligate.  "  Sing  of  wars,  and  of  victories,  and  of 
conquests !  Apollo  is  the  god  whom  we  worship,  and  whose  praises  we  resound. 
Therefore,  spread  your  palms  with  paeans  of  triumph  at  the  feet  of  victors  I " — so  say 
Conquerors.  Standing  erect,  with  his  thumbs  thrust  in  the  arm-holes  of  his  vest, 
his  chest  thrown  forward  and  his  head  backward,  like  an  oily,  overfed,  bigoted 
Pharisee,  "  Sing  of  me,"  says  the  Self-Bighteoua  "  Praise  the  Saviour  1  "  says  the 
believer,  and  the  call  receives  a  response.  {N.  H.  Van  Arsdale.)  The  stones 
would  Immediately  cry  out. — Guilty  silence  in  Christ's  cause : — I.  Our  Saviour 
means  to  intimate,  that  this  silence  would  be  vile.  Let  us,  then,  proceed  with 
this  dismal  business,  and  arraign  this  fearful  silence.  1.  We  tax  it,  first,  with  the 
most  culpable  ignorance.  If  you  found  a  man,  who  was  entirely  insensible  to  Milton's 
"  Paradise  Lost,"  or  Cowper's  "Task,"  dead  to  the  touches  of  Eaffael's  pencil,  to 
all  the  beautiful  and  enbUme  scenery  of  nature,  to  all  that  is  illustrious  and  inspir- 
ing in  human  disposition  and  action,  you  would  be  ready  to  say,  "Why,  thi« 
senselessness  ia  enough  to  maVo  a  stone  speak."     But  where  are  we  now  ?     Men 


«HAP.  XIX.]  ST.  LUKE.  429 

may  be  undeserving  of  the  praise  they  obtain  ;  or  if  the  praise  be  deserved  ia 
the  reality,  it  may  be  excessive  in  the  degree ;  but  there  can  be  no  excess  here.  It 
is  impossible  to  ascribe  titles  too  magnificent,  attributes  too  exalted,  adorations 
too  intense,  to  Him  who  is  "  fairer  than  the  children  of  men,"  who  is  the  "  chief 
among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely. "  Now  to  be  insensible  to  such  a  Being 
as  this,  argues,  not  merely  a  want  of  intellectual,  but  of  moral  taste,  and  evinces, 
not  only  ignorance,  but  depravity.  He  who  died,  not  for  a  country,  but  for  tha 
world,  and  for  a  world  of  enemies — He  awakens  no  emotion,  no  respect.  Shame, 
Bhame  !  2.  We  charj^e  this  silence,  secondly,  with  the  blackest  ingratitude  I 
need  not  enlarge  on  this  hateful  vice.  The  proverb  says,  "  Call  a  man  ungratefol, 
and  you  call  him  everything  that  is  bad."  The  Lacedaamonians  punished 
ingratitude.  "  The  ungrateful,"  says  Locke,  "  are  like  the  sea  ;  continually  receiv- 
ing  the  refreshing  showers  of  heaven,  and  turning  them  all  into  salt."  "  The  un- 
grateful," says  South,  "  are  Hke  the  grave  ;  always  receiving,  and  never  returning." 
But  nothing  can  equal  your  ingratitude,  if  you  are  silent.  For  you  will  observe, 
that  other  beneficiaries  may  have  some  claim  upon  their  benefactors,  from  a 
community  of  nature  or  from  the  command  of  God  ;  but  we  have  no  claim,  we  are 
unworthy  of  the  least  of  all  His  mercies.  3.  We  tax  this  silence  with  shameful 
cruelty.  We  are  bound  to  do  all  the  good  in  our  power.  If  we  have  ourselves  re- 
oeived  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  we  are  bound  to  impart  it.  If  the  inhabitants  of  a 
village  were  dying  of  a  disease,  and  you  had  the  remedy,  and  held  your  peace ;  if  yoa 
saw  a  fellow-creature  going  to  drink  a  deadly  poison,  and  instead  of  warning  him 
you  held  your  peace  ;  if  you  saw  even  a  poor  stranger  going  to  pass  over  a  deep  and 
deadly  river,  upon  a  broken  bridge,  and  you  knew  that  a  little  lower  down  there  was 
A  marble  one,  and  you  held  your  peace  ;  is  there  a  person,  that  would  ever  pass  you 
without  standing  still  and  looking  round  upon  you  and  exclaiming,  "  You  detestable 
wretch,  you  infamous  villain,  you  ought  not  to  live  1 "  "If  these  should  hold  their 
peace,  the  stones  would  cry  out."  How  is  it,  then,  that  we  have  so  much  less  moral 
feeling  than  the  lepers  had,  when  they  said,  "  This  is  a  good  day,"  and  reflecting 
upon  their  starving  babes  said,  "  If  we  altogether  hold  our  peace,  some  evil  will 
befall  us ;  let  us  therefore  go  and  tell  the  king's  household  "  ?  II.  Secondly,  our 
Saviour  seems  to  intimate,  that  this  silence  is  difficult.  Now  we  often  express  a 
difficulty  by  an  obvious  impossibility.  The  Jews  said,  "  Let  Him  come  down  from 
the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  on  Him."  Their  meaning  was,  that  they  could  not 
believe  on  Him ;  for  the  condition  seemed  to  them  impossible.  The  Saviour  here 
Bays,  *'  Yoa  impose  silence  upon  these  disciples,  but  tbis  is  impossible;  yes,  they 
will  hold  their  peace  when  dumb  nature  shall  become  vocal,  and  not  before."  "  If 
these  should  hold  their  peace,  the  stones  would  cry  out ;  "  that  is,  their  principles 
will  actuate  them,  their  feelings  must  have  operation  and  utterance.  If  yoa  could 
enter  heaven,  you  would  find  that  there  He  attracts  every  eye,  and  tills  every  heart, 
and  employs  every  tongue.  And  in  the  Chorch  below  there  is  a  degree  of  the  same 
inspiration.  1.  The  impressions  that  Christ  makes  upon  His  people  by  conviction 
are  very  powerful.  2.  The  impressions  He  produces  by  hope  are  very  powerful. 
8.  The  impressions  He  produces  by  love  are  very  powerful.  He  so  attaches  His 
disciples  to  Himself  by  esteem  and  gratitude,  as  to  induce  them  to  oome  oat  of  the 
world,  to  deny  themselves,  to  take  up  their  cross,  and  to  be  willing  to  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  III.  Our  Saviour  here  intimates  further,  that  this 
SILENCE  wouu)  BB  USELESS.  "  If,"  says  He,  "those  of  whom  you  complain  were  to 
hold  their  peace,  you  would  gain  nothing  by  their  silence ;  there  woald  not  be  a 
cessation  of  My  praise,  bat  only  a  change  of  instruments  and  voices  ;  rather  than 
My  praise  should  be  suspended,  what  they  decline  others  would  be  sure  to  rise  up  to 
perform ;  if  these  should  hold  their  peace,  the  stones  would  cry  oat."  1.  First,  we 
shall  glance  at  the  supposed  silence.  2.  And,  secondly,  observe  the  improbable 
instraments  that  are  employed  to  perpetuate  the  testimony.  It  is  not  said,  "  If 
these  shonld  hold  their  peace  the  angels  wonld  cry  oat,  men  would  cry  out  " ;  no  ; 
"  the  stones  would  cry  oat."  Can  stones  live?  can  stones  preach  and  write  and 
translate  the  Scriptures  T  Can  they  aid  in  carrying  on  such  a  cause  as  this  ?  Why 
not  f  He  can  employ,  and  often  does  employ,  the  most  unlikely  characters.  The 
wrath  of  man  praiseth  Him.  We  see  this  in  the  case  of  Henry  the  Eighth.  It  ia 
of  great  importance  to  know  whether  we  are  God's  servants,  or  whether  we  are  God's 
enemies ;  bat  as  to  Him,  He  can  employ  one  as  well  as  another.  This  was  the 
case  with  Saal  of  Tarsus.  He  was  a  persecutor  once ;  but  then  he  was  called  by 
Divine  grace,  and  preach  the  faith  that  once  he  endeavoured  to  destroy.  All  th« 
Lord's  people  onoe  were  enemies:  but  He  found  a  way  into  their  hearts,  and  He 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.,  xnu 

made  them  friends.  They  were  all  once  "  stones  "  ;  but  of  these  stones  God  ha» 
"raised  up  children  unto  Abraham."  They  were  as  hard  as  stones,  as  insensible  as 
stones,  as  cold  as  stones  ;  but  they  are  now  flesh,  and  every  feeling  of  this  flesh  is- 
alive  to  God.  3.  Thirdly,  notice  the  readiness  of  their  appearance.  "  If  these- 
should  hold  their  peace,  the  stones  would  immediately  cry  out."  "The  King's 
business  requires  haste " ;  both  because  of  its  importance,  and  the  fleeting 
uncertainty  of  the  period  in  which  He  will  allow  it  to  be  performed.  4.  Then, 
lastly,  observe  the  certainty  of  their  appearance,  when  they  become  necessary.  The 
certainty  of  the  end  infers  the  certainty  of  all  that  is  intermediately  necessary  to  it. 
Upon  this  principle,  our  Saviour  here  speaks ;  it  is,  I  am  persuaded,  the  very  spirit 
of  the  passage.  "  My  praise  " — as  if  He  should  say — "  must  prevail ;  and  therefore 
means  must  be  forthcoming  to  accomplish  it,  and  to  carry  it  on."  Let  us,  first, 
apply  this  certainty  as  the  prevention  of  despair.  Secondly  ;  as  a  check  to  vanity 
and  pride.  My  brethren  in  the  ministry,  we  are  not — no,  we  are  not  essential  tO' 
the  Kedeemer's  cause.  We  are  not  the  Atlases  upon  which  the  Church  depends  j. 
the  government  is  upon  His  shoulders  who  filleth  all  in  all.  Thirdly  ;  as  a  spur 
and  diligence  and  zeal.  (TF.  Jay.)  All  ought  to  praise  God: — Have  we  not 
heard,  or  have  I  not  told  you  years  ago,  of  some  great  conductor  of  a  musical 
festival  suddenly  throwing  up  his  baton  and  stopping  the  proceedings,  saying. 
"  Flageolete  !  "  The  flageolete  was  not  doing  its  part  of  the  great  musical  utterance. 
The  conductor  had  an  ear  that  heard  every  strain  and  tone.  You  and  I  probably 
■would  have  heard  only  the  great  volume  of  music,  and  would  have  been  glad  to 
listen  with  entranced  attention  to  its  invisible  charm,  but  the  man  who  was  all  ear 
noted  the  absence  of  one  instrument,  and  throwing  up  his  baton,  he  said, 
**  Flageolet."  Stop  till  we  get  all  that  is  within  us  into  this  musical  offering.  So  1 
-want  our  hymn  of  praise  to  be  sung  by  every  man,  by  every  power  in  his  souL  {J, 
Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  41-44.  He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  It. — Christ  weeping  over 
Jerusalem : — I.  The  Exclamation  of  Christ,  and  His  teabs  in  their  bejection 
TO  THE  qdilty  CITY.  1.  He  remembered  days  of  old.  On  these  sinners  the  object 
of  His  mission  seemed  entirely  lost.  2.  But  with  the  self-denying  love  of  a  patriot,, 
and  the  grace  of  a  Saviour,  He  looked  beyond  His  own  sufferings,  and  fixed  His  eye 
on  theirs.  What  an  appeal  to  His  pity  was  there  1  The  city  was  beleaguered  andi 
lost — the  dwelling  of  Holiness  was  laid  waste.  3.  The  sentence  is  broken  and 
incomplete.  It  is  eloquently  completed  by  the  tears,  which  are  the  natural  language- 
of  compassion,  and  express  its  intentness  beyond  all  words.  What  the  present 
might  have  been  1  II.  The  beabino  of  the  record  on  ourselves.  1.  There  are 
things  which  pre-eminently  belong  to  your  peace.  2.  The  period  allotted  to  you  for 
attending  to  them  is  definite  and  brief.  3.  Should  your  day  close,  and  leave  you 
unsaved,  your  guilt  will  be  great,  and  your  condition  remediless.  4.  This  is  » 
spectacle  calling  for  the  profoundest  lamentation.  5.  The  tears  of  Jesus  prove 
His  unextinguished  compassion  for  the  guilty.  (John  Harris.)  The  teart 
cf  Jesus: — I.  Lost  Privileges. — "  Oh,  that  thou  hadst  known  the  things  which 
belong  unto  thy  peace."  II.  Lost  Opportunities. — "  Even  thou  in  this  thy  day. 
Nations  and  men  have  their  day  :  1.  Youth.  2.  Special  occasions,  as  Confirmation 
3.  Eeligious  strivings  within  our  own  manifold  opportunities,  which  may  be  prized 
and  used,  or  neglected  and  abused.  HI.  Lost  Souls. — "  But  now  they  are  hid 
from  thine  eyes."  (Clerical  World.)  Jesus  weeping  over  perishing  sinners: — L 
That  gospel  blessings  abb  conducive  to  the  peace  of  mankind.  They  are  the- 
things  which  belong  unto  our  peace.  Here  let  us  more  particularly  observe — L  What 
those  things  are  to  which  our  Lord  refers.  The  blessings  of  grace  in  this  world- 
Deliverance — from  bondage,  condemnation,  and  guilty  fears  (Psa.  cxvi.  16  ;  Isa. 
xii.  1  ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  4) ;  and  holiness — both  of  heart  and  life  (Obadiah  17  ;  Eom.  vi. 
22).  The  blessings  of  glory  in  the  eternal  state.  An  eternal  life  of  rest,  felicity, 
honour,  and  security  (Rom.  ii.  6,  7).  2.  How  these  things  are  conducive  to  our 
peace.  They  belong  unto  our  peace  as  they  produce  sweet  tranquillity  of  mind  (EccL 
ii.  26).  This  arises  from  peace  with  God  (Rom.  v.  1);  peace  of  conscience  (2  Cor.  i, 
12) ;  a  peaceable  disposition  (James  iii.  18,)  ;  the  joy  of  victorj'  (Rom.  viii.  37  r 
1  Cor.  XV.  57)  ;  and  the  joy  of  hope  (Rom.  v.  2,  and  xiv.  17).  Oar  test  teaches  us — 
n.  That  these  blessings  must  be  known  to  be  enjoyed.  "  Oh  that  thou  hadst 
known,"  Ac.  The  knowledge  thus  necessary  must  be — 1.  A  speculative  knowledge  i 
that  is,  we  must  have  a  correct  view  of  them  as  they  are  exhibited  in  God's  Wor3 
—For  we  are  naturally  without  them  (Rom.  iii.  16-18).     We  must  seek  them  tt 


XIX.J  ST.  LUKE,  431 

obtain  them  (Job  xxii.  21 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  5).  And  we  must  understand  them  in  order 
that  we  may  seek  them  aright :  we  must  understand  the  nature  of  them ;  the 
necessity  of  them ;  and  the  way  to  obtain  them  (Prov.  xix.  2).  The  knowledge  hero 
required  must  also  be — 2.  An  experimental  knowledge.  This  is  evident—From 
the  testimony  of  inspired  apostles  (2  Cor.  v.  1 ;  xiii.  5  ;  1  John  v.  19).  And  from 
the  nature  of  gospel  blessings  ;  spiritual  sight,  liberty,  and  health,  must  be 
experienced  to  be  enjoyed.     Our  text  teaches  us — III.  That  a  season  is  aitobded 

UB    FOB  ACQmRINO    THE    KNOWLEDGE    OF    THESE   BLESSINOS.       1.    This    SeaSOU     IS     here 

called  our  day,  because  it  is  the  time  in  which  we  are  called  to  labour  for  the 
blessings  of  peace  (John  vi.  27  ;  Phil.  ii.  12 ;  13  ;  2  Peter  iii.  14).  2.  This  season 
is  favourable  for  seeking  the  things  here  recommended  ;  for  they  are  set  before  us 
(Deut.  XXX.  19,  29) ;  we  have  strength  promised  to  seek  them  with  (Isa.  xl.  31); 
and  we  have  hght  to  seek  them  in  (John  xii.  36).  Hence,  we  should  also 
recollect — 3.  This  season  is  limited ;  it  is  only  a  day.  Our  text  also  teaches  us, 
with  respect  to  gospel  blessings — IV.  That  it  is  God's  will  they  shodlo  bs 
BNJOTED  BT  VS.  Thls  is  Certain.  1.  From  the  wish  of  Christ — "  O  that  thou 
hadst  known,"  &c.  Such  a  wish  we  find  often  repeated  by  God  in  His  Word,  and 
expressed  in  the  kindest  manner ;  see  Deut.  v.  29,  xxxii.  29 ;  Isa.  xlviii.  18.  2. 
From  the  tears  of  Christ.  These  demonstrate  the  sincerity  of  His  wish  (Deut. 
xxxii.  4)  ;  the  great  importance  of  godliness  (1  Tim.  iv.  8)  ;  and  the  dreadful 
doom  of  impenitent  sinners  (Rom.  ii.  8,  9).  3.  From  the  visitations  of  Christ.  He 
visited  us  by  His  incarnation  ;  and  He  still  visits  us  by  the  strivings  of  His  Spirit,  the 
gifts  of  His  providence,  and  the  ministry  of  His  Word.     V.  That  all  who  seek  these 

BliESSINQS    ABIGHT      WILL    OBTAIN      THSM.         VI.      ThAT     THE     BEJECTION     OF     THE8B 

BLBSsiNQS  18  PUNISHED  WITH  DESTBUCTION.  {Theological  Sketch-book.)  The  tears 
of  Jems  : — We  are  told  three  times  of  Christ  weeping  :  in  this  passage ;  in  John 
zi.  35 ;  in  Heb.  v.  7.  1.  Jesus  wept  in  sympathy  with  othees.  At  Bethany.  1. 
It  is  not  sinful  to  weep  under  affliction.  2.  The  mourner  may  always  count  on  the 
sympathy  of  Jesus.  3.  When  our  friends  are  mourning,  we  should  weep  with  them. 
^  II.  The  teab  of  Jesus'  compassion.  Text.  1.  Observe  the  privileges  which  were 
granted  the  Jews,  and  neglected.  2.  Observe  the  sorrow  of  Jesus  for  the  lost.  IH. 
The  teabs  of  peesonal  suffebino.  Probably  the  Agony  in  Gethsemane  is  alluded 
to  in  Heb.  v.  7.  1.  Think  not  that  because  you  suffer  you  are  not  chosen.  2. 
Nor  that  you  are  not  a  Christian  because  you  feel  weak,  {W.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The 
tears  of  Jesus : — I.  Our  Lord,  by  His  tears  over  Jerusalem  proclaims  to  us  the  duty 
or  lookino  at  the  things  of  this  wobld  in  theib  tbue  light,  of  estimating  all  that 
surrounds  us,  not  as  it  appears  to  the  hope,  the  fear,  the  enthusiasm,  the  pride  of 
many,  but  as  it  is  viewed  in  the  sight  of  God,  whose  judgment  shall  alone  stand, 
when  the  false  standards  and  false  excitements  of  the  moment  have  passed  for  ever 
away.  His  tears  speak  to  us  the  same  lesson  which  He  elsewhere  taught  in  words, 
"Judge  not  after  the  appearance,  but  judge  righteous  judgment."  '  For  there 
was  apparently  little  to  draw  forth  the  tears  of  our  Blessed  Lord  at  that  moment. 
And  is  it  not  so  now,  my  brethren  ?  Do  we  not  exult  and  rejoice  in  things,  and 
persons,  and  scenes  which  would  call  forth  only  tears  from  our  Saviour  7  Oh  that 
we  may  strive  to  see  things  in  their  true  light— that  is,  in  the  light  of  the  eternity 
in  which  we  shall  soon  find  ourselves  I  oh  that  we  may  estimate  them,  not  by  the 
standards  of  sense  and  time,  but  in  the  true  balance  of  God's  unerring  judgment ! 
II.  And,  secondly,  we  see,  as  from  other  passages  of  Holy  Scripture,  the  exceeding 
SINFULNESS  OF  SIN,  in  that  sin  has  the  power  of  calling  forth  tears  from  the  Saviour 
in  the  midst  of  so  much  exultation  and  beauty.  AIi  1  my  brethren,  nothing  is  so 
truly  mournful  as  sin.  It  is  the  great  evil  of  life ;  neither  poverty,  nor  sic^ess, 
nor  slanderous  words,  nor  the  contempt  of  the  world,  have  any  real  sting  in  them 
apart  from  this.  Take  sin  away,  and  the  world  becomes  a  Paradise.  Take  an 
away,  and  the  lives  of  the  unfortunate  are  filled  with  happiness.  It  is  sin  which 
has  cast  a  blight  over  existence  on  every  side  of  as  :  trace  each  form  of  suffering 
and  sorrow  around  you  to  its  ultimate  source,  and  you  will  find  that  source  to  be  sin. 
Alas  1  brethren,  there  are  many  who  come  to  Church,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  and 
even  approach  the  Holy  Communion,  and  yet  know  nothing  of  their  own  hearts,  and 
the  deadly  poison  of  nnrepented  sin,  which  dwells  within  them,  and  the  real  peril  in 
which  their  souls  are  placed.  (S.  W.  Sheffington,  M.A.)  Christ  weeping  over 
Jerusalem  : — Tears,  looked  at  materially,  admit  a  very  ready  explanation  ;  they  are 
•ecreted  by  a  gland,  they  are  drawn  from  the  fluids  of  the  body,  and  are  rounded  and 
bronght  down  by  the  law  of  gravitation.  ^  The  poets  give  the  spiritual  meaning, 
when  they  call  tears  the  blood  of  the  wounds  of  the  soul,  the  leaves  of  Uie  plant  ot 


433  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zn. 

sorrow,  the  hail  and  rain  of  life's  winter,  the  safety-valves  of  the  heart  under 
pressure,  the  vent  of  anguish-showers  blown  up  by  the  tempests  of  the  soul.  If 
God  had  a  body  He  would  weep.  God  does  grieve,  and  if  He  had  a  corporeal 
nature,  tears  would  not  be  inconsistent  with  all  the  recognized  attributes  of  Deity. 
There  is  an  eloquence  in  tears  which  is  irresistible.  There  is  a  sacredness  in  tears 
which  almost  forbids  the  discussion  of  weeping.  There  is  a  dignity  in  tears  which 
makes  them  consistent  with  the  utmost  intelligence  and  strength  and  nobility  ol 
character.  There  are  men  with  hard  heads,  cold  hearts,  good  digestion,  and  full 
purses,  who  know  nothing  of  tears ;  but  he  who  values  true  manhood  and  spiritual 
riches  will  not  envy  such  men.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be 
comforted."  1.  Jesus  wept  as  a  man,  as  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  as  the  perfect  man 
Christ  Jesus,  "Behold  the  man."  To  the  utmost  extent  of  human  sadness  waa 
Jesus  grieved,  when  "He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it."  2.  Jesus  wept  as  a 
Jew.  The  broadest  love  may  be  discriminating,  and  may  include  strong  individual 
attachments.  Jesus  was  interested  in  every  land  and  in  every  race.  No  land  or 
race  was  shut  out  from  His  heart.  But  there  were  special  attachments  to  Palestine, 
and  strong  ties  to  the  holy  city.  3.  Jesus  wept  as  a  teacher.  Light  had  come  into 
the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil. 
And  this  was  the  condemnation.  He  was  conscious  of  a  pure  heart  in  His  teaching, 
and  He  saw  the  corruption  of  the  human  heart  in  the  rejection  and  contempt  of  His 
instructions.  4.  Jesus  wept  as  a  foreteller,  as  a  prophet.  He  who  was  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person,  declared  the  mind 
and  will  and  heart  of  God,  when,  beholding  this  doomed  city.  He  wept  over  it.  5. 
JesuB  wept  as  the  Messiah.  He  was  the  woman's  seed  promised  in  Paradise.  He 
was  the  Shiloh  seen  by  Jacob.  He  was  the  prophet  revealed  to  Moses.  He  was  the 
Prince  of  peace  spoken  of  by  Isaiah.  To  Him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness.  The 
law  was  His  shadow.  Much  was  written  in  the  Psalms  and  prophets  concerning 
Him.  His  history  and  character.  His  words  and  works,  fulfilled  various  scriptures 
written  by  inspired  men.  His  claim  to  the  Messiahship  was  distinct  and  full  and 
clear.  Yet  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men.  Yet  when  He  came  to  His  own. 
His  own  received  Him  not.  This  was  a  sorrow  for  His  Father's  sake.  He  was  the 
fufilment  of  His  Father's  ancient  and  oft-repeated  promise.  He  was  His  Father's 
unspeakable  gift.  What  a  requital  of  infinite  and  eternal  love  1  And  this  was  a 
sorrow  for  the  people's  sake.  Instead  of  receiving  Him  they  were  looking  for 
another.  But  Jesus  knew  that  their  eyes  would  fail  by  looking  in  vain.  6. 
Jesus  wept  as  a  Saviour,  He  looked  upon  those  who  would  not  be  saved,  and  wept 
over  them.  Measure  His  sorrow  by  His  knowledge  and  by  His  hatred  of  sin  ; 
measure  His  sorrow  by  His  own  freedom  from  sin  ;  measure  His  sorrow  by  the  love 
of  His  great  heart.  To  see  evil,  and  to  be  unable  to  remedy  it,  is  anguish ;  but  to  see 
evil,  and  to  be  able  and  willing  to  remove  it,  and  to  be  baffled  by  the  wilfulness  and 
waywardness  of  the  sufferer  or  of  the  evil-doer,  is  anguish  keener  and  deeper  still. 
Jesus  knew  all  this  when  "  He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it."  7.  Jesus  wept  aa 
God  manifest  in  flesh.  The  God  grieved  and  the  man  wept.  The  Divine  nature 
does  suffer,  and  these  tears  reveal  the  fact.  The  whole  nature  of  the  Christ, 
the  Bedeemer  of  men,  was  sad,  when  Jesus  on  this  occasion  wept.  These  tears, 
then,  were  the  tears  of  a  man,  a  patriot,  a  teacher,  and  a  prophet.  They  were  the 
tears  of  the  Messiah  and  the  Saviour  and  the  God-man.  They  were  both 
haman  and  divine,  tears  of  pity  and  patriotism,  tears  of  sympathy  and 
of  displeasure,  tears  of  a  wounded  spirit  and  of  a  loving  soul,  {S.  Martin,  D.D.) 
The  tears  of  Jeitiia : — 1.  The  tears  of  Jesus  Christ  are  compassionate  tears.  Like 
His  heavenly  Father,  He  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth.  The 
office  of  tbe  Judge  is  not  His  willing  office.  It  made  Him  sorrowful  to  see  men  sin. 
It  made  Him  sorrowful  to  see  men  reject  the  gospel.  It  made  Him  sorrowful  to 
see  men  choose  their  own  misery.  2.  Again,  the  tears  of  Jesus  are  admonitory 
warning — some  have  even  called  them  terrible  tears.  He  would  not  have  wept,  I 
think  we  may  say  with  confidence,  merely  because  a  little  pain,  or  a  little  suffering, 
or  even  a  little  anguish  and  misery,  lay  before  us.  He  shrank  not  from  pain  :  Ha 
endured  suffering — yea,  the  death  of  the  Cross.  He  faced  anguish  and  misery,  and 
flinched  not.  There  was  only  one  thing  which  Jesus  Christ  could  not  endure — or, 
if  He  endured  it  for  an  hour  Himself,  certainly  could  not  advise  others,  nor  bear 
others,  to  encounter  without  Him — and  that  was  the  real  displeasure,  the  prolonged 
hiding  of  the  countenance,  the  actual,  terrible,  punitive  wrath  of  God.  It  was 
because  He  foresaw  that  for  impenitent,  obstinate,  obdurate  sinners,  that  He  wept 
these  bitter  tears.    I  call  them  admonitory  tears  ;  I  will  even  consent  to  call  them 


CEAP.  nx.]  ST.  LUKE.  433 

terrific  tears.  They  seem  to  say  to  ns,  "  Oh,  presame  not  too  far  1 "  ''3.  I  will  add 
another  thing.  The  tears  of  Jesus  were  exemplary  tears.  As  He  wept,  so  ought 
we  to  weep.  We  ought  to  weep  tears  of  sorrow  over  our  sins.  We  ought  to  weep 
tears  of  repentance  over  our  past  lives,  over  our  many  short-comings  and  back- 
elidings,  omissions  of  good  and  commissions  of  evil,  lingering  rebelling  obstinate 
sins,  cold  poor  languishing  dying  graces.  But  more  than  this.  We  ought  to  weep 
more  exactly  as  He  wept.  He  wept  not  for  Himself :  so  also,  io  our  place,  should 
we.  4.  I  will  add,  without  comment,  a  fourth  word — the  tears  of  Jesus  Christ  are 
consolatory  tears.  Yes,  this,  in  all  their  accents,  is  the  sweet  undersong —Jesus 
Christ  cares  for  us.  The  tears  of  Jesus  are,  above  all  else,  consolatory.  _  They  say 
to  us,  "  Provision  is  made  for  you."  They  say  to  us,  "  It  is  not  of  Christ,  it  is  not  of 
God,  if  you  perish."  They  say  to  us,  "  Escape  for  your  life — because  a  better,  and  a 
higher,  and  a  happier  hfe  is  here  for  you  1 "  (Dean  Vaughan).  Christ  weeping 
over  nnners : — 1.  What  oub  Lord  did  :  "  He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it." 
1.  He  wept  for  the  sins  they  had  committed,  and  the  evil  treatment  which  He 
Himself  should  receive  at  their  hands.  2.  He  foresaw  the  calamities  which  were 
coming  upon  them,  and  desired  not  the  woful  day.  3.  Spiritual  judgments  also 
awaited  them,  and  this  was  matter  of  still  greater  lamentation.  4.  The  final 
consequence  of  all  this  also  affected  the  compassionate  Saviour;  namely,  their 
everlasting  ruin  in  the  world  to  come.  II.  Consider  what  oub  lord  said  as  well 
AS  DID,  when  He  came  near  and  beheld  the  city — "  If  thou  hadst  known,"  &c. 
Here  observe — 1.  The  whole  of  religion  is  expressed  by  knowledge.  Not  specu- 
lative, but  such  as  sanctifies  the  heart  and  influences  the  conduct — the  holy  wisdom 
that  Cometh  from  above.  2.  That  which  it  chiefly  concerns  us  to  know  is,  "  the 
things  which  belong  to  our  peace."  3.  There  is  a  limit  to  which  this  knowledge  is 
confined.  ♦•  This  thy  day."  4.  When  this  time  is  elapsed,  our  case  will  be  for 
ever  hopeless :  Now  tiie  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  "  are  hid  from  thine 
eyes  1 "  Improvement.  (1)  Did  Christ  weep  for  sinners ;  and  shall  they  not  weep 
for  themselves?  Does  not  God  call  us  to  weeping ;  and  does  not  our  case  call  for 
it?  (2)  Let  us  beware  of  rejecting  the  gospel,  and  trifling  with  our  privileges, 
lest  we  be  given  up  to  final  impenitence.  Insensibility  is  the  forerunner  of  destruc- 
tion. (3)  Let  those  who  are  truly  acquainted  with  the  things  which  belong  to  their 
peace  be  thankful,  and  adore  the  grace  which  has  made  them  to  differ.  {B. 
Beddome,  M.A).     Christ  weeping  over  Jerusalem : — I.  I  observe,  in  the  first  place, 

that   THERE  ARE   CERTAIN   THINGS,   THE   KNOWLEDGE   OV  WHICH   IB   ESSENTIAL  TO   YOUR 

BTBBNAii  PEACE.  1.  It  deeply  concerns  you  to  know,  for  example,  in  what  situation 
you  stand,  witii  respect  to  God  and  the  world  to  come.  2.  Again,  it  deeply 
concernB  us  to  know,  whether  God,  by  any  means,  may  be  reconciled,  to  those  who 
have  set  themselves  in  opposition  to  His  will.  3.  Once  more,  it  deeply  concerns 
you  to  know,  what  state  of  mind  is  required  in  you,  in  order  that  you  may  profit 
by  the  grace  and  mercy  of  your  dying  Saviour.  II.  I  observe,  secondly,  that  the 
Son  or  God  is  host  aefectionatelt  desirous  that  we  should  know  these 
things.  III.  Nevertheless,  the  coupabsion  of  Christ  will  not  stop  the 
COURSE  or  His  justice,  if  these  things  be  finally  disregarded.  1.  How 
inexcusable  is  the  thoughtless  sinner,  who,  after  all,  vdll  not  know  the  things 
which  belong  unto  his  peace  1  2.  But  reflect,  on  the  other  hand,  how  welcome 
will  every  returning  sinner  bel  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  Saviour's  tears  over 
Jertisalem  ;-4-The  sight  of  Jerusalem,  then,  as  Jesus  was  about  to  enter  it,  suggested 
the  thought  of  national  misery  and  degradation.  He  looked  on  the  Temple,  the 
place  where  the  adorations  and  sacriflces  of  successive  generations  had  been 
offered ;  it  was  now  profaned.  He  looked  on  the  city,  the  metropolis  of  Judsea, 
and  the  scene  of  high  solemnities,  and  it  was  peopled  by  transgressors  ;  was  soon 
to  be  reduced  by  the  might  of  a  conquering  power,  its  streets  to  be  drenched  with 
blood,  and  its  buildings  to  be  razed.  Our  Lord  might  chiefly  allude  to  outward 
calamity,  but  can  we  doubt  that  the  moral  state  of  Jerusalem's  inhabitants  was 
what  gave  Him  most  concern?  The  doom  spoken  of  descended  as  an  act  of 
vengeance,  inflicted  by  God.  But  Jesus  thought  also  of  a  still  more  pitiable  wreck. 
He  reflected  on  the  consequences  of  unp»irdoned  sin.  It  was  not  merely  the  over- 
throw of  tower  and  palace,  the  destruction  of  what  had  been  for  so  long  a  "  house 
of  prayer " ;  this  called  not  forth  an  expression  of  such  deep  concern.  It  was 
principally  an  idea  of  the  spiritual  ruin  coming  upon  such  as  had  transgressed 
against  so  much  light  and  warning,  and  who  had  resisted  such  earnest  and  oft- 
repeated  pleadings.  I.  In  further  speaking  from  these  verses,  we  may  consider, 
first  of  all,  the  words  to  imply,  that  the  people  of  Jerusalem  has  misuoted  a 
VOL.  m.  28 


434  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

*'  DAT  " — OF  oiiACE,  NOW  DBAWiNO  TO  A  OhOBM — a  time  which  had  not  been  foUowecl 
by  suitable  and  adequate  improvement.  II.  Let  os  consider  our  Lord's  manifesta- 
tion of  feeling  and  His  words  on  this  occasion,  as  showing  the  importance  of  in 

TIME    ATTENDING   TO    THE    THINGS    THAT   "  BELONO   TO  OUB    PEACE."       III.    It    WOUld 

appear  that  there  is  a  set  time  allowed  fob  doing  this.  Though  it  were  trua 
that  the  spirit  of  God  ceases  not  to  strive  with  man ;  though  there  were  not  danger 
of  the  sinner  being  wholly  given  up  to  his  idols,  yet  to  defer  so  great  a  work  is 
hazardous  and  foolish.  Is  that  the  best  time  for  turning  to  God  when  languor  and 
decay  are  attacking  the  frame  ?  FV.  Our  Saviour's  declaration,  when  He  bewailed 
Jerusalem's  impenitence,  is  a  pledge  op  His  concekn  fob  the  state  of  sinners 
generally.  Observe  how  long-suffering  He  was,  saying  still,  "  Turn  ye  atMyreproof." 
They  had  slain  His  prophets  ;  they  were  about  to  shed  His  blood  ;  they  had  cast 
dishonour  on  the  law  and  appointments  of  the  Most  High,  provoking  Him  to 
anger ;  yet  Jesus'  sorrow  showed  the  grief  that  filled  His  soul.  These  were  the 
words  of  One  who  knew  no  guile,  and  to  whom  iniquity  was  abhorrent.  Be 
encouraged  therefore,  0  sinner,  however  many  thine  iniquities  and  pungent  thy 
sense  of  guilt,  to  seek  His  favour.  {A.  R.  Bonar,  D.D^  Jesus  weeping  over 
tinners  : — I.  Sin  is  no  trifle.  II.  Evert  uan  has  his  day  of  merciful  visita- 
tion. But  mercy  has  its  limits.  The  day  of  grace  will  close.  III.  The  sinker's 
doom  is  sealed  when  Christ  gives  him  dp.  The  die  cast  salvation  beyond  reach. 
Hope  gone.  lY.  It  is  a  lost  season  of  mercy  and  opportunity  that  will  so 
BMBiTTEB  THE  ETERNITY  OF  THE  LOST.  {J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  Tears  on 
i>ekolding  a  multitxide  of  men : — There  is  always  something  heart-moving  in  the 
«ight  of  a  multitude  of  men.  The  Persian  Xerxes  shed  tears  as  he  watched  the 
interminable  ranks  march  past  him  on  the  way  to  Greece.  The  iron  Napoleon 
once  melted  as  he  reviewed  the  vast  army  which  followed  him  to  his  Bussian 
campaign.  And  when  the  proudest,  sternest,  and  most  imfeeling  hearts  have  shown 
emotion,  what  should  we  expect  from  the  pitiful  Son  of  God  ?  Whenever  He  saw 
the  multitude,  and  especially  the  city  multitude,  He  was  moved  with  compassion. 
That  mass  of  life,  heaving  and  throbbing  like  a  troubled  sea ;  that  ceaseless  tramp 
of  eager  feet  and  confused  roar  of  innumerable  voices ;  that  measureless  volume 
of  mingled  hope  and  despair ;  that  infinitely  varied  array  of  faces,  old  and  young, 
careless  and  anxious,  joyous  and  miserable, — of  laughing  girls  and  broken-hearted 
widows,  of  jocund  joys  and  haggard  old  men,  with  hungry  looks ;  that  incongruous 
procession  of  wealth  and  poverty,  of  want  and  superfluity,  of  rags  and  velvet,  of 
vulgarity  and  refinement,  of  respectability  and  vice,  of  plump  and  well-fed  life  and 
vagrant  homelessness,  of  purity  and  shame,  of  sweet  religious  hope  and  dismal 
despair,  of  titled  splendour  and  nameless  vagabondism,  of  feet  winged  with  hope 
climbing  to  ambition's  goal  and  of  feet  hurrying  to  the  dark  river  to  end  the  tragedy 
of  bitter  memories  in  one  last  cold  plunge ;  that  myriad-headed  life,  with  all  its 
selfish  isolations,  its  fierce  loneliness  amid  the  jostling  crowd,  its  every  heart 
knowing  its  own  bitterness  or  gloating  over  its  own  joy,  unknown  and  unsym- 
pathized  with  by  its  neighbours  ;  that  awful  race  of  passion  and  frenzied  quest  in 
which  the  runners  forget  that  they  are  immortal  souls  with  God's  image  stamped 
on  every  face.  How  was  it  possible  for  Him,  to  whom  all  souls  were  dear — all  the 
children  of  the  heavenly  Father — how  was  it  possible  for  Him  to  look  upon  that, 
or  think  of  it,  without  emotion  melting  into  tears  ?  What  man  or  woman  of  us  can 
think  of  it  without  sharing  in  its  pity  and  pathetic  interest  ?  (J.  Oreenhough,  M.A.) 
Christ's  compassion  for  the  Jewish  people : — I.  Inquire  what  there  was  a  the 
«TATB  or  the  Jewish  people,  which  so  moved  the  compassion  of  oub  Lobd.  The 
privileges  of  the  Jewish  people  were  above  all  lands.  They  were  blessed  with  a 
divine  theocracy ;  and  to  them  belonged,  amongst  other  most  important  privileges, 
the  oracles  of  God.  What  could  God  have  done  which  He  had  not  done  for  them  ? 
The  compassion  of  our  Lord  was  moved,  therefore — By  their  inflexible  obstinacy. 
Theirs  was  the  sin  of  men  who  hate  the  light,  lest  by  it  their  deeds  should  be 
reproved  t  2.  Inveterate  hostility.  That  greatness  and  power,  when  abused,  should 
be  hated,  would  not  excite  our  surprise ;  but  that  goodness  and  mercy,  when 
exercised,  should  be  hated,  might  well  excite  our  surprise,  were  it  not  abundantly 
proved  in  their  history.    3.  By  their  impending  judgments.     H.  Consider  what 

■THB  PBGSBNT  STATE  OF  THAI  PEOPLE   CALLS  FOR  FROM  OUB  HANDS.      (W.  Marsk,  M.A.) 

The  tears  and  lamentations  of  Jesm: — I.  First,  we  are  to_  contemplate  cub  Lord's 
inward  obief.  1.  We  note  concerning  it  that  it  was  so  intense  that  it  could  not 
be  restrained  by  the  occasion.  The  occasion  was  one  entirely  ^by  itself :  s  brief 
gleam  of  sunlight  in  a  oloady  day,  a  glimpse  of  summer  amid  a  orael  winter. 


«HA».  XIX]  8T.  LUKE.  48* 

That  mast  have  been  deep  grief  which  ran  counter  to  all  the  demands  of  tha 
season,  and  violated,  as  it  were,  all  the  decorum  of  the  occasion,  turning  a 
festival  into  a  mourning,  a  triumph  into  a  lament.  2.  The  greatness  of  His  grief 
may  be  seen,  again,  by  the  fact  that  it  overmastered  other  very  natural  feelings 
which  might  have  been,  and  perhaps  were,  excited  by  the  occasion.  Our  Lord 
«tood  on  the  brow  of  the  hill  where  He  could  see  Jerusalem  before  Him  in  all  its 
beauty.  What  thoughts  it  awakened  in  Him  1  His  memory  was  stronger  and 
quicker  than  ours,  for  His  mental  powers  were  unimpaired  by  sin,  and  He  could 
remember  all  the  great  and  glorious  things  which  had  been  spoken  of  Zion,  the  city 
of  God.  Yet,  as  He  remembered  them  all,  no  joy  came  into  His  soul  because  of  the 
victories  of  David  or  the  pomp  of  Solomon ;  temple  and  tower  had  lost  all  charm 
for  Him ;  "  the  joy  of  the  earth  "  brought  no  joy  to  Him,  but  at  the  sight  of  the 
venerable  city  and  its  holy  and  beautiful  house  He  wept.  3.  This  great  sorrow  of 
His  reveals  to  us  the  nature  of  our  Lord.  How  complex  is  the  person  of  Christ ! 
He  foresaw  that  the  city  would  be  destroyed,  and  though  He  was  divine  He  wept. 
While  His  nature  on  the  one  side  of  it  sees  the  certainty  of  the  doom,  the  same 
nature  from  another  side  laments  the  dread  necessity.  4.  In  this  our  Lord  reveals 
the  very  heart  of  God.  Did  He  not  say,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  tha 
Father  "  ?  Here,  then,  you  see  the  Father  Himself,  even  he  who  said  of  old,  "  As 
I  Uve,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked ;  but 
that  ihe  wicked  turn,"  &o.  5.  From  a  practical  lesson,  we  may  remark  that  this 
weeping  of  the  Saviour  should  much  encourage  men  to  trust  Him.  Those  who 
desire  His  salvation  may  approach  Him  without  hesitation,  for  His  tears  prove  His 
hearty  desires  for  our  good.  6.  This,  too,  I  think  is  an  admonishment  to  Christian 
workers.  Never  let  us  speak  of  the  doom  of  the  wicked  harshly,  flippantly  or 
without  holy  grief.  7.  Let  me  add  that  I  think  the  lament  of  Jesus  should  instruct 
all  Uiose  who  would  now  come  to  Him  as  to  the  manner  of  their  approach.  While 
I  appealed  to  you  just  now  were  there  any  who  said,  "  I  would  fain  come  to  Jesus, 
but  how  shall  I  come  "  ?  The  answer  is, — come  with  sorrow  and  with  prayer, 
even  as  it  is  written,  "  they  shall  come  with  weeping,  and  with  supplications  will  I 
lead  them."  As  Jesus  meets  you  so  meet  Him.  HI.  We  are  now  to  consider  oub 
Lobd's  vebbal  iamentations.  These  are  recorded  in  the  following  words :  "  Oh 
that  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong 
unto  thy  peace  1  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes."  1.  First,  notice,  he 
laments  over  the  fault  by  which  they  perished — "  Oh  that  thou  hadst  known." 
Ignorance,  wilful  ignorance,  was  their  ruin.  2.  The  Lord  laments  the  bliss  which 
they  had  lost,  the  peace  which  could  not  be  theirs.  "  Oh  that  thou  hadst  known 
the  things  that  belong  unto  thy  peace."  3.  But  our  Lord  also  lamented  over  the 
persons  who  had  lost  peace.  Observe  that  He  says, — "  Oh  that  thou  hadst  known, 
even  thou.  Thou  art  Jerusalem,  the  favoured  city.  It  is  little  that  Egypt  did  not 
know,  that  Tyre  and  Sidon  did  not  know,  but  that  thou  shouldst  not  know  I  "  Ah, 
friends,  if  Jesus  were  here  this  morning.  He  might  weep  over  some  of  you  and  say — ■ 
*'  Oh  that  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou."  4.  Our  Lord  wept  because  of  th« 
opportunity  which  they  had  neglected.  He  said,  "  At  least  in  ibis  thy  day."  It 
was  such  a  favoured  day  :  they  aforetime  had  been  warned  by  holy  men,  but  now 
they  had  the  Son  of  God  Himself  to  preach  to  them.  5.  The  Lord  Jesus  mourned 
again  because  He  saw  the  blindness  which  had  stolen  over  them.  They  had  shut 
their  eyes  so  fast  that  now  they  could  not  see :  their  ears  which  they  had  stopped 
had  become  dull  and  heavy  ;  their  hearts  which  they  had  hardened  had  waxen 
gross ;  so  that  they  could  not  see  with  their  eyes,  nor  hear  with  their  ears, 
nor  feel  in  their  hearts,  nor  be  converted  that  He  should  heal  them.  Why,  the 
truth  was  as  plain  as  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  and  yet  they  could  not  see  it ; 
and  80  is  the  gospel  at  this  hour  to  many  of  you,  and  yet  you  perceive  it 
not.  6.  Lastly,  we  know  that  the  great  flood>gates  of  Christ's  grief  were 
pulled  up  because  of  the  ruin  which  He  foresaw.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
tears  of  Je$tu : — Strangely  mysterious  are  these  tears  1  But  they  were  as  real 
as  they  are  mysterious — solemnly  and  awfully  real  —  the  bitterest  that  ever 
descended  from  a  grief- stricken  countenance.  They  were  the  tears  of  a  man,  but 
the  expression  of  Deity ;  and  viewing  them  in  the  light  of  the  ancient  love  and 
peculiar  complacency  with  which  Jerusalem  and  its  inhabitants  bad  been  divinely 
regarded,  we  may  designate  them  as  the  tears  of  disappointed  affection.  How 
briny  and  how  many  have  been  such  tears,  as  they  have  fallen,  hot  and  scalding, 
from  the  eyes  of  broken-hearted  weepers  I  There  are  the  tears  of  the  father,  welUug 
op  from  the  depths  of  parental  love,  in  thinking  of  his  prodigal  boy.    There  are 


A36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chip.  zxz. 

the  tears  of  the  mother,  wept  over  a  lost  daughter — tears  that  had  been  less  bittes 
bad  the  green  turf  received  them  instead  of  a  memory  of  shame.  Bitter,  indeed, 
are  such  tears,  but  not  so  intensive  of  sorrow  as  "  the  tears  of  Jesus  wept  over  lost 
souls."  I  have  read  somewhere  of  a  traveller  who  found  a  fragment  of  an  arch 
among  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem;  and  by  calculating  on  the  principles  of  architectural 
construction,  he  proved  that  the  arch,  when  complete,  must  have  spanned  the  gulf 
that  was  near  the  city,  and  have  rested  on  the  other  side.  That  ruined  arch,  to 
the  eye  ol  that  traveller,  indicated  what  it  originally  was,  as  contrasted  with  what 
it  then  was.  Sin  in  the  soul  reveals  the  same  thing.  In  man,  apart  from  sin,  we 
eee  what  the  soul  was  made  to  be.  In  sin  we  see  what  the  soul  is — a  noble  thing 
in  ruins.  It  is  solemnizing  to  walk  amidst  the  vestiges  of  some  sacred  temple — to 
pick  up  here  and  there  fragments  of  what  were  once  objects  of  beauty  and  strength; 
to  see  in  one  place  pieces  of  an  antique  window ;  in  another,  the  segment  of  a 
colossal  pillar  ;  elsewhere,  a  remnant  of  tracery  work,  with  bits  of  rich  and  curious 
mosaic.  But  what  must  have  been  the  emotions  of  Jesus,  as  He  stood  there  before 
the  collapsed  powers,  and  contemplated  the  desecrated  sanctities  of  human 
t«mplesl — souls  once  so  fair  in  beauty,  and  so  glorious  in  strength,  that  the 
Creator  looked  upon  them,  and  "  behold,  they  were  very  good  1  "  Now  so  com- 
pletely a  v>T:eck  that  as  the  Saviour  looked,  •'  He  beheld  and  wept  I  "  How  fearful 
is  the  power  belonging  to  man  1  Here  we  see  the  Son  of  God — One  whose  might 
and  dominion  over  all  material  forces,  satanic  agencies,  and  physical  ailments  were 
absolute.  No  power  stood  in  His  way  as  a  resisting  medium  save  one ;  and  this 
was  a  power  of  resistance  that  opened  the  floodgates  of  soul-sorrow,  drew  tears  from 
His  eyes,  and  broke  forth  in  the  convulsive  exclamation  :  "  O  Jerusalem  I  Jeru- 
salem 1 "  In  the  light  of  these  tears  what  awful  responsibility  is  seen  to  clothe 
the  human  spirit  1  What  power  of  will  I — of  a  will  that  can  resist  the  Divine  will  I 
"  How  often  would  I,  but  ye  would  not  1 "  (G.  H.  Jackson.)  Tears  a  true  mark 
of  manhood : — If  it  really  was  so,  as  has  been  gathered  from  Epiphanius,  that  some 
of  the  ancient  Christians,  or  persons  who  bore  the  name,  wished  to  expunge  Irom 
the  canon  of  Scripture  what  is  said  of  the  Saviour's  weeping  on  these  two  occasions, 
as  if  it  had  been  unworthy  of  so  glorious  a  Person  to  shed  tears,  it  was  very  strange, 
and  betrayed  at  once  a  sinful  disrespect  for  the  inspired  Word  of  God,  a  leaning  to 
the  doctrines  of  Stoical  pride  and  apathy,  and  an  ignorance  of  what  constitutes 
real  excellence  of  human  character.  It  is  certainly  a  mark  of  imbecility  to  be  given 
to  weep  for  trifling  reasons ;  but  to  weep  occasionally,  and  when  there  is  an 
adequate  cause,  instead  of  being  a  weakness,  is  perfectly  compatible  with  true 
courage  and  manly  sense,  nay,  is,  in  fact,  a  trait  in  the  character  of  the  majority 
of  the  most  heroic  and  stout-hearted  men  of  whom  we  read,  either  in  sacred  or 
profane  history.  As  examples  of  this  from  Scripture  may  be  mentioned,  Abraham, 
Isaac,  Joseph,  David,  Jonathan,  Hezekiah,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezra,  Nehemiah, 
Peter,  and  Paul.  Who  more  firm  than  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  ? — ^yet  he  thus 
writes  to  the  Philippians,  "  Many  walk,  of  whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and  now 
tell  you  even  weeping,  that  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  whose  end 
is  destruction."  As  for  King  David,  that  "  mighty  valiant  man,  and  man  of  war," 
the  ancestor,  and,  in  some  respects,  the  type  of  Christ,  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that 
he  wept  at  the  very  place  were  Jesus  now  wept ;  for  it  is  thus  written,  in  tb« 
account  of  his  fleeing  from  Jerusalem,  on  the  rebellion  of  Absalom,  "David  went 
up  by  the  ascent  of  Mount  Olivet,  and  wept  as  he  went  up,  and  had  his  head 
covered  ;  and  all  the  people  that  were  with  him  covered  every  man  his  head,  and 
they  went  up.  weeping  as  they  went  up."  Nor  is  it  foreign  to  the  defence  of  this 
act  of  weeping,  as  consonant  with  the  character  of  the  brave,  to  produce  the 
authority  of  heathen  writers.  Homer,  then,  attributes  tears  to  several  of  his 
heroes,  Virgil  to  ^neas,  and  their  respective  historians  to  Alexander  the  Great, 
Julius  CsBsar.  Cato,  Brutus,  Marcellus,  and  Scipio ;  and  one  of  the  Latin  poets 
says,  "  Nature  shows  that  she  gives  very  tender  hearts  to  mankind,  by  giving  them 
tears.  This  is  the  best  part  of  our  disposition  or  feeling."  Beyond  a  doubt,  the 
tenderness  which  our  Lord  now  displayed  harmonized  with,  and  set  off  by  contrast, 
the  wonderful  resolution  which  animated  Him.  when  "  He  turned  not  back,"  but 
"  set  His  face  like  a  flint "  to  what  was  now  before  Him.  (Jos.  Foote,  M.A,)  The 
ttart  of  love  : — I  heard  the  other  day  of  a  bad  boy  whom  his  father  had  often  rebuked 
and  chastened,  but  the  lad  grew  worse.  One  day  he  had  been  stealing,  and  his  father 
felt  deeply  humiliated.  He  talked  to  the  boy,  but  his  warning  made  no  impression; 
and  when  he  saw  his  child  so  callous  the  good  man  sat  down  in  his  chair  and  burst 
out  oiying,  m  if  his  heart  would  break.    The  boy  stood  very  indifferent  for  s  tim*. 


JJBAP.  XIX.]  ST.  LUKE.  iSl 

bat  at  last  as  he  saw  the  tears  falling  on  the  floor,  and  heard  his  father  sobbing, 
lie  cried,  "  Father,  don't ;  father,  don't  do  that  :  what  do  you  cry  for,  father  ?  " 
"  Ah  I  my  boy,"  he  said,  *•  I  cannot  help  thinking  what  will  become  of  you,  grow- 
ing up  as  you  are.  You  will  be  a  lost  man,  and  the  thought  of  it  breaks  my  heart." 
"  Oh,  father  I  "  he  said,  "  pray  don't  cry,  I  will  be  better.  Only  don't  cry,  and  I 
will  not  vex  you  again,"  Under  God  that  was  the  means  of  breaking  down  the 
boy's  love  of  evil,  and  I  hope  it  led  to  his  salvation.  Just  that  is  Christ  to  you. 
He  cannot  bear  to  see  you  die,  and  He  weeps  over  you,  saying,  "  How  often  would 
I  have  blessed  yon,  and  yon  would  not !  "  Oh,  by  the  tears  of  Jesus,  wept  over  you 
in  effect  when  He  wept  over  Jerusalem,  turn  to  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  If 
thou  hadst  known,  even  thou, — Christ's  lament  over  Jerusalem : — Let  us  observe, 
briefly,  that  in  our  Lord's  lament  over  the  doomed  city  there  is  to  be  traced  a 
threefold  vein  of  feeling,  1.  The  tears  and  words  of  Jesus  Christ  are  the  tears  and 
words  of  a  true  patriot,  for  Jerusalem  was  the  heart  and  head  of  the  nation.  It 
was,  politically  speaking,  more  what  Paris  is  to  France  than  what  London  is  to 
England,  and  although  Christ's  ministry  had  been  largely  spent  in  Galilee,  we 
know  from  St,  John's  Gospel  that  at  the  great  festivals  He  bad  laboured  often  and 
continuously  in  the  sacred  city.  It  may  be  thought  that  there  was  no  place  for 
patriotism  in  the  heart  of  Jesus  Christ — that  coming  as  He  did  from  heaven  with 
a  mission  to  the  whole  race  of  men,  and  with  a  work  to  do  for  each  and  for  all.  He 
could  not  thus  cherish  a  mere  localized  and  bounded  enthusiasm — that,  as  all  had 
interest  in  Him,  His  interest  must  reciprocally  be  for  all  and  world-embracing — 
that  as  in  Him,  according  to  His  apostle,  "  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  bar- 
barian nor  Scythian,  bond  nor  free,"  but  all  are  one,  so  He  must  have  been  Himself 
incapable  of  that  restricted  and  particular  concentration  of  thought  and  feeling  and 
action  upon  the  concerns  of  a  single  race  or  district  which  we  practically  under- 
stand by  patriotism.  My  brethren,  there  is  an  element  of  truth  in  this,  Jesus 
Christ,  although  a  Jew  by  birth,  belonged  by  His  freedom  from  local  peculiarities 
to  the  whole  human  family.  He  was,  in  a  higher,  more  comprehensive,  more 
representative  sense  than  any  before  Him,  human.  All  that  was  best,  all  that  was 
richest  in  humanity,  had  its  place  in  Him,  and  this  is,  at  any  rate,  one  import  of 
the  title  by  which  He  was  commonly  wont  to  speak  of  Himself  as  the  Son  of  Man 
But  His  relation  to  the  whole  race  did  not  destroy  His  relation  to  His  country  any 
more  than  it  destroyed  His  relation  to  His  family — to  His  mother,  to  His  foster- 
father,  to  those  first  cousins  of  His  who,  after  the  Hebrew  manner,  are  called  His 
brethren.  Certainly  He  subordinated  family  ties  as  well  as  national  ties  to  the 
claims  of  the  kingdom  of  God— to  His  Father's  business  as  He  called  it  when  only 
twelve  years  old.  But  because  He  kept  these  lower  sympathies,  claims,  obligations, 
in  their  proper  place.  He  did  not  ignore — He  did  not  disavow  them.  To  Him,  as 
the  Son  of  Mary,  His  family  was  dear ;  to  Him,  as  the  Son  of  David,  the  history 
of  His  country  was  dear.  He  would  have  parted  with  something  of  His  true  and 
deep  humanity  had  it  been  otherwise ;  and  therefore  when  He  gazed  on  the  city  of 
His  ancestors  (for  such  it  was)  and  saw  in  vision  the  Boman  conqueror  already 
approaching,  and  casting  up  earthworks  on  that  very  hill  on  which  He  was 
standing,  and  then  by  and  by  entering  the  sacred  city  with  fire  and  sword,  nor 
resting  from  His  work  till  he  had  ploughed  up  the  very  foundations,  till  not  one 
stone  had  been  left  upon  another.  His  Jewish  heart  felt  a  pang  of  anguish  which 
became  tears  and  words,  "  If  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou  at  least  in  this  thy 
day  the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  I  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine 
eyes."  2,  But  the  lamentation  of  Christ  over  Jerusalem  had  a  higher  than  any 
political  or  social  meaning.  The  polity  of  Israel  was  not  merely  a  state :  it  was  a 
church  as  well.  It  was  the  kingdom  of  God  among  men.  It  is  this  which  explains 
the  passionate  emotion  towards  Jerusalem  which  abounds  in  the  Psalter — the  joy 
in  her  glory,  in  her  beauty,  in  her  world-wide  fame — the  enthusiasm  which  can 
"  walk  about  Zion  and  go  round  about  her  and  tell  the  towers  thereof  " — the  anger 
deep  and  strong  which  cannot  forget  that  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem  it  was  Edom 
which  joined  in  the  cry  for  her  destruction — the  woe  which  cannot,  which  will  not, 
be  comforted  when  she  lies  before  the  heathen  in  her  ruin  and  her  desolation.  It 
was  as  a  theocratic  kingdom — as  we  should  gay,  a  Church — that  Jerusalem  and  the 
whole  Jewish  pohty  was  so  dear  to  tbe  reHgious  Jew ;  and  this  aspect  of  the  sacred 
city  underlies  those  words  which  Jesus  spoke  on  the  road  from  Bethany.  Once 
more.  Jerusalem  was  not  merely  a  country  or  a  church :  it  was  a  hive  of  men  and 
women :  it  was  a  home  of  souls.  Among  these,  to  each  of  these,  the  Divine  Christ 
had  preached,  but  had  preached  in  vain.    It  was  not  the  threatened  arohitecturt 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caAP.  jx*. 

of  the  Herodian  temple  which  drew  tears  from  those  Divine  eyes.  It  was  not 
chiefly  the  tragic  ending  of  a  history  rich  in  its  interest  and  its  incident.  It  waa 
the  condition,  the  destiny,  the  eternal  destiny  of  the  individual  men  and  women 
of  that  very  generation  to  which  Christ  had  ministered  ?  What  of  them  ?  They 
had  heard  Him ;  and  what  were  they  after  hearing  Him  t  Ah  I  it  was  over  those 
&oals  for  which  He  was  presently  to  shed  His  blood  that  Jesns  wept  His  tears.  It 
was  souls  that  for  Him  made  up  Jerusalem.  And  it  is  in  this  last  sense  that  our 
Lord's  words  come  most  closely  home  to  as.  Our  influence  upon  our  country, 
upon  our  portion  of  the  Church,  is  necessarily  very,  fractionally  small.  We  are 
each  one  as  a  private  soldier  in  a  great  army,  who  has  only  to  obey  orders  that  are 
given  by  others ;  but  in  our  individual  capacities  it  is  otherwise.  Here  as  single 
souls  we  decide  as  well  as  act.  Here  we  are  free  to  make  the  most  of  opportunities  : 
we  are  responsible  for  doing  so.  And  opportunities  come  to  us  as  we  walk  along 
the  path  of  life,  as  Christ  came  to  the  Jews  eighteen  centuries  ago.  They  come  to 
us :  we  see  them  coming.  We  know  that  they  are  at  hand — that  they  are  close 
upon  us.  We  know — we  might  know — that  they  will  not  be  within  our  reach 
always — perhaps  not  to-morrow.  It  is  the  time,  the  solemn  time,  of  our  visitation. 
It  is  some  friend  who  has  brought  before  us  for  the  first  time  the  true  meaning,  the 
true  solemnity,  the  blessedness  of  life.  It  is  some  change  of  circumstances,  some 
great  soul-subduing  sorrow  which  has  forced  upon  us  a  sense  of  the  transitory 
nature  of  all  things  here  below.  It  is  some  one  trath  or  series  of  truths  about  our 
Divine  Lord,  His  person,  or  His  work,  unknown,  or  known  and  rejected  before, 
which  has  been  borne  in  upon  us  with  a  strength  and  clearness  of  conviction  which 
we  cannot,  if  we  would,  possibly  mistake,  and  which  involves  obedience,  action, 
sacrifice,  as  its  necessary  correlatives.  It  is  an  atmosphere  of  new  aspirations, 
of  higher  thoughts,  of  longings  to  be  other  and  better  than  we  are,  that  has,  we 
know  not  how,  taken  possession  of  us.  It  is  the  presence  and  the  breathing,  could 
we  only  know  it,  of  a  heavenly  Friend  who  haunts  our  spirits  that,  if  we  will.  He 
may  sanctify  them.  Christ — in  one  word — has  been  abroad  by  His  Spirit  in  the 
streets  and  secret  passages  of  the  soul,  as  of  old  He  was  abroad  in  the  by-ways  and 
the  temple-courts  of  Jerusalem ;  and  the  question  is.  Have  we  welcomed  Him  ? — 
Have  we  held  EQm  by  the  feet,  and  refused  to  let  Him  go  except  He  bless  us  ?  We 
are  worse  off  though  we  may  not  trace  the  deterioration.  We  have  suffered  if  not 
without  yet  assuredly  within.  We  have  been  tried,  and  failed ;  and  failure 
means  weakness  entaUed  upon,  incorporated  into,  the  system  of  the  soul.  (Canon 
Liddon.)  Tenth  Sunday  after  Trinity: — We  have  here,  not  only  weeping 
but  tearful  lamentation,  weeping  accompanied  with  voice  and  words ;  and 
the  weeper  is  the  God-man,  Christ  Jesus.  Eternal  Deity  is  not  an  unfeeling 
Almightiness.  He  has  a  heart,  and  that  heart  can  be  touched,  and  grieved,  and 
moved  with  compassion,  and  stirred  with  emotions.  I.  God  intends  obeat  things 
FOB  THOSE  TO  wHou  He  HAS  GIVEN  His  woBD  AND  ORDINANCES.  He  had  choseu  Jeru- 
salem, and  set  up  His  temple  there,  and  made  it  the  centre  of  His  most  particular 
dealings  with  the  elect  nation,  that  it  might  reflect  His  glory,  show  forth  His 
praises,  and  be  the  crown  and  rejoicing  of  the  whole  earth.  The  thing  meant  to 
be  reached  and  made  the  everlasting  possession  of  its  people,  is  here  summed  up 
by  the  Saviour  in  the  word  "  peace " ;  not  mere  rest  from  disturbance  and 
strife ;  nor  yet  only  health  and  well-being,  as  the  word  often  denotes  in  the  Old 
Testament ;  but  that  which  i§  the  subject  of  Divine  promise,  the  highest  results  of 
God's  mercy  and  favour,  the  true  Messianic  blessing  of  everlasting  freedom  from 
the  distresses  and  consequences  of  sin,  and  exaltation  to  near  and  holy  relationship 
with  God  and  heaven.  And  great  things  are  meant  for  us,  even  the  same  things 
of  "  peace  "  which  pertained  at  first  to  the  ancient  Jerusalem.    II.  Theee  is  a  day 

OB  season  WHEBEIN  to  know  and  attend  to  the  THINGS  THAT  BE8PECT  THIS  "PEACE." 

And  unto  us  have  their  forfeited  privileges  now  descended.  This  is  our  day, 
beaming  with  all  the  light  and  blessings  which  once  belonged  to  the  Jews,  only 
marked  by  an  easier  ritual  and  a  better  economy  (Heb.  xii.  18-24).    IIL  The  day 

OP   OBACE    HAS    ITS    BOtJNDAEIES,    OVEB  WHICH    God'S   SAVING   MERCIES  DO   NOT  FOLLOW 

THOSE  WHO  MisiMPBovB  THEM.  There  was  a  Jewish  age  which  ended  in  judg- 
ment, and  the  cutting  off  of  those  who  failed  to  improve  it ;  and  so  this  present 
age  must  also  end.  The  day  of  grace  is  limited,  on  the  one  side,  by  the  late- 
ness of  the  period  in  life  at  which  the  gospel  comes  to  a  man,  and,  on  fbe  other,  by 
the  failure  of  the  faculties  necessary  to  handle  and  use  it.  It  ia  also  quite  possible 
for  one's  day  of  grace  to  terminate  while  yet  both  reason  and  life  oontinae.  There 
may  be  a  loss  of  the  external  means  and  opportnnitias  of  salvation,  or  raoh  a 


OBAP.  ziz.]  ST.  LUKE.  439 

separation  from  them,  as  for  ever  to  prevent  our  reaching  it.  And  where  there  has 
been  long  and  persistent  resistance  of  grace,  habitual  suppression  of  religious  con- 
victions and  feelings,  wilful  refusal  to  fulfil  known  duty,  and  persevering  withstand- 
ing of  the  influences  and  impulses  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  there  is  not  only  a 
possibility,  but  great  danger  of  bringing  on  a  state  of  callous  indifference,  and 
incapacitation  which  puts  the  offender  beyond  the  reach  of  salvation.  IV. 
Thb  tebmination  op  the  day  op  grace,  withodt  having  secdked  the  blessing 
FOB  which  it  was  INTENDED,  IS  AH  AWFUL  cAiiAMiTT.  In  the  case  of  Jerusalem 
It  brought  tears  and  lamentations  from  the  Son  of  God.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 
The  solicitude  of  Christ  for  incorrigible  sinners : — I.  Specify  some  op  the  more 
OBVIOUS  CHAEACTERisTics  OP  INCORBIGIBLB  MEN.  There  are  several  classes  of  people 
who,  to  say  the  least,  are  greatly  exposed  to  unyielding  impenitence,  and  who  give 
fearful  in(Ucation  of  final  ruin.  1.  This  may  be  affirmed  of  men  of  a  sceptical  turn 
of  mind.  Such  men  are  very  apt  never  to  become  pious.  2.  Another  class  of 
persons  who  are  rarely  made  the  subjects  of  grace  are  those  of  notoriously  loose 
and  vicious  habits.  3.  It  may  also  be  remarked,  that  men  who  are  in  the  habit  of 
making  light  of  sacred  things,  and  trifling  with  God,  seldom  become  men  of  piety. 
If  they  can  scoff  at  religion,  if  they  can  deride  its  conscientious  disciples,  there  is 
little  reason  to  beheve  they  will  ever  become  its  disciples  themselves.  4.  In  the 
same  melancholy  multitude  are  likewise  found  all  those  who  are  ardently  and 
eagerly  attached  to  the  world.  5.  There  is  another  class  of  men  who  exhibit  fearful 
Bymptoms  of  deep  degeneracy,  and  they  are  those  whose  chosen  companions 
are  the  guilty  enemies  of  God  and  all  righteousness.  Men  cannot  habitually 
associate  with  those  who  are  destitute  of  aU  moral  principle,  and  have  no  fear  of 
<jk)d  before  their  eyes,  without  partaking  of  their  character.  6.  Those  persons  also 
give  strong  indications  of  being  incorrigible,  who  have  become  hardened  under 
religious  privileges.  7.  Still  more  hopeless  are  those  who  have  outlived  conviction, 
and  resisted  the  Holy  Spirit.  8.  There  is  one  class  of  persons  more  whose  con- 
dition is  as  hopeless  as  that  of  any  we  have  mentioned ;  I  mean,  the  hypocrite  and 
eelf-deceiver.    II.  We  proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to  inquire,  what  thebe  is  in 

THE  CONDITIOK  of  SUCH  PERSONS  TO  EXCITE  THE  SYMPATHY  AND  SOLICITUDE  OP   ChBIST. 

1.  Their  determined  rejection  of  offered  mercy.  This  is  Uke  a  dagger  to  Christ's 
heart.  2.  Their  perversion  of  the  means  of  grace.  3.  Their  utterly  depraved 
character.  And  now,  in  conclusion,  I  cannot  forbear  remarking,  in  the  first  place, 
how  unlike  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  the  apathy  of  the  people  of  God  in  view  of  the 
perishing  condition  of  impenitent  men.  Secondly,  our  subject  strongly  enforces, 
the  importance  of  a  diligent  and  anxious  improvement  of  the  day  and  means  of 
salvation.  Once  more,  in  view  of  our  subject,  we  may  not  avoid  the  inquiry.  Are 
there  none  in  this  assembly  towards  whom  the  Saviour  is  now  exercising  the  same 
tender  compassion,  which  He  exercised  over  incorrigible  Jerusalem  ?  I  only  add, 
in  the  last  place,  if  such  are  the  compassions  of  Christ  towards  guilty  sinners,  what 
confidence  may  we  have  that  He  will  save  all  that  come  to  Him.  [G.  Spring,  D.D.) 
Christ  weeping  over  Jerusalem  : — I,  Why  did  He  weep  ?  It  has  been  supposed  that 
the  picture  of  that  approaching  ruin  and  desolation  which  was  coming  so  rapidly 
upon  the  unconscious  capital,  at  once  appalled  and  overwhelmed  Him.  He  sketches 
that  picture  in  strong  and  rapid  strokes  Himself  (vers.  43,  44).  And  that  which 
added  to  it  an  element  of  profoundest  gloom,  was  the  unconsciousness  of  those  whom 
such  a  doom  was  threatening.  Scarce  a  soul  in  Jerusalem  seems  to  have  been 
greatly  sensible  either  of  the  national  decadence  or  of  its  own  individual  peril. 
Must  it  not  have  been  this  that  made  Him  weep  ?  I  do  not  doubt  that  it  was  an 
element  in  that  Divine  and  unmatched  sorrow.  But  that  sorrow  loses  its  pro- 
foundest significance  unless  we  see  that  it  had  another  and  deeper  element  still. 
What  is  it,  that  in  the  thought  of  a  wise  and  good  man  costs  him  the  deepest  pang 
when  be  encounters  the  waywardness  and  wrong-doing  of  his  own  child  T  Is  it 
merely  that,  as  he  looks  forward,  he  sees  the  inevitable  misery  which  that  waywardness 
will  entail  t  Bat  yon  may  be  sure  that  such  a  parent  is  thinking  of  something  else 
with  a  keener  anguish  still.  He  is  thinking,  "  What  must  the  nature  be  that  is  so 
insensible  to  love  and  duty  and  goodness  I  "  He  is  thinking,  "What  are  the  moral 
sensibilities  of  one  to  whom  baseness  and  ingratitude  and  wrong-doing  are  such 
easy  and  instinctive  things  !  "  He  is  thinking,  "  What  have  I  to  hope  for  from  a 
ehild  whose  rnling  impulse  come  oat  in  deeds  like  these !  "  And  even  so,  I  think, 
it  was  with  Christ.  Nay,  we  are  not  left  to  our  surmises.  His  own  words  tell  us 
what  made  Him  weep:  "If  thoa  ....  thine  eyes."  It  was  this  spectacle  of 
human  insensibility,  of  eyes  that  would  not  see,  and  of  ears  that  would  not  hear^ 


UO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  XXX. 

that  broke  the  Saviour  down.  The  love  of  goodness,  the  longing  for  righteoneness, 
the  aspiration  for  nobleness  and  spiritual  emancipation — these  were  dead  in  them. 
And  it  was  this  that  made  Christ  weep.  II.  And  this  brings  me  to  that  other 
question  suggested  by  these  tears  of  Christ.  What  did  they  move  Him  to  do? 
Bemember,  that  so  far  as  the  Jerusalem  of  that  day  was  concerned,  He  Himself 
intimates  the  case  to  have  been  hopeless.  And  when  that  scornful  indifference  on 
their  part  was  exchanged  at  last  for  a  distinctive  enmity,  with  that  needless  prodi- 
gality, as  doubtless  it  seemed  even  to  some  of  His  own  disciples.  He  flung  away 
His  life.  Flung  it  away  ?  Aye,  but  only  how  soon  and  how  triumphantly  to  take 
it  again !  Such  a  history  is  pregnant  with  lessons  for  to-day.  There  are  a  good 
many  of  us,  who  from  the  elevation  of  a  thoughtful  observation,  are  looking 
down  on  the  city  in  which  we  live.  How  fevered  and  faithless  and  morally 
insensible  seem  multitudes  of  those  who  live  in  it.  How  can  such  a  one 
look  down  on  all  this  and  not  weep  7  God  forbid  that  such  a  spectacle  should 
leave  any  one  of  us  insensible  or  unmoved  1  But  when  that  is  said,  let  us  not 
forget  that  with  Christ  weeping  was  but  the  prelude  and  forerunner  of  working. 
There  were  tears  first,  but  then  what  heroic  and  untiring  toil  1  I  hear  men  say,  no 
matter  what  good  cause  invites  their  co-operation,  "  It  is  of  no  use.  Most  men  are 
bound  to  go  to  the  devil ;  it  is  the  part  of  wisdom  to  get  oat  of  the  way  and  let 
them  go  as  quickly  as  possible  " ;  and  I  brand  all  such  cries,  no  matter  in  what 
tones  of  complacent  hopelessness  they  may  utter  themselves,  as  treason  against 
God  and  slander  against  humanity.  Faithlessness  like  this  is  a  denial  of  God,  and 
of  goodness  as  well.  And  as  such,  it  is  an  atheism  with  which  no  terms  are  to  be 
made  nor  any  truce  to  be  kept.  For,  high  above  our  blinded  vision  there  sits  One 
who,  as  He  once  wept  over  Jerusalem  and  then  died  for  it,  now  lives  for  Jerusalem 
and  for  all  His  wayward  children,  and  who  bids  us  watch  and  strive  with  Him  for 
those  for  whom  once  He  shed  His  blood  I  And  if  He  is  still  watching,  even  as 
once  He  wept  over  His  creatures,  God  forbid  that  of  any  human  soul  you  and  I 
should  quite  despair  1  And  therefore  least  of  all  our  own  souls.  And  so,  while  we 
weep,  whether  it  be  over  the  evil  that  is  in  others  or  in  ourselves,  our  tears  will  be 
rainbows,  bright  with  the  promise  of  an  immortal  hope.  Aye,  far  above  the 
sorrows  and  the  sins  of  the  city  that  now  is,  we  shall  see  the  splendours  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  that  is  yet  to  be.  {Bishop  H.  C.  Potter.)  The  sinner's  day : — I.  That 
THE  SINNER  HAS  HIS  DAT  07  MEBCT  AND  HOPE.  1.  It  is  a  period  of  light.  Night  is 
the  season  of  darkness.    2.  A  period  of  activity.    We  must  work  now,  or  never. 

3.  An  exceedingly  limited  period.    "  A  day."    But  a  step  from  cradle  to  tomb. 

4.  The  present  period  is  our  day.  II.  This  day  is  accompanied  with  things  which 
BELONG  to  the  sinneb's  PEACE.  By  peace  here  we  understand  the  welfare,  the 
salvation  of  the  sinner.  The  peace  of  God  is  the  pledge  and  earnest  of  every 
blessing.  Now,  in  this  day  we  have — 1.  The  gracious  provisions  of  peace.  Christ 
has  made  peace  by  His  cross,  and  before  ns  is  the  cross  lifted  up.  2.  The 
invitations  and  promises  of  peace  belong  to  this  day.  3.  The  means  of  ob- 
taining peace  belong  to  this  day.    HI.  That  if  these  things  abe  not  known  now, 

IN  THIS  ODB  DAY,  THEY  WILL  BE  FOB  EVEB  BIDDEN   FBOM  OUB  BYES.      Now  obscrVO — 

1.  The  future  state  of  the  sinner  is  one  of  night.  As  such  it  is  a  period  of 
darkness.  2.  This  state  of  night  will  be  everlasting.  Application  :  We  learn — 1. 
That  the  sinner's  prcBcnt  state  is  one  of  probation  and  mercy.  2.  That  Qoi 
sincerely  desires  the  salvation  of  souls.  3.  That  all  who  lose  their  souls  do  so  by 
their  own  impenitency.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Christ's  lamentation  over  Jerusalem : — 
I.  The  exhibition  of  chabacteb  which  it  gives  us.  Here  we  perceive — 1.  The 
Saviour's  deep  interest  in  the  state  of  man.  2.  The  Saviour's  compassion  to  the 
chief  of  sinners.  II.  The  sentiments  it  conveys.  1.  That  there  are  things 
belonging  to  a  man's  peace  which  it  becomes  him  to  know.  2.  That  there  is  a  day 
in  which  a  man  might  know  these  things.  3.  That  if  this  day  be  wasted  these 
things  will  be  hidden  from  him.  {Essex  Remembrancer).  Three  times  in  a 
nation's  history : — These  words,  which  rang  the  funeral  knell  of  Jerusalem,  tell  oat 
in  our  ears  this  day  a  solemn  lesson;  they  tell  as  that  in  the  history  of  nations, 
and  also,  it  may  be,  in  the  personal  history  of  individuals,  there  are  three  times — a 
time  of  grace,  a  time  of  blindness,  and  a  time  of  judgment.  This,  then,  is  our 
subject — the  three  times  in  a  nation's  history.  When  the  Bedeemer  spake,  it  was  for 
Jerusalem  the  time  of  blindness ;  the  time  of  grace  was  past ;  that  of  judgment 
was  to  come.  I.  The  t;mb  of  grace.  We  find  it  expressed  here  in  three  different 
modes :  first,  '•  in  this  thy  day  " ;  then,  "  the  things  which  belong  to  thy  peace  " ; 
and  thirdly,  "the  time  of  thy  visitation."     And  from  thii  we  onderstand  the 


OBAP.  xxc]  57.  LUKE.  441 

meaning  of  a  time  of  grace ;  it  was  Jerusalem's  time  of  opportunity.  The  time  in 
which  the  Eedeemer  appeared  was  that  in  wiiich  faith  was  almost  worn  out.  Ha 
found  men  with  their  faces  turned  backward  to  the  past,  instead  of  forward  to  the 
future.  They  were  as  children  clinging  to  the  garments  of  a  relation  they  have  lost ; 
life  there  was  not,  faith  there  was  not — only  the  garments  of  a  past  belief.  He 
found  them  groaning  under  the  dominion  of  Bome;  rising  up  against  it,  and 
thinking  it  their  worst  evil.  The  coldest  hour  of  all  the  night  is  that  wliich 
immediately  precedes  the  dawn,  and  in  that  darkest  hour  of  Jerusalem's  night  bet 
Light  beamed  forth ;  her  Wisest  and  Greatest  came  in  the  midst  of  her,  almost 
unknown,  born  under  the  law,  to  emancipate  those  who  were  groaning  under  the 
law.  His  life,  the  day  of  His  preaching,  was  Jerusalem's  time  of  grace.  During 
that  time  the  Redeemer  spake  the  things  which  belonged  to  her  peace :  but  they 
rejected  them  and  Him.  Now,  respecting  this  day  of  grace  we  have  two  remarks  to 
make.  First :  In  this  advent  of  the  Redeemer  there  was  nothing  outwardly  re- 
markable to  the  men  of  that  day.  And  just  such  as  this  is  God's  visitation  to  us. 
Generally,  the  day  of  God's  visitation  is  not  a  day  very  remarkable  outwardly. 
Bereavements,  sorrows — no  doubt  in  these  God  speaks ;  but  there  are  other 
occasions  far  more  quiet  and  unobtrusive,  but  which  are  yet  plainly  days  of  grace. 
A  scruple  which  others  do  not  see,  a  doubt  coming  into  the  mind  respecting  some 
views  held  sacred  by  the  popular  creed,  a  sense  of  heart  loneliness  and  solitariness, 
a  feeling  of  awful  misgiving  when  the  future  Ues  open  before  us,  the  dread  feeling 
of  an  eternal  godlessness,  for  men  who  are  living  godless  lives  now — these  silent 
moments  unmarked,  are  the  moments  in  which  the  Eternal  is  speaking  to  our  souls. 
Once  more  :  That  day  of  Jerusalem's  visitation — her  day  of  grace — was  short.  A 
lesson  here  also  for  us.  A  few  actions  often  decide  the  destiny  of  individuak, 
because  they  give  a  destination  and  form  to  habits ;  they  settle  the  tone  and  form 
of  the  mind  from  which  there  will  be  in  this  life  no  alteration.  We  say  not  that 
God  never  pleads  a  long  time,  but  we  say  this,  that  sometimes  God  speaks  to  a  nation 
or  to  a  man  but  once.  If  not  heard  then.  His  voice  is  heard  no  more.  II.  Thb  tiub 
OF  BLINDNESS.  If  a  man  will  riot  see,  the  law  is  he  shall  not  see ;  if  he  will  not  do 
what  is  right  when  he  knows  the  right,  then  right  shall  become  to  him  wrong,  and 
wrong  shall  seem  to  be  right.  UI.  The  tiub  of  jt7dqment.  It  came  in  the  way  of 
natural  consequences.  We  make  a  great  mistake  respecting  judgments.  God's 
judgments  are  not  arbitrary,  bat  the  results  of  natural  laws.  The  historians  tell 
us  that  Jerusalem  owed  her  min  to  the  fanaticism  and  obstinate  blindness  of  her 
citizens;  from  all  of  which  her  Redeemer  came  to  emancipate  her.  Had  they 
understood,  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,"  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,"  and 
••  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers " ;  had  they  understood  that,  Jerusalem's  day  of 
rum  might  never  have  come.  Is  there  no  such  thing  as  blindness  among  our- 
selves ?  May  not  this  be  our  day  of  visitation  ?  First,  there  is  among  us  priestly 
blindness  ;  the  blindness  of  men  who  know  not  that  the  demands  of  this  age  are  in 
advance  of  those  that  have  gone  before.  Once  more,  we  look  at  the  blindness  of 
men  talking  of  intellectual  enlightenment.  It  is  true  that  we  have  more  en- 
lightened civilization  and  comfort.  What  then?  Will  that  retard  our  day  of 
jndgment  7  Jerusalem  was  becoming  more  enlightened,  and  Rome  was  at  its  most 
eivUised  point,  when  the  destroyer  was  at  their  gates.  Therefore,  let  us  know  the 
day  of  our  visitation.  It  is  not  the  day  of  refinement,  nor  of  political  liberty,  nor 
of  advancing  intellect.  We  must  go  again  in  the  old,  old  way ;  we  must  return  to 
simpler  manners  and  to  a  purer  life.  We  want  more  faith,  more  love.  The  life  ot 
Christ  and  the  death  of  Christ  must  be  made  the  law  of  oar  life.  {F.  W. 
Robertson,  M.A.)  The  things  belonging  to  our  peace: — I.  These  are  thinos 
WHICH  belong  to  ovk  PEACE.  Peace  has  a  large  signification ;  it  implies  not  only 
the  inward  feeling  of  the  mind,  but  generally  our  happiness  and  welfare.  The 
things  which  belong  to  our  peace  are  provided  for  as  and  pressed  upon  our 
acceptance  in  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  And  this  peace  mast  be  sought  for  personally 
by  each  one  on  his  own  behall  But  it  concerns  his  everlasting  peace  that  the 
sinner  should  ondergo  a  change  of  heart.  H.  Tbbbb  ib  a  time  in  which  we  may 
BBCOBB  THOSE  THINGS  THAT  MAKE  FOB  ouB  PEACE.  Now  Is  that  time,  and  ttow  is  ths 
ofdy  time.  Of  to-morrow  neither  you  nor  I  are  secure.  Now  is  the  time  in  which  you 
may  seek  the  Lord,  and  in  which  He  will  be  found.  III.  These  is  a  this  whbh 
VHBT  WILL  BE  roB  EVES  HID  rBOH  ouB  XTKB.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  hard 
and  obdorate  heart — there  is  saoh  a  state  as  final  impenitence — there  ii 
raoh  a  ealamitooB  condition  as  that  ot  a  lost  soul.  (H.  J.  Ha$tings,  M.A.) 
^hrJMt'a  app4al  to  thi  heart : — L  This  tht  dat.    The  day  of  thy  visitation,  th* 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  jmM, 

day  when  God's  goodness  and  grace  were  especially  near  thee ;  the  day  of  dawning 
hopes  and  bright  promises ;  the  day  which,  if  it  had  been  welcomed  and  used 
aright,  might  have  coloured,  ennobled,  and  redeemed  all  the  rest.  It  was  the  day 
'when,  as  youths,  we  left  our  father's  house  to  take  our  place  in  the  busy  worlds 
when  thoughts  of  duty  and  honour,  of  true  work  and  faithful  service,  were  fresh 
and  strong  in  our  breasts,  when  we  were  resolved,  God  helping  us,  there  should  be 
no  idle  hours,  no  corrupting  habits,  no  dread  secrets  which  could  not  be  breathed 
or  even  thought  of  in  the  sanctity  of  the  home,  or  in  the  presence  of  our  sister  or 
our  mother.  Or,  it  was  the  day  when  some  heavenly  vision  of  the  beauty  of  good- 
ness, of  the  sacredness  of  service,  of  the  helpfulness  of  prayer,  of  the  nearness  of 
God  to  your  innermost  soul,  filled  your  heart  with  its  glow  and  peace,  and  you 
longed  and  vowed  ever  to  cherish  the  kindly  light,  ever  to  obey  the  heavenly  voice, 
ever  to  walk  with  God,  and  repose  in  Him.  Or,  it  was  the  day  when,  after  some 
sad  fall,  or  after  many  reckless,  wasted  years,  you  came  to  yourself,  you  saw  from 
the  very  edge  the  precipice  to  which  you  had  come,  you  felt  keenly  and  bitterly  the 
misery  of  the  shame  into  which  you  had  sunk,  and,  for  the  first  time,  Christ's 
vision  of  the  face  and  heart  of  God,  of  the  Father  seeking  the  poor  prodigal,  brought 
penitence  and  hope ;  when  thoughts  of  Christ,  with  His  words  of  forgiveness  and 
help  and  peace,  seemed  welcome  and  consoling  to  yon,  as  rest  at  last  to  the  sleep- 
less brain,  or  kindly,  gentle  care  to  the  fever-stricken  patient.  II.  If  thou  hadbt 
KKOWN  AT  LEAST  IN  THIS  THY  DAT.  'Tis  oHB  of  the  sorrows  of  life  that  we  spend  a 
lifetime  in  gaining  the  needful  experience.  "  Human  experience,"  says  Coleridge, 
"  hke  the  stern-lights  of  a  ship  at  sea,  too  often  only  illuminates  the  faith  we  have 
passed  over. "  The  youth  does  not  know  the  value  of  the  school  tUl  after  he  has 
left  it,  or  the  comfort  and  charm  of  the  home  till  it  is  broken  up  and  he  is  alone  in 
the  world;  the  man  does  not  know  the  value  of  time,  or  health,  or  money,  or 
character,  tiU  harsh  misfortune  or  his  own  fault  have  deprived  him  of  them  ;  we 
do  not  fully  realize  how  much  we  needed  the  companionship,  example,  and  sympathy 
of  friends  till  death  has  snatched  them  from  us.  And  so  with  spiritual  blessings 
and  opportunities.  III.  The  things  that  belong  unto  tht  peace.  The  life  ol 
Christ  in  the  heart.  The  service  of  our  heavenly  Father  here  and  now.  {J.  T. 
Stannard.)  Our  day  of  grace  : — As  God  dealt  with  the  city  of  Jerusalem, 
so  He  deals  with  us  as  individuals.  God  has  given  us  a  day  of  grace- 
has  given  a  time  wherein  to  repent  of  sin  and  prepare  for  another  world. 
This  day  and  this  period  is  circumscribed.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a  circle  described 
around  us ;  and  when  we  pass  over  that  boundary,  then  the  day  of  grace  as  past  and 
gone ;  the  spirit  has  ceased  to  strive,  and  our  doom  is  fixed  for  ever.  I  will  illus- 
trate this  from  history.  One  of  the  kings  of  Syria  made  war  upon  Egypt,  which 
was  at  that  time  an  ally  of  the  Boman  republic.  When  the  news  reached  the  Roman 
senate,  they  despatched  into  Egypt  two  senators,  one  of  whom  was  a  dear  friend  of 
the  king.  They  went  direct  to  the  camp  of  the  Syrian  monarch,  who  came  forth 
to  meet  them ;  but  the  senator,  refusing  to  recognize  him  as  his  friend,  at  once  put 
him  upon  his  choice — to  raise  the  seige  and  withdraw  his  army  out  of  Egypt,  or  to 
forfeit  his  friendly  relation  with  Borne,  who  would  at  once  send  forth  her  legions 
and  compel  him.  To  this  he  endeavoured  to  give  an  equivocal  answer :  he  would 
consider  over  it,  or  he  would  consider  of  it  at  another  time.  But  this  was  not 
enough  for  the  Bomans  ;  the  senator,  therefore,  with  the  wand  he  had  in  his  hand, 
drew  a  circle  around  him  on  the  sand  where  they  stood,  and  demanded  his  answer 
and  decision  ere  he  left  it.  He  had  to  make  his  choice :  he  decided  to  withdraw 
his  army,  and  then  the  senator  extended  his  hand  and  recognized  his  friend.  In  a 
similar  way  God  has  drawn  a  circle  around  us,  and  demands  us  to  make  a  choice. 
That  circle  is  our  day  of  grace.  May  we,  then,  to-day,  while  it  is  called  to-day,  harden 
not  our  hearts,  lest  God  should  swear  in  His  wrath  we  shall  not  enter  into  His  rest  I 
{A  Jones.)  "In  this  thy  day  "  ; — Thy  day  1  If  when  the  sun  sets  in  the  west  we 
were  not  sure  whether  he  would  rise  on  the  morrow,  oh  what  an  evening  it  would 
be  1  One  day  1  "  Thy  day  1 "  How  precious  !  But  if  the  day  is  allowed  to  pass, 
and  the  work  of  the  day  not  done,  how  terrible  the  sunset !  Jerusalem  had  her 
day ;  the  day  was  passing — it  was  past.  Jerusalem  did  not  know  her  day,  and  did 
not  notice  that  it  had  passed.  Jerusalem,  with  her  day  done,  was  laughing :  Jesus, 
looking  on  lost  Jerusalem,  wept.  This  is  not  of  private  interpretation — it  is  written 
for  our  sakes.  Our  city  has  a  day ;  ourselves  have  a  day.  Throughout  this  day  it 
is  peace — your  peace — pressing  hke  the  air  around  us.  The  night  cometb,  when 
that  light  of  life  is  gone.  Men  mistake  the  meaning  of  Emmanuel's  tenderness. 
It  is  not  tenderness  to  sin.    Men  are  tender  to  their  own  sin,  treating  it  as  a  spoiled 


CBAP.  xiz.]  ST.  LUKE.  44S 

child — blaming  it  in  words,  but  fondling  it  all  the  while ;  and  they  think  that 
Christ  will  turn  out  such  an  one  as  themselves.  His  grief  does  not  indicate  a 
holding  back,  a  hesitating  to  cast  away  the  wicked.  The  earnestness  with  which 
the  Bedaemer  strove  to  snatch  the  brand  from  the  burning,  shows  that  there  is  a 
burning  for  the  brand.  The  tears  He  shed  over  Jerusalem  do  not  prove  that  He 
■will  falter  and  hesitate  to  lay  her  even  with  the  ground  when  her  day  is  done :  if 
He  had  thought  that  Jerusalem  might  escape  in  her  sin,  He  would  not  have  wept 
to  see  her  sinning.  No  preachers  are  so  terrible  as  the  Redeemer's  tears.  {W. 
Amot.)  Too  late: — God  forbid  that  any  of  you  should  at  the  last  have  the 
dismay  of  the  Scotchwoman  of  whom  I  was  reading.  One  night  she  could  not 
■leep  because  of  her  soul's  wandering  from  Christ.  She  got  up  and  wrote  in  her 
diary  :  "  One  year  from  now  I  will  attend  to  the  matters  of  my  soul."  She  retired, 
but  could  not  sleep.  So  she  arose  again,  and  wrote  a  better  promise  in  her  diary : 
*'  One  month  from  now  I  will  attend  to  the  matters  of  my  soul."  She  retired  again, 
but  found  no  sleep,  and  arose  again  and  wrote :  "  Next  week  I  will  attend  to  the 
matters  of  my  souL"  Then  she  slept  soundly.  The  next  day  she  went  into  sceneg 
of  gaiety.  The  following  day  she  was  sick,  and  the  middle  of  next  week  she  died. 
Delirium  lifted  from  her  mind  just  long  enough  for  her  to  say :  "  I  am  a  week  too 
late.  I  am  lost  I  "  Oh,  to  be  a  year  too  late,  or  a  month  too  late,  or  a  week  too 
late,  or  a  day  too  late,  or  a  minute  too  late,  or  a  second  too  late,  is  to  be  for  ever 
too  late.  May  God  Almighty,  by  His  grace,  keep  us  from  the  wild,  awful,  crushing 
catastrophe  of  a  ruined  soul.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  The  time  of  the  visitation. — 
Knowing  the  time  of  our  visitation : — I.  The  timk  of  odb  visitation.  1.  The 
country  which  has  given  us  birth.  We  are  highly  favoured  in  this  respect. 
We  enjoy  religious  freedom.  2.  The  dispensation  under  which  we  live.  Full 
blaze  of  gospel  sun.  3.  The  revelation  which  God  has  been  pleased  to 
give  ns  of  His  will.  4.  The  ministry,  by  which  the  written  Word  is  explained 
to  the  understanding  and  enforced  on  the  conscience.  U.  Tbe  purposes 
poB  WHICH  TIMES  OP  VISITATION  ARE  OBANTED.  They  are  granted  for  purposes  of 
the  highest  consequence  to  every  one  of  you.  1.  First  of  all,  to  be  instrumental  in 
accomplishing  the  conversion  of  your  hearts  and  lives  to  God.  2.  This  entire 
conversion  of  your  hearts  and  lives  to  God,  is  the  foundation  of  all  Christian 
experience  and  all  Christian  practice.  3.  And  then,  as  to  its  final  and  ultimate 
object,  this  "  time  of  visitation  "  looks  forward  to  your  everlasting  salvation ;  for 
the  work  of  religion  is  not  only  to  be  begun,  and  it  is  not  only  to  be  proceeded  with, 
but  it  is  likewise  to  be  perfected.  III.  Odb  neglect  of  these  opportunities. 
How  is  it  that,  notwithstanding  we  are  all  favoured  with  the  means  of  salvation, 
and  with  many  loud  calls  to  secure  the  purposes  for  which  they  are  given  to  us — 
how  is  it  that  so  many  amongst  even  you  are  as  yet  unsaved,  and  "  know  not  the 
time  of  your  visitation  "  ?  1.  I  suppose  that,  in  reference  to  some,  it  is  in  con- 
sequence of  your  perseverance  in  the  practice  of  sin.  2.  There  are  others  who 
know  not  and  do  not  improve  "  the  time  of  their  visitation,"  by  reason  of  their 
thoughtlessness  and  inattention  to  Divine  things.  3.  There  is  another  reason  to  be 
assigned  for  your  not  knowing  •'  the  time  of  your  visitation  " — and  that  is,  indecision 
and  delay.  •'  He  that  is  not  with  Me,"  said  Christ,  '•  is  against  Me."  4.  Then,  let 
me  say,  further,  that  all  those  know  not  "  the  time  of  their  visitation,"  who,  for 
any  reason  whatever,  do  not  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  believe  with  their 
hearts  unto  righteousness.  5.  Perhaps  I  ought  to  say,  there  are  some  who  know 
not  ••  the  time  of  their  visitation,"  by  reason  of  their  inconstancy  and  negligence. 
rv.  In  the  last  place,  we  ought  to  look  a  little  at  the  judgment  which,  sooner  or 

liATER,  IB   SURE   TO   OVERTAKE   ALL   THOSE  WHO  PERSIST  IN  DIBREGAEDING   THEIR   MEANS 

AND  OPPORTUNITIES.  {J.  Bicknell.)  Divine  visitations : — The  system  of  the 
natural  world — ^with  all  its  laws,  facts,  processes,  and  events ;  the  system  of  social 
life,  including  the  family  and  civil  society ;  the  system  of  business  life,  including 
all  proper  industries  and  right  occupations,  all  rightful  forms  of  development,  all 
cares  and  labours — all  these  are  included  in  the  system  of  visitations  which  God 
employs  in  His  daily  education  of  men,  and  their  treatment  and  control.  In  other 
words,  God  employs  all  the  apparatus  of  the  natural  world,  in  its  results  both  upon 
the  body  and  the  mind ;  all  the  social  influences  that  surround  and  educate  men ; 
all  the  organizations  by  which  man  is  drawn  oat  in  various  industries,  and  becomes 
an  operative  and  a  creator ;  all  the  varioojs  events  that  transpire  outside  of  the 
mind  or  its  volition,  which  come  up  in  what  we  call  providences  of  God ;  and  above 
all  these,  the  direct  gospel  system,  snperviBed  by  God's  personal  Spirit.  Through 
•U  these  variooB  infloences,  God  acts  upon  the  human  sool ;  and  all  these  are  tat 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  jmm, 

parts  of  God's  one  system,  for  the  deTelopment,  the  edaoation,  and  the  elevation  ol 
men.  The  time  of  God's  visitations  has  included  every  period  of  our  lives.  They 
have  not  been  special  to  youth,  to  middle  life,  or  to  old  age.  Not  only  has  tho 
Divine  economy  bad  respect  to  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  but  to  man  as  a  creature. 
For  example,  there  are  times — and  the  element  of  time  has  entered  largely  into  the 
system  of  Divine  culture — when  they  have  met  as  in  childhood,  with  influences 
appropriate  to  that  period,  acting  through  the  easier  affections  and  susceptibilities 
of  early  life.  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  a  man  in  this  house,  who,  if  he  were  to 
speak  his  experience,  would  not  say,  "  I  was  subject  in  my  boyhood  to  times  of 
religious  depression."  They  say  "depression,"  though  they  should  rather  say 
religious  inspiration  and  elevation.  These  were  awakenings  by  which  they  were 
lifted  up  from  the  dull  and  the  obscure  of  life,  and  made  to  feel  something  of  the 
invisible,  and  of  the  power  of  the  world  to  come.  And  as  childhood  goes  into  boy- 
hood or  early  manhood,  the  Divine  strivings  do  not  cease.  They  may  change  their 
form  ;  they  may  cease  to  act  through  the  same  susceptibilities ;  they  may  take  hold 
through  the  developments  of  the  understanding,  the  speculations  of  a  man's  reason, 
or  a  different  and  larger  reach  of  the  imagination ;  but,  nevertheless,  they  take 
hold  still  in  early  manhood  and  middle  life.  God's  visitations  of  mercy  not  only 
include  every  one  of  the  faculties  of  the  human  soul,  and  all  the  periods  of  time  in 
which  a  man  lives,  but  are  made  to  act  npon  men  through  every  gradation  and 
variation  of  their  condition  and  history.  In  other  words,  we  are  tried  in  everj 
possible  development  of  our  physical  state.  We  are  tried  by  our  disappointments  ; 
we  are  tried  by  our  successes  1  God  heaps  mercies  upon  men,  and  then  takes  them 
all  away  I  He  blesses,  enriches,  and  establishes  men,  and  then  shuts  them  up, 
impoverishes,  and  subverts  them  !  It  is  remarkable,  in  respect  to  these  visitations 
of  God,  that  they  do  not  follow  the  telescope ;  they  are  rather  like  comets,  that 
come  when  they  please ;  for  when  yon  search  for  God,  *•  by  searching  you  cannot 
find  Him  out."  Such  thoughts  have  come  to  you  unbidden,  sometimes  in  your 
counting-room,  or  when  you  were  on  a  journey,  or  on  the  sea ;  sometimes  when  yoa 
have  been  in  your  house  all  alone,  your  family  in  the  country ;  sometimes  in 
trouble  and  adversity ;  in  various  ways — often  coming,  though  never  twice  alike, 
as  if  the  Divine  phases  had  sought  to  present,  at  different  times,  different  aspects 
to  you.  And  if,  all  the  way  along,  you  had  treasured  up  these  times — precious 
times  of  great  treasure  1 — if  you  had  treasured  them  as  yon  have  when  yoa  have 
made  a  good  bargain,  or  gained  a  new  honour ;  if  you  had  treasured  aU  these 
interior  peculiarities  as  you  have  the  exterior — you  would  find  them,  I  think,  almost 
within  speaking  distance  all  the  way  from  childhood  to  manhood;  and  although 
you  had  never  such  a  consecutive  view  of  the  whole,  yet  really  all  along  you  have 
been  subject  to  such  impressions !  Under  such  visitations  there  is  brought  very 
near  to  men  such  a  thought  of  the  other  life,  of  God's  eternal  kingdom  and  their 
immortality  in  it,  as  may  produce  very  serious  practical  fruits  in  them.  In  view  of 
these  facts  and  illustrations  of  facts,  I  remark  in  closing,  first,  upon  the  immensity 
of  the  influences  which  men  receive  for  good — the  disproportion  in  this  world 
between  the  educating  influences  for  good,  and  those  which  sometimes  we  suspect 
are  for  evil.  For  we  are  apt  to  think  that  this  great  world  is  all  against  goodness, 
and  that  men  are  surrounded  by  such  inducements  to  evil,  such  temptations  of 
their  passions,  that  there  is  an  impression  that  man  is  so  neglected  and  so  set  npon 
at  disadvantage,  that  there  is  scarcely  the  evidence  of  his  ever  being  an  object  of 
mercy.  Contrariwise,  it  is  a  tmth  that  man  stands  in  the  midst  of  a  world  which 
is  one  peculiar  and  complex  educating  institution,  and  what  is  more,  educating  in 
the  right  direction.  The  gradual  growing  effect  of  the  course  that  I  have  been 
speaking  of,  is  worthy  of  a  moment's  attention — the  habit  of  thus  resisting  the 
visitation  of  God's  Spirit  upon  as.  What  is  the  result  of  having  a  visitation,  and 
of  neglecting  it  7  The  general  apprehension  is,  that  it  offends  God,  and  that  man 
is  destroyed  vindictively,  or  penally ;  bnt  we  must  look  at  it  more  narrowly  than 
that.  In  the  first  place,  then,  I  think  that  it  is  in  respect  to  our  moral  suscepti- 
bihties  as  it  is  in  regard  to  all  our  senses ;  they  become  blunted  by  repeated  perver- 
sion. A  man  can  treat  his  eye  in  such  a  way  that  he  shall  become  blind.  He  can 
blant  his  hearing  so  that  he  shall  become  deaf.  He  can  injure  bis  tongue  so  as  to 
have  no  appreciation  of  flavours.  He  can  conduct  himself  so  that  his  whole  body 
may  be  broken  down  and  destroyed  before  he  is  fifty  years  old.  So  in  respect  to  a 
man's  moral  nature.  A  man's  moral  susceptibUities  may  be  so  dull,  that  by  the 
time  he  is  fifty  years  old,  these  approaches  no  longer  affect  him  in  this  world.  And 
the  effect  is,  the  gradual  diminution  of  moral  susceptibility ;  so  that  the  oonjna» 


«BAP.  XIX.]  ST.  LUKE,  445 

tions  of  oircnmstances,  bj  which  the  man  shall  appear  to  himself  to  be  sarroanded, 
are  less  and  less  frequent,  because  their  effect  is  less  and  less  apparent.  What  is 
the  state  of  sach  a  man  ?  What  a  terrible  condition  it  is  for  a  man  to  stand  in  t 
Ah !  when  the  day  of  visitation  is  passed,  what  has  happened  ? — not  alone  in  those 
extreme  cases,  of  men  who  are  hardened  past  aU  shame  and  feeling ;  but  what  has 
happened  in  other  cases,  where  men  are  not  so  incorrigible,  and  not  so  hard  ?  Is 
God  so  angry  at  them  that  He  ceases  to  offer  them  any  more  mercy  ?  Does  He 
pass  them  altogether  by  ?  Not  at  all  I  Oh,  the  goodness  of  God  I  There  is  just  as 
much  summer  in  the  deserts  of  Arabia  as  in  our  American  prairies  I  The  sun  and 
the  showers  of  sommer  are  in  both  places :  but  it  is  a  desert  in  one,  and  it  is  a 
growing,  luxuriant  prairie  in  the  other.  Thero  is  just  as  much  summer  for  a 
sepulcbjre  as  there  is  for  a  mansion ;  but  the  summer  sun  brings  joy  and  cheer  to 
those  in  the  populous  house,  where  the  father  and  the  mother  are  happy,  and  sJl 
the  children  are  full  of  glee  and  joy ;  while,  as  it  shines  upon  the  sepulchre's  roof, 
everything  is  solitary,  sad,  and  still,  because  there  are  dead  men's  bones  within, 
which  the  sunlight  can  never  waken  1  It  is  just  the  same  in  the  moral  govenmient 
of  God.  There  is  the  same  provision  of  light,  of  air,  of  warmth,  of  raiment,  in  im- 
mense abundance  ;  but  all  these  are  conjoined  with  this  one  invariable,  universal 
necessity — onr  own  appropriation  of  them.  There  is  unlimited  store  of  good,  yet 
men  will  starve  if  they  do  not  appropriate  it  to  themselves.  There  is  an  ocean  of 
air,  yet  men  will  suffocate  if  they  refuse  to  breathe.  He  is  resolute  for  eviL  He 
has  been  surrounded  by  Divine  influences,  but  he  has  continually  resisted  them, 
until  he  has  been  hardened  by  the  process — until  moral  susceptibility  has  died  out 
of  him — ontil  he  has  disorganized  his  nature — nntil  he  has  destroyed  himself  I 
And  when  he  passes  through  the  brief  period  of  his  life — through  its  rapid  rolling 
months  and  years — and  rises  into  the  presence  of  God,  he  stands  in  condemnation  I 
Then  he  will  not  be  able  to  say  one  word !  The  long  procession  of  God's  teachings, 
which  were  given  to  draw  him  away  from  his  inunorality ;  all  the  Divine  influ- 
ences that  have  been  visited  upon  him ;  aU  these  things  wUl  then  stand  out  unmis- 
takably and  indisputably ;  and  the  man  will  have  nothing  to  say,  except  this — "  I 
destroyed  myself  1 "  (U.  W.  Beeeher.)  Times  of  visitatitm : — 1.  And  first,  I  would 
ask  yon  to  go  back  to  the  period  of  your  youth.  Was  not  that  a  "  time  of  visita- 
tion f"  Do  yon  not  remember  its  freshness,  its  freedom,  its  joy?  2.  Again:  I 
may  speak  of  those  special  Divine  influences  which  are  often  realized  in  connec- 
tion with  the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  preaching  of  God's  Word,  as  con- 
stituting »•  a  time  of  visitation."  3.  Yet  again  :  there  are  "  times  of  visitation,"  in 
which  the  individual  is  more  directly  concerned,  as  separate  from  all  around  him. 
It  may  be  in  the  church,  or  it  may  be  at  home  in  the  quiet  chamber,  or  it  may 
be  in  neither,  but  out  under  the  great  dome  of  heaven,  and  among  the  scenes 
of  nature.  4.  Once  more :  there  are  providential  events  which  may  be  regarded 
in  the  light  of  a  "  time  of  visitation  "  to  those  concerned  in  them.  {C.  M.  Merry.) 
The  time  of  visitation : — 1,  What  is  a  Drviira!  visitation  ?  1.  The  common  use 
of  the  word  associates  it  with  judgment,  with  judicial  infliction  of  punishment  of 
some  sort.  2.  Divine  visitations  are  often  connected  with  the  purpose  of  blessing. 
d.  God  visits  us,  in  giving  us  the  fruits  of  the  earth  in  due  season.  4.  Visitation 
means  warning.  It  is  in  this  sense  our  Lord  here  describes  His  own  ministry  as 
the  ••  visitation  "  of  Jerusalem.  Partly,  no  doubt,  it  was  a  visitation  of  judgment, 
yet  more  was  it  a  visitation  of  blessing ;  it  brought  with  it  instruction,  grace, 
pardon.  Elis  visitation  was  also  a  warning  against  some  besetting  sins  of  a  very 
old  and  settled  religion — against  formalism,  hypocrisy,  insincere  use  of  sacred 
language,  insincere  performance  of  sacred  duties;  and  it  was  especially  a 
warning  to  the  people  of  Israel,  against  their  taking  a  wrong  turn  in  their 
thoughts   and  aspirations  and  efforts  in   the  future   before  them.      II.    Whz 

SHO0U>  THB   FAHiUBE   TO  KNOW    TBB    TIUB   OW    VISITATION   VEBY    OFTSN  BB   FOLLOWBO 

BT  SUCH  OBEAT  CONSEQUENCES?  1.  Becauso  such  failure  implies  the  decline  of 
spiritual  interest,  which  in  those  who  have  had  any  rel^ious  training  and 
opportimities  is  culpable.  To  believe  sincerely  in  the  living  God,  who  interests 
Himself  in  His  mortal  creatures,  is  to  be  on  the  look-out  for  tokens  of  His  inter- 
vention in  the  affairs  of  men ;  in  other  words,  for  His  visitations.  When  a  Divine 
visitation  comes,  it  is  a  touchstone  of  the  interests  of  souls :  it  finds  some  anxious, 
expectant,  wilUng  to  recognize  and  make  the  most  of  it,  and  others,  as  our  Lord 
said,  whose  hearts  have  waxed  gross,  and  whose  ears  are  dull  of  hearing,  and  whose 
eyes  are  closed.  This  insensibility  to  the  approach  of  God  in  His  life  and  power 
wounds  the  heart  of  God.  We  cannot  forsake  Him  for  anything  else  with  impunity. 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  m, 

2.  If  God  visits  in  warning,  then  to  neglect  His  visitation  is  to  neglect  conditions 
of  safety  against  dangers  which  are  before  us.  So  it  was  now  with  the  Jews.  If 
the  Jews  had  given  heed  to  the  teaching  of  our  Saviour  the  conflict  with  the- 
Eoman  authority  would  never  have  taken  place.    III.  Thk  difticdlty  fob  mant 

MEN  IS  TO  RECOGNIZE    AT    THE    CBITICAL    MOMENT    THE    PACT    THAT   GOD  IB  V18ITIN<* 

THEM.  The  most  vitally  important  days  and  weeks  in  the  history  of  a  soul  may- 
have  little  to  distinguish  them  outwardly  from  other  days.  It  needs  the  earnest, 
penetrating  recognition  of  God's  unceasing  and  loving  interest  in  His  creatures  ta 
read  life  aright,  whether  it  be  corporate  or  individual  life,  to  see  the  moral  and. 
spiritual  worth  of  events.  It  may  be  said  that  there  is  room  for  a  great  deal  of 
illusion  in  this  matter  of  Divine  visitation.  "  We  may  easily  think  ourselves  more 
important  people  than  we  are ;  we  may  imagine  that  the  events  of  our  little  lives 
have  a  meaning  and  worth  which  does  not  belong  to  them.  Is  there  any  test  or 
criterion  of  His  visitation  ?  "  Well,  we  have  first  of  all  to  remember  that  no 
human  life  at  any  moment  is  other  than  an  object  of  the  deepest  interest  to  God. 
He  who  made,  He  who  redeemed.  He  who  sanctified  us,  does  not  think  any  life  too- 
insignificant  to  be  visited  by  Him.  The  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered ;  it 
is  impossible  that  the  Infinite  Love  should  ever  despise  the  work  of  His  own  hands, 
the  purchase  of  His  own  cross.  The  only  question  is,  whether  we  are  warranted  in 
thinking  that  His  interest  and  oversight  have  at  a  given  time  reached  a  special 
climax  or  visitation,  having  exceptional  claims  on  our  attention ;  and  we  arfr 
justified  in  thinking  that  this  is  the  case  if  the  truth  which  such  a  visitation 
enforces  is  in  correspondence  with  the  higher  truth  which  we  have  learned  before, 
though,  perhaps,  going  beyond  it,  and  if  the  conduct  to  which  we  are  impelled  or 
encouraged  involves  self-denial,  involves  that  which  is  unwelcome  or  exacting. 
(Canon  Liddon.)  Divine  visitations  : — 1.  God  visits  a  nation,  when  at  a  critical 
moment  in  its  history  He  bids  it  maintain  some  imperilled  principle,  or  do  some 
great  act  of  justice.  Perhaps  the  opportunity  has  been  neglected ;  it  passes,  and 
then  the  sentence  of  national  decline  is  written  on  the  pale  of  history,  with  the 
added  reason :  "  Because  thou  knowest  not,"  &o.  2.  God  visits  at  His  own  time 
the  several  branches  of  His  Church,  it  may  be  after  long  years  of  apathy  and 
darkness.  He  visits  a  church  when  He  raises  up  in  her  teachers  who  insist  upon 
forgotten  aspects  of  truth,  who  call  men  from  false  standards  of  life ;  or  when  He 
opens  great  ways  of  extending  His  people  and  of  influencing  numbers  of  human 
beings  to  seek  the  things  that  belong  to  their  peace.  If  this  invitation  to  better 
things  is  set  aside,  nominally  as  if  it  were  the  revival  of  some  old  superstition,  but 
rather  really  because  it  makes  an  unwelcome  demand  on  the  conscience  and  the 
will,  then  the  day  of  visitation  passes,  and  the  doom  of  the  church  which  comea 
in  time  is  justified  in  the  conscience  of  its  own  children :  "  Because,"  Ac.  _  3.  Souls 
are  the  units  of  which  nations  and  churches  are  composed,  and  God  visits  a  soul 
when  He  brings  before  it  a  new  range  of  opportunities.  One  of  yourselves,  we 
will  say,  has  been  for  years  recognizing  just  so  much  of  religious  truth  as  the 
people  about  him,  and  no  more;  acting  just  so  far  upon  the  duties  which  it  suggests, 
and  no  further  ;  your  thought  and  practice  are,  as  we  say,  conventional — that  is  to 
say,  they  are  determined  by  the  average  feeling  of  those  among  whom  you  are 
thrown  in  Ufe,  and  not  by  any  personal  sense  or  grasp  of  religious  principle,  of 
what  religious  principle  is,  of  what  is  due  to  it,  of  what  is  due  to  the  Infinite  and 
Everlasting  God.  And  then  something  occurs  which  appeals  to  the  soul  as  nothing 
has  appealed  to  it  before,  which  puts  life,  destiny  and  duty,  truth,  Holy  Scripture, 
the  Cross  of  Christ,  the  Person  of  Christ,  the  garments  of  Christ,  the  Church  of 
Christ,  before  it  in  quite  a  new  light.  It  may  be  a  sentence  in  a  letter :  it  may  be 
a  sudden  thought  which  takes  possession  of  you  at  the  time  of  prayer ;  it  may  be 
a  friend  who  insists  on  duties  which  have  hitherto  been  mere  phrases  to  you ;  it 
may  be  that  you  suddenly  find  yourself  obliged  to  decide  between  two  courses — one 
involving  sacrifice  more  or  less  painful,  and  the  other  the  surrender  of  something 
which  your  conscience  tells  you  is  right  and  true,  and  the  having  to  make  a 
decision  puts  a  strain  on  your  moral  being,  which  is  of  itself  a  visitation.  Or,  one 
who  has  been  intimately  associated  with  you  for  many  years  has  died ;  his  death 
has  taught  you  the  emptiness  of  this  passmg  life,  it  has  put  you  out  of  heart  with 
the  half-hearted  religion  of  past  years  ;  in  short,  this  trial,  while  it  presses  heavily 
on  yonr  heart,  has  gone  far  to  make  yon  quite  other  than  what  yon  were.  And  thi» 
is  a  yisitation.  God  is  speaking  to  your  soul,  and  much  depends  on  yoor  under* 
standing  Him,  on  your  resolving  and  acting  and  re-fashioning  your  life  accordingly. 
Much,  I  say,  dependi  on  this ;  for  be  snre  that  it  is  very  serious  to  have  enjoyed 


miT.xxz.^  ST.  LVKE.  ar 

each  a  religiotis  opportunity  and  to  have  neglected  it.  Divine  visitation  doea 
not  leave  us  where  it  found  us ;  it  always  leaves  us  better  or  worse.  To  have  been 
in  contact  with  truth  and  grace,  and  to  have  put  it  from  us,  is  to  be  weaker,  poorer^ 
worse  off — religiously  speaking — than  we  were.  When  the  Divine  visitation  of  the 
Boul  has  been  rejected,  then  the  day  of  its  enemies  has  arrived ;  then  the  legions  of 
hell  encamp  all  around  it,  the  powers  of  darkness  make  sure  of  their  victim.  There 
is  such  a  thing  as  the  last  chance  in  the  life  of  a  soul.  Ood  knows  when  it  has 
passed  by  each  of  us,  but  one  day  certainly  all  of  us  do,  in  whatever  way,  pass  it. 
{Ibid.)  The  visitation  of  Jerusalem: — 1.  This  visitation  of  Jerusalem  by  its 
Monarch  was  unobtrusive.  There  was  nothing  of  outward  pageantry  or  of  royalty 
to  greet  the  Son  of  David;  there  was  no  royal  livery,  no  currency  bearing  the- 
king's  nnage  and  superscription — all  these  things  had  passed  into  the  hands  o£ 
a  foreign  conqueror,  or  in  parts  of  the  country,  into  the  hands  of  princes  who  hadi 
the  symbol  of  independence  without  its  reality.  There  was  not  even  the  amount 
cf  circumstance  of  state  which  attends  the  reception  of  a  visitor  to  some  modern 
institution — a  visitor  who  only  represents  the  majesty  of  some  old  prerogative  or 
some  earthly  throne.  As  Israel's  true  King  visits  Jerusalem  He  always  reminds 
us  of  a  descendant  of  an  ancient  family  returning  in  secret  to  the  old  home  of  his 
raoe ;  everything  is  for  him  instinct  with  precious  memories ;  every  stone  is  dear 
to  him,  while  he  himself  is  forgotten.  He  wanders  about  unnoticed,  unobserved, 
or  with  only  such  notice  as  courtesy  may  accord  to  a  presumed  stranger.  He  ia 
living  amid  thoughts  which  are  altogether  unshared  by  the  men  whom  he  meets  as 
he  moves  silently  and  sadly  among  the  records  of  the  past,  and  he  passes  away 
from  sight  as  he  came,  with  his  real  station  and  character  generally  unrecognized»- 
if,  indeed,  he  is  not  dismissed  as  an  upstart  with  contempt  and  insult.  So  it  was 
with  Jerusalem  and  its  Divine  Master.  He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own' 
received  Him  not.  It  may,  indeed,  be  asked  whether  the  unobtrusive  character  of' 
His  visit  does  not  excuse  the  ignorance  of  Jerusalem.  But,  my  brethren,  there  is 
ignorance  and  ignorance.  There  is  the  ignorance  which  we  carmot  help,  which  ia 
part  of  our  circumstances  in  this  life,  which  is  imposed  on  us  by  Providence,  and 
such  ignorance  as  this,  so  far  as  it  extends,  does  efface  responsibility.  God  will 
never  hold  a  man  accountable  for  knowledge  which  God  knows  to  be  out  of  hia 
reach ;  but  there  is  also  ignorance,  and  a  great  deal  of  it,  in  many  lives  for  whick' 
we  are  ourselves  responsible,  and  which  would  not  have  embarrassed  us  now  if  we- 
had  made  the  best  of  our  opportunities  in  past  times,  and  just  as  a  man  who,; 
being  drunk,  commits  a  street  outrage  is  held  to  be  responsible  for  the  outrage^ 
which  he  commits  without  knowing  what  he  is  doing,  because  he  is  undoubtedly 
responsible  for  getting  into  this  condition  of  brutal  insensibility,  so  God  holds  us 
all  to  be  accountable  for  an  ignorance  which  He  knows  to  be  due  to  our  own 
neglect.  Now  this  was  the  ctise  with  the  men  of  Jerusalem  at  that  day.  Had  they 
studied  their  prophets  earnestly  and  sincerely,  had  they  refused  to  surrender  them- 
selves to  political  dreams  which  flattered  &eir  self-love  and  which  coloured  alt< 
their  thoughts  and  hopes,  they  would  have  seen  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  Divine 
Visitor  whose  coming  Israel  had  for  long  ages  been  expecting.  As  it  was.  His 
approach  was  too  unobtrusive  for  a  generation  which  looked  forward  to  a  visible 
triumph.  Thus  they  knew  not  the  time  of  their  visitation.  And  the  visita^ 
tion  of  Jerusalem  was  final;  it  was  not  to  be  repeated.  God,  who  at  sundry 
times  and  in  divers  manners  spake  in  times  past  unto  the  fathers  of  the- 
Jewish  race  by  the  prophets,  in  these  last  days  spoke  unto  them  by  His  Son. 
Those  were  His  last  words  to  His  chosen  people,  the  last  probation,  the 
last  opportunity ;  we  may  reverently  say  that  there  was  no  more  after  that  to  be 
done.  Each  prophet  had  contributed  something  which  others  could  not ;  each  had 
fiUed  a  place  in  the  long  series  of  visitations  which  no  other  could  filL  Already 
Jerusalem  had  been  long  since  once  destroyed  after  a  great  neglected  opportunity^ 
The  Book  of  Jeremiah  which  we  have  lately  been  reading  in  the  daily  lessons,  i» 
one  long  and  pathetic  commentary  on  the  blindness  and  obstinacy  of  kings,  priests*, 
prophets,  and  people  who  preceded  the  Chaldean  invasion,  and  who  rendered  it 
inevitable.  And  still  that  ruin,  vast,  and  for  the  time  being,  utter  as  it  was,  had- 
been  followed  by  a  reconstruction,  that  long  and  bitter  exile  by  a  return.  But 
history  will  not  go  on  for  ever  repeating  events  which  contradict  probability.  One- 
greater  visitation  awaited  Jerusalem,  one  more  utter  ruin,  and  each  was  to  be  the 
last.  "Because  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation."  What  ia  the 
explanation  of  that  "  because  '*  ?  What  is  the  connection  as  between  canse  and 
cmel  which  it  suggests  ?    Does  it  mean  merely  that  the  Jews,  having  as  a  people 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxk 

rejected  Christ,  were  punished  by  the  destruction  of  their  city  and  temple,  but  that 
nothing  further  can  be  said  about  it  ?  That  the  punishment  was  independent  of 
the  crime,  although  not  excessive,  and  that  it  might  just  as  easily  as  not  have  been 
something  else  than  what  it  was,  since  the  punishment  was  inflicted  from  without 
by  the  Boman  army,  which,  consisting  as  it  did  of  brave  and  disciplined  pagans, 
could  have  no  ideas  about  the  spiritual  history  or  responsibilities  of  a  distant 
Asiatic  race  ?  No,  brethren ;  this  is  not  the  full  or  the  true  account  of  the  case. 
Here,  as  elsewhere,  God  works  by  laws  which  we  may  trace  and  which  are  not 
generally  superseded  by  agencies  of  a  different  character.  Jerusalem's  ignorance 
of  its  visitation  by  the  King  Messiah,  had  a  great  deal  to  do  as  cause  with  effect 
with  Jerusalem's  ruin.  What  was  the  main  cause  of  that  ruin  ?  It  was,  as  has 
been  said,  that  the  Jews  were  under  the  influence  of  a  false  and  blind  prejudice 
and  ambition.  They  had  made  up  their  minds  that  their  Messiah  was  to  be  a 
political  rather  than  a  spiritual  king  ;  He  was  to  make  Jerusalem  the  centre  of  an 
empire  which  would  hold  its  own  against  the  legions  of  Borne  ;  and  with  this  over- 
mastering prejudice  in  their  minds  the  Jews  could  not  recognize  the  real  Messiah 
when  He  came,  and  the  day  of  their  visitation  escaped  them.  Yet  it  was  this  same 
political  phrenzy  of  theirs  which  ultimately  brought  them  into  trouble  with  the 
Boman  power;  and  if  they  had  only  understood  the  real  meanings  of  their 
prejudices,  had  seen  in  their  Messiah  a  spiritual  monarch,  and  had  accepted 
Him  when  He  came,  the  mind  of  the  people  would  have  taken,  mast 
have  taken,  a  totally  different  direction,  and  the  fatal  collision  with  the 
forces  of  Borne  would  never  have  taken  place.  {Ibid.)  Illnes*  regarded 
as  God's  visitation: — There  are  two  ways  of  looking  at  an  illness.  We  may 
trace  it  to  its  second  or  immediate  cause,  the  infection,  the  blood-poisoning, 
the  imprudence,  the  hereditary  taint,  and  there  stop ;  or  we  may  with  greater 
reason  look  up  to  Him  who  is  the  true  Lord  of  all,  the  flrst  cause,  and  who  worketh 
all  things  by  the  counsel  of  His  own  will ;  and  if  we  do  this  last,  we  must  see  in  an 
illness  a  visitation  from  God.  He  knows  what  we  want.  He  sees,  it  may  be,^  that 
in  ns  which  will  never  be  corrected  in  the  days  of  rude  health  and  of  high  spirits ; 
He  sees  the  insensibility  to  the  seriousness  of  Ufe,  to  the  claims  of  others,  to  the' 
true  interests  of  the  soiU,  to  the  unfathomable  love  of  the  Divine  Bedeemer ;  and  an 
illness  which  gives  time  for  prayer,  for  reflection,  for  resolution,  is  a  school  of  disci- 
pline. Those  who  have  never  had  bad  health  are,  it  has  been  truly  said,  objects  of 
anxiety ;  those  who  have  had  it,  and  who  are  none  the  better  for  it,  are  certainly 
objects  of  the  very  deepest  concern  and  compassion.  There  was  a  story  told  many 
years  since  of  a  boat  which  was  getting  near  the  rapids  above  the  Falls  of  Niagara. 
The  boatmen  managed  to  reach  the  shore,  but,  disregarding  the  advice  which  waH 
earnestly  given  them,  they  put  out  again  into  the  stream,  with  the  object  of  cross- 
ing to  the  opposite  bank.  The  current  proved  too  strong  for  them,  and  those  who 
had  warned  them  of  their  danger  looked  on  with  a  distress  which  was  too  great 
for  words  while  the  boat  glided  down  with  an  ever-increasing  speed  to  the  edge  of 
the  falls.  It  is  possible,  brethren,  in  what  concerns  another  life,  to  be  in  that  con- 
dition, to  have  ignored  God's  last  word  of  warning,  and  to  be  hurrying  onwards, 
tmder  the  stress  of  influences  which  we  cannot  any  longer  resist  or  control,  towards 
the  awful  future.  Great  reason  is  there  for  prayer,  that  at  the  critical  turning-point 
of  our  career  we  may  have,  in  oar  Lord's  words,  eyes  to  see  and  ears  to  hear,  that 
we  may  distinguish  God's  visitations  in  life  from  what  is  ordinary  in  it ;  that  we 
may  remember  that  in  every  life,  even  in  the  most  highly  favoured,  there  is  sooner 
or  later  a  visitation  which  is  the  last.  {Ibid.)  Guilty  ignorance: — Well- 
known  as  these  words  are,  there  is  in  them  something,  when  we  think  of  it,  un- 
expected ;  something  different,  apparently,  from  what  we  should  have  looked  for. 
The  condemnation  of  the  people  seems  to  be  pat  upon  a  cause  somewhat  unlike 
what  we  might  have  thought.  The  Lord  does  not  say,  it  is  because  ye  are  about  to 
crucify  the  Lord  of  Glory  ;  or,  because  ye  have  been  a  sinful  and  stiff-necked  people ; 
or,  because  by  your  traditions  ye  have  made  the  Word  of  God  of  none  effect ;  or, 
because  ye  are  hypocrites,  or  impenitent :  though  all  these  things,  and  many  more, 
were  not  only  true  against  the  people,  but  had  often  been  alleged  by  Himself  to  their 
condemnation.  He  does  not,  I  say,  allege  any  of  these  broad,  overt,  intelligible 
sins  in  this,  the  last  most  solemn,  irreversible  denunciation  of  their  judgment ;  bat 
He  sayi,  "  Because  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation ! "  God  had  visited 
His  people,  and  they  knew  it  not  1  He  had  come  onto  His  own,  and  His  own  had 
known  Him  not.  He  does  not  even  say,  that  they  had  pretended  not  to  know 
Him ;  but,  literally  and  plainly,  that  thoj  knew  Him  not.  They  might  have  kw>wa. 


OUP.  xuc.]  BT.  LVKB.  449 

Him ;  they  ought  to  have  known  Him ;  bat  He  came,  and  they  knew  Him  not.  Let 
OS  learn,  then,  that  men  may  really  be  quite  ignorant  of  what  they  are  doing,  and 
yet  very  guilty,  and  involved  in  the  heaviest  condemnation.  But,  again,  are  we  to 
suppose  that  they  did  not  choose  to  know ;  that  they  might,  then  and  there,  by  a 
stronger  exercise  of  will,  by  some  more  forcible  or  candid  purpose,  have  known  what 
they  thus  wilfully  were  ignorant  of  i  It  is  possible  that  they  might ;  but  it  is  by 
no  means  certain :  that  is,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  mach  disobedience,  much 
inattention  to  the  constant  indications  of  God's  will  vouchsafed  to  them,  much 
C8;glect  of  opportunities,  had  not  set  them  so  much  out  of  the  way  of  forming  right 
judgments  on  such  things,  as  to  make  it  morally  impossible,  or,  at  least,  in  the 
highest  degree  unlikely,  that  they  should  come  to  a  right  knowledge  of  the  nature 
of  our  Lord  and  the  sacredness  of  His  mission.  No  doubt  they  had,  if  we  may  so 
fipeak,  a  great  deal  to  say  for  themselves,  in  their  firm  and  persevering  rejection  of 
our  Lord  and  His  doctrine ;  not,  indeed,  a  word  of  real  weight  or  truth,  but  a  great 
deal  which,  Tirged  by  men  in  their  state  of  mind,  and  addressed  to  men  of  their 
state  of  mind,  would  appear  to  be  full  of  force  and  cogency.  Would  they  not,  feel- 
ing no  doubt  of  the  sacred  validity  of  their  own  traditions,  look  upon  Him  and 
describe  Him  as  one  who  made  light  of  the  authority  of  God,  and  of  Moses,  and  the 
ancients?  May  we  not  easily  suppose  with  what  immense  effect  they  would  urge 
the  impolicy  of  giving  any  heed  to  our  Lord's  teaching :  the  impolicy  in  respect  of 
the  Bomans  ;  the  impolicy  in  respect  of  the  great  impediment  which  would,  by  our 
Lord's  partial  success,  be  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  true,  temporal  Messias,  so  long 
expected  ?  If  we  suppose  that  the  actions,  which  we  criticize,  appeared  to  the 
persons  who  were  about  to  perform  them  in  the  same  clear  and  unquestionable 
light  in  which  we  see  them,  we  at  once  lose,  or  rather  turn  into  mischief  and  hurt, 
the  historical  examples :  we  do  exactly  what  the  Jews  did,  when  they  said,  •'  If  we 
had  lived  in  the  times  of  our  fathers,  we  would  not  have  been  partakers  in  their 
deeds,"  and  yet  filled  up  the  measure  of  those  very  fathers,  by  doing  a  deed  pre- 
cisely like  theirs  in  kind,  though  infinitely  worse  than  theirs  in  degree.  We  com- 
fort ourselves  by  condemning  them,  while  we  exactly  imitate,  or  even  exceed  their 
sins.  We,  like  them — like  all  mankind — are  perpetually  called  upon  to  act ;  often 
suddenly — often  in  cases  of  great  and  obvious  consequence — often  in  cases  appa- 
rently slight,  but  really  of  most  serious  and  vital  importance  to  ub  :  the  same  per- 
plexities and  bewilderments  as  I  just  described,  of  feeling,  of  policy,  of  liberality 
and  candour,  of  conscience,  of  foreseen  consequences,  rise  up  around  us;  we  act  in 
more  or  less  uncertainty  of  mind,  but  our  uncertainties  often  woefully  aggravated 
by  our  previous  misconduct ;  and  there  are  many  to  excuse  us,  many  to  encourage 
Qs,  many  to  take  part  with  us,  and  yet,  in  the  sight  of  God,  our  act  is  one,  it  may 
be,  of  clear  and  undoubted  sin.  But  again,  the  particular  thin^  of  which  the  Jews 
were  in  this  instance  ignorant,  was  the  visitation  of  God.  Christ  had  come  to  them, 
God  had  visited  His  people  ;  and  they,  blinded  by  all  these  various  kinds 
of  self-deceit,  of  long-continued  disobedience,  of  inveterate  hardness  of  heart,  and 
neglect  of  lesser  indications  of  God's  will  and  presence,  had  not  known  Him.  Now 
here  again  is  matter  of  high  concern  and  warning  to  us  all.  For  we,  too,  have 
Dur  visitations  of  God ;  if  not  exactly  such  as  this  great  one  of  Christ  coming 
actually  in  the  flesh,  for  us  to  worship  or  to  crucify,  according  as  our  hearts  recog- 
nize and  know  Him,  or  disown  and  rebel  against  Him,  yet  visitations  many,  various, 
and  secret.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  we  have  known  them.  Some,  indeed, 
may  have  been  so  striking  as  not  to  be  mistaken.  But  many,  perhaps  most,  perhaps 
the  most  searching  and  important,  may  have  been  absolutely  unknown  to  us.  And 
not  less  than  this  seems  to  be  plainly  taught  by  our  Lord,  where,  in  the  25th  of  St. 
Matthew,  He  describes  the  actual  scene  of  judgment.  The  righteous  and  the 
wicked  alike  seem  to  be  amazed  to  hear  of  the  matters  alleged  for  their  acquittal  and 
condemnation.  How  unexpected,  then,  may  be  to  us  the  voice  of  judgment! 
{Bithop  Moberly.) 

Vers.  45,  46.  My  house  la  the  bonse  of  prayer.— Tfc«  purified  temple  .■>— Regard- 
ing the  Church  as  an  institution,  with  its  possessions,  its  laws,  its  days  of  worship, 
its  rulers,  its  teachers,  its  outward  services,  we  may  find  for  ourselves  a  lesson  in 
tixis  incident.  And  that  lesson  is,  that  the  spiritual  character  of  the  Church  is 
everything,  and  that  its  first  object  is  to  deepen  in  men's  hearts  the  sense  of  the 
Divfaie  and  the  spiritual.  When  that  great  end  is  lost  sight  of,  the  Churoh  has 
parted  with  her  strongest  claims  upon  the  world,  and  it  has  forfeited  also  its  privi- 
lege as  a  witness  for  God  on  the  earUi.   The  spiritoal  influence  is  the  first  and  chiei 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRAIOR.  [chap,  jxu 

purpose  of  the  Ohuroh  of  Christ.  The  lesson  of  this  narrative  comes  home  to  us  in 
ihese  days,  when  so  much  time  and  thought  are  given  to  the  outer  framework  of 
Church  forms  and  usages ;  and  that  lesson  may  be  needed  to  correct  our  spirit  of 
bustling  and  restless  energy  in  what  is  at  the  best  only  the  machinery  of  spiritual 
life,  and  not  spiritual  life  itself.  There  is  no  class  of  men  who  are  more  in  danger 
of  losing  the  true  meaning  of  religion  than  those  who  are  employed  in  its  service. 
If  I  were  to  seek  for  oases  in  which  spiritual  truth  had  been  travestied  and  turned 
to  not  only  secular  but  profane  purposes,  I  do  not  know  that  I  could  find  them  more 
readily  than  in  men  to  whom  all  sacred  words  and  acts  have  grown  so  famihar  that 
they  have  ceased  to  express  spiritual  facts  at  all.  Those  who  are  always  engaged 
in  religious  works  are  apt  to  lose  the  sense  of  their  sacredness.  No  man  more 
needs  to  be  on  his  guard  against  an  unspiritaal  life  than  the  man  who  is  perpetually 
•employed  in  spiritual  offices.  He  brings  within  the  courts  of  Ood's  house  what 
ought  to  be  left  without ;  he  forgets  his  high  spiritual  functions  in  the  bustle  and 
cam  which  attend  them ;  and  it  is  really  no  absolute  guarantee  of  a  religious  and 
spiritual  life  that  a  man's  profession  is  the  teaching  of  religion.  Christ's  words  and 
acts  read  as  all  a  lesson,  then ;  they  tell  us  that  in  the  most  sacred  occupations  of 
life  there  may  be  foond  cares  and  anxieties  which  are  less  religious,  and  which  are 
apt  to  swallow  up  too  much  of  a  man's  time  and  thoughts.  There  is  another  temple 
of  a  different  kind,  of  which  a  word  may  be  said.  The  whole  Christian  body  is,  in 
the  words  of  the  New  Testament,  a  temple  of  God.  There  is  a  sacredness  in  that 
temple,  the  spiritual  community  of  Christians,  if  we  would  only  think  of  it,  much 
greater  than  in  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  or  in  any  building  devoted  to  holy  uses. 
And  just  as  the  whole  Christian  community  is  a  temple  sacred  to  Ood,  so  each 
individual  heart  is  in  itself  a  temple  where  God  Most  High  is  honoured  and  wor- 
shipped. (A.  WaUon,  D.D.)  Lessons  from  Christ's  cUaiising  of  the  temple: — 1. 
Abuses  are  apt  to  creep  into  the  Church.  Let  as  be  on  oar  guard  against  their  first 
introdaotion.  2.  The  Church  is  much  indebted,  under  God,  to  those  who  have  had 
the  ooorage  to  stand  forward  as  real  reformers.  Hezekiah  ;  Josiah  ;  the  English 
reformers.  They  are  indeed  the  benefactors  of  the  Church  who  successfully  exert 
themselves  to  correct  doctrinal  and  practical  errors,  and  to  promote  the  scriptural 
administration  of  ordinances,  discipline,  and  government.  Thus,  the  progress  of 
eorrnption  is  arrested,  the  beauty  of  Christianity  is  restored,  and  the  glory  of  God, 
and  Uie  religious,  and  even  civil,  interests  of  men  are  promoted.  3.  It  is  the  duty 
of  OS  all,  according  to  our  several  places  and  stations,  to  do  what  we  can  to 
reform  whatever  abases  may  exist  in  the  Church  in  oar  own  times.  4.  Let 
this  purification  of  the  temple  lead  as  to  seek  the  purification  of  oar  own 
hearts.  5.  In  aU  we  attempt  for  the  benefit  of  others,  or  of  ourselves,  let 
us  imitate  the  zeal  which  our  Master  displayed  on  this  occasion.  To  be 
asefal  to  man,  or  acceptable  to  God,  we  must  be  deeply  in  earnest — we  mast  have 
'the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  this  respect.  Neither  fear,  nor  shame,  nor  sinful  inclination 
shoold  restrain  as  in  such  cases.  [JajMs  Foote,  M.A.)  Christ's  indignation  aroused 
by  irreverence : — In  contemplating  this  action  we  are  at  first  sight  startled  by  its 
peremptoriness.  "Is  this,"  we  say  to  ourselves — "is  this  He  who  is  called  the  Lamb 
of  God  ?  He  of  whom  prophecy  said  that  He  should  neither  strive  nor  cry  ;  He 
who  laid  of  Himself,  "  Come  to  Me ;  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart "  ?  Is  there 
not  some  incongruity  between  that  meek  and  gentle  character  and  those  vehement 
acts  and  words.  No,  my  brethren,  there  is  no  incongruity.  As  the  anger  which 
u  divorced  from  meekness  is  but  unsanctified  passion,  so  the  false  meekness  which 
can  never  kindle  at  the  sight  of  wrong  into  indignation,  is  closely  allied,  depend 
npon  it,  to  moral  collapse.  One  of  the  worst  things  that  the  inspired  Psalmist  can 
find  it  in  his  heart  to  say  of  a  man  is,  "  Neither  doth  he  abhor  anything  that  is 
evil."  Bishop  Butler  has  shown  that  anger,  being  a  part  of  our  natural  constitution 
is  intended  by  our  Maker  to  be  excited,  to  be  exercised  upon  certain  legitimate 
objects ;  and  the  reason  why  anger  is  as  a  matter  of  fact  generally  sinful  is,  because 
It  is  generally  wielded,  not  by  our  sense  of  absolute  right  and  truth,  but  by  our  self- 
love,  and,  therefore,  on  wrong  and  needless  occasions.  Our  Lord's  swift  indignation 
was  just  as  much  a  part  of  His  perfect  sanctity  as  was  His  silent  meekness  in  the 
^our  of  His  passion.  We  may  dare  to  say  it,  that  He  could  not,  being  Himself, 
tiave  been  silent  in  that  temple  court,  for  that  which  met  His  eye  was  an  offence 
first  against  tixe  eighth  commandment  of  the  Decalogue.  The  money  brokers  were 
habitually  firaodalent.  But  then  this  does  not  explain  His  treatment  of  the  sellers 
of  the  doves,  which  shows  that  He  saw  in  the  whole  transaction  an  offence  against 
Ihe  flnt  and  second  commandments.      All  irreverence  is  really,  when  we  get  t» 


«HAP.  XIX.1  ST.  LUKE.  451 

the  bottom  of  it,  unbelief.  The  first  great  truth  that  we  know  is  the  solitary  sapre- 
macy  of  the  Eternal  God ;  the  second,  which  is  its  consequence,  the  exacting  cha- 
racter of  Hia  love.  God  is  said,  in  the  second  commandment,, to  be  a  "  jealous  God." 
{Carum  Liddon.)  Christ  dealt  immediately  with  wrong: — ^What  He  might  have 
done  1  He  might  have  said,  "  Well,  this  temple  will  one  day,  and  that  day  not  far 
distant,  be  thrown  down.  I  shall  not  interfere  with  this  abuse  now,  because  in  the 
natural  order  of  things  it  will  be  overturned  along  with  this  structure."  Jesus 
Christ  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  trifle  so.  I  don't  know  that  Jesus  Christ  knew 
the  meaning  of  the  word  expediency,  as  we  sometimes  prostitute  it.  He  saw  wrong. 
If  that  wrong  would  in  five  minutes  work  itself  out,  that  was  no  consideration  to  Him. 
Meanwhile,  to  Him  five  minutes  was  eternity  I  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  cleaming 
of  the  temple : — I  shall  endeavour  to  call  your  attention  to  one  or  two  of  the  most 
marked  features.  And  in  the  first  place,  I  would  bid  you  notice  our  blessed  Lord's 
seal,  that  zeal  of  which  the  Psalmist  said,  speaking  prophetically,  "  the  zeal  of 
Thine  house  hath  even  eaten  me  "  (Psa.  Ixix.  9).  2.  But  again,  the  conduct  of  our 
Lord  shows  us  the  reverence  that  is  due  to  God's  house.  The  Jewish  temple  was 
emphatically  a  "  house  of  prayer,"  it  was  a  place  where  God  had  promised  His 
special  presence  to  those  who  came  to  worship.  And  there  are  some  things  which, 
like  oxen  and  sheep,  are  things  not  clean  enough  to  be  brought  into  the  temple  of 
-God ;  all  evil  feelings,  and  pride,  and  unkindness,  and  envy,  and  self-conceit,  and 
other  wicked  emotions  may  not  be  brought  into  God's  temple ;  they  must  be  driven 
out  with  scourges,  they  must  not  be  tolerated.  Then  also  there  are  some  things 
which,  like  the  doves,  though  pure  in  themselves,  have  no  business  in  the  temple 
of  God  ;  the  cares  of  this  world,  things  necessarily  engaging  our  attention  at  other 
times,  may  not  enter  these  doors :  God's  church  is  intended  to  be  as  it  were  a  little 
«nclosed  spot  where  worldly  things  may  not  enter.  But  again,  the  tables  of  money- 
changers must  not  be  here  ;  this  is  no  place  for  thoughts  of  gain,  it  is  a  profanation 
of  God's  temple  to  bring  them  here.  And,  lastly.  Christian  brethren,  we  cannot 
but  be  reminded,  by  our  Lord's  cleansing  of  the  temple  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  of 
that  awful  cleansing  of  His  temple  which  will  one  day  take  place,  when  all  that  ia 
vile  and  offensive  shall  be  cast  out  of  His  temple,  and  everything  that  maketh  a  lie 
oast  into  the  lake  of  brimstone.  {H.  Goodwin,  M.A.)  The  home  of  prayer: — I, 
Our  first  inquiry  is — What  is  ode  Lord's  view  as  to  the  pdeposb  and  end  which  He 
DESioNB  His  eabthlt  temples  to  sbbvb  ?  And  this  is  the  answer — "  My  house  is  the 
hoase  of  prayer."  He  calls  us  here  to  pray.  The  work  to  which  He  sets  as  in  the 
sanctuary  is  mainly  devotional.  1.  As  first,  that  common  or  united  prayer  is  need- 
ful for  man.  Ptayer  itself  is  almost  an  instinct  of  nature.  Man  must  worship. 
And  he  must  worship  in  company  ;  he  must  pray  with  others.  2.  Another  obser- 
•vution  which  the  Divine  idea  in  regard  to  the  earthly  sanctuary  suggests  is,  that 
oommon  or  united  prayer  is  acceptable  to  G  "4.  3.  Common  or  united  prayer  ia 
efficacious  to  obtain  Divine  gifts.  Otherwise,  Gk>d  would  not  assign  to  it  so  foremost 
«  position  in  the  worship  of  the  sanctnary.  II.  Ma&'s  depabiubb  nou  this  Divine 
IDEA  ABOUT  THE  HousB  ow  GoD  OM  EABTH.  "Yo  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves." 
There  is  man's  perversion  of  God'a  design.  You  know,  of  course,  what  the  particu- 
lar sin  was  which  these  words  of  our  Lord  were  intended  to  reprove.  It  was  the 
appropriation  on  the  part  of  these  Jews  of  a  portion  of  the  temple  enclosure  to  pur- 
poses of  worldly  barter.  This  was  the  way  in  which  the  Jewish  people  lost  sight  of 
the  Divine  idea  in  regard  to  their  temple.  And  though  it  is  not  possible  for  men 
now  to  commit  precisely  the  same  offence,  I  fear  it  would  not  be  diffieolt  to 
trace  a  corresponding  sin,  even  in  the  present  altered  condition  of  the  church.  It 
is  possible  now  to  desecrate  sacred  places  and  offices  to  purposes  of  worldly  gain. 
It  18  possible  to  make  a  traffic  of  spiritual  functions  and  emoluments.  But,  my 
iriends,  these  are  not  the  only  things  in  which  a  departure  from  God's  idea  about 
Uis  sanctnary  may  be  marked  now.  There  are  others,  of  another  complexion  and 
character,  it  is  true,  but  not  the  less  to  be  reprehended.  It  is  to  these  that  I  would 
tnore  especially  call  your  attention.  1.  Let  me  say,  then,  that  some  pervert  God's 
idea  by  making  tiie  house  of  prayer  a  house  of  preaching.  With  them  the  sermon 
is  almost  everything.  They  are  impatient  of  aU  else  to  get  to  that.  Prayers,  and 
lessons,  and  psalms,  and  creeds,  are  all  just  to  be  endured  as  a  sort  of  preliminary 
to  that.  2.  I  remark  again,  that  some  depart  from  God's  intention  with  respect  to 
the  sanctuary  by  making  the  house  of  prayer  •*  a  house  of  mere  Sunday  resort." 
They  must  pass  the  day  somewhere ;  they  must  get  through  it  somehow,  and  so,  aa 
it  is  customary,  and  seemly,  and  respectable,  they  will  go  to  churoH.  They  are  aa 
well  there,  they  think,  as  anywhere  else ,  but,  alas  I  this  is  all.    3.  I  remark,  in  th« 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  six. 

next  place,  that  some  pervert  this  design  by  making  the  hoase  ol  prayer  "  a  house 
of  formal  service."  Their  service  is  no  more  than  lip  service.  (C  M.  Merry.} 
*'  My  house  is  the  house  of  prayer : — Nor  are  there  wanting  examples,  in  all  succeed- 
ing ages,  of  the  conscientious  and  religious  regularity  with  which  the  faithful  ever 
attended  the  public  means  of  grace.  Thus,  for  example,  "  Zacharias  and  Elizabeth 
walked  in  all  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord  blameless."  The  just 
and  devout  Simeon  "  waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,  and  came  by  the  Spirit 
into  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  These,  so  striking  examples  of  such  excelleut  men, 
and  the  uniform  and  continuous  practice  of  the  faithful  in  all  ages,  show  that  thft 
public  worship  of  God  is  an  institution  of  Divine  authority.  That  there  is  a  God  is 
the  first  suggestion  of  unassisted  reason,  and  that  God  ought  to  be  worshipped  is 
the  foundation  and  first  principle  of  all  religion.  Accordingly,  we  have  reason  to 
believe,  that  public  worship  began  with  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  that  it  has 
been  continued  and  maintained  in  all  countries  and  in  all  times,  and  under  every  form 
of  religion  that  man  has  devised  or  God  instituted.  The  ancient  Jews  for  example, 
dedicated  a  seventh  part  of  their  time  to  the  service  and  worship  of  God.  We  may 
also  remark,  that,  from  the  earUest  ages,  not  only  particular  times,  but  also  par- 
ticular places,  were  set  apart  and  consecrated  to  these  sacred  services.  In  the 
darkest  times  of  heathen  idolatry,  when  there  were  "  gods  many,  and  lords 
many,"  magnificent  temples  were  built,  stately  altars  erected,  costly  sacrifices 
offered,  solemn  rites  celebrated,  and  the  elegant  arts  of  painting  and  sculpture, 
poesy  and  music,  were  called  into  the  service  of  dumb  idols.  In  after  times,  when 
the  children  of  Israel  were  in  the  wilderness,  and  had  no  fixed  nor  settled  abode,  the 
tabernacle  was  erected  by  God's  special  command,  and  richly  endowed  with  sacred 
utensils  and  ornaments  for  His  solemn  worship.  L  Pcblic  wobseip  is  calculated 
TO  DISPLAY  THE  OLOBY  OF  GoD.  As  the  oouit  of  an  earthly  monarch  derives  its 
dignity  from  the  splendour  and  number  of  its  attendants,  so  the  church,  "the 
court  of  the  Lord,"  shows  forth  the  majesty  of  the  Most  High  by  its  multitudes  of 
humble  worshippers.  II.  Pdblic  wobship  is  also  calculated  to  pbomote  and  pkb- 
PETUATE  TBB  PBACTicE  OF  PUBE  AND  UNDEFiLED  BELiGioN.  Prayer  kindlcs  and  keep» 
up  the  spirit  of  piety  in  the  soul.  And  if  the  "  house  of  prayer  "  be  thus  holy, 
how  great  should  be  the  purity  of  those  who  frequent  it  7  Here,  again,  let  the 
royal  Psalmist  be  our  director,  "  Praise  is  comely  for  the  upright."  {A.  McEwen.): 
The  house  of  prayer : — •'  My  house  is  the  house  of  prayer."  This  is  as  true  of  that 
portion  of  the  holy  body  which  we  call  the  Church  visible  or  militant  as  it  is  of  the 
rest.  The  object  of  the  visible  Church  is  not  solely  philanthropic,  although  the 
Church's  duty  is  to  do  good  unto  all  men,  specially  to  them  that  are  of  the  house- 
hold of  faith.  It  is  not  solely  the  moral  perfection  of  its  members,  although  the 
purification  to  Himself  of  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good  works  was  certainly  & 
main  object  of  its  founder ;  still  less  is  it  the  prosecution  of  inquiry  or  speculation, 
however  interesting  about  God,  because  we  already  know  all  that  we  ever  really 
shall  know  in  this  state  about  Him.  We  have  on  our  lips  and  in  our  hearts  the 
faith  that  was  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  This  temple,  visible  and  invisible,  is 
thus  organized  by  its  Divine  founder  throughout  earth  and  heaven  to  be  a  whole  of 
ceaseless  communion  with  God ;  and  as  its  heavenly  members  never,  never  for  one 
moment  cease  in  their  blessed  work,  so  by  prayers,  broken  though  they  be  and 
interrupted — by  prayers  and  intercessions,  by  thanksgiving  and  praise,  private  and 
public,  mental  and  vocal,  the  holy  Church  throughout  the  world  duth  acknowledge 
Him  who  is  the  common  centre  of  light  and  love  to  all  its  members,  whether  on 
this  side  the  veil  or  beyond  it.  Into  this  temple  also  there  sometimes  intrudes 
that  which  moves  the  anger  of  the  Son  of  Man,  for  this  spiritual  society  has  its 
place  among  men.  It  is  in  the  world,  although  not  of  it,  and  it  thus  sometimes 
admits  within  its  courts  that  which  cannot  bear  the  glance  of  the  All-Holy.  And 
especially  is  this  apt  to  be  the  case  when  the  Church  of  Christ  has  been  for  many 
ages  bound  up  with  the  life  and  history  of  a  great  nation,  and  is,  what  we  call  in< 
modern  language,  established — that  is  to  say,  recognized  by  the  State,  and  secured 
in  its  property  and  position  by  legal  enactments.  I  am  far  from  denying  that  this 
state  of  things  is  or  may  be  a  very  great  blessing,  that  it  secures  to  religion  a  pro  • 
minence  and  a  consideration  among  the  people  at  large,  which  would  else  be  wanting 
to  it,  that  it  visibly  asserts  before  men  the  true  place  of  God  as  the  ruler  and  guide 
of  national  destiny ;  but  it  is  also  undeniable  that  such  a  state  of  things  may  bring 
^th  it  danger  from  which  less  favoored  churches  escape.  To  be  forewarned,  let 
US  trust,  is  to  be  forearmed ;  but  whenever  it  happens  to  a  great  Church,  or  to 
its  guiding  minds,  to  think  more  of  the  secular  side  of  its  position  than  they  think 


CHAP,  in.]  ST.  LUKE.  4oS 

of  the  spiritoal — more,  it  maj  be,  of  a  seat  in  the  Senate  and  of  high  social  rank 
than  of  the  work  of  God  among  the  people  ;  if,  in  order  to  save  income  and  position 
in  times  of  real  or  supposed  peril,  there  is  any  willingness  to  barter  away  the  safe- 
guards of  the  faith,  or  to  silence  the  pleadings  of  generosity  and  justice  in  deference 
to  some  uninstructed  clamour — then  be  sure  that,  unless  history  is  at  fault  as  well 
as  Scripture,  we  may  listen  for  the  footfalls  of  the  Son  of  Man  on  the  outer  thres- 
hold of  the  temple,  and  we  shall  not  long  listen  in  vain.  Churches  are  disestabUshed 
and  disendowed  to  the  eye  of  sense,  through  the  action  of  political  parties ;  to  the 
eye  of  faith  by  His  interference  who  ordereth  all  things  both  in  heaven  and  in 
earth,  and  who  rules  at  this  moment  on  the  same  principles  as  those  which  of  old 
led  Him  to  cleanse  His  Father's  temple  in  Jerusalem.  (Cation  Liddon.)  Ood's 
houxe  a  house  of  prayer : — "  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer."  Here  is 
a  law  for  the  furniture  and  equipment ;  here  is  a  definition  of  the  object  and  purpose 
of  a  material  Christian  church.  There  are  great  diiierences,  no  doubt,  between  the 
Jewish  Temple  and  a  building  dedicated  to  Christian  worship ;  but  over  the  portals 
of  each  there  might  be  traced  with  equal  propriety  the  words,  "  My  house  shall  be 
called  the  house  of  prayer."  No  well-instructed,  no  really  spiritual  Christian  thinks 
of  his  parish  church  mainly  or  chiefly  as  a  place  for  hearing  sermons.  Sermons 
are  of  great  service,  especially  when  people  are  making  their  first  acquaintance  with 
practical  Christianity,  and  they  occupy  so  great  a  place  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
because  they  were  of  necessity  the  instrument  with  which  the  first  teachers  of 
Christianity  made  their  way  among  unconverted  Jews  and  heathens.  Nay,  more, 
since  amid  the  importunities  of  this  world  of  sense  and  time  the  soul  of  man  is 
constantly  tending  to  close  its  eyes  to  the  unseen,  to  the  dangers  which  so  on  every 
side  beset  it,  to  the  pre-eminent  claims  of  its  Eedeemer  and  its  God,  sermons  which 
repeat  with  unwearying  earnestness  the  same  solemn  certainties  about  God  and 
man,  about  the  person,  and  work,  and  gifts  of  Christ,  about  life  and  death,  about 
the  fleeting  present  and  the  endless  future,  are  a  vital  feature  in  the  activity  of 
every  Christian  Church,  a  means  of  calhng  the  unbelieving  and  the  careless  to  the 
foot  of  the  cross,  a  means  of  strengthening  and  edifying  the  faithful.  Still,  if  a 
comparison  is  to  be  instituted  between  prayers  and  sermons,  there  ought  not  to  be 
a  moment's  doubt  as  to  the  decision  ;  for  it  is  not  said,  "  My  house  shall  be  called 
a  hoase  of  preaching,"  but  "My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer." 
Surely  it  is  a  much  more  responsible  act,  and,  let  me  add,  it  is  a  much  greater 
privilege,  to  speak  to  God,  whether  in  prayer  or  praise,  than  to  listen  to  what  a 
fellow-sinner  can  tell  you  about  Him ;  and  when  a  great  congregation  is  really 
joining  in  worship,  when  there  is  a  deep  spiritual,  as  it  were  an  electric,  current  of 
sympathy  traversing  a  vast  multitude  of  souls  as  they  make  one  combined  advance 
to  the  foot  of  the  eternal  throne,  then,  if  we  could  look  at  these  things  for  a  moment 
with  angels'  eyes,  we  should  see  something  infinitely  greater,  according  to  all  the 
roles  of  a  true  spiritual  measurement,  than  the  eflect  of  the  most  eloquent  and  the 
most  persuasive  of  sermons.  "  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer  "  is  a 
maxim  for  all  time,  and  if  this  be  so,  then  all  that  meets  the  eye,  all  that  falls  upon 
the  ear  vnthin  the  sacred  walls,  should  be  in  harmony  vrith  this  high  intention, 
fihould  be  valued  and  used  only  with  a  view  to  promoting  it.  Architecture,  paint- 
ing, mnral  decoration,  and  the  like,  are  only  in  place  when  they  lift  the  soul 
upwards  towards  the  invisible,  when  they  conduct  it  swiftly  and  surely  to  the 
gate  of  the  world  of  spirits,  and  then  themselves  retire  from  thought  and  from 
view.  Music  the  most  pathetic,  the  most  suggestive,  is  only  welcome  in  the 
temples  of  Christ,  when  it  gives  wings  to  spiritualized  thought  and  feeling,  when  it 
promotes  the  ascent  of  the  soul  to  God.  If  these  beautiful  arts  detain  men  on  their 
ovm  account,  to  wonder  at  their  own  intrinsic  charms,  down  among  the  things  of 
sense ;  if  we  are  thinking  more  of  music  than  of  Him  whose  glory  it  heralds,  more 
of  the  beauty  of  form  and  colour  than  of  Him  whose  Temple  it  adorns,  then 
be  Bore  we  are  robbing  God  of  His  glory,  we  are  turning  His  Temple  into  a 
den  of  thieves.  No  error  is  without  its  element  of  truth,  and  jealousy  on 
this  point  was  the  strength  of  Puritanism,  which  made  it  a  power  notwith- 
standing its  violence,  notwithstanding  its  falsehood.  And  as  for  purely  secular 
conversations  within  these  walls,  how  unworthy  are  they  in  view  of  our 
Redeemer's  words!  Time  was,  nnder  the  first  two  Stuarts,  when  the  nave  of 
the  old  St.  Paul's  was  a  rendezvous  for  business,  for  pleasure,  for  public  gossiping, 
BO  that  Evelyn  the  diarist,  lamenting  the  deplorable  state  to  which  the  great  church 
vas  redoeed,  says  that  it  was  already  named  a  den  of  thieves.  Is  it  too  much  to 
mg  that  the  Bedeemer  was  not  long  in  punishing  the  desecration  of  His  Temple  I 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

First  there  came  the  axes  and  hammers  of  the  rebellion,  and  then  there  came  tha 
swift  tongues  of  fire  in  1660,  and  the  finest  cathedral  that  England  ever  saw  went 
its  way.  Would  that  in  better  times  we  were  less  constantly  unmindful  of  the  truth 
that  its  successor  is  neither  a  museum  of  sculpture  nor  yet  a  concert-room,  and 
that  He  whoso  house  it  is  will  not  be  robbed  of  His  rights  with  permanent  impunity. 
(Ibid.)  The  regenerate  soul  is  a  house  of  prayer : — "  My  house  shall  be  called  the 
house  of  prayer."  This  is  true  of  every  regenerate  soul.  When  it  is  in  a  state  of 
grace  the  soul  of  man  is  a  temple  of  the  Divine  presence.  "  If  any  man  love  Me, 
and  will  keep  My  words.  My  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  onto  him  and 
make  our  abode  with  him."  Christ's  throne  within  the  soul  enlightens  the  under- 
standing, and  kindles  the  affections,  and  braces  the  will,  and  while  He  thus  from 
His  presence-chamber  in  this  His  spiritual  palace,  issues  His  orders  hour  by  hour 
to  its  thinking  and  acting  powers.  He  receives  in  return  the  homage  of  faith  and 
love,  a  sacrifice  which  they  delight  to  present  to  Him.  So  it  is  with  God's  true 
servants,  but  alas !  my  brethren,  if  you  and  I  compare  notes,  what  shall  we  say  7 
Even  when  we  desire  to  pray  we  find  ourselves  in  the  outer  court  of  the  soul 
surrounded  all  at  once  with  the  tables  of  the  money-changers,  and  with  the  seats 
of  the  men  who  sell  the  doves.  Our  business,  with  all  its  details,  follows  us  in  the 
churches,  follows  us  into  our  private  chambers,  follows  us  everywhere  into  the 
presence  of  our  God.  Our  preparations  for  religious  service,  the  accidents  of  our 
service,  occupy  the  attention  which  is  due  to  the  service  itself.  Sometimes,  alas  t 
we  do  not  even  try  to  make  the  very  first  steps  towards  real  prayer,  and  steps  which 
ordinary  natural  reverence  would  suggest ;  we  lounge,  we  look  about  os,  just  aa 
though  nothing  in  the  world  were  of  less  importance  than  to  address  the  Infinite 
and  Eternal  God.  But  sometimes,  alas  !  we  do  close  the  eyes,  we  do  bend  the 
knee,  we  try  to  put  force  upon  the  soul's  powers  and  faculties,  and  to  lead  them 
forth  one  by  one,  and  then  collectively  to  the  footstool  of  the  King  of  kings ;  when, 
lo  1  they  linger  over  this  memory  or  that,  they  are  burdened  with  this  or  that  load 
of  care,  utterly  foreign  to  the  work  in  hand.  They  bend,  it  is  true,  in  an  awkward 
sort  of  way  in  the  sacred  presence  beneath,  not  their  sense  of  its  majesty,  not  their 
sense  of  the  love  and  the  beauty  of  God,  but  the  vast  and  incongruous  weight  of 
worldliness  which  prevents  their  realizing  it.  And  when  a  soul  is  thus  at  its  best 
moments  fatally  troubled  and  burdened  about  many  things,  God  in  His  mercy  bidea 
His  time  ;  He  cleanses  the  courts  of  a  Temple  which  He  has  predestined  to  be  His 
for  ever.  He  cleanses  it  in  His  own  time  and  way  ;  He  sends  some  sharp  sorrow 
which  sweeps  from  the  soul  all  thoughts  save  one,  the  nothingness,  the  vanity  of 
all  that  is  here  below ;  and  so  He  forces  that  soul  to  turn  by  one  mighty,  all-com- 
prehending act  to  Himself,  who  alone  can  satisfy  it ;  or  He  lays  a  man  upon  a  bed 
of  sickness,  leaving  the  mind  with  all  its  powers  intact,  but  stripping  from  the  body 
all  the  faculties  of  speech  and  motion,  and  then  through  the  long,  weary  hours  the 
man  is  turned  in  upon  himself ;  and  if  there  is  any  hope  for  him  at  alU  if  at  that 
critical  moment  he  is  at  all  alive  to  the  tender  pleadings  of  the  All-merciful,  ha 
will  with  his  own  hands  cleanse  the  temple ;  he  sees  the  paltriness  of  the  trifles 
that  have  kept  him  back  from  his  chiefest,  from  his  only  good  ;  he  expels  first  one 
and  then  another  unworthy  intruder  upon  the  sacred  ground.  The  scourge  is 
sharp,  the  resistance  it  may  be  persevering  ;  the  hours  are  long,  and  they  are 
weary,  but  the  work  is  done  at  last.  (Ibid.)  Irreverence  rebuked: — When 
Walter  Hook  (afterwards  Dean  of  Chichester)  was  Vicar  of  Coventry,  he  was  once 
presiding  at  a  vestry  meeting  which  was  so  largely  attended  as  to  necessitate^  an 
adjournment  to  the  church.  Several  persons  kept  their  hats  on.  The  vicar 
requested  them  to  take  them  off,  but  they  refused.  "  Very  well,  gentlemen,"  he 
replied,  "  but  remember  that  in  this  house  the  insult  is  not  done  to  me,  bat  to  your 
God."    The  hats  were  inunediately  taken  off. 


CHAFTEB  XX. 

Ybbs.  9-19.  A  certain  man  planted  a  Tinejrard. — Lessotu:—!.  Let  tu  be  thankful 
that  God  has  plamted  His  vineyard  among  ns.  We  are  situated,  not  in  any  of  the 
deserts,  or  wastes,  or  commons,  of  the  world,  but  in  the  vineyard,  in  "  a  garden 
inclosed,"  in  the  very  garden  of  Uie  Lord.     2.  Let  ua  inquire  whether  we  be 


XX]  8T.  LUKE.  465 

jrenderisg  to  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  the  frnit  which  He  expects  in  its  seasoD. 
3.  Beware  of  resembling  these  wicked  husbandmen  in  their  conduct,  lest  you  also 
resemble  them  in  their  doom.  What  reception,  then,  are  you  giving  to  God's 
ministers,  and  especially  to  God's  beloved  Son  ?  4.  In  the  last  place,  see  that  you 
give  to  the  Lord  Jesus  that  place  in  your  spiritual  building  which  is  His  due.  Let 
Him  be  both  at  its  foundation  and  at  its  top.  Let  Him  be  both  "  the  author  and 
the  finisher  of  your  faith."  (J.  Foote,  MjI.)  God's  manifold  mercy : — Like  the 
drops  of  a  lustre,  which  reflect  a  rainbow  of  colours  when  the  sun  is  glittering  upon 
them,  and  each  one,  when  turned  in  difTerent  ways,  from  its  prismatic  form  shows 
«11  the  varieties  of  colour,  so  the  mercy  of  Grod  is  one  and  yet  many,  the  same  yet 
ever  changing,  a  combination  of  all  the  beauties  of  love  blended  harmoniously 
together.  You  have  only  to  look  at  mercy  in  that  light,  and  that  light,  and  that 
light,  to  see  how  rich,  how  manifold  it  is.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Fruitfulnest  the 
tttt  of  valtie: — Years  ago  in  Mentone  they  estimated  the  value  of  land  by  the 
number  of  olive-trees  upon  it.  How  many  bearers  of  the  precious  oil  were  yielding 
their  produce  ?  That  was  the  question  which  settled  the  value  of  the  plot.  Is  not 
this  the  true  way  of  estimating  the  importance  of  a  Christian  Church  ?  Mere  size 
is  no  criterion ;  wealth  is  even  a  more  deceiving  measure,  and  rank  and  education 
are  no  better.  How  many  are  bearing  fruit  unto  the  Lord  in  holy  living,  in  devout 
intercession,  in  earnest  efforts  for  soul  winning,  and  in  other  methods  by  which 
fruit  is  brought  forth  unto  the  Lord?  {Sword  and  Trowel.)  Ahmed  mercy: — 
Nothing  so  cold  as  lead,  yet  nothing  more  scalding  if  molten ;  nothing  more  blunt 
than  iron,  and  yet  nothing  so  keen  if  sharpened ;  the  air  is  soft  and  tender,  yet  out 
of  it  are  engendered  thunderings  and  lightnings  ;  the  sea  is  calm  and  smooth,  but 
if  tossed  with  tempests  it  is  rough  beyond  measure.  Thus  it  is  that  mercy  abused 
tarns  to  fury;  God,  as  He  is  a  God  of  mercies,  so  He  is  a  God  of  judgment ;  and 
it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  His  punishing  hands.  He  is  loath  to  strike,  but 
when  He  strikes,  He  strikes  home.  If  His  wrath  be  kindled,  yea,  but  a  little,  vroa 
be  to  all  those  on  whom  it  lights ;  how  much  more  when  He  is  sore  displeased  with 
a  people  or  person  I  (John  Trapp.)  The  Son  rejected : — Turning  to  the  parable, 
notice — I.  The  Ownsb'b  cladi.  His  right  and  authorit^r  are  complete.  God 
presses  His  right  to  our  love  and  service.  Blessings  are  privileges,  and  privileges 
are  obligations.  II.  The  Owner's  loving  patience.  There  never  was  an  earthly 
employer  who  showed  such  persistent  kindness  towards  such  persistent  rebellion. 
The  account  of  servants  sent  again  and  again,  in  spite  of  insults  and  death,  is  a 
faint  picture  of  His  forbearance  towards  Israel.  Mercies,  deliverances,  revelations, 
pleadings,  gather,  a  shining  host,  around  all  their  history,  as  the  angelic  camp  was 
close  to  Jacob  on  his  journey.  But  all  along  the  history  stand  the  dark  and  blood- 
stained images  of  mercies  despised  and  prophets  slain.  The  tenderness  of  God  in 
the  old  dispensation  is  wonderful ;  but  in  Christ  it  appears  in  a  pathos  of  yearning. 
IIL  The  rejection.  IY.  The  judouznt.  It  was  just,  necessary,  complete,  reme- 
diless. V.  Thb  tinaIi  exaltation  of  the  Son.  {Charles  M.  Southgate.)  TJie 
rejected  Son : — I.  God's  interest  in  His  vineyard.  The  great  truths  of  the  Old 
Testament  are  from  the  prophets  rather  than  from  the  priests.  The  grand  progress 
of  truth  has  depended  npon  these  fearless  men.  The  age  without  its  prophet  has 
been  stagnated.  The  priesthood  is  conservative ;  prophecy,  progressive.  The  true 
prophet  is  always  great ;  truth  makes  men  great.  Only  by  a  clear  understanding 
of  the  accumulating  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  can  we  appreciate  the  Divine 
care.  In  this  lesson  as  to  the  care  of  God  for  His  vineyard,  Christ  has  marked  the 
distinction  between  the  functions  of  the  prophets  and  Himself.  They  had  spoken 
as  servants ;  He  as  the  Son.  In  such  a  comparison  is  seen  the  transcendent  reve- 
lation of  God  in  Christ.  He  was  the  heir.  The  interests  of  the  Father  were  iden- 
tical with  His  own.  It  was  in  such  a  comparison  that  Christ  declared  the  infinite 
grace  of  God  in  the  incarnation  and  its  purpose.  II.  The  irreverence  of  uen. 
The  whole  attitude  of  God  toward  His  Church  is  that  of  an  infinite  condescension 
and  pity.  1.  The  attitude  of  these  men  toward  the  truth.  The  greatest  conflicts 
have  been  between  the  truth  of  God  and  the  personal  desires  of  men.  2.  This 
antagonism  is  manifested  in  the  treatment  of  those  who  are  righteous.  In  one 
sense  he  who  accepts  a  truth  becomes  its  personation,  and  as  a  consequence  must 
bear  all  the  malignity  of  those  who  hale  that  same  truth.  Witness  the  treatment 
of  the  prophets  in  evidence.  Because  Micaiah  uttered  that  which  was  displeasing 
to  the  government  of  Israel  he  was  scourged  and  imprisoned.  Because  the  prophet 
Jeremiah  gave  an  onwelcome  prophecy  to  his  king,  although  it  was  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  he  was  thrown  into  a  dungeon  for  his  coorage.    No  better  fate  awaited 


A5$  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOB,  [CHU.  I& 

the  prophet  Isaiah  than  to  be  eawn  asunder  by  order  of  the  ruler  of  God's  chosen 
people.  It  was  the  high  priest  who  obtained  a  decree  for  the  expulsion  of  Amof 
from  Jerusalem.  3.  This  antagonism  to  the  prophets  of  the  truth  is  only  a  lesser 
expression  of  a  burning  hatred  toward  God.  The  spirit  of  hatred  to  the  prophets 
would  result  in  the  killing  of  the  Son  of  God.  Whether  the  truth  or  man  or  God 
stands  in  the  way  of  this  lust  for  power,  the  result  is  the  same.  III.  The  poweb 
oT  THE  PEOPLE.  Kepcatedly  this  truth  is  brought  out  in  the  life  of  Christ.  "  They 
sought  to  lay  hold  on  Him,  but  feared  the  people."  In  these  few  words  we  recog- 
nize the  corrective  of  the  terrible  accusation  against  human  nature.  If  such  a 
history  is  the  expression  of  what  is  universal,  then  we  must  discern  the  fact  that 
the  truth  is  more  safe  in  the  hands  of  the  many  than  of  the  few.  lY.  The  bovb- 
BEiGNTY  of  THE  owNEB  OF  THE  viNEYASD.  In  the  parallel  accotmt  of  this  parable  in 
Matthew,  we  read  the  question  of  Christ :  "  When  the  lord,  therefore,  of  the  vine- 
yard Cometh,  what  will  he  do  unto  those  husbandmen  ?  "  In  all  history  this  same 
truth  has  been  often  witnessed.  The  rejecters  of  God  are  self-rejected  from  Him. 
The  power  that  is  not  used  for  God  is  taken  from  ns  and  given  to  those  who  will 
use  it.  There  are  two  practical  suggestions  very  intimately  connected  with  this 
theme  that  we  briefly  notice.  First :  The  greatest  hindrance  to  Christ's  kingdom 
may  come  from  those  who  are  the  highest  in  the  administration  of  its  affairs. 
Second :  The  stupidity  of  wickedness.  These  very  men  who  robbed  God  were 
robbing  themselves.  By  planning  to  possess  the  vineyard  they  lost  it.  By  at- 
tempting to  keep  the  owner  away  they  cast  themselves  out.  God  controls  His 
own  kingdom  and  Church.  "  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  is  become  the 
head  of  the  comer:  this  was  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes." 
(D.  O.  Hears.)  Parable  of  the  vineyard  let  to  husbandvmn : — I.  The  mateeialb  of 
WEIGH  THE  FARABLS  IS  COMPOSED  are  objccts  which  were  familiar  in  Palestine,  or 
common  in  warm  countries ;  a  vineyard,  a  proprietor,  and  tenants.  IL  Let  a* 
next  attend  to  the  objects  which  oub  Savioub  had  ts  view  in  delivebinq  this 
PABABLE ;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  inquire  what  are  the  important  truths  con* 
tained  in  it.  The  objects  of  our  Saviour  in  this  parable  seem  to  be — 1.  To  point 
out  the  singular  advantages  bestowed  on  the  Jews  as  a  nation.  2.  Their  conduct. 
3.  Their  punishment.  4.  The  transference  of  their  advantages  to  others.  Infer- 
ences :  1.  From  this  passage  we  may  learn  that  we,  as  Christians,  possess  a  portion 
of  that  kingdom  which  the  Lord  Jesus  came  to  establish.  For  the  Christians  came 
in  the  place  of  the  Jews.  This  kingdom  consists  in  privileges,  in  blessings,  in 
superior  knowledge,  and  superior  means  of  improvement.  Of  those  privileges  wa 
have  much  cause  to  be  grateful,  but  none  whatever  to  be  proud.  For  they  were  not 
given  because  we  were  better  than  other  nations :  but  they  were  bestowed  solely 
that  we  might  cultivate  and  improve  them,  and  become  the  blessed  instruments  of 
conveying  them  to  others.  2.  That  if  we  cease  to  bring  forth  the  fmit  of  holiness, 
the  kingdom  of  God  will  also  be  taken  from  us.  God  has  given  us  much,  and 
therefore  of  ns  much  will  be  required.  (J.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  Herodiant  and 
Pharisees  combined  against  Jesvs : — 1.  The  combination  of  men  of  opposite  senti- 
ments, in  a  particular  case,  affords  no  proof  that  truth  and  justice  are  connected 
with  their  temporary  union.  2.  In  the  conduct  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  on  this 
occasion  we  see  the  disgraceful  artifices  which  malice  leads  men  to  employ.  8. 
From  this  passage  we  may  observe  the  perfect  knowledge  which  Jesus  had  of  the 
characters,  principles,  and  intentions  of  His  enemies.  4.  The  wisdom  of  Jesos  was 
also  conspicuous  on  this  occasion.  Had  He  been  a  mere  man,  we  should  have  said 
He  was  distinguished  by  presence  of  mind.  Now  His  wisdom  is  strongly  displayed 
here.  He  might  have  refused  to  answer  the  question  of  the  Pharisees  and  Hero- 
dians,  as  the  Pharisees  had  done  to  Him.  Or  He  might  have  given  some  dark 
enigmatical  reply  which  they  could  not  have  perverted.  But,  instead  of  doing  so. 
He  gave  a  plain  decided  answer,  without  fear  or  evasion.  6.  The  fearless  regard  tc 
truth  which  the  Lord  Jesus  displaced  on  this  occasion  deserves  to  be  carefully 
noticed.  He  did  not  mean  to  decline  answering  the  question,  Whether  it  was 
lawful  to  pay  taxes  to  Csesar.  On  the  contrary.  He  instantly  declared  that  it  was 
lawful ;  and  not  only  lawful,  but  obligatory,  as  they  themselves  had  unwillingly 
confessed.  For  the  allusion  to  the  denarius  struck  them  forcibly ;  and  they  went 
away  admiring  the  person  whom  they  had  come  to  expose  and  overwhelm.  6. 
Lastly,  we  may  observe  the  disposition  which  our  Savionr  always  showed  to  direct 
the  attention  of  His  hearers  to  Hae  duty  which  they  owed  to  God.  If,  then,  we  art 
to  render  to  God  the  things  that  are  God's,  we  must  render  everything  to  God; 
lor  everything  we  have  belongs  to  Him — our  capacities,  our  opportunities,  9a 


CKiP.  XX.]  ST.  LUKE.  4St 

advantagos,  our  blessings.  {Tbid.)  It  will  grind  Mm  to  powder. — The  madness  of 
opposing  Christ : — "  It  is  said  that  a  hundred  thousand  birds  dy  against  the  lights 
of  the  lighthouses  along  the  Atlantic  coast  of  the  United  States,  and  are  killed 
annually."  So  says  a  sSp  cut  from  this  morning's  newspaper.  We  need  not  ba 
afraid  in  these  excited  times  that  captious  cavillers  will  put  oat  our  hope.  Thd 
dark  wild  birds  of  the  ocean  keep  coming  forth  from  the  mysterious  caverns ;  they 
seem  to  hate  the  glitter  of  the  lenses.  They  continue  to  dash  themselves  upon  the 
thick  panes  of  glass  in  the  windows.  But  they  usually  end  by  beating  their  wings 
to  pieces  on  the  unyielding  crystal  tiU  they  fall  dead  in  the  surf  rolling  below.     {C. 

5.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  wreck  of  infidelity  : — Some  years  ago,  a  man  and  his 
wife  were  found  living  in  a  wretched  broken-down  house  in  a  low  part  of  London ; 
and  although  the  husband  was  down  with  illness,  his  only  bed  was  a  little  straw, 
with  a  coarse  dirty  wrapper  for  a  covering,  and  a  brick  for  a  pillow.  An  old  chair 
and  a  saucepan  appeared  to  be  the  only  other  furniture  on  the  premises,  while  the 
wife  in  attendance  was  subject  to  fits,  which  made  her  for  the  time  more  like  a  wild 
animal  than  a  woman.  Though  reduced  to  so  wretched  a  condition,  this  man  was 
really  gifted  and  educated ;  and  in  days  of  health  tind  strength  he  had  worked  with 
his  pen  for  an  infidel  publisher.  What,  then,  was  the  cause  of  his  downfall  ?  It 
eo  happened  that  the  sufferer  answered  this  question  himself ;  for,  casting  his  dull, 
leaden-looking  eyes  around  the  room  after  a  visitor  had  entered,  he  remarked, 
••This  is  the  wreck  of  infidelity  1 " 

Vers.  20-26.  They  watched  Him. — Chritt  teas  watched,  and  so  are  we : — The  chief 
priests  and  rulers  of  the  Jews  watched  Jesus,  but  not  to  learn  the  way  of  salvation. 
They  watched  TTim  with  the  evil  eyes  of  malice  and  hatred,  desiring  to  take  hold 
of  His  words,  to  entangle  Him  in  His  talk,  that  they  might  accuse  Him,  and  deUver 
Him  op  to  die.  He  loved  all  men,  yet  He  was  hated  and  rejected  of  men ;  He  went 
about  doing  good,  yet  they  tried  to  do  Him  harm.  The  enemies  of  Christ  are  ever 
watching  for  our  fall,  esiger  to  hear  or  to  tell  any  evil  thing  about  us,  ready  to  cast 
the  stone  of  slander  against  us.  Yon  know  that  the  whitest  robe  first  shows  the 
stain,  let  as  remember  whose  purity  we  wear  if  we  have  put  on  Christ.  Let  us  strive 
"  to  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise,  redeeming  the  time,  because  the 
days  are  evil."  6  we  are  tempted  to  say  or  do  something  which  is  equivocal, 
though  the  way  of  the  world,  let  as  pause  and  ask  ourselves  whether  it  will  bring 
discredit  on  our  faith,  whether  it  will  dishonour  our  Master.  But  there  are  others 
who  watdi  ns,  and  in  a  different  manner.  The  Church  in  Paradise  watches  the 
Church  on  earth  and  prays  for  it.  Our  path  of  Ufe  is  compassed  by  a  great  cloud  ot 
witnesses ;  the  saints  who  have  fought  the  battle  and  won  the  crown,  they  watch  as. 
St.  Paul,  resting  after  his  good  fight,  and  his  many  perils,  is  watching  to  see  how 
we  are  fighting  against  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil.  St.  Peter,  restored  to  the  side 
of  Jesus,  watches  to  see  iJE  any  of  ns  deny  their  Lord.  St.  Thomas,  no  longer 
doubtful,  watches  to  see  if  our  faith  be  strong.  Holy  Stephen  watches  as  when  the 
stones  of  insult  and  persecution  assail  as ;  ihe  forty  martyrs,  who  died  for  Jesus 
on  the  frozen  pool  at  Sebaste,  watch  us  when  the  world  looks  coldly  on  us,  and 
many  another  who  passed  through  fire  and  water  watches  as  in  our  battle  and  the 
race  that  is  set  before  us.  Thus  with  the  enemies  of  God  watching  for  our  fall,  and 
the  saints  of  God  watching  for  our  victory,  let  us  watch  ourselves,  and  let  our  cry 
oe,  "  Hold  Thou  me  up  that  my  footsteps  slip  not."  (H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.) 
Cowards  are  like  eats: — Cowards  are  Uke  cats.  Cats  always  take  their  prey  by 
springing  suddenly  upon  it  from  some  concealed  station,  and,  if  they  miss  their 
aim  in  tiie  first  attack,  rarely  follow  it  up.  They  are  all,  accordingly,  cowardly, 
sneaking  animals,  and  never  willingly  face  their  enemy,  unless  brought  to  bay,  or 
wounded,  trusting  always  to  their  power  of  surprising  their  victims  by  the  aid  of 
their  stealthy  and  noiseless  movements.  [Dallas,  "  Natural  History  of  the  Animal 
Kingdom")  Whose  image  and  saperscrlptlon  hath  it  7 — The  Divine  image  in  the 
soul : — 1.  The  Divine  image  ought  to  be  our  highest  glory.  2.  Let  the  Divine  image 
which  we  bear  be  a  constant  exhortation  to  serve  God.  3.  Never  defile  the  Divine 
image  by  sin.     4.  Endeavour  to  increase  every  day  the  beauty  of  the  Divine  image. 

6.  Bespect  the  Divine  image  in  your  neighbour.  (Bishop  Ehrler.)  Man  is  Ood't 
property : — More  than  all  visible  things,  we  ourselves,  vhth  the  facnlties  of  body 
and  soul,  are  Ood's.  Man  is  God's  image,  God's  coin,  and  therefore  belongs  to 
Ood  entirely.  I.  On  what  is  this  DrviNS  ownership  tounded  t  1.  On  creation. 
Man  is  God's  property.  (1)  As  God's  creature.  All  that  is  created  belongs  to  God, 
bj  whose  omnipotence  it  was  made.     (2)  As  God's  creature  he  bears  the  DiviiM 


458  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx, 

image.  2.  On  redemption.  (1)  The  soul  of  the  first  man  was  a  sopematural  imag* 
of  God,  created  in  original  justice  and  sanctity.  (2)  In  consequence  of  the  first  sin, 
the  soul  was  deprived  of  sanctifying  grace  (Eom.  v.  12).  (3)  God  had  compassion 
on  man,  and  found  means  (through  the  Incarnation)  to  restore  His  image  in  the 
human  soul.  II.  Consequknces  RESULTma  fkom  this  Divinb  ownership.  1.  W« 
should  render  to  God  our  soul.  (1)  Our  understanding.  (2)  Our  will.  (3)  Our  heart. 
2.  Our  body  and  all  its  members.  (Grimm.)  The  medal  made  useful : — One  day, 
when  Martin  Luther  was  completely  penniless,  he  was  asked  for  money  to  aid  an 
important  Christian  enterprise.  He  reflected  a  little,  and  recollected  that  he  had  a 
beautiful  medal  of  Joachun,  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  which  he  very  much  prized. 
He  went  immediately  to  a  drawer,  opened  it,  and  said  :  "  What  art  thou  doing  there, 
Joachim?  Dost  thon  not  see  how  idle  thou  art?  Come  out  and  make  thyself 
useful."  Then  he  took  out  the  medal  and  contributed  it  to  the  object  solicited  for. 
Bender  unto  Csesax  the  thln^rs  frbich  be  Ctesar's. — Casar't  due  and  God's  due  :—I. 
That  kings  and  pbinces  have  a  certain  bight  and  dxte  pertaining  to  rasu  bt 
God's  appointment,  which  it  is  not  lawtitl  for  ant  mam  to  keep  from  thkm.  This 
is  plain  here  as  if  Christ  had  said :  "It  is  of  God,  and  not  without  the  disposing 
and  ordering  of  His  Providence,  that  the  Roman  Emperor  hath  put  in  his  foot 
among  you,  and  is  now  your  liege  and  sovereign  :  you  yourselves  have  submitted  to 
his  government,  and  have  in  a  manner  subscribed  unto  that  which  God  hath 
brought  upon  you ;  now,  certainly,  there  is  a  right  pertaining  to  him  respectively 
to  his  place.  This  he  must  have,  and  it  cannot  be  lawful  for  you,  under  any 
pretext,  to  take  it  from  him."  So  that  this  speech  is  a  plain  ground  for  this. 
But  what  is  Cesar's  due?  1.  Prayer  for  him  (1  Tim.  ii.  1).  (1)  That  he  may  be 
endowed  with  all  needful  graces  for  his  place,  (a)  Wisdom,  (b)  Justice,  (c) 
Temperance,  i.e.,  sobriety  and  moderation  in  diet,  in  apparel,  in  delight,  &o.  (d) 
Zeal  and  courage  in  God's  matters.  This  it  is  which  will  make  kings  prosper 
(1  Kings  ii.  2,  3).  (2)  That  he  may  be  delivered  from  all  dangers  to  which  he  is 
subject  in  his  place.  Kings  are  in  danger  of  two  sorts  of  enemies,  (a)  Enemies 
to  their  bodies  and  outward  state.  Traitors.  Conspirators,  {b)  Enemies  to  their 
souls.  Flatterers.  2.  Submission  to  him.  By  this  I  mean  "  an  awful  framing 
and  composing  of  the  whole  man  respectively  to  his  authority."  And  nowhere, 
because  I  mention  the  whole  man,  and  man  consisteth  of  two  parts ;  therefore  I 
will  declare,  first,  what  is  the  submission  of  the  inner  man  due  to  a  king  by  the 
Word  of  God;  and  then,  what  is  the  submission  of  the  outward  man.  1.  Touching 
the  submission  of  the  inner  man,  I  account  the  substance  of  it  to  be  this — "  A 
reverent  and  dutiful  estimation  of  him  in  regard  of  his  place."  "  Fear  the  Lord 
and  the  king,"  said  Solomon.  As  the  "  fearing  of  God "  argueth  an  inward 
respectiveness  to  His  Divine  majesty,  so  the  fearing  of  the  king  intends  the  like, 
the  heart  carrieth  a  kind  of  reverent  awe  unto  him.  And  this  is  that  honouring 
the  king  which  St.  Peter  giveth  charge  of  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  Honour  is  properly 
an  inward  act,  and  we  honour  a  superior  when  our  respect  is  to  him  according  to 
his  dignity.  That  this  reverent  estimation  of  a  king,  which  I  term  the  substance 
of  inward  submission,  may  be  the  better  understood,  we  must  consider  touching  it 
two  things.  (1)  The  ground  of  it  is  a  right  understanding  of  the  state  and  condi- 
tion ol  a  king's  place,  (a)  Its  eminence.  (6)  Its  usefulness.  (2)  Now  the  com- 
panion of  this  reverent  esteem  of  Caesar  is  a  ready  and  willing  disposition  to 
perform  to  him  and  for  him  any  service  he  may  require.  2.  I  come  now  to  speak 
of  the  outward  submission,  which  is  that  which  is  for  the  testification  and  mani- 
festation of  the  inward.  An  outward  submissiveness  without  an  inward  awfulness 
were  but  hypocrisy ;  to  pretend  an  inward  respect  without  giving  outward  evidence 
thereof,  were  but  mockery.  This  outward  submission  is  either  in  word  or  in  action. 
It  includes — (1)  Conformity  to  the  laws.  (2)  Yielding  of  the  person  in  time  of  war. 
(3)  Furnishing  supplies.  II.  That  it  is  not  liAWFUi  for  ant  man  to  deprive 
a£mightt  God  of  that  which  is  His  doe.  "  You  are  careful,"  saith  our  Saviour, 
"•B  it  seemeth,  to  inquire  touching  Caesar's  right,  as  if  you  were  so  tender- 
eonsoienced  that  yon  would  not  keep  ought  from  him  that  were  his.  It  becometh 
yon  to  be,  at  the  least,  as  careful  for  God ;  there  is  a  right  also  due  to  Him,  look 
yon  to  it,  that  yon  give  it  Him."  Thus  is  the  doctrine  raised,  God  must  have  His 
due  as  well  as  the  king  his.  Nay,  He  is  to  have  it  much  more ;  "  He  is  the  King 
of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  By  Him  it  is  that  earthly  kings  do  reign.  He 
beareth  rule  over  the  kingdom  of  men,  and  giveth  it  to  whosoever  He  will."  Let 
me  begin  by  explaining  what  is  here  meant  by  the  Lord's  due.  The  oonscionable 
performanoe  of  any  good  duty  is  in  some  sense  the  Lord's  due,  because  the  samt 


zx.]  BT.  LUKE.  451 

IB  required  bj  Him;  and  bo  even  tbat  which  was  epoken  of  before,  by  the 
same  of  Csesar's  due,  is  God'e  due,  because  the  law  of  God  binds  us  to  it.  When 
we  speak,  therefore,  of  God's  due,  we  intend  thereby  that  which  is  more  properly 
and  more  immediately  belonging  to  Him.  For  example's  sake — in  a  house,  whereof 
every  room  and  corner  is  the  master's,  yet  that  where  he  lieth  himself  is  more 
particularly  called  his  ;  bo  whereas  all  good  services,  even  those  which  appertain 
to  men,  are  the  Lord's,  He  being  the  commander  of  them,  yet  those  are  more  pre- 
eisely  and  specially  termed  His  which  belong  to  Him  more  directly.  And  of  the 
does  of  this  sort  we  are  now  to  treat ;  and  these  may  justly  be  referred  to  two 
general  heads.  The  first  I  may  call  His  *•  prerogative,"  the  other  His  "  worship." 
Under  God's  "  prerogative  "  I  comprehend  two  things.  1.  ••  That  the  things  which 
concern  Him  must  have  the  pre-eminence."  2.  "  That  He  must  have  absolute 
obedience  in  aU  things."  And  now  I  come  to  the  next  part  of  His  due,  "  His 
worship."  By  His  worship  is  understood  that  more  direct  and  proper  service 
which  we  do  to  God  for  the  declaration  of  our  duty  to  Him,  of  our  dependence  on 
Him,  and  of  our  acknowledgment  both  to  expect  and  to  receive  all  good  and  comfort 
from  Him.  Here  the  particulars  to  be  considered  of,  under  this  head  of  worship, 
are— 1.  "  That  He  must  be  worshipped."  2.  "  That  He  must  be  so  worshipped  as 
Himself  thinks  good."  (S.  Eieron.)  Duty  discriminated : — "  Go  with  me  to  the 
concert  this  afternoon?  "  once  asked  a  fashionable  city  salesman  of  a  new  assistant 
in  the  warehouse.  "  I  cannot."  "  Why  ?  "  "  My  time  is  not  my  own ;  it  belongs 
to  another."  "  To  whom?  "  "  To  the  firm,  by  whom  I  have  been  instructed  not 
to  leave  without  permission."  The  next  Sabbath  afternoon  the  same  salesman  said 
to  this  clerk,  ••  Will  you  go  to  ride  with  us  this  evening ? "  "I  cannot."  "  Why f  " 
"  My  time  is  not  my  own  ;  it  belongs  to  another."  "  To  whom  ?  "  "  To  Him  who 
has  said,  ♦  Remember  the  Sabbath-day  to  keep  it  holy.' "  Some  years  passed,  and 
that  clerk  lay  upon  his  bed  of  death.  His  honesty  and  fidelity  had  raised  him  to 
a  creditable  position  in  business  and  in  society,  and,  ere  his  sickness,  life  lay  fair 
before  him.  "  Are  you  reconciled  to  your  situation  ?  "  asked  an  attendant.  "  Tes, 
reconciled ;  I  have  endeavoured  to  do  the  work  tbat  God  has  allotted  me,  in  His 
fear.  He  has  directed  me  thus  far ;  I  am  in  His  hands,  and  my  time  is  not  my 
own."  {W.  Baxendale.)  Religion  and  politics : — It  is  a  common  saying  that 
religion  has  nothing  to  do  with  politics,  and  particularly  there  is  a  strong  feeling 
current  against  all  interference  with  politics  by  the  ministers  of  religion.  This 
notion  rests  on  a  basis  which  is  partly  wrong,  partly  right.  To  say  that  religion 
has  nothing  to  do  with  politics  is  to  assert  that  which  is  simply  false.  It  were  as 
wise  to  say  that  the  atmosphere  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  principles  of  archi> 
lecture.  Directly  nothing,  indirectly  much.  Some  kinds  of  stone  are  so  friable, 
that  though  they  vrill  Uat  for  centuries  in  a  dry  cbmate,  they  will  crumble  away  in 
a  Jew  years  in  a  damp  one.  There  are  some  temperatures  in  which  a  form  of  a 
building  is  indispensable,  which  in  another  would  be  unbearable.  The  shape  of 
doors,  windows,  apartments,  all  depend  upon  the  air  that  is  to  be  admitted  or 
excluded.  Nay,  it  is  for  the  very  sake  of  procuring  a  habitable  atmosphere  within 
certain  limits  that  architecture  exists  at  all.  The  atmospheric  laws  are  distinct 
from  the  laws  of  architecture  ;  but  there  is  not  an  architectural  question 
into  which  atmospheric  considerations  do  not  enter  as  conditions  of  the  ques- 
tion.  That  which  the  air  is  to  architecture,  religion  is  to  politics.  It  is 
the  vital  air  of  every  question.  Directly,  it  determines  nothing — indirectly, 
it  conditions  every  problem  that  can  arise.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world 
must  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ.  How — if  His 
Spirit  is  not  to  mingle  with  political  and  social  truths  ?  (F.  W.  Bohertson.) 
No  division  of  allegiance : — Our  Lord  here  recognizes  no  division  of  allegiance. 
He  does  not  regard  man  as  under  two  masters — as  owing  duty  to  Csesar  and  duty 
to  God.  Is  there  a  trace  in  all  His  other  teaching  that  He  contemplated  such 
a  division  7  Did  ever  a  word  fall  from  Him  to  indicate  that  He  looked  upon  some 
obligations  as  secular  and  others  as  sacred  *  No ;  God  is  set  forth  by  EEim  always 
and  everywhere  as  the  sole  Lord  of  man's  being  and  powers.  Nothing  man  has 
can  be  Cesar's  in  contradiction  to  that  which  is  God's.  Christ  claims  all  for  the 
Sovereign  Master.  Body,  soul,  and  spirit,  riches,  knowledge,  influence,  love — all 
belong  to  Him ;  there  is  but  one  empire,  one  service,  one  king ;  and  life,  with  all  its 
complexity  of  interest,  is  simple — simple  as  the  Infinite  God  who  has  given  it, 
Bightly  understood,  therefore,  the  great  precepts  of  the  text  are  in  perfect  accord 
wiSb  tile  doctrine  of  Ood's  sole  and  supreme  lordship  over  every  thought,  and 
faoalty,  and  posBession  of  man.   "  Bender  unto  Csesar  the  things  that  are  Cnsar's." 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  xx. 

Why  ?  Who  enacts  it  ?  Who  has  the  right  to  require  it  ?  The  answer  i»— 
"  God."  It  is  a  part  of  your  religious  obedience  to  be  a  loyal  citizen.  Within 
the  sphere  that  belongs  to  him  Caesar  claims  your  service  as  the  ordained  repre- 
sentaUve  and  minister  of ;  God.  Civil  obedience  is  an  ordinance  of  the  Church ; 
civil  society  is  the  creation  of  God  Himself.  It  is  He  who,  through  the  earthly 
ruler,  demands  your  tribute.  The  result,  the  order,  and  the  progress  of  society 
are  His  work ;  and  thus  the  principle  of  aU  duty  is  ultimately  one.  The  inclusion 
of  the  lower  obedience  in  the  higher  has  been  well  illustrated  from  the  world  of 
nature.  The  moon,  we  know,  has  its  own  relation  to  the  earth ;  but  both  have 
a  common  relation  to  the  sun.  The  moon's  orbit  is  included  in  the  earth's  orbit, 
but  the  sun  sways  and  balances  both  of  them  ;  and  there  is  not  a  movement  of  the 
moon  in  obeying  the  inferior  eai-thly  attraction,  which  is  not  also  an  act  of 
obedience  to  the  superior  spheres.  And  just  so,  God  has  bound  up  together  our 
relation  to  •'  the  powers  that  be  "  in  this  world,  with  our  relation  to  Himself.  He 
has  set  us  under  rulers  and  in  societies  as  a  kind  of  interior  province  of  His 
mighty  kingdom,  but  our  loyalty  as  subjects  and  our  duty  as  citizens  are  bat  a  part; 
of  the  one  supreme  duty  which  we  owe  to  Him.  {Canon  Duckworth.)  Secular 
and  religious  duties  not  in  conjlict : — I.  Our  secular  and  spiritual  relations  are  co- 
existent and  co-relative  in  fact.  H.  The  obligations  which  arise  from  each  are  to 
be  recognized  equitably,  and  the  respective  duties  performed  faithfully.  lU.  They 
ought  not  to  be  in  conflict,  but  mutually  helpful.  Both  are  of  God,  and  with  Him 
are  no  discords.  lY.  Application  of  the  principle  to — 1.  Secolar  business,  society, 
politics,  &o.    2.  Soul  culture,  worship,  Christian  work.     (Anon.) 

Vers.  27-38.  There  were,  therefore,  soTen  hrethren. — TJie  world  to  eome: — 
L  That  thbbk  is  anotheb  wobld.  Our  Lord  calls  it  that  world.  It  is  evidently 
opposed  to  "  this  world  "  (ver.  34) ;  "  the  children  of  this  world."  We  know  a  little 
of  this  world.  Oh  that  we  knew  it  aright !  Oh  that  we  saw  it  with  the  eyes  of 
faith!  The  world  of  which  we  speak  is  a  world  of  light,  and  purity,  and  joy. 
There  is  "  no  night  there "  (Kev.  zzi.  25).  Hell  is  eternal  dar^ess ;  heaven  is 
eternal  light.  No  ignorance,  no  errors,  no  mistakes  ;  but  the  knowledge  of  God  in 
Christ  begun  on  earth  is  there  completed ;  for  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known 
(1  Cor.  ziii.  12).  U.  It  will  be  a  great  uatteb  to  obtain  that  wobld.  Notice  oor 
Saviour's  words,  "  they  which  shall  be  accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  world." 
Oh,  it  will  be  a  great  matter  to  obtain  that  world !  It  will  be  a  matter  of  amazing 
grace  and  favour.     And  oh,  what  a  matter  of  infinite  joy  will  it  be  I    IIL  Some 

KIND  OF  WOBTHIMSSB  IS  MECESSABT  TO  THE  OBTAIKINO  OT  THAT  WOBLD.     "  They   whlch 

shall  be  accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  world."  This  worthiness  includes  merit  and 
meetness ;  or,  a  title  to  glory,  and  a  fitness  for  it.  Both  these  are  necessary.  But 
where  shall  we  look  for  merit?  Not  in  man.  lY.  The  bel&tioms  or  the  pbksent 
WOBLD  WILL  NOT  SUBSIST  IN  THE  WOBLD  TO  COME.  OuT  Lord  says,  "  They  neither 
marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage."  This  expression  is  not  intended  to  dis- 
parage that  kind  of  union  ;  for  marriage  was  ordained  by  God  Himself,  while  yet 
our  first  parents  retained  their  original  innocence.  But  in  heaven  this  relation  will 
cease,  because  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  instituted  will  also  cease.  Nor  shall 
the  glorified  need  the  aid  of  that  domestic  friendship  and  comfort  which  result 
from  the  married  state,  and  which  are  well  suited  to  our  embodied  condition ;  for 
even  in  paradise  the  Creator  judged  it  was  not  "good  for  man  to  be  alone"  (Gen.ii 
18).  But  in  heaven  there  will  be  no  occasion  for  the  lesser  streams  of  happinese^ 
when  believers  have  arrived  at  the  fountain.  Oh,  let  us  learn  from  hence  to  sit  loose 
to  all  creature  comforts.  V.  In  that  wobld  death  will  be  fob  eveb  abolished. 
This  is  a  dying  world.  VL  The  blessed  inhabitants  of  that  wobld  shall  bb 
LIKE  the  ANOELS.  "  They  are  equal  unto  the  angels."  VII.  The  besubbeotioh  of 
the  body  will  pebfect  the  bliss  of  God's  people.  **  They  are  the  children  of 
God,  being  the  children  of  the  resurrection ;  they  shall  be  accounted  worthy  to 
obtain  that  world,  and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  (G.  Burder.)  Lessons  :— 
Creatures  on  the  brink  of  the  grave  should  not  forget  it,  nor  refuse  to  look  into  it. 
1.  Be  reminded  that  we  have  persons  resembling  the  Sadducees  in  our  own  times. 
There  are  some  who  seek  to  subvert  the  leading  truths  of  religion  ;  and  the  method 
they  pursue  is  very  like  that  followed  by  the  Sadducees  of  old.  They  rarely  make 
the  attack  openly,  like  honest  and  generons  assailants ;  but  they  start  difficulties, 
and  endeavour  to  involve  the  subjects  of  inquiry  in  inextricable  perplexity.  8. 
Let  us  be  suitably  affected  by  the  doctrines  of  immortality  and  the  resorrection 
here  taught.     3.  Once  more,  let  as  improve  this  passage  in  reference  to  thft 


<;hap.  rs.]  ST.  LUKE.  461 

-endearing  relations  of  life.  We  are  here  reminded  that  death  is  coming  to  break 
them  all  up,  and  that  short  is  the  time  we  are  to  sustain  them.  Far  be  it  from  us 
to  regard  them  with  indifference.  BeUgion  requires  us  to  fulfil  their  duties  with 
all  {Section  and  faithfukiess.  Tet,  they  are  of  very  limited  duration,  and  very 
little  value,  in  comparison  with  eternity.  (Jot.  Foote,  M.A.)  The  Sadducees 
silenced  : — I.  Give  some  account  of  the  Sadducees  : — A  small  number  of  men  of 
rank  and  affluence,  who  had  shaken  off  such  opinions  and  practices  as  they 
deemed  a  restraint  upon  their  pleasures.  They  acknowledged  the  truth  of  the 
Pentateuch,  but  rejected  the  tradition  of  the  elders.  They  also  denied  a  future 
state,  and  believed  that  the  soul  dies  with  the  body.  II.  Consider  thb  aboument 
OF  THE  Sadducees.    III.  Gonsideb  how  Jesus  Christ  acted  oh  this  occasion. 

1.  He  removed  the  difficulty  which  had  puzzled  the  Sadducees.  They  had  not 
studied  the  Scriptures  with  sufficient  attention,  and  a  sincere  desire  of  understand- 
ing their  meaning.  If  they  had  done  so,  they  could  not  have  doubted  of  a  future 
state.  If,  again,  they  had  reflected  on  the  power  of  God,  they  would  have 
concluded  that  what  might  appear  difficult  or  impossible  to  man,  is  possible 
and  of  easy  accomplishment  with  God.  He  then  explained  the  difficulty.  It 
is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  He  speaks  only  of  the  righteous.  On 
this  subject  our  Saviour  reveals  two  important  truths, — First,  that  the 
righteous    never    die;    and,     secondly,    that    they     become   like    the   angels. 

2.  Our  Saviour,  then,  having  removed  the  difficulty  which  had  embarrassed  the 
Sadducees,  and  having  at  the  same  time  communicated  new  and  important  infor- 
mation concerning  the  world  of  spirits,  next  proceeded  to  prove  from  Scripture  th& 
certainty  of  a  future  state.  He  argued  from  a  passage  in  the  Book  of  Exodus,  where 
God  is  represented  as  speaking  from  the  burning  bush  to  Moses,  and  saying,  "  I  am 
the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob  "  (Exod.  iii.  6).  It  is  here  particularly 
to  be  observed,  that  the  force  of  our  Saviour's  argument  rests  upon  the  words,  I  am 
the  God.  Had  the  words  been  I  was  the  God,  the  argument  would  be  destroyed. 
IV.  Attend  to  the  inferences  which  we  mat  justly  draw  from  this  subject.  1. 
A  difficulty  arising  from  our  ignorance  is  not  sufficient  to  disprove  or  weaken  direct  or 
positive  evidence.  2.  Although  a  future  state  is  not  clearly  revealed  in  the  Books 
of  Moses,  yet  it  is  presupposed,  for  the  passage  here  selected  can  be  explained  only 
on  the  assurance  that  there  is  such  a  state.  3.  From  our  Saviour's  declaration 
here,  we  also  obtain  the  important  information,  that  the  righteous,  after  their 
removal  from  this  world  by  death,  do  not  sink  into  a  state  of  sleep  or  insensibility ; 
for  the  passage  which  He  quotes  implies  that  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  after 
death,  remained  alive,  and  still  continued  to  acknowledge  and  serve  God ;  for  all 
these  things  are  included  in  what  our  Saviour  says.  Now,  the  inference  we  draw 
is,  that  what  is  true  respecting  the  patriarchs  we  may  safely  extend  to  all  good  men, 
that  they  are  all  in  a  similar  situation.  4.  While  informed  by  our  Saviour,  in  the 
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  that  immediately  after  death  angels  are 
employed  to  conduct  the  spirits  of  the  righteous  to  paradise,  we  are  also  assured 
here  by  the  same  authority,  that  they  shall  be  made  like  to  the  angels.  When  to 
these  we  add  the  passage  quoted  above,  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  respecting 
the  office  of  angels,  it  appears  necessarily  to  follow  that  the  righteous  shall  be 
elevated  in  rank  and  situation ;  for  they  shall  associate  with  celestial  beings,  and  ' 
consequently  will  receive  all  the  benefits  which  can  arise  from  society  so  pure  and 
exalted.  Nor  can  we  help  believing  that  while  thus  mingled  with  angels  they  will 
be  engaged  in  similar  duties  and  employments.  {J.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  world 
to  come: — I.  That  there  is  anotbeb  state  of  being  beside  and  beyond  the  pbb- 
SENT  statb.  None  can  deny  the  importance  of  the  question,  "  If  a  man  die,  shall 
he  live  again  ?  "  1.  The  traditions  of  universal  belief.  It  is  said  that  there  is  not, 
perhaps,  a  people  on  the  face  of  the  earth  which  does  not  hold  the  opinion,  in  some 
iorm  or  other,  that  there  is  a  country  beyond  the  grave,  where  the  weary  are  at  rest. 
Tet  this  universality  of  belief  is  no  proof ;  it  is  but  a  mere  presumption  at  best.  2. 
Certain  transformations  which  take  place  in  nature  around  us.  Such  as  that  of  the 
butterfly  from  the  grave  of  the  chrysalis,  and  spring  from  the  grave  of  winter. 
Such  analogies,  however,  although  appropriate  as  illustrations,  are  radically  defec- 
tive as  proofs.  The  chrysalis  only  teemed  dead  ;  the  plants  and  trees  onl^  seemed 
to  have  lost  their  vitality.  3.  There  is,  again,  the  dignity  of  man.  But  while  much 
may  be  said  on  one  side  of  this  question,  not  a  little  can  be  said  on  the  other. 
"  Talk  as  you  will,"  it  has  been  said,  "  of  the  grandeur  of  man — why  should  it  not  - 
1>e  honour  enough  for  him  to  have  his  seventy  years'  life-rent  of  God'e  aniTerse  ? 
4.  It  is  bj  the  gospel  alone  that  life  and  immortality  have  been  brought  to  light. 


469  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xx. 

n.   TbAT  TBB  FUTTTRE   state   in  HAHT   IUPOBTAST  PABTICUIiABS  IS  WIDELT  DIFFERSMT 

TBOM  THB  PRESENT  STATE.  They  differ — 1.  In  their  constitution.  "  The  childrea 
of  this  world  marry,  and  are  given  in  marriage ; "  bat  there  will  be  nothing  of  thi» 
kind  in  heaven.  The  institution  of  marriage  is  intended  to  accomplish  two  great 
objecta.  (1)  the  propagation  of  mankind.  Bat  in  that  world  the  number  of  the 
redeemed  family  will  be  complete,  and  henoe  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage  will 
be  done  away.  (2)  Mutual  help  and  sympathy.  2.  In  the  blessedness  enjoyed. 
(1)  Negative.  "  Neither  can  they  die  any  more."  (2)  Positive.  "  They  shall  be 
equal  unto  the  angels  " — in  nature,  immortality,  purity,  knowledge,  happiness.  It 
is  further  added,  that  they  will  be  "  the  children  of  God,  being  children  of  the 
reiurrection."  To  the  blessing  of  adoption  several  gradations  appertain.  What  is 
spoken  of  here  is  the  highest.  The  apostle  refers  to  it  in  those  striking  words, 
"  Becanae  the  creature  itself  shall  be  delivered,"  &o.  (Bom.  viii.  21-23).     III.  That 

BEFORE    THIS  GLORIOUS    STATE   CAK    BE    ENTERED    UPON,    CEBTAIN    PBE-BEQCIBITES   ARE 

iNDisPENSABLT  BEQUiBED.  None  oan  attain  the  world  but  those  which  shall  be 
accounted  worthy.  Two  things  may  be  here  noticed.  1.  Our  guilty  persons  must- 
be  accepted.  That  can  only  be  done  through  the  Lord  Jesus — winning  Christ,  and 
being  found  in  Him,  not  having  on  our  own  righteousness.  3.  Our  sinful  nature 
must  be  renewed.  Worthiness  and  meetness  are  often  used  as  synonymous  terms. 
Thus  we  read  in  one  place,  "  Bring  forth  fruits  worthy  of  repentance  " ;  in  another, 
••  Bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance."  So  with  the  worthiness  in  the  passage 
before  us ;  it  is  to  be  understood  as  indicating  meetness  for  the  heavenly  inheri- 
tance.  Now,  nothing  that  defileth  can  enter  there.  Holiness  of  heart  and  life  i& 
an  essential  qualification.  The  pure  alone  shall  Bee  God.  {Expository  Outlinet.) 
Mercy  weavei  the  veil  of  secrecy  over  the  future : — Once,  we  have  somewhere  read^ 
there  was  a  gallant  ship  whose  crew  forgot  their  duties  on  board  by  the  distant 
vision  of  their  native  hills.  Many  long  years  had  passed  over  them  since  they  had 
left  their  fatherland.  As  soon  as  one  of  their  number  caught,  from  the  top  mast^ 
the  first  glance  of  his  home-scenes,  he  raised  a  shout, "  Yonder  it  is  I  yonder  it  is !  " 
That  shout  shot  like  electricity  through  every  heart  on  board,  all  sought  to  catch, 
the  same  glance,  some  climbed  the  masts,  others  took  the  telescope,  every  eye  waa 
on  it,  and  every  heart  went  forth  with  the  eye ;  every  spirit  was  flooded  with  old 
memories  and  bounded  with  new  hopes.  All  thoughts  of  the  vessel  on  which  they 
stood,  and  which  was  struggling  with  the  billows,  were  gone ;  they  were  lost  in  the 
strange  and  strong  excitement.  The  vessel  mighthave  sprung  a  leak,  run  on  shore, 
or  sunk  to  the  bottom  for  ought  they  thought  about  her.  The  idea  of  home  filled 
and  stirred  their  natures ;  the  thought  of  the  land  in  which  their  fathers  lived  and 
perhaps  their  mothers  slept ;  the  land  of  their  childhood,  and  the  land  of  a  thousand 
associations  so  swallowed  tip  every  other  thought,  that  their  present  duties  wera 
utterly  neglected.  Somewhat  thus,  perhaps,  it  would  be  with  us,  were  the  particu- 
lars of  the  heavenly  world  made  clear  and  palpable  to  our  hearts.  The  veil  o£ 
secrecy  drawn  over  them  is  woven  by  the  hand  of  mercy.  {D.  TJionuu,  D.D.\ 
Reticence  of  the  Bible  in  regard  to  heavenly  happiness  : — Casper  Hauser  was  shut  up 
in  a  narrow,  dimly -lighted  chamber  when  a  little  child.  He  grew  to  manhood  there. 
He  never  saw  the  earth  or  the  sky.  He  knew  nothing  about  flowers  or  stars,  moun- 
tains or  plains,  forests  or  streams.  If  one  had  gone  to  him  and  tried  to  tell  him  o( 
these  things,  of  the  life  of  men  in  city  or  country,  of  the  occupations  of  men  in  shop 
or  field,  the  effort  would  have  been  a  failure.  No  words  could  have  conveyed  to  him 
any  idea  of  the  world  outside  of  his  cell.  And  we  are  like  him  while  shnt  ap  in. 
these  bodies.  The  spirit  must  go  out  of  its  clay  house  before  it  can  begin  to  know 
anything  definite  about  life  in  the  spirit  world.  {Christian  Age.)  Equal  onto  tli» 
angela. — Equality  with  angelt: — Glorified  saints  are  equal  to  the  angels.    L  Ih 

THEIR  DIGNIFIED    POSITION.        IL    In   THEIR    SUBLIME   WORSHIP.        UL    Im   THEIB  VH- 

DECATiNO  STRENGTH  (Fsa.  ciii.  20 ;  Zech.  ziL  8).  Like  angels,  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall  henceforth  excel  in  strength.  Weariness  and  fatigue  shall  be  for  ever  unknown. 
rV.  In  theib  minibtering  bebviob  (Heb.  i.  14).  V.  In  lotino  obbdiehcs.  We- 
read  of  angels  that  they  "  do  His  commandments,  hearkening  to  the  voioe  of  Hi» 
word."  VI.  In  their  earnest  btudt  op  the  utstebt  op  KSDEEMnro  IiOTe. 
Speaking  of  the  Gospel  and  its  priceless  privileges  and  blessings,  Peter  says^ 
"  Which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into"  (chap.  i.  12).  VII.  In  the  jotpux. 
zntebest  which  thet  peel  in  the  salvation  op  sinners.  VIIL  Im  teeib  immobtaii. 
youth.  Angels  grow  not  old,  as  men  on  earth  do.  They  wear  no  traeei  of  age ; 
revolving  years  tell  not  on  them.  (P.  Morrison.)  EquaU^  of  men  with  angels  :— 
J.  Mxs  ABB  CAPABLE  OP  BEING  HADE  EQUAL  TO  TH>  AMOEu.    That  man  is  oapablft 


CHAP.  XT.]  ST.  LUKE.  463 

of  equalling  the  angels  in  the  duration  of  their  existence,  may  be  very  easily  shown. 
Originally  he  Tras,  hke  them,  immortal.  But  what  man  once  possessed,  he  must 
etill  be  capable  of  possessing.  Equally  easy  is  it  to  show  that  man  is  capable  of 
being  made  equal  to  the  angels  in  moral  excellence.  The  moral  excellence  of  crea- 
tures, whether  human  or  angelic,  consists  in  their  conformity  to  the  law  of  God. 
Originally  he  was  perfectly  holy ;  for  God  made  man  upright,  in  Hia  own  image, 
and  this  image  consisted,  as  inspiration  informs  us,  in  righteousness  and  true  holi- 
ness. Man  is  then  capable  of  being  made  equal  to  the  angels  in  moral  excellence. 
Man  is  also  capable  of  being  raised  to  an  intellectual  equality  with  the  angels,  or 
being  made  equal  to  them  in  wisdom  and  knowledge.  The  image  of  God  in  which 
he  was  created,  included  knowledge,  as  well  as  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  He 
was,  as  inspiration  informs  us,  but  Uttle  lower  than  the  angels.  But  this  small 
intellectual  inferiority,  on  the  part  of  man,  may  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for, 
without  supposing  that  his  intellectual  faculties  are  essentially  inferior  to  those  of 
angels,  or  that  his  mind  is  incapable  of  expanding  to  the  full  dimensions  of 
angelic  intelligence.  It  may  be  accounted  for  by  difference  of  situation,  and  of 
advantages  for  intellectual  improvement.  Man  was  placed  on  the  earth,  which  is 
God's  footstool.  But  angels  were  placed  in  heaven,  which  is  His  throne,  His  palace, 
and  the  peculiar  habitation  of  His  holiness  and  glory.  They  were  thus  enabled  to 
approach  much  nearer,  than  could  earth-bom  man,  to  the  great  Father  of  lights  v 
and  their  minds  were,  in  consequence,  illuminated  with  far  more  than  a  double 
portion  of  that  Divine,  all-disclosing  radiance  which  diffuses  itself  around  Him.  If 
the  mind  of  an  infant  can  expand,  during  the  lapse  of  a  few  years,  to  the  dimen . 
sions  of  a  Newton's  mind,  notwithstanding  all  the  unfavourable  circumstances  ia 
which  it  is  here  placed,  why  may  it  not,  during  an  eternal  residence  in  heaven,  with 
the  omniscient,  all-wise  God  for  its  teacher,  expand  so  far  as  to  embrace  any  finite 
circle  whatever  ?  Little,  if  any,  less  reason  have  we  to  believe  that  he  is  capable  of  being 
made  equal  to  them  in  power.  It  has  been  often  remarked  that  knowledge  is  power  ; 
and  observation  must  convince  every  one  that  it  is  so.  Man's  advances  in  knowledge 
have  ever  been  accompanied  by  a  proportionate  increase  of  power.  A  knowledge  of 
metals  gave  him  power  to  subdue  the  earth.  But  we  have  already  seen  that  man  ia 
capable  of  being  made  equal  to  the  angels  in  knowledge.  Again,  man  is  capable  of 
being  raised  to  an  equality  with  the  angels  in  glory,  honour,  and  felicity.  The 
glory  of  a  creature  must  consist  principally  in  the  intellectual  and  moral  excel- 
lences with  which  he  is  endued ;  and  we  have  already  seen  that  in  these  respects 
man  is  capable  of  being  made  equal  to  the  angels.     XL  That  in  thb  futxtbe  world,. 

GOOD  MEN   SHALL  BE  MADE  EQUAL  TO   THEM  IN   EACH  OF  THESE   PABTICT7LABS.      The  fact 

that  men  are  capable  of  being  made  equal  to  the  angels,  goes  far  to  prove  the  truth 
nf  this  proposition.  From  the  appearance  of  Moses  and  Elijah  on  the  mount  of 
transfiguration,  it  seems  evident  that  they  possessed  power  of  various  kinds,  of 
which  we  are  destitute.  They  had  power  to  descend  from  the  mansions  of  the 
blessed,  and  to  return,  and  also,  as  it  should  seem,  to  render  themselves  visible  or 
invisible,  at  their  pleasure.  Indeed  it  is  certain,  that  in  some  respects  at  least,  the 
powers  of  the  righteous  must  be  greatly  increased,  or  they  would  be  unable  to 
Bustain  that  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,  and  honour,  and 
felicity,  which  is  reserved  for  them  in  the  future  world.  There  is  a  dreadful 
oounterpart  to  this  truth,  which,  though  not  mentioned  in  our  text,  must 
be  briefly  noticed.  Every  argument,  which  proves  that  good  men  are  capable 
of  being  made  equal  to  the  holy  angels,  may  justly  be  considered  a» 
proving,  with  equal  clearness,  that  wicked  men  are  capable  of  equalling  the 
fallen  angels,  who  kept  not  their  first  estate.  (£.  Pay$on,  D.D.)  In 
the  returrectum  taints  are  a$  angels: — I.  Ih   heatbm  the  saints  abb   holt  as- 

THE     ANOELS     ARE     HOLT.        II.      In    HEAVEN     THE     SAINTS,   LIKE     THE   ANGELS,    SHALL 

XHOAOE  IN  BECOMING  ACTS  AND  EXEBCiBEB.  1.  I  Say  acts  and  exercises,  for  while 
heaven  is  to  be  a  place  of  rest,  it  is  not  to  be  a  place  of  idleness.  In  heaven  the 
saints  are  to  be  as  angels,  and  angels,  we  biow,  are  active  in  the  service 
of  God.  2.  In  particular,  the  saints,  like  th«  angels,  engage  in  singing  the 
praises  of  God.  3.  Farther,  the  saints,  like  the  angels,  are  engaged  in  con- 
templating the  works  of  Ood,  and  especially  His  wonders  in  providence  and 
redemption.  4.  Yet  further,  in  heaven  the  saints,  like  the  angels,  are  engaged 
in  works  of  love.  The  angels,  we  have  seen,  are  actively  employed  in  the  service 
of  God.  The  whole  method  of  the  Divine  procedure,  so  far  as  it  comes  under  our 
view,  seems  to  be  carried  on  by  a  system  of  means  or  instruments.  God  fulfils 
fiis    purposes    by  agents    employed   by  flim  who  are  blessed  themselves  va4 


464  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohas.  «, 

conveying  blessings  to  others,  who  are  happy  and  diffnsing  happiness.  Even  ia 
inanimate  creation  on  earth  we  find  that  nothing  is  aseless  ;  everything  haa 
a  purpose  to  serve  :  the  stone,  the  plant,  the  animal,  every  part  of  the  plant  and 
animal  has  a  purpose  to  serve  ;  it  may  be  an  end  in  itself,  bat  it  is  also  a  means 
towards  another  end.  The  ear  aids  the  eye,  and  the  touch  aids  the  ear  and 
eye,  and  every  member  aids  every  other  ;  it  is  good  in  itself,  and  is  doing  good 
to  others.  But  these  inanimate  objects  perform  their  work  unknowingly,  uncon- 
sciously. It  is  different  with  angels  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 
They  perform  their  allotted  work  knowing  what  they  are  doing,  and  blessed 
in  the  doing  of  it.  Modem  science  shows  us  how  much  material  agency  can  do. 
Take,  as  an  example,  the  electric  telegraph,  which  is  every  day  carrying  messages 
past  your  place.  A  methodical  action  is  performed  at  one  end  of  a  wire,  and 
in  a  few  moments  an  intelligent  communication  is  given  at  the  other  end,  hundreds 
of  miles  away.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  capacity  of  body.  We  know  that  our  Lord's 
body  after  His  resurrection  appeared  and  disappeared,  and  acted  no  one  could  tell 
how.  But  in  the  resurrection  our  bodies  will  be  like  His,  spiritual  aud  celestial. 
They  will  therefore  be  fit  ministers  to  the  perfected  spirit — not,  as  here,  hindrances 
at  times,  but  always  helps,  and  ready  to  fulfil  the  will  of  th«  spirit.  {J.  McCosh, 
D.D.)  The  mortal  and  the  immortal : — Ours  is  a  dying  world,  and  immortality 
has  no  place  upon  this  earth.  That  which  is  deathless  is  beyond  these  hills. 
Mortality  is  here ;  immortality  is  yonder !  Mortality  is  below ;  immortality  ia 
above.  "  Neither  can  they  die  any  more,"  is  the  prediction  of  something  future, 
not  the  announcement  of  anything  either  present  or  past.  At  every  moment  one 
of  the  sons  of  Adam  passes  from  this  life.  And  each  swing  of  the  pendulum 
is  the  death-warrant  of  some  child  of  time.  "  Death,"  •*  death,"  is  the  sound  of 
its  dismal  vibration.  "  Death,"  "  death,"  it  says,  unceasingly,  as  it  oscillates  to 
and  fro.  The  gate  of  death  stands  ever  open,  as  ijf  it  had  neither  locks  nor  bars. 
The  river  of  death  flows  sullenly  past  our  dwellings,  and  continually  we  hear  the 
splash  and  the  cry  of  one,  and  another,  and  another,  as  they  are  flung  into  the 
rushing  torrent,  and  carried  down  to  the  sea  of  eternity.  If,  then,  we  would 
get  beyond  death's  circle  and  shadow,  we  must  look  above.  Death  is  here,  but 
Ufe  is  yonder  1  Corruption  is  here,  incorruption  is  yonder.  The  fading  is  here, 
the  blooming  is  yonder.  Blessed  words  are  these :  "  Neither  can  they  die  any 
more."  It  is  not  simply.  Neither  shall  they  die  any  more,  but  neither  can  they 
die  any  more.  Death,  which  is  now  a  law,  an  inevitable  necessity,  shall  then  ba 
an  impossibilty.  Blessed  impossibility  I  Neither  can  they  die  any  more  !  They 
are  clothed  with  the  immortality  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  for  as  the  Head  is  immortal, 
so  shall  the  members  be.  Ah,  this  is  victory  over  death  !  This  is  the  triumph 
of  life  !  It  is  more  than  resurrection ;  for  it  is  resurrection,  with  the  security  that 
death  can  never  again  approach  them  throughout  eternity.  All  things  connected 
with  that  new  resurrection-state  shall  be  immortal,  too.  Their  inheritance  is 
nnfading.  Their  city,  the  new  Jerusalem,  shall  never  crumble  down.  Their 
paradise  is  as  much  beyond  the  power  of  decay  as  it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  a 
second  serpent-tempter.  Their  crowns  are  all  imperishable;  and  the  white 
raiment  in  which  they  shine  shall  never  need  cleansing  or  renewal.  (JH".  Bonar, 
D.D.)  Moses  showed  at  the  bush. — The  living  God  of  living  men: — God  is  thr 
God  or  aiiL  mem,  however  dieterbnt  from  each  other  tbet  mat  bb.  It  would 
be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  name  three  men  so  closely  related  to  each  other, 
and  yet  so  conspicuously  different  from  each  other,  as  were  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob.  Abraham  is  of  the  grandest  heroic  type — heroic  in  thought,  in  action,  and, 
above  all,  in  that  faith  which  is  the  inspiration  both  of  the  highest  thinking  and 
of  the  no>lest  forms  of  conduct.  But  what  a  falling  off  is  there  in  Isaac  I  Ha 
hardly  seems  his  father's  son.  Quiet,  thoughtful,  a  lover  of  ease  and  good  fare, 
with  no  genius  for  action,  his  very  wife  chosen  for  him  as  if  he  were  incompetent 
even  to  marry  himself,  unable  to  rule  his  own  household,  unable  even  to  die — 
it  woold  almost  seem,  when  his  time  was  come,  that  he  fades  out  of  history  years 
before  he  slips  his  mortal  coil.  Jacob,  again,  strikes  one  as  unlike  both  his 
father  and  his  grandfather.  We  think  of  him  as  timid,  selfish,  crafty,  unscrupulous, 
with  none  of  the  innocence  of  Isaac,  little  or  none  of  the  splendid  courage  and 
generosity  of  Abraham.  What  I  want  you  to  mark,  then,  is  the  grace  of  God 
in  calling  Himself,  as  He  did  for  more  than  a  thousand  years  by  the  month  of 
His  servants  the  prophets,  the  God  of  each  and  all  of  these  three  men.  Different 
M  they  were  from  each  other,  they  are  all  dear  to  Him.  He  has  room  enoagh 
in  His  heart  for  them  all.    Rightly  viewed,  then,  there  is  hope  for  as  a^d  for 


CHAP.  XX.]  ST.  LUKE.  465 

all  men  in  this  familiar  phrase.  If  God  is  not  ashamed  to  call  Himself  their  God, 
may  He  not,  will  He  not,  be  our  God  too,  and  train  us  as  He  trained  them,  till 
all  that  is  weak  and  selfish  and  subtle  iu  us  is  chastened  out  of  us,  and  we  recover 
the  image  in  which  He  created  us  ?  II.  God  our  Father  will  never  let  Hig 
CBiLDBEN  DIE.  The  text  our  Lord  quoted  was  this:  To  Moses  at  the  bush — 
between  four  and  five  hundred  years,  that  is,  after  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob 
were  dead — Jehovah  had  said,  "  I  am," — not  I  was — '•  the  God  of  Abrahaiii, 
and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob."  But  how  could  He  still  be  the  God  of  these  men 
if  they  had  long  been  extinct?  He  is  not  the  God  of  dead  men,  but  of  living  men. 
The  three  patriarchs  were  very  certainly  not  living  in  this  world  when  God  spoke 
to  Moses.  They  must,  therefore,  have  been  living  in  some  other  world.  Dead  to 
men,  they  must  have  been  alive  unto  God.  Obviously,  then,  men  do  not  all  die 
when  they  die.  1.  Because  our  Lord  saw  in  God  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  He  inferred  that  these  men  could  not  die ;  that  even  when  they  did 
die,  they  must  have  lived  on  unto  God.  And  that  after  all  is,  I  suppose,  the 
argument  or  conviction  on  which  we  all  really  base  our  hope  of  immortality.  "  Art 
Thou  not  from  everlasting,  0  Lord  my  God,  mine  Holy  One  ♦  We  shall  not  die." 
The  eternity  of  God  implies  the  immortality  of  man.  2.  But  our  Lord  at  least 
reminds  us  by  His  words  of  another  ground  for  hope.  Nature  has  many  symbols 
which  speak  of  a  life  capable  of  passing  through  death,  a  life  which  grows  in 
volume,  in  power,  in  beauty,  by  its  submission  to  death.  Every  spring  we  behold 
the  annual  miracle  by  which  the  natural  world  is  renewed  into  a  richer,  lovelier  life. 
Tear  by  year  it  emerges  from  its  wintry  tomb  into  the  fuller  and  more  fruitful 
life  of  summer.  We  may  not  care  to  base  any  very  weighty  arguments  on  these 
delicate  and  evanescent  yet  continually-recurring  symbols ;  but,  nevertheless,  they 
speak  to  oar  imagination  and  our  hearts  with  a  force  and  a  winning  persuasiveness 
beyond  that  of  logic.  III.  What  is  to  hinder  us  from  arguing  that,  if  God  is  still 
their  God,  and  they  still  live  unto  Him,  then  God  must  even  now  be  carrying 

ON     THE    DISCIPLINE    AND     TRAINING    WHICH   Hb     COMMENCED  UPON    THEM   HERE,   and 

carrying  it  on  to  still  larger  and  happier  issues  ?  If  they  live,  and  live  unto  God, 
must  they  not  be  moving  into  a  closer  fellowship  with  Him,  rising  to  a  more 
hearty  adoption  of  His  will,  >a  fuller  participation  of  His  righteousness  and 
love?  No  one  of  you  will  question  the  validity  of  such  an  argument  as 
that,  I  think.  Ton  will  all  gladly  admit  that,  since  he  still  lives,  Abraham 
must  by  this  time  be  a  far  greater  and  nobler  man  than  he  was  when  he  left 
the  earth,  and  must  be  engaged  in  far  nobler  discoveries  and  enterprises. 
ChrigVs  answer  to  the  Sadducees : — L  Wb  will  consider  it  as  an  argument  ad 

BOUINEM,  AND  SHEW  THE  FITNESS  AND  70RGS  OF  IT  TO  CONVINCE  THOSE  WITH  WHOM  OUB 

Satioub  DISPUTED.  1.  We  will  consider  what  our  Saviour  intended  directly  and 
immediately  to  prove  by  this  argument.  And  that  was  this,  That  there  is  another 
state  after  this  life,  wherein  men  shall  be  happy  or  miserable  according  as  they 
have  lived  in  this  world.  And  this  doth  not  only  suppose  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  but  forasmuch  as  the  body  is  an  essential  part  of  man,  doth,  by  consequence, 
infer  the  resurrection  of  the  body;  because,  otherwise,  the  man  would  not  be 
happy  or  miserable  in  another  world.  2.  The  force  of  this  argument,  against  those 
with  whom  our  Saviour  disputed,  will  further  appear,  if  we  consider  the  great 
veneration  which  the  Jews  in  general  had  for  the  writings  of  Moses  above  any 
other  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  they  (especially  the  Sadducees)  looked 
upon  only  as  explications  and  comments  upon  the  law  of  Moses ;  but  they  esteemed 
nothing  as  a  necessary  article  of  faith,  which  had  not  some  foundation  in  the 
writings  of  Moses.  And  this  seems  to  me  to  be  the  true  reason  why  our  Saviour 
chose  to  confute  them  out  of  Moses,  rather  than  any  other  part  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. 3.  If  we  consider  further  the  peculiar  notion  which  the  Jews  had  concerning 
the  use  of  this  phrase  or  expression,  of  God's  being  any  one's  God.  And  that  was 
this:  that  God  is  nowhere  in  Scripture  said  to  be  any  one's  God  while  he  was 
alive.  And,  therefore,  they  tell  us,  that  while  Isaac  lived,  God  is  not  called  the 
God  of  Isaac,  but  the  "fear  of  Isaac."  I  will  not  warrant  this  observation  to  be 
good,  because  I  certainly  know  it  is  not  true.  For  God  doth  expressly  call  Himself 
"the  God  of  Isaac,"  while  Isaac  was  yet  alive  (Gen.  xxviii.  10):  "I  am  the  Lord 
God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the  God  of  Isaac."  It  is  sufficient  to  my  purpose 
that  this  was  a  notion  anciently  carrent  among  the  Jews.  And  therefore  our 
Savionx's  argument  from  this  expression  must  be  so  much  the  stronger  against 
them  :  for  if  tlie  souls  of  men  be  extinguished  by  death  (as  the  Sadducees  believed) 
what  did  it  signify  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  to  have  God  called  their  Godt 
TOL.  m.  80 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRAIOR.  [ohap.  x* 

after  they  were  dead  ?  4.  The  great  respect  which  the  Jews  had  for  these  threa 
fathers  of  their  nation,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  They,  who  had  so  superstitious 
a  veneration  for  them,  would  easily  believe  anything  of  privilege  to  belong  to 
them :  so  that  our  Saviour  doth  with  great  advantage  instance  in  them,  in  favour 
of  whom  they  would  be  inclined  to  extend  the  meaning  of  any  promise  to  the 
ntmost,  and  allow  it  to  signify  as  much  as  the  words  could  possibly  bear.  So  that 
it  is  no  wonder  that  the  text  tells  us,  that  this  argument  ptft  the  Sadducees  to 
silence.  They  durst  not  attempt  a  thing  so  odious,  as  to  go  about  to  take  away 
anything  of  privilege  from  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  II.  Enquibe  whether 
IT  BE  MOBE  THAN  AN  ARGUMENT  AD  HOMiNEM.  The  foUowing  Considerations  would 
appear  to  indicate  that  our  Lord  really  meant  the  matter  to  be  regarded  as  settled 
fact.  1.  If  we  consider  that  for  God  to  be  any  one's  God  doth  signify  some  very 
extraordinary  blessing  and  happiness  to  those  persons  of  whom  this  is  said.  It  i3 
a  big  word  for  God  to  declare  Himself  to  be  any  one's  God ;  and  the  least  we  can 
imagine  to  be  meant  by  it,  is  that  God  will,  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  employ 
His  power  and  wisdom  to  do  him  good :  that  He  will  concern  Himself  more  for  the 
happiness  of  those  whose  God  He  declares  Himself  to  be,  than  for  others.  2.  If 
we  consider  the  eminent  faith  and  obedience  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 
Abraham  left  his  country  in  obedience  to  God,  not  knowing  whither  he  was  to  go. 
And,  which  is  one  of  the  most  unparalleled  and  strange  instances  of  faith  and 
obedience  that  can  be  almost  imagined,  he  was  willing  to  have  sacrificed  his  only 
son  at  the  command  of  God.  Isaac  and  Jacob  were  also  very  good  men,  and  devout 
worshippers  of  the  true  God,  when  almost  the  whole  world  was  sunk  into  idolatry 
and  all  manner  of  impiety.  Now  what  can  we  imagine,  but  that  the  good  God  did 
design  some  extraordinary  reward  to  such  faithful  servants  of  His?  especially  if 
we  consider,  that  He  intended  this  gracious  declaration  of  His  concerning  them, 
for  a  standing  encouragement  to  all  those  who,  in  after  ages,  should  follow  the 
faith,  and  tread  in  the  steps  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  3.  If  we  consider  the 
condition  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  this  world.  The  Scripture  tells  us, 
that  "  they  were  pilgrims  and  strangers  upon  the  earth,"  had  no  fixed  -ind  settled 
habitation,  but  were  forced  to  wander  from  one  kingdom  and  country  to  another ; 
that  they  were  exposed  to  many  hazards  and  difficulties,  to  great  troubles  and 
afflictions  in  this  world ;  so  that  there  was  no  such  peculiar  happiness  befel  them, 
in  this  life,  above  the  common  rate  of  men,  as  may  seem  to  fill  up  the  big  words  of 
this  promise,  that  God  would  be  their  God.  4.  Then,  we  will  consider  the  general 
importance  of  this  promise,  abstracting  from  the  particular  persons  specified  and 
named  in  it,  viz.,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ;  and  that  is,  that  God  will  make  a 
wide  and  plain  difference  between  good  and  bad  men ;  He  will  be  so  the  God  of 
good  men  as  He  is  not  of  the  wicked  :  and  some  time  or  other  put  every  good  man 
into  a  better  and  happier  condition  than  any  wicked  man :  so  that  the  general 
importance  of  this  promise  is  finally  resolved  into  the  equity  and  justice  of  the 
Divine  Providence.  And  now  having,  I  hope,  sufficiently  cleared  this  matter,  I 
shall  make  some  improvement  of  this  doctrine  of  a  future  state,  and  that  to  these 
three  purposes.  1.  To  raise  our  minds  above  this  world,  and  the  enjoyments  of 
this  present  life.  2.  The  consideration  of  another  life  should  quicken  our  prepara- 
tion for  that  blessed  state  which  remains  for  us  in  the  other  world.  3.  Let  the 
consideration  of  that  unspeakable  reward  which  God  hath  promised  to  good  men 
at  the  resurrection,  encourage  us  to  obedience  and  a  holy  life.  We  serve  a  great 
Prince  who  is  able  to  promote  us  to  honour ;  a  most  gracious  Master  who  will  not 
let  the  least  service  we  do  for  Him  pass  unrewarded.  This  is  the  inference  which 
the  apostle  makes  from  his  large  discourse  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection 
(1  Cor.  XV.  58).  Nothing  will  make  death  more  welcome  to  us,  than  a  constant 
course  of  service  and  obedience  to  God.  ••  Sleep  (saith  Solomon)  is  sweet  to  the 
labouring  man  " :  so  after  a  great  diligence  and  industry  in  "  working  out  our  own 
salvation,"  and  (as  it  is  said  of  David)  "  serving  our  generation  according  to  the 
will  of  God,"  how  pleasant  will  it  be  to  fall  asleep  1  And,  as  an  useful  and  well- 
spent  life  will  make  our  death  to  be  sweet,  so  our  resurrection  to  be  glorious. 
{Archhithop  Tillotton.)  Resurrection:  an  Easter-day  Sermon: — In  the  words  of 
the  text,  the  ground  on  which  our  Blessed  Lord  declares  the  resurrection  of  men 
to  rest,  is  well  worthy  of  our  deepest  attention.  He  does  not  say  that  because  He 
Himself  was  ere  long  to  be  orncified  and  to  rise  again,  therefore  mankind  should 
also  rise.  He  goes  down  even  deeper  than  this,  to  the  very  root  of  all  hope  and 
life  for  man ;  to  that  on  which  His  own  incarnation  and  death  and  reiarrection 
NSt ;  to  the  very  foundation  of  being — even  the  nature  of  God  Himself.     Becans* 


CHAP.  XX.]  ST.  LUKE.  467 

<}od  is  Qod ;  the  living  and  tmohangeable  God ;  becaase  He  has  called  U3  into 
existence,  and  made  us  what  we  are ;  because  He  has  revealed  Himself  as  our  Qod ; 
and  taken  us  into  covenant  with  Himself,  therefore,  man  shall  not — man  cannot, — 
perish.  But  there  is  another  most  blessed  and  comforting  truth  taught  us  in  tha 
text ;  without  which  resurrection  would  cease  to  be  a  blessing,  would  lose  all  power 
to  console  and  strengthen,  would  become  a  dark  and  dismal  phantom.  God  is  the 
God, — not  of  solitary  and  separate  souls, — but  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of 
Isaac,  the  God  of  Jacob ;  the  God  of  father  and  son  and  grandson ;  the  God  who 
has  appointed  and  preserves  the  order  of  human  society,  upholds  its  relationships, 
and  will  not  disappoint  the  pure  and  sweet  affections  which  have  been  nurtured  in 
them.  Would  Abraham  be  the  same  Abraham  if  there  were  no  Isaac ;  Isaac,  the 
same  Isaac,  if  there  were  no  Abraham  and  Jacob  ?  Nay,  if  the  dishonour  of 
forgetfulness  were,  in  the  life  beyond  the  grave,  thrown  on  the  human  loves  and 
affections  which  have  been  born  on  earth,  would  God  be  the  same  God  ?  (/.  N. 
Bennie,  LL^.) 

Vers.  41-44.  How  say  they  that  Christ  Is  David's  son  1 — David,  ChrUVs  ancestor : — 
"  How  say  they  that  Christ  is  David's  son  ?  "  Reading  David's  history,  we  might 
«xclaim,  ''How,  indeed  I  "  Son  of  David,  Son  of  God :  is  not  this  like  son  of  sin, 
son  of  grace  ?  But  if  in  the  ancestor  sin  abounded,  in  the  descendant  grace  much 
more  abounded ;  and  wisdom  will  inquire  whether  there  is  any  relation  between  the 
Buperabounding  grace  and  the  abounding  sin.  We  may  think  of  Christ  as  a 
«piritual  David,  and  we  may  think  of  David  as  a  natural  Christ,  in  this  way :  we 
may  suppose  a  nature  like  Christ's,  but  without  what  we  know  He  possessed — a 
governing,  harmonizing  spirit  of  holiness.  Imagine  that.  Imagine  one  whose 
natural  endowments  resembled  Christ's,  but  without  the  presiding  spirit  of  holiness  ; 
then,  we  say,  you  would  have  another  variety  of  David's  life — one  more  distinguished 
by  nobleness,  but  one  marked  and  saddened  with  many  an  act  of  dishonour.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  you  suppose  David  to  become  perfectly  spiritual,  to  have  that 
presiding  holiness  which  Christ  had  ;  amongst  all  the  ancient  saints,  there  would 
have  been  none  so  like  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  though  still  less  than  He.  And  thus 
it  is  that  we  have  in  David  the  nature  of  Christ,  but  without  the  Divine  harmonio 
regulation ;  and  we  have  in  Christ  the  nature  of  David,  but  not  now  with  the  fleshly 
irregularities,  not  sullied  by  blots,  not  made  the  shame  as  well  as  in  part  the  glory 
of  Israel,  but  utterly  free  from  evil.  Christ  is,  then,  considered  as  David's 
descendant,  the  inheritor  of  his  sensibilities,  which  shine  in  our  Lord  with  completest 
lustre.  He  is  also  the  inheritor  of  his  contests ;  and  our  Lord  overcomes  with 
nnvaried  and  complete  victory  those  temptations  which  assaulted  His  ancestor. 
And  by  being  at  once  the  possessor  of  his  sensibilities  and  the  inheritor  of  his 
contests.  He  becomes  the  expiation  of  his  sins.  You  will  often  find  in  the  history 
of  families  that  troubles  accumulate,  and  as  it  were  ripen,  until  they  are  "  laid 
upon  "  some  one  individual ;  that  on  this  individual  rests  the  burden  of  evil  which 
has  been  slowly  accumulating.  Now,  you  may  have  a  case  in  which  it  seems  that 
the  burden  of  evil  so  rests  that  the  man  is  borne  down,  crushed,  and  destroyed  ; 
and  here  yon  say,  through  the  wickedness  of  his  House,  this,  the  last  descendant, 
is  utterly  shaken  and  ruined.  But  you  may  also  have  a  successful  fight ;  the 
burden  is  on  the  back,  but  the  strength  is  in  the  man.  This  is  at  once  the  most 
burdened  and  most  powerful  indiTidual  sprung  from  the  race.  It  is  he  who, 
grappling  with  the  evil  in  its  fullest  strength,  shall  retrieve  the  fortunes  of  the 
family.  There  are  histeric  cases  which  illustrate  that  principle.  In  every  family 
history  evil  goes  on  worsening,  or  good  goes  on  strengthening  ;  and  we  may  have 
instances  of  men  borne  down  by  the  evil,  and  other  instances  of  men  oppressed  very 
greatly  and  yet  triumphing,  and  so  retrieving  honour  and  fortune.  Now  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  was  a  spiritual  David ;  He  shares — possesses,  indeed,  to  the  full — 
David's  sensibilities ;  He  engages  in  the  moral  contests  in  which  David  so  often 
failed  ;  and  He  becomes  the  expiation  of  David's  sins — that  is  to  say.  He  utterly 
annuls  that  power  of  sin  so  manifest  and  hateful  in  David,  and  brings  in  a  strength 
of  holiness  which,  as  gradually  diffused  in  the  breasts  of  men,  shall  cause  the 
instrument  that  else  would  be  discordant  to  be  a  harp  of  joy — shall  reflne  from 
earthly  alloys  that  sacred  metal  which,  as  God's  gold,  he  will  work  up  into  the 
ornaments  and  harps  of  heaven.    (T.  T.  Lynch.) 

Vers.  45-47.  Beware  of  the  scribes. — The  situ  of  the  scribes  and  Phariteet  .*— 
The  scribes  were  doctors  of  the  law,  who   read   and   expounded  the   Scriptoz* 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ix. 

to  the  people.      They  were  possessed  of  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  cooupie^ 
the  Beat  of  Moses.     The  Pharisees  were  a  kind  of  separatists  among  the  Jews,  a» 
their  name  indeed  denotes.    When  Jesns  speaks  to  these  men,  He  no  longer  wears  Hi» 
wonted  aspect.    His  language  is  not  that  of  compassion  and  tenderness,  bat  of  stern 
denunciation.    It  is  important  that  Jesus  should  be  presented  to  as  under  these 
two  aspects,  of  forgiving  mercy  and  of  relentless  wrath,  in  order  to  stimulate  hope 
and  to  repress  presumption.     In  the  text  Jesus  proceeds  to  indicate  the  grounds  of 
that  woe  He  had  denounced  upon  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.    He  points  out  to  the 
people  the  crimes  with  which  they  were  chargeable,  and  the  hypocrisy  of  their 
conduct.    It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  He  does  not  content  Himself  with  speaking  to 
the  guilty  parties  alone.    He  unveils  their  character  before  the  face  of  the  world. 
They  were  deceiving  the  people  by  their  pretences,  and  therefore  the  people  must 
be  warned  against  them.     The  same  thing  is  true  of  all  pretenders  in  religion. 
Trnth  and  justice,  and  love  for  the  souls  of  men,  alike  demand  that  sach  pretencea 
ehonld  be  made  manifest.      The  first  charge  adduced  against  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  in  the  text  is,  that  they  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men — 
that  they  neither  entered  into  it  themselves,  nor  suffered  those  who  were  entering 
to  go  in.     When  the  question  is  put,  what  methods  did  they  take  to  accomplish 
this  ?  the  easiest  and  perhaps  the  most  natural  answer  would  be,  that  it  was  by 
their  extraordinary  strictness  and  outward  purity.     The  mass  of  the  people  were 
regarded  by  them  as  little  better  than  heathens.     They  abjured  the  society  of  such 
men ;  and  one  special  ground  of  offence  against  Jesus  was,  that  He  did  not  imitate 
them  in  this  respect.    It  might  be  readily  presumed,  then,  that  by  such  austerities 
as  marked  their  outward  conduct,  they  rendered  religion  altogether  so  repulsive  aa 
to  deter  the  common  people  from  inquiring  into  its  claims,  rather  than  to  invite 
them  to  submit  themselves  to  its  authority.     Thus,  it  may  be  supposed,  they  shut 
np  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men.    It  is  notorious  that  such  an  accusation  a» 
this  has  been  always  preferred  against  the  pure  ministers  of  a  pure  religion.     The 
duty  of  the  minister  is  to  declare  the  truth  as  he  finds  it  in  the  Bible,  and  to  actupoa 
the  directions  he  has  there  received.    In  thus  preaching  and  acting,  however,  many 
may  be  shut  out  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  it  is  not  he  who  has  closed  its  gates 
against  them,  but  God  Himself.       But  the  supposition  is  very  far  from  being 
correct,  that  the  Pharisees  were  accused  of  shutting  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against 
men  by  the  strictness  and  austerity  to  which  they  pretended.     We  shall  discover 
the  real  grounds  of  the  accusation  by  comparing  the  text  with  the  parallel  passage 
in  the  Gospel  according  to  Luke.    It  is  there  said  (Luke  xi.  52) :  "  Woe  unto  you 
lawyers,  for  ye  have  taken  away  the  key  of  knowledge  :  ye  enter  not  in  yourselves, 
and  them  that  were  entering  in  ye  hindered."     The  way,  then,  in  which  they  shut 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  themselves  and  others,  was  by  taking  away  the  key 
of  knowledge.    In  order  to  this,  let  us  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  precise  position  of 
the  Pharisee,  and  the  place  which  he  assigned  to  the  word  of  God.    Let  us  observe 
how  he  used  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  by  what  precise  instrumentality  he  shut 
tip  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men.    The  Pharisees  did  not  deny  men  the  use 
of  the  Bible.    They  did  not  conceal  the  knowledge  of  its  contents.    The  people 
heard  it  read  from  year  to  year  in  their  synagogues.  It  was  explained  to  them,  and  their 
attention  solicited  to  its  truths.     How,  then,  could  it  be  said  that  they  had  taken 
away  the  key  of  knowledge  ?    The  answer  to  the  question  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact, 
not  that  they  withheld  the  word  of  God,  but  that  they  made  the  commandment  of 
God  of  none  effect  by  their  tradition.     They  refused  to  acknowledge  the  fact  that 
God  is  the  only  teacher  and  director  of  His  Church.     They  added  to  His  word 
instructions  of  their  own.    The  Divine  authority,  if  it  is  to  be  preserved  at  all, 
must  stand  apart  from  and  be  superior  to  all  other  authority.    The  claims  of  God 
are  paramount,  and  so  soon  as  they  cease  to  be  so,  tbey  cease  to  be  Divine.     In 
ether  words,  God  is  no  longer  God — His  worship  is  rendered  vain — and  His  com- 
mandments become  of  none  effect.    Thus  the  key  of  knowledge  is  altogether  taken 
away,  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  shut  against  men.      The  fact  that  the 
commandments  of  men  occupied  such  a  place  at  all  vitiated  their  whole  doctrine  and 
worship,  deprived  men  of  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
against  them.    Such  a  Church  ceased  to  be  a  blessing,  and  had  become  a  corse  to 
the  nation.    It  was  a  Church  not  to  be  reformed,  bat  to  be  destroyed.    It  was  rotten 
at  the  very  heart,  and  nothing  remained  for  it  but  woe.     But  the  text  is  pregnant 
with  instruction  and   admonition   to  all   the  professed  disciples  of  Christ.      It 
impresses  npon  us  the  doctrine  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  by  knowledge. 
This  ib  the  key  that  unlocks  the  celestial  gates.    We  cannot  obtain  an  entrance  t* 


CHAP,  xx.]  ST.  LUKE.  46t 

it  in  any  other  way.  The  lock  will  not  yield  to  any  other  power.  Not  that  all 
kinds  of  knowledge  are  equally  available.  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  God  and 
JesQS  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent.  To  be  ignorant  of  Christ  is  to  be  shut  out  of 
heaven.  To  know  Jesus  Christ  is  to  open  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  highest 
gifts,  the  most  shining  acquirements,  cannot  bring  us  a  footstep  nearer  heaven. 
Nothing  else  avails  to  open  up  the  kingdom  to  men  but  the  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ.  From  the  text  also  we  learn  this  doctrine,  that  the  ministers  of  the  Church 
have  in  a  certain  sense  the  power  of  shutting  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against 
men.  They  are  set  up  as  lights  of  the  world.  Their  business  is  to  instruct  the 
ignorant.  If  they  neglect  the  duties  or  pervert  the  designs  of  their  office,  how  are 
men  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ?  From  the  doctrines  set  forth  in  the 
text,  let  us  lay  to  heart  the  following  practical  instructions :  1.  Let  us  learn  to  read 
the  Bible,  and  to  Usten  to  its  truths,  in  the  assurance  that  our  eternal  destiny 
depends  upon  the  knowledge  of  them.  2.  Let  ministers  also  learn  their  proper 
vocation  as  porters  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  let  them  beware  of  handling  the 
Word  of  God  deceitfully.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  examine  the  second  charge  which 
Jesus  brings  against  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  It  is  conveyed  in  these  words — 
"  Woe  unto  you  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  !  for  ye  devour  widows'  houses,  and 
for  a  pretence  make  long  prayers ;  therefore  ye  shall  receive  the  greater  damnation." 
The  crime  of  the  Pharisees  was  not  one,  but  manifold,  and  Jesus,  in  faithfulness, 
accumulates  His  charges  against  them.  Lest  for  a  moment  they  should  forget  the 
heinous  character  of  these  charges.  He  recapitulates  with  each  the  coming  doom 
which  awaited  them.  This  second  sin  which  Jesus  charges  against  the  Pharisees 
is  of  a  very  aggravated  kind.  It  is  devouring  the  houses  of  widows.  Not  contented 
with  making  void  the  commandments  of  God,  these  men  were  guilty  of  the  most 
hateful  practices.  Having  usurped  a  treasonable  authority  in  Divine  things,  their 
lives  were  characterized  by  acts  of  atrocious  oppression  and  cruelty.  Insinuating 
themselves  into  the  confi(lence  of  the  weak  and  the  defenceless,  they  made  their 
high  religious  profession  a  covert  for  the  basest  covetousness.  They  become  robbers 
of  the  widow  and  the  fatherless.  Such  wickedness  of  conduct  might  have  been 
expected  as  the  sure  result  of  the  corruptions  they  had  introduced  into  the  Divine 
worship.  Purity  of  faith  is  the  surest  guardian  of  integrity  of  life.  In  the  case  of 
the  Pharisees  the  wickedness  was  peculiarly  hateful.  The  sin  of  which  they  were 
guilty  was  devouring  houses,  or,  in  other  words,  involving  families  in  ruin,  by 
appropriating  and  devouring  the  substance  which  belonged  to  them.  But  this  sin 
was  accompanied  with  a  threefold  aggravation.  First,  the  houses  they  involved 
in  ruin  were  the  houses  of  widows.  Secondly,  their  sin  was  yet  farther  aggravated 
by  being  committed  nnder  the  pretext  of  religion.  They  committed  robbery  under 
the  guise  of  piety.  Thirdly,  they  made  an  extraordinary  profession  of  religions 
zeal.  They  not  only  prayed  with  a  view  to  the  more  easy  perpetration  of  robbery, 
but  their  prayers  were  long.  Widows  were  their  easy  dupes.  Thus  we  are  directed 
to  one  of  the  marks  which  indicate  the  mere  pretender  to  godliness,  and  by  which 
we  shall  be  able  to  detect  and  expose  the  hypocrite.  For  the  pretender  in  religion, 
having  necessarily  some  selfish  object  in  view,  and  not  being  animated  by  a  love  of 
the  truth,  may  be  expected  to  turn  his  profession  to  the  best  possible  account.  And 
whether  for  the  purpose  of  gratifying  his  vanity,  of  acquiring  power  and  influence, 
or  of  increasing  wealth,  he  will  always  find  his  readiest  instruments  in  silly  and 
restless  women.  Hence,  too  readily,  among  despisers  of  religion,  the  reproach  has 
been  taken  up  against  the  true  and  living  Church,  that  its  most  active  promoters, 
and  most  zealous  adherents,  are  women,  and  that  the  prayers  of  its  members  are 
only  for  a  pretence.  Surely  it  would  be  to  infer  rashly  to  conclude,  that  because 
the  ministers  or  members  of  a  Church  were  signalized  by  fervent  and  frequent 
prayer,  and  because  devout  and  honourable  women,  not  a  few,  were  among  its  most 
zealous  friends,  such  a  Church  was  guilty  of  the  Pharisaic  crime,  and  justly  lay 
under  the  reproach  and  the  woe  denounced  in  the  text.  Let  us  examine  and  see. 
No  one  can  read  the  personal  history  of  Jesus  without  perceiving  how,  in  the  days 
of  His  earthly  ministry,  He  had  among  His  most  honoured  and  endeared  disciples 
devout  women  not  a  few,  whose  rich  gifts  He  did  not  despise,  and  whose  devoted 
love  He  did  not  spurn.  Who  was  it  that  blamed  the  expenditure  of  a  very  precious 
box  of  ointment  f  Is  it,  on  the  other  hand,  an  unfailing  mark  of  a  hypocrite  to 
make  long  prayers  ?  Doubtless  there  have  been  many,  in  every  age,  who  have 
assumed  the  form  of  godliness  while  denying  its  power,  who  have  drawn  near  to 
God  with  the  mouth,  and  honoured  Him  with  the  lips,  while  their  hearts  have  been 
lar  from  Him.    But  if  hypocritical  pretenders  affect  this  devotion,  is  it  not  an 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx, 

evidence  that  prayer  is  the  proper  and  trne  life  of  the  believer  ?  Why  shoald  th« 
Pharisee  pretend  to  it,  if  the  religious  propriety  of  the  thing  itself  were  not  felt  and 
acknowledged  ?  The  hypocrite  does  not  affect  that  which  does  not  essentiallj 
belong  to  godliness.  Jesus  did  not  accuse  the  Pharisees,  and  pronounce  a  woe  upon 
them,  because  they  received  the  support  of  women,  even  of  widows,  nor  because  of 
the  frequency  or  length  of  their  prayers.  Abstracted,  however,  from  the  peculiar 
circumstances  and  aggravations  with  which  the  sin  was  accompanied  in  the  actual 
practice  of  the  Pharisees,  the  thing  condemned  in  the  text  is,  prayer  which  is 
uttered  only  in  pretence,  and  prayer  which  has  a  selfish  and  worldly  end  in  view. 
Widows  were  the  objects  against  whom  the  Pharisees  put  in  practice  their  artful 
hj'pocrisy.  But  it  is  obvious  that  whosoever  may  be  the  objects  of  the  deception, 
the  essential  character  of  the  sin  remains  the  same.  Nor  is  the  nature  of  the  sin 
atlected  by  the  extent  of  the  pretended  devotion.  The  pretence  is  the  thing  blame- 
worthy. It  is  true  the  sin  becomes  more  heinous  in  proportion  to  the  height  of  the 
profession,  and  the  Pharisees  are  worthy  of  greater  damnation,  because  they  not 
only  pretended  to  devotion,  but  to  very  high  flights  of  it.  Leaving  out  of  view, 
however,  such  aggravating  circumstances  as  these,  that  their  prayer  was  long,  and 
that  the  widows  and  the  fatherless  were  their  prey,  we  have  the  essential  character 
of  the  sin  set  before  us,  as  at  least  worthy  of  damnation,  namely,  making  a  profession 
of  religion  for  the  purpose  of  advancing  worldly  interests,  and  securing  the  ends  of 
earthly  ambition.  The  Pharisees  of  our  day,  then,  who  lie  under  the  woe  pronounced 
by  Jesus,  are — 1.  Those  ministers  who  enter  upon  and  continue  in  their  office  for  a 
piece  of  bread.  The  most  pitiable  being  among  all  the  afflicted  sons  of  humanity 
is  he  who  has  assumed  the  holy  office  of  the  ministry  for  the  sake  of  worldly  ends 
and  objects.  2.  But  the  Pharisaic  crime  is  by  no  means  limited  to  ministers. 
Those  people  are  guilty  of  it,  in  whatever  position  they  are  placed,  who,  for  the  sake 
of  good  repute,  from  fear  of  worldly  loss,  or  from  the  desire  of  worldly  gain — or 
who,  actuated  by  any  earthly  or  selfish  motive  whatever,  make  profession  of  a 
religion  which  they  do  not  believe.  We  have  yet  to  examine  a  third  charge  which 
Jesus  brings  against  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  He  accompanies  the  recital  of  it 
with  a  denunciation  of  the  same  woe  he  had  already  twice  invoked  upon  them. 
"  Woe  onto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  I  for  ye  compass  sea  and  land  to 
make  one  proselyte  ;  and  when  he  is  made,  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of 
hell  than  yourselves."  The  apostles  of  deceit  and  falsehood  have  often  manifested 
a  zeal  in  the  propagation  of  their  principles  which  is  fitted  to  minister  a  severe 
reproof  to  those  who  know  and  who  believe  the  truth.  This  does  not  arise  from  the 
circumstance  that  the  apostles  of  error  are  possessed  of  more  energy  and  activity  of 
mind  than  the  friends  of  truth,  but  because  they  have  frequently  a  more  hearty 
interest  in  the  advancement  of  their  cause.  Let  there  be  an  opening  for  worldly 
advancement,  and  the  gratification  of  worldly  ambition,  and  the  way  is  crowded 
with  rival  and  eager  candidates.  There  is  no  remissness  of  effort  among  them.  The 
conquests  of  early  Christianity  were  rapid  and  wide,  because  its  apostles  had  strong 
faith  and  untiring  zeal.  Prom  what  has  been  stated,  it  will  be  manifest  that  it  is 
not  the  fact  of  making  proselytes  or  converts  against  which  the  woe  of  Christ  is 
denounced.  This,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  great  duty  which  He  has  laid  upon  all  His 
disciples ;  and  the  illustrious  reward  He  hath  promised  to  the  work  is,  that  they 
who  turn  many  to  righteousness  shall  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever.  A 
church  is  doing  nothing  if  it  be  not  making  proselytes.  It  is  a  dead  trunk  ready 
for  the  fire.  They  did  not  care  to  make  their  converts  holier  and  better  and 
happier  men.  They  made  them  twofold  more  the  children  of  hell  than  themselves. 
It  was  enough  that  they  assumed  the  name  and  made  the  outward  profession.  It 
will  be  instructive  to  examine  for  a  little  the  methods  they  adopted  for  preserving 
their  influence,  extending  their  power,  and  crushing  the  truth.  We  will  thus  be 
able  to  understand  more  perfectly  the  grounds  of  the  condemnation  pronounced 
against  them,  and  how  their  zeal  should  have  produced  such  fruits.  1.  In  the 
ninth  chapter  of  the  Gospel  according  to  John  we  find  the  record  of  a  miraculous 
work  of  Jesus,  in  opening  the  eyes  of  a  man  who  had  been  blind  from  his  birth. 
The  Pharisees  became  aware  that  such  a  miracle  had  been  wrought,  and  with  great 
propriety  made  immediate  and  diligent  inquiry  into  the  reality  of  the  fact.  The 
means,  then,  by  which  they  sought  to  quench  the  truth — to  induce  a  denial  of  the 
manifest  power  of  God,  and  to  retain  the  people  as  their  proselytes  and  followers — 
were  to  bring  against  Jesus  the  accusation  of  breaking  the  law  of  the  land.  He 
who  did  so,  they  argued,  must  be  a  sinner — he  could  not  come  from  God,  and  to 
follow  him  would  be  certain  destruction.     2.  Throughout  the  narratives  of  tha 


CHAP,  xn.]  ST.  LUKE.  471 

evangelists  there  are  scattered  abundant  evidences  of  another  instrument  of 
proselytizing  employed  by  the  Pharisees.  It  is  the  language  of  reviling  and  scorn. 
They  ridiculed  the  poverty  of  the  disciples.  Doubtless  by  such  reviling  and 
mockery  they  might  attain  a  certain  measure  of  success.  3.  Another  instrument  of 
the  Pharisees  for  making  and  retaining  proselytes,  was  misrepresentation  and 
calumny.  They  watched  the  words  of  Jesus  that  they  might  have  something  to 
report  to  His  disadvantage.  4.  The  Pharisees  made  converts  by  force.  They  took 
np  the  weapons  of  persecution  and  vigorously  employed  them.  The  charge  as 
expressed,  pronounces  woe  against  them,  because  of  their  great  zeal  in  making 
proselytes,  and  because  of  the  lamentable  results  which  followed  apon  their  eon-" 
version.    {W.  WiUon.) 


CHAPTER  XXL 


Tbbs.  1-4.  TUB  poor  widow  hath  cast  in  more  than  they  aXL—The  widow's 
mites : — Onr  Lord  wished  to  see  ♦'  how  the  multitude  cast  money  into  the  collection- 
chest  " — not  only  how  much — anybody  could  have  discovered  that — but  in  what 
manner  and  spirit  it  was  being  done  :  reverently  or  irreverently — as  unto  God  or 
as  unto  man — so  as  to  display  or  so  as  to  conceal  the  offering — with  a  conscientious 
aim  to  give  all  that  was  due,  or  a  self -convicted  sense  that  a  part  thereof  was  being 
withheld.  The  searching  eye  of  the  Master  struck  through  the  outward  demeanour 
of  each  passing  worshipper,  right  down  to  the  motive  that  swayed  the  hand.  He 
was  reading  the  heart  of  each  giver.  He  was  marking  whether  the  gift  was  the 
mere  fruit  of  a  devotionless  habit — a  sheer  affectation  of  religious  liberality — or, 
as  it  ought  to  be,  a  humble  and  sincere  token  of  gratitude  and  consecration  to  God. 
These  were  the  inquiries  that  were  engaging  the  mind  of  our  Lord  on  this  memor- 
able occasion.  We  are  not  informed  how  long  He  had  sat  or  what  discoveries  He  had 
made  before  the  arrival  of  the  "poor  vndow,"  but  He  noticed  that  she  gave  but 
two  "  mites  " ;  and  knowing  that  this  was  all  she  had,  He  discerned  the  unselfish- 
oess  and  love  that  prompted  an  offering  which  would  perhaps  be  her  last  oblation 
on  the  altar  of  the  Lord.  This  act  of  imfeigned  devotion  touched  Him  at  once, 
insomuch  that  He  immediately  called  His  disciples,  and  drew  their  attention  to  so 
striking  and  instructive  a  case.  It  was  her  gift,  rather  than  any  other,  that 
attracted  the  greatest  interest  in  the  courts  of  heaven.  It  was  her  offering,  rather 
than  any  other,  that  was  alone  worthy  of  a  permanent  record  in  the  Gospel  History 
and  the  "books  of  eternal  remembrance."  And  why?  Not  only  because  she 
gave  "  all  her  living,"  but  because  she  gave  it  unto  the  Lord  "with  all  her  heart." 
Not  at  all  in  a  spirit  of  petulance  or  desperation,  as  might  have  been  the  case ;  not 
at  all  because  she  saw  want  staring  her  in  the  face,  and  thought  it  no  longer 
worth  her  while  to  retain  the  paltry  coins  she  possessed.  On  the  contrary,  it  was 
the  fineness  of  the  woman's  spirit,  the  richness  of  her  gratitude  and  love,  the 
wealth  of  her  self-forgetfulness  and  trust  under  the  severity  of  her  trials,  that 
gave  her  little  gift  the  exceeding  rareness  of  its  value.  She  was  neither  despairing 
nor  repining,  but  "walking  by  faith"  and  in  contentment,  reflecting  that,  not- 
withstanding her  indigence,  there  was  none  to  whom  she  was  so  great  a  debtor  as 
unto  the  Lord  her  God,  who  in  His  providence  had  given  her  all  she  had,  or  ever 
had  had,  or  ever  would  have,  temporal  and  spiritual.  And  out  of  the  depths  of 
her  adoration  and  thankfulness  she  says  unto  herself,  "I  will  go,"  in  iny  poverty 
and  sincerity,  "  and  pay  my  vows  unto  the  Lord  in  the  presence  of  all  His  people," 
oast  my  slender  and  oiJy  offering  into  the  sacred  treasury,  and  await  the  goodness 
of  His  hand  in  "  the  land  of  the  living."  The  other  worshippers  were  giving 
f  ariously,  but  all  "  of  their  abundance  " ;  or,  as  the  Bevised  Version  has  it,  ♦'  of  their 
superfluity."  They  never  missed  what  they  gave.  They  were  sacrificing  nothing  to 
enable  them  to  give.  They  could  have  given  more,  some  of  them  far  more,  and 
never  have  felt  tiie  slightest  pressure  in  consequence.  But  the  "  poor  widow  "  had 
not  an  iota  more  to  offer.  She  gave  her  "  uttermost  farthing,"  and  she  gave  it 
gladly.  (J.  W.  Pringle,  M.A.)  The  duty  of  almtgiving : — 1.  It  is  necessary  and 
scriptural  that  there  be  public  voluntary  contributions  for  pious  and  charitable 
purposes.  2.  Both  the  rich  and  the  poor  should  contribute  to  pious  and  charitable 
purposes,  and  that  according  to  their  respective  ability.    8.  It  concerns  us  all  t« 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxu 

see  that  oul  contributions  be  such,  in  respect  of  the  principles  and  motives  from 
■which  they  flow,  as  will  meet  with  the  Divine  approbation.  4.  Be  exhorted  to 
cast  liberally  into  the  offerings  of  God,  by  the  encouraging  considerations  which 
are  placed  before  you  in  His  Word.  (1)  Remember  that  the  eye  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  upon  you.  (2)  Bemember,  again,  the  considerations  connected  with  the 
amazing  kindness  of  your  God  and  Saviour  to  you.  (3)  Be  exhorted,  once  more, 
to  give  liberally,  by  the  consideration  of  the  promise  of  an  abundant  recompense, 
both  in  this  world  and  in  the  world  to  come.  (Jas,  Foote,  M.A.)  The  anonymotu 
widow  : — It  is  related  of  Father  Taylor,  the  sailor  missionary  of  Boston,  that  on 
one  occasion,  when  a  minister  was  urging  that  the  names  of  the  subscribers  to  an 
institution  (it  was  the  missionary  cause)  should  be  published,  in  order  to  increase 
the  funds,  and  quoted  the  account  of  the  poor  widow  and  her  two  mites,  to  justify 
this  trumpet-sounding,  he  settled  the  question  by  rising  from  his  seat,  and  asking 
in  his  clear,  shrill  voice,  "  Will  the  speaker  please  give  us  the  name  of  that  poor 
widow  ?  "  {Christian  Age.)  The  widow's  mite : — When  it  is  said  that  this  mite 
was  all  this  woman's  living,  it  must,  of  course,  mean  all  her  living  for  that  day. 
She  threw  herself  upon  the  providence  of  God  to  supply  her  with  her  evening  meal 
or  night's  lodging.  From  what  she  gave,  which  the  Lord  brought  to  light  and 
commended,  the  expression  "  I  give  my  mite  "  has  passed  into  a  proverb,  which 
in  the  mouths  of  many  who  use  it  is  ridiculous,  if  not  profane.  What  ought  tc 
be  the  mite  of  one  in  a  good  business  which  yields  him  several  hundreds  a  year 
clear  proflt  ?  What  ought  to  be  the  mite  of  a  professional  man  in  good  practice, 
after  all  reasonable  family  claims  are  provided  for  ?  A  man  with  an  income  of  at 
least  two  or  three  hundred  a  year  once  said  to  me,  when  I  called  upon  bim  for 
assistance  in  keeping  up  a  national  school,  "  I  wiU  think  about  it,  sir,  and  I  will 
give  you  my  mite."  He  did  think,  and  his  mite  was  two  shillings.  Contrast  this 
with  the  following.  Two  aged  paupers,  having  only  the  usual  parish  pay,  became 
communicants.  They  determined  that  they  would  not  neglect  the  offertory ;  but 
how  was  this  to  be  done,  as  they  were  on  starvation  allowance  ?  Well,  during  the 
week  before  the  celebration,  they  did  without  light,  sat  up  for  two  or  three  hours 
in  the  dark,  and  then  went  to  bed,  and  gave  the  few  pence  which  they  saved  in  oi) 
or  rushlights  to  be  laid  on  the  altar  of  God,  (M.  F.  Sadler.)  Giving  hit  all: — 
A  gentleman  was  walking  late  one  night  along  a  street  in  London,  in  which  stands 
the  hospital  where  some  of  our  little  friends  support  a  bed  ("  The  May  Fair  Cot," 
in  Ormond  Street  Hospital)  for  a  sick  child.  There  were  three  acrobats  passing 
along  there,  plodding  wearily  home  to  their  miserable  lodgings  after  their  day's 
work ;  two  of  them  were  men,  and  they  were  carrying  the  ladders  and  poles  with 
which  they  gave  their  performance  in  the  streets  whenever  they  could  collect  a 
crowd  to  look  on.  The  third  was  a  little  boy  in  a  clown's  dress.  He  trotted 
wearily  behind,  very  tired,  and  looking  pale  and  sick.  Just  as  they  were  passing 
the  hospital  the  little  lad's  sad  face  brightened  for  a  moment.  He  ran  up  the 
steps  and  dropped  into  the  box  attached  to  the  door  a  little  bit  of  paper.  It 
was  found  next  morning  there.  It  contained  a  sixpence,  and  on  the  paper  was 
written,  "For  a  sick  child."  The  one  who  saw  it  afterwards  ascertained,  as  he 
tells  us,  that  the  poor  little  waif,  almost  destitute,  had  been  sick,  and  in  his  weary 
pilgrimage  was  a  year  before  brought  to  the  hospital,  which  had  been  a  "  House 
Beautiful  "  to  him,  and  he  was  there  cured  of  his  bodily  disease.  Hands  of  kindness 
had  ministered  to  him,  words  of  kindness  had  been  spoken  to  him,  and  he  had  left  it 
cured  in  body  and  whole  in  heart.  Some  one  on  that  day  in  a  crowd  had  slipped  a 
sixpence  into  his  hand,  and  that  same  night  as  he  passed  by,  his  grateful  little  heart 
gave  up  for  other  child-sufferers  "  all  the  living  that  he  had."  It  was  all  done  so 
quietly,  so  noiselessly ;  but  oh !  believe  me,  the  sound  of  that  little  coin  falling 
into  God's  treasury  that  night  rose  above  the  roar  and  din  of  this  mighty  city,  and 
■was  heard  with  joy  in  the  very  presence  of  God  Himself.  The  giving  out  oj 
abundance  and  out  of  penury : — "  Mamma,  I  thought  a  mite  was  a  very  little  thing. 
What  did  the  Lord  mean  when  He  said  the  widow's  mite  was  more  than  all  the 
money  the  rich  men  gave?"  It  was  Sunday  afternoon,  and  the  question  was 
asked  by  a  little  child  of  eight,  who  had  large,  dark,  inquiring  eyes,  that  were 
always  trying  to  look  into  things.  Mamma  had  just  been  reading  to  her  the  story 
from  the  Bible,  and  now  she  wanted  it  explained.  Mamma  thought  for  a  few 
minutes,  and  then  said,  "  Well,  Luln,  I  will  tell  yon  a  little  story,  and  then  I 
think  yon  will  understand  why  the  widow's  mite  was  more  valuable  than  ordinary 
mites.  There  was  once  a  little  girl,  whose  name  was  Kitty,  and  this  little  girl  had 
ever  80  many  dolls,  almost  more  than  she  could  count.     Some  were  made  of  china, 


CHAP,  zn.]  8T.  LUKE.  473 

and  others  were  made  of  wax,  with  real  hair  and  beaatiftil  eyes  that  woald  open 
and  shut ;  but  Eitty  was  tired  of  them  all,  except  the  newest  one,  which  her  auntie 
bad  given  her  at  Christmas.  One  day  a  poor  little  girl  came  to  the  door  beggings 
and  Kitty's  mother  told  her  to  go  and  get  one  of  her  old  dolls  and  give  it  away. 
She  did  so,  and  her  old  doU  was  like  what  the  rich  men  put  into  the  treasury.  She 
could  give  it  away  just  as  well  as  not,  and  it  didn't  cost  her  anything.  But  the 
poor  Uttle  beggar  girl  was  delighted  with  her  dolL  She  had  never  had  bat  one 
before,  and  that  was  a  rag  doll ;  but  this  one  had  such  lovely  curly  hair,  and  she 
had  never  seen  any  lady  with  such  an  elegant  pink  silk  dress  on.  She  was  almost 
afraid  to  hold  it  against  her  dirty  shawl,  for  fear  of  soiling  it ;  so  she  hurried 
home  as  fast  as  she  could,  to  hide  it  away  with  her  few  small  treasures.  Just  as 
she  was  going  upstairs  to  their  poor  rooms,  she  saw  through  the  crack  of  the  door 
in  the  basement  her  little  friend  Sally,  who  had  been  sick  in  bed  all  summer,  and 
who  was  all  alone  all  day,  while  her  mother  went  out  washing,  to  try  and  earn 
money  enough  to  keep  them  from  starving.  As  our  little  girl  looked  through  the 
crack  she  thought  to  herself,  *  I  must  show  Sally  my  new  dolly.'  So  she  rushed 
into  the  room  and  on  to  the  bed,  crying, '  0  Sally  1  see ! '  Sally  tried  to  reach  out 
her  arms  to  take  it,  but  she  was  too  sick ;  so  her  little  friend  held  up  the  dolly, 
and  as  she  did  so,  she  thought,  *  How  sick  Sally  looks  to-day  t  and  she  hasn't  any 
dolly.'  Then,  with  one  generous  impulse,  she  said, '  Here,  Sally,  you  may  have 
her.'  Now,  Lulu,  do  you  see  ?  The  Uttle  girl's  dolly  was  like  the  widow's  mite — 
she  gave  her  all."  The  largett  giver : — The  late  BiBhop  Selwyn  was  a  man  of 
ready  wit  as  well  as  of  devout  Christian  feeling.  In  his  New  Zealand  diocese  it 
was  proposed  to  allot  the  seats  of  a  new  church,  when  the  Bishop  asked  on  what 
principle  the  allotment  was  to  be  made,  to  which  it  was  replied  that  the  largest 
donors  should  have  the  best  seats,  and  so  on  in  proportion.  To  this  arrangement, 
to  the  surprise  of  every  one,  the  Bishop  assented,  and  presently  the  question  arose  who 
had  given  the  most.  This,  it  was  answered,  should  be  decided  by  the  subscription 
list.  "  And  now,"  said  the  Bishop,  "  who  has  given  the  most  ?  The  poor  widow 
in  the  temple,  in  casting  into  the  treasury  her  two  mites,  had  cast  in  more  than 
they  all ;  for  they  of  their  abundance  had  cast  into  the  treasury,  but  she  had  cast 
in  all  the  living  that  she  had."  (W,  Baxendale.)  A  Welsh  boy'$  offering  : — It  is 
related  of  a  little  Welsh  boy  who  attended  a  missionary  meeting  that  when  he  had 
given  in  his  collecting  card  and  what  he  had  obtained  from  his  friends,  he  was  greatly 
distressed  because  he  had  not  a  halfpenny  of  his  own  to  put  in  the  plate  at  the 
meeting.  His  heart  was  so  thrilled  with  interest  in  the  work  that  he  ran  home 
and  told  his  mother  that  he  wanted  to  be  a  missionary,  and  asked  her  to  give  him 
something  for  the  collection,  but  she  was  too  poor  to  give  him  any  money.  He 
was  disappointed  and  cried ;  but  a  thought  struck  him.  He  collected  all  his 
marbles,  went  out,  and  sold  them  for  a  penny,  and  then  went  to  the  meeting  again 
and  put  it  on  the  plate,  feeling  glad  that  he  was  able  to  do  something  to  promote 
the  cause  of  missions.  What  one  halfpenny  can  do: — A  son  of  one  of  the  chiefs 
of  Burdwan  was  converted  by  a  single  tract.  He  could  not  read,  but  he  went  to 
Bangoon,  a  distance  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  ;  a  missionary's  vrife  taught 
him  to  read,  and  in  forty-eight  hours  he  could  read  the  tract  through.  He  then 
took  a  basket  fall  of  tracts ;  with  much  difficulty  preached  the  gospel  at  his  own 
home,  and  was  the  means  of  converting  hundreds  to  God.  He  was  a  man  of 
influence ;  the  people  flocked  to  hear  him ;  and  in  one  year  one  thousand  five 
hundred  natives  were  baptized  in  Arracan  as  members  of  the  Church.  And  all 
this  through  one  little  tract !  That  tract  cost  one  halfpenny  I  Oh  t  whose  half- 
penny was  it  ?  God  only  knows.  Perhaps  it  was  the  mite  of  some  little  girl ; 
perhaps  the  well-earned  oflering  of  some  little  boy.  But  what  a  blessing  it  was  ! 
{Bowea.)  The  gifts  of  the  poor : — Sarah  Hosmer,  while  a  factory  girl,  gave  fifty 
guineas  to  support  native  pastors.  When  more  than  sixty  years  old  she  longed  so 
to  furnish  Nestoria  with  one  more  preacher  that,  living  in  an  attic,  she  took  in 
•ewing  until  she  had  accomplished  her  cherished  purpose.  Dr.  Gordon  has  well 
■aid,  "  In  the  hands  of  this  consecrated  woman,  money  transformed  the  factory 
girl  and  the  seamstress  into  a  missionary  of  the  Cross  and  then  multiplied  her  six- 
fold." But  might  we  not  give  a  thousand  times  as  much  money  as  Sarah  Hosmer 
gave,  and  yet  not  earn  her  reward  ?  The  true  worth  of  money : — After  all, 
objects  take  their  colour  from  the  eyes  that  look  at  them.  And  let  us  be  sssored 
that  there  is  an  infinite  difference  in  the  sight  of  an  eye  which  is  the  window  of  a 
Mrdid  soul  and  an  eye  from  which  looks  a  soul  that  has  been  ennobled  by  the  royal 
loaeh  of  Christ.    There  are  some  eyes  that  read  upon  a  piece  of  gold  nothing  oat 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cakp.  zxi. 

the  figures  that  tell  its  denomination.  There  are  others,  thank  Grod,  that  see  open 
it  truths  that  thrill  and  gladden  and  uplift.  If  the  lust  of  gold  has  blinded  your 
eyes  to  all  else  but  its  conventional  value,  go  to  the  feet  of  Christ,  and  to  His  ques- 
tion, •'  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  7 "  answer,  ••  Lord,  that  mine 
eyes  might  be  opened."  And  when  you  have  learned  to  look  through  money  into 
that  iniinite  reach  that  lies  beyond  it,  you  will  have  learned  the  lesson  of  the 
gospel.  Tou  may  then  be  a  "  rich  Christian,**  making  earth  brighter  and  better, 
and    building   for   yourself   in   heaven    "  everlasting   habitations."  Liberal 

giving : — In  a  sequestered  glen  in  Burmah  lived  a  woman,  who  was  known  as 
Naughapo  (Daughter  of  Goodness).  She  was  the  Dorcas  of  the  glen — clothing  the 
naked,  feeding  the  hungry,  soothing  the  afflicted,  and  often  making  her  little 
dwelling  the  home  of  the  poor,  that  they  might  enjoy  the  privilege  of  the  neigh- 
bouring school.  Mrs.  Mason,  the  missionary,  visiting  her,  was  struck  with  the 
beauty  of  her  peaceful  home — evidently  a  spot  which  the  Lord  had  blessed.  .  .  . 
The  day  before  she  left,  a  pedlar  had  called  with  his  tempting  fabrics  for  sale ;  but 
though  this  poor  woman  was  in  poor  garments,  she  had  but  one  rupee  for  pur- 
chases, while  on  the  following  morning  she  and  her  family  put  thirteen  rupees  into 
Mrs.  Mason's  hand,  to  be  deposited  in  the  mission  treasury.  {Mrs.  Wylie's 
**  Life  of  Mrs.  Mason.")  Noble  giving: — General  Gordon  had  a  great  number 
of  medals,  for  which  he  cared  nothing.  There  was  a  gold  one,  however,  given  to 
him  by  the  Empress  of  China,  with  a  special  inscription  engraved  upon  it,  for 
which  he  had  a  great  liking.  But  it  suddenly  disappeared,  no  one  knew  when  or 
how.  Years  afterwards  it  was  found  out  by  a  curious  accident  that  he  had  erased 
the  inscription,  sold  the  medal  for  ten  pounds,  and  sent  the  sum  anonymously  to 
Canon  Millar,  for  the  relief  of  the  sufferers  from  the  cotton  famine  at  Manchester. 
{E.  Hake.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Adorned  with  goodly  stones  and  gifts. — On  the  object  and  %ue  of  thg 
sanctuary : — I.  Tb£  circumstances  ttmdeb  which  Chbist  uttebed  these  wobds. 
Every  attentive  reader  of  Holy  Scripture  must  have  remarked  this  fact,  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  Bible,  viz.,  that  whenever  and  wheresoever  God  revealed  His  choice  ol 
a  spot  among  the  sons  of  men,  to  "  place  His  Name  there  " — where  He  might  be 
especially  present  with  them,  to  receive  their  worship,  and  to  bestow  on  them  Hia 
blessing — that  spot  was  always  directed  and  made  to  be  as  great  a  contrast,  and  aa 
much  superior  as  possible  to  all  other  places  in  which  men  ordinarily  abode.  But 
all  this,  as  the  same  attentive  reading  of  Holy  Scripture  must  also  convince  us,  waa 
immediately  directed  to  its  own  great  and  specific  objects.  It  was  designed  by  God 
to  lead  Hieir  thoughts  upward  to  Himself.  The  temple  had  been  a  great  pro- 
bationary blessing  to  the  Jews;  it  had  been  ordained  of  old  by  God,  for  the 
advancement  of  their  essential  and  everlasting  good ;  and  it  was  now  foredoomed 
to  such  ruin  and  desolation,  that  "  there  should  not  be  left  in  it  one  stone  u^n 
another,  which  should  not  be  thrown  down,'  only  because  of  the  way  in  wmcb 
they  had  abused  their  privileges,  trampled  on  their  mercies,  and  forgotten  the 
covenant  while  they  walked  in  the  very  presence  of  their  God.  XL  Application  : 
1.  These  words  of  our  Lord  give  no  sort  of  encouragement  to  the  notion  which 
has  often  prevailed,  and  has  been  much  repeated  in  our  days,  of  its  being  utterly 
immaterial  what  kind  of  fabric  we  dedicate  to  the  Most  High  ;  that  all  must  be 
alike  to  Him,  and  the  meanest  sufficiently  acceptable  in  His  sight ;  inasmuch  as 
"  He  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,"  and  can  be  as  well  honoured 
within  walls  of  clay,  as  beneath  the  stateliest  roof  that  ever  was  raised  by  man. 
When  men  live,  according  to  their  respective  degrees,  in  a  state  which  God  has 
prospered— dwelling,  if  not,  like  David,  in  "houses  of  cedar,"  at  least  in  those  of 
competence  and  comfort — it  is  not  for  them  to  suffer  the  "  Ark  of  God  to  remain 
within  curtains  " ;  and  though  to  the  wanderer  in  the  desert,  or  the  colonist  in  his 
new  settlement,  the  best  tent  or  cot  he  could  procure  might  be  meet  for  the  service  of 
his  God,  yet  it  is  not  so  for  a  society  of  Englishmen,  dwelling  in  the  very  bosom  of 
their  highly  favoured  country  and  Church.  How  far  are  we  using  our  Eedeemer'a 
sanctuary  upon  earth,  in  such  a  manner  as  that,  when  this  fails,  we  maybe  received 
into  "  a  building  of  God  ;  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens  "  ? 
We  must  not  forget  the  possibility  there  is  that  we  might  be  walking  in  the  judicial 
blindness  of  Israel,  whilst  we  are  possessed  of  all  the  light,  and  ail  the  means  of 
grace,  with  which  the  Christian  Church  is  entrusted.  (J.  PuckU.)  Admiration 
for  tfie  outward  form  rather  than  for  the  spiritual  meaning : — Is  there  any  one 
Christian,  however  austere,  who,  on  entering  the  body  of  oar  cathedral  not  for  the 


CHAP.  XXI.]  ST.  LUKE.  475 

first  time  bat  the  twentieth,  and  allowing  his  eye  to  wander  along  its  avenue  of 
columns,  or  into  the  depth  at  once  so  mysterious  and  so  impressive,  of  the  distant 
choir;  or  towards  those  arches,  at  once  light  and  bold,  which,  like  a  vigorous 
vegetation  on  each  pilaster,  throw  out  and  intertwine  their  stems  at  the  centre — ia 
there  any  one  who  has  not  said  to  himself.  How  beautiful  this  is  I  what  harmony  I 
what  unison  among  all  these  stones  !  what  music  in  this  architecture  I  what  poetry 
in  this  edifice  1  Those  who  reared  it  are  dead,  but  though  dead  they  still  speak  to 
us ;  and  their  conception,  full  of  adoration,  their  conception,  a  species  of  prayer, 
is  so  united  to  their  work,  that  we  think  we  feel  it  and  breathe  it  as  we  advance 
within  these  walls  which  carry  us  over  a  vista  of  ages.  Such  ia  our  feeling  ;  and  if 
we  are  not  alone,  we  can  scarcely  help  giving  it  utterance.  Thus,  doing  what  the 
disciples  did  when  they  exclaimed.  What  stones  !  what  buildings  1  might  we  not 
hear  ourselves  addressed  by  our  Lord  in  words  of  reproof,  "  Is  it  this  you  are  look- 
ing at  ?  "  And  why  should  we  not  be  reproved  if  our  soul  goes  no  farther  than  our 
eye,  if  it  stops  where  our  eye  is  obliged  to  stop ;  if  symbols,  appearances,  visible 
things,  hold  it  captive ;  if  the  splendours  of  art  chain  down  our  heart  to  the  earth 
instead  of  raising  it  to  heaven  ?  This  is  the  censure  which  Jesus  Christ  passes  on 
His  disciples.  He  had  looked  into  their  souls,  and  there  detected  that  lust  of  the 
flesh,  that  lust  of  the  eye,  and  that  pride  of  life,  which  are  the  three  connecting 
chains  by  which  the  enemy  of  God  links  us  closely  to  outer  darkness.  The  man 
and  the  Jew  were  equally  revealed  in  that  involuntary  exclamation  ;  man,  dazzled 
by  whatever  is  seen,  and  filled  with  contempt  for  what  is  not  seen  ;  the  Jew,  proud 
of  the  exterior  pomp  of  a  worship,  the  deep  meaning  and  internal  idea  of  which 
had  long  escaped  him,  and  attaching  himself  obstinately  to  the  law — in  other 
words,  a  shadow,  at  the  very  moment  when  this  law  was  more  than  ever  a  shadow. 
Is  it  this  you  are  looking  at  ?  What !  these  few  grains  of  dust,  which  are  large 
only  because  yon  are  little?  Whatl  these  gifts  extorted  by  fear,  vanity,  and 
custom,  from  individuals  who  refused  to  begin  by  giving  themselves  to  God? 
What  i  the  gorgeous  falsehood  of  these  marbles  and  gildings,  of  aU  those  orna> 
ments,  the  pious  import  of  which  has  long  since  been  forgotten  ?  Is  it  this  you 
are  looking  at  ?  (A.  Vimt,  D.D.)  Looking  at  the  true  grandeur  of  Christianity : — 
Christianity  has  taken  a  form  in  the  world ;  it  has  become  visible.  Travelling 
over  ages,  and  propagating  itself  in  the  world,  it  has  assumed  a  place  among  the 
things  to  which  the  world  pays  regard ;  and  besides  this  grandeur  of  space  and 
duration  which  procures  it  a  species  of  respect  on  the  part  of  the  most  indifferent, 
it  has,  by  its  intellectual  grandeur  (I  mean  by  the  grandeur  of  the  ideas  which  it 
expresses,  and  those  which  it  suggests),  captivated  the  regard  and  admiration  of 
thinkers.  Thus  is  it  great  after  the  fashion  of  the  world.  Beware  of  admiring  it 
most  of  all  for  that  grandeur.  Let  us  fear  lest  its  true  grandeur  escape  our  notice. 
Let  us  not  allow  our  eye  to  be  misled,  and  oblige  Jesus  Christ  to  say  to  us  again, 
"  Is  it  this  yon  are  looking  at?"  How  great  our  misfortune  if  we  should  have 
entered  the  empire  of  the  invisible  only  to  link  ourselves  more  securely  to  the 
visible,  and  if  in  the  kingdom  of  spirit  we  should  have  been  able  only  to  find  the 
world  I  How  miserable,  U  trusting  to  those  vain  and  hollow  words,  "  The  temple 
of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,"  we  should  neglect, 
as  the  prophet  says  in  the  same  place,  thoroughly  to  amend  onr  ways  and  our  doings 
(Jer.  vii.  4,  5).  To  look  only  to  this  twofold  greatness  of  Christianity,  the  material 
and  intellectual,  is  truly  to  do  like  the  first  companions  of  Jesus  Clu-ist,  to  fix  oar 
look  upon  stones.  Vast  thoughts,  secular  traditions,  splendid  recollections,  all 
these  are  stones ;  cold  materials,  hard  and  dead.  There  are  other  stones,  living 
stones,  which  form  together  a  spiritual  building,  a  holy  priesthood  (1  Peter  ii.  5). 
{Ibid.)  Warnings: — 1.  That  sin  has  laid  the  foundation  of  ruin  in  the  most 
flourishing  cities  and  kingdoms ;  Jerusalem,  the  glory  of  the  world,  is  here  by  sin 
threatened  to  be  made  a  desolation.  2.  That  the  threatenings  of  God  are  to  be 
feared,  and  shall  be  fulfilled,  whatever  appearing  improbabilities  there  may  be  to 
the  contrary.  It  is  neither  the  temple's  strength,  nor  beauty,  that  can  oppose  or 
withstand  God's  power.  (W.  Burkitt.)  The  destruction  of  the  temple  foretold : — 
With  this  scene  before  them  they  most  have  found  it  harder  BtUl  to  acquiesce  in 
the  thought  of  the  destruction  of  the  city  and  temple.  Bat  the  prediction  of  their 
overthrow  contained  an  important  lesson  for  the  disciples  and  for  us.    It  is  this — 

1.  ImBTITCTIOMS  and  BYSTKMg  OV  SEUOION  OPPOSED  TO  ChBIST,  BOWCTXB  STBONO 
AKD  SPLENDID  THET     HAT    APPEAB,     ABB    DOOMED    TO  DSSTBCCTIOII.       They   hftTO    nO 

guarantee  for  their  continuance  and  perpetuity  in  the  splendour  and  toasuTe 
strength  of  their  temples.    Error  is  weak  and  on  the  road  to  downfadl,  no  mattac 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  xbu 

how  strong  it  looks,  and  truth  is  strong  and  on  the  way  to  victory,  no  matter  how 
weak  and  insignificant  it  appears.  Other  religions  besides  Judaism  have  iUastrated 
these  truths.  It  was  thus  with  the  ancient  Greek  and  Boman  religions.  Whea 
Paul  went  to  Ephesus,  where  the  goddess  Diana  was  worshipped,  her  temple  so 
luagniiicent  and  stately  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of  the  world. 
Wbat  was  thus  witnessed  in  the  ancient  world,  wherever  and  whenever  its  religions 
came  in  contact  and  conflict  with  Christianity,  is  repeated  in  every  age.  It  is  being 
witnessed  to-day  in  Japan  and  in  India  where  long-established  systems  of  religion, 
with  imposing  rites  and  magnificent  temples,  are  gradually  being  undermined  by 
the  influence  of  the  gospel.  The  splendid  and  massive  structures  in  which  those 
religions  have  been  enshrined  have  no  power  to  preserve  them.  They  are  crumb- 
ling before  the  preaching  of  the  Cross.  They  belong  to  those  transitory  '*  human 
things,"  whose  fate  a  brilliant  English  historian  compares  to  that  of  icebergs  drift- 
ing southward  oat  of  the  frozen  seas.  **  So  long  as  the  equilibrium  is  sustained 
you  would  think  they  were  stable  as  the  rocks.  But  the  sea-water  is  warmer  thaa 
the  air.  Hundreds  of  fathoms  down  the  tepid  current  washes  the  base  of  the 
berg.  Silently  in  those  far  deeps  the  centre  of  gravity  is  changed,  and  then,  in  a 
moment,  with  one  vast  roll,  the  enormous  mass  heaves  over,  and  the  crystal  peaka 
which  had  been  glancing  so  proudly  in  the  sunlight  are  buried  in  the  ocean  for  ever." 

II.     ThK     disciples     of    ChBIST    ABE     TO     EXPKCT  AKD   BE   ON   TBEIB  OOABO   AGAINST 

IMFOSTOBS  AHD  FALSE  Chbists.  "  Many  shall  come  in  My  name,  saying,  I  am 
Christ,  and  shall  deceive  many."  The  liability  to  be  deceived  by  such  impostors 
exists  in  all  men.  For  in  the  souls  of  all  there  is  an  expectation  of,  or  longing  for, 
a  mighty  deliverer  like  the  Messiah  of  the  prophets.  If  Jesus  is  rejected,  or  not 
confidently  believed  in  as  the  true  Christ,  some  false  Christ  is  likely  to  win  their 
faith  and  lead  astray.    IIL  Jesus  teaches  His  disciples  that  befobe  His  belioiok 

FINALLY  TBICMPHS  THET  UUST  HEAB  AND  SITFFKB  AMD  WITNESS  MANY  DBEADFtTL  AND  DIS- 
TRES8IMO  THINQS  AS  INCIDENTS  IN  ITS  CONQUEST  OF  THE  WOBLD.      "  Ye   shall  hear,"  he 

said,  "  of  wars  and  rumours  of  wars.  .  .  .  Nation  shall  rise  against  nation  and 
kingdom  against  kingdom ;  there  shall  be  earthquakes  in  divers  places ;  there  shall 
be  famines.  .  .  .  They  shall  deliver  you  up  to  councils ;  and  in  synagogues  ye  shall 
be  beaten ;  and  before  governors  and  kings  shall  ye  stand  for  My  sake  for  a  testi- 
mony unto  them."  Bat  the  fearful  prophecy  was  mingled  with  words  that  spanned 
the  dark  cloud  with  a  rainbow  ol  hope.  "  Be  not  troubled,"  He  said ;  '♦  these  things 
must  needs  come  to  pass  .  .  .  these  things  are  the  beginning  of  travail."  "  They 
must  needs  come  to  pass,"  because  they  were  the  inevitable  consequences  of  sin — 
the  retribation  long  delayed  but  steadily  accumulating,  for  the  sins  of  the  nation  in 
the  past.    lY.  In  this  conflict  with  sin  and  false  bsuqion  thbt  should  bblt 

FOB  DEFENCE  AN»   VOB  VICTOBY   UPON   THE  DiVINE  HELP. 

Vers.  7-28.  Uaster,  liat  when  shall  these  things  be  ? — Judaitm  overthrown  :--l. 
The  Masteb's  wabnino  concsbnino  false  Chbists.  1.  Many  will  assume  the  daring 
rdle.  (1)  Some  saying,  "  I  am  Christ."  (2)  Others  saying,  "  The  time  draweth 
near."  2.  There  is  danger  of  being  deceived.  "Take  heed,"  &c  II.  The 
Masteb's  instbcction  in  bespeot  to  what  must  pbeceds  His  coiono.  1.  The  great 
events  which  must  precede.  (1)  Political  commotion.  (2)  Physical  changes.  (3) 
Social  distresses.  2.  The  persecution  that  must  precede.  (1)  Its  severity.  (2) 
Its  advantage.  (3)  Support  under  it.  (4)  Assurance  and  counsel  in  view  of  it. 
8.  Jerusalem's  destruction  must  precede  it.  (1)  This  destruction  was  then  near. 
(2)  This  destruction  terrible.  Lessons :  1.  Christ's  wonderful  knowledge  of  future 
events.  (1)  He  foreknew  the  destiny  of  all  nations.  (2j  The  opposition  with 
which  Christianity  would  be  met.  (3)  The  trials  His  disciples  would  have  to 
endure.  (4)  Christ  knows  no  surprise.  2.  Christ's  wonderful  ability  to  maintain 
His  gospel  and  to  sustain  his  followers.  (1)  No  power  can  overthrow  it.  (2)  His 
followers  will  triumph.  3.  Jerusalem's  destruction  symbolizes  the  dreadful  doom 
of  those  who  reject  Christ.  (D.  <7.  Hughes,  M.A.]  The  end  .-—When  I  was  a 
Sunday-school  scholar — after  I  had  finished  reading  my  library  bocks— I  would 
look  at  the  words  on  the  last  pages,  "The  end,"  and  underneath  these  words 
were  pictures ;  some  of  them  I  remember.  There  was  a  hand  holding  an  inverted 
torch,  and  it  seemed  to  say,  "  The  flame  is  dying  out,  this  is  the  end."  Another 
picture  was  a  candlestick  with  a  candle  burned  almost  oat,  and  the  last  flickering 
light  of  the  candle  said,  "  The  light  is  going  out,  soon  it  will  leave  you  in 
darkness."  In  another  book  a  man  was  seen  as  having  left  his  house,  the  door 
was  closed  and  he  was  shut  oat  in  the  outer  darkness.      He  was  waUdng  in  • 


OHAv.  rsi,]  ST.  LUKE.  477 

Barrow  path,  and  just  before  him  there  was  a  pitfall,  and  in  it  were  the  words, 
"  The  end  " ;  truly  man  steps  out  of  this  life  into  the  next.    There  was  a  picture 
I  saw  only  once,  but  I  can  never  forget  the  impression  that  it  left  on  my  mind. 
It  was  a  midnight  scene,  with  the  moon  and  stars  lighting  ap  the  darkness  that 
hung  over  a  graveyard,  and  on  a  tombstone  more  prominent  than  the  rest  were 
these  impressive  words,  "  The  end."    So  there  is  an  end  to  a  book,  an  end  to  onr 
days,  onr  months,  our  lives,  and  an  end  to  everything  on  earth.    There  is  an  end 
of  working,  of  learning,  and,  whether  neglected  or  improved,  there  will  be  an  end 
of  all  our  teaching.     Sabbath-school  scholars  and  teachers,  •'  Work  while  it  is  day, 
for  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work."     {American  Sunday  School  World.) 
Experience  of  an  earthquake : — The  traveller  Humboldt  gives  an  interesting  account 
of  the  first  earthquake  he  witnessed.    It  was  at  Cumana,  in  South  America.     The 
first  shock  came  after  a  strange  stillness.     It  caused  an  earthquake  in  his  mind, 
for  it  overthrew  in  a  moment  all  his  lifelong  notions  about  the  safety  of  the  earth. 
He  could  no  longer  trust  the  soil  which  up  to  that  day  had  felt  so  firm  under  his 
feet.    He  had  only  one  thought — universal,  boundless  destruction.    Even  the  cro- 
codiles ran  from  the  river  Orinoco  howling  into  the  woods ;  the  dogs  and  pigs  were 
powerless  with  fear.     The  whole  city  seemed  "  the  hearth  of  destruction."    The 
hoQses  could  not  shelter,  for  they  were  falling  in  ruins.     He  turned  to  the  trees, 
but  they  were  overthrown.     His  next  thought  was  to  run  to  the  mountains,  but 
they  were  reeling  like  drunken  men.    He  then  looked  towards  the  sea.     Lo !  it  had 
fled ;  and  the  ships,  which  a  few  minutes  before  were  in  deep  water,  were  rocking 
on  the  bare  sand.     He  tells  us  that,  being  then  at  his  wit's  end,  he  looked  up,  and 
observed  that  heaven  alone  was  perfectly  calm  and  unshaken.     Many  strange 
things  are  yet  to  come  upon  the  world — earthquakes,  overturnings,  npheavings. 
But  amid  them  all,  as  the  Book  tells  as,  the  Christian  shall  look  ap  to  the 
heavenly  One,  "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  and 
to  His  heavenly  home  which  cannot  be  moved.     {From  '*  Bible  Echoes")        Fre- 
quency of  earthquakea: — An  earthquake  is  only  a  volcano  hushed  up.     When 
Stromboli  and  Gotopaxi  and  Vesuvius  stop  breathing,  let  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  beware.     Seven  thousand  earthquakes  in  two  centuries  recorded  in  the 
catalogue  of  the  British  Association.  Trajan,  the  Emperor,  goes  to  ancient  Antioch, 
and  amid  the  splendour  of  his  reception  is  met  by  an  earthquake  that  nearly  de- 
stroys the  Emperor's  life.    Lisbon,  fair  and  beautiful  at  ten  o'clock  on  November 
1, 1755,  in  six  minutes  sixty  thousand  have  perished,  and  Voltaire  writes  of  them : 
••  For  that  region  it  was  the  last  judgment,  nothing  wanting  but  a  trumpet ! " 
Europe  and  America  feeling  the  throb.     Fifteen  hundred  chimneys  in  Boston 
partially  or  fully  destroyed.    But  the  disasters  of  other  centuries  have  had  their 
counterpart  in  our  own.    In  1812  Caracas  was  caught  in  the  grip  of  the  earthquake; 
in  1822,  in  Chili,  one  hundred  thousand  square  miles  of  land  by  volcanic  force 
upheaved  to  four  and  seven  feet  of  permanent  elevation ;  in  1854  Japan  felt  the 
geological  agony ;  Naples  shaken  in  1857 ;  Mexico  in  1858 ;  Mendoza,  the  capital 
of  the  Argentine  Bepublic,  in  1861 ;  Manilla  terrorised  in  1863 ;   the  Hawaiaa 
Islands  by  such  force  uplifted  and  let  down  in  1871;  Nevada  shaken  in  1871, 
Antioch  in  1872,  California  in  1872,  San  Salvador  in  1873,  while  in  the  summer  of 
1883  what  subterranean  excitements !    Ischia,  an  island  of  the  Mediterranean,  a 
beautiful  Italian  watering-place,  vineyard  clad,  sarrounded  by  all  natural  charm 
and  historical  reminiscence ;   yonder  Capri,  the  summer  resort  of  the  Roman 
«mperors ;   yonder,  Naples,  the  paradise  of  art — this  beautiful  island  suddenly 
toppled  into  the  trough  of  the  earth,  eight  thousand  merry-makers  perishing,  and 
some  of  them  so  far  dovm  beneath  the  reach  of  human  obsequies  that  it  may  be 
said  of  many  a  one  of  them  as  it  was  said  of  Moses,  "  The  Lord  buried  him."    {Dr. 
Talmage.)        It  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  testimony. — The  testimony  of  life: — The 
tale  of  it  shall  live  on.     The  light  of  their  lives  shall  shine  through  their  forms 
and  reveal  the  inner  glory  in  eternity.     This  is  the  eternal  recompense — reve- 
lation.   The  revelation  of  the  Christhke  spirit  in  a  world  where  to  be  Christlike 
is  to  be  glorious  and  blessed ;  where  the  scars  of  battle  are  marks  of  honour, 
and  the  martyr's  brow  is  anointed  like  Christ's  with  the  oil  of  joy  and  gladness 
through  eternity.     And  now  what  are  we  doing  which  shall  turn  to  os  for  a 
testimony  at  t^at  day?    A  testimony  of  what?     What  is  the  record  that  shall 
be  read  out  about  as?     What  hidden  things  shall  the  book  of  remembrance 
feveal?     How  much  is  said  and  done  daily  because  we  love  God  and  moit  do 
His  will  at  whatever  cost  ?    Many  a  clever  stroke  of  business  is  done,  no  doobt ; 
many  a  happy  speculation ;  or  perhaps  a  brilliant  trick,  or  next  door  to  it.    Quits 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rsfc 

right,  quite  fair,  no  donbt,  as  business  goes  in  these  days,  bat  not  the  kincl 
of  thing  which  will  turn  to  you  for  a  testimony  when  it  is  read  out  on  high. 
Bealize  it.  Set  it  before  your  mind's  eye.  Beings  of  angelic  truth,  purity,  charity, 
all  round  you,  circle  beyond  circle  ;  and  Christ,  who  lived  that  life  which  it  make» 
us  blush  to  read  about,  in  the  midst.  And  what  is  there  in  your  life  in  tune  with 
it ;  which  you  will  hear  read  out  with  joy  in  that  great  company ;  which  makes- 
you  the  blessed  freeman  of  that  world  in  which  "the  Lamb  who  was  slain  "  is 
King  ?  What  deeds  do  we  leave  for  recompense  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just  ? 
No  matter  what  the  world  thinks  about  it,  the  real  question  is,  What  do  we  think 
of  it  ourselves  f  In  the  quiet  hours  when  the  world  is  shut  out,  and  its  babbling  is 
silent,  what  do  we  think  of  it  ?  There  is  a  sterner,  surer  Judge  within  than  any 
that  the  world  can  set  to  weigh  us.  How  stand  we  before  that  tribunal  ?  It  wiii 
prophesy  to  us  how  we  shall  stand  before  the  bar  of  Christ  at  last.  (J.  B.  Brown, 
B.A.)  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom. — Christ's  promise  the  support  of 
His  despised  ministers: — I.  The  prediction  here  implied,  viz.,  that  the  apostles 
should  not  fail  of  adversaries  to  oppose  them.  This,  indeed,  was  to  be  no  small 
argument  of  their  apostolic  mission.  For  such  as  engage  themselves  in  the  servio* 
of  that  grating,  displeasing  thing  to  the  world,  called  "truth,"  must  expect  th» 
natural  issue  and  consequent  of  truth,  which  is  a  mortal  hatred  of  those  who 
epeak  it.  The  next  thing  offering  itself  to  our  consideration  is,  how  this  enmity 
(especially  in  the  apostles'  time,  which  the  words  chiefly  point  at)  was  to  exert 
itself.  1.  For  gainsaying;  the  word  in  the  Greek  is  dprtivelv,  importing  oppo- 
sition in  disputation,  with  an  endeavour  to  refel  or  confute  what  is  alleged  by 
another.  And  thus  we  find  the  apostles  frequently  and  fiercely  encountered  by 
adversaries  of  very  different  persuasions,  by  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  the  several 
sects  belonging  to  both.  They  were  perpetually  railed  at  as  deceivers  and  impos- 
tors, even  while  they  were  endeavouring  to  undeceive  the  world  from  those  wretched 
impostures  and  delusions  which  had  so  long  and  so  miserably  bewitched  it :  in  a 
word,  they  were  like  physicians  exchanging  cures  for  curses ;  and  reviled  and 
abused  by  their  froward  patients,  while  they  were  doing  all  they  could  for  their 
health  and  recovery.  But — 2.  The  other  branch  of  the  opposition  designed  against 
the  apostles  and  ministers  of  Christ  is  expressed  by  "  resisting  "  ;  a  word  importing 
a  much  more  substantial  kind  of  enmity  than  that  which  only  spends  at  the  mouth, 
and  shows  itself  in  froth  and  noise ;  an  enmity  which,  instead  of  scoffs  and  verbal 
assaults,  should  encounter  them  with  all  that  art  could  contrive  or  violence  execute ; 
with  whips  and  scourges,  cross  and  gibbet,  swords  and  axes;  and  though  bare 
words  draw  no  blood,  yet  these,  to  be  sure,  would.  And  such  were  the  weapons 
with  which  they  were  to  act  their  butcheries  upon  the  Christians ;  till  at  length, 
through  all  the  sorts  and  degrees  of  cruelty,  the  same  martyrdom  should  both  crown 
and  conclude  their  sufferings  together.    II.  Christ's  promise  to  His  apostles 

Of    SUCH   AN   assistance    FROM    ABOVE    AS    SHOULD   OVERCOME   AND    MASTER    ALL   THEIBT 

adversaries'  opposition.  1.  For  the  thing  promised,  "a  mouth  and  wisdom"; 
that  is,  an  ability  of  speaking,  joined  with  an  equal  prudence  in  action  and 
behaviour.  Which  things  we  will  consider  first  singly,  and  then  in  conjunction. 
And — (1)  For  the  ability  of  speaking  conferred  upon  the  apostles.  It  was  highly 
requisite  that  those  who  were  to  be  the  interpreters  and  spokesmen  of  heaven 
should  have  a  rhetoric  taught  them  from  thence  too ;  and  as  much  beyond  any  that 
could  be  taught  them  by  human  rules  and  art  as  the  subjects  they  were  to  speak  of 
surpassed  the  subject  of  all  human  eloquence.  Now  this  abUity  of  speech,  I  con- 
ceive, was  to  be  attended  with  these  three  properties  of  it.  (a)  Great  clearness  and 
perspicuity,  (b)  An  unaffected  plainness  and  simplicity,  (c)  A  suitable  and 
becoming  zeal  or  fervour.  (2)  The  other  and  next  is  that  of  wisdom,  the  noblest 
endowment  of  the  mind  of  man  of  all  others,  of  an  endless  extent,  and  of  a 
boundless  comprehension ;  and,  in  a  word,  the  liveliest  representation  that  a 
created  nature  can  afford  of  the  infinity  of  its  Maker.  And  this,  as  it  is  in  men,  is 
properly  the  great  principle,  directing  them  how  to  demean  themselves  in  all  the 
particular  passages,  accidents,  and  occasions  of  human  life,  which  being  in  the  full 
compass  of  them  indeed  innumerable,  to  recount  and  treat  of  them  all  here  would 
be  next  to  impossible ;  but  as  for  that  wisdom  which  most  peculiarly  belonged  to 
the  first  dispensers  and  ministers  of  the  gospel,  I  shall  only  mention  two  instances, 
in  which  it  most  remarkably  shows  itself,  namely — (a)  That  they  opposed  neither 
things  nor  persons,  any  further  than  they  stood  in  their  way  in  the  ministry  of  it. 
On  the  contrary,  « I  am  become  all  things  to  all  men,"  sajrs  St.  Paul,  and  that 
neither  to  gain  favoor  nor  interest,  but  only  conrertE  to  Christianity  (1  Cor.  ix.  2S). 


CHAP.  XXI.3  ST.  LUKE.  47S 

(6)  The  other  instance  of  the  wisdom  given  by  our  Saviour  to  His  apostles  was 
their  resolute  opposing  all  doctrines  and  interests  whatsoever,  so  far  as  they  stood 
in  opposition  to  the  gospel.  2.  The  person  promising,  who  was  Christ  Himself : 
"I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom."  I  lay  particular  stress  and  remark  upon 
this,  because  Christ  seems  by  this  very  thing  to  give  His  disciples  an  assurance  of 
His  resurrection.  For  surely  they  could  not  expect  to  receive  gifts  from  above, 
while  the  giver  of  them  was  underground.  IH.  By  what  means  Christ  conferred 
THOSE  oiTTS  UPON  Hi3  DISCIPLES  AND  APOSTLES ;  and  that  we  find  was  by  the  effusion 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  and  giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  ministerial 
gifts  more  especially.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  A  scoffer  silenced  : — One  evening,  a  few 
yeare  ago,  while  a  few  believers  in  Christ  were  holding  an  open-air  meeting  in  the 
Caledonian  Boad,  London,  a  man  commenced  to  mock  the  speaker  and  taunt  him 
with  being  paid  half-a-crown  to  come  and  preach  to  the  people,  and  even  went  so 
far  as  to  charge  the  preacher  with  telling  a  parcel  of  lies.  No  notice  was  taken  of 
the  mocker  for  some  Uttle  time,  but  as  he  persisted  in  making  a  disturbance,  and 
declaring  that  the  person  addressing  the  meeting  did  it  for  money,  and  that  it  was 
a  good  thing  for  him  to  be  able  to  get  half-a-crown  so  easily,  the  gentleman  stopped 
short  in  his  discourse,  and  turning  to  the  scoffer,  said,  "  My  dear  friend,  it  is  you 
that  are  uttering  untruths ;  I  do  not  preach  for  half-a-crown,  but  for  a  crown,  •  a 
crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  me ; '  and 
He  will  give  you  one  too  if  you  will  only  go  to  Him  and  ask  for  it."  The  disturber 
said  but  little  after  this,  and  stayed  till  the  meeting  closed.  A  martyr's  beautiful 
reply  : — That  was  a  beautiful  reply  of  Margaret  Maitland,  Scotland's  maiden 
martyr,  to  her  persecutors.  They  had  bound  an  aged  Christian  to  a  stake  far  out 
between  low  and  high  tide,  and  Margaret  herself  to  another  stake  nearer  the  shore. 
They  hoped  that,  seeing  the  struggles  and  painful  death  of  her  companion,  she  would 
be  terrified  and  would  recant.  She  gazed  on  the  awful  scene  with  deep  sympathy,  but 
without  any  manifestation  of  fear.  When  they  asked  her,  "  Margaret,  what  do  you 
see  yonder  ?  "  she  replied,  ••  I  see  Christ  suffering  in  the  person  of  one  of  His  saints." 
She  knew  that  when  her  turn  came  to  be  suffocated  by  the  rising  tide  Christ  would 
be  with  her  also ;  that  He  would  share  in  her  sufferings ;  that  He  would  sustain  her 
in  the  terrible  ordeal.  This  is  the  kind  of  faith  we  need  for  ourselves  and  for  the 
Church.  In  your  patience  possess  ye  yotir  souls. — Patience : — It  should  rather 
read,  By  your  endurance  ye  shall  gain  possession  of  your  lives.  It  is  also  "  ye  shall 
bring  your  spiritual  life  safely  through  the  coming  troubles."  It  was  a  sore  trial  for 
the  early  Christians  to  be  severed  from  their  holy  places,  from  their  city  home.  In 
that  sundering  of  cherished  ties  there  lay,  we  may  well  believe,  an  agony  that  changed 
the  very  nature  of  those  who  endured  it.  But  it  taught  them  to  look  far  afield,  to 
bow  down  at  no  single  shrine,  and  sent  them  forth  to  evangelize  the  world.  Out  of 
the  ruin  of  their  most  cherished  relics  there  grew  up  a  more  noble  conception  of  the 
Church.  Age  after  age  each  time  of  change  has  seemed  to  bring  with  it  the  end ;  afr 
each  crisis  have  been  heard  the  same  appeals  to  heaven,  the  same  despair  of  earth  v- 
and  yet  to  those  who  had  patience  the  evil  time  has  passed  away,  and  men  have 
found  themselves  living  in  a  fresh  air  of  hope  with  expanded  vision  and  larger 
powers  for  good.  _  Our  tranquility  is  Uttle  affected  by  news  of  distant  suffering.  It 
is  the  old  Horatian  difference  between  the  eyes  and  the  ears.  We  fancy  that  our 
own  troubles  are  far  the  worst  the  world  has  ever  been  called  on  to  undergo. 
Warnings  come  from  older  men  to  whom  the  dark  cloud  seems  to  cover  the  heavens. 
The  young  see  the  sunshine  coming  up  with  soft  rich  colours  of  promise  from 
behind  the  storm.  Are  there  any  peculiar  causes  for  alarm  ?  I.  The  alarm  is  as 
old  as  Christendom.  II.  The  existence  of  some  life  is  a  cheering  thing.  HI,  We 
need  more  manliness  in  our  religion ;  more  that  will  attract  hard-knit  men.  IV.  If 
the  Christian  faith  is  to  declare  its  Divine  origin  in  the  face  of  vehement  attack  or 
learned  contempt,  it  cannot  be  by  shutting  itself  up  in  safe  sanctuary  and  refusing 
to  enter  the  field  with  its  antagonists.  It  is  not  without  anguish  that  we  rise  "  out 
of  our  dead  selves  to  better  things."  Yet  there  is  no  other  way  for  the  nobles  ol 
mankind.  {Dean  Kitchin.)  On  patience  : — The  possession  of  our  souls  is  a  very 
emphatical  expression.  It  describes  that  state  in  which  a  man  has  both  the  full 
command,  and  the  undisturbed  enjoyment,  of  himself ;  in  opposition  to  his  nnder< 
({oing  some  inward  agitation  which  discomposes  his  powers.  Upon  the  least 
reflection  it  must  appear,  how  essential  such  a  state  of  mind  is  to  happiness.  He 
only  who  thus  possesses  his  soul  is  capable  of  possessing  any  other  thing  with 
advantage ;  and,  in  order  to  attain  and  preserve  this  self-possession,  the  most  im- 
portant requisite  is,  the  habitual  exercise  of  patience.     I  ^ow  that  patience  is  apt 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  to. 

to  be  ranked,  by  many,  among  the  more  bumble  and  obscure  virtues ;  belonging 
chiefly  to  those  who  groan  on  a  sick  bed,  or  who  languish  in  a  prison.  If  their 
fiituation  be,  happily,  of  a  different  kind,  they  imagine  that  there  is  no  occasion  for 
the  discipline  of  patience  being  preached  to  them.  But  I  hope  to  make  it  appear, 
that,  in  every  circumstance  of  life,  no  virtue  is  more  important,  both  to  duty  and  to 
happiness ;  or  more  requisite  for  forming  a  manly  and  worthy  character.  Ife 
principally,  indeed,  regards  the  disagreeable  circumstances  which  are  apt  to  occur. 
But  in  our  present  state,  the  occurrence  of  these  is  so  frequent,  that,  in  every  con- 
dition of  life,  patience  is  incessantly  called  forth.  I.  Patience  under  provocations. 
We  are  provoked,  sometimes  by  the  folly  and  levity  of  those  with  whom  we  are  con- 
nected ;  sometimes  by  their  indifference,  or  neglect ;  by  the  incivility  of  a  friend, 
the  haughtiness  of  a  superior,  or  the  insolent  behaviour  of  one  in  lower  station. 
Hardly  a  day  passes,  without  somewhat  or  other  occurring,  which  serves  to  ruffle 
the  man  of  impatient  spirit.  Of  course,  such  a  man  lives  in  a  continual  storm. 
He  knows  not  what  it  is  to  enjoy  a  train  of  good  humour.  Servants,  neighbours, 
friends,  spouse,  and  children,  all,  through  the  unrestrained  violence  of  his  temper, 
become  sources  of  disturbance  and  vexation  to  him.  In  vain  is  affluence ;  in  vain 
are  health  and  prosperity.  The  least  trifle  is  sufficient  to  discompose  his  mind,  and 
poison  his  pleasures.  His  very  amusements  are  mixed  with  turbulence  and  passion. 
I  would  beseech  this  man  to  consider  of  what  small  moment  the  provocations 
which  he  receives,  or  at  least  imagines  himself  to  receive,  are  really  in  themselves ; 
but  of  what  great  moment  he  makes  them  by  suffering  them  to  deprive  him  of  the 
possession  of  himstlf.  II.  Patience  under  disappointments.  Are  we  not,  each  in 
his  turn,  doomed  to  experience  the  uncertainty  of  worldly  pursuits  7  Why,  then, 
aggravate  our  misfortunes  by  the  unreasonable  violence  of  an  impatient  spirit  f 
Perhaps  the  accomplishment  of  oar  designs  might  have  been  pregnant  with  misery. 
Perhaps  from  our  present  disappointment  future  prosperity  may  rise.  lU.  Patiencii 
undkb  restraints.  No  man  is,  or  can  be,  always  his  own  master.  We  are  obliged, 
in  a  thousand  cases,  to  submit  and  obey.  The  discipline  of  patience  preserves  our 
minds  easy,  by  conforming  them  to  our  state.  By  the  impetuosity  of  an  impatient 
and  onsubmitting  temper,  we  fight  against  an  unconquerable  power;  and  aggravate 
the  evils  we  must  endure.  lY.  Patience  under  injuries  and  wronos.  To  these, 
amidst  the  present  confusion  of  the  world,  all  are  exposed.  No  station  is  so  high, 
no  power  so  great,  no  character  so  unblemished,  as  to  exempt  men  from  being 
attacked  by  rashness,  malice,  or  envy.  To  behave  under  such  attacks  with  due 
patience  and  moderation,  is,  it  must  be  confessed,  one  of  the  most  trying  exercises 
of  virtue.  But,  in  order  to  prevent  mistakes  on  this  subject,  it  is  necessary  to 
observe,  that  a  tame  submission  to  wrongs  is  not  required  by  religion.  We  are  by 
no  means  to  imagine  that  religion  tends  to  extinguish  the  sense  of  honour,  or  to 
suppress  the  exertion  of  a  manly  spirit.  It  is  under  a  false  apprehension  of  this 
kind  that  Christian  patience  is  sometimes  stigmatized  in  discourse  as  no  otJier 
than  a  different  name  for  cowardice.  On  the  contrary,  every  man  of  virtue  ought 
:to  feel  what  is  due  to  his  character,  and  to  support  properly  his  own  rights.  Be- 
aentment  of  wrong  is  a  useful  principle  in  human  nature ;  and  for  the  wisest  pur- 
poses was  implanted  in  our  frame.  It  is  the  necessary  guard  of  private  rights;  and 
the  great  restraint  on  the  insolence  of  the  violent,  who,  if  no  resistance  were  made, 
'would  trample  on  the  gentle  and  peaceable.  Besentment,  however,  if  not  kept 
-within  due  bounds,  is  in  hazard  of  rising  into  fierce  and  cruel  revenge.  It  is  the 
office  of  patience  to  temper  resentment  by  reason.  V.  Patience  under  adversity 
AND  AF7LI0TION.  This  is  the  most  common  sense  in  which  this  virtue  is  understood; 
as  it  respects  disease,  poverty,  old  age,  loss  of  friends,  and  the  other  calamities  which 
are  incident  to  human  life.  In  general,  there  are  two  chief  exercises  of  patience  under 
adversity ;  one  respecting  God,  and  another  respecting  men.  Patience  with  respeot 
to  God,  must,  in  the  days  of  trouble,  suppress  the  risings  of  a  murmuring  and 
rebellious  spirit.  Patience  in  adversity,  with  respect  to  men,  must  appear  by  the 
composure  and  tranquility  of  our  behaviour.  The  loud  complaint,  the  querulous 
temper,  and  fretful  spirit,  disgrace  every  character.  They  show  a  mind  that  is  un- 
manned by  misfortunes.  We  weaken  thereby  the  sympathy  of  others ;  and  estrange 
them  from  the  offices  of  kindness  and  comfort.  The  exertions  of  pity  will  be  feeble, 
'when  it  is  mingled  with  contempt.  {H.  Blair,  D.D.)  On  patience  : — Now  the 
feelings  nnavoidably  disagreeable  to  us,  and  tempting  as  to  impatience,  are  chiefly 
pain,  sorrow,  fear,  and  anger.  1.  Pain :  under  which  may  be  comprehended  also 
siekness,  restlessness,  and  languid  lowness.  2.  The  next  source  of  impatience  before 
flMntioned  is  sorrow :  which  sometimes  is  mere  sympathy  with  the  calamities  of 


OHA».  xn.]  ST.  LUKE.  481 

others.    3.  The  next  canse  of  impatience,  mentioned  before  was  fear.    4.  The  last 
trial  of  our  patience,  of  which  I  proposed  to  speak,  is  anger.   (T.  Seeker.)       Patient 
»elf-possession  in  times  of  trial: — Be  collected,  that  you  may  be  strong;  stand  still,  and 
stand  firmly,  if  you  can  do  nothing  else ;  do  not  slip  back,  or  step  aside,  or  attempt 
anything  wrong  or  questionable.    Patience  is  not  merely  a  passive  submission  to  evil, 
a  dull,  stupid,  unfeeling  indifference,  like  the  insensibility  of  wood  or  stone;  it  is  the 
result  of  thought ;  it  implies  effort ;  it  is  a  sort  of  active  bearing  up  of  oneself  under 
the  pressure  of  calamity,  which  at  once  indicates  self-possession  and  secures  it ;  it 
reacts  upon  that  from  which  it  proceeds,  and  causes  it  to  become  stronger  and 
stronger.     I  wish  now  to  request  your  attention  to  some  of  the  advantages  which 
flow  from  obedience  to  the  precept,  in  the  case  of  Christians,  when  called  to  suffer 
great  affliction,  or  when  exposed  to  the  fear  of  impending  calamity.     1.  In  the  first 
place,  there  is  the  consciousness  of  not  increasing  the  affliction  by  sin.     If  a 
Christian  is  impatient,  and  gives  way  to  fretfulness  and  temper,  or  other  forms  of 
restiveness  under  trouble,  he  not  only  loses  the  advantage  of  calmness  and  self- 
possession,  but  his  conscience  receives  a  fresh  injury ;    his  proper  religious  feelings 
are  hurt ;  his  inward  personal  peace  is  disturbed ;  and  thus  the  trouble  presses 
upon  him  with  double  weight.    It  is  a  great  blessing  not  to  be  exposed  to  this. 
Z*  In  the  next  place,  self-possession  in  a  time  of  trouble  will  enable  an  individual  to 
take  a  just  view  of  his  actual  circumstances,  and  of  the  nature  and  ends  of  the 
Divine  infliction.     We  are  under  the  rule  and  guidance  of  One  who  has  always  aa 
object  in  what  He  does — an  object  worthy  of  Himself,  and  connected  with  the  peace 
and  holiness  of  His  Church.    3.  In  the  third  place,  the  man  who  has  full  possession 
of  himself  in  a  time  of  affliction  will  be  able  to  engage  in  certain  exercises  of  mind 
which  trouble  calls  to,  but  which  are  impossible,  or  next  to  it,  when  the  soul  is  dis- 
turbed by  agitation  and  excitement.      *'  In  the  day  of  adversity  consider."      "  Call 
upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble."    "Glorify  Me  in  the  flre."    "Enter  into  thy 
chamber."    "Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  Qod."    "My  son,  despise  not  thoa 
the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  neither  faint  when  thoa  art  rebuked  of  Him." 
But  none  of  these  things  can  be  done,  or  done  well,  if  the  man  is  not  quiet,  patient,. 
and  self-possessed  ;  if  be  is  the  victim  of  hurry,  alarm,  consternation,  and  surprise. 
4.  Observe,  fourthly,  that  it  is  only  by  such  self-possession  as  the  text  inculcates^ 
that  an  individual  will  be  able  to  select  and  apply  the  proper  means  of  escape  from 
calamity,  or  which  may  help  him  to  meet  it,  or  to  counteract  its  effects.    .5.  In  the 
last  place,  obedience  to  the  text,  explained  as  an  exhortation,  will  best  prepare  a 
man  for  the  end  and  result  of  trouble,  whatever  that  result  may  be.     If  the  cloud 
and  the  calamity  pass  away,  and  the  man  be  fuUy  delivered  from  it,  he  will  be  able 
to  look  back  with  serenity  and  gratitude,  free  from  self-reproach  or  shame.     If 
it  terminate  fatally,  for  himself  or  others,  he  wUl  be  able  to  acquiesce,  with  in- 
telligent faith,  in  the  Divine  will.    {W.Binnie,  D.D.)        The  soul  won  by  patience: — 
The  Authorised  Version  reads,  "In  your  patience  possess  ye  your  souls."    It  bida 
the  imperilled  Christian,  fortified  by  promise,  to  endure  to  the  end,  keeping  his  soul 
tranquil  and  trustful.   A  beautiful  precept,  yet  inferior,  both  in  reading  and  render- 
ing, but  most  certainly  in  the  latter,  to  one  other,  which  is  that  of  the  Bevised 
Version,  "In  your  patience  ye  shall  win  your  souls."    For  the  imperative  we 
substitute  the  future  ;  in  other  words,  for  precept  we  read  promise.    This  is  one 
change — for  "  possess  "  we  read  "  win  " ;  for  a  soul  given  in  creation,  we  are  bidden 
to  look  for  a  soul  to  be  given  in  glory.     The  case  is  one  of  those  in  which  the  word 
before  us  always  means  to  acquire,  and  never  means  to  possess.    Now  we  turn  from 
a  comparison  of  renderings  to  tiie  appUcation  of  the  saying  itself.    "In  your 
patience  ye  shall  win  your  souls,"  •'some  of  you  shall  be  put  to  death,"  "ye  shall 
be  hated  of  all  men,"  "  not  a  hair  of  your  head  shall  perish,"  "  in  your  patience  ye 
shall  win  your  souls."    Death  itself  shall  not  prevent  this  ;  for  the  soul  here  spoken 
of  is  the  life's  life,  the  thing  which  unbelief  and  unfaithfulness  can  alone  forfeit  for 
any  man,  the  thing  which  is  saved  by  faith,  the  thing  which  is  acquired,  gained, 
won  in  the  exercise  of  patience.     There  is  a  lower  truth  in  the  saying  in  reference 
to  this  present  life.      Multitudes  of  human  lives  have  been  won  by  patience ;   the 
histories  of  battles  and  sieges  are  in  large  part  histories  of  the  triumph  of  patience; 
cities  would  have  been  lost,  and  fields  would  have  been  lost,  but  for  the  grace  of 
patience  in  the  commanders  and  the  leaders.    But  certainly  the  converse  is  true ; 
in  patience  has  been  defeat,  has  been  disaster,  has  been  bloodshed,  a  thousand  and 
ten  thousand  times ;  the  analogy  of  earth  and  time  gives  support  to  the  promise 
when  we  read  it  as  it  was  spoken  of  the  soul  and  of  things  heavenly.    What  is 
patience  as  Christ  speaks  it  ?    The  Greek  word  for  patience  is  made  up  of  two  part8» 
VOL.  m.  81 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [(ii/A».  xo. 

one  meaning  oontinnance,  and  the  other  meaning  submission ;  so  that  the  com- 
bined term  may  be  defined  as  submissive  waiting,  that  frame  of  mind  which  is  will- 
ing  to  wait  as  knowing  whom  it  serves,  willing  to  endure  as  seeing  the  Invisible ; 
recognizing  the  creaturely  attitude  of  subjection  to  the  Creator ;  recognizing  also 
the  filial  relationship  which  implies  a  controlling  hand  and  a  loving  mind  in  heaven. 
Submissive  waiting,  this  is  patience,  and  we  see,  then,  why  great  things  should  be 
spoken  of  it,  why  it  should  even  be  made  the  sum  of  Christian  virtues,  why  to  it 
rather  than  to  any  other  grace,  the  promise  should  be  affixed,  "  In  your  patience" — 
in  the  exercise,  resolved  and  unwearied,  of  the  grace  of  submissive  expectancy — "  ye 
shall  at  last  win  your  souls."     "  Then  the  soul  is  not  yet  won  ?  "    Yes  and  no  ;  the 
soul,  the  true  life  of  each  one,  is  already  redeemed,  bought,  bought  back  with 
precious  blood ;   and  the  soul,  the  life's  life  of  each  one,  is  already  committed  to  us 
by  Christ  Himself  for  omnipotent  keeping.    "  I  know,"  St.  Paul  writes,  "  whom  I 
have  believed,  and  I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  guard  my  deposit " — the  soul 
which  I  have  committed  to  Him — "against  that  day."    This  is  true.    Our  Lord 
speaks  not  here  to  contradict  His  own  word,  or  to  vitiate  His  own  work,  which  says 
quite  indiscriminately  in  Holy  Scripture,  "Ye  were  saved,"  that  is,  on  Calvary; 
"  Ye  have  been  saved,"  this  is,  in  redemption  ;  "  Ye  are  being  saved,"  that  is,  in  the 
work  of  grace;  "Ye  shall  be  saved,"  that  is,  in  the  day  of  glory.     But,  in  fullest 
consistency  with  all  these,  there  is  room  for  a  promise,  "  Ye  shall  win  your  souls." 
Let  no  man  presume.     There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  life's  life  hangs  suspended  on 
that  mark,  as  St.  Paul  calls  it,  which  is  the  goal  of  the  race.    "  I,"  he  says,  "  count 
not  myself  to  have  apprehended."      There  is  a  grace  of  submissive  expectancy ; 
still,  and  because  there  is  this,  there  is  a  something  yet  in  front  of  me.    At  present 
I  do  not  quite  possess  even  my  own  soul.    Oh  1  it  often  eludes  me  when  I  would 
say,  **  All  my  own  I  carry  with  me."  Oh  I  there  are  many  misgivings  and  doubtinga 
in  us,  even  in  the  things  most  surely  believed.    I  cannot  always  command  the  life's 
life,  which  is  the  soul,  when  I  would  carry  it  with  me  to  the  mercy-seat.      I  find 
earth  and  the  world,  flesh,  and  sense  oftentimes  too  strong  and  too  predominately 
present  with  me  just  when  I  would  be  at  my  very  best  for  prayer  and  praise.    I 
caimot  pretend  to  say  that  I  have  quite  attained  even  to  the  possession  of  my  own 
innermost  being.    A  great  promise.    Now  let  us  lose  ourselves  for  a  moment  in  the 
contemplation  of  this  promise,  "  Ye  shall  win  your  souls  " ;  and  then  in  one  last 
word  see  the  connection  of  it  with  the  realm  and  region  of  patience.      "  In  your 
patience  ye  shall  win  your  souls  " :    at  last  my  soul  shall  be  my  own.    That  is  the 
promise.    It  is  a  wonderful  interpretation  of  a  wonderful  saying  appended  to  the 
parable  of  the  unrighteous  steward :  "  If  ye  have  not  been  faithful  in  the  use  of  " 
that  which  was  so  precarious  and  so  fugitive  that  even  while  you  had  it  it  might 
rather  be  called  "  another's  " — the  possession  in  greater  or  lesser  measure  of  the 
substance  of  this  world — '•  who,"  our  Lord  asks,  "  who  should  give  you  that  which 
is  your  own  " — that  which  is  your  own,  still  to  be  won — the  soul,  the  life's  life  of 
this  text?    Patience  may  lack,  often  does  lack,  one  at  least  of  its  ingredients; 
there  might  be  a  waiting  which  was  no  submission,  which,  on  the  contrary,  was  in- 
dolence, was  procrastination,  was  dallying,  the  man  sitting  still,  and  letting  alone, 
and  waiting  upon  chances  which  are  no  grace   at  all,    but  the    opposite;    or 
there    might   be    a    submission  which   was    no   enterprise,  and  waiting    upon 
Providence  with  more  or  less  of  the  resignation  which  is  the  ape  and  shadow 
of  patience,  which  has  in  it  no  doing  nor  daring  for  Christ,  no  present  running 
and   fighting,  and,    therefore,   no   future    crown.      But   who    shall    speak    the 
praises    of    the    real   gospel,  Christian,    spiritual    patience  f     (Dean  Vaughan.) 
Making  for  ourselves  souls : — The  revised  translation  restores  this  word  of  Jesus  to 
its  original  force.     The  Lord  did  not  bid  His  disciples  simply  to  possess  their  souls 
in  patience.      He  told  them  that  through  endurance  they  were  to  win  their  souls. 
Souls,  then,  are  for  us  to  win.     Literally  the  word  used  by  Jesus  means,  procure 
for  yourselves  souls.      Life  is  to  be  to  us,  in  some  sense,  an  acquisition  of  soul. 
This  active  verb  used  by  Jesus  in  relation  to  the  soul  is  suggestive.      How  may  the 
disciples  acquire  their  own  souls  ?    Are  we  to  work  with  the  Creator  in  making  our 
own  souls  ?    We  are  to  go  into  life,  and,  as  men  in  business  gain  possessions,  we  are 
to  procure  our  souls  from  life.     Souls,  then,  may  not  be  such  ready-made  products 
of  nature  as  we  are  accustomed  to  imagine  ;  the  souls  of  men  are  possibly  but  the 
reeds  of  immortality.   They  may  be  the  germs  scattered  by  a  spiritual  power  in  this 
soil  of  the  fiesh,  and  destined  to  spring  up,  and  to  grow,  if  we  do  not  succeed  in 
killing  them,  into  the  powers  of  an  endless  life.    In  what  ways  are  we  to  set  about 
procuring  for  ourselves  sodLn  ?  The  first  thing  for  as  to  do  is  the  thing  which  thoM 


«HAP.  xn.]  ST.  LUKE.  483 

men  had  alreadj  done  to  whom  Jesus  gave  this  promise  that  they  should  win  their 
aouls.  What  they  had  done — the  first  decisive  step  which  they  had  taken  in  the 
work  of  finding  their  lives — was  not,  indeed,  to  acquaint  themselves  with  all  know- 
ledge, or  to  peer  into  all  mysteries.  They  had  not  even  lingered  at  the  doors  of  the 
school  of  the  Eabbies.  But  when  One  who  spake  as  never  man  spake,  and  who 
looked  into  men's  souls  with  the  hght  of  a  Divine  Spirit  in  His  eye,  came  walking 
upon  the  b6ach  where  they  were  mending  their  nets,  and  bade  them  leave  all  and 
follow  Him,  they  heard  their  own  being  commanded  as  by  the  King  of  truth,  and 
At  once  they  left  all  and  followed  Him.  They  counted  not  the  cost ;  they  obeyed, 
when  they  found  themselves  commanded  by  God  in  Christ.  This  promise,  "  Ye 
shall  win  your  souls,"  was  addressed  to  men  who  had  surrendered  themselves 
wholly  to  that  which  they  had  seen,  and  knew  of  God.  It  was  a  pledge  of  soul  made 
to  men  who  had  the  wills  of  disciples.  This  prime  condition  of  winning  our  souls 
remains  unchanged,  and  no  simpler  or  more  searching  words  for  it  can  be  framed 
than  those  first  requirements  of  Jesus  Christ  of  every  man — "Bepent,"  "  believe." 
If  a  man  wishes  in  all  sincerity  to  gain  his  own  soul,  he  must  begin  by  turning  with 
a  will  from  the  sin  of  the  world  which  he  knows  has  laid  foul,  destructive  hand 
upon  his  life ;  he  must  rise,  and  meet  duty,  trusting  himself  with  all  his  heart  to 
«very  whisper  of  truth  and  echo  of  God  within  him.  The  first  step  in  the  way  of 
acquiring  our  souls,  let  me  repeat,  is  the  decision  of  discipleship.  I  answer  then, 
eeoondly,  we  are  to  acquire  soul  by  living  now  with  all  the  soal  we  do  have.  If 
we  are  to  win  souls  from  life,  we  must  put  our  whole  souls  into  life ;  but  the  trouble 
with  us  is  that  we  often  do  not.  We  live  half-hearted,  and  with  a  certain  reserve 
often  of  ourselves  from  our  every-day  life  in  the  world.  But  you  remember  how 
Jesus  insisted  that  His  disciples  should  serve  God  and  love  man  with  all  their 
Bouls,  and  with  all  their  strength.  The  way  to  gain  more  soul  and  better  is  to  live 
freely  and  heartily  with  all  the  soul  we  do  have.  Christ  alone  may  show  us  what 
a  whole-hearted,  whole-souled  life  should  be.  He  completes  lives.  He  gives  soul 
and  heart  abundantly  in  life.  Has  He  not  said  we  are  to  love  God  with  all  our 
minds,  and  all  our  hearts,  and  all  our  strength?  "  Yes,"  some  one  thinks,  "  but 
how  can  I  in  my  little  tread-mill  of  a  life,  in  my  circumscribed  sphere,  put  my  whole 
soul  into  it,  live  with  all  my  might  ?  I  wish  I  had  an  opportunity  of  life  into  which 
I  could  throw  all  my  soul — but  what  am  I  and  my  little  place  ?  I  know  I  am  not 
living  with  all  my  heart."  But  you  may  1  You  may,  if  you  are  willing  to  learn 
Jesus'  secret,  and  to  find  your  life  while  losing  it.  Perhaps  in  the  very  effort  it  may 
cost  us  to  put  our  hearts  into  little  things — to  do  common  things  as  disciples  heartily 
«s  unto  the  Lord — may  be  the  exercise  of  soul  which  God  has  appointed  for  us  that 
thereby  we  may  gain  capacity  of  spirit  for  the  whole  service  of  heaven.  Bight  here 
it  may  help  us  to  come  back  to  our  text.  In  your  patience  ye  shall  win  your  souls. 
Not  many  of  those  disciples  to  whom  Jesus  was  then  speaking  became  distinguished 
Christians.  They  had  no  great  part  to  play  in  this  world.  All  but  three  or  four 
of  the  twelve  are  only  names  to  us.  But  every  man  of  them  had  a  splendid  chance 
to  win  soul  by  endurance.  God  giyes  to  common  people  this  opportunity  of  winning 
on  earth  souls  large  enough  and  good  enough  to  appreciate  by  aud  by  what  heaven 
is.  Patience  may  be  the  making  of  a  soul.  That  regiment  of  men  is  held  all  the 
morning  waiting  under  fire.  They  broke  camp  with  enthusiasm  enough  to  sweep 
Ihem  up  to  any  line  of  flame.  But  they  are  held  still  through  long  hours.  They 
might  show  splendid  courage  in  action ;  but  the  orders  are  to  stand.  Only  to  stand 
still  under  fire  I  But  that  day  of  endurance  is  enough  to  make  a  veteran  of  the 
recruit  of  yesterday.  The  discipline  of  waiting  under  life's  fire  makes  veteran 
Bouls.  Through  the  habit  of  endurance  God  trains  often  his  best  souls.  If  you 
keep  up  heart  in  your  life  of  trial,  by  that  patience  what  a  soul  for  God's  kingdom 
may  be  won  I      {Newman  Smyth,  D.D.)  How  to  use  life: — How  different  life 

must  look — how  different  what  we  call  sometimes  its  strange  providences  must  look 
— to  the  eye  of  one  above  who  can  see  souls,  and  how  they  are  forming  for  the  end- 
less life !  And  our  own  souls — is  this  world  absorbing  and  exhausting  them,^r  by 
the  grace  of  God  are  we  transmuting  all  our  work  and  experience  of  life  into  more 
soul  and  sweeter  ?  My  friends,  am  I  not  bringing  to  you  from  this  word  of  the 
Lord  a  very  simple  yet  all-sufficient  test  for  everything  you  are  doing  or  planning 
in  your  lives  ?  Can  I  acquire  soul  by  it  f  Be  sure,  any  course  of  life  which  causes 
any  shrinkage  of  soul  is  not  right.  The  open  Christian  life  is  constant  enlargement 
of  heart.  Long  ago  the  Hebrew  poet  looked  up,  and  saw  that  the  soul  that  runs  in 
the  way  of  the  Lord's  commandments  is  enlarged.  "  Be  ye  also  enlarged,"  said  an 
apostle,  m  Jesus'  name.      His  gospel  does  not  come  to  you  and  me  with  a  olosa 


484  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oB4r.  xxb 

eystem  of  restrictions  confronting  us  on  every  hand  with  mmatnral  restraints. 
Christ  does  for  us  what  Satan  offered  to  do  for  Christ,  but  never  had  the  power  to 
do — He  gives  us  all  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  because  He  gives  us  receptive  seals 
and  pure  hearts  for  all  God's  works  and  worlds.  All  things  are  yours,  for  ye  ar» 
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's.  You  shall  be  disciples  of  the  Divine  Man.  Ton  are 
here  for  a  little  while  to  procure  for  yourselves  souls,  and  to  help  others  win  their 
souls.  God's  Spirit  is  here  with  you  to  give  you  hearts  in  sympathy  with  all  God- 
like things.  Grieve  not  that  Holy  Spirit.  Beware  of  anything  which  helps  kill 
eouL  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he 
poesesseth.  Acquire  soull  {Ibid.)  Self-winning: — This  baby  has  to  learn  ta 
see.  He  has  eyes,  sound,  olear,  lovely  orbs  into  which  a  mother's  eye  looks  as  into 
deep  wells  of  love,  but  when  he  emerges  into  consciousness  and  begins  to  take  note 
of  things  around  him,  hold  up  a  ball  before  him,  and  see  how  aimless  is  his  grasp 
at  it.  His  eye  has  not  yet  learned  to  calculate  distances.  You  know  how  the  blind, 
when  restored  to  sight,  have  to  learn  to  see :  sight  and  seeing  are  not  the  same 
things.  Sight  is  a  gift  of  nature.  Seeing  has  to  be  won.  That  blind  man  whom 
Jesus  healed  did  not  at  once  receive  power  to  see.  At  the  first  touch  he  said,  "  I 
see  men,  for  I  behold  them  as  trees,  walldng,"  in  vague  outline,  confused,  like  the 
blending  of  trees  in  a  grove.  "When  Jesus  laid  His  hand  upon  him  a  second  time, 
be  saw  all  things  clearly.  We  see  the  same  truth  as  related  to  special  training  of 
the  senses.  We  have  all  heard  the  story  of  "  eyes  and  no  eyes."  One  man  will 
see  the  material  for  a  volume  where  another  sees  nothing  but  stocks  and  stonss. 
And,  going  still  deeper,  there  is  that  moral  something  which  we  call  self-mastery. 
In  how  many  do  you  see  it?  How  many  men  do  you  see  who  make 
their  thoughts  work  on  given  lines  ;  who  have  their  hand  on  the  gates 
■which  shut  out  vain  and  wicked  thoughts  ;  in  whom  the  whole  moral 
and  spiritual  nature  is  obedient  to  law,  and  is  marshalled  and  massed 
and  directed  by  a  supreme  will  ?  We  say  a  man  is  self-possessed.  What  do  we 
inean  by  that,  but  that  there  resides  in  the  man  a  power  which  holds  all  hia 
faculties  at  command,  and  brings  them  to  bear  in  spite  of  aU  distractions  ?  There 
can  be  no  better  phrase  to  express  it.  He  possesses  himself.  He  can  do  what  he 
will  with  that  side  of  the  self  which  he  chooses  to  use.  Man's  self  must  develop 
powers  of  resistance  and  control.  It  must  be  so  completely  in  hand  that  he  can 
eay  to  wind  and  water,  "  You  shall  not  possess  me  and  carry  me  whither  you  will. 
Bather  shall  you  do  my  bidding,  and  grind  my  corn,  and  turn  my  lathe,  and  carry 
me  whither  I  wUl."  "  Nature,  red  in  tooth  and  claw,"  roars  and  pants  and  ragea 
after  him.  He  must  win  his  life  from  her  jaws.  And  no  less  does  the  truth  hold 
higher  up.  As  we  follow  human  nature  upward,  it  is  only  the  antagonists  that 
change.  The  contact  and  the  conflict  are  perpetuated.  The  Bible  is  full  of  this. 
It  may  indeed  be  said  that  the  underlying  truth  of  the  whole  Bible,  working  itself 
out  through  the  successive  stages  of  history  and  the  infinite  varieties  of  humaa 
experience,  is,  how  shall  a  man  win  his  own  soul  ?  A  whole  economy  of  secret, 
spiritual  forces  is  arrayed  against  this  consummation.  Hence  it  is  that  Paul  says, 
"  We  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan."  Hence  we  are  told  of  a  wrestle  which 
is  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with  spiritual  hosts ;  marshalled  and  organized  evil 
in  the  spiritual  realm  ;  princes  of  darkness.  So,  too,  our  Lord  told  Peter  of  an  unseen 
terrible  power,  fired  with  malignant  desire  to  sift  him  as  wheat.  And  under  the 
stress  of  this  fact,  the  whole  current  of  New  Testament  teaching  settles  down  inta 
one  sharply-defined  channel ;  that  spiritual  mastery,  self-possession,  self-wielding, 
are  the  outcome  only  of  patient  effort  and  discipline  protracted  up  to  the  very  end. 
Accordingly  we  hear  an  apostle,  far  on  in  his  Christian  career,  saying,  "  I  keep  my 
body  under. "  The  great  feature  of  this  text  is  that  Christ  points  us  away  from 
circumstances  to  souls.  You  stand  some  day  by  the  ocean  swept  with  a  tempest. 
It  is  a  grand  spectacle.  A  score  of  things  in  the  clouds  and  in  the  waves  appeal  to 
you.  You  mark  the  height  of  the  billows,  their  tremendous  volume  and  swiftness 
and  power,  their  mad  struggle  round  the  sunken  reefs ;  but  after  all  it  is  not  the 
grandear  or  the  terror  of  the  scene  which  most  enchains  you.  Your  interest  is 
concentrated  on  that  ship  yonder.  You  forget  the  spectacle  of  the  maddened  ocean 
as  you  watch  her  fight  with  it.  The  question  which  fills  your  mind  is  not  how  long 
the  storm  is  going  to  continue,  or  whether  it  is  likely  to  become  more  severe.  It  is 
whether  the  ship  will  ride  out  the  gale.  And  so  all  circumstances  take  theit 
character  from  their  relation  to  man's  soul.  The  question  is  whether  the  man  will 
ride  out  the  storm  of  circumstance ;  the  whole  significance  of  circurnstance  turns 
CO  whether  it  will  conquer  the  man  or  be  conquered  by  him ;  whether  it  will  swallow 


CHAP.  SSI.]  ST.  LUKE.  485 

up  the  soul,  or  •whether  the  man  will  bring  his  soul  alive  and  entire  out  of  the 
tempest.  This  is  the  way  in  which  Christ,  as  He  is  pictured  in  the  text,  looks  out 
upon  that  horrible  tempest  of  blood  and  fire  ;  and  this  is  the  attitude  of  the  whole 
Bible  toward  the  struggle  and  convulsion  of  this  world.  Through  it  all  God  has 
His  eye  on  man's  moral  destiny.  To  us,  often,  the  principal  things  are  the  war 
and  the  confusion,  the  dislocation  and  the  overturning.  To  Him  the  principal 
thing  is  the  destiny  of  that  soul  in  the  midst  of  the  storm.  Will  the  man  win  his 
soul  or  not  ?  Circumstances  will  adjust  themselves  if  men  are  right.  The  great 
struggle  in  God's  eyes  is  not  between  parties  or  sects  or  opinions.  It  is  between  the 
Boul  and  the  world.  Victory  is  the  man's  overcoming  the  world  ;  not  one  side  of 
the  world  getting  the  better  of  the  other;  not  the  victory  of  the  man's 
native  force  of  will  and  physical  power  over  the  things  which  assail  his  fortime 
or  his  reputation,  but  the  perfecting  of  his  spiritual  manhood  in  the  teeth  of  all  the 
loss  and  damage  and  pain  which  this  world  can  bring  to  him.  You  and  I  will  win 
this  battle  if  we  shall  win  our  souls,  (Ibid.)  Patience,  the  precious  little  herb : — 
Two  little  German  girls,  Brigitte  and  Wallburg,  were  on  their  way  to  the  town,  and 
each  carried  a  heavy  basket  of  fruit  on  her  head.  Brigitte  murmured  and  sighed 
constantly ;  Wallburg  only  laughed  and  joked.  Brigitte  said :  "  What  makes  you 
laugh  so  ?  Your  basket  is  quite  as  heavy  as  mine,  and  you  are  no  stronger  than  I 
am."  Wallburg  answered  :  "  I  have  a  precious  little  herb  on  my  load,  which  makes 
me  hardly  feel  it  at  all.  Put  some  of  it  on  your  load  as  well."  "  0,"  cried  Brigitte, 
*•  it  must  indeed  be  a  precious  little  herb  !  I  should  like  to  lighten  my  load  with 
it;  so  tell  me  at  once  what  it  is  called."  Wallburg  replied,  "  The  precious  little  herb 
that  makes  all  burdens  light  is  called  'patience.' "  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden 
down. — The  desolation  of  Jerusalem  confirms  our  faith  in  God's  promises  : — Samuel 
Rutherford  says  :  •*  We  too  often  believe  the  promises  as  the  man  that  read  Plato's 
writings  concerning  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  So  long  as  the  book  was  in  his 
hand,  he  believed  what  was  said ;  but  as  soon  as  he  laid  it  down,  he  began  to 
imagine  that  his  soul  was  only  an  airy  vapour  that  perisheth  with  the  expiring  of 
the  breath.  It  would  greatly  help  to  preserve  us  from  this,  and  strengthen  our 
faith,  if  we  oftener  compared  Scripture  with  Scripture,  and  prediction  with  fulfil- 
ment." Two  rabbis,  we  are  told,  approaching  Jerusalem,  observed  a  fox  running 
up  the  hill  of  Zion.  Aged  Babbi  Joshua  wept,  but  Babbi  Eliezer  laughed. 
"Wherefore  dost  thou  weep?  "demanded  Eliezer.  "I  weep  because  I  see  what 
was  written  in  the  Lamentations  fulfilled:  'Because  of  the  mountain  of  Zion  which 
is  desolate,  the  foxes  f&\\  upon  it.* "  "  And  therefore  do  I  laugh,"  said  Rabbi 
Eliezer ;  "  for  when  I  see  with  my  own  eyes  that  God  has  fulfilled  His  threatenings 
to  the  letter,  I  have  thereby  a  pledge  that  not  one  of  His  promises  shall  fail,  for  He 
is  ever  more  ready  to  show  mercy  than  judgment."  Restoration  of  the  Jews : — In 
the  year  1808,  the  generous  Lewis  Way,  when  riding  with  a  friend  in  Devonshire, 
had  his  attention  drawn  by  a  companion  to  some  stately  trees  in  a  park  they  were 
passing.  "  Do  you  know,"  said  his  friend,  "  the  singular  condition  that  is  attached 
to  these  oaks  ?  A  lady  who  formerly  owned  this  park,  stipulated  in  her  will  that 
they  should  not  be  cut  down  until  Jerusalem  should  again  be  in  possession  of 
Israel ;  and  they  are  growing  still."  Mr.  Way's  heart  was  deeply  moved  by  this 
incident.  The  idea  of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  took  possession  of  his  mind.  In 
the  following  year  he  succeeded  in  forming  the  London  Society  of  the  Jews.  The 
labours  of  this  and  other  kindred  societies  have  since  been  so  graciously  owned, 
that  in  England  and  on  the  Continent  there  are  now  thousands  of  Jewish  converts, 
many  of  whom  are  ministers  of  the  gospel,  some  of  them  preachers  and  students 
whose  names  have  become  almost  household  words  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 
There  shall  be  signs. — Signs  of  the  times : — The  mere  simple  relations  of  these 
portentous  appearances  strike  us  with  horror  :  and  Josephus,  who  has  left  us  a  full 
history  of  these  times,  informs  us  that  they  all  actually  happened  at  that  tragical 
period.  When  he  enters  upon  the  subject,  he  uses  some  of  the  very  words  of  this 
chapter,  proposing  to  speak  of  the  signs  and  prodigies  which  presignified  the 
approaching  desolation ;  and  he  mentions  the  following  horrendous  prognostica- 
tions :  A  star,  in  the  shape  of  a  sword,  or  a  comet,  pointing  down  upon  the  city, 
was  seen  to  hang  over  it  for  a  whole  year.  There  were  other  strange  and 
nnaccountable  meteors  seen  in  the  aerial  regions :  armies  in  battle-array,  and 
chariots  surrounding  the  country  and  investing  their  cities  ;  and  this  before  sunset 
The  great  gate  of  the  temple,  which  twenty  men  could  scarcely  shut,  and  which 
was  made  fast  with  bolts  and  bars,  opened  of  its  own  accord  to  let  in  their  enemies: 
"  for  so,"  says  Josephos,  "  oar  wise  men  understood  the  omen.     At  the  ninth  hoot 


48A  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

of  the  night  a  great  light  shone  upon  the  temple  and  the  altar,  as  it  it  had  been 
noon-day ;  and  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  when  the  priests  went  at  midnight  into 
the  temple  to  attend  their  service,  they  first  heard  a  kind  of  noise  as  of  persons 
removing  from  a  place,  and  then  a  voice,  "  Let  us  away  from  hence."  And  what 
Josephus  relates  is  confirmed  by  Tacitus,  a  Roman  historian  of  the  same  age  who 
had  no  connection  with  the  Jews.  1.  There  seems  to  be  a  correspondence  and 
propriety  in  it,  that  there  should  be  a  kind  of  sympathy  between  the  natural  and 
moral  world ;  that  when  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  are  tossed  and  agitated,  the 
earth  itself  should  totter  and  tremble  under  them;  that  when  the  light  of  the 
rational  world,  the  splendour  of  courts  and  kingdoms,  is  about  to  be  extinguished 
or  obscured,  the  sun  and  moon,  and  other  lights  of  the  material  world,  should  abate 
their  glory  too,  and,  as  it  were,  appear  in  mourning ;  that  when  some  grand  event 
is  hastening  to  the  birth,  that  terribly  illustrious  stranger,  a  comet,  should  make  ua 
a  visit,  as  its  harbinger,  and  shake  its  horrendous  tail  over  the  astonished  world  ; 
that  when  peace  is  broke  among  the  nations,  the  harmony  of  the  elements  should 
likewise  be  broken,  and  they  should  fall  into  transient  animosities  and  conflicts, 
like  the  restless  beings  for  whose  use  they  were  formed.  There  is  an  apparent 
congruity  and  propriety  in  these  things,  and  therefore  the  argument  is  at  least 
plausible  ;  but  as  it  is  drawn  only  from  analogy,  which  does  not  universally  hold, 
I  shall  not  lay  much  stress  upon  it.  And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  as  there  is  an 
obvious  analogy,  which  does  unquestionably  hold  in  many  instances,  between  the 
natural  and  moral  world,  the  argument  is  not  to  be  utterly  disregarded.  2.  These 
unusual  appearances  are  peculiarly  adapted  to  raise  the  attention  of  mankind,  and 
prepare  them  for  important  revolutions.  There  is  a  propriety  and  advantage,  if 
not  a  necessity,  especially  with  regard  to  that  part  of  mankind  (and  there  are 
always  many  such  upon  earth)  whose  benefit  is  intended  by  these  extraordinary 
events  and  revolutions,  that  they  be  prepared  for  them.  And  they  cannot  prepare 
for  them  without  some  general  expectation  of  them ;  and  they  can  have  no 
expectation  of  them  without  some  warning  or  premonition  of  them.  Now  the 
ordinary  appearances  in  nature  cannot  answer  this  end,  because  they  are  ordinary, 
and  therefore  not  adapted  to  rouse  and  fix  the  attention ;  and  because  they  really 
have  no  such  premonitory  signification.  And  as  to  the  Word  of  God,  it  may  have 
no  direct  perceivable  reference  to  such  extraordinary  periods ;  and,  therefore,  can 
give  us  no  previous  warning  of  their  approach.  But  these  unusual  phenomena  ar6 
peculiarly  adapted  to  this  end  :  their  novelty  and  terror  catch  the  attention  of  the 
gazing  world.  Such  premonitions  would  be  striking  illustrations  of  the  goodness 
and  equity  of  his  administration,  who  does  not  usually  let  the  blow  fall  without 
previous  warning,  and  they  would  contribute  to  the  right  improvement  of  such 
dispensations.  This,  therefore,  I  think,  we  may  look  upon,  at  least,  as  a  probable 
argument ;  especially  if  we  add  that,  as  these  unusual  appearances  are,  in  their 
own  nature,  fit  to  be  premonitions,  so — 3.  It  seems  natural  to  mankind  to  view 
them  in  that  light ;  and  they  have  been  universally  looked  upon  in  that  light  in  all 
ages  and  countries.  As  to  the  Jews,  the  matter  is  clear ;  for  Josephus  tells  us,  that 
their  wise  men  actually  put  this  construction  upon  those  alarming  appearances, 
which  preceded  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  And  as  they  had  been  accustomed  to 
miracles  for  the  confirmation  of  their  religion,  they  were  even  extravagant  in  their 
demands  of  this  sort  of  evidence  upon  every  occasion ;  as  we  find  in  the  history  ol 
the  evangelists.  As  to  the  Gentiles,  this  was  the  general  sentiment  of  all  ranks 
among  them,  not  only  of  the  vulgar,  but  of  their  poets  and  philosophers.  From 
mankind's  generally  looking  for  miracles  to  prove  a  religion  Divine,  and  from 
impostors  pretending  to  them,  we  justly  infer  that  God  has  so  formed  our  nature, 
that  it  is  natural  to  us  to  expect  and  regard  this  sort  of  evidence  in  this  case  :  and 
that  God  does  adapt  himself  to  this  innate  tendency,  and  has  actually  wrought 
true  miracles  to  attest  the  true  religion :  and  we  may,  with  equal  reason,  infer  from 
the  superstitions  of  mankind,  with  regard  to  omens  and  prodigies,  that  God  has 
given  a  natural  bent  to  our  minds  to  look  for  them  ;  and  that  in  extraordinary 
periods  he  really  does  give  such  previous  signs  of  future  events.  4.  History 
informs  us,  that  such  unusual  commotions  and  appearances  in  the  natural  world, 
have,  with  a  surprising  regularity,  generally  preceded  unusual  commotions  and 
revolutions  in  the  moral  world,  or  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  When  an 
hypothesis  is  supported  by  experiments  and  matters  of  fact,  it  ought  to  be  received 
as  true.  And  this  argument  will  appear  decisive,  if  we  find,  in  fact,  that  such 
commotions  and  revolutions  in  the  world  have  been  uniformly  preceded  by  soma 
prodigies :  for  such  an  uniformity  of  such  extraordinary  periods,  cannot  be  the 


xn.]  ST.  LURE.  48T 

effect  of  chance,  or  of  blind  natural  causes,  unadjusted  and  undirected  by  an  in- 
telligent superior  power ;  but  it  must  be  the  effect  of  design,  a  wise  and  good 
design,  to  alarm  the  world,  and  put  them  in  a  proper  posture  to  meet  these  grand 
occurrences.  There  is  nothing  more  natural,  nothing  which  astronomers  can 
compute  with  more  exactness,  than  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon ;  and  yet  thesa 
have  so  regularly  and  uniformly  preceded  the  first  grand  breaches,  and  the  total 
overthrow  of  kingdoms  and  nations,  that  we  cannot  but  think  they  were  intended  to 
signify  such  revolutions ;  and  thus  mankind  generally  interpreted  them.  A  total 
eclipse  of  the  sun  happened  before  the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes  by  the  Assyrians  ; 
before  the  captivity  of  the  Jews  in  Babylon ;  at  the  death  of  Christ,  about  thirty- 
seven  years  and  a  half  before  the  last  destruction  of  Jerusalem ;  and  about  the  same 
number  of  years  before  the  slaughter  of  six  hundred  thousand  Jews  under  Adrian  ; 
before  the  conquest  of  the  Babylonians  by  the  Medes ;  and  before  the  fall  of  the 
Medo-Persian,  Grecian,  and  Boman  empires.  Upon  the  whole,  let  us  endeavour  to 
put  ourselves  in  a  posture  of  readiness  to  meet  with  all  events  that  may  be 
approaching.  Though  I  know  not  these  futurities,  yet  I  know  it  shall  be  well  with 
them  that  fear  God :  but  it  will  not  be  well  with  the  wicked ;  neither  shall  he 
prolong  his  days,  which  are  as  a  shadow;  because  he  feareth  not  before  God. 
{President  Davies,  M.A.)  Second  Sunday  in  Advent  : — This  coming  is  not  at 
death.  Death  is  nowhere  called  the  coming  of  Christ.  It  may  be  the  going  of  the 
saints  to  Him,  but  it  is  not  His  coming  to  them,  in  any  such  sense  as  that  in 
which  we  declare  in  the  Creed  :  "  He  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead." 
Though,  in  some  sense,  always  present,  there  are  respects  in  which  He  is  quite 
absent,  in  which  He  has  been  absent  since  the  day  of  His  ascension  from  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  and  in  which  He  will  continue  to  be  absent  until  mankind  "  shall 
see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in  a  cloud,  with  power  and  great  glory."  And  in  that 
same  sense  in  which  He  is  now  absent  from  the  earth,  He  is  again  to  come  to  the 
earth,  when  *'  every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail 
because  of  Him."    I.  Let  us,  therefore,  in  the  first  place,  assuke  oxjbselvbs  of  thk 

BCKlPTUBAIiNESS  AND  OBTHODOXY  OF  THE  DOCTKINE,  THAT  THE  GLORIOUS  LOBD  JeSDS 
ChKIST  is  BEALLI  and  LITEEALLT  to  RETUBN  AGAIN  IN  PEESON  TO  OUB  WOBLD.^     ThiS  is 

the  more  important,  as  the  tendencies  are  to  neglect  and  explain  away  this  article 
of  the  faith.  It  was  a  vital  and  characteristic  part  of  the  faith  and  hope  of  the 
early  Christians  to  look  forward  to,  and  to  expect,  the  coming  again  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Indeed  the  whole  success  of  redemption  itself  is  conditioned  upon  His 
return.  To  strike  it  out,  would  confound  the  whole  system  of  salvation,  carry 
otter  confusion  into  all  attempts  intelligently  to  believe  or  defend  the  gospel  as  of 
God,  and  dry  up  the  heartiest  and  hopefuUest  springs  of  faith,  holiness,  and 
Christian  life.  II.  With  this  point  settled,  let  us  look  next  at  the  signs  which 
THE  Saviour  specified  as  the  hebalds  of  His  second  coming.  These  are  given  with 
great  particularity  in  the  text  before  us.  Luther  distinguished  them  into  two 
leading  classes  ;  and  we  may  safely  follow  him  in  this,  as  also  in  his  exposition  of 
the  words  which  describe  them.  1.  He  finds  in  the  text  a  Divine  prediction  of 
an  ever-growing  earthiness,  sensuaMty,  and  unbelief,  on  the  part  of  the  great  mass 
of  men,  as  the  day  of  judgment  draws  near.  There  is  to  be  no  millennium  of 
universal  righteousness,  liberty,  and  peace,  before  Christ  comes ;  but  "  evil  men 
and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving,  and  being  deceived  "  (2  Tim. 
iii,  13).  2.  The  second  class  is  given  with  equal  distinctness,  and  embraces  many 
wonders  in  nature,  so  imposing  as  to  challenge  universal  observation.  III. 
Finally,  let  us  glance  at  the  sort  of  affections  which  the  occurrence  of  these 
signs  of  the  Savioue's  coming  should  beget  and  nurture  in  our  souls.  Luther 
well  read  the  human  heart,  when  be  said,  "  There  be  very  few  who  would  not 
rather  that  the  day  of  judgment  might  never  come."  But  this  is  not  the  way  in 
which  our  Saviour  would  have  us  affected  by  this  subject.  It  is  indeed  a  terrible 
thing  for  the  guilty,  and  is  meant  so  to  be,  that  it  may  break  up  their  false  security, 
and  arouse  them  to  repentance  and  a  better  life  ;  but  it  is  designed  to  be  a  joy  and 
consolation  to  all  true  believers.  It  is  intended  to  be  a  thing  of  precious  promise 
and  of  glad  hope  to  them.  {J.  A.  Seiss,D.D.)  Ttrror  produced  by  a  meteoric 
ahower: — During  a  great  meteoric  shower  in  South  Carolina,  an  eye-witness  writes  : 
•*  I  was  suddenly  awakened  by  the  most  distressing  cries  that  ever  fell  on  my  ears. 
Shrieks  of  horror  and  cries  for  mercy  I  could  hear  from  most  of  the  negroes  of  the 
three  plantations,  amounting  in  all  to  about  six  hundred  or  eight  hundred.  While 
earnestly  listening  for  the  cause,  I  heard  a  faint  voice  near  the  door  calling  my 
name.     I  arose,  and  taking  my  sword,  stood  at  the  door.     At  this  same  time  I  stiU 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \cntt.  xa 

heard  the  same  Toice  heseeching  me  to  rise,  eafing :  •  Oh,  my  God !  the  world  is  on 
fire  ! '  I  then  opened  the  door,  and  it  is  dif&calt  to  Bay  which  excited  me  the  most 
— the  awfuhiess  of  the  scene,  or  the  distressed  cries  of  the  negroes.  Upwards  of  • 
hundred  lay  prostrate  on  the  ground — some  speechless,  and  some  with  the  bitterest 
cries,  but  with  their  hands  raised  imploring  God  to  save  the  world  and  them. 
The  scene  was  truly  awful,  for  never  did  rain  fall  much  thicker  than  the 
meteors  fell  towards  the  earth;  east,  west,  north,  and  south  it  was  the  same." 
Encouragejnent  Jrom  Christ's  promised  advent : — I.  The  persons  unto  whom  these 
words  are  uttered,  in  the  particle  "  your " :  "  Lift  up  your  heads."  II.  What 
things  they  are  of  which  our  Saviour  here  speais,  in  the  first  words  of  the  text : 
"  Now  when  these  things  begin  to  come  to  pass."  III.  The  behaviour  which  our 
Saviour  commends  unto  us,  in  these  words:  "Look  up,  lift  up  your  heads." 
IV.  Last  of  all,  the  reason  or  encouragement ;  words  of  life  and  power  to  raise  us 
from  all  faintness  of  heart  and  dulness  of  spirit :  "  For  your  redemption  draweth 
nigh."  It  will  not  be  amiss  a  little  to  consider  whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  in  the 
late  declining  age  of  the  world  so  great  disorder,  distemper,  and  confusion  have  their 
place :  and  it  shall  yield  us  some  lessons  for  our  instruction.  1.  And,  first  of  all, 
it  may  seem  to  be  natural,  and  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  For  our  common 
experience  tells  us,  that  all  things  are  apt  to  breed  somewhat  by  which  themselves 
are  ruined.  How  many  plants  do  we  see  which  breed  that  worm  which  eats  out 
their  very  heart !  We  see  the  body  of  man,  let  it  be  never  so  carefully,  so  precisely 
ordered,  yet  at  length  it  grows  foul,  and  every  day  gathers  matter  of  weakness  and 
disease,  which,  at  first  occasioning  a  general  disproportion  in  the  parts,  must  at 
the  last  of  necessity  draw  after  it  the  ruin  and  dissolution  of  the  whole.  It  may 
then  seem  to  fall  out  in  this  great  body  of  the  world  as  it  doth  in  this  lesser  body 
of  ours :  by  its  own  distemper  it  is  the  cause  of  its  own  ruin.  For  the  things  here 
mentioned  by  our  Saviour  are  nothing  else  but  the  diseases  of  the  old  decaying 
world.  The  failing  of  light  in  the  sun  and  moon — what  is  it  but  the  blindness  of 
the  world — an  imperfection  very  incident  to  age  ?  Tumults  in  the  sea  and  waters — 
what  are  they  but  the  distemper  of  superfluous  humours,  which  abound  in  age  f 
Wars  and  rumours  of  wars  are  but  the  falling  out  of  the  prime  qualities,  in  the 
union  and  harmony  of  which  the  very  being  of  the  creature  did  consist.  Scarcely 
had  the  world  come  to  any  growth  and  ripeness,  but  that  it  grew  to  that  height  of 
distemper  that  there  was  no  way  to  purge  it  but  by  a  general  flood,  "  in  which,  as 
it  were  in  the  baptism,  its  former  sins  were  done  away"  (Hosea  iv.  17).  2.  But  yon 
may  peradventure  take  this  for  a  speculation,  and  no  more ;  and  I  have  urged  it  no 
further  than  as  a  probable  conjecture.  And  therefore  I  will  give  you  a  second 
reason.  Besides  this  natural  inclination,  God  Himself  hath  a  further  purpose  in 
it.  He  that  observes  the  ways  of  God  as  far  as  He  hath  expressed  Himself,  shall 
find  that  He  hath  a  delight  to  show  unto  the  world  those  that  are  His ;  to  lift  them 
up  on  high,  and  mark  and  character  them  out  by  some  notable  trial  and  tempta- 
tion. To  draw  this  down  to  our  present  purpose  :  To  try  the  strength,  the  faith, 
the  love,  the  perseverance  of  those  who  are  His,  God  is  pleased  to  give  way  to  this 
tumult  and  danger  in  the  last  days.  He  sets  before  us  these  terrors  and  affright- 
ments,  to  see  whether  we  fear  anything  more  than  Him,  or  whether  anything  can 
Ehake  the  reliance  and  trust  which  we  repose  in  Him ;  whether  our  faith  will  be 
strong  when  the  world  is  weak ;  whether  our  light  will  shine  when  the  sun  is 
darkened ;  whether  we  can  establish  ourselves  in  the  power  of  God's  Spirit  when 
"  the  powers  of  heaven  are  shaken  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  29).  And  indeed  what  are  all 
these  signs  here  mentioned  but  mormoes,  mere  toys  to  fright  children  with,  ii 
we  could  truly  consider  that,  if  the  world  should  sink,  and  fall  upon  our  heads, 
it  cannot  hurt  a  soul,  nor  yet  so  grind  the  body  into  dust  that  God  cannot  raise 
it  up  again?  3.  As  sin  and  iniquity  have  increased,  so  have  the  means  to  reclaim 
it.  As  wickedness  hath  broken  in  as  a  flood,  so  hath  judgment  been  poured  forth, 
and  doth  swell,  wave  upon  wave,  line  upon  line,  judgment  upon  judgment,  to 
meet  it,  and  purge  it,  and  carry  it  away  with  itself,  and  so  run  out  both  together 
into  the  boundless  ocean  of  God's  mercy.  This  is  God's  method ;  who  knows 
whereof  we  are  made,  and  therefore  must  needs  know  what  is  fittest  to  cure  us. 
If  His  little  army  of  caterpillars,  if  common  calamities,  will  not  purge  us.  He 
brings  in  swoid,  and  famine,  and  pestilence,  to  make  the  potion  stronger.  III. 
Our  third  general  part  was  the  consideration  of  the  behaviour  which  our  Savionz 
commends  unto  us  in  these  words:  "Look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads";  words 
borrowed  from  the  behaviour  which  men  use  when  all  things  go  as  they  would 
bave  them.    As  herbs,  when  the  sun  comes  near  them,  peep  oat  of  the  earth, 


•HAP.  xzz.]  ST.  LVKE.  489 

or  as  summer-birds  begin  to  sing  when  the  spring  is  entered,  so  onght  it  to 
be  with  U3  "  when  these  things  come  to  pass."  This  winter  should  make  us  a 
spring;  this  noise  and  tumult  should  make  us  sing.  Wars,  famines,  plagues, 
inundations,  tumults,  confusion  of  the  world,  these  bring  in  the  spring  of  all  true 
Christians ;  and  by  these,  as  by  the  coming  of  summer-birds,  we  are  forewarned 
that  our  Sun  of  Righteousness  draws  near.  1.  Fear  is  a  burden  that  maketh  us  not 
able  to  look  upwards,  towards  that  which  might  rid  and  ease  us  of  it,  but  towards 
something  that  may  hide  aud  cover  us.  2.  Grief  is  another  weight  that  presseth 
down.  "Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul?"  saith  David  (Psa.  xlii.  5,  11). 
3.  These  two,  fear  and  sorrow,  are  the  mother  and  the  nurse,  the  beginners  and 
fomenters,  of  all  murmuring  and  repining.  What  aire  all  the  pleasures,  what 
are  all  the  terrors,  of  the  world  to  him  that  is  made  one  with  Christ,  who  conquered 
also  7  That  therefore  this  doctrine  may  pass  the  better,  which  at  first  sight  is  but 
harsh  and  rugged,  we  will  show  you — 1.  That  it  is  possible  to  arm  ourselves  with 
such  courage  and  resolution  in  common  calamities.  2.  That  it  is  a  great  folly  not 
to  do  so.  3.  What  impediments  and  hindrances  they  be  which  overthrow  our 
courage,  and  take  our  hearts  from  us,  when  such  things  as  these  come  to  pass. 
1.  And,  first,  of  the  possibiUty  of  this  doctrine.  And,  if  we  look  a  little  upon  the 
manners  of  men,  we  shall  find  them  very  apt  and  ready  to  plead  impossibilities  and 
difficulties  where  their  own  practice  confutes  them.  Now  to  manifest  the  possibility 
of  this,  I  think  I  cannot  do  it  better  than  by  an  ensample :  and  I  will  give  you  one, 
and  that  too  of  an  Ethnic  man,  that  knew  not  Christ,  nor  His  rich  promises,  nor 
ever  heard  of  the  glory  of  the  gospel.  There  is  a  hill  in  Italy,  Vesuvius  they  call 
it,  which  is  wont  sometimes  to  break  out  in  flames  of  fire,  to  the  terror  and  amaze- 
ment of  all  that  dwell  nigh  unto  it.  The  first  time  that  in  the  memory  of  man  it 
fired,  was  in  the  days  of  Vespasian  the  emperor ;  at  which  time  it  brake  forth  with 
that  horrible  noise  and  cry,  with  that  concussion  and  shaking  of  the  earth  near 
about  it,  with  that  darkness  and  stench,  that  all  within  the  compass  thought  of 
nothing  now  but  eeternam  illam  et  novissimam  mundo  Tioctem,  "that  time  was 
ended,  and  the  world  drawing  to  its  dissolution."  Pliny,  the  great  philosopher, 
and  the  author  of  the  famous  "History  of  Nature,"  lay  then  at  Micenum,  not 
far  ofi  :  and  out  of  a  desire  he  had  to  inform  himself,  he  drew  near  to  the  place 
where  he  thought  the  fire  began.  And  in  the  midst  of  that  horror  and  confusion 
BO  undaunted  and  fearless  was  he  that  he  studied,  and  wrote,  and  ate,  and  slept, 
and  omitted  nothing  of  his  usual  course.  His  nephew,  a  great  man  afterwards 
with  Trajan  the  emperor,  oat  of  whom  I  take  this  history,  reports  himself,  that 
being  there  at  that  time,  notwithstanding  all  the  terrors  and  affrightments,  yet 
he  called  for  his  books,  he  read,  he  noted,  as  if  he  had  not  been  near  the 
mountain  Vesuvius,  but  in  his  study  and  closet:  and  yet  was  at  that  time  but 
eighteen  years  of  age.  I  have  been  somewhat  the  more  large,  besides  my  custom, 
in  opening  the  particulars  of  this  story,  because  it  is  the  very  emblem,  the  very 
picture,  of  the  world's  dissolution,  and  of  the  behaviour  which  is  here  enjoined 
Christians  when  that  time  shall  come.  What,  though  there  be  signs  in  the  sun  and 
moon  and  stars  ?  must  my  light  thereof  be  turned  into  darkness?  must  my  sim  set 
at  noon,  and  my  stars,  those  virtues  which  should  shine  in  my  soul,  fall  out  of 
their  sphere  and  firmament?  When  the  world  is  ready  to  sink,  do  thou  raise 
thyself  with  expectation  of  eternal  glory.  2.  I  have  done  with  the  first  point — the 
possibility  of  the  doctrine,  that  we  must  arm  ourselves  with  courage  and  resolution 
against  common  calamities.  I  proceed  now  to  the  second — that  it  is  an  argument 
of  great  folly  not  to  do  so.  Is  it  not  a  great  foUy  to  create  evil,  to  multiply  evils ; 
to  discolour  that  which  was  sent  for  our  good,  and  make  it  evil;  to  make 
that  which  speaketh  peace  and  comfort  unto  us  a  messenger  of  death  ?  3. 
Let  na  now  consider  the  lets  and  impediments,  or  the  reasons  why  our 
hearts  fail  as  at  such  sights  as  these.  I  shall  at  this  time  only  remove 
a  pretended  one ;  having  spoken  of  self-love  and  want  of  faith,  which  are 
retd  and  true  hindrances  of  Christian  courage.  The  main  pretence  we  make  for 
onr  pusillanimity  and  cowardice  is  our  natural  weakness,  which  we  derived  from 
oar  first  parents,  and  brought  with  as  into  the  world.  Fear  not,  therefore :  why 
should  we  fear  ?  Christ  hath  subdued  our  enemies,  and  taken  from  them  every 
weapon  that  may  hurt  us.  He  hath  taken  the  sting  not  only  from  sin,  but  from 
those  evils  which  are  the  natural  issues  and  products  of  sin.  He  hath  made 
afQictions  joyful,  terrors  lovely,  that  thoa  mayest  "look  ap"  npon  them,  and  "  lift 
ap  thy  head."  I  have  done  with  this  pretence  of  natural  weakness,  and  with 
my  third  part;  and  I  oome  now  to  the  foorth  and  last,  the  enoooragement 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  xxi» 

cnr  Saviour  giveth:  "For  your  redemption  draweth  nigh."  IV.  And  "when 
these  things  come  to  pass,"  when  such  terrible  signs  appear,  this  news  is  very 
Beasonable.  "  As  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul "  (Prov.  xxv.  25),  so  is  the  promise 
of  liberty  to  those  "  who  have  been  in  bondage  all  their  life  long  "  (Heb.  ii.  15), 
under  the  fear  of  those  evils  which  show  themselves  unto  us,  and  lead  us  captive, 
and  keep  us  in  prison,  so  that  we  cannot  look  up.  How  will  the  prisoner  even  sing 
in  his  chains,  when  news  is  brought  that  his  ransom  is  paid,  and  his  redemption 
near  at  hand !  It  is  a  liberty  to  be  told  we  shall  be  free :  and  it  is  not  easy  to 
determine  whether  it  more  affect  ns  when  it  is  come,  or  when  it  is  but  in  the 
approach,  drawing  nigh  ;  when  we  are  free,  or  when  we  are  but  told  that  shortly 
we  shall  be  so.  And  indeed  our  redemption  is  actus  individuus,  "  one  entire  act "  ; 
and  we  are  redeemed  at  once  from  all ;  though  the  full  accomplishment  of  it  be  by 
degrees.  But  we  may  say  truly  of  this  first  redemption  what  some  in  St.  Paul 
said  falsely  of  the  second  resurrection,  This  redemption's  time  "  is  past  already  " 
(2  Tim.  ii.  18) ;  past  on  our  Bedeemer's  side,  nothing  left  undone  by  Him :  only  it 
remains  on  ours  to  sue  out  our  pardon,  and  make  our  redemption  sore.  And  there- 
fore there  is  another  redemption  that  they  call  prceservantem,  "  which  settles  and 
establishes  us,  preserves  "  us  in  an  angelical  state,  free  from  sin,  from  passions, 
from  fear.  And  when  this  comes,  we  shall  sin  no  more,  hope  no  more,  fear  no 
more:  all  sins  shall  be  purged  out,  all  hope  shall  be  fulfilled,  all  tears  shall  be 
wiped  from  our  eyes,  and  all  trembling  from  our  hearts.  And  this  is  the  redemp- 
tion here  meant,  the  only  trust  of  the  Christian,  the  expectation  of  the  faithful. 
(A,  Farindon,  D.D.)  Signs  of  nearing  redemption : — Ere  autumn  has  tinted  the 
woodlands,  or  the  cornfields  are  falling  to  the  reaper's  song,  or  hoary  hilltops  like 
grey  hairs  on  an  aged  head  give  warning  of  winter's  approach,  I  have  seen  the 
swallow's  brood  pruning  their  feathers  and  putting  their  long  wings  to  the  proof  ; 
and  though  they  might  return  to  their  nests  in  the  window  eaves,  or  alight  again 
on  the  housetops,  they  darted  away  in  the  direction  of  sunny  lands.  Thus  they 
showed  that  they  were  birds  bound  for  a  foreign  clime,  and  that  the  period  of  their 
migration  from  the  scene  of  their  birth  was  at  hand.  Grace  also  has  its  prognostics. 
Tbey  are  as  infallible  as  those  of  nature.  So  when  the  soul,  filled  with  longings 
to  be  gone,  is  often  darting  away  to  glory,  and  soaring  upwards,  rises  on  the  wings 
of  faith,  till  this  great  world,  from  her  sublime  elevation  looks  a  little  thing,  God's 
people  know  that  they  have  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit.  These  are  the  pledges  of 
heaven — a  sure  sign  that  "  their  redemption  draweth  nigh."  Such  devout  feelinga 
afford  the  most  blessed  evidence  that  with  Christ  at  the  helm,  and  "  the  wind  "  that 
"  bloweth  where  it  hsteth  "  in  our  swelling  sails,  we  are  drawing  nigh  to  the  land 
that  is  very  far  off ;  even  as  the  reeds  and  leaves  and  fruits  that  float  upon  the 
briny  waves,  as  the  birds  of  strange  and  gorgeous  plumage  that  fly  round  his  ship 
and  alight  upon  its  yards,  as  the  sweet-scented  odours  which  the  winds  waft  ont  to 
sea  assure  the  weary  mariner  that  ere  long  he  shall  drop  his  anchor  and  end  his 
voyage  in  the  desired  haven.    (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 

Vers.  29-33.  Behold  the  fig-tree  and  all  the  trees. — The  parable  of  the  Jig-tree: — 
I.  Teaching  of  xbs  pabable.  1.  Shows  course  and  sequence  of  events  as  certain 
and  necessary  as  the  processes  of  nature.  AH  is  in  progress.  Be  sure  of  the 
issue.  Be  alive  to  the  tokens  of  its  approach.  2.  The  incongruity  of  the  com- 
parison  is  its  instruction.  Its  purpose  to  fix  attention  not  on  an  end,  but  on  a 
beginning  ;  not  on  what  going,  but  on  what  coming ;  not  on  tokens  of  dissolution, 
but  on  hidden  life  stirring  beneath,  after  last  storm  to  break  out  into  the  "  kingdom 
of  God."  II.  Use  op  its  teachino.  1.  See  that  it  belongs  to  you.  2.  Live 
nnder  the  sense  of  what  is  coming.  You  need  it — (1)  To  prevent  this  present  world 
from  absorbing  you.  (2)  To  prevent  it  from  depressing  yon.  {Canon  T.  D. 
Bernard.)  The  big  clock: — Do  you  know  that  God  has  a  big  clock,  bigger  than 
any  one  yon  have  ever  seen,  bigger  indeed  than  Big  Ben  at  Westminster.  But  thia 
big  clock  does  not  make  any  noise,  yon  can  never  hear  it  ticking ;  and  it  does  not 
strike,  but  yet  it  goes  on,  year  after  year,  year  after  year,  marking  the  time.  What 
do  yon  think  is  the  face  of  this  clock?  It  is  the  earth ;  the  fields  and  meadows  and 
hedgerows  in  every  part  of  the  world — that  is  the  face  of  this  clock.  And  what  do 
you  think  are  the  figures  upon  this  dial?  They  are  flowers  and  birds  and 
leaves.  God's  big  clock  does  not  tick,  but  it  lives ;  it  does  not  strike  the  hours, 
only  some  flowers  open  out  or  die  away  when  the  hour  has  come.  Isn't  that  what 
Jesus  meant  when  He  said,  Look  at  the  fig-tree  and  all  the  trees  ;  they  are  beginning 
BOW  to  put  out  buds.     "Very  well ;  you  know  by  that  that  this  is  spring-time,  and 


amAt.  XX3.]  8T.  LUKE.  491 

by  tiiat  you  knew  that  snminer  !■  coming  near.  The  huds  tell  what  o'clock  it  is  by 
the  time  of  year,  WTien  you  were  learning  to  tell  the  time  on  the  face  of  the  clock 
on  the  mantel-shelf,  how  did  you  begin  ?  "Was  it  not  by  first  learning  the  quarters  ? 
When  the  long  hand  was  half-way  down  on  the  right,  you  knew  it  was  a  quarter 
past ;  when  it  was  half-way  up  on  the  left,  you  knew  it  was  a  quarter-to ;  and  when 
it  was  down  between  these,  you  knew  it  was  half-past ;  and  when  it  was  up  between 
them  you  knew  the  clock  was  going  to  strike  the  hour.  Well,  just  as  there  are  four 
quarters  in  our  clocks  so  there  are  four  quarters  in  this  big  clock  we  are  speaking 
about.  The  first  quarter  is  springtime,  half-past  is  summer,  quarter-to  is  autumn, 
and  when  winter  comes  the  year  is  ended.  When  you  look  at  the  trees  and  flowers 
you  can  pretty  well  tell  what  o'clock  it  is  by  the  year.  But  standing  between  the 
quarters  of  the  clock  there  are  other  figures.  How  many  of  these  are  there 
altogether?  Twelve,  are  there  not?  And  how  many  months  are  there  in  a  year? 
You  know — twelve.  So,  you  see,  this  clock  has  got  all  the  figures,  and,  what  is 
stranger  still,  it  marks  all  the  figures  by  flowers  and  fruits  ;  for  there  are  different 
flowers  that  come  out  every  month  of  the  year.  If  a  smart  boy  were  to  keep  his 
eyes  about  him,  and  understood  things  as  he  walked  in  the  country,  when  he  found 
certain  trees  beginning  to  bud  and  certain  flowers  beginning  to  peep  up,  he  would 
say.  This  must  be  the  month  of  January ;  for  these  always  come  out  in  January. 
Later  on,  if  he  saw  some  others,  he  would  say.  This  must  be  February ;  for  these 
always  come  out  in  February,  And  so  through  all  the  year,  if  he  was  clever,  he 
would  find  the  flowers  and  trees  telling  him  what  month  it  was.  But  there  is 
something  stranger  still  about  this  clock  of  God's ;  and  you  must  remember  it,  so 
that  from  time  to  time  during  the  year  you  may  learn  to  use  your  eyes  and  notice 
what  God  is  doing  in  the  fields.  It  is  this  :  God's  clock  tells  the  hours  of  the  day 
as  well  as  the  months  of  the  year.  The  months  are  the  twelve  figure?  ;  but  you 
know  that  between  the  twelve  figures  there  are  the  little  minutes,  and  these  minutes 
are  made  up  of  moments.  Now  the  minutes  in  God's  big  clock  are  days,  and 
the  moments  are  hours,  and  the  clock  tells  them  all.  What  then  can  be  the 
meaning  of  this  big  clock  ?  Surely  it  is  to  tell  us  that  time  is  passing.  Does  it  not 
plainly  say  that  if  we  do  not  grow  right  in  the  springtime  of  our  life,  we  shall  not 
be  able,  when  the  summer  comes,  to  go  back  to  the  springtime  and  mend  what  has 
been  wrong  ?  You  would  not  like  to  grow  up  wicked,  would  you  ?  Then  learn  to 
grow  as  the  flowers  grow.  How  is  that  ?  By  always  looking  at  the  sun,  and  taking 
its  light,  and  following  it,  for  the  flowers  follow  the  sun  with  their  heads,  and  so 
they  become  beautiful.  Do  you  the  same  with  Jesus — follow  Him  with  your  hearts. 
(J.  B.  Howatt.)  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away. — Heaven  and  earth  shall 
•past  away : — It  is  something  to  startle  us,  and  make  us  ask  ourselves,  if  indeed 
such  things  can  be ;  whether  He  is  in  earnest  who  says  so,  and  whether  the  world 
which  practises  upon  us  by  its  looks  as  though  it  were  eternal,  is  indeed  such  an 
imposter,  and  we  who  believe  it,  so  foolish  and  so  ignorant  1  Yet  so  it  is.  Now, 
it  seems  to  some  of  you,  I  dare  say,  as  to  most  men,  that  this  is  a  great  deal  more 
astonishing  than  that  anything  so  inconsiderable,  materally  considered,  as  a  man, 
Bhould  pass  away,  as  you  see  happen  every  day  by  death.  It  seems  a  pity  to  break 
to  pieces  so  goodly  a  machine  as  heaven  and  earth,  and  uproot  its  adamantine  basis. 
But  if  so,  I  think  you  are  wrong.  It  seems  to  me  nothing  at  all  astonishing,  that 
anything  for  which  we  have  no  longer  a  use  should  finally  be  thrown  aside,  or  broken 
up,  and  the  old  materials  put  to  some  other  purpose,  be  it  an  ordinary  implement, 
or  be  it  a  world.  It  seems  to  me  very  reasonable  and  very  likely  in  itself,  that,  in 
the  infinite  wisdom  and  power  of  God,  one  world  should  be  ripened,  so  to  say,  out 
of  another,  as  you  see  the  fruit  come  out  of  the  flower,  and  the  flower  out  of 
the  bud,  so  that  the  first  shall  decay  before  the  higher  one  can  be  per- 
fected. It  is  very  reasonable  that,  as  a  mere  manifestation  of  power,  in 
order  to  show  to  his  creatures  the  strength  of  His  right  hand,  and  the 
absolute  independency  of  His  will,  God  should  dash  in  pieces,  from  time 
to  time,  or  consume  by  the  breath  of  His  nostrils,  what  was  made  by 
His  word,  and  stood  only  by  His  sufferance.  Besides,  in  the  elements  out 
of  which  heaven  and  earth  are  made,  there  is  no  thought  or  feeling;  they 
are  brute,  dead  things ;  and  are  capable  neither  of  pain  nor  pleasure.  Whether 
they  abide  or  not  in  the  forms  into  which  God  has  thrown  them,  it  is  the  same  to 
them ;  no  harm  is  inflicted  on  them  ;  they  are  as  unconscious  of  change  as  they  are 
impotent  to  feel  or  will.  But,  if  heaven  and  earth  must  pass  away,  another  conse- 
quence will  follow,  which  is  to  every  one  of  us  of  awful  importance.  If  the  earth, 
such  as  it  now  is,  shall  be  utterly  destroyed,  manifest  it  is,  that  oar  present  life. 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  xbu 

and  cares,  and  pleasures,  and  occupations,  all  that  men  make  their  happiness  of, 
will  likewise  be  brought  to  an  end.  And  this  brings  me  to  another  point — and  a 
reason  for  the  passing  away  of  the  present  world,  which  I  have  not  yet  mentioned, 
though  it  might  easily  occur  to  any  thoughtful  mind.  It  is  a  condemned  world  ; 
sentence  is  passed  upon  it  I  And  it  is  condemned,  because  it  is  guilty,  and  all  over 
polluted  1  And  do  not  wonder  at  this,  for  you  know  with  what  feelings  we  regard  a 
chamber  or  a  house  in  which  a  murder,  or  some  abominable  crime,  has  been  com- 
mitted ;  how  we  shrink  from  it  and  abhor  it,  and  hate  the  sight  of  it,  and  should 
think  it  the  greatest  misery  in  the  world,  if  we  have  any  feelings  worthy  of  man,  to 
be  compelled  to  take  up  our  abode  within  it.  A  sort  of  guilt,  as  well  as  involuntary 
pollution,  seems  to  attach  to  the  very  floors  and  senseless  walls  which  have  wit- 
nessed the  crime,  and  have  not  fallen  down  or  opened  upon  the  wicked  in  the  midst 
of  their  wickedness.  And  we  should  rejoice  at  seeing  them  pulled  down  to  the 
ground,  and  the  last  memorial  of  the  crime  removed  from  our  eyes  1  Well,  bo  it  is 
exactly  in  regard  to  the  world  in  which  we  live,  with  all  its  majestic  mechanism,  its 
living  forces,  and  all  the  ornaments  which  God's  hand  has  thrown  round  abont  it. 
It  is  stained  with  six  thousand  years  of  sin.  And  this  brings  us  to  another  portion 
of  the  question.  If  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  shall  anything  succeed  into 
their  room,  or  shall  that  space  which  they  occupied  be  utterly  blank  and  desolate  ? 
The  answer  is,  no.  So  to  say,  there  shall  rise  two  new  worlds,  or  such  a  change  as 
comes  to  the  same  thing,  out  of  the  ruins  of  it ;  even  as  oat  of  the  earth  destroyed 
by  the  flood  there  sprrmg  forth  that  in  which  we  now  dwell.  There  shall  be  the 
new  heavens  and  new  earth,  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness,  and  the  face  of  God's 
countenance  shineth  for  evermore — the  habitation  of  those  who  have  lived  and  died 
in  the  Lord.  And  on  the  other  hand,  the  world,  where  the  light  is  darkness,  and 
the  life  is  death,  and  the  good  is  evil,  and  weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of 
teeth  are  the  voice  thereof — even  the  habitation  of  the  ungodly  for  ever  and  ever. 
And  this  gives  yon  the  true  reason,  dear  brethren,  why  the  judgment  is  now  sus- 
pended, and  son  and  moon  are  shining,  and  night  and  day,  and  spring  and  harvest, 
come  and  go,  and  all  things  remain  as  at  the  beginning.  It  is  that  God's  last  dis- 
pensation npon  earth  may  have  full  room  and  time  to  display  itself  in  all  its  com- 
binations with  human  good  and  evil,  before  the  voice  from  the  throne  shall  proclaim 
that  it  is  finished.  It  is  that,  in  the  sight  of  all  His  creatares,  the  patience  and 
long-suffering  of  God,  which  leadeth  to  repentance,  might  have  full  epace  and 
opportunity  in  which  to  show  themselves,  and  vindicate  to  the  uttermost  the 
exceeding  forbearance  of  our  heavenly  Father  even  towards  them  that  perish !  It 
is  that,  year  after  year.  His  saints  may  be  gathered  in  till,  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
the  flock  which  he  has  given  to  Christ  shall  have  been  called  out  of  all  nations  and 
languages,  and  the  Saviour  be  satisfied  in  the  sight  of  His  soul's  travail.  {J.  Qarhett.) 
XO.J  words  shall  not  pass  away. — The  words  of  Jesus  permanent : — ^I.  Tne  words  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  words  which  He  spoke  for  our  direction,  for  our  purification,  for 
our  comfort,  for  oar  redemption,  have  not  passed,  and  shall  not  pass  away.  Oar 
human  intellect  accepts  them  with  reverence,  and  must  ever  retain  them.  Our 
human  passions  acknowledge  their  salutary  power,  and  look  up  to  them  for  per- 
petual control  and  guidance.  Our  human  fears  are  soothed  by  them,  and  cannot  let 
them  go.  Our  human  hopes  are  informed,  elevated,  and  sanctified  by  them,  and 
constantly  resort  to  them  for  refuge,  and  lean  upon  them  for  rest.  All  oar 
human  affections  have  borrowed  from  them  Divine  light  and  warmth,  and  mast 
reflect  that  light  and  warmth  for  ever.  II.  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away." 
Giving  to  this  sentence  an  individual  application,  we  may  feel  that  heaven  and 
earth  pass  away  from  the  sight  of  all  of  us.  Fancies  as  brilliant  as  the  blue  vault 
above  us,  promises  as  fair,  expectations  and  resolves  as  high,  and  possessions  which 
we  have  deemed  as  firmly  founded  as  the  earth  itself,  have  vanished,  and  will  again 
vani^;  and  what  is  there  left  behind?  The  words  of  Christ  are  left,  when  the 
visions  break,  and  the  possessions  disappear — words  of  patience,  and  coarage,  and 
comfort,  always  left  for  the  strengthening  of  our  hearts,  if  our  hearts  will  hear  and 
accept  them.  The  words  of  Jesus  are  the  promises  of  God  the  Father  to  the  souls 
of  men.  When  eyes  are  growing  dim,  and  the  heart  is  ceasing  to  beat,  and  heaven 
and  earth  are  passing  away,  as  they  sorely  will  from  all  of  as,  what  remains  for  the 
eoul's  help  and  reliance  but  the  words  of  Jesas,  which  are  the  promises  of  God  ? 
III.  And  let  us  remember  that  the  words  of  Jesus,  attested  as  they  are  by  the 
Father  who  sent  Him,  permanent  as  time  has  proved  them,  true,  and  satisfying, 
and  lasting  as  the  human  soul  has  found  them,  are  not  only  the  promises  of  God 
for  man's  hope  and  trust,  but  the  law  of  God  for  man's  final  jadgment.      As  ■ooh 


OTAP.  XXX.]  ST.  LUKE.  493 

they  will  remain,  when  heaven  and  earth,  in  any  and  every  sense,  have  passed 
away.  The  words  of  Christ,  essentially  permanent,  and  surviving  all  change,  will 
meet  oor  souls  in  the  last  day,  and  be  pronounced  upon  them,  for  acquittal  or  for 
doom.  And  certaiu  and  necessary  it  is,  that  the  sentence  which  will  be  adjudged 
unto  ns  hereafter  by  those  words,  will  be  in  strict  accordance  with  the  observance 
or  the  neglect  with  which  we  treated  them  here,  before  our  present  heaven  and  earth 
had  passed  away.  {F.  W.  P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  The  ineffaceable  ward : — On  one 
occasion  when  William  Dawson,  the  Yorkshire  Preacher,  waa  giving  out  a  hymn, 
he  suddenly  stopped  and  said :  "  I  was  coming  once  through  the  town  of  Leeds,  and 
saw  a  poor  little  half-witted  lad  rubbing  at  a  brass  plate,  trying  to  rub  out  the 
name ;  but  the  poor  lad  did  not  know  that  the  harder  he  rubbed  the  brighter  it 
shone.    Now,  friends,  sing: — 

*  Engraved  as  in  eternal  brass 
The  mighty  promise  shines  ; 
Nor  can  the  powers  of  darkness  rase 
Those  everlasting  lines.' " 

rhen,  M  ihongh  he  saw  the  devil  robbing,  he  said :  *'  Satan  eannot  nib  it  off— 

'  His  hand  hath  writ  the  Saored  Word 
With  an  immortal  pen.'  " 

The  enduring  vDord$ : — An  infidel  in  London  had  a  wife  who  possessed  a  Bible  which 
she  regularly  read ;  being  annoyed  at  this,  the  man,  who  had  frequently  tbireatened 
to  do  so,  threw  the  book  upon  the  fire.  This  appears  to  have  taken  place  at  dinner- 
time. He  then  left  home  to  go  to  his  work,  but  soon  returned  to  see  if  the  last 
vestige  of  the  volume  had  disappeared.  The  woman,  who  naturally  felt  distressed 
at  her  loss,  said  she  thought  it  must  be  completely  burned ;  but  her  husband  stirred 
the  ashes  to  see  if  such  was  the  case,  when  he  read  what  fastened  itself  upon  his 
mind,  and  led  to  his  conversion — "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My 
word  shall  not  pass  away."  The  sister  of  this  man  was  the  wife  of  a  London 
pastor ;  and  just  when  the  Bible  was  burning  she  was  earnestly  praying  for  her 
brother's  conversion.    {Sword  and  Trowel.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  Surfeiting^  and  dronkennesa. — Gluttony  and  drunkennett  to  be 
avoided : — L  I  will  attempt  to  show  you  the  evils  and  mischief  ow  these  sins 
WHICH  ouB  Savioub  HEBE  CAUTIONS  OS  AOAiNST.  Be  it  known  to  you,  then,  that 
miserable  are  the  effects  and  fruits  of  these  vices.  Gluttony  and  greediness  drove 
our  first  parents  out  of  Paradise.  They  tell  us  that  Heliogabalus  used  to  bring  his 
parasites  into  dining-rooms  that  had  deceitful  floors,  and  thence  they  fell  and  were 
destroyed.  This  is  but  an  emblem  of  the  ruin  which  attends  those  who  are  addicted 
to  immoderate  eating  and  drinking.  Besides  what  I  have  said  already,  I  will  farther 
show  you  the  pernicious  effects  of  this  luxurious  practice  in  these  five  particulars. 
1.  This  vice  is  generally  fatal  to  men's  estates,  as  the  wise  man  observes,  and 
therefore  dissuades  from  this  folly  (Prov.  xxiii.  20,  21).  2.  How  unspeakably  per- 
nicions  is  this  sin  to  the  body  as  well  as  the  estate  !  3.  This  sin  is  injurious  not 
only  to  the  body  of  man,  but  to  his  mind  and  soul,  his  better  and  more  refined  part. 
Its  operations  are  stified  and  choked,  its  faculties  are  rendered  dull  and  useless, 
and  the  excellent  spirit  which  was  made  to  look  up  to  heaven  bows  down  to  the 
earth,  becomes  gross  and  carnal,  and  is  plunged  into  dirt  and  mire.  4.  Luxurious 
eating  and  drinking  are  the  nurses  of  wantonness  and  uneleanness.  5.  Contempt 
and  disgrace  are  the  just  reward  of  luxury.     II.  I  am  to  lay  down  cebtain  boles 

AND   DIBECTIONB    WHEBEBT   TOO    UAY    OBDEB   T0UB3ELVE8  ABIOHT    IN  THE   USE   OF  THE 

PLEASUBES  OF  MEAT  AND  DBiNE.  These  are  things  natural  and  necessary,  and  there- 
fore lawful  and  innocent  in  themselves.  1.  Offend  not  as  to  quantity;  eat  and 
drink  no  more  than  what  is  requisite.  Nature  is  content  with  slender  provision, 
«nd  Christianity  maintains  the  same  moderation.  2.  Offend  not  as  to  quality,  that 
is,  be  not  over-curious  in  the  choice  of  your  meats  and  drinks.  3.  Desire  not  to 
faro  more  costly  than  is  agreeable  to  your  condition.  4.  Be  careful  that  you  spend 
not  too  much  time  in  eating  and  drinking.  5.  (And  which  is  near  a-Un  to  the 
former  rule)  Make  it  not  your  grand  business  to  eat  and  drink.  6.  Then  these 
bodily  refreshments  of  meat  and  drink  are  lawful  and  commendable,  when  they  are 
accompanied  with  charity  towards  the  needy.     7.  Let  your  eating  and  drinking  b* 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  xn. 

attended  not  only  with  charity,  hut  with  all  other  testimonies  of  religion  and  serving 
God.  Among  the  pagans  their  tables  were  sacred.  It  should  be  much  more  bo 
among  Christians,  that  is,  we  should  make  them  serviceable  to  virtue,  and  to  the 
promoting  of  our  own  and  others'  spiritual  good.  III.  I  will  propound  to  you  some 
HELPS  AND  AS8I8TAKCES.  1.  That  you  may  not  offend  God  by  the  extravagant  use 
of  meats  and  drinks,  begin  within,  and  strive  to  check  your  undue  appeHtes  there. 
Intemperance  and  luxury  begin  at  the  heart ;  stifle  it  there.  2.  You  may  be  helped 
in  the  discharge  of  the  duty  which  I  have  been  treating  of,  by  understanding  your- 
selves aright,  by  considering  your  excellent  nature  and  make.  3.  To  antidote  you 
against  this  immoderation  m  meats  and  drinks,  think  seriously  of  the  dreadful 
judgments  of  God  which  attend  this  sin  (see  Isa.  v.  11 ;  Amos  vi.  1,  *c.).  4,  Think 
of  death  and  judgment,  and  the  serious  consideration  of  these  will  be  serviceable  to 
check  you  in  your  intemperate  courses.  {John  Edwards,  D.D.)  Ruined  hy 
drink: — The  following  fact  is  related  by  a  worthy  clergyman,  who  lived  and 
officiated  not  far  from  this  place.  •*  There  are  persons  so  hardened  in  sin,  and  so 
totally  given  up  of  God,  that  neither  sickness  nor  death  can  make  any  impression 
on  them.  I  remember  one  of  this  unhappy  description,  in  the  county  of  Essex, 
whom  I  both  visited  during  his  illness,  and  interred  after  he  was  dead.  He  was 
a  clever  fellow,  and  of  good  family,  but  so  totally  depraved,  that  when  one  of  his 
bottle  companions  wrote  to  inform  him  that  he  was  about  to  die  and  go  to  hell, 
and  desired  to  know  what  place  he  should  bespeak  for  him  there,  he  sat  down 
and  gave  him  for  a  reply,  that  he  did  not  care  where  it  was  if  there  was  only 
brandy  and  mm  enough.  Thus  he  lived,  and  soon  after  died  a  martyr  to  spirituous 
liquors,  cursing  and  blaspheming,  notwithstanding  all  that  could  be  done  to  bring 
him  to  a  better  mind.  Being  possessed  of  two  bank  bills,  of  the  value  of  ten. 
pounds  each,  which  was  all  the  little  property  he  had  left, — 'Now,'  said  he  to 
a  person  who  stood  by,  '  when  I  have  spent  these  in  brandy  and  rum,  I  shall  be 
content  to  die  and  go  to  hell.'  He  sunk,  however,  before  they  were  expended, 
and  left  just  enough  to  bury  him."  (Essex  Remembrancer,)  The  luaniry  and 
tcorldliness  of  the  present  age  : — I.  First,  thb  wabnino.  To  whom  is  that  warning 
addressed?  "Take  heed  to  yourselves;  .  .  .  for  as  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all 
them  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  You  see  there  is  a  contrast  drawn 
between  yourselves  and  the  whole  earth.  "  Yourselves  "  shows  ns  to  whom  the 
warning  is  spoken — it  is  to  the  Church.  To  His  own  washed,  saved,  sanctified 
ones,  He  says,  "  Take  heed  to  yourselves."  He  says  to  them,  "Take  heed  to  your- 
selves, lest  at  any  time  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  surfeiting,  and  drunken- 
ness and  the  cares  of  thi"  life."  Mark  that  expression,  "  at  any  time."  It  would 
seem  as  though  the  prophecy  has  a  continuous  bearing,  from  the  time  that  it  was 
delivered  up  to  the  end  of  the  world — that  this  warning  is  spoken  to  the  Church  of 
God  in  all  ages.  Take  notice  here  that  the  heart  is  spoken  of  as  meaning  the  inner 
life  of  a  Christian.  Take  heed  lest  the  springs  of  spiritual  life  be  weakened  by  the 
cares,  or  the  frivolities,  or  the  ease,  or  the  luxury,  or  the  gains,  or  the  occupations 
of  this  present  life.  The  word  "  overcharged  "  literally  means  "  weighed  down." 
You  see  that  not  only  surfeiting  and  drunkenness  are  spoken  of,  but  "  the  cares  of 
this  life."  On  the  one  hand  the  Lord  speaks  of  all  the  glare  of  earth,  on  the  other 
hand  He  speaks  of  the  toil  of  earth.  II.  Now,  see  the  beason  of  the  wabnino — 
"  For  as  a  snare  shall  it  come  upon  all  them  that  dwell  upon  the  face  of  the  whole 
earth."  The  meaning  of  this  is,  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  take  the  world  by 
surprise.  III.  Thirdly,  we  come  to  speak  of  the  peecept  gbounded  upon  thb 
WABNINO,  and  the  reason  of  the  warning — "  Watch  ye,  therefore,  and  pray  always, 
that  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  all  these  things  that  shall  come  to  pass, 
and  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man."  You  may  have  marked  in  history,  that  before 
empires  fell,  or  great  capitals  were  destroyed,  luxury  in  the  empire  or  in  the  capital 
had  reached  a  climax.  It  was  so  at  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii ;  it  was  the  case  at 
Bome.  Every  species  of  indulgence,  luxury,  and  comfort  seemed  to  be  gathered 
together  by  the  inhabitants  around,  when  the  burning  mountain  poured  forth  its 
flames,  while  streams  of  lava  buried  the  cities,  and  hurried  the  people  into  eternity. 
And  so,  when  Bome  was  taken  by  the  Goths,  or  northern  nations,  it  had  reached 
the  highest  point  of  luxury,  pomp,  and  pride.  So  Babylon  is  described  in  the 
Revelation — whatever  that  Babylon  means — it  is  described  as  saying,  just  before 
it  is  destroyed — "I  sit  as  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow."  In  the  very  height 
of  her  pomp — in  the  very  zenith  of  her  pride — in  the  midst  of  her  mag- 
nificence, God  casts  her  down,  and  she  sinks  like  lead  in  the  mighty  waters.  It 
will  be  so,  doubtless,  with  the  nations  of  the  world — with  the  kingdoms  of  pro* 


CHAP,  xn,]  ST.  LUKE.  195 

fessing  Christendom — with  the  great  capitals  of  Europe ;  there  will  be  pride,  an(3 
Itixary,  and  magnificence,  and  men  will  be  passing  their  time  in  ease  and  affluence, 
and  self-indulgence,  "  when  sudden  destruction  shall  oome  upon  them,  as  travail 
upon  a  woman  with  child,  and  they  shall  not  escape."     Watch  ye,  therefore; 
watch  against  the  prevailing  taste  for  show — watch  against  the  prevailing  love  of 
ease — watch  against  the  selfishness  of  the  age,  the  luxury  that  creeps  even  into  the 
Church ;  watch  and  take  heed,  brethren,  lest  you  tread  in  the  world's  footsteps. 
{W.  Pennefather,  M.A.)        A  heart  overcharged  with  care  : — I.  Let  us,  think,  then, 
in  the  first  place  of  where  this  injunction  beaIjLY  applies  to  cs — When  is  the 
heart   "  overcharged  with  care "  ?     Distinguish  between  care  and  sorrow.     God 
sends  sorrows  but  He  never  sends  cares.     No  one  can  doubt  the  necessity  for 
sorrow,  it  has  a  part  in  our  development  which  nothing  else  can  fulfil,  and,  there- 
fore, as  long  as  God  loves  us  and  would  do  His  best  for  us  we  may  be  sure  we  shall 
suffer,  and  that  such  suffermg  never  need  be  a  curse,  but  care  always  must.    Who 
are  the  most  miserable  to-day?    Not  the  sorrowful,  but  the  careworn.     When 
Christ  said  "  Take  heed  lest  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  care,"  He  pointed  to 
life's  great  tyranny.     When,  then,  does    this  concern    us  ?      The  word    means 
**  oppressed,"  "  weighed  down."     1.  Then  it  is  true  when  the  heart  is  not  able  to 
rise.     Spiritual  aspirations  have  not  quite  died  out  nor  are  heavenward  promptings 
ever  felt,  but  the  soul  cannot  respond  to  them ;  response  needs  thought,  time, 
effort,  and  these  cannot  be  spared,  so  life  is  absorbed  by  the  earthly,  and  the  higher 
things   are  as  though  they  were  not.     Then,  indeed,  the  heart  is  overcharged 
(oppressed,  weighed  down)  with  care.     2.  So,  too,  is  it  when  the  heart  has  no  room 
for  the  play  of  its  best  affections.     So  I  say  is  it  right  to  be  so  absorbed  by  business 
that  we  are  practically  lost  to  everything  else,  are  practically  slaves  to  money- 
getting,  and  deadened  to  those  influences  and  enjoyments  by  which  our  better 
nature  is  developed  and  the  deep  places  of  our  heart  satisfied  ?     We  cannot  believe 
it  is.     3.  And  so,  too,  when  the  heart  finds  care  to  be  a  burden  that  crushes  it. 
God  means  us  to  be  free  from  oppression.    His  promises  and  requirements  and  the 
provisions  of  His  grace  all  point  to  that :  "  Come  unto  Me  and  I  will  give  you 
rest,"  says  He,  "peace  I  leave  with  you,  My  peace  I  give  unto  you,"  "  be  careful 
for  nothing,"  "  take  no  anxious  thought,"  "  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understanding  shall  keep  your  heart  and  mind."    II.    Consider  what  oub  lobd 
BAYS  ABOUT  THIS  STATE.     "Take  heed  1  "  He  says,  "take  heed  to  yourselves  lest 
kt  any  time  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  care."    That  is,  you  may  fall  into  this 
state  unawares,  to  avoid  it  needs  much  watchfulness.    Glance  at  two  or  three  facts 
which  blind  us  to  the  perils  of  a  care-burdened  heart.     1.  For  instance,  it  seems 
inseparable  from  duty.    The  tendency  of  our  time  is  opposed  to  calm  life,  and 
•Ten  to  calm  pauses  in  the  midst  of  life.    How  seldom  one  sees  a  really  quiet  face  i 
Care  need  not  be,  that  is.    Let  us  not  be  misled  into  it  with  the  idea  that  it  is 
unavoidable,  that  we  cannot  perform  our  proper  task  and  keep  our  proper  place 
■without  being  oppressed  by  it.     Christ's  "  Take  heed  I  "  means  that  if  we  will,  for 
all  appearance  to  the  contrary,  we  may  escape  the  evil.     2.  Then,  it  seems  con- 
sistent with  devotion  to  Christ.    That  is  another  point  which  makes  us  think 
lightly  of  care — there  seems  to  be  no  sin  in  it.    But  see  the  company  this  keeps 
in  the  text :  "  Hearts  overcharged  with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness  and  cares  I " 
"  Surfeiting  and  drunkenness  and  cares  " — these  are  classed  together  in  the  mind 
of  Christ.    Then  failure  in  these  matters,  as  much  as  failure  in  the  other,  is  to  be 
abhorred  as  disloyalty  to  God.     Care  springs  from  very  evil  roots,  from  unbelief 
and  waywardness  and  very  often  from  an  idolatrous  spirit.    Therefore  let  us  not 
go  into  it  or  live  in  it  deceived  as  to  its  nature,  as  though  it  were  harmless,  but  let 
us  shrink  from  it  alarmed  at  our  Lord's  warning  :  "  Take  heed  ! " — "  Take  heed 
lest  at  any  time  your  heart  be  overcharged  with  care."    3.  Then,  too,  it  seems  the 
natural  result  of  temperament.    That  is  another  fact  which  blinds  us  to  its  evil» 
for  we  are  apt  to  excuse  certain  forms  of  wrong-doing  if  we  have,  as  we  think,  a 
tendency  to  them.    Let  us  give  up  making  light  of  the  sin  of  care  because  it  is 
natural,  and  of  thinking  that  because  it  is  natural  it  is  unconquerable.    Consider, 
thirdly,  what  this  wobd  of  oob  Lobd  tet  fubtheb  implies.     The  command  not 
under  any  circumstances  to  have  "  hearts  overcharged  with  care,"  is  a  most  solemn 
assurance  that  this  is  possible.    We  can  rise  to  some  measure  of  it  at  once,  but  its 
full  measure  is  the  fruit  of  spiritual  culture.    Briefly  notice  the  lines  this  culture 
must  take.     I.  We  must  train  ourselves  to  undertake  nothing  but  at  the  bidding  of 
God,     Cares  are  largely  due  either  to  a  consciousness  that  we  have  taken  onr 
fliflairs  into  our  own  hands  and  must  be  responsible  for  the  result,  or  to  a  feebW 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tb. 

realization  that  having  obeyed  God  we  are  His  servants  and  an  thaa  under  Hi4 
protection.  Deliberate  obedience  is  one  of  the  great  secrets  of  peace.  2.  And  ws 
must  train  ourselves  to  commit  our  cares  fearlessly  to  Him.  Many  of  them  are 
self-imposed,  and,  as  I  implied,  it  will  not  be  easy  to  lose  their  burden.  We  mu3t 
avoid  such.  3.  I  need  only  add  that  we  must  train  ouirselves  to  regard  oommuoioa 
with  God  as  our  first  duty.  For  that  communion  is  the  basis  of  ^e  faith  I  speak 
«L    (C.  New.) 

Ver.  36.  Watch  ya,  therefore,  and  pray  always. — Christian  preparation  for  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  : — The  subject  of  our  inquiry  to-day  will  be — "  What  practical 
effect  ought  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord's  second  coming  to  have  on  you  and  me, 
living  when  and  where  and  as  we  do  7  "  On  the  certainty  of  that  coming,  I  need, 
I  suppose,  say  very  little.  On  the  manner  of  that  coming,  we  possibly  may  not  be 
agreed  ;  the  time  of  it  is  expressly  and  purposely  concealed  from  us.  Two  things, 
therefore,  seem  to  me  to  have  a  right,  as  elements,  to  induence  our  practice  in  this 
matter ;  the  absolute  certainty  that  the  day  will  come,  and  the  absolute  uncertainty 
when  it  will  come.  In  fact,  in  both  these  respects  we  are  in  much  the  same  situa- 
tion as  we  are,  when  in  health  and  strength  and  the  prime  of  life,  with  regard  to 
the  day  of  our  death.  We  know  that  it  must  be;  but  no  sign  appears  of  iU 
immediate  approach.  And  from  this  example,  so  common  and  so  well  understood, 
we  may  perhaps  be  able  easily  to  deduce  our  duty  in  the  other  case.  The  wise 
course  with  regard  to  the  inevitable  day  of  one's  death  appears  to  be  this  :  never 
to  lose  sight  of  the  certainty  of  it,  but  to  keep  ourselves  ever  ready,  while  at  the 
same  time  we  do  not  morbidly  brood  over  the  fact,  nor  allow  it  to  interrupt  oar 
duties  in  life.  And  here,  as  in  that  other  case,  we  must  avoid  a  diseased  and 
restless  state  of  anticipation,  as  well  as  the  opposite  extreme  of  entire  forgetfulness. 
But  perhaps  it  may  be  said,  In  laying  down  rules  for  the  one  consideration,  that  of 
our  own  deaths,  are  we  not  also  including  the  other,  the  expectation  of  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  ?  Certainly,  in  some  particulars  the  two  great  events  coincide ;  but  by 
no  means  in  all.  And  it  may  be  profitable  for  a  few  moments  to  ask  ourselvea 
wherein  they  are  identical,  and  wherein  each  has  its  region  peculiar  to  itself. 
They  coincide  in  that  each  event,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  will  put  a  limit  to 
this  our  present  state  of  existence ;  but  they  differ,  in  that  the  one  will  do  this  for 
ourselves  alone ;  the  other,  for  all  mankind.  And  this  is  a  strictly  practical 
consideration;  for  I  suppose  few  of  as  are  so  selfish  as  to  corifine  our 
anticipations  and  provisions  to  ourselves  alone,  but  we  all  extend  them 
over  those  who  are  to  come  after  as.  The  certainty,  then,  of  the  day 
of  the  Lord  will  influence  those  provisions,  if  we  look  on  it  as 
bringing  the  limit  of  this  state  of  time ;  we  shall  be  rather  anxious  to  do 
present  good  with  our  substance,  making  moderate  provision  for  our  successors, 
than  to  lay  the  foundations  of  great  possessions,  and  starve  our  charities  to  do  so. 
Again,  they  differ,  in  that  the  one  brings  to  ourselves  alone  the  final  state  ;  the 
other  completes  the  great  scheme  of  redemption.  The  number  of  God's  elect  will 
be  accomplished,  and  His  glorious  kingdom  will  have  come.  And  such  a  con- 
sideration, while  it  may  not  have  much  distinctive  influence  upon  our  individual 
Christian  lives,  ought  to  have  much  upon  our  regard  of  our  relative  duties,  and  oar 
efforts  for  spreading  Christ's  gospel  on  earth.  {Dean  Alford.)  On  preparing 
for  ChriaVa  coming  rather  than  for  death : — Of  all  the  subjects  on  which  we  may 
speculate  as  to  our  own  state  and  destination,  perhaps  none  is  so  mysterious,  none 
so  difficult  to  form  a  definite  idea  of,  as  the  condition  of  the  dead  after  the  act  of 
death ;  on  the  other  hand  nothing  is  more  simple  and  clear,  than  their  state  after 
the  coming  of  the  Lord.  There  is,  then,  this  consideration,  which  is  worthy  at 
least  of  our  notice ;  that  the  looking  for  and  waiting  unto  the  day  of  the  Lord 
brings  us  something  more  definite,  something  immediately  following  it  of  a  more 
tangible  kind,  more  calculated  to  make  a  deep  impression  on  us,  than  the  con- 
templation of  the  day  of  our  own  death.  The  realities  consequent  on  the  one  are 
«nd  must  be,  even  to  the  strongest  faith,  shrouded  in  a  mist  which  is  to  as 
Impenetrable ;  the  other,  with  its  realities,  stands  forth  boldly  before  us,  marked 
oot  in  all  its  features  by  the  hand  of  Christ  HimseU.  So  that  the  man  who  waits 
for  the  Lord's  coming  is  likely  to  be  more  definite,  more  assured,  more  manly  and 
determined  in  whatever  effects  on  his  character  such  anticipation  may  have,  than 
ht  who  merely  looks  forward  to  his  own  death.  Moreover,  when  we  compare  the 
two  as  to  the  qaestion,  whidb  best  befits  the  Christian  as  an  object  of  thought 
•nd  expectation — we  cannot,  I  think,  hesitate  a  moment.    The  New  Testameofc 


OKAP.  XXI.]  ST.  LUKE.  497 

is  fall  of  exhortations  to  watch  and  prepare  for  the  Lord's  coming.  From  His  owd 
discourses  while  on  earth  in  the  flesh,  through  those  of  the  apostles  in  the  Acts, 
through  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter,  St.  James,  St.  John,  St.  Jude,  even  to 
the  latest  written  words  of  the  Spirit  in  the  Bevelation,  no  command  is  more 
frequent,  none  more  solemnly  impressed  on  ns,  than  that  we  should  keep  that  great 
event  constantly  in  view,  and  be  ever  ready  for  it.  Whereas  we  shall  hardly  find 
one  exhortation,  addressed  directly  to  as  as  Christians,  to  be  ready  for  the  day  of 
our  own  death.  And  why  so  ?  clearly  not  because  such  readiness  is  not  necessary 
— far  from  it  indeed — but  because  the  greater  absorbs  the  less:  because  the- 
promise  of  our  ascended  Saviour — His  return  to  us — His  coming  to  take  account  of 
His  servants — includes  in  it  all  that  the  other  possibly  could  do,  and  very  much' 
more  ;  because  death  is  at  the  best  but  a  gloomy  thing,  bearing  trace  of  the  curse, 
accompanied  with  pain  and  sorrow,  whereas  the  Lord's  coming  is  to  His  people  a 
thought  full  of  joy — the  completion  of  their  redemption,  the  beginning  of  their 
reign    of    glory.      (Ibid.)  Preparation    of  heart : — ^We    want,    in    our    pre- 

paration for  the  day  of  the  Lord,  lightness  of  heart ;  hearts  which  we  can  lift  up^ 
to  heaven  where  our  treasure  is  ;  hearts  which  are  not  tied  down  to  this  earth — 
not  cleaving  to  the  dust.  And  how  may  we  lighten  our  hearts?  The  first 
lightening — the  first  rolling  oft  of  the  burden  which  weighed  so  heavily  on  them, 
is  the  work  of  God's  Spirit  in  the  day  of  His  power ;  is  that  setting  free  from  the 
load  of  sin  by  the  blessed  eftects  of  justifying  faith  in  Christ,  in  which  the  law  of 
the  Spirit  of  life  makes  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  But  how  may  we 
best  keep  them,  when  thus  lightened,  from  again  accumulating  a  burden,  and  being 
weighed  down  from  their  proper  object  of  contemplation  and  desire  ?  Listen  to 
our  Lord's  command.  It  is  the  surfeiting  of  this  world's  employments  and 
pleasures  which  thus  clogs  the  heart.  This,  then,  of  all  things  is  to  be  shunned,  if 
we  would  be  prepared  for  that  day.  You  cannot,  beloved,  be  casting  yourselves 
fully  into  the  arms  of  the  world,  and  be  prepared  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 
The  two  things  are  absolutely  incompatable.  If  you  choose  the  part  of  eagerness 
about  things  present,  that  day  will  come  upon  you  unawares — whether  it  come 
with  the  sign  in  the  clouds  and  the  resurrection  trumpet,  or  with  the  sinking  of  the 
flesh  and  heart,  the  curtained  chamber,  the  bedside  group  fading  away  from  the 
failing  vision.  (Ibid.)  The  command  to  watch: — Two  facts  concerning  His 
advent  are  plainly  stated  and  they  are  all  that  a  majority  of  His  Church  will 
perceive,  namely :  that  we  are  ignorant  of  the  time  of  the  end ;  that  it  will  be 
sudden.  I.  The  ready  soul  is  the  diligekt.  II.  The  beadt  soul  is  the 
VIGILANT.  III.  The  beadv  boul  is  the  pbatkeful.  {De  Witt  S.  Clark.) 
The  safety  of  prayer : — Our  Lord  did  not  so  much  urge  the  duty  of  praying  as 
the  safety  of  prayer.  L  To  this,  then,  let  us  first  turn  our  thoughts.  Jesus 
mentioned  as  the  special  aim  of  prayer :  "  That  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy 
to  escape  all  these  things,"  i.e.,  calamities,  that  their  city,  nation,  race,  and,  in  fact, 
the  human  family  were  liable  to  experience,  but  yet  might  escape  if  only  they 
would  seek  to  be  accounted  "worthy  "  to  do  so.  The  word  "  worthy "  as  here  used 
calls  for  examination ;  for  if  it  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  deserving  because  faultless,. 
there  is  no  use  in  saying  anything  about  it :  we  are  not  that ;  and  we  never  caa 
60  be  *'  accoimted  worthy,"  having  already  committed  aggravated  offences  against 
God  without  number,  which  have  brought  compromises  of  guilt  and  stains  upon 
our  souls.  The  idea  of  merit,  however,  which  the  word  "  worthy  "  usually  carries 
with  it,  is  not  at  all  intended  in  this  verse.  The  verb  used  is  a  military  term 
really,  meaning  to  conquer,  to  win  a  victory,  to  prevail  against  another,  against 
an  enemy,  against  bafQing  influences  and  hindering  circumstances.  Hence  the 
meaning  of  the  word  in  the  text  is :  that  they  might  be  able  to  prevail  and 
escape  all  the  calamities  Jesus  had  been  speaking  of.  The  Bevised  Version 
sustains  this  interpretation.  It  gives  the  text :  "  But  watch  ye  at  every  season^ 
making  supplication  that  ye  may  prevail  to  escape  all  these  things  that  shall 
come  to  pass,  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man."  It  was  not  that  He  counselled 
His  disciples  to  deserve  or  merit  safety  through  their  good  conduct,  although 
their  good  conduct  was  to  be  as  binding  as  ever,  but  to  pray  that  they  might 
be  tenacious  of  purpose,  anyielding,  and  therefore,  successful  in  overcommg 
temptation,  walking  so  faithfully  with  their  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  to  practise  good 
conduct  and  persevere  in  it.  11.  Mind,  they  were  to  pray  that  they  might  be 
tenacious.  On  that  they  ought  to  resolve;  ought  to  set  out  to  be  tenacious 
in  Christian  living,  in  overcoming  human  oppositions,  surmounting  temporal 
obstacles,  social  lundrances,  threats  of  rulers,  frowns  of  society,  oppositions  oi 
VOL.  m.  82 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

families,  clamours  of  self-interest,  desires  for  enjoyment,  and  lusts  that  ruin  the 
goal — bearing  their  cross  to  follow  after  Jesus  ;  but  still,  in  addition  to  all  this,  nay 
in  order  to  accomplish  all  this,  they  were  to  make  continual  and  systematic 
applications  to  the  Host  High  God.  Wherever  you  have  failed  tell  it  to  God ; 
in  perfect  frankness  confess  it  to  Him,  and  ask  Him  to  account  you  worthy  to 
escape  all  forces  of  temptation,  and  all  calamities  that  are,  or  are  to  be,  consequent 
on  Bin ;  or  as  the  Eevised  Version  has  the  text :  "  Make  supplication  that  you  may 
prevail  to  escape,"  every  evil  of  ungodliness,  whether  already  wrought  in  the 
callousness  of  your  heart,  or  in  a  weakness  of  character  growing  out  of  self-love, 
or  in  the  fearful  sorrows  that  are  to  be  experienced  on  Christ's  rejection  of  your 
undying  soul  in  the  judgment  day.  (Dr.  Truvibull.)  Watching : — L  Watch 
ovEB  YOUB  oDTQOiNGs  (Mark  vii.  20).  II.  Watch  oveh  the  incomings.  See  to 
it  that  mind  and  heart  are  ever  filled  with  such  suggestions  as  can  carry  the 
stamp  of  Christ's  approval.  III.  Watch  oveb  youb  soBBouNDraos.  Your  life 
has  to  be  lived  in  the  midst  of  hindering  difficulties  and  influences.  Then 
tmderstand  your  life.  Know  the  power  of  your  circumstances.  IV.  Watch  ovkb 
10UB  OPPORTUNITIES.  You  wUl  have  opportunities  (1)  of  growing  in  grace ;  (2) 
of  showing  faithfulness  to  your  Lord ;  (3)  of  serving  Him  in  your  daily  sphere. 
{The  Weekly  Pulpit.)  Watching: — ^I.  Its  peculiae  chabacteb.  The  very  quint- 
essence of  all  faith ;  the  very  reason  why  faith  is  necessary  for  the  true  life 
The  soul  in  which  burns  the  light  of  faith  looks  forward,  and  by  looking  forward 
is  helped  to  step  forward,  expecting  some  strange  yet  true  results.  The  will  is 
strengthened  to  assert  itself,  sometimes  on  ventures  which  appear  without 
foundation,  but  which  are  based  upon  the  reality  of  what  is  to  come.  So  the 
Christian  can  go  forward  with  confidence  and  security.  1.  From  the  call  of 
Abraham  to  the  present  day,  the  supreme  attitude  of  God's  children  has  been  that 
of  expectancy.  2.  Just  as  the  Israelites  looked  for  the  first  coming  of  the  Messiah, 
eo  Christians  look  for  the  second  coming  in  power  and  great  glory.  II.  The 
EssENTiAii  BENEFITS  OF  wATCHiNO.  1.  It  is  a  power  which,  though  often  latent 
and  unobserved,  is  still  a  power  of  incalculable  force.  The  unknown  reserve  of 
spiritual  influence  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the  sincerely  Christian  character. 
2.  The  watcher  is  always  ready.  No  haziness  about  life,  or  uncertainty  about 
its  aims.  (Anon.)  Watchfulness: — See  that  sentry  at  the  gate  of  an  encamp- 
ment or  a  fortress — mark  his  measured  tread,  his  martial  port,  his  anxious  though 
determined  countenance — his  quiet  and  searching  glance,  as  he  repeats  his 
constant  walk — that  soldier  is  awake ;  but  he  is  more — he  is  upon  his  guard — his 
mind  is  full  of  his  important  trust — he  feels  the  weight  of  his  responsibility. 
But  see — his  frame  becomes  relaxed,  his  form  grows  less  erect,  his  movements 
lose  their  regular  mechanical  succession — his  look  is  vacant  or  abstracted,  he 
no  longer  looks  afar  oS  and  at  hand  in  search  of  approaching  danger,  he  has 
«ither  forgotten  it,  or  ceased  to  reckon  it  so  imminent.  And  yet  the  man  is  wide 
awake ;  not  only  are  his  eyes  still  open,  but  they  see  surrounding  objects ;  all 
his  senses  are  still  active,  and  his  mind,  though  distracted  from  his  present 
duty,  is  as  much  at  work  as  ever ;  for  no  sooner  does  the  slightest  sound  arouse 
him,  than,  as  if  by  magic,  he  recovers  his  position  and  the  tension  of  his  muscles, 
he  resumes  his  measured  walk,  his  mingled  air  of  circumspection  and  defiance, 
and  his  look  of  bold  but  anxious  scrutiny.  Even  before,  he  was  awake  ;  but  now 
he  is  awake  and  at  the  same  time  on  his  guard.  Precisely  the  same  difference 
'exists  between  a  simple  wakefulness  in  spiritual  matters — a  wakefulness  of  under- 
standing, conscience,  and  affection,  and  the  active  exercise  of  spiritual  vigilance ; 
ithis  is  impossible  without  the  other,  but  the  other  does  not  necessarily  involve 
this.  In  both  oases,  that  is,  in  the  literal  and  spiritual  case  supposed,  there 
is  a  sensible  gradation  of  remissness  or  the  opposite.  We  have  seen  the  sentry 
■wholly  losing  for  a  moment  the  recollection  of  his  solemn  trust ;  but  this  is  not 
the  only  way  in  which  he  may  unconsciously  betray  it.  Look  at  him  again. 
Every  look,  every  motion,  now  betokens  concentration  of  his  thoughts  and 
feelings  on  the  danger  which  impends,  and  against  which  he  is  set  to  watch. 
Perhaps  he  is  now  motionless,  but  it  is  only  that  his  eye  may  be  more  steadfastly 
iixed  upon  the  point  from  which  the  enemy's  approach  is  apprehended.  In  that 
point  his  whole  being  seems  to  be  absorbed.  Aiid  you  can  see  at  a  glance  that 
ne  is  ready,  even  for  the  first  and  faintest  intimation  of  a  moving  object  on 
that  dim  horizon.  But  while  he  stands  like  a  statue,  with  his  face  turned 
iowards  that  dreaded  point,  look  beyond  him  and  behind  him,  at  those  forms  which 
ate  becoming  every  moment  more  and  more  defined  against  the  opposite  quarter 


<Bap.  XXI.]  ST.  LUKE.  499 

of  the  heavens.  He  hears  them  not,  because  their  step  is  noiseless;  he  sees 
them  not,  becaase  bis  eye  and  all  his  faculties  are  employed  in  an  opposite 
direction.  While  he  strains  every  sense  to  catch  the  first  intimations  of 
approaching  danger,  it  is  creeping  stealthily  behind  him,  and  when  at  last  his  ear 
distinguishes  the  tramp  of  armed  men,  it  is  too  late,  for  a  hostile  hand  is  already 
on  his  shoulder,  and  if  his  life  is  spared,  it  is  only  to  be  overpowered  and  disarmed 
without  resistance.  And  yet  that  soldier  was  not  only  awake,  but  on  his  guard 
— his  whole  being  was  absorbed  in  contemplation  of  the  danger  which  impended  ; 
but,  alas,  he  viewed  it  as  impending  only  from  one  quarter,  and  lost  sight  of 
it  as  really  approaching  from  another.  We  may  even  suppose  that  he  was  right 
in  looking  where  he  did,  and  only  wrong  in  looking  there  exclusively.  There 
was  an  enemy  to  be  expected  from  that  quarter,  and  if  this  had  been  the  only 
one,  the  sentry's  duty  would  have  been  successfully  performed;  bat  he  was 
not  aware,  or  had  forgotten,  that  the  danger  was  a  complex  one — that  while  the 
enemy  delayed  his  coming,  another  might  be  just  at  hand,  and  thus  the  very  con- 
centration of  his  watchfulness  on  one  point  defeated  its  own  purpose,  by 
withdrawing  his  attention  from  all  others.  By  a  slight  shifting  in  the  scene, 
I  might  present  to  you  the  same  man  or  another,  gazing  not  at  one  point  only, 
but  at  all ;  sweeping  the  whole  visible  horizon  with  his  eye  as  he  maintains  his 
martial  vigil.  See  with  what  restless  activity  his  looks  pass  from  one  distant 
point  to  another,  as  if  resolved  that  nothing  shall  escape  him,  that  no  imaginable 
source  of  danger  shall  remain  unwatched.  That  man  might  seem  to  be  in  every 
sense  awake  and  on  his  guard — surprise  might  seem  to  be  impossible — but  hark ! 
what  sound  is  that  which  suddenly  disturbs  him  in  his  solitary  vigils  7  he  looks 
hastily  around  him,  but  sees  nothing,  yet  the  sound  is  growing  every  moment 
louder  and  more  distinct;  *♦  a  voice  of  noise  from  the  city" — "the  voice  of  them 
that  shout  for  mastery  " — •'  the  voice  of  them  that  cry  for  being  overcome  "  ! 
Doubt  is  no  longer  possible — it  is — it  is  behind  him — ^yes,  the  enemy  for  whom 
he  looked  so  vigilantly,  is  within  the  walls,  and  the  banner  which  he  thought 
to  have  seen  waving  at  a  distance,  is  floating  in  triumph  just  above  his  head. 
The  cases  which  I  have  supposed  are  not  mere  appeals  to  your  imagination. 
They  are  full  of  instruction  as  to  practical  reaUties.  They  vividly  present  to  us 
in  figurative  forms  the  actual  condition  of  the  soul  in  reference  to  spiritual 
dangers.  {J,  A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Before  the  Son  of  Man. — Before  the  Son  of 
Man: — I.  BiaiD  bequikeuents  of  His  standard.  1.  Consecration.  Implies 
self-surrender.  The  doctrine  of  the  Cross  lies  at  the  threshold  of  Christian  living. 
2.  Parity.  Involves  thought  of  the  heart,  speech,  actions.  3.  Non-resistance. 
"  Overcome  evil  with  good."  This  is  the  law  of  the  New  Testament,  though 
not  of  nations  or  of  the  world.  4.  Forgiveness  of  injury.  Goes  beyond  passive 
indifference.  Exacts  positive  affection.  II.  Duty  of  standino  befobb  Him. 
Every  time  we  hear  the  gospel,  we  "  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man."  Every  time 
we  witness  EUs  ordinances,  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  Him.  How  ?  Either 
condemned  or  justified.  Christ  is  the  great  Befiner  of  men.  It  is  our  duty  to 
stand  before  Him.  1.  Because  His  is  the  only  perfect  standard.  He  makes  no 
mistakes.  2.  Because  it  is  the  only  way  to  secure  His  favour.  Once  men  put 
Him  on  trial ;  now  the  order  is  reversed.  He  demands  that  every  man  be  put  to 
the  test,  to  show  his  quality.  To  refuse  to  submit  to  Christ's  judgment,  is  to 
confess  cowardice.  3.  Because  by  this  we  reach  our  proper  place.  The  scientific 
principle  is  here  appUed.  It  is  a  species  of  "natural  selection" — "the  survival 
of  the  fittest."  Conclusion :  To  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man  implies — 1.  Your  life 
in  harmony  with  His.  2.  Watching  and  prayer.  3.  His  favour  and  divinest 
blessing.    {H.  S.  Lobingier. ) 

Vers.  87,  38.  The  Mount  of  Olives. — Contemplations  on  Olivet: — It  will  not  be 
difficult  to  conceive  how  our  Lord  passed  this  sleepless  night  on  the  Mount  of 
Ohves.  L  Night  fobebodings  oveb  the  doom  of  the  city  which  had  bejbcted 
Him.  Can  we  wonder  that  His  thoughts  that  night  were  sad  ?  Meet  the  facts  fully 
and  attentively,  of — 1.  Christ's  grief  over  the  apostate  city.  2.  Christ's  grief  over 
the  doomed  city.  He  knew  the  inseparable  connection  between  sinning  against 
Christ  and  impending  doom.  11.  Night  beflections  upon  His  pbofhecies  which 
FORESHADOWED  THE  END.  Desccration  of  the  Holy  City ;  slaughter  and  dispersion 
of  Qod's  people ;  dire  international  struggles  ;  decadence  of  faith,  &c.  UI.  Night 
anticipations  of  the  cijObin..  ti:vENTS  OF  His  earthly  cabeeb.  He  clearly  read  each 
Incident  cf  His  nearing  anguish,  and  He  carefully  confronted  it  all.    Nothing  coald 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ra, 

divert  Him  from  His  goal.  IV.  Night  pbepabation  fob  thb  subrenceb  to  Hb 
KEABiKO  DEATH.  1.  Why  this  readlncss  to  meet  death  ?  He  would  save  others ;  not 
Himself.  2.  For  whom  this  readiness  to  die  ?  For  false  friends  and  hating  foes. 
(W.  H.  Jellie.)  Work  and  prayer: — The  life  of  the  Lord  Jesns  on  earth  was  a, 
true  human  life  ;  and  it  is  only  as  we  fully  recognize  this  fact  that  we  can  find  in 
it  an  example  for  our  guidance.  Here  is  a  brief  but  instructive  record  of  one 
important  portion  of  His  ministry  on  earth — itself  a  type  of  His  whole  course.  The 
day  was  given  to  work — the  evening  to  quiet  rest,  meditation,  and  prayer.  Both 
were  necessary  to  the  fulfilment  of  His  mission,  and  both  are  essential  to  the  com- 
pleteness of  our  Christian  character.  Here  are  two  elements  of  Christian  excel- 
lence, apparently  apposite,  yet  both  must  be  blended  in  one  who  would  attain  tO' 
the  fulness  of  the  stature  of  a  perfect  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  Many  have  tried,  are 
trying,  to  separate  them.  There  have  been  ages,  there  are  still  individuals  and 
parties  in  whom  there  is  an  excess  of  the  devotional — an  excess,  because  it  is  to  the 
exclusion  of  the  active  part.  Man  can  never  pray  too  often  or  too  earnestly  ;  but 
if  his  whole  ideas  of  religious  duty  be  confined  to  the  reading  of  so-called  spiritual 
books,  the  attendance  on  the  pubhc  worship  of  God,  or  the  performance  of  certain 
acts  of  private  devotion — if  the  whole  time  that  is  not  spent  thus  is  regarded  as 
something  removed  from  the  sphere  of  religion — if  the  ordinary  work  of  the  world 
be  looked  on  as  something  that  is  fitted  to  lower  the  tone  of  the  soul,  and  to  inter- 
fere with  spiritual  earnestness — if  even  active  service  for  Christ  be  depreciated,  then 
the  true  character  of  a  Christian  Ufe  is  altogether  forgotten.  There  is  the  opposite 
danger,  and  it  is  perhaps  that  into  which  we  are  most  prone  to  fall.  Ours  is  the 
age  of  activity— from  every  side  come  to  the  Christian  calls  for  earnest  labour,  for 
the  overthrow  of  error,  for  the  enlightening  of  ignorance,  for  the  diffusion  of  the 
Gospel,  for  the  relief  of  suffering  and  poverty,  for  the  advancement  of  the  number- 
less institutions  which  seek  the  advancement  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Demands  of  this 
character  are  incessant ;  and  if  obedience  to  them  be  the  whole  of  our  religion — if 
such  engagements  prevent  heart-searching,  God-seeking,  quiet  meditation,  and 
earnest  prayer — if  they  draw  us  away  from  that  self-communion  which  is  the  true 
prelude  to  communion  with  God — if  all  is  bustle,  excitement,  outward  struggle, 
there  is  sure  to  be  weakness.    I.  It  will  not  need  much  argument  to  prove  that 

ACTIVE  liABOUBB  FOB  ChBIST  ABE  AN  ESSENTIAL  PAST  OF   ChBISTIAN  DUTY.       The    life   of 

Christ  is  the  model  for  all  true  human  lives.  In  the  perfection  of  His  self-sacrifice, 
in  His  readiness  for  all  kinds  of  service,  in  His  eagerness  to  search  out  opportunities 
for  blessing  man,  in  His  indifference  to  every  motive  or  feeling  that  would  have 
held  Him  back  in  His  ministry  of  love — in  the  resolve  so  early  announced,  that  He 
must  be  about  His  Father's  business,  our  great  Master  inspires  and  guides  us.  His 
own  teachings  indicate  clearly  that  His  followers  are  not  to  be  recluses  dwelling: 
apart  from  their  kind,  but  men  taking  their  place  in  the  world's  associations  and 
movements,  that  they  may  affect  them  for  good.  They  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and 
that  salt  must  be  applied  to  the  mass  which  it  is  to  season  and  preserve,  else  where 
were  its  value  ?  Surely  it  argues  no  want  of  charity  to  say  that  all  these  pleas  argue 
an  absence  of  true  love  to  Christ.  Men  complain  of  want  of  opportunities,  want  ot 
adaptation,  want  of  intellect,  when  their  one  grand  deficiency  is  want  of  heart. 
Love  will  quicken  languid  feelings,  multiply  the  few  talents,  ennoble  that  which 
else  were  mean,  breathe  courage  into  trembUng  hearts,  and  make  the  foolish  wise 
to  win  souls.  Difficnlties  that  to  sluggards  seem  insuperable,  will  but  stimulate  its 
ardour  and  reveal  its  strength.  II.  The  Cheistian  man  must  have  his  times  fob 
BETiBEMSNT  AND  PBAYEB.  This  is  the  Other  lesson  taught  by  the  brief  record  of  the 
last  week  of  our  Lord's  ministry  on  earth.  Now  as  the  crisis  draws  near  and  the 
cross  is  in  immediate  prospect,  still  more  does  His  spirit  crave  that  retirement  in 
which,  with  strong  crying  and  tears,  He  can  make  His  supplication  to  His  heavenly 
Father.  To  us  the  spectacle  is  alike  sublime  and  mysterious,  yet  full  of  instruc- 
tion. The  glories  which  belong  to  the  God  cannot  make  us  forget  that  He  has 
become  in  all  respects  like  to  us,  and  that  as  our  elder  brother  He  teaches  us  our 
need,  and  shows  us  where  we  must  seek  for  strength  and  succour.  For  we,  too, 
need  our  times  of  rest  for  meditation,  self-examination,  and  prayer.  Soul  and  body 
in  this  follow  the  same  law.  Science  tells  us,  and  experience  confirms  the  truth, 
that  food  is  not  more  needful  for  the  body  than  rest.  Want  of  sleep  will  exhaust 
and  kill  as  well  as  want  of  food.  So  with  the  souL  Asleep  in  the  full  sense  it 
ought  never  to  be,  but  rest,  cessation  of  conflict,  labour,  and  trial,  it  does  need. 
Constant  excitement,  unrelaxing  toil,  unceasing  struggle,  would  have  the  same 
effect  on  it  as  on  the  body.  We  feel,  in  our  bodily  life,  need  for  even  more  than  the 


•HAP.  zxn.]  8T.  LUKE.  60] 

night  of  sleep.  Who  can  tell  the  blessing  to  the  world,  even  as  a  mere  physical 
good,  of  the  Christian  Sabbath  ?  Our  Good  Shepherd  knows  our  need,  and  there- 
lore  He  has  still  waters  to  which  He  leads  His  flock — "  waters  of  restings,"  where 
oar  spirits,  exhausted  by  work  or  warfare,  may  find  the  refreshment  they  require. 
He  calls  ns,  therefore,  to  rest  and  prayer,  that  we  may  find  the  "  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  Thus  the  earnest  worker  is  prepared  to  be  the  most  importunate 
pleader  with  God,  and  the  fervent  prayer,  in  its  turn,  fills  the  sonl  with  the  inspira- 
tion of  a  barning  zeal  and  the  confidence  of  an  assored  faith.    {J,  O.  Eogertt  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXn. 


Ykbb.  1,  S.  Sought  how  they  might  Mil  Him. — The  eonspiraey  agairut  Christ : — 
This  chapter  gives  us  a  sad  and  sorrowful  relation  of  the  chief  priests*  conspiracy 
against  the  life  of  our  blessed  Saviour;  in  which  we  have  three  particulars 
observable :  1.  The  persons  making  this  conspiracy,  the  chief  priests,  scribes,  and 
elders ;  that  is,  the  whole  Jewish  sanhedrim,  or  general  council ;  they  all  jay  their 
malicious  heads  together,  to  contrive  the  destruction  of  the  holy  and  innocent 
Jesus.  Thence  learn,  that  general  councils  have  erred,  and  may  err  funda- 
mentally, both  in  matters  of  doctrine  and  practice  ;  they  did  not  befieve  Jesus  to 
be  the  Messias,  after  all  the  miracles  wrought  before  their  eyes,  but  ignominiously 
put  Him  to  death.  2.  The  maimer  of  this  conspiracy  against  the  life  of  our  blessed 
Saviour ;  it  was  clandestine,  secret,  and  subtle.  They  consulted  how  they  might 
take  Him  by  craft,  and  put  Him  to  death.  Learn  thence,  that  Satan  makes  use  of 
the  subtlety  of  crafty  men,  and  abuseth  their  parts  as  well  as  their  power  for  his 
own  purposes  and  designs:  the  devil  never  sends  a  fool  on  his  errand.  3.  The 
circumstance  of  time  when  this  conspiracy  was  managed,  at  the  feast  of  the  passover. 
{W.  Burkitt). 

"Vers.  S-€.  Then  entered  Satan  into  Judas. — Progressive  wickedness  : — Men  do 
not  become  great  villains  at  once.  Souls  are  not  like  meteoric  bodies,  that  are 
blazing  amongst  the  stars  at  one  moment,  and  the  next  in  some  dark  pit  on  earth, 
wrapped  in  a  noxious  and  sulphurous  smoke.  They  are  rather  like  trees,  they  fall 
by  degrees.  See  that  great  monarch  of  the  forest  I  For  years  disease  has  been  in 
its  roots,  and  a  long  succession  of  foul  insects  have  been  gnawing  at  its  vitals. 
Slowly  and  silently  the  decline  goes  on.  At  first  the  outward  symptoms  are 
scarcely  visible.  A  few  withered  leaves  on  one  of  its  branches  on  a  certain  spring 
are  first  noticed  by  the  old  woodman.  The  next  spring,  and  not  only  withered 
leaves  are  seen,  but  perhaps  a  leafless  branch  or  two.  Thus  through  many  a  long 
year  the  deterioration  proceeds,  until  at  last  it  is  rotten  to  the  core,  and  only 
awaits  some  slight  breeze  blowing  in  the  right  direction  to  strike  it  down.  One 
morning  a  gentle  gust  of  air  sweeps  through  the  wood,  the  tree  falls  with  a  crash 
that  sbakes  its  neighbours,  vibrates  through  the  forest,  and  appals  the  district  with 
its  boom. 

Vers.  7-13.  Oo  and  prepare  ns  the  passover. — Preparation  for  the  Last  Supper: — 
Passover  just  at  hand.  Day  of  preparation.  The  Lamb  to  be  offered  is  Himself. 
"  Go  and  prepare — get  ready — for  Me;  let  it  be  heart-preparation."  1.  This  prepa- 
ration was  general.  All  Old  Testament  teachings,  histories,  prophecies,  and  events 
were  a  preparation  for  the  death  on  the  cross.  "  Go,  prepare  to  meet  Me  around 
that  taole  of  commemoration."  2.  When,  or  at  what  time,  concerned  the  disciples. 
Your  time  to  prepare  is  now.  3.  The  character  of  this  command.  Lnperative. 
*'  Go."  Now  Grotius,  who  lived  to  be  fifty  before  he  made  this  preparation,  said, 
"  I  have  passed  the  whole  of  my  life  laboriously  doing  nothing."  Cast  away  your 
sins,  your  prayerlessness.  "  I  have  lost  ten  years ;  I  give  the  rest  to  Jesus,"  should 
be  the  resolution  of  youth.  4.  Tou  will  need  to  carry  nothing  in  there.  The  feast 
is  prepared.  (S.  E.  Tyng,  I>.D.)  Preparation  for  the  Lord's  Supper : — Part  of 
the  preparation  for  the  Lord's  Sapper  consists  in  learning  about  Christ.  Uulesa 
we  taxow  fiim  we  cannot  remember  Him.  If  we  know  little  about  Him  out 
Mmembranoe  of  Him  \nll  be  poor  and  shallow.    Suppose  yon  were  asked  to  dt 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (0=^'  'tm. 


something,  to  illuminate  your  house  or  to  plant  a  tree,  in  remembrance  of  some  on« 
of  whom  you  had  never  heard — Bocehoris,  for  instance — you  might  do  it ;  but  what 
sense  would  there  be  in  your  doing  it?  You  know  nothing  about  him.  What  yaa 
did  would  be  a  mere  external  and  formal  observance.  If  I  told  you  that  according 
to  Manetho  he  was  the  only  monarch  belonging  to  the  twenty-fourth  dynasty  of 
Egyptian  kings,  he  would  still  be  nothing  more  than  a  name  to  you.  Was  he  a 
good  king  or  a  bad  king  ?  Did  he  build  temples,  pyramids,  great  pubho  works, 
make  canals,  establish  wise  and  beneficent  laws,  fight  famous  battles,  contribute  to 
the  civilization  and  happiness  of  his  people,  or  did  he  do  nothing?  Was  his 
reign  long  and  glorious?  Was  he  remembered  after  his  death  with  love  and 
honour  ?  Or  was  his  memory  execrated  ?  You  don't  know ;  I  believe  no  one 
knows.  His  name  stands  in  a  list  of  ancient  kings,  that  is  all  we  can  say,  and  to 
do  anything  in  remembrance  of  him  would  be  an  unmeaning  ceremony.  Bemem- 
brance  must  be  based  on  knowledge,  and  the  richer  our  knowledge  the  more  vivid 
is  our  remembrance.  When  there  is  to  be  any  public  celebration  of  a  great  man, 
when  a  statue  is  to  be  erected  or  a  building  opened  in  his  honour,  the  newspapers 
tell  us  about  his  life,  and  about  what  he  did  for  the  country ;  and  speeches  are 
delivered  to  recall  the  grounds  on  which  his  memory  deserves  to  be  perpetuated. 
And  so  a  large  part  of  the  proper  preparation  for  the  Lord's  Supper  consists  in 
learning  all  we  can  know  about  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  four  Gospels  are  the 
best  preparation  for  the  service.  {R.  W.  Dale.)  The  last  passover : — L  Christ's 
DESiKE  TO  EAT  THE  PASSOVER.  This  in  another  place  is  expressed  in  the  strongest 
terms  (Luke  xxiL  15).  Now,  this  he  might  do  for  the  following  reasons :  1.  It 
was  the  Lord's  passover,  so  called  in  Exod.  xii  11.  2.  Hereby  he  gave  an  un- 
deniable proof,  that  He  was  made  under  the  ceremonial  as  well  as  moral  law.  3.  This 
was  His  last  passover,  and  had  an  immediate  relation  to  His  subsequent  sufferings. 
4.  The  company  with  which  He  was  to  eat  the  passover,  and  the  gospel  ordinance 
He  was  about  to  institute  in  its  room,  might  increase  the  ardour  of  His  desire. 
Hence  those  tender  words :  "  I  shall  eat  the  passover  with  My  disciples."  IL  Notice 
THE  piiACB  IN  WHICH  Christ  WOULD  EAT  THIS  PASsovEB.  Not  in  fierod's,  or  the  High 
Priest's  palace  ;  for  He  who  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  did  not  affect 
state  and  grandeur.  Not  in  the  magnificent  dwelling  of  a  Boman  officer,  or  Jewish 
ruler,  where  He  might  be  attended  with  a  numerous  retinue  of  servants  ;  He  came 
not  to  be  ministered  to,  but  to  minister.  Now  this  may  be  considered  as  emble- 
matical— 1.  Of  the  gospel  Church.  2.  It  may  resemble  the  renewed  and  sanctified 
heart.  "  Commune  with  your  own  heart "  ?Psa,  iv.  4).  "  Enter  into  your  own 
chamber  "  (Heb.)  The  furiaished  room  may  also  resemble  a  heart  endowed  with  all 
the  gifts,  and  adorned  with  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit.     (B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 

Vers.  14-20.  With  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this  passover  with  yon. — The  last 
fossover — Christ's  desire  for  it : — "  This  passover  before  I  suffer  1 "  It  tells  ns, 
surely,  that  there  was  some  connection  between  the  passover  and  the  suffering  of 
Christ,  and  a  special  connection  in  this  passover  at  which  He  and  His  disciples  were 
now  sitting  down.  Let  us  think  of  some  of  the  reasons  why  the  Saviour  desired  so 
earnestly  to  join  in  this  last  passover  before  He  suffered.  1.  One  reason  was,  that 
the  passover  had  now  reached  its  end,  and  fuund  its  full  meaning.  The  ancient 
covenant,  which  changed  the  slaves  of  Egypt  into  God's  servants,  gives  place  to  the 
new,  which  changes  his  servants  into  His  sons,  and  commences  that  golden  chain,  "If 
children,  then  heirs :  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ,"  &o.  And  here,  too,  are 
the  means  of  the  redemption.  The  passover,  which  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  the 
covenant  the  door-posts  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  descends  until  its  last  victim  dies 
beneath  the  shadow  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  Its  efficacy  is  gone,  for  He^  has 
appeared  who  is  to  finish  transgression,  to  make  an  end  of  sin,  and  to  bring  in  an 
everlasting  righteousness.  At  best  it  was  a  shadow,  but  now  the  great  reality  has 
come,  "Christ  our  passover,  sacrificed  for  us."  It  is  no  unconscious  victim,  but 
one  who  freely  gives  Himself,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  may  bring  us  to  God. 
2.  Another  reason  why  Christ  desired  to  be  present  at  this  passover  was,  for  the 
support  of  His  own  soul  in  the  approaching  struggle.  "Before  I  suffer  1 "  He  had 
a  terrible  conflict  to  meet,  for  which  He  longed,  and  at  which  He  trembled.  We 
may  feel  startled  at  the  thought  that  the  Son  of  God  should  be  dependent  on  such 
aid  at  such  a  moment.  And  yet  it  is  in  keeping  with  all  His  history — ^with  the 
whole  plan  of  redemption.  The  Divine  and  human  are  inseparably  interwoven  in 
the  life  and  work  of  Christ.  3.  We  are  led  naturally  to  this  further  reason— that 
Christ  desired  to  be  present  at  the  last  passover  because  His  friends  needed  special 


cuue.  XXII.]  ST.  LUKE.  503 

comfort.     "  To  eat  this  passover  with  you  before  I  suffer."    He  desired  to  make  Hia 
converse  with  them  at  this  passover  in  the  upper  chamber  a  strength  and  conso- 
lation to  them  against  the  sore  temptations  they  were  to  encounter.     And  may  we 
not  believe  that  Christ  still  prepares  His  people  for  what  may  be  lying  before  them, 
and  that  He  employs  His  comforts  "  to  prevent  "  them — to  go  before  them — in  the 
day  of  their  calamity.     When  darkness  is  about  to  fall,  God  has  lamps  to  put  into 
the  hand  by  anticipation.  He  who  made  His  ark  go  before  His  ancient  people  in  all 
their  wanderings,  causes  the  consolations  of  His  Word  to  smooth  the  way  of  them 
that  look  to  Him.     He  knows  what  painful  steps  are  before  us  in  the  journey  of 
life,  what  privations,  what  bereavements — it  may  be  that  the  most  solemn  step  of 
all  must  ere  long  be  taken — and  He  desires  to  eat  this  passover  with  us  "  before  we 
suffer."  4.  The  last  reason  we  give  for  Christ's  desire  to  be  present  at  this  passover 
is,  that  it  looked  forward  to  all  the  future  of  His  Church  and  people.    At  the  close 
of  the  last  passover,  Christ  instituted  that  communion  of  the  Supper  which  has 
come  down  through  many  generations — which  goes  forth  into  all  the  world  as 
the  remembrance  of  His  death  and  the  pledge  of  the  blessings  it  has  purchased  for 
us.    How  frail  this  little  ark  which  His  hand  has  sent  out  on  those  stormy  waters, 
but  how  safely  it  has  carried  its  precious  freight !     And  this  presence  of  His,  at  the 
first  communion,  looks  still  further — on  to  the  period  when,  instead  of  His  Spirit, 
we  shall  have  Himself.     He  desired  to  take  His  place  in  person  at  the  first  com- 
munion in  our  world,  and  when  the  great  communion  opens  in  heaven,  He  shall  be 
seen  in  His  place  once  more.  {J.  Ker,  D.D.)     The  Lord's  Supper : — We  need  not  look 
for  great  things  in  order  to  discover  great  truths.     To  those  who  reach  after  God  he 
will  reveal  his  deepest  secrets  through  things  insignificant  in  themselves,  within  the 
routine  of  common  lives.    No  event  occurs  more  regularly  than  the  daily  meal. 
None,  perhaps,  gathers  around  it  so  many  pleasant  associations.    Its  simplest 
possible  form,  in  Christ's  time,  consisted  in  eating  bread  and  drinking  a  cup  of 
wine.    Into  this  act,  one  evening,  He  gathered  all  the  meaning  of  the  ancient  sacri- 
fices ;  all  sacred  and  tender  relations  between  Himself  and  His  followers,  and  all 
the  prophecies  of  His  perfected  kingdom.     L  The  pbbparation.      •«  They  made 
ready  the  passover."    Note  concerning  the  making  ready  that — 1.  It  was  deliberate. 
The  room  was  selected  and  secured.    The  hour  was  appointed.     Two  of  the 
disciples  were  chosen  to  prepare  the  lamb  and  to  spread  the  table.    The  Lord's 
Supper  is  not  less,  but  far  more,  rich  in  meaning  than  was  the  ancient  passover.  It 
requires  the  preparation  of  mind  and  heart  made  by  private  meditation,  and  by  the 
gathering  together  beforehand  of  disciples  for  prayer,  conference,  and  instruction. 
2.  It  was  exclusive.    "I  shall  eat  the  passover,"  Christ  said,  "with  My  disciples." 
No  others  were  invited,  because  no  others  were  fitted  to  share  in  the  ceremony 
which  He  was  to  inaugurate.    3.  It  was  famUiar.     He  drew  closer  to  His  disciples 
as  the  time  approached  in  which  He  was  to  teach  them  how  to  celebrate  His  great 
act  for  the  redemption  of  the  world.    Such  times  must  be  cherished  as  the  warm, 
spring  hours  of  spiritual  growth.    4.  It  was  solemn.    The  shadow  of  the  greatest 
tragedy  in  the  world's  history,  close  at  hand,  hung  over  them,  as  they  went  through 
the  silent  streets  to  the  prepared  guest  chamber.    His  manner,  His  words,  His 
actions,  were  filled  with  the  consciousness  of  it.    II.  The  betkateb  pointed  out. 
1.  It  leads  each  true  disciple  to  self-examination.    2.  It  helps  to  reveal  to  Himself 
the  false  disciple.    Judas  knew  that  he  was  out  of  place  in  that  upper  chamber. 
The  Lord's  table,  which  symbolizes  the  most  intimate  fellowship  with  Him,  is  a 
means  of  leading  selfish  men  to  begin  to  realize  the  awful  and  utter  loneliness  ol 
sin.    3.  It  helps  us  to  realize  the  baseness  of  a  false  confession  of  Christ.     UL  The 
SnpPEB  INSTITUTED.     1.  A  now  sacrifice.     Oxen,  sheep,  and  doves  had  for  centuries 
been  slain  as  a  sign  that  through  life  offered  in  sacrifice,  human  Ufe  that  had  been 
forfeited  by  sin  might  be  restored.     But  from  that  night  the  broken  bread  takes 
the  place  of  all  these,  and  represents  to  us  the  body  of  Christ  given  as  a  sacrifice 
for  siimers.     2.  A  new  covenant.     3.  A  new  kingdom,  which  was  begun  when  first 
Christ  through  the  Holy  Spirit  began  to  rule  in  one  human  heart.   {A.  E.  Dunning.) 
The  happineis  of  attending  Tlie  Communion : — During  the  sunshine  of  his  prosperity. 
Napoleon  I.  thought  httle  of  God  and  religious  duties.    But  when  his  power  had 
been  broken,  and  he  was  an  exile  at  St.  Helena,  he  began  to  see  the  vanity  of 
earthly  things,  and  became  earnest  and  attentive  to  religion.    Then  it  was  that  he 
returned  a  very  remarkable  answer  to  one  who  asked  hirn  what  was  the  happiest 
day  in  his  Ufe.      "Sire,"  said  his  questioner,  "allow  me  to  ask  yon  what  was 
the  happiest  day  in  all  your  life?    Was  it  the  day  of  your  viotoiy  at  Lodi7 
at  Jena?  at  Austerlitz?   or  was  it  when  yon  were  crowned  emperor?"     l&o, 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap,  xzn, 

roy  good  friend,  replied  the  fallen  emperor,  "  it  was  none  of  these.  It  waB 
the  day  of  my  first  communion  I  That  was  the  happiest  day  in  all  my  life  1 " 
Sacraviental  service  : — I.  How  intekse  thb  Satioub's  love  for  vb  must  have  been, 
in  that  His  desire  was  not  extinguished  by  the  knowledge  that  it  was  to  be  His 
death-feast.  II.  How  close  His  fellowship  with  men,  as  shown  in  that  He  desired 
to  spend  such  an  hour  in  their  company.    III.  How  bageb  the  Masteb  was  to 

MAKE  the  disciples  BEALIZE   THE   NEABNESS   OF  THE   HEAVENLY  BLES8INQ    He    WOULD 

ruBCHASE  FOB  THEM,  and  to  give  them  a  pledge  of  it  for  their  assurance.  "  I  will 
uot  eat  any  more  thereof,  until  it  be  fulfilled,"  Ac.  The  Lord's  Supper,  then  insti- 
tuted, is  thus  designed  to  be — 1.  An  evidence  of  Christ's  undying  love.  2.  An 
assurance  of  His  intimate  fellowship.  3.  A  confirmation  of  His  promise  of  the 
everlasting  blessedness.  {Anon.)  The  Last  Supper : — I.  The  passoveb  pbbpaeed. 
This  preparation  is  suggestive  of  three  things.  I.  The  dispensation  in  which  Christ 
and  His  apostles  still  were.  2.  The  all-comprehensive  knowledge  possessed  by 
Christ.  3.  That  in  the  midst  of  enemies  Christ  still  had  friends  in  Jerusalem. 
II.  The  passoveb  eaten.  I.  Our  Lord's  punctuality  (ver.  14).  2.  Our  Lord's 
intense  desire  in  respect  to  this  passover.  (1)  Because  the  last  He  would  celebrate 
with  them.  (2)  Because  He  would  impress  them  with  the  connection  between  Him- 
self as  God's  Lamb,  and  the  paschal  lamb.  (3)  Because  He  would  awaken  in  them 
an  intense  desire  for  His  second  coming,  when  He  would  sit  down  with  them  in  the 
Kingdom  of  God.  III.  The  passoveb  bupeeseded.  1.  By  the  estabhshment  of  an 
ordinance  which  commemorates  the  true  passover  (see  1  Cor.  v.  7).  2.  By  the 
assurance  of  the  better  hope  which  this  ordinance  affirms  (Heb.  vii.  19-22). 
3.  By  the  emblematic  re-cmcifixion  of  our  Lord,  which  should  inspire  them  to  a 
constant  remembrance  of  His  personal  love  for  them  (1  Cor.  xi.  24).  Lessons :  1. 
Retrospection  essential.  (1)  Bread  broken.  (2)  Wine  poured  out.  2.  Introspec- 
tion essential  (1  Cor.  xi.  28).  3.  Prospection  essential  (1  Cor.  xi.  26).  (D.  C 
Huglies,  M.A.)        The  cup  of  suffering  and  of  Communion: — I.  That  communion 

BETWEEN  ChBIST  AND  BELIEVEBS  WILL   BE    BENEWED   IN   HEAVEN.      Even   On   this   Side 

heaven,  seasons  of  pure  spiritual  communion  are  not  denied  us.  This  exhausts 
the  Saviour's  idea.  His  words  are  to  be  taken  not  literally,  but  spiritually. 
The  wine  is  put  for  the  thing  represented  —  the  joys  and  the  felicities  of 
the  final  state,  and  to  drink  the  wine  new  with  Him  is  to  partake  the  inmost 
pleasure  of  His  soul.  II.  This  communion  will  be  pebfect  and  unmixed.  We 
receive  only  in  part ;  and  this  necessarily  renders  every  act  of  communion  im- 
perfect. But  in  heaven  it  will  be  otherwise.  Our  nature  will  be  so  purified  and 
transformed,  as  that  every  power  and  every  property  will  be  an  avenue  to  convey 
the  stream  of  life  and  glory  into  the  soul.  The  fellowship  will  be  that  of  perfected 
spirits.  There  will  be  no  darkness  in  the  understanding,  no  error  in  the  judgment, 
no  guilt  in  the  conscience,  no  sin  in  the  heart.  IH.  This  communion  will  bb 
unintebbupted  and  etebnal.  Sublime  and  refreshing  as  are  the  seasons  of  spiritual 
joy  which  we  experience  on  earth,  they  are,  generally  speaking,  but  of  short  dura- 
tion. Here  perpetuity  of  enjoyment  is  impossible,  but  there  it  is  certain.  The 
union  between  the  Saviour  and  the  soul  will  never  be  dissolved,  and  therefore  the 
fellowship  will  never  end.  Here  we  are  overtaken  by  fatigue  and  exhaustion,  but 
there  we  shall  be  endowed  with  immortal  vigour ;  here  sickness  and  infirmity  often 
intervene,  but  there  the  inhabitants  shall  never  say  they  are  sick ;  here  we  enjoy 
communion  at  intervals,  there  it  will  be  eternal.  IV.  This  communion  will  bb 
heightened  by  the  pbesence  and  the  fellowship  of  the  whole  bedeemed  Chubch. 
It  is  no  common  joy  which  we  experience  even  in  the  most  private  communion  ;  but 
this  joy  is  heightened  when  we  can  blend  with  other  souls  in  harmony  with  our 
own.  What,  then,  must  be  the  communion  of  the  coming  world,  where  we  shall  hold 
immediate  fellowship  not  only  with  God  and  the  Bedeemer,  but  at  the  same  moment, 
and  in  the  same  act,  with  angels  and  the  whole  Church  of  the  redeemed  ?  Dehght- 
ful  is  the  union  and  fellowship  of  minds  on  earth  I  Wben  heart  communes  with 
heart  it  is  like  the  mingling  dew-drops  on  the  flower.  But  this  union  will  be  height- 
ened  in  heaven.  There  we  shall  find  none  but  kindred  minds,  with  which  it  will 
be  impossible  not  to  unite.  The  blessedness  of  the  future  world  is  in  reserve  for  , 
those  only  who  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth.  Into  the  heavenly  opm- 
munion  none  will  be  received,  but  those  who  have  here  held  feUowship  with  a  risen 
and  glorified  Saviour.  {R.  Ferguson,  LL.D.)  He  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks, 
and  brake  It. — The  Holy  Communion : — I.  Holy  Communion — what  is  it  1  1.  ij 
is  Christ's  own  ordinance.  Being  a  communicant  is  the  test  of  the  reality  of  your 
Christian  profession.    2.    It  is  the  command  of  the  Great  Master.    Emphatie, 


CHAF.  XXII.]  ST.  LUKE.  806 

plain,  straightforward,  definite.  A  test  of  our  faithfulneBS  as  the  servants  of 
Christ.  3.  It  is  the  dying  wish  of  the  best  of  Friends.  You  cannot  disregard  it, 
and  be  true  to  BQm.  4.  Its  great  importance  is  taught  plainly  by  the  teaching  and 
practice  of  the  early  Church.  It  was  at  first  the  only  act  of  united  worship.  And 
it  was  celebrated  at  least  every  Lord's  Day.  II.  What  is  its  nature  ?  1.  It  is  a 
memorial.  A  picture  for  all  time  of  Christ's  body  broken  and  blood  shed  for  the 
sins  of  man.  (1)  A  memorial  to  God  the  Father.  In  our  prayers  we  say,  "  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  "  ;  or  some  such  words;  t.«.,  we  plead  before  the  Father  what 
He  has  done  for  us.  In  the  Holy  Communion  we  say,  "  for  Jesus'  sake  "  not  in 
words,  but  in  the  very  acts  which  He  Himself  has  taught  us.  Thus  it  is  our  highest 
act  of  prayer.  (2)  A  memorial  to  ourselves.  How  easily  we  forget.  This  refreshes 
our  memory,  and  rekindles  our  love.  (3)  A  memorial  to  an  unthinking  or  un- 
believing world.  A  witness  to  men  that  we  beUeve  in  Jesus,  who  lived  and  died 
and  stiU  lives  for  us.  2.  It  is  a  means  of  grace.  Jesus  Himself  is  pleased  in  this 
ordinance  of  his  own  appointment  to  give  us  Himself.  3.  It  is  a  bond  of  union 
between  ourselves  and  others.  In  partaking  together  one  sacred  food  we,  made  one 
with  Jesus,  are  brought  nearer  to  one  another.  (1)  A  bond  of  union  between 
those  who  belong  to  the  same  earthly  family.  (2)  A  bond  of  union  between  those 
who  belong  to  the  same  congregation.  (3)  A  bond  of  union  between  all  Christiana 
who  love  the  Lord  Jesus.  (4)  A  bond  of  union  between  those  who  are  resting  in 
paradise.  III.  Who  ought  to  come  ?  1.  Those  who  know  how  poor  their  love  is, 
and  want  to  love  God  more.  2.  Those  who  are  trying  to  serve  God,  and  fail 
because  they  are  weak,  and  need  strength.  3.  Those  who  are  sinful,  but  desire  to 
become  holy.  4.  Those  who  are  careful  and  troubled  about  many  things,  and  long 
for  rest.  IV.  Who  ought  not  to  come  ?  1.  Those  who  are  sinning,  and  do  not 
want  to  give  up  their  sin.  2.  Those  who  think  themselves  good  enough.  The  self- 
satisfied  obtain  no  blessing,  for  they  seek  none.  V.  How  to  come.  1.  Humbly. 
Why  ?  Because  we  are  not  worthy  to  come.  2.  Trustingly  and  simply.  Taking 
God  at  His  word,  and  not  asking  questions.  3.  Earnestly.  Meaning  what  we  are 
doing.  Not  because  others  come,  but  because  we  realize  that  in  our  sinfulness  and 
our  unworthiness  we  find  the  strongest  reason  why  we  ought  to  come.  ^  4.  Reve- 
rently. Humbly  realizing  the  presence  of  Jesus,  and  earnestly  desiring  His 
blessing.  5.  Eegularly.  Have  a  fixed  rule  about  it.  Do  not  leave  it  to  be  done  at 
any  time  when  it  is  convenient  or  suits  you.  6.  More  and  more  frequently.  Aa 
you  grow  older  you  ought  to  be  more  earnest,  and  in  order  to  serve  God  better  yoa 
must  seek  more  help.  The  grown-up  man  is  not  content  with  the  same  amount  of 
food  as  the  child  ;  and  the  man  who  is  desirous  to  grow  up  into  the  full  measure 
of  the  stature  of  Christ,  needs  more  spiritual  nourishment  than  the  man  who  is 
only  a  babe  in  Christ.  7.  Early.  When  your  thoughts  are  fresh,  your  heart  free 
from  cares  and  worries,  your  mind  undisturbed  by  worldly  things.  Give  to  God 
the  best  you  can.  Let  Him  have  the  first  of  the  day.  (C.  J.  Eidgeway,  M.A.) 
The  Holy  Communion  : — I.  The  obdinance  itseut.  IL  Its  chakactebistics.  1.  A 
Divine  ordinance.  2.  A  perpetual  ordinance.  3.  A  binding  and  obligatory  ordi- 
nance. 4.  It  should  be  a  frequent  ordinance.  No  Lord's  Day  without  the  Lord's 
Supper,  in.  Ths  spibit  in  which  it  shouu)  be  obbebved.  1.  Deep  humility  of 
mind.  2.  Grateful  love  to  Jesus.  3.  Faith.  4.  Love  to  all  mankind.  6.  Joyous 
hope.  IV.  The  advantages  arising  tbom  obedience  to  this  command  of  Cekist's. 
1.  The  soul  will  be  strengthened.  9.  Christ  will  be  increasingly  precious. 
8.  Holiness  will  be  increased.  4.  Heaven  will  be  desired.  Application:  1.  Address 
regular  communicants.  Come  in  a  right  spirit.  Be  watchful,  humble,  prayerful, 
Ac.  2.  Address  irregular  communicants.  Why  so  ?  It  is  disobedience,  inoonsia 
tency,  injurious  to  yourselves,  Church,  world.  8.  Those  who  never  commune  a< 
all.  (1)  The  conscientiously  doubtful.  Do  you  hate  sin?  Believe  in  Christ,  &g. 
Are  you  willing  to  obey  him?  Then  draw  near,  Ac.  (2)  Those  who  are  really- 
unfit  for  the  Lord's  table,  are  also  unfit  for  death,  judgment,  eternity.  {J.  Bums, 
D.D.)  The  Sacrament  of  Holy  Communion : — In  preserving  this  festival,  we  are 
nrged  alike  by  affection  and  duty.  L  The  act.  L  To  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by 
way  of  remembrance,  we  may  point  out  the  simplicity  of  this  act.  2.  But  though 
•  simple  it  is  significant.  The  material  forms  and  visible  things,  represent  spiritual 
and  invisible  realities.  8.  The  participation  of  this  Sacrament  is  a  manifestation 
of  Christian  unity  (1  Cor.  x.  16,  17).  4.  This  act  is  commemorative.  6.  This 
ordinance  is  also  sealing.  A  pledge  of  Divme  mercy.  A  covenant  act.  6.  This 
Sacrament  is  also  prospective.  "  Till  He  come."  11.  Ths  coumamo.  ••  This  do." 
L  Unanimonsly.     2.  Frequently.     8.  Gratefully.     4.  Reverently.    &  Wtrthilj. 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rtu. 

"Discerning  the  Lord's  Body."  {R.  M.  Willcox.)  The  Lord's  Supper :—Tht 
Lord's  Supper — what  a  title  1  How  full  of  memories,  how  it  carries  us  back  into 
the  very  heart  of  the  past !  What  a  solemn  night  it  tells  of — what  a  meeting — what 
a  parting !  The  Lord's  Supper,  however  often  it  is  celebrated,  always  ought  to 
carry  us  back  to  the  institution.  For  the  little  company  of  the  disciples  it  was  a 
night  of  gloom.  The  week  had  opened  amid  Hosannas  ;  for  a  moment  it  had 
seemed  as  if  the  Saviour  was  to  be  the  hero  and  the  idol  of  the  multitude.  But  the 
acclaims  died  away.  The  bitter  hostility  of  the  rulers  reasserted  itself  in  a  series 
of  angry  or  crafty  assaults ;  and  now  we  are  on  the  very  eve  of  that  other  and  most 
opposite  cry — •'  Away  with  Him ;  crucify  Him.  His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our 
children."  The  fortunes  of  the  new  gospel,  as  man  must  judge,  were  that  night  at 
the  very  lowest  ebb.  As  the  event  advances  it  is  made  quite  evident  that  this  is  a 
parting  meeting,  and  that  the  Lord  and  Master  knows  it.  He  speaks  of  Himself  as 
departing,  not  on  a  temporary  journey,  but  by  a  violent  death.  People  who  are 
bent  upon  explaining  away  everything  that  is  remarkable,  still  more  everything  that 
is  superhuman  in  the  Gospels,  have  denied  that  the  words  "  Take,  eat,  this  is  My 
Body  ;  Drink  ye  all  of  this,  for  this  is  My  Blood,"  were  words  of  institution  at  all. 
They  say  that  they  were  merely  a  pathetic  way  of  typifying  to  the  disciples  His 
approaching  death,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  any  future  conomemoration  of  it 
when  He  should  be  gone.  It  is  not  necessary  to  argue  this  point,  because  we  have 
the  clearest  testimony  from  the  earliest  date  rationally  possible ;  the  testimony  of 
friends  and  foes  ;  of  Christians  and  Pagans ;  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Luke ;  of  Pliny 
no  less  than  Justin  Martyr,  that  those  who  heard  the  words  did  understand  them 
as  words  of  institution,  and  did  act  upon  them  as  such.  The  breaking  of  the 
bread,  the  coming  together  to  eat  the  Lord's  Supper  were  phrases  of  perpetual  re- 
currence as  soon  as  there  was  any  Church  founded,  and  wherever  that  Church 
spread  itself  over  Asia  and  Europe;  and  that  custom,  always,  and  everywhere, 
explained  itself  by  going  back  to  the  scene  in  the  guest-chamber  the  night  before  the 
Crucifixion.  But  now,  if  the  words  had  this  meaning,  the  thought  comes  upon  us 
with  great  force,  how  wonderful  is  it  that  our  Lord,  Imowing  that  this  was  His  last 
night  upon  earth  as  a  man  in  flesh  and  blood,  instead  of  regarding  it  as  an  end, 
looks  upon  it  as  a  beginning,  speaks  of  it  as  a  preliminary,  a  necessary  preliminary 
to  results  foreseen  and  foreknown,  in  particular  to  what  He  calls  the  remission  or 
dismissal  of  sins,  and  gives  directions  for  the  perpetual  remembrance  of  Hia 
approaching  baptism  of  blood,  in  an  ordinance  which  is  to  have  for  its  marked 
feature  the  symbolic  eating  and  drinking  of  His  own  Body  and  Blood.  Brethren, 
this  is  a  great  thought.  Our  Lord  in  the  same  night  in  which  He  was  betrayed, 
the  very  night  before  He  suffered,  did  not  look  upon  that  betrayal  or  upon  that 
passion  as  a  disaster,  as  a  blow  struck  at  His  work,  or  His  enterprise,  but  rather  as 
its  necessary  condition.  It  is  the  fore-ordained  consummation.  The  same  night 
in  which  He  was  betrayed,  and  in  the  clearest  foresight  of  His  Crucifixion,  He 
founds  an  ordinance.  He  institutes  a  sacrament  in  express  recognition,  and  for  the 
everlasting  remembrance,  of  His  death  of  violence  and  torture,  of  ignominy  and 
agony.  Well,  now  let  us  pass  on  to  the  very  words  of  the  institution,  so  much 
more  surprising  and  startling  than  if  they  had  merely  spoken  of  commemorating 
His  death — "  Take,  eat,  this  is  My  Body  " ;  "  Drink  ye  all  of  this,  for  this  is  My 
blood."  It  would  not  have  been  at  all  startling,  and  not  at  all  surprising,  if  our 
Lord  had  bidden  His  disciples  to  come  together  from  time  to  time  to  meditate  upon 
His  cruel  and  suffering  death.  A  mere  man  might  have  thought  of  this,  might 
even  have  made  it  a  religious  service  to  go  over  the  particulars  of  His  passion, 
partly  as  a  memorial  to  a  lost  friend,  and  partly  for  the  encouragement  of  serious, 
devout,  and  humble  living.  But  this  cannot  be  said  of  the  expressions  before  us — 
"  Take,  eat,  this  is  My  Body."  "  Drink  this,  for  it  is  My  Blood."  So  far  from  thia 
being  the  common  language  of  a  dying  friend,  it  would  be  language  of  which  all 
would  shrink  from  the  hearing  or  the  uttering.  Brethren,  it  speaks  for  itself,  that 
they  must  have  regarded  Him  who  said,  "  Take,  eat,  this  is  My  Body,"  as  one  alto- 
gether different  from  any  common,  or  any  merely  human  person.  It  would  be 
cruelty,  it  would  be  impiety,  it  would  be  insanity  in  any  friend,  living  or  dying,  to 
use  such  expressions  concerning  himself.  They  say  this,  if  they  say  anything,  "My 
death  shall  be  your  life ; "  '*  My  body  is  given.  My  blood  is  outpoured  for  you."  In 
that  death  is  involved  the  life  of  the  world.  In  tiiat  separation  of  flesh  and  blood 
which  is  the  act  of  dying,  the  sins  of  the  world  are  taken  away ;  yet  this  is  not  ai 
a  single  isolated  fact  just  to  be  accepted,  just  to  be  relied  upon,  without  corollary  or 
consequence — not  so.     "  I,  the  dying,  the  once  dead,  shall  be  alive  again  after 


CHAP,  xm.]  ST.  LUKE.  507 

death,  and  be  your  life,  not  as  a  dead  man,  but  as  one  alive  after  death ; 
so  must  you  deal  with  Me.  You  must  receive  Me  into  your  hearts,  you  must, 
as  it  were,  eat  Me  and  drink  Me,  so  that  I  may  enter  into  your  very  being,  and 
become  a  part  of  you ;  not  as  a  man  in  human  form  treading  upon  the  earth,  com- 
panying  with  you  as  a  man  with  his  friends,  but  in  a  totally  different  manner,  aa 
one  that  died  and  was  dead,  but  who  now  liveth  to  die  no  more  ;  as  one  that  has 
died  and  risen  again ;  as  one  that  is  now  in  heaven ;  as  one  that  has  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  sends  Him  forth  for  perpetual  indwelling  in  the  hearts  of  His  people." 
So  eat,  so  drink,  for  refreshing,  and  for  sustentation.  "  The  flesh  profiteth  nothing" ; 
no,  not  though  you  could  hold  in  the  hand  and  press  with  the  teeth  the  very  body  of 
the  Crucified.  The  flesh,  even  the  sacred  flesh,profiteth  nothing; "  it  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth."  One  moment  of  spiritual  contact  with  the  risen  and  glorified  is  worth 
whole  centuries,  whole  millenniums,  of  the  corporeal  co-existence,  (Dean  Vaughan.) 
The  advantages  of  remembering  Christ : — I.  We  are  to  inquire,  first,  what  is  implied 
IN  RBMEMBEBiNQ  Cheist.  1.  There  is  evidently  implied  in  this  remembrance  a 
knowledge  of  Him,  a  previous  acquaintance  with  Him.  He  must  have  occupied 
much  of  our  thoughts,  have  entered  into  our  hearts,  and  been  lodged  in 
the  deepest  recesses  of  our  minds.  2.  Hence  to  remember  Christ  implies 
a  heart-felt  love  for  Him.  3.  Hence  to  remember  Christ  implies  also  a  fre- 
quent and  affectionate  recalling  of  Him  to  our  minds,  II.  Let  us  proceed  to 
inquire  why  Cheist  has  left  tjs  this  commakd  to  eemembeb  Him.  1.  He  has 
done  this  for  a  reason  which  ought  greatly  to  humble  us.  He  has  said,  "Remember 
Me,"  because  He  knows  that  we  are  prone  to  forget  Him.  2,  But  our  proneness  to 
forget  Christ  is  not  the  only  reason  why  He  has  commanded  us  to  remember  Him. 
He  has  given  us  this  command,  because  He  desires  to  be  remembered  by  us,  3. 
The  great  reason,  however,  why  Christ  has  commanded  us  to  remember  Him,  is 
this — He  knows  that  we  cannot  think  of  Him  without  deriving  much  benefit  to  our- 
selves.  in.  What,  then,  aee  the  advantages  besulting  from  an  habitual  bbmem- 
brance  of  Jesus  ?  This  is  our  third  subject  of  inquiry ;  let  us  proceed  to  consider 
it.  1.  The  first  of  these  benefits  is  comfort  to  the  soul,  when  wounded  by  a  sense 
of  sin.  2,  An  habitual  remembrance  of  Christ  has  a  tendency  also  to  elevate  our 
affections.  3.  This  heavenly -mindedness  would  lead  us  to  a  third  benefit  resulting 
from  this  remembrance  of  Christ — patience  and  comfort  in  our  affliction  b.  4.  The 
remembrance  of  Christ  tends  also  to  keep  alive  within  us  a  holy  hatred  of  sin, 
Kothing  makes  sin  appear  half  so  hateful,  as  the  cross  of  Christ;  nothing  so 
effectually  checks  it  when  rising  in  the  soul,  as  the  thought  of  a  dying  Saviour. 
O  let  me  never  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh  1  IV,  But  if  wb  would  habitually 
bbmembeb  Cheist,  let  us  not  foegbt  the  command  given  ds  in  the  text, 
"  This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me."  We  soon  forget  objects  which  are  removed  from 
oar  sight ;  and  our  Lord,  who  knows  and  pities  this  weakness  of  our  nature,  has 
given  us  an  abiding  memorial  of  Himself.  He  has  appointed  an  ordinance  for  this 
very  purpose,  to  remind  us  of  His  love.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Christ  wanting  to  be 
remembered : — The  Holy  Communion  is  the  memorial  of  our  Redeemer's  sacrifice, 
I.  Chbist  wants  to  be  bemembeeed  fob  what  He  has  done  fob  us.  We  never 
must  forget  the  past,  or  lose  sight  of  Calvary,  Great  Prophet,  we  must  ever  think 
of  what  He  has  done  to  teach ;  Great  Priest,  what  He  has  done  to  atone  ;  and  Great 
King,  what  He  has  done  to  win  the  allegiance  and  devotion  of  our  hearts.    II,  Odb 

LOBD  WANTS  TO   BE   EEMEMBEBED   IN   WHAT  He   IS  DOING  FOB   US.        He  liveS  tO  Carry 

on  and  to  carry  out  His  work  of  grace  in  our  hearts  and  lives.  III.  Christ  wants 
TO  be  bemembeeed  fob  what  He  is  under  pledge  to  do.  We  anticipate  the 
coronation  of  our  King,  and  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb.  Veils  hide  Him 
now;  we  long-  for  the  vision  of  His  face.  (R.  Tuck,  B. A.)  The  Holy  feast : — 
1.  A  feast  of  charity.  2.  A  feast  of  commemoration.  3,  A  feast  of  sanctified 
communion.  4.  A  feast  of  hope,  (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  The  Sacrament  of  Holy 
Communion : —  I.  A  direction  from  Chbist — '•  Do  this,"  1.  Addressed  by  our 
Lord  (1)  to  the  apostles,  and  (2)  through  them  to  the  whole  catholic  Church.  2. 
Spoken  as  a  Friend  to  His  Mends,  3.  Spoken  instructively.  As  oar  Prophet, 
4.  Spoken  authoritatively.  As  our  King,  Christ  expects  us  to  keep  this  our  military 
oath  with  Him.  If  an  earthly  commander  had  but  to  say  to  his  servant, "  go,"  and 
he  went ;  and  "  come,"  and  he  came ;  how  much  more  "ought  we  to  be  in  subjectioQ 
to  the  Father  of  spirits  and  live?"  "  See  then,  oh  believer,  that  ye  refuse  not 
Him  who  speaketh. "  Do  not  come  to  the  Holy  Table — (a)  formally ;  {b)  grudgingly, 
or  of  necessity.  But  come — (a)  humbly;  (b)  reverently;  (c)  faithfully.  II.  An 
axPLANATOBT MOTivB — "  In  remembrance  of  Me."    {R,  S.  Brocket  M.A.)        The  eup 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. 

ofreconeiliation : — Warburton  and  Tucker  were  contemporary  bishop  and  dean  in  th« 
same  cathedral.  For  many  years  they  were  not  even  on  speaking  terms.  It  was 
on  a  Good  Friday,  not  long  before  Warburton's  death  ;  they  were  at  the  Holy  Table 
together.  Before  he  gave  the  cup  to  the  dean,  he  stooped  down,  and  said  in  tremu- 
lous emotion,  "  Dear  Tucker,  let  this  be  the  cup  of  reconciliation  between  us."  It 
had  the  intended  effect ;  they  were  friends  again  to  their  mutual  satisfaction. 
(Christian  Age.)  The  Lord's  Supj>er : — I.  The  instctution  of  this  holt  bit». 

"This  do" — that  is,  do  what  I  am  doing.  To  do  what  Jesus  did  we  are  to  take 
bread  and  wine.    And  we  are  to  take  this  bread  and  wine,  not  for  an  ordinary  meal 

for  they  "had  supped";  and  St.  Paul  says,  "If  any  hunger,  let  him  eat  at 

home," — but  for  a  sacramental  feast,  a  means  of  feeding  in  our  souls  upon  the  Body 
and  Blood  of  Christ  our  Saviour.  Again,  if  we  would  do  what  Jesus  did,  we  must, 
before  we  eat  that  bread  and  drink  that  wine,  have  them  consecrated :  "  Jesus 
blessed"  ;  and,  as  St.  Paul  says,  "  the  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless."  Next,  we 
are  to  have  a  minister  to  consecrate  them.  We  do  not  find  that  any  disciples  meet- 
ing together  could  consecrate  the  elements,  for  in  Matthew  we  are  told,  that "  Jesus 
blessed  it  and  brake  it,  and  then  gave  it  to  the  disciples  and  said.  Take,  eat,  this  is 
My  Body."  Again  we  find,  that  in  doing  this,  our  Lord  accompanied  it  with  prayer. 
II.  The  purpose  of  the  Lord's  Supper — "  do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me."  The 
remembrance  of  Jesus  may  be  considered  actively  or  passively — "  this  do  in  remem- 
brance of  Me  " — that  is,  to  remind  Jesas  of  us,  or  to  remind  us  of  Jesus.  The 
expression  may  be  applied  both  ways,  and  may  be  profitably  considered  in  either 
view.  We  have  need  of  reminding  Christ  of  us,  of  our  necessities,  our  wants,  our 
joys,  and  our  sorrows,  as  in  Isa.  xliii.  26.  In  Numb.  x.  9,  we  have  the  same  truth  of 
reminding  God  of  us  set  before  the  Jews,  and  so  again  in  Mai.  iii.  16, 17.  In  this  view  of 
these  words,  we  have  then  this  truth  set  before  us  that,  in  that  holy  ordinance,  we 
remind  Jesus  of  His  covenanted  mercy,  of  His  dying  love,  the  price  it  cost  Christ  to 
purchase  our  souls,  the  greatness  of  His  promises,  the  reality  and  truth  of  our  faith  in 
Him,  the  necessity  we  have  to  bring  before  Him  our  weakness  and  our  woes.  We  remind 
Him  that  we  do  indeed  believe  in  Him,  and  that,  believing  in  Him,  we  cling  to  His 
precious  covenant.  In  taking  of  the  memorials  of  His  dying  love,  we  remind  Him 
that  we  are  those  of  whom  He  has  said,  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  though  He  were 
dead,  yet  shall  he  live,  and  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  on  Me  shall  never  die." 
But  again,  the  remembrance  of  Jesus,  taken  passively,  implies  that  we  remember 
Jesus  ;  our  remembrance  of  Jesus  implies,  not  merely  a  remembrance  of  one  act 
of  the  Saviour,  of  one  truth,  or  one  fact  connected  with  His  gospel  or  His  life,  but 
a  remembrance  of  Himself.  He  does  not  say,  do  it  in  remembrance  of  the  cross — 
do  it  in  remembrance  of  the  garden,  but,  do  it  in  remembrance  of  Me— My  person 
—My  oflSces— My  qualities— My  whole  being— Christ  Jesus  our  Redeemer — our 
Friend.  Eemembrance  of  Jesus  must  vary  in  intensity,  and  affection,  and  character, 
in  proportion  to  our  knowledge  of  His  love.  His  grace,  His  kindness,  and  His  truth, 
and  of  our  habitual  abiding  in  Him  in  our  own  souls.    III.  Who  are  the  pbrbohs 

THAT   ought   to   PARTAKE   OF   IT  ?      IV.  ThE    DUTY   OF  OBSERVINO   IT.       It  WaS  giveU  for 

disciples.  {J.  Baylee,  D.D.)  The  Lard's  Supper  an  emblem  and  memorial  :-~l. 
It  is  AN  EMBLEM.  The  question  is,  then,  what  unseen  things  do  these  simple  objects 
represent  ?  1.  The  human  nature  of  Christ ;  His  incarnation.  2.  The  deaUi  of 
Christ,  too,  is  shadowed  forth  in  this  ordinance.  We  have  more  than  bread  before 
as  in  it,  it  is  bread  which  has  been  broken  ;  and  more  than  vrine,  it  is  wine  which 
has  been  poured  forth.  3.  The  consecrated  elements  are  emblematical  also  of  the 
great  end  and  design  of  our  Lord's  incarnation  and  death.  H.  Let  us  now  go  on 
to  another  view  of  this  ordinance.  It  is  a  memorial.  "  This  do,"  He  says,  "  in 
remembrance  of  Me."  Bnt  it  is  not  Himself  simply  considered,  that  our  Lord  calls 
on  us  here  to  remember ;  it  is  Himself  as  these  emblems  set  Him  forth,  given  and 
bleeding  for  us  ;  it  is  Himself  in  His  humiliation,  sufferings,  and  death.  Why  the 
institution  of  an  ordinance  to  bring  things  like  these  to  our  remembrance  ?  1. 
Partly,  perhaps,  on  account  of  the  joy  Christ  Himself  feels  in  the  recollection  of  them. 
His  heart  overflows  with  joy  at  the  thought  of  His  cross  and  passion,  and  He  would 
have  us  think  of  them  and  sympathize  with  Him  in  His  joy.  2.  The  remembrance 
of  Christ's  incarnation  and  death  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  us  ;  therefore  also 
He  may  have  established  this  memorial  of  them  among  us.  "  All  our  fresh  springs  " 
are  in  our  crucified  Lord,  and  therefore  He  brings  Himself  frequently  before  us  as 
our  crucified  Lord  that  we  may  go  to  Him  as  the  great  source  of  our  mercies,  and 
take  of  His  blessings.  3.  There  is  another  reason  to  be  given  for  the  setting  up  of  this 
memorial  of  our  Lord's  sufferings — it  is  our  liability  to  forget  them.  (C.  Bradle^,  M.A.) 


CBif.  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE.  503 

Christ's  vicarious  death : — A  single  verse,  written  on  paper,  now  yellow  with  age, 
hangs  on  the  wall  of  a  nobleman's  study  in  London.  It  has  a  remarkable  history, 
and  has,  in  two  notable  instances,  at  least,  been  blessed  of  God  to  conversion.  The 
verse  was  originally  composed  by  Dr.  Valpy,  the  eminent  Greek  scholar  and  author 
of  some  standard  school  books.  He  was  converted  late  in  life,  and  wrote  this  verse 
«8  A  oonf essiou  of  faith : — 

**  In  peace  let  me  resign  my  breath, 
And  Thy  salvation  see ; 
My  sins  deserve  eternal  death, 
But  Jesus  died  for  me." 

On  one  oooasion  Dr.  Marsh  was  visiting  the  house  of  Lord  Boden,  where  he  held  a 
Bible  reading  with  the  family.     He  mentioned  Dr.  Valpy's  conversion  by  way  of 
illustration  in  the  course  of  his  remarks,  and  recited  the  verse.    Lord  Boden  was 
particularly  struck  with  the  Unes,  wrote  them  out,  and  afifixed  them  to  the  wall  of  hia 
study,  where  they  still  are.     Lord  Eoden's  hospitable  mansion  was  often  full  of 
visitors,  among  whom  were  many  old  army  officers.     One  of  these  was  General 
Taylor,  who  served  with  distinction  under  Wellington  at  Waterloo.    He  had  not,  at 
that  time,  thought  much  on  the  subject  of  religion,  and  preferred  to  avoid  all  dis- 
cussion of  it.     But  soon  after  the  paper  was  hung  up  he  went  into  the  study  to  talk 
with  his  friend  alone,  and  his  eyes  rested  for  a  few  moments  upon  the  verse.  Later 
in  the  day  Lord  Boden  upon  entering  his  study  came  upon  the  general  standing 
before  the  paper  and  reading  it  with  earnest  face.    At  another  visit  the  host  noticed 
that  whenever  General  Taylor  was  in  the  study  his  eyes  rested  on  the  verse.    At 
length  Lord  Boden  broke  the  ice  by  saying,  "  Why,  General,  yon  will  soon  know  that 
verse  by  heart."    "  I  know  it  now  by  heart,"  replied  the  general,  with  emphasis 
and  feeling.    A  change  came  over  the  general'tf^  spirit  and  life.     No  one  who  was 
intimately  acquainted  with  him  could  doubt  its  reality.    During  the  following  two 
years  he  corresponded  readily  with  Lord  Boden  about  the  things  which  concerned 
his  peace,   always  concluding  his  letters  by  quoting  Dr.  Valpy's  verse.    At  the 
end  of  that  time  the  physician  who  attended  General  Taylor  wrote  to  Lord  Boden 
to  say  that  his  friend  had  departed  in  peace,  and  that  the  last  words  which  fell 
from  his  dying  lips  were  those  which  he  had  learned  to  love  in  his  lifetime. 
A   young  relative  of   the  family,  an  officer  who  served  in    the  Crimea,  also 
saw  it,  but  turned  carelessly  away.     Some  months  later  Lord  Boden  received  the 
intelligence  that  his  young  acquaintance  was  sufTering  from  pulmontiry  disease, 
and  was  desirous  of  seeing  him  without  delay.      As  he  entered  the  sick-room 
the  dying  man  stretched  out  both  hands  to  welcome  him;  at  the  same  time 
repeating  Dr.   Valpy's  simple  lines.      "They  have    been  God's   message,"   he 
said,  **of  peace  and  comfort  to  my  heart  in  this  illness,  when  brought  to  my 
memory,  after  days  of  darkness  and  distress,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Comforter." 
The  ordained  memorial: — I.   The  main  object  of  ihb  Sdppeb  is  a  pebsonaii 
MEMORIAL.    "In  remembrance  of  Me."    We  are  to  remember  not  so  much  His 
doctrines,  or  precepts,  as  His  person.    Bemember  the  Lord  Jesus  at  this  Supper — 
1.  As  the  trust  of  yoor  hearts.    2.  As  the  object  of  your  gratitude.    3.  As  the  Lord 
ol  your  conduct.     4.  As  the  joy  of  your  lives.    5.  As  the  Bepresentative  of  your 
persons.    6.  As  the  Bewarder  of  your  hopes.    Bemember  what  He  was,  what  He 
IS,  what  He  will  be.    Bemember  Him  with  heartiness,  concentration  of  thought, 
realizing  vividness,  and  deep  emotion.    II.  The  mbmoeial  rrsELP  is  stbiking.    1. 
Simple,  and  therefore  like  Himself,  who  is  transparent  and  unpretentious  truth. 
Only  bread  broken,  and  wine  poured  out.     2.  Frequent — "  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it," 
and  so  pointing  to  onr  constant  need.     He  intended  the  Supper  to  be  often  enjoyed. 
8.  Universal,  and  so  showing  the  need  of  all.    "  Drink  ye  all  of  it."    In  every  land, 
aU  His  people  are  to  eat  and  drink  at  this  table.    4.  His  death  is  the  best  memory 
of  Himself,  and  it  is  by  showing  forth  His  death  that  we  remember  Him.     6.  Hia 
covenant  relation  is  a  great  aid  to  memory ;  hence  He  speaks  of — "  The  new  cove- 
nant in  My  Blood."    We  do  not  forget  Adam,  our  first  covenant-head ;  nor  can  we 
forget  our  second  Adam.     6.  Our  receiving  Him  is  the  best  method  of  keeping  Him 
in  memory ;  therefore  we  eat  and  drink  in  this  ordinance.    No  better  memorial 
ooald  have  been  ordained.    III.  The  object  aimed  at  is  itselt  imvitino.    Since 
we  are  invited  to  come  to  the  holy  Supper  that  we  may  remember  our  Lord,  we  may 
safely  infer  that — 1.  We  may  come  to  it,  though  we  have  forgotten  Him  often  and 
sadly.    In  fact,  this  will  be  a  reason  tot  coming.    2.  We  may  oome,  though  othen 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xxn, 

may  be  forgetful  of  Him.  We  come  not  to  judge  them,  but  to  remember  Him  onr 
selves.  3.  We  may  come,  though  weak  for  aught  else  but  the  memory  of  Hi». 
goodness.  4.  It  will  be  sweet,  cheering,  sanctifying,  quickewing,  to  remember 
Him ;  therefore  let  us  not  fail  to  come.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Sacrament 
better  than  a  sermon : — Frequently  to  me  the  Supper  has  been  much 
better  than  a  sermon.  It  has  the  same  teaching-power,  but  it  is  more' 
vivid.  The  Lord  is  known  to  us  in  the  breaking  of  bread,  though  our  eyes 
have  been  holden  during  His  discourse.  I  can  see  a  good  meaning  in  the 
saying  of  Henry  III.,  of  France,  when  he  preferred  the  Sacrament  to  a  sermon  :  "I 
had  rather  see  my  Friend  than  hear  Him  talked  about."  I  love  to  hear  my  Lord 
talked  about,  for  so  I  often  see  Him,  and  I  see  Him  in  no  other  way  in  the  Supper 
than  in  a  sermon ;  but  sometimes,  when  my  eye  is  weak  with  weeping,  or  dim  with- 
dust,  that  double  glass  of  the  bread  and  wine  suits  me  best.  {Ibid.)  The  ends 
for  which  the  Holy  Cominunion  is  appointed : — 1.  It  is  appointed  to  be  a  memorial 
of  Christ.  2.  It  is  a  standing  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Christianity.  3.  It  furnishes 
an  opportunity  of  the  open  profession  of  the  Christian  religion  in  general,  and, 
especially,  of  our  trusting  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  for  forgiveness  and  acceptance 
with  God.  4.  Another  end  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  to  be  an  act  of  Church  fellow- 
ship, or  communion.  5.  The  Lord's  Supper  gives  an  opportunity  of  covenanting 
with  God,  and  engaging  to  be  the  Lord's.  He  who  partakes  of  the  Communion  is, 
by  that  very  act,  as  completely  and  voluntarily  bound  to  serve  the  Lord,  as  if  he 
had  engaged  aloud  to  do  so  in  the  plainest  terms  of  speech,  or  subscribed,  with  his 
own  hand,  a  written  deed  to  that  effect.  It  follows,  too,  by  necessary  consequence, 
that,  though  he  is  not  bound  to  anything  to  which  he  was  not  in  duty  bound  before,, 
yet,  if  he  abandon  himself  to  sin,  he  is  justly  chargeable  with  breach  of  engage- 
ment. This  argument  does  not  rest  on  anything  peculiar  to  the  Supper ;  but  it 
applies  to  it  with  particular  force.  6.  Another  very  comprehensive  end  of  this 
ordinance  is  to  be  a  means  of  cherishing  all  the  graces  of  the  Divine  life.  We  say 
of  cherishing  them,  not  of  implanting  them  ;  for,  though  the  grace  of  God  is  not  ta 
be  limited,  and  may  reach  the  heart,  for  the  first  time,  in  any  circumstances,  those 
who  partake  of  the  Lord's  Supper  ought  already  to  be  possessed  of  the  Christian 
character  in  some  degree.  7.  Once  more,  this  ordinance  is  intended  to  lead  oar 
thoughts  forward  to  our  Lord's  second  coming.  It  is  not  only  retrospective,  but 
prospective.  It  is  not  only  a  remembrance  of  something  past,  but  an  anticipation 
of  something  future.  {James  Foote,  M.A.)  Remembering  Jesus  : — In  remem- 
brance of  Him  I  What  a  flood  of  recollections  comes  back  to  us  as  we  think  on 
these  words.  To  every  class,  age,  and  character  amongst  ub  those  words  are 
spoken.  To  you  babes  and  children  He  says,  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me,  the 
Child  Jesus,  who  for  you  once  lay  as  a  babe  in  the  manger  at  Bethlehem,  who  for 
your  sakes  grew  as  a  child  in  favour  with  God  and  man,  who  was  obedient  to  His 
parents,  a  gentle,  holy  Child ;  do  this,  be  obedient,  be  gentle,  be  loving,  keep  your 
baptismal  vow  in  remembrance  of  Me. "  It  speaks  to  you,  young  men,  and  says, 
"  Do  this,  keep  yourselves  pure,  flee  fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul,  be 
helpful,  be  earnest,  not  slothful  in  business,  labour  honestly  in  your  appointed  task, 
do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me,  who  as  a  young  man  was  pure  and  earnest  and 
helpful,  who  laboured  patiently  and  obscurely  in  lowly  Nazareth."  He  speaks  to 
all  who  have  money  or  time  or  influence  at  their  disposal,  He  says,  "  Do  this,  go 
about  doing  good,  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked,  comfort  the  fatherless  and  the 
widow ;  never  turn  your  face  from  any  poor  man ;  if  thou  hast  much,  give 
plenteously,  if  thou  hast  little  do  thy  diligence  to  give  gladly  of  that  little,  do  this 
in  remembrance  of  Me,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  who  went  about  doing  good,  who 
gave  up  all  time,  glory,  honour,  wealth,  life  itself,  for  others,  who  sought  out  the 
ignorant  and  ihose  who  were  out  of  the  way,  who  dried  the  widow's  tears,  who 
ministered  to  the  sick,  who  was  not  ashamed  to  help  and  comfort  even  the  publican 
and  the  fallen  woman,  who  suffered  hunger  and  thirst,  and  want,  and  insult  for  Hia 
people  ;  O  you,  who  are  called  by  My  name,  do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me,  for  in 
that  ye  do  such  things  unto  the  least  of  My  people,  ye  do  it  unto  Me,  and  verily  ye 
have  your  reward."  To  you  who  are  anyways  afflicted  and  distressed  He  speaks 
and  says,  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me,  bear  this  cross  meekly  in  remembrance 
of  that  bitter  cross  of  Mine,  for  what  sorrow  is  like  unto  My  sorrow,  what  night  ot 
agony  can  equal  that  night  in  Gethsemane,  what  grave  can  now  be  without  hope 
since  that  one  grave  in  the  Garden  which  was  unsealed  on  Easter  morning  f  "  (If. 
J.  Wilnwt  Buxton,  M.A,)        The  memorial  of  Jesus  :—l.   Tmt  ewunotioh  o»  k 

OSBPLY    DEVOTSD    FSIEND.        II.     ThB    IMJONCTION    OF    1    DBPABTSD    FbIUD.        lit 


CBAP.  rm.]  ST.  LUKE.  811 

What  do  wb  bpeciallt  commemobatb  bt  oub  compliancb  with  this  command? 
His  death,  as  a  sacrificial  atonement  for  our  sins,  and  as  the  most  remarkable 
display  of  His  love  for  us,  though  sinners.  IV.  In  commemorating  Christ's  death 
bj  this  ordinance,  wb  recall  thb  ionomint,  bepboach,  and  shamb  Hb  endubbi> 
ON  OCR  BfHAiiF.    V.  Reflect  that  these  things,  mobe  than  all  othebb,  abe  wobtht 

OF  BEINQ  HELD  IN  ETEBLASTINa  BEMEUBBANCB.  YI.  HeBE,  TOO,  WB  KEEP  IN 
remembrance  TBANSACTIONS  in  WHICH  EVEBT  QEMEBATION  HAS  THB  SAMB  INTEREST, 
AND   WHICH    PRESENT    TO   ALL  THB   SAMB    MOST   INTITINO    AND    SOLEMN   ASPECTS.      VIL 

Once  more,  in  the  same  direction  of  thought,  we  observe  that,  in  thb  celebbation 

OF  DEEDS  OF  PROWESS  AND  PATRIOTISM,  THB  BEMOTEB  THE  PERIOD  OF  THEIR  PER- 
FORMANCE,  THE    LESS    IS    THB    INTEREST    AWAKENED   BY   THEM,    while    io    relation    tO 

the  great  event  which  we  this  day  commemorate,  thb  remoter  the  aoe  and 

GENERATION,  THB  DEEPEB  WILL  BB  THB  INTEBEST  FELT  IN  IT,  AND  MORS  NOMBBOUS 
WILL  THBT  BB  WHO  CELBBBATB  IT.  YIII.  In  THIS  OBDINANCB  CHRISTIANS  ARB 
CALLBD  UPON  TO  BEMBMBEB  AN  UNSEEN  FrIEND,  UNTIL  THB  APPOINTED  PERIOD  OF  HiS 
REAPPEARANCE.  IX.  FrOM  THB  SIMPLE  NATUBE  OF  THE  SYMBOLS  EMPLOYED,  WB  INFEB 
THAT  THIS  COMMEMORATION  IS  TO  BE  UNIVERSAL  AS  THB  ChUBCH,  AND  EXTENSIVE  AS 
THE  WORLD.      X.    Notice  the  peculiar  CHARACTEB  of  THIS  COMMAND  AS   DISTINOUISHED 

FBOM  ALL  OTHERS  ENJOINED  BY  DiviNE  AUTHORITY.  This  oommemorative  command 
is  not  issued  to  us  so  much  in  the  manner  of  a  Lord  and  lawgiver,  as  in  the 
character  of  a  claim  of  gratitude  and  affection.  The  Creator  commands  thus,  "  Do 
this  and  live ;  or,  fail  to  do,  and  die."  So  does  the  Lawgiver  command — "  Thou 
Shalt  do  this  in  fear  of  Me,  and  of  the  penalties  of  disobedience."  But  our  Lord's 
command  in  the  text  speaks  to  us  in  a  very  different  manner.  He  does  not  say, 
"  Do  this  in  fear  of  Me  as  God,"  but  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me,  as> 
Redeemer" — "Do  this,  I  beseech  you,  as  you  love  Me,  and  as  I  have  loved  you. 
I  have  done  My  work — '  It  is  finished.'  Now  do  your  part  in  remembrance  of  this 
finished  work.''  In  obeying  this  command,  we  obey  it  as  having  especial  and 
peculiar  reference  to  the  Mediator.  Other  commands,  hke  those  of  the  moral  law, 
respect  the  providence  and  moral  government  of  God,  and  the  benefit  of  man — this 
one  directly  issues  from,  and  gives  glory  to,  the  dying  Redeemer,  the  God-man, 
"  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith."  In  His  other  commands  Christ  addresses 
us  as  our  Master,  our  Shepherd,  our  Divine  and  Supreme  Teacher — in  this  He 
instructs  us  in  our  duties  to  God,  to  our  neighbour,  and  to  ourselves.  All  His  other 
commands  appear  to  point  outwards  in  the  direction  of  various  rights  and  duties  ;. 
thie  command  only  points  inwards  :  others,  away  from  Himself — this,  to  Himself,. 
"Do  this  in  remem'brance  of  Me—  in  remembrance  of  My  body, My  blood.  My  death.. 
That  death  which  I  endured  for  your  sakes,  do  you  at  least  remember  for  My  sake.**' 
{J.  E.  Leifchild,  M.A.)  Design  of  the  Lord's  Sup'per  : — I.  Commemorative.  1. 

"In  remembrance  of  Me" — the  end.  2.  "Do  this" — the  means.  II.  Repre- 
SBNTATiVB.  1.  The  bread,  or  Christ's  body,  represents  His  personality,  or  the 
Incarnation.  2.  The  wine,  or  Christ's  blood,  represents  His  work,  or  the  Atone- 
ment. 3.  The  bread  and  wine,  the  body  and  blood,  represent  the  incarnate' 
career.  IH.  Proclamative.  An  immortal  witness  to  tiie  crucifixion  (1  Cor.  xi. 
26).  IV.  CovENANTiVB  (Lukc  xxii.  20).  The  engagement  both  Divine  and  human. 
V.  Communicative  (1  Cor.  x.  17).  VI.  Associative.  Personal  membership  in 
Christ  is  universal  co-membership  of  Christ's  people.  VH.  Anticipative  (Matt> 
ixvi.  29).  The  dirge  gUdes  into  the  psean.  Hint  of  the  new  heavens  and  new 
earth.  Bridegroom  and  bride  at  the  same  marriage -supper  of  the  Lamb  (Rev. 
xix.  6-9).  (National  Baptist.)  The  blood  of  the  new  covenant : — I.  Thb  new 
COVENANT  OF  FOBOiTENEss  AND  LIFE.  The  new  reminds  of  the  old.  From  the  old 
we  may  learn  what  to  look  for  as  essential  features  of  the  new.  Take  three  illus- 
trations— 1.  The  covenant  with  Noah,  on  leaving  the  Ark.  2.  The  covenant  witit 
Abraham,  on  entering  Canaan.  3.  The  covenant  with  Jloses,  on  leading  the> 
people  from  Egypt.  The  new  covenant  is  an  engagement  between  God  and  man,, 
through  Christ,  who  acts  as  representative  of  God  to  man  and  of  man  to  God.  It 
implies  mutual  pledges.  On  God's  side  is  pledged  forgiveness ;  remission  of  sins ; 
and  life,  in  its  fullest,  highest  meaning.  On  man's  side  is  pledged  the  obedience- 
oi  faith.  IL  The  blood  which  seals  and  sanctions  the  covenants.  Look  again. 
at  the  three  cases  mentioned.  Each  covenant  was  sealed  with  blood.  Noah  took, 
of  the  clean  beasts  for  his  offering,  which  devoted  the  spared  lives  to  the  service  of 
God.  Abraham  divided  the  creatures,  when  he  entered  into  his  covenant.  And 
Moses  sprinkled  with  blood  both  the  book  and  the  people,  when  the  covenant  was 
ratified.    Why  always  with  blood  ?    Because  the  blood  is  the  symbol  of  the  life^ 


S19  TUE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiU 

and,  so,  shedding  blood  was  a  symbolical  way  of  taking  a  solemn  vow  to  give  the 
whole  life  to  obedience.  Then  see  how  Christ's  blood  becomes  the  seal  of  the  nev^ 
covenant.  Take  Christ  as  Mediator  for  God.  He  condescended  to  our  weakness, 
and  pledged  His  very  being,  His  very  life,  to  His  faithfulness  towards  us.  In  this 
sense  He  is  God's  sacrilice.  Take  Christ  as  mediator  for  man.  And  in  this  He  is 
man's  sacrifice.  Then  two  things  come  to  view.  1.  He  seals  our  pledge  that  we 
will  spend  Ufe  in  obedience,  serving  God  up  to  and  through  death.  In  accepting 
Christ  as  our  Saviour,  we  acknowledge  that  He  has  taken  this  pledge  for  us.  2.  In 
giving  His  blood.  His  life,  to  us  to  partake  of,  Christ  would  give  us  the  strength  to 
keep  our  pledge.  Illustrate  by  the  Scottish  Covenanters,  opening  a  vein,  and 
signing  with  their  life-blood  the  "  Covenant "  on  the  gravestone,  in  Greyfriars 
Church,  Edinburgh.  What,  then,  is  the  pledge  which  we  take  afresh  in  each 
sacramental  act  ?  Obedience  unto  death.  The  obedience  of  faith.  What  is  the 
pledge  we  receive  afresh  in  every  sacramental  act  ?  The  assurance  of  Divine  for- 
giveness, and  eternal  life.  Why  do  we  take  the  sacramental  emblems  together  f 
In  order  that  we  may  be  mutual  witnesses ;  and  then  true  helpers  one  of  another 
in  keeping  our  pledge.     {TJie  Weekly  Pulpit.) 

Vers.  21-23.  The  Son  of  Man  goeth. — The  Son  of  Man,  and  His  going : — I.  Thr 
Son  of  Man.  1.  Beference  of  the  appellation.  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that 
the  appellation,  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  belongs  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  is  peculiar  to 
Him.  2.  Origin  of  the  appellation  (see  Psa.  xviii.  17).  3.  Meaning  of  the 
appellation.  When  the  Messiah  is  termed  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  the  term  fixes  the 
mind  both  on  the  reality  of  His  manhood,  and  on  the  circumstances  which  dis- 
tinguish Him  among  men.  It  marks  Him  as  truly  a  man,  a  descendant  of  man ; 
but  it  as  really  marks  Him  as  standing  out  from  the  rest  of  men.  The  leading 
thoughts  suggested  by  the  designation,  "  the  Son  of  Man,"  as  given  to  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  are  these :  that  He  is  a  real  man,  truly  a  partaker  of  human  nature  ; 
that  He  is  a  perfect  man,  the  normal  man,  man  as  he  should  be ;  that  He  is  the 
representative  man,  the  second  Adam,  charged  with  the  responsibilities  of  the  race; 
that  He  is  the  God-man,  a  true  man  in  nnion  with  the  true  God ;  finally,  that  He 
is  the  predicted  man,  the  great  subject  of  New  Testament  prophecy ;  a  man,  a  son 
of  man — the  man,  the  son  of  man.  H.  The  going  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The  pre- 
destined, predicted  "  going  "  of  this  Son  of  Man  comes  now  to  be  considered. 
♦'  The  Son  of  Man,"  said  the  Son  of  Man  Himself,  goeth,  "  goeth  as  was  deter- 
mined, goeth  as  it  is  written."  Heaven  was  His  original  abode — earth  was  His 
present  residence;  but  it  was  not  intended  to  be  His  permanent  dwelling-place. 
He  had  come  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  was  to  go  from  earth  to  heaven.  When 
He  came.  He  came  not  unsent.  He  was  commissioned  to  do  a  great  work,  and, 
^hen  that  work  was  accomplished,  He  was  to  return  to  Him  that  sent  Him. 
1.  He  went  to  the  grave.  2.  He  went  to  the  grave  as  it  is  written.  Before  pro- 
ceeding farther  in  tracing  the  Son  of  Man's  amazing  journey,  it  may  be  well  for  ua 
here  to  stop  and  inquire  how,  when  He  went  thus  to  the  grave,  He  went  "  as  it  is 
written  "  ?  Here,  there  are  three  remarks  which  deserve  our  attention — (1)  He  went 
in  the  character  in  which  it  was  written  He  should  go  ;  (2)  He  went  in  the  dis- 
position in  which  it  was  written  He  should  go ;  and  (3)  In  many  of  the  particular 
and  even  minute  details  of  His  progress.  He  went  "as  it  was  written."  (1)  He 
suffered  and  died  as  a  pubUc  person,  the  representative  of  His  people,  the  victim 
of  sin.  He  suffered  for  us,  the  just  in  the  room  of  the  unjust ;  and  this  is  as  it 
was  written.  (2)  He  went,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  spirit  of  the  most  entire  self- 
devotedness,  cheerful  resignation,  magnanimous  fortitude.  No  man  took  His  life 
from  TTitn  ;  He  laid  it  down  of  BKmself.  And  all  this  was  written  of  Him.  (3)  The 
agony  in  (Jethsemane  was  as  it  was  written ;  also  His  betrayal,  the  particular 
insults  and  injuries  done  Him,  the  manner  in  which  His  death  was  accompUshed, 
the  circumstances  of  His  funeral,  &e.  3.  He  went  to  heaven.  4.  He  went  to 
heaven  as  it  is  written.    (D.  Brown,  D.D.) 

Vers.  24-30.  He  that  Is  greatest  among  yon  let  him  be  as  the  younger.— How 
to  he  the  greatest  in  Christ's  Kingdom: — I.  Thebe  is  a  nboessabt  and  natcbaIi 
DEBnat  ts  HAN  FOB  suPBBioBiTT.  I.  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  principle 
exists  universally.  2.  It  is  admitted  that  the  desire  is  an  inherent  principle.  S.  It 
is  therefore  a  holy  and  righteous  principle.   4.  It  is  a  necessary  principle.  II.  The 

BEST  HBN  HAT  FAIL  TO   DISCOVEB  THE   TBUB   WAT  TO  H0N0X7B  AND   DIQNITT.         1.   The 

caase  of  the  disciple's  failure     This  strife  arose  in  the  absence  of  the  Saviooz, 


•EAT.  XTTT.]  ST.  LUKE.  513 

2.  The  spirit  of  their  failure.  "  Accoonted."  Carnal,  external,  worldly  ambition. 
8.  The  manifestation  of  their  failure.  III.  Fidelity  to  Cheist  in  teiaii  QnAiiiFiEs 
FOB  THE  HioBEB  spHEBES  AND  HONOUBS  IN  His  KiNODOM.  1.  Adherence  to  Christ 
brings  us  into  contact  with  the  greatest  trials.  2.  All  true  disciples  cleave  to 
Christ,  even  in  His  trials.  3.  Christ  will  honourably  acknowledge  and  reward 
fidelity  in  His  disciples.  (1)  It  is  honour  as  reward  for  humble  service.  (2)  It  is 
distinguished  honour.  (3)  It  will  be  satisfying  honour.  (2'.  M.  Evans.)  The 
evils  of  worldly  ambition: — I.  The  dispute  akose — 1.  Out  of  ignorance  as  to  the 
nature  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  2.  Out  of  the  worldly  ambition  of  their  own 
hearts.  H.  The  Lobd  bebuked  this  spirit  of  wobldlt  ambition.  By  drawing 
their  attention  to  His  own  example.  Application  :  1.  Show  the  widespread  preva- 
lence of  this  worldly  ambition  in  the  Church.  2.  Urge  lowliness  of  mind.  (1)  By 
the  strong  commendation  Christ  bestows  on  it.  (2)  By  the  injury  done  to  the 
cause  of  Christ,  when  His  followers  manifest  the  opposite  spirit.  {F,  F.  Goe.  M.A.) 
Lessons : — 1.  Beware  of  a  proudly  aspiring  and  envious  spirit.  Seek  not  to  rise  on 
the  ruins  of  others,  or  by  trampling  on  others.  2.  Bemember  wherein  true  great- 
ness consists,  and  follow  after  it.  It  consists  in  high  attainments  in  piety  and 
usefulness.  3.  Whatever  your  attainments  may  be,  be  humble,  if  you  would  be 
great.  4.  Let  the  disciples  of  Christ  continue  with  Him,  notwithstanding  every 
trial.  {James  Foote,  M.A.)  Self-seeking : — ^I.  The  narrative  we  are  considering 
discloses  what  effect  self-seeeino  had  on  the  disciples.  1.  It  blinded  their  eyes  to 
the  glory  of  the  Son  of  God.  They  saw,  indeed.  His  mighty  works,  and  longed  to 
be  able  to  do  such  works  themselves;  but  the  hidden  life  of  righteousness  and 
peace  and  love  they  did  not  see  and  were  not  yet  capable  of  seeing.  Darkness 
cannot  comprehend  the  light.  Men  seeking  conspicuous  places  cannot  understand 
the  mind  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  humbled 
Himself,  and  became  obedient  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross.  2.  The  self-seeking 
spirit  plunged  the  disciples  into  a  quarrel  on  the  eve  of  a  great  occasion.  3.  The 
self-seeking  spirit  put  the  disciples  into  a  false  attitude  of  presumption,  under, 
taking  more  than  they  were  able  to  do.  "  Jesus  answered  and  said,  Ye  know  not 
what  ye  ask."  4.  The  spirit  of  self-seeking  confused  their  notions  of  dominion. 
They  had  adopted  the  maxims  of  the  Gentiles,  and  were  in  danger  of  believing 
that  a  man  was  great  simply  because  he  exercised  authority.  IL  Self-sacbifice. 
1.  The  courage  of  self-sacrifice.  It  shrinks  back  from  no  danger,  fears  no  hard- 
ship, and  is  superior  to  all  suffering.  He  took  the  twelve  disciples  apart  and  said 
nnto  them :  "  We  go  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and  the  Son  of  Man  shall  be  betrayed,  con- 
demned, and  crucified."  Knowing  all  things  that  should  be  accomplished,  He  went 
forward;  He  went  forward  that  they  might  be  accomplished.  2.  The  universality 
of  self-sacrifice.  Because  this  is  the  way  of  the  Son  of  Man,  therefore  it  must 
become  the  way  of  every  man.  Each  man  is  to  take  up  his  cross.  Each  man  is  to 
become  like  the  man.  3.  The  reward  of  self-sacrifice.  Spiritual  promotion  comes 
according  to  just  and  immutable  law.  4.  The  kingdom  of  self-sacrifice.  They 
would  reverse  the  maxims  of  the  Gentiles,  and  reckon  the  servant  greater  than  the 
master.  (Edward  B.  Mason.)  "  As  he  that  doth  serve  "  : — Dr.  Muhlenburg  gave 
a  beautiful  illustration  of  obedience  to  his  Master  when  he  once  took  up  a  tray  of 
dishes  in  St.  Luke's  hospital  and  carried  them  down  to  the  kitchen.  Someone 
meeting  him,  and  protesting  against  his  doing  such  menial  work,  he  quickly  said, 
*'  What  am  I,  but  a  waiter  in  the  Lord's  hotel  ?  "  The  law  of  service : — The  desire 
for  distinction  is  one  of  the  radical  principles  of  our  nature ;  never  so  crucified  and 
buried  but  that,  in  unexpected  ways  and  moments,  it  may  revive,  and  rise  again 
in  power.  In  the  world  we  find  it,  and  in  the  Church.  Charles  Y.  could  lay  off 
the  Imperial  purple,  but  could  not  so  easily  dispossess  himself  of  the  imperial  will. 
Simon  Stylites,  on  his  pillar  in  the  Lybian  desert,  was  as  willing  to  draw  crowds 
out  after  him  as  any  most  lordly  Bishop  of  Alexandria.  The  decrepit  anchorite,  in 
spite  of  his  austerities,  was  still  a  man  ;  his  stomach  hungry  for  bread,  his  heart 
hungry  for  applause.  This  subtle  passion  is  strongest  in  the  middle  and  more 
athletic  period  of  life.  It  comes  in  between  the  love  of  pleasure,  which  besets  our 
youth,  and  the  love  of  gain,  which  besets  our  age.  Though  liable  to  desperate 
abuse,  this  passion,  like  every  other,  was  benevolently  given.  If  it  causes  wars,  and 
builds  up  oppressive  institutions,  poisoning  the  hearts  and  cursing  the  lives  of  men» 
it  is  likewise  one  of  the  sharpest  spurs  to  honourable  toil,  inspires  the  grandest 
achievements,  and  strikes  its  deepest  roots  into  the  deepest  natures.  It  is,  then, 
not  to  be  fought  against,  as  an  enemy  to  virtue,  but  drawn  into  service  rather,  aa 
u)  ally.  I.  Tbue  gbeatness  is  mot  indicated  bithss  bt  a  conshcdous  positioh, 
VOL.  in.  63 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxtt. 

OB  THS  BUZZ  OF  POPUiAB  A.FPiiAnsE.  Exalted  stations  add  nothing  to  hnman 
stature.    A  great  reputation  may  chance  to  balloon  a  very  little  man.     II.  Tbob 

GBEATNESS   IS  NOT  INDICATED   INFALLIBLY  EVEN  BY  THE  PBE8ENCE   OF   OEEAT  ABILITIBS, 

OB  GBEAT  ACQUISITIONS.  Hero-woiship  is  a  perpetual  fact  in  history.  Mankind  ara 
sadly  prone  to  be  fascinated  by  mere  ability,  or  what  is  so  esteemed,  irrespective  of 
its  exercise  ;  by  mere  learning,  irrespective  of  its  aims  and  uses.  We  encounter 
this  idolatry  in  every  walk  of  life.  Much  lamentation  is  poured  out  over  what  is 
called  dormant  power — Cromwells  that  lead  no  armies,  Newtons  that  write  no 
"'  Principia,"  Miltons  that  build  no  lofty  rhymes.  Men  are  named  in  every  circle, 
<of  whom  it  is  remarked  that  they  are  possessed  of  great  abilities,  if  they  would 
only  exercise  them  ;  or  possessed  of  great  learning,  if  they  would  only  use  it.  No 
doubt  there  is  such  a  thing  as  having  one's  talent,  a  real  talent,  laid  up  in  a  napkin. 
But  there  is  probably  much  less  of  waste  in  this  way  than  is  commonly  supposed. 
There  is  a  meaning,  perhaps,  in  that  feature  of  the  Gospel  parable,  which  represents 
the  idle  talent  as  being  a  solitary  and  single  one ;  a  talent  in  some  one  direction, 
as  that  of  a  mere  chemist,  mathematician,  linguist,  or  logician.  Ability  of  this 
sort,  thus  partial,  limited,  and  narrow,  may  doubtless  be  content  to  slumber,  or 
exercise  itself  only  in  trifling.  But  true  greatness  cannot  justly  be  predicated  of  any 
such  ability.  Beal  power  has  fulness  and  variety.  It  is  not  narrow  like  lightning, 
l)ut  broad  like  light.  The  man  who  truly  and  worthily  excels  in  any  one  line  of 
endeavour,  might  also,  under  a  change  of  circumstances,  have  excelled  in  some 
other  line.  He  who  eight  times  led  conquering  legions  into  Gaul,  could  also  write 
matchless  commentaries  describing  their  exploits.  He  who  fought  at  Marengo  and 
Austerlitz,  could  also  build  Alpine  roads  and  construct  the  Code  Napoleon.  He 
who  sang  "  Paradise  Lost,"  could  also  pen  ablest  state  papers.     III.  The  ideal 

Ain>   MEASUBE   OF     GREATNESS,    AS    SET   BEFOBE    US    BY   ChBIST    HiMSELF,    CONSISTS    IN 

USEFULNESS.  He  who  does  the  greatest  amount  of  good  in  this  world  is  the 
i;reatest  man.  This  is  the  Christian  sentiment.  It  is  also  at  bottom  the  universal 
sentiment.  The  Titans  of  ancient  fable,  who  piled  mountains  together,  and 
fitormed  the  heavens,  were  not  great,  only  huge.  Hercules  was  great  by  virtue  of 
the  twelve  great  labours  which  he  performed.  Grecian  art,  faultless  as  it  was, 
failed  of  being  great  by  being  sensual.  Hindoo  generals  are  not  great  leaders,  for, 
though  they  wield  vast  masses  of  men,  they  wield  them  to  little  or  no  purppse.  He 
is  not  great,  who  merely  wastes  the  nations ;  only  he  is  great  who  saves  and  serves 
them.  This  rule,  which  the  historic  judgment  of  the  world  thus  proceeds  upon,  is 
more  an  instinct  than  a  principle.  Christianity  lays  it  down  with  emphasis  as  the 
highest  law.  According  to  this  law,  he  only  is  great  of  heart  who  floods  the 
■world  with  a  great  affection.  He  only  is  great  of  mind  who  stirs  the  world  with 
great  thoughts.  He  only  is  great  of  will  who  does  something  to  shape  the  world 
to  a  great  career.  And  he  is  greatest  who  does  the  most  of  all  these  things,  and 
does  them  best.  As  to  the  particular  sphere  in  which  a  man  shall  lay  out  the 
labour  of  his  life,  this  must  be  determined  by  a  wise  regard  to  individual  tastes, 
talents,  and  circumstances.  Each  must  choose  for  himself  the  employment  and 
sphere  best  suited  to  his  gifts.  But  all  must  choose  with  one  heart,  one  purpose, 
in  the  fear  of  God,  and  under  the  light  of  eternal  realities.    lY.  The  motives  to 

THE   ADOPTION   OF   SUCH   A   BULE   OF   LIFE  ABE   OBVIOUS   AND   STBONG.      1.   It  is  the  key 

to  happiness.  God  is  infinitely  happy  in  His  boundless  beneficence.  Christ  was 
happy  in  giving  Himself  up  a  sacrifice  for  the  world.  In  all  ages,  the  happiest  of 
men  have  been  the  busiest  and  most  beneficent.  2.  It  enhances  power ;  relative 
power  and  actual  power.  He  who  works  for  God  and  man,  with  the  least  of 
solicitude  about  himself,  has  all  the  forces  of  Providence  working  with  him.  All 
these  forces  are  powerful,  so  is  he ;  and  their  triumph  is  his  triumph.  Moreover, 
the  benevolent  affections  are  the  best  stimulants  of  the  intellect,  the  best  allies  and 
energizers  of  the  will.  Henry  Martyn  was  twice  the  man  for  going  to  Persia  that  he 
would  have  been  had  he  remained  in  England;  and  consequently  has  twice  the  fame. 
it  is  by  dying  that  we  live.  It  is  only  the  good  and  the  self-denying  who  rule  us  from 
their  urns.  3.  It  is  noble.  Selfishness  is  pitiful  and  paltry.  (JK.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.) 
He  that  Berveth, — The  servant  of  sinners :— We  find  in  these  words  a  double 
reference — first,  to  the  character,  and  secondly,  to  the  office,  of  the  Son  of  Man ; 
to  His  character  as  the  lowly  one,  to  His  office  as  the  servant.  For  the  purpose  of 
bringing  both  these  things  before  His  disciples.  He  makes  use  of  those  marvellong 
words,  "I  am  among  you  as  the  Serving  One."  Consider  three  things  in  reference 
to  this  service.  I.  Its  histoby.  It  is  not  with  His  birth  in  Bethlehem  that 
Christ's  service  begins.    His  visit  to  our  first  father  in  paradise  was  its  true  oom« 


^WAP.  rxa.]  ST.  LUKE.  615 

mencemeot.  After  that  we  find  Him,  age  after  age,  visiting  the  children  of  men, 
and  always  in  the  character  of  one  ministering  to  their  wants.  At  His  ascension 
Hi  only  entered  on  a  new  department  of  service;  and  as  the  Advocate  with  the 
Father,  the  Intercessor,  the  Forerunner,  we  see  Him  still  serving.  Nor,  when  Ha 
comes  again  in  strength  and  majesty,  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  does  Ha 
lose  sight  of  His  character  as  the  Ministering  One  (Luke  xii.  37).  II.  Let  us  oon- 
«iDEB  THE  NATUBE  OF  THIS  BEEvicE.  It  is  in  all  respects  like  Himself — like  Him 
who,  though  He  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  became  poor.  1.  It  is  willing  service.  His 
"varied  rounds  of  service  are  no  heavy  task.  He  is  the  willing  servant  of  the 
needy.  2.  It  is  a  loving  service.  Out  of  no  fountain  save  that  of  love  could 
such  amazing,  such  endless  acts  of  service  flow.  The  loving  and  the  serving  are 
inseparable.  3.  It  is  self-denying  service.  To  continue  ministering,  day  after 
day,  in  the  midst  of  reproach,  and  opposition,  and  injection,  was  self-denial  and 
devotedness  such  as  man  can  hardly  either  credit  or  conceive.  4.  It  is  patient^ 
■unwearied  service.  He  has  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and  on  them  that  are  out 
of  the  way.  He  breaks  not  the  bruised  reed  ;  He  quenches  not  the  smoking  flax. 
By  day  or  by  night  we  find  Him  ever  girt  for  service.  5.  It  is  free  service.  Ic 
cannot  be  bought,  for  what  gold  could  purchase  it  ?  Neither  does  it  need  to  be 
bought,  for  it  is  freely  rendered.  III.  Its  ends  and  objects.  It  is  to  sinners  that 
this  service  is  rendered ;  and  there  is  much  in  this  to  exhibit  the  ends  which  it 
has  in  view.  This  gracious  servant  of  the  needy  is  willing  to  be  employed  by  any 
one,  no  matter  who,  let  him  be  the  poorest,  and  the  sickliest,  and  the  feeblest  of 
«11  who  ever  sought  a  helper,  a  protector,  or  a  guide,  on  their  way  to  the  kingdom. 
■{H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  life  of  service : — Let  us  ask  ourselves  why  our  Lord  has 
done  so  much  for  mankind  in  proposing  a  life  of  service  as  the  true  life  of  man. 
'Service,  I  apprehend,  is  thus  necessary  in  some  shape  for  all  of  us,  because  it 
involves  the  constant  repression  of  those  features  of  our  nature  which  constantly 
tend  to  drag  it  down  and  degrade  it.  Aristotle  remarked,  more  than  two  thousand 
vears  ago,  that  all  our  faulty  tendencies  range  themselves  under  the  two  heads  of 
(temper  and  desire — bad  temper  or  ill-regulated  desire.  When  the  one  element  is 
not  predominant  in  an  undisciplined  character,  you  will  find,  in  some  shape,  the 
other,  and  sometimes  you  will  find  the  one  and  sometimes  the  other  at  different 
periods  in  the  life  of  the  same  man.  Now,  service — that  is,  the  voluntary  under- 
taking of  work  in  obedience  to  the  Higher  Will — is  a  corrective  to  each  o£  these 
tendencies.  1.  It  is  a  corrective,  first  of  all,  of  temper  in  its  ordinary  and  every- 
day form  of  self-assertion  or  pride.  The  man  who  serves  from  his  heart  cannot 
indulge  in  self-assertion ;  he  represses  self  if  he  tries  to  perform  his  service  well. 
Each  effort,  each  five  minutes,  of  conscientious  service  has  the  effect  of  keeping 
self  down,  of  bidding  it  submit  to  a  higher  and  more  righteous  will ;  and  this 
process  steadily  persevered  in  ultimately  represses  it,  if  not  altogether,  yet  very 
oonsiderably.  And  what  a  substantial  service  this  is  to  human  nature  and  to 
human  character.  Be  sure  of  this,  that  self-assertion,  if  unchecked,  is  pitiless 
when  any  obstacle  to  its  gratification  comes  in  its  way.  The  self-asserting  man 
delights  in  making  an  equal  or  an  inferior  feel  the  full  weight  of  his  petty  import- 
ance ;  he  enjoys  the  pleasure  of  commanding  in  the  exact  ratio  of  the  pain  or 
discomfort  which  he  sees  to  be  the  cost  of  obedience ;  and  thus,  sooner  or  later,  self- 
assertion  becomes  tyranny,!and  tyranny,  sooner  rather  than  later,  means  some  revolt 
which  carries  with  it  the  ruin  of  order.  The  tyrant  in  the  State,  in  the  family,  in  the 
office,  in  the  workshop,  is  the  man  bent  on  the  assertion  of  self  ;  and,  despite  the 
moments  of  passing  gratification  which  he  enjoys,  such  a  tyrant  is  really  mora 
xniserable  than  his  subjects,  for  the  governing  appetite  of  his  character  can  never  be 
adequately  gratified ;  it  is  in  conflict  with  the  nature  of  things,  it  is  in  conflict  with  the 
4aw8  of  social  life,  it  is  in  conflict  with  the  Divine  will ;  and  when  it  is  repressed, 
curbed,  crushed  by  voluntary  work  in  obedience  to  a  higher  will,  a  benefit  of  the 
very  first  order  has  been  conferred  on  human  nature  and  on  human  society.  2. 
And  in  like  manner  work  voluntarily  undertaken  in  obedience  to  a  higher  will 
corrects  ill-regulated  desire.  Distinct  from  gross  sin  is  the  slothful,  easy, 
«nervated,  self-pleasing  temper  which  is  the  soil  in  which  gross  sin  grows.  The 
New  Testament  calls  this  district  of  human  nature  concupiscence — that  is  to  say, 
misdirected  desire — desire  which  was  meant  to  cleave  to  God — at  least,  to  centre  in 
God  the  eternal  beauty,  but  which,  through  some  bad  warp,  does,  in  fact,  attach 
itself  to  created  objects,  and  generally  to  some  object  attractive  to  the 
tenses.  This  evil  can  only  be  radioaily  cured  by  making  God  the  object 
«i  desire — that  ia  to  say,   by  a  love  of  God;   and  a  true  love  of  God  will 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chip,  xxb, 

express  itself  in  service — the  service  of  man  as  well  as  of  God  (1  John  iv 
20).  Service  keeps  this  ill-regulated  desire  at  bay,  and  it  centres  the  aoul'd 
higher  desire  or  love  more  and  more  perfectly  on  its  one  legitimate  object. 
And  then,  incidentally,  it  braces  character,  and  this  is  what  is  wanted  if  a  man  is 
to  escape  from  the  enervation  of  a  life  of  sensuous  and  effeminate  ease.  (Canon 
Liddon.)  The  glory  of  service  : — Helpfulness  is  the   highest   quality  of  the 

human  life.  Service  is  the  crowning  glory  of  man.  The  serving  type  is  the 
noblest  type  of  all  the  manifold  varieties  of  human  development.  The  principle 
of  the  text  is  not  to  the  effect  that  service  is  one  and  the  same  with,  or  altogether 
made  up  of,  what  we  know  as  the  activities  of  life.  *'  And  if  I  bestow  all  my 
goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  if  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and  have  not  love,  it 
profiteth  me  nothiug."  That  it  is  not  always  what  we  call  the  most  active  life 
which  is  the  most  useful.  Activity  is  not  all  of  service.  There  is  the  moral  power 
static,  as  well  as  the  moral  power  dynamic.  Again,  let  us  note  that  service  does 
not  discard  the  element  of  beauty  or  the  splendour  of  intellectual  gifts.  Beauty, 
rightly  so  named,  binds  up  ever  within  it  a  factor  of  highest  value.  A  beautiful 
picture  is  nothing  less  than  a  moral  force  in  the  world.  The  Madonna  face,  the 
Madonna  form,  through  the  centuries  rebuke  coarseness,  teach  purity,  uplift 
human  thoughts,  refine  human  souls.  So  with  flowers.  Their  beauty  has  a  moral 
value.  The  window-sill  which  lifts  them  up  is  twice  blessed.  It  blesses  him  who 
plants  and  him  who  passes.  The  law  of  service,  as  proclaimed  by  highest 
authority,  refuses  her  not  beauty  as  an  ally.  All  that  is  meant  is  that,  when  Beauty 
Etands  by  herself,  divorced  from  Service,  then  the  latter  is  higher,  nobler.  So  also 
of  the  splendour  of  mental  gifts.  This  splendour  also  may  rest  upon,  may  add  a  new 
beauty  and  a  new  power  to  that  which  is  the  highest  type  of  human  life.  But 
when  it  stands  off  by  itself,  when  it  offers  itself  as  a  substitute  for  or  a  rival  of 
service,  then  to  the  latter  must  be  given  the  pre-eminence.  Measured  by  the  true 
standard  of  human  greatness,  the  inventor  of  the  Calculus  is  less  of  a  man  than 
the  founder  of  London's  ragged  schools.  It  is  better  and  it  is  nobler  to  help  one 
poor,  vicious  human  life  into  a  pure  and  happy  immortality  than  it  is  to  weigh  th» 
Bun  or  to  write  equations  for  the  planets.  The  same  must  also  be  said  when  high 
station  is  brought  into  comparison  with  helpfulness.  But  let  us  turn  to  the  direct 
consideration  of  the  great  canon  of  human  worthiness.    I.  Helpfulness  is  more 

LIKE,  IN  MOKE  PEEFEOT  HARMONY  WITH,  THE  DiVINE  BEAUTT,  WITH  THAT  DiVINB 
BEAUTY   WHICH   HAS   ITS   EVENEK  APOCALYPSE  UPON   NATURE'S   FIELD  AND   IN  THE  HUMAN 

SOUL.  Even  upon  His  material  works  has  God  stamped  the  law  of  sympathetic 
service.  Bead  this  written  out  in  the  clouds  of  the  sky.  These  are  the  great 
water-carriers  of  the  world.  And  how  diligently,  how  joyously,  they  carry  on  their 
labour  of  love  1  The  huge  masses  skip  and  whirl  and  chase  each  other  like  lambs 
at  play ;  but,  however  weary,  they  never  think  of  laying  down  the  burden  which 
they  bear.  And  the  mountains,  too,  are  in  service.  Look  upon  the  Andes, 
vertibral  ridge  of  a  continent.  They  are  a  giant  hand  raised  to  catch  and  redis- 
tribute the  moisture  of  the  trade-winds  from  the  Atlantic,  thus  sending  it  back 
across  the  plains  in  healthful  and  life-giving  streams.  And  water,  too,  serves.  By 
one  of  its  lines  cold  is  carried  southward,  and  by  another  heat  is  carried  north- 
ward, thus  diminishing  the  inequalities  of  temperature  and  making  the  earth  f 
pleasant  residence  for  man.  So  is  it  through  every  department.  Nature  is  an 
organism.  Not  a  drop  of  water  leads  a  selfish  life,  not  a  wind-blast  is  without  its 
mission.  And  let  that  human  life  which  dares  to  lift  heavenward  the  formal  pro- 
iession  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  demand — let  such  a  one  take  his  rebuke 
from  ocean's  lips  I  Let  him  hear  it  sounding  in  the  winds  of  heaven  1  Let  him 
hear  it  thundered  forth  by  the  everlasting  mountains.  Human  lives  are  not 
wanted  in  this  world  for  ornament.  God  has  prettier  things  for  this  purpose. 
And  such  a  life,  I  say,  is  in  full  harmony  with  the  Divine.  For  a  long  time  th& 
world  and  man  knew  not  God.  In  this  ignorance  and  blindness  we  can  well 
imagine  men  asking  the  question,  •'  What  is  God  ?  "  To  whom  is  He  like  ?  Is  He 
the  Zeus  of  the  celestial  world,  full  of  vindictiveness  and  passion  f  Is  He  th» 
Oriental  monarch,  luxuriously  lounging  in  the  palace  room  of  the  universe?  And 
while  men  so  questioned,  the  door  of  heaven  opened,  and  a  Divine  one  in  visible 
form  walked  forth  before  the  eyes  of  men.  And  this  form,  what  was  it  f  "  That 
of  a  servant."  He  bore  men's  burdens.  He  healed  men's  sicknesses.  He  com- 
forted human  sorrows.  He  went  about  doing  good.  He  gave  His  life  a  ransom 
for  many.  And  now  that  the  Divine  Spirit  is  in  the  world  the  manifestation  i» 
ine  same.    He,  too,  comes  in  service.     He  is  the  Advocate,  the  Comforter,  His 


CEAP.  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE.  Elt 

the  soft  hand  which  wipes  away  the  falling  tear  and  binds  up  the  broken  heart. 
Such  ia  the  Divine,  such  is  Deity.     II.  But,  in  the  second  place,  of  all  moraii 

FORCES,     HELPFULNESS     IS     THE     MOST     POTEKT     IN      THE     EDIFICATION     OF     INi>IVIDUAIi 

CHABACTEB.     There  is  nothing  which  grounds  a  man  in  truth  and  righteousness  so 
firmly,  there  is  nothing  which  lifts  him  up  so  surely,  as  the  doing  of  good  to 
others.     This,  indeed,  is  only  the  highest  illustration  of  a  law  wide  as  the  realm 
of  human  life.     The  bird  which  sings  for  others  gladdens  its  own  heart  with  its 
song.     The  brook  which  flows  with  music  for  listening  ears  grows  more  clear  and 
limpid  as  it  flows.     Old  ocean's  mighty  tides  and  racing  gulf  streams,  which  ever 
serve  the  need  of  man,  paint  the  great  deep  with  its  spotless  blue,  and  bring  safety 
and  life  to  all  the  mighty  host  which  march  and  counter-march  within  its  hollow 
bed.     In  doing  good,  everything  in  God's  universe  gets  good.     Service  of  others  is 
highest  service  of  self,  and  the  best  way  for  any  man  to  grow  in  grace  is  to  move 
forward  into  service.      III.    But,   again,   helpfulness  is    more    lasting,   more 
IMMORTAL,  THAN  ANTTHiNO  ELSE  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.     "  Whether  thcrc  be  prophecies, 
they  shall  fail;  whether  there  be  tongues,  they   shall   cease;  whether  there  be 
knowledge,  it   shall  vanish  away.     But  charity  never  faileth."     Bad  as  is  this 
world,  it  is  good  enough  to  transmute  and  to  hold  immortality  within  it.    The 
beauty   of    the   beneficent   deed,   the  widow's  two   mites,  the  alabaster  box  of 
ointment,  Sir  Philip  Sidney's  cup  of  cold  water ;  the  passing  shadow  of  Florence 
Nightingale,  which  the  dving  soldier  strove  to  kiss;  above  all,  the  patient  and 
gentle  self-denial  of  the  Christ  life — these  are  pictures  which  this  world — God's 
world,  after  all — will  not  let  fade.     The  suns  of  centuries  rise  and  set  upon  them. 
Consider  what  this  canon  of  human  worthiness  calls  for  of  those  who  would 
receive  honour  under  it.     1.  This,  first  of  all :  personal  goodness.     In  this  world 
of  ours  the  tares  grow  together  with   the  wheat.     Service  of  man   calls  for  a 
servant  first  of  all ;  and  this  can  no  one  of  us  be  who  is  not  disinterestedly  in  love 
with  his  kind,  and  true  and  pure  in  all  his  works.     To  do  good  works  which  shall 
endure  we  ourselves  must  be  good.     2.  In  the  second  place,  tbe  canon  of  the  text 
demands  that  we  should  be  willing  to  help  when  help  is  required.     3.  The  law  of 
the  higher  type  also  makes  this  a  duty.     We  should  seek  opportunities  for  doing 
good.     The  glory  of  the  patriarch  of  Uz  was  written  in  these  words,  "  The  cause 
that  I  knew  not  I  searched  out. "     4.  The  principle  of  the  text  teaches  also  the 
obligation  of  self-training.     If  we  do  not  know  how  to  help  now,  why,  then,  we 
should  learn.     If  we  are  unfit  for  service  now,  we  must  make  ourselves  fit.     Con- 
genital  infirmities  may  be   corrected.     The  inertia  of   selfish   idleness  and  of 
grasping  covetousness  may  be  overcome  by  him  who,  upon  his  knees,  opens  hia 
heart  to  the  entrance  of  the  Divine  Spirit.     The  enthusiasm  of  humanity  may  be 
caught  from  the  example  and  inspiration  of  Jesus  Christ.     The  mill-wheel  will 
cease  to  revolve  when  the  waters  of  the  rushing  stream  are  cut  off ;  the  moving 
train  will  stop   when  the  glowing  heat  cools  within   the  hidden  chamber ;  and 
charity  in  this  world  will  degenerate  into  a  professional  schedule  without  inspira- 
tion and  without  power  when  the  name  of  Jesus  is  no  longer  writ  by  the  hand  of 
Faith  upon  its  banner.     (5.    S.   Mitchell,  D.D.)         Servus  servorum: — I.  Ocb 
Lord's  position.    1.  In  the  world  our  Lord  was  not  one  of  the  cultured  few  on 
'whom  others  wait.    He  was  a  working-man,  and  in  spirit  Servant  of  servants.     2. 
In  the  circle  of  His  own  disciples  He  was  one  that  served.    3.  In  celebration  of 
Holy  Supper,  He  was  specially  among  them  "  as  He  that  serveth,"  for  He  washed 
His  disciples'  feet.    4.  In  the  whole  course  of  His  life,  Jesus  on  earth  ever  took 
the  place  of   the  servant  or  slave.    His   ear  was  bored   by  His  entering  into 
covenant.     "  Mine  ears  hast  thou  digged,  or  pierced  (Psa.  xl.  6  (margin) ;  Exod. 
xxi.  6).    His  office  was  announced  at  His  coming,  "Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will  1  " 
(Psa.  xL  7  ;  Heb.  x.  5-9).     His  nature  was  fitted  for  service :  He  "  took  upon  Him 
the  form  of  a  servant "  (Phil.  ii.  7).    He  assumed  the  lowest  place  among  men 
(Psa.  xxii.  6 ;  Isa.  liii.  3).     He  cared  for  others,  and  not  for  Himself.    "  The  Son 
of  Man  came  not  to  be  served  but  to  serve  "  (Mark  x.  45).    He  laid  aside  His  own 
will  (John  iv.  34 ;  vi.  38).     He  bore  patiently  all  manner  of  hardness  (1  Peter  ii. 
23).    n.  The  wonder  or  it — that  He  should  be  a  servant  among  His  own  servants. 
The  marvel  of  it  was  rendered  the  greater — 1.  As  He  was  Lord  of  all  by  nature 
and  essence  (CoL,  i.  15-19).     2.  As  He  was  superior  in  wisdom,  holiness,  power, 
and  in  every  other  way,  to  the  very  best  of  them  (Matt,  viii  26,  27  ;  John  xiv.  9). 
8.  As  He  was  so  greatly  their  Benefactor  (John  xv.  16).    4.  As  they  were  such 
poor  creatures,  and  so  unworthy  to  be  served.    lU.  The  explanation  of  it.     We 
mast  look  for  thie  to  His  own  nature.    1.  He  is  so  infinitely  great  (Heb.  i.  2-4). 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  jxiu, 

2.  He  is  so  immeasurably  full  of  love  (John  xv.  9;  1  John  iii  16).  IV.  Thb 
IMITATION  OF  IT.  1.  In  checrfully  chooaing  to  fulfil  the  most  lowly  offices.  2.  la 
manifesting  great  lowliness  of  spirit  and  humility  of  bearing  (Eph.  iv.  1-3  ;  Phil. 
ii.  3 ;  1  Peter  v.  5).  3.  In  laying  ourselves  out  for  the  good  of  others.  Let  self- 
eacrifice  be  the  rule  of  our  existence  (2  Cor.  xii.  15).  4.  In  gladly  bearing  iuj  astice 
rather  than  break  the  peace,  avenge  ourselves,  or  yrieve  others  (1  Peter  ii.  19,  20 ; 
iii.  14).  5.  In  selecting  that  place  in  which  we  receive  least,  and  give  most ; 
choosing  to  wait  at  table  rather  than  to  sit  at  meat.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christlike  service  : — A  true  character  can  never  be  built  on  a  false  foundation ;  oa 
the  denial  of  a  fact  or  on  pretending  not  to  see  it.  There  are  greater  men  and  Icoa  ; 
stronger  and  weaker ;  wiser  and  less  wise ;  men  fit  to  rule  and  men  fit  only  to  ba 
led;  some  who  can  teach  and  others  whose  business  it  is  to  learn.  The  right 
relationship  between  men  is  to  be  reached,  if  at  all,  by  a  manly  acknowledgment  of 
the  facts  which  divide  them  and  the  individual  superiorities  which  set  one  above 
another.  It  is  he  who  can  rightly  say,  "  Master  and  Lord  am  I "  ;  who  can  also 
Bay  with  the  fullest  emphasis,  *'  I  am  among  you  as  the  servant "  1     I.  Since,  then, 

THE  MORAL  CHABACTERISTIC8  OF  THIS  VOLUNTABY  SERVICE  WCTC  those  which  gave  it  WOrth, 

let  us  try  in  a  few  words  to  disentangle  these  moral  characteristics  and  understaud 
them.  They  may  be  summed  up,  I  think,  in  these  two :  in  unselfish  love  as  tJtie 
root-virtue,  and  in  lowliness  of  mind  as  the  specific  shape  which  love  must  taka 
when  it  girds  itself  to  serve.  II.  Taking,  then,  these  words  of  Jesus,  "I  am  in  the 
midst  of  you  as  your  attendant,"  to  be  virtually  descriptive  of  His  whole  positios 
ON  earth  and  the  spirit  of  His  entire  career,  we  find  that  His  life  may  be  described 
thus :  it  was  a  voluntary  service  of  other  men,  rooted  in  pure  love  for  them,  aud 
carried  out  with  such  lowliness  of  mind  as  deems  no  office  degrading  which  can  be 
lovingly  rendered.  Notice  next,  more  expressly  than  we  have  yet  done,  that  such 
lowly,  loving  service  of  others  was  not  in  His  case  an  occasional  effort  or  a  mere 
ornament  of  character  exhibited  now  and  then.  It  formed  the  staple  of  His  life. 
Christ  came,  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister  ;  not  to  enrich  Himself,  either 
with  nobler  or  baser  wealth,  but  to  impoverish  Himself  that  He  might  make  many 
rich.  With  Him  it  is  not,  as  with  other  men,  "  I  will  sit  at  table,  and  do  you  wait 
on  Me  "  ;  but  it  is,  "  you  sit  at  table,  and  I  will  wait."  III.  But  is  this,  after  all, 
A  MORE  excellent  WAT  WHICH  Jesos  HAS  SHOWN  ?  Wherein  is  it  more  excellent  f 
The  King's  Son  came  among  us.  We  called  Him  our  "  Lord  and  Master,"  and  we 
said  well ;  but  He  was  as  one  who  served  us !  Now  we  know  that  the  Father  on 
high  is  like  unto  Him.  The  divinest  part  of  His  relationship  to  His  creatures  lies 
here,  that  being  Lord  of  all  He  makes  Himself  the  servant  of  all.  How  is  He  by 
day  and  night  creation's  unwearied  watcher,  provider,  attendant,  benefactor  1  The 
lions  roar  and  He  feedeth  them.  Not  a  sparrow  falls  but  He  heeds  it.  The  liliea 
spin  not,  yet  He  clothes  them.  True,  patient  minister  to  each  creature's  need,  in 
whose  loving  eyes  nothing  is  too  minute  to  be  remembered  nor  too  mean  to  be 
served  ;  He  is  for  ever  with  tender  humble  carefulness  laying  His  might  and  His 
providence  and  His  inventiveness  and  His  tastefulness  at  the  service  of  all  creation. 
What  1  cries  out  the  heart  of  the  proud,  is  this  your  conception  of  the  Eternal  ? 
Were  not  all  things  made  for  His  glory,  then  ?  Yes,  indeed,  for  His  glory  ;  but  not 
in  the  ignoble  sense  we  so  often  intend  !  Not  made  to  be  sacrificed  to  His  pleasure. 
Not  made  for  a  boastful  display  of  His  omnipotence  or  skill ;  nor  as  mere  trappings 
or  attendants  to  lend  dignity  to  His  court.  Away  with  such  vain  thoughts,  borrowed 
from  the  barbaric  and  vulgar  splendour  of  an  Oriental  despotism  I  Verily,  the  uni- 
verse is  the  mirror  of  its  Creator's  glory  ;  but  it  is  so  because  it  shows  Him  to  be 
prodigal  of  His  love,  lavishing  His  care  upon  the  least,  stooping  to  adorn  the 
poorest,  and  made  then  supremely  glad  when  He  can  see  His  creatures  glad.  The 
glory  of  God  ;  where  is  it  ?  that  He  ministers  to  all !  His  blessedness ;  what  is  it  P 
to  make  others  blessed  !  I  see,  then,  that  when  the  Son  came  among  us  as  a  servant, 
it  became  Him  as  a  son  to  do  so,  for  it  became  the  Father  whose  Son  He  was.  Ilr 
was  a  prolongation  only,  although  a  right  marvellous  one,  of  that  character  whose 
Divineness  men  had  been  slow  to  see,  but  which  God  the  Maker  had  pencilled  with 
light  across  His  creation.  (/.  0.  Dy  kes,  D.D. )  Continued  with  Me  in  My  tempta- 
tions.— The  tolitarirusas  of  Christ  in  His  temptations: — We  get  here  a  wonderful 
glimpse  into  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  a  most  pathetic  revelation  of  His  thoughts  and 
experiences  ;  all  the  more  precious  because  it  is  quite  incidental,  and,  we  may  say, 
unconscious.  I.  The  tempted  Christ.  "  In  My  temptations" — so  He  summed  up 
His  life  1  The  period  to  which  He  refers  lies  between  the  wilderness  and  the  garden, 
»ad  includes  neither.     His  whole  ministry  was  a  field  of  oontinaal  and  diversified 


OOP.  xxn.]  8T.  LUKE.  51t 

temptations.  No  sham  fight.  1.  Let  us  think  of  the  tempted  Christ,  that  oar  con 
ceptions  of  His  sinlessness  may  be  increased.  His  was  no  antried  and  cloistered 
virtue,  pure  because  never  brought  into  contact  with  seducing  evil,  but  a  militant 
and  victorions  goodness,  that  was  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day.  2.  Let  us  think 
of  the  tempted  Christ,  that  our  thankful  thoughts  of  what  He  bore  for  as  may  ba 
warmer  and  more  adequate,  as  we  stand  afar  off  and  look  on  at  the  mystery  of  Hia 
battle  with  our  enemies  and  His.  3.  Let  as  think  of  the  tempted  Christ,  to  make 
the  lighter  burden  of  oar  cross  and  oar  less  terrible  conflict  easier  to  bear  and  to 
wage.  So  will  He  continue  with  ua  in  our  temptations,  and  patience  and  victory 
flow  to  us  from  Him.  II.  Thb  lonely  Chbist.  The  most  solitary  man  that  ever 
lived.  His  nearest  kindred  stood  aloof  from  Him.  Even  in  the  small  company  of 
His  friends,  there  were  absolutely  none  who  either  understood  Him  or  sympathized 
■with  Him.  Talk  of  the  solitude  of  pure  character  amid  evil,  like  Lot  in  Sodom,  or 
of  the  loneliness  of  uncomprehended  aims  or  unshared  thoughts — whoever  ex- 
perienced that  as  keenly  as  Christ  did  ?  The  more  pure  and  lofty  a  nature,  the  more 
keen  its  sensitiveness,  the  more  exquisite  its  delights,  and  the  sharper  its  pains. 
The  more  loving  and  unselfish  a  heart  the  more  its  longing  for  companionship  ;  and 
the  more  its  aching  in  loneliness.  That  lonely  Christ  sympathizes  with  all  solitary 
hearts.  If  ever  we  feel  ourselves  misunderstood  and  thrown  back  upon  ourselves  ; 
if  ever  our  heart's  burden  of  love  is  rejected ;  if  our  outward  lives  be  lonely  and 
earth  yields  nothing  to  stay  our  longing  for  companionship ;  if  our  hearts  have 
been  filled  with  dear  ones  and  are  now  empty,  or  but  filled  with  tears,  let  us  think 
of  Him  and  say,  "  Yet  I  am  not  alone."  He  lived  alone,  alone  He  died,  that  no 
heart  might  ever  be  solitary  any  more.  III.  The  grateful  Christ.  His  heart  was 
gladdened  by  loving  friends,  and  He  recognized  in  their  society  a  ministry  of  love. 
Where  there  is  a  loving  heart  there  is  acceptable  service.  It  is  possible  that  our 
poor,  imperfect  deeds  shall  be  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  acceptable,  well-pleasing 
to  Him.  Which  of  us  that  is  a  father  is  not  glad  at  his  children's  gifts,  even  though 
they  be  purchased  with  his  own  money,  and  be  of  little  use  ?  They  mean  love,  so 
they  are  precious.  And  Christ,  in  like  manner,  accepts  what  we  bring,  even  though 
it  be  chilled  by  selfishness,  and  faith  broken  by  doubt,  and  submission  crossed  by 
self-will.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  I  appoint  onto  you  a  kingdom. — Called  to  a 
kingdom : — There  was  once  a  young  prince,  heir  to  the  throne  of  Bussia,  who  was 
giving  himself  to  every  form  of  dissipation.  He  took  up  his  residence  in  Paris,  and 
entered  heartily  into  all  its  gaieties.  One  evening,  as  he  was  seated  with  a  number 
of  young  profligates  like  himself,  drinking,  gambling,  and  making  merry,  a  message 
was  privately  conveyed  to  him  that  his  father  was  dead.  Pushing  away  from  him 
the  dice  and  the  wine-cup,  he  rose  up  and  said,  "  I  am  emperor  1 "  and  forthwith 
announced  that  his  must  henceforth  be  a  different  kind  of  life.  Young  men,  I  have 
to  tell  you  to-night  of  a  kingdom  to  which  you  are  called.  To  you  the  Lord  Jesus 
says,  "  I  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom,  as  My  Father  hath  appointed  unto  Me."  To 
no  meaner  rank  are  you  to  aspire  than  to  that  of  "kings  and  priests  unto  God." 
But  when  the  day  came  that  Saul  was  actually  to  be  made  king,  the  youth  was 
"  not  to  be  found."  He  had  hid  himself  among  the  stuff.  Saul  concealed  amid 
the  baggage,  perhaps  the  comnussariat  for  that  large  assembly  of  people  ;  hidden, 
tall  fellow  as  he  was,  amid  the  heap  of  boxes  and  baskets  of  all  kinds — is  he  not 
a  picture  of  many  a  young  man  whom  God  is  calling  to  a  kingdom,  but  who  is  chin- 
deep  in  business,  bo  absorbed  in  worldly  matters  that  he  cannot  attend  to  the 
affairs  of  his  soul  ?    {J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  81-84.  Bataa  hath  desired  to  have  yon. — The  temptation  of  St.  Peter: — 
Our  Lord  is  conversing  here  with  His  dear  disciples  a  little  before  His  crucifixion. 
In  the  tenderness  of  ^s  heart,  He  almost  thanks  them  for  their  faithful  adherence 
to  Him  (vers.  2S-30).  And  now  comes  a  sudden  transition,  showing  us  the  strong 
feeling  at  work  at  this  time  in  our  Lord's  breast.  He  thinks  the  next  moment  of 
the  perils  these  men  will  have  to  pass  through  in  their  way  to  those  thrones,  and 
gives  them  abruptly  a  warning  of  one  of  them.  I.  We  must  begin  with  this  wabn- 
iNO.  1.  See  in  it  our  Lord's  knowledge  of  the  invisible  world.  We  know  nothing 
of  Satan  but  what  we  are  told.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  does  see  him  as  he  goes  about ; 
and  He  not  only  sees  him,  He  can  look  into  his  heart  and  discern  the  secret  purposes 
and  desires  of  it.  2.  See  next  here  the  crafty  policy  of  Satan.  "  He  hath  desired 
to  have  you,''  oar  Lord  says ;  **yoa  especially;  you,  believers  in  Me,  rather  than 
the  Jews  or  heathen  around  you ;  yoa.  My  most  beloved  disciples,"  &o.  Why  ? 
Ceoaaae  they  stood  more  in  his  way  than  any  others.    3.  We  may  see  here  the 


620  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zzh. 

limited  power  of  Satan.  He  cannot  touch  one  of  these  men  without  God's  permis* 
eion.  U.  Leaving  now  the  other  disciples,  let  as  look  at  the  effect  of  this  wabn* 
iNO  ON  ONE  OF  THEM,  Peteb.  "  SimoH,  Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have 
you."  1.  Observe,  that  it  excited  his  love.  If  mere  feeling  could  have  made  a 
martyr,  Peter  was  already  prepared  to  be  one.  2.  And  observe  again — this  warning 
did  not  shake  Peter's  self-confidence.  And  yet  it  was  given  in  a  manner  calculated 
to  shake  it.  It  made  no  impression  on  him  or  a  very  faint  one.  3.  And  mark 
again — this  warning  did  not  prevent  Peter's  fall.  III.  We  may  come  now  to 
another  point  in  the  text — the  tendeb  meect  of  oub  Lobo  to  Peteb  notwith- 
STANDING  HIS  SELF-SDFFiciENCT  AND  FALL,  OT  rather,  in  anticipation  of  his  self- 
suflSciency  and  fall.     "  I  have  prayed  for  thee,"  He  says,  "  that  thy  faith  fail  not." 

1.  We  must  be  struck  at  once,  I  think,  with  tiie  lowUness  of  this  language.  Our 
Lord  has  been  speaking  just  before  in  the  almost  unveiled  dignity  of  the  Godhead. 
He  has  been  manifesting,  too,  a  knowledge  of  Satan  and  a  knowledge  of  the  human 
heart  such  as  none  but  the  infinite  Jehovah  can  possess  ;  and  yet  when  His  fallen 
apostle  is  to  be  rescued,  what  does  He  say  f  "  I  will  rescue  him  "  ?  or,  as  in  Paul's 
case,  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  him  "  ?  No;  He  speaks  now  as  a  feeble  man; 
"The  mighty  God  only  can  rescue  him.  I  have  prayed  for  him."  What  a  view 
does  this  give  us  of  our  Lord's  humility !  And  what  a  view,  too,  of  the  awful 
nature  of  sin  I  of  the  difficulty  of  extricating  even  a  servant  of  God  out  of  it  I 

2.  Observe,  too,  the  peculiar  tenderness  of  His  love  for  those  who  are  peculiarly 
tempted.  3.  And  there  is  the  intercession  of  our  Lord  to  be  noticed  here — its 
infiuence  on  our  preservation  from  sin  or  recovery  from  it.  Faith  lies  at  the  root 
of  every  grace.  It  is  that  within  as  which  first  lays  hold  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  it 
is  that  which  keeps  hold  of  Him.  It  seems  the  lowest,  the  poorest,  and  meanest 
of  all  graces,  but  it  is  notwithstanding  the  most  active  and  operative  of  all ;  it 
secretly  does  the  most.  (C  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  sifting  of  Peter: — I.  Thb 
CHAEACTEB  OF  Peteb.  The  character  of  Peter  is  a  very  marked  one.  His  character 
stands  out  in  bold  prominence  and  relief,  like  an  object  situated  on  a  height,  and 
seen  between  us  and  a  clear  sky.  We  notice  at  once  his  natural  sincerity  and  bold- 
ness, his  vehemence  and  self-confidence ;  his  liability  to  be  hurried  away  by  the 
tide  of  events  and  the  current  of  prevailing  feeling.  We  perceive  that  as  a  disciple 
of  Christ  he  is  under  the  guardian  care  and  grace  of  heaven ;  but  we  discover  sin 
lurking  within,  and  bursting  forth  from  time  to  time  as  the  liquid  fire  of  the 
volcano  breaks  out  from  the  mountain  whose  surface  may  be  covered  with  the 
loveliest  foliage.  His  love  to  Jesus  was  genuine  and  sincere — for  with  all  his  fail- 
ings Peter  was  no  hypocrite  ;  yet  he  not  infrequently  resists  the  will  of  his  Master, 
and  at  times  is  positively  ashamed  of  Him.  He  is  zealously  affected  in  every  good 
thing,  but  his  zeal  is  often  unthinking  and  impetuous,  and  proceeds  from  a  self- 
confident  and  self-righteous  rather  than  a  humble  and  trustful  spirit  of  dependenc; 
on  God ;  and  it  comes  forth  when  it  should  be  restrained,  and  fails  when  it  shoultt 
flow.  II.  Temptation  of  Peteb  by  Satan.  "  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,  that 
he  may  sift  you  as  wheat."  We  see  that  we  are  to  regard  our  temptations  as 
coming  from  Satan  the  tempter,  the  accuser.  He  who  rebelled  against  God  in 
heaven  seeks  to  thwart  His  will  on  earth.  "  The  devil  entered  into  Judas  Iscariot," 
whom  he  hurried  from  one  crime  to  another  till  he  laid  violent  hands  on  himself. 
May  he  not  succeed  also  with  his  brother  apostle  ?  In  tempting  us  Satan  takes 
advantage  of  two  circumstances.  He  employs  the  world  to  sedace  us,  and  he 
addresses  the  corruption  of  the  heart.  First,  he  takes  advantage  of  the  ciroum- 
stances  in  which  we  are  placed,  and  of  the  worldly  and  sinful  character  of  those 
with  whom  we  mingle.  Breathing  as  we  do  an  infected  atmosphere,  we  are  apt  to 
take  in  malaria  which  breeds  moral  disease.  III.  The  eecoveey  of  Peteb,  thbouoh 
THE  PBAYEB  OF  Jesus  SUSTAINING  HIS  FAITH.  It  is  of  vast  moment  that  Christians 
should  know  wherein  lies  the  secret  of  their  strength.  It  lies  first  of  all  in  the 
intercession  of  Christ,  and  secondly  in  their  remaining  faith.  1.  It  does  not  lie 
primarily  in  yourselves — in  the  liveliness  of  your  feelings  or  the  strength  of  your 
resolutions.  Purposes  formed  in  our  own  strength  are  like  the  writing  upon  the 
sand,  which  is  swept  away  by  the  first  breath  of  the  tempest  or  the  first  swelling  of 
the  tide.  The  believer's  steadfastness  does  not  lie  in  himself,  but  in  another. 
His  strength  is  in  the  foundation  on  which  he  rests,  and  that  foundation  is  the  Bock 
of  Ages.  How  was  it  that  Peter  was  restored  ?  The  cause  was  to  be  found  iu 
ihe  work  of  Christ.  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee."  He  was  recovered,  not  by  the 
meritoriouB  power  and  efficacy  of  his  own  prayers,  but  by  the  prayers  of  Christ. 
When  Peter  was  brought  to  repentance  he  prayed ;  but  there  is  a  previous  ques- 


eHAP.  rxn.]  ST.  LUKE,  621 

tion — What  bronght  him  to  repentance  ?  If  Christ  had  not  first  prayed  for  him, 
he  had  never  prayed  for  himself.  2.  There  was,  however,  a  secondary  power,  and 
this  was  Peter's  faith.  IV.  The  command,  "  when  thou  abt  converted,  strengthen 
THY  BRETHREN."  In  this  conversion  there  was  much  searching.  This  we  learn 
from  the  interview  with  which  our  Lord  favoured  Peter  after  His  resurrection. 
•'  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  Me  ?  "  was  the  question  ;  and  Peter  could 
answer.  Brethren,  according  to  the  sins  of  which  you  are  conscious,  so  let  your 
love  and  zeal  now  be  in  the  service  of  God.  (J.  McCosh,  D.D.)  The  sifting  of 
life : — The  figure  which  Christ  here  makes  use  of  in  order  to  describe  the  severe 
ordeal  through  which  Peter,  the  most  prominent  of  all  the  disciples,  was  to  pass,  is 
a  very  significant  one  ;  and  we  cannot  believe  that  it  was  used  by  chance,  or  with- 
out full  intention.  The  sifting  of  wheat  is  a  most  hard  and  thorough,  but  a  most 
necessary,  process.  The  wheat,  as  it  has  grown,  has  become  associated  with  the 
protecting  chaff,  which  it  is  necessary  should  be  blown  away,  and  with  the  foreign 
substances  taken  from  the  earth  and  from  the  air,  which  must  be  separated.  Before 
the  wheat  is  ready  for  use,  it  must  be  sifted  or  winnowed ;  no  pains  must  be  spared 
to  make  the  process  as  thorough  as  possible.  Only  an  enemy  to  the  wheat,  or  a 
disbeliever  in  its  true  powers,  would  desire  to  spare  it  such  an  ordeal.  As  it  falls, 
after  such  a  process,  into  the  receptacle  which  has  been  prepared  for  it,  solid  and 
clean,  its  value  is  greatly  enhanced.  There  is  now  no  doubt  about  its  true  nature 
and  the  work  to  which  it  should  be  put.  It  carries  out  all  the  points  of  the  analogy 
to  notice  that  Peter  is  not  promised  that  he  shall  be  saved  from  the  sifting  process  : 
no  hand  is  put  forth  to  hold  him  securely  sheltered  ;  no  cloud  wraps  him  away  from 
danger.  Peter  is  too  valuable  to  be  thus  treated.  If  he  is  wheat  he  must  be  sifted. 
I.  And  so  we  learn  the  great  lesson  from  Christ,  that  ditficdlties  are  as  necessart 

AND  BENEFICIAL  FOR  THE  SOUL  AS  WINNOWING  IS  FOR  THE  WHEAT.  The  wiuds  Of  tempta- 
tion blow,  and  the  poor,  lightly-weighted  souls  are  carried  away ;  wbile  the  strong 
ones  are  stripped  of  many  things  in  which  they  trusted,  and  the  true  power  of  principle 
becomes  more  evident  in  their  lives.  The  question  of  the  winnowing  floor  is  always 
being  repeated :  Are  you  wheat  or  chalf  1  1.  There  is  the  shifting  of  change  of 
position,  the  pouring  from  vessel  to  vessel — a  process  under  which  the  light  grains 
are  removed,  and  which  finds  its  parallel  in  the  change  of  life's  demands.  You  are 
rich,  and  the  qnestion  the  next  day  is.  Can  you  stand  poverty  ?  or  you  are 
poor,  and  the  sudden  access  of  prosperity  tests  your  real  ability  and  weight.  Will 
the  one  rob  you  of  your  spirit,  or  the  other  of  your  humility  ?  If  they  will,  then 
you  have  been  sifted  with  the  result  of  proving  that  you  are  but  chaff.  Changes 
from  joy  to  sorrow  or  from  sorrow  to  joy,  from  light  to  dark  or  from  dark  to  Ught — 
those  have  revealed  the  substance  of  many  a  man  to  as ;  and  we  have  said,  "  I 
thought  that  he  could  stand  it  better,"  or  we  have  exclaimed,  "  What  a  noble  man 
he  is  I  He  is  just  as  he  was  before,  not  puffed  up  by  his  exaltation,  not  broken  by 
dejection."  2.  And  there  is  the  sifting  of  progress :  ideas  and  men  aU  pass  through 
that.  New  tests  are  applied,  just  as  ever  new  sieves,  with  closer  and  closer  meshes, 
wait  for  the  falling  grain  with  sharper  discrimination  at  each  stage  of  the  process. 
The  truth  of  one  generation  or  one  age  of  life  is  sifted  before  it  is  accepted  by  the 
next.  Some  accretion,  some  profitless  protecting  husk,  is  cast  off,  and  the  sub- 
stance is  more  valuable  than  ever.  The  man  finds,  after  life's  experience,  that  not 
one  particle  of  the  truth  as  to  honesty,  virtue,  and  God  has  proved  itself  false, 
although  he  smiles  at  the  childish  conceptions  which  enshrined  it  for  him,  and 
which  long  ago  passed  away ;  and  with  each  generation  God's  truth  is  made  simpler 
and  clearer  to  the  eyes  of  all.  II.  But  what  has  Satan  to  do  with  it  ?  Satan 
rejoiced  at  the  anticipation  of  this  process  and  longed  to  see  it  begin,  because 
he  did  not  believe  that  Peter  could  stand  it ;  he  does  not  believe  that  any  man 
can,  and  he  longs,  therefore,  to  see  men  come  under  the  test.  At  first  this  sifting 
seems  to  give  evil  the  advantage.  But  the  meaning  of  those  words  of  Christ's 
gradually  comes  out :  "  Fear  not  them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no 
more  that  they  can  do."  There  is  an  ultimate  kernel  of  life  which  the  sifting  cannot 
touch.  It  is  a  reality  which  defies  all  the  processes  of  ultimate  solution  which  can 
be  brought  against  it.  That  is  the  belief  which  makes  a  man  strong  to  endure 
temptation,  brave  to  pass  through  all  changes,  courageous  to  march  with  all  pro- 
gress of  ideas.  It  was  to  the  soul  that  Christ  spoke  ;  on  it  all  His  work  was  based. 
When  He  had  once  seen  that  soul  conscious  of  itself  and  of  its  power  in  the  heart 
of  a  man.  He  was  not  afraid  to  let  the  world  sift  him,  though  he  might  be  a  man  with 
as  many  weaknesses  and  foibles  as  Simon  Peter.  Let  them  be  shaken  off  and 
blown  away,  like  corrupting  substances  or  infolding  chaff.    When  that  was  all  dona 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrn 

the  man  remained.  III.  I  think,  then,  that  we  can  understand  that  tone  of 
confidence  with  which  Jesus  speaks  of  the  trial  which  is  to  befall  ffis  great 
disciple.  To  His  eye  the  conditions  are  not  hopeless.  He  does  not  deprecate  the 
struggle,  but  rather  in  it  anticipates  the  defeat  of  Satan.  But  the  tone  of  confidence 
is  still  more  sublime  when  the  means  of  steength  and  victoet  are  considered. 
The  whole  of  the  sifting  process  administered  by  its  great  master  and  confident 
authority,  Satan,  is  to  be  brought  to  bear  ;  and  yet  Peter  will  not  succumb  because 
Christ  has  prayer  for  him  that  his  faith  fail  not.  See  how  Christ  puts  Himself 
against  the  world.  Through  that  prayer  the  life  of  Peter  was  inade  strong  to  bear 
the  ordeal ;  through  that  prayer  he  was  able  to  defy  the  world  and  Satan.  That 
prayer  told  of  the  relation  which  He  had  established  between  that  disciple  tor 
whom,  and  the  Father  to  whom,  it  was  offered.  He  stood  between  the  two.  The 
subject,  the  offerer,  the  receiver  of  the  prayer,  were  one  in  their  purpose  and 
desire  to  overcome  and  bafQe  Satan.  Defeat  was  impossible.  (Arthur  Brooks.) 
ChrUVs  warning  to  Peter : — 1.  The  greatness  or  nearness  of  the  danger.  There  are 
Bome  souls  that  there  is  no  delaying  or  dallying  with  them ;  but  if  ye  will  save 
them  at  all,  ye  must  save  them  quickly ;  ye  must  deal  roundly  and  nimbly  with 
them  if  ever  ye  intend  them  any  good.  The  Spirit  of  God,  He  speaks  quick,  and 
He  speaks  often,  again  and  again,  where  He  would  prevent  from  danger.  2.  The 
security  of  the  person  warned.  Peter  was  not  more  in  danger  than  he  was  insen- 
sible of  his  danger.  3.  The  affection  of  the  Monitor  or  person  that  gives  the 
warning ;  that  is  also  in  the  doubling  of  the  appellation.  It  is  a  sign  Christ's  heart 
was  much  in  it,  and  that  He  bore  a  singular  love  and  respect  to  Peter,  in  that  He 
does  thus  passionately  admonish  him.  Love  is  full  of  sohcitude  and  carefulness 
for  the  party  beloved.  The  matter  of  the  admonition  or  the  warning  itself.  1. 
The  persons  aimed  at.  They  are  here  said  to  be  you.  He  spake  before  to  Peter  in 
the  singular,  Simon,  Simon ;  now  it  is  you,  in  the  plural.  To  signify  thus  much 
unto  us ;  that  there's  the  same  condition  of  all  befievers  as  of  one.  That  which 
befalls  one  Christian  it  is  incident  to  all  the  rest.  The  reason  of  it  is  this — because 
they  all  consist  of  the  same  natures,  and  are  acted  by  the  same  principles.  (1) 
Tou  believers,  rather  than  other  men.  Satan's  aim  is  especially  at  such,  to  get 
them.  As  for  wicked  and  ungodly  persons,  who  are  yet  in  their  unregenerate  con- 
dition, he  has  them  already.  And  there  are  two  considerations  especially  which 
do  lay  ground  to  this  practice  in  him.  (a)  That  absolute  antipathy  and  hatred  and 
contrariety  which  is  in  him  to  goodness  itself,  yea,  to  God  Himself,  who  is  the 
chiefest  good.  The  devil,  because  he  hates  goodness  itself,  therefore  he  assaults 
it  wherever  he  finds  it.  (h)  It  proceeds  from  that  envy  and  pride  which  is  in  him. 
(2)  You  eminent  believers  rather  than  other  Christians.  This  is  the  manner  of 
Satan  to  cast  his  sticks  most  at  those  trees  which  are  fullest  of  fruit ;  where  he 
spies  more  grace  than  ordinary,  there  especially  to  lay  his  chiefest  assaults.  There 
is  a  double  reason  for  it  which  does  encourage  him  to  it — First,  it  is  the  greater 
victory ;  and  secondly,  it  is  the  greater  advantage.  He  does  more,  both  in  it  and 
by  it.  The  use  of  this  to  ourselves  is — First,  to  teach  Christians  not  to  trust  to 
their  own  habitual  graces  nor  to  the  number  or  measure  of  them.  Secondly,  we 
learn,  hence,  not  to  pass  uncharitable  censures  upon  the  servants  of  God  which  are 
under  temptations,  as  to  conclude  them  therefore  to  be  none  of  His  servants.  (3) 
Tou  apostles  and  ministers  rather  than  other  eminent  believers.  I.  The  pesiom 
itself — Satan  hath  desired  you.  As  here  is  Satan's  restraint,  so  moreover  his  malice 
and  boldness  of  attempt.  1.  Here  is  implied  Peter's  ignorance  and  present 
nnadvisedness.  He  was  not  aware  of  this  attempt  of  Satan.  So  is  it  Ukewtse  with 
many  others  of  God's  servants.  Satan  does  secretly  lay  siege  unto  their  souls,  and 
they  do  not  discern  it.  It  is  a  great  piece  of  skill  to  know  indeed  when  we  are 
tempted,  and  to  be  apprehensive  that  we  are  under  a  temptation.  2.  We  see  here 
also  the  love  of  Christ,  who  helps  our  ignorance  in  this  particular,  and  advises  us 
where  we  are  less  regardful.  3.  Here  is  also,  as  sometimes,  the  eminency  and  con- 
epicuousness  of  the  temptation.  (1)  To  have  you  to  corrupt  you.  (2)  This  were 
enough  to  make  as  look  about  ns ;  that  Satan  would  have  us  to  corrupt  us,  but  yet 
that  is  not  all — he  would  have  us  to  afflict  us  too.  As  Satan  would  weaken  our 
faith,  so  also  darken  our  comfort ;  and  as  he  would  draw  as  into  sin,  so  likewise 
trouble  as  and  torment  us  for  it.  U.  The  amplification  of  it.  And  to  sift  or 
winnow  yon  as  wheat.  1.  Take  it  in  an  ill  sense ;  as  Satan's  intent,  so  to  winnow 
you,  is  to  shake  and  remove  you.  This  expression  shows  the  unweariedness  of 
Satan  in  his  attempts  npon  the  godly,  and  his  several  courses  which  he  takes  with 
them,  to  annoy  them.    He  shifts  them  and  he  removes  them  from  one  temptatioB 


OBAP.  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE.  5S3 

to  another.  But — 2.  It  may  also  be  taken  in  a  good  sense ;  and  so,  as  expressing 
to  OB  the  event  of  Satui's  practices,  though  beyond  his  own  desire  and  intention. 
The  winnowing  of  the  com  in  the  fan,  it  is  not  for  the  hurt  of  it,  but  for  the  good 
of  it.  And  they  fit  them  also  for  future  service.  We  see  here  how  also  God  out- 
wits Satan  and  destroys  his  own  plots  by  himself.  {J.  Horton,  D.D,)  Peter's 
sifting : — I.  The  disceimtnation  which  otjb  Loed  makes  ik  prating  tor  Hia 
DISCIPLES.  Why  single  out  Simon  for  this  peculiar  distinction  ?  Because  he  was 
the  weakest,  the  most  in  danger,  the  most  hable  to  fall.  His  rashness  Eind  impul- 
eiveness  would  expose  him  to  the  fiercest  assaults,  and  render  him  least  able  to 
tesist.  Let  ns  learn  from  this  that  tiie  easily  tempted  ones  are  they  to  whom 
Christ's  sympathy  and  helpfulness   go  out  in  most  tender  interest.      II.  Thb 

NATrRE    OF  THE    HELP    WHICH    ChRISI  GAVE   TO   PeTEB   IN    HIS   PERIL.       1.    NoticC  the 

individuahty  of  this  intercession.  "  For  thee."  Each  one  of  us  is  the  object 
of  Christ's  particular  watchfulness  and  care.  2.  Christ  made  His  supplication 
before  the  danger  came.  "  I  have  prayed."  He  did  not  wait  until  the  disciple 
was  in  the  snare  before  He  sought  help  for  him.  3.  The  petition  itself. 
What  did  Jesns  ask  for  His  imperilled  disciple?  Not  that  he  might  escape 
the  trial,  for  he  needed  just  this  experience ;  not  even  that  he  might  not  fall ; 
but  that  his  faith  might  not  fail,  might  not  suffer  an  utter  and  endless  eclipse 
as  had  that  of  Judas.  HI.  Thb  resttlt  of  Peter's  sifting.  Chafi  sifted  out, 
pnre  wheat  left.  IV.  Through  his  painful  experience,  Simon  was  prepared 
TO  BE  A  MORE  HELPFUL  MAN.  "  When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren." 
He  was  to  use  his  new  knowledge,  gained  by  his  sad  and  painful  experiences,  in 
blessing  others.  Whatever  God  does  for  us,  He  wants  us  to  do  in  torn  for  others. 
All  the  lessons  He  teaches  ns,  He  wants  ns  to  teach  again.  (J.  R.  Miller^  D.P.) 
The  benefits  of  sifting : — There  are  defects  in  many  characters  which  apparently 
can  be  removed  only  by  some  terrible  experiences  like  those  of  Peter.  This  seems 
to  have  been  true  of  David.  Mingled  with  all  his  noble  qualities,  qualities  which 
made  him,  when  purified,  the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  there  were  many  evil 
elements  of  which  his  nature  had  to  be  cleansed ;  and  he  also  was  allowed  to  fall 
into  Satan's  hand  to  be  sifted.  Bat  from  that  sifting  he  came  a  new  man,  cleansed 
and  enriched.  Many  of  David's  sweetest  songs  received  their  inspiration  from  the 
experience  of  his  fall  and  eclipse,  and  from  the  painful  chastening  he  endured.  In 
every  matored  life,  however  many  the  noble  qualities,  there  are  also  many  faults 
and  defects  bound  up  with  the  good.  For  example,  one  has  firmness,  and  &:mnes3 
is  a  good  quality ;  but  it  is  yet  a  very  chaffy  firmness.  Some  of  it  is  stubbornness  ; 
part  is  selfish  pride ;  part  is  most  unamiable  obstinacy.  There  is  a  good  element 
there,  but  there  is  also  much  chaff  which  must  be  blown  away  before  it  can  be 
noble.  Christlike  firmness.  By  and  by,  when  mid-life  has  come,  and  when  the 
defects  have  been  sifted  out,  you  will  see  a  firmness  stable  as  a  rock,  yet  gentle  as 
the  heart  of  a  little  child.  It  has  been  cleansed  of  its  chaff  in  the  gusts  of  trial, 
and  is  now  pure,  golden  wheat.  Or  there  is  pride  in  the  character.  It  makes  a 
man  arrogant,  self-willed,  haughty.  But  pride  is  not  altogether  an  evil  quality.  It 
has  in  it  an  element  of  nobleness.  It  is  the  consciousness  of  dignity,  of  Divine 
birthright,  of  power.  As  it  appears,  however,  in  early  years,  there  is  much  in  it 
that  is  offensive  and  bad.  The  man  must  be  winnowed  until  the  unlovely  qualities 
are  removed,  till  the  arrogance  and  tbe  selfwill  are  gone.  At  length  you  see  the  old 
man,  after  many  experiences  of  trial  and  pain,  lordly  and  regal  still,  but  gentle, 
humble,  benevolent,  with  a  sweet  spirit,  using  his  noble  gifts  for  lowly  service,  with 
his  fine  hands  washing  the  feet  of  humble  disciples.  Pride  has  not  been  destroyed ; 
it  has  been  sifted,  cleansed,  and  sanctified.  Or  take  gentleness ;  even  this  quality, 
beautiful  as  it  is,  may  be  very  chafiy.  It  may  be  weakness ;  it  may  be  the  absence 
of  firmness,  mixed  np  with  timidity  and  want  of  strong  moral  principle.  The 
gentleness  is  golden,  but  the  defects  must  be  got  out.  Take,  once  more,  what  we 
call  temp(  r.  A  man  is  easily  provoked,  swept  away  by  sudden  gusts  of  anger. 
Now,  temper  itself  is  not  a  bad  quality.  It  is  not  to  be  destroyed,  as  we  sometimes 
say.  Without  temper  a  bar  of  steel  becomes  like  lead.  A  man  without  temper  is 
■weak  and  worthless.  We  are  to  learn  self-controL  A  strong  person  is  one  who  has 
a  strong  temper  under  perfect  mastery.  These  are  simple  illustrations  of  the 
sifting  which  Peter  experienced.  Every  one  has,  in  greater  or  less  degree,  to  pass 
throngh  the  same  processes  in  some  way.  Sometimes  the  separation  and  cleansing 
go  on  qnietly  and  gradually,  nnder  the  kindly  culture  of  the  Spirit.  Sometimes 
kiflietioiia  are  God's  messengers — sickness,  or  sorrow,  or  pain.  Sometimes  tempta- 
tion is  necessary,  the  buffeting  of  Satan.  All  of  us  have  in  ns  by  nature,  eyen  ijtez 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

regeneration,  much  that  is  nnlovely,  mnch  that  can  never  enter  heaven,  and  mast 
in  some  way  be  got  out  of  us.  In  Guido's  painting  of  '*  Michael  and  the  Dragon  '* 
the  archangel  stands  upon  the  fallen  foe,  holding  a  drawn  sword,  victorious  and 
supreme  ;  but  the  monster  beneath  him  yet  lives.  It  cowers  and  writhes.  It  dares 
not  lift  up  its  head,  but  it  is  not  yet  slain.  This  is  a  symbol  of  the  conquest  of  grace 
over  the  old  nature  in  the  best  of  us.  It  is  not  dead,  though  under  our  feet ;  and 
this  old  evil  must  be  got  out.  The  process  may  be  long  and  painful,  but  Christ  is 
lookiDg  on,  and  every  experience  of  sifting  should  leave  us  a  little  purer.  Thus  it 
is  that  even  our  falls,  if  we  are  Christ's,  make  as  holier.  Evil  habits  conquered 
become  germs  of  character.  An  old  man  sat  dreaming  one  day  about  his  past, 
regretting  his  mistakes  and  follies,  and  wishing  he  had  never  committed  them.  He 
made  a  list  on  paper  of  twenty  things  in  his  life  of  which  he  was  ashamed,  and  was 
about  to  seize  an  imaginary  sponge  and  rub  them  all  oat  of  his  biography,  thinking 
iiow  much  more  beautiful  his  character  would  have  been  if  they  had  not  been  com- 
mitted. But  to  his  amazement  he  found  that  if  there  were  any  golden  threads 
running  through  his  life,  they  had  been  wrought  there  by  the  regrets  felt  at 
wrongs  ;  and  that,  if  he  should  wipe  out  these  wrong  acts,  he  would  destroy  at  the 
same  time  whatever  of  nobleness  or  beauty  there  was  in  bis  character.  He  found 
that  he  had  got  all  his  best  things  oat  of  his  errors,  with  the  regret  and  the  repent- 
ing which  foUowed.  There  is  a  deep  truth  here — that  our  mistakes  and  our  sins,  if 
we  repent  of  them,  will  help  in  the  growth  and  upbuilding  of  our  character.  We 
can  make  wrong  the  seed  of  right  and  righteousness.  We  can  transmute  error  into 
wisdom.  We  can  make  sorrows  bloom  into  a  thousand  forms  like  fragrant  flowers. 
Our  very  falls,  through  the  grace  and  tender  love  of  Christ,  become  new  births  to 
oar  souls.  In  the  hot  £res  of  penitence  we  leave  the  dross,  and  come  forth  as  pure 
gold.  But  we  must  remember  that  it  is  only  Christ  who  can  make  our  sins  yield 
blessing.  (Ibid.)  St.  Peter's  sifting  and  conversion: — 1.  The  secret  may  be  told 
in  a  few  words.  The  cause  and  spring  of  the  most  obvious  defects  in  the  apostle's 
character  was  that  large  and  assured  confidence  in  himself  which  made  him  so 
quick  to  speak,  so  prompt  to  act.  But,  throughout  Scripture,  as  in  human  nature, 
self-confidence  is  opposed  to  faith  or  confidence  in  God,  Everywhere,  too,  we  are 
told  that  God  dwells  only  in  the  humble,  lowly,  contrite  heart.  So  that  if  God  was 
to  take  up  His  abode  with  Peter,  if  the  impulsive  and  vehement  strength  of  the 
man  was  to  be  schooled  into  stedfastness  and  hallowed  by  the  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  in  order  that,  being  himself  divinely  moved  and  led,  he  might  rightly 
lead  the  Apostolic  Company  during  those  first  critical  months  in  which  the  founda- 
tions cf  the  Church  were  laid,  then,  obviously,  his  self-confidence  must  be  purged 
oat  of  him,  and  replaced  by  the  humility  with  which  God  deUghts  to  dwell.  On 
no  other  terms  could  he  be  fitted  for  the  work  to  which  he  was  called.  And  there- 
fore it  was  that  Satan  "  obtained  "  him — obtained,  i.e.,  permission  to  sift  and  purge 
self-trust  out  of  him.  If  the  process  was  severe,  the  task  and  honour  for  which  it 
prepared  him  were  great ;  and  greatness  is  not  to  be  achieved  on  easy  terms.  It  is 
a  cruel  spectacle,  one  of  the  saddest  on  which  the  stars  have  ever  looked  down — a 
brave  man  turned  coward,  a  true  man  turned  liar,  a  strong  man  weeping  bitterly 
over  the  very  sin  which  of  all  sins  might  well  have  seemed  impossible  to  him  I 
But  would  anything  short  of  this  open  and  shameful  fall,  this  fracture  at  his 
strongest  point,  have  sufficed  to  purge  him  of  that  self-confidence  which  we  have 
seen  to  be  so  potent  and  so  active  in  him  up  to  the  very  instant  of  his  fall  t  And 
if  nothing  else  would  have  so  suddenly  and  sharply  sifted  it  out  of  him,  and 
wrought  into  him  the  humility  which  fitted  him  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to 
found  the  Church  which  Christ  was  about  to  redeem  with  His  precious  blood,  shall 
we  complain  of  the  severity  of  the  process  by  which  he  was  purged  from  a  dangerous 
self-trust  and  made  meet  for  a  task  so  honourable  and  blessed?  Shall  we  not 
rather  ask  that  we  too  may  be  sifted  even  by  the  most  searching  trials,  if  we  too 
may  thus  be  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  be  qualified  for  a  Divine 
service  ?  2.  So  far,  then,  we  have  seen  how  Satan  obtained  Peter,  that  he  might 
sift  him.  But  if  Satan  obtained,  Christ  prayed  for  him,  and  even  obtained  him  in 
A  far  higher  sense ;  for  He  obtained  that  Peter  should  only  be  "  sifted,"  and  that 
the  sifting  should  issue  in  his  "  conversion."  It  is  to  this  second  part  of  the  process 
that  we  have  now  to  turn  our  thoughts ;  for  the  conversion  of  the  apostle  was  no 
less  gradual,  and  no  less  complete  and  wonderful,  than  his  fall.  Event  meets  and 
answers  event,  false  steps  are  retrod,  broken  threads  are  taken  op  and  worked  in, 
triumphs  of  faith  are  set  over  against  failures  in  faith,  denials  are  retrieved  by 
eonfessions ;  the  evil  in  the  man  is  sifted  out  of  him,  the  good  cultivated,  consoli- 


«BAr.  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE.  6'ili 

dated,  made  percianent ;  and  in  and  throngh  all  this  strange  and  mingled  discipline 
vre  see  the  grace  of  God  at  work  to  prepare  him  for  the  most  honourable  service 
and  the  highest  blessedness.  Let  as  be  sare,  then,  that  God  has  a  plan  for  as  no 
less  than  for  Peter,  a  plan  which  dominates  all  oar  fugitive  impulses,  and  change- 
ful passions,  and  broken  purposes,  and  unconnected  deeds.  Our  lives  are  not  the 
accidental  and  purposeless  fragments  they  often  seem  to  us  to  be.  God  is  so  dis- 
posing them  as  that  we  may  be  sifted  from  all  evil,  converted  to  all  goodness.  His 
end  for  ns  being  that  we  may  become  perfect  and  entire,  lacking  nothing.  {8. 
■Cox,  D.D.)  Satan's  prayer,  and  Christ's  : — Three  parties  are  before  us  in  these 
words — three  parties  to  a  crisis — the  sinner,  the  sinner's  friend,  and  the  sinner's 
foe.  A  conflict  is  revealed  to  us — a  conflict  between  two  of  the  parties  with 
reference  to  the  third.  The  conflict  is  a  conflict  of  prayer.  It  is  by  prayer  that 
the  great  rivals  strive  for  the  mastery.  Of  the  two  prayers,  that  of  Satan  is 
first  in  order.  The  adversary  speaks  first,  and  makes  his  request.  Jesus  follows 
him.  The  suit  of  Jesus  is  founded  upon  the  adversary's  demand,  and  is  shaped 
accordingly.  There  is  the  prayer  of  Satan,  and  then  there  is  the  counter-prayer 
of  oar  Lord.  How  fares  it  with  the  two  requests  ?  The  answer  is  favourable — 
favourable  to  both.  Is  Satan's  prayer  granted  ?  It  is.  Yes  I  Satan  succeeds  in 
his  application,  and  Peter  is  handed  over  to  him  to  be  sifted  as  wheat.  It  is  easy 
to  discover  the  reason.  He  might  boast  that  if  he  had  been  allowed  to  subject 
Peter  to  the  ordeal  Jesus  would  not  have  been  able  to  carry  Peter  safely  through ; 
and  that,  if  he  had  been  suffered  to  try,  he  could  have  plucked  the  sheep  from  the 
Shepherd's  hands.  It  is  necessary  that  Satan's  defeat  be  directly  and  manifestly 
the  work  of  Christ.  The  prayers,  then,  are  granted.  Let  us  see  what  their 
import  is.  Satan's  request  is,  that  he  may  be  allowed  to  tempt  Peter.  He 
expresses  his  desire  to  have  Peter,  that  he  may  sift  him  as  wheat.  He  would  sift 
him  as  wheat ;  that  is,  in  the  same  way.  Wheat  is  sifted  by  being  shaken  up  and 
down.  He  would  sift  Peter  by  the  shock  and  agitation  of  great  and  sadden  trials. 
He  would  sift  him  as  wheat ;  that  is,  for  the  same  purpose.  Wheat  is  sifted  that 
it  may  be  known  what  amount  of  wheat  there  is,  and  what  amount  of  chaff,  as 
well  as  for  other  reasons.  He  would  sift  Peter,  in  order  to  show  what  measure  of 
genuine  faith  is  in  him,  and  perhaps  to  show  that  no  true  faith  is  in  him,  and  that 
Peter  himself,  with  his  great  professions,  is  chaff  entirely,  and  not  wheat  at  all  I 
What  now  is  the  prayer  of  Jesus  f  Does  it  betray  any  fear  ?  It  might  seem  to 
betray  fear,  if  it  were  that  Satan's  request  should  be  denied.  But  He  prays  not 
that  the  trial  may  not  come.  What,  then,  does  Jesus  pray  for ?  "I  have  prayed 
for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  His  request  is  that  Peter's  faith  may  not  be 
wholly  or  finally  overborne.  It  is  that  Peter  may  not  have  too  little  faith  for  the 
emergency  that  is  at  hand  to  keep  him  from  being  an  apostate  and  a  castaway. 
The  Saviour  has  a  glorious  purpose  with  reference  to  the  serpent.  He  means  to 
plant  His  own  foot  on  the  serpent,  and  to  braise  his  head.  Let  as  now  deduce 
some  lessons  from  the  scene  which  has  been  surveyed.  These  prayers  may  afford 
ns  much  instruction.  1.  For  one  thing,  we  learn  somewhat  of  the  malice  of  the 
devil.  He  knows  nothing  of  love  or  pity.  2.  But  if  the  malice  of  the  devil 
appears,  so  do  the  love  and  compassion  of  Jesus.  The  contrast  between  them  is 
beautiful.  The  spectacle  of  Satan  praying  against  Peter  and  Jesus  praying  for  him 
brings  oat  in  strong  relief  the  kindness  of  the  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 
brother.  The  sympathy  of  Jesus  is  also  here  exemplified.  3.  Again,  there  is  a 
lesson  here,  that  ought  not  to  be  lost  upon  us,  respecting  the  craft  and  hypocrisy  of 
Satan.  In  the  very  presence  of  God  we  find  him  trying  to  hide  his  malice  under 
cover  of  something  like  a  zeal  for  nprigbtness  and  truth.  His  insinuation  is  that 
Peter's  religion  is  but  a  pretence ;  and  he  would  fain  appear  as  a  friend  of  truth, 
who  is  prepared  to  show  this  if  he  is  allowed.  His  motive,  forsooth,  is  less  to  do 
harm  to  Peter  than  simply  to  unmask  him  for  the  sake  of  truth,  and  to  prove  him 
to  be  what  he  really  is.  He  does  not  want  to  corrupt  Peter's  mind ;  oh,  no  I  He 
would  merely  show  it  to  be  corrupt  already  1  But  there  is  a  lesson,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  encourage  and  comfort  us.  Jesus  is  watchful,  and  Jesus  is  wise.  4.  One 
lesson  more.  We  may  learn  the  excellence  of  faith.  Mark  the  testimony  of  the 
Saviour  Himself :  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  And  we  have 
not  the  testimony  of  Jesus  alone.  We  have  Satan's  involuntary  tribute  to  this 
capital  grace.  It  was  the  faith  of  the  apostle  that  he  was  about  to  assail,  and,  if 
possible,  to  extinguish.  Peter  had  signalized  himself  by  his  faith.  It  was  his 
faith  that  produced  his  renowned  confession,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
living  Qod."     The  confession  was  gall  and  wormwood  to  Satan ;  he  ooald  not 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxll. 

forget  or  forgive  it ;  and  be  denounced,  in  his  rage,  and  determined  to  strike  at» 
the  faith  from  which  it  sprang.  He  dislikes,  and  he  fears,  the  faith  of  Ood'ft 
people.  And  not  without  reason.  It  is  faith  that  unites  us  to  Christ,  and  keeps 
up  the  communication  vi'ith  His  fulness.  If  the  foe  can  but  break  that  blessed 
bond  of  connection,  he  will  have  us  for  his  own.  {A.  Gray.)  Satan's  power  is 
limited : — 1.  The  Bible  doctrine  of  Satan's  existence  is  strikingly  corroborated  by 
the  devilish  in  society.  2.  His  existence  has  been  revealed  in  mercy  to  us.  3. 
He  has  the  wiU  to  destroy  us,  but  not  the  power.  4.  He  is  ever  active.  6.  We  are 
saved  from  his  cruel  and  hellish  hate  by  the  intercession  of  Christ.  {Anon.} 
I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fall  not. — Christ's  prayer  for  Peter : — I.  The 
ESSENTIAL  FACTS  iuvolved  in  the  occurrence.  1.  It  was  an  hour  full  of  trial  and 
danger  for  all  the  disciples.  2.  Peter  especially  was  in  danger.  3.  Christ  prayed,, 
not  simply  for  them  all,  but  for  Peter  particularly  and  personally.  4.  The  specific 
point  in  his  spiritual  condition  to  which  the  prayer  was  directed,  was  the  preserva- 
tion of  his  "  faith."  5.  Christ  also  advised  him  of  all  the  facts  in  the  case — of  the 
greatness  of  the  peril,  the  source  of  it,  and  the  duty  of  the  hour.  U.  The  fbac- 
ncAL  TBCiHS  it  teaches  for  all  time.  1.  Christ  really  interposes  to  save  His  people 
when  in  peril.  2.  He  intercedes  for  particular  persons.  3.  Christ's  intercessions 
go  into  effect  only  through  the  moral  or  spiritual  state  of  the  disciple.  4.  Faith  is 
the  special  element  of  the  Christian's  security.  5.  Christ's  prayers,  as  well  as  BUs 
design  and  desire,  as  to  each  one,  look  beyond  the  individual  to  others.  "  Strengthen' 
thy  brethren,"  6.  Christ's  intercessions  are  not  in  vain,  but  take  effect  even  when 
they  seem  to  falL  {M.  Valentine,  D.D.)  Divine  help  in  temptation : — Now,  what 
the  Lord  said  to  Peter,  He  still  virtually  says  to  all  His  people :  "  I  have  prayed 
for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  When  Mrs.  Winslow  was  bereaved  of  an  affec- 
tionate husband,  deprived  of  fortune,  and  in  a  strange  land,  and  friends  far  away, 
*'  The  enemy,"  she  said,  "  seemed  to  sift  me  as  wheat.  I  would  steal  away  and 
weep  in  agony,  for  I  lost  my  hold  and  confidence  in  Him  who  had  said,  '  I  will 
never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee.'  "  This  buffeting  of  the  adversary,  however,  was. 
but  for  a  season,  for  afterwards,  through  the  helpful  grace  of  her  Lord,  her  faith 
revived,  and  she  was  able  to  say,  "  He  is  all  and  everything  He  said  He  would  be. 
He  is  my  joy  by  night  and  by  day,  my  stay  in  trouble,  my  strength  in  weakness, 
the  lifter-up  of  my  head,  my  portion  for  ever.  God  be  praised  1  God  be  praised  1  "^ 
Not  less  touching  is  the  recorded  conflict  and  triumph  of  a  young  disciple.  A 
Christian  mother,  not  long  ago,  finding,  as  she  sat  beside  her  dying  boy,  that  Satan 
had  been  dealing  with  him,  said,  "  Does  he  ever  trouble  you,  George?  "  "  Oh  yes  ; 
he  has  been  very  busy  with  me,  especially  when  I  have  been  weak,  telling  me  I  was 
too  great  a  sinner  and  could  not  be  saved."  "  And  what  did  you  say  ?  "  "I  told 
him  I  had  a  great  Saviour  "  ;  and  then  he  added,  "  I  think  the  tempter  is  nearly 
done  with  me  now."  Some  weeks  before  his  death  he  had  been  saying,  "  There  is 
light  in  the  valley  " ;  and  turning  to  his  mother,  he  said  very  solemnly,  "  Ah,  it 
would  be  a  dark  valley  without  a  light !  "  On  the  last  day  of  his  life  she  said  to 
him,  "  Is  there  hght  in  the  valley  now,  George  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,  yes !  "  And  when 
further  asked,  "  Is  Satan  done  with  you  now  ?  "  "  Well,  I  think  he  is  almost.  He 
is  lurking  near,  however ;  but  Jesus  is  nearer."  {R.  Macdonald,  D.D.)  Christ'* 
praying  for  Peter: — In  this  adversative  but,  there  is  a  threefold  antithesis  or  oppo- 
sition, which  may  be  here  observed  and  taken  notice  of  by  us.  First,  an  opposition 
of  the  persons,  Christ  against  Satan.  It  is  the  devil  that  assaults,  bat  it  is  the 
Saviour  that  labours  to  divert  it.  And  there  is  a  great  matter  in  this — a  potent 
assistant  is  a  great  encouragement  against  a  potent  assailant.  Now,  thus  is  Christ, 
in  comparison  of  Satan.  He  has  the  greater  prevalency  with  Him,  especially  in 
approaches  to  God,  and  the  requests  which  He  makes  to  Him  for  His  people.  The 
second  is,  the  opposition  of  actions  or  performances,  praying  against  desiring. 
Satan  has  but  desired,  yea,  but  Christ  has  prayed.  But  He  ohoses  rather  here  to 
do  it  by  prayer,  that  He  might  hereby  sanctify  this  performance  to  us,  and  show 
us  the  efficacy  of  it  as  to  the  vanquishing  of  temptations  themselves.  The  third  is, 
the  opposition  of  success,  establishment  against  circumvention.  Satan  has  desired 
to  have  you,  but  I  have  so  ordered  the  matter  that  thy  faith  shall  not  fail  notwith- 
Btanding.  His  attempts  upon  thee  shall  be  in  vain.  Which  latter  now  leads  me 
from  the  first  general  part  to  the  second  here  in  the  text ;  to  wit,  the  matter^  of 
Christ's  prayer,  or  the  thing  itself  requested  by  Him  in  these  words,  "That  thy  faith 
fail  not."  For  the  negative — First,  to  consider  that  what  it  is  not.  Where  we  may 
observe  that  it  is  not  that  Peter  might  have  no  temptation  befall  him ;  that,  one 
would  have  thought,  had  been  more  suitable.    When  He  had  said  before  "  Bataxt 


VBAt.  nn.]  SI.  LUKE.  627 

hath  desired  to  have  you,"  we  might  have  expected  He  should  have  said  next,  "  but 
I  have  prayed  that  he  shall  have  nothing  to  do  with  you."  This  it  pleases  God  to 
Buffer  and  permit  upon  divers  considerations.  First,  for  their  greater  abasement  and 
humiliation.  The  servants  of  God  are  apt  sometimes,  where  grace  is  not  more 
watchful  in  them,  to  be  advanced  and  Ufted  up  in  themselves.  Secondly,  as  ta 
breed  humility,  so  also  to  breed  compassion  and  tenderness  of  spirit  to  others. 
Christians,  as  they  are  apt  sometimes  to  be  too  well  opinionated  of  themselves ;  so 
a'so  to  be  now  and  then  too  harsh  and  rigorous  towards  their  brethren.  Thirdly, 
God  suffers  His  servants  to  be  tempted  for  the  honour  of  His  own  grace  in  support- 
ing them  and  keeping  them  up,  and  for  the  confusion  Ukewise  of  the  enemy  in  his 
attempts  upon  them.  Let  us  not,  then,  have  our  armour  to  get  when  our  enemy  is 
coming  upon  us,  but  be  furnished  aforehand  ;  and  remember  that  we  trust  not  to 
any  grace  which  we  have  already  received,  but  be  still  labouring  and  striving  for 
more.  The  second  is  the  positive  part  of  it  in  the  words  of  the  text,  "that  thy  faith 
may  not  fail."  To  take  them  absolutely  as  they  he  in  themselves,  and  so  they 
do  signify  to  us  the  safety  of  Peter's  condition ;  and,  together  with  him,  of  all 
other  believers.  Their  faith,  it  shall  not  fail.  This,  it  may  be  made  good  unto  us 
from  sundry  considerations.  1.  The  nature  of  grace  itself  which  is  an  abiding 
principle.  Faith  is  not  a  thing  taken  up,  as  a  man  would  take  up  some  new  fashion 
or  custom,  but  it  is  a  thing  rooted  and  incorporated  in  us,  and  goes  through  the 
substance  of  us,  it  spreads  itself  through  the  whole  man,  and  is,  as  it  were,  a  new 
creature  in  us.  2.  The  covenant  of  grace,  which  is  an  everlasting  covenant.  "  I 
will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them  "  (Jer.  xxxii.  40).  3.  The  spirit  of 
grace,  which  is  not  only  a  worker  but  an  establisher  and  a  sealer  of  this  faith  in  us, 
and  to  us  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  That  the  servants  of  God  they  shall  have  their  faith  much 
upheld  in  such  conditions.  We  have  this  implied,  that  a  steadfast  faith  is  a 
fiingular  help  in  temptatioru  Now,  the  efficacy  of  faith  in  temptation  is  discem- 
able  in  these  particulars — (1)  As  it  pitches  us  upon  the  strength  and  power  of  God. 
That  which  keeps  up  ft  soul  in  temptation,  it  is  an  almighty  power,  it  is  a  power 
which  is  above  all  the  powers  of  darkness  itself.  (2)  Faith  helps  in  temptation  as 
it  lays  hold  upon  the  promises  of  God,  (3)  As  it  lays  hold  upon  Christ,  and  pitches 
us,  and  fastens  us  upon  Him,  we  are  so  far  safe  and  sure  in  temptation,  as  Christ 
has  any  hold  of  us  and  we  of  Him.  When  the  stability  of  a  Christian  is  said  to 
depend  upon  the  prayers  of  Christ,  this  is  exclusive  of  any  virtue  or  merit  of  their 
own.  The  consideration  of  this  doctrine  is  very  much  still  for  the  comfort  of 
believers,  as  to  this  particular.  They  may  from  hence,  in  the  use  of  good  means, 
be  very  confident,  and  persuaded  of  their  perseverance,  because  they  have  Christ 
praying  for  them.  And  there  are  two  things  in  this  that  make  for  them.  The  one 
^e,  as  I  said,  first,  the  acceptance  which  Christ  is  sure  to  have  with  His  Father. 
Secondly,  As  there  is  Christ's  acceptance,  so  the  constancy  of  His  interceding  for 
ns.  If  Christ  should  only  pray  for  us  sometimes  we  might  seem  to  be  no 
longer  upon  sure  terms,  than  such  times  as  He  prayed  for  as;  "but  now  He 
ever  hveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  (eT*.  Horton,  D.D.)  When  thou  art 
converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren. — Peter  helped  by  his  fall  to  strengthen 
his  brethren : — L  On  the  first  view  of  such  a  crime  as  Peter's,  wk  should  scpposb 

THAT  Alil.  HIS  IMFLUENCS  OVBB  HIS  BBETHBEN,  ALL  HIS  ABILITT  TO  DO  GOOD,  HIS 
CAPACITT   TO    IMPABT   STBEMOTH   TO   OTHBBB,  WBBB  LOST,  AND  THAT  FOB   EVEB.      At  the 

most,  he  could  only  hope  to  be  forgiven,  and  to  live  as  an  unnoticed  believer, 
brooding  in  the  shade  over  his  ingratitude  and  content  to  take  an  obscure  place 
during  tibe  remainder  of  his  life.  For  consider  in  what  position  he  would  now  be 
placed.  1.  First  his  own  shame  would  naturally  bring  with  it  a  sense  of  weakness, 
and  would  furnish  a  good  reason  for  concentrating  his  efforts  upon  himself.  2.  His 
brethren  in  such  a  case  would  naturaUy  lower  their  opinion  of  him.  3.  His 
brethren  would  naturaUy  feel  that  a  man  of  such  glaring  sins  was  not  the  man 
k)  be  put  foremost  in  their  efforts  to  do  good  outside  of  the  Church.  U.  But,  not> 
withstanding  all  this,  it  may  be  tme,  under  a  system  of  grace,  that  thb  manifesta- 
tion OF  chabacteb  which  is  hade  bt  a  pabticulab  sin  hat  tubm  into  a  blessino  Ta 
HiH  who  is  allowed  TO  FALL  INTO  IT.  In  this  csse  it  is  not  sin,  but  an  outward 
sin  that  is  the  source  of  good,  and  this  is  accomplished,  not  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  things,  but  through  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  Of  two  persons  In  the  same  moral 
condition  before  the  eye  of  God  one  may  be  untempted  and  so  far  forth  innocent, 
while  the  other  yields  to  a  temptation,  before  which  the  first  also  would  have  fallen, 
bad  it  been  allowed  to  assail  him.  Now  I  say  in  such  a  case  as  this  the  outward 
sin  may  under  the  gospel  be  made  a  blessing  to  him  who  commits  it ;  nay,  more. 


628  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  tCHAP.  xxtt, 

the  blessing  may  extend  beyond  himself  to  all  around  him.  He  may  become  • 
wiser,  better,  stronger  Christian  than  he  was  before.  1.  And  this  will  be  mad« 
apparent,  if  we  consider  that  in  this  way  he  arrives  at  a  better  knowledge  of  hia 
own  character  and  is  impressively  warned  against  his  own  faults.  2.  But  secondly, 
a  person  who  is  thus  recovered  from  his  sins  has  the  practical  power  derived  from 
a  renewed  hope  of  forgiveness.  3.  A  person  in  Peter's  condition  appeals  to  the 
affections  of  the  Church,  and  he  has  a  closer  hold  upon  them  than  if  he  had  never 
become  a  kind  of  representative  of  Divine  grace.  {T.  D.  Woolsey.)  Tlie  ministry 
of  a  converted  man : — I.  Jesus  employs  converted  sodls  to  do  His  work.  The 
testimony  of  living  men  glorifies  Christ.  II.  A  converted  man  can  givb  a  reason 
FOB  HIS  FAITH.  A  Workman  who  has  been  employed  in  the  manufacture  of 
machinery  is  best  able  to  explain  the  principles  aud  manner  of  its  work.     III.  A 

CONVERTED  MAN  CAN  SPEAK  CONFIDENTLY.    IV.  A  CONVERTED  MAN  SPEAKS  WITH 

SYMPATHY,  AS  NO  ONE  ELSE  CAN.     Lcam — 1.  The  Strength  of  the  ministry.    2.  Grace 
is  given  to  be  employed  for  others.    3.  We  must  use  means,  and  be  very  diligent  in 
the    use    of  them,   if   we  would  strengthen  our  brethren.     (Canon  FremantU.) 
Second  conversion: — I.  What  is  meant  by  second  conversion.      It  implies  that 
there  has   been  a  first  conversion;  that  is,  a  principle  of  true  piety  has  been 
implanted  in  the  bosom,  but  it  has  hitherto  been  there  in  a  weak,  imperfect  form. 
The  heart  has  been  changed,  but  the  change  is  superficial  and  defective.     The 
repentance  is  sincere,  but  not  deep  and  thorough.    The  faith  is  real,  but  not  strong 
and  controlling.     The  love  is  genuine,  but  iuconstant  and  feeble.     And  so  of  all 
the  Christian  graces  ;  they  exist  in  him  who  has  had  a  first  conversion,  but  in  an 
imperfect,  partially  developed  state,  weak,  unstable,  unsymmetrical,  and  bearing 
but  little  fruit  in  the  life.     Now  the  effect  of  a  second  conversion  is  to  take  the 
subject  out  of  this  low,  inadequate,  and  ineffective  state  of  piety,  and  raise  him 
higher,  and  make  him  more  faithful  in  the  Divine  life.    The  antecedents  of  this 
change  are  often  very  similar  to  those  that  precede  first  conversion.    It  commencea 
in  a  serious,  scrutinizing  view  of  one's  spiritual  state  and  prospects.     The  subject 
of  this  change  becomes  dissatisfied  with  his  present  type  of  religion.    As  he  passes 
tihrough  this  second  conversion  as  I  call  it,  he  seems  to  himself  to  enter  into  a  new 
epiritual  region.     He  sees  Divine  things  in  a  clearer  and  more  affecting  light  than 
he  ever  did  before.    II.  Its  reality  as  a  matter  of  experience.     The  apostles 
before  and  after  Pentecost.     Through  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  they  rose  to  holier  love, 
to  a  more  spiritual  faith  and  hope  in  Christ,  and  to  a  greater  consecration  to  Hia 
service.     The  late  Dr.  Judson,  of  the  Burmah  Baptist  Mission,  after  he  had  been 
years  in  his  field  of  labour,  earnestly  engaged  in  his  work,  and  no  doubt  as  a  true 
Christian  man,  experienced  a  change  in  his  religious  feelings  and  views  which,  in 
all  its  essential  elements,  may  properly  be  regarded  as  a  second  conversion,  and 
which  gave  a  new  impulse  and  a  new  power,    as  well  as  a  greatly  increased 
spirituality,  and  joy,  and  hope,  to  the  whole  of  his  subsequent  life.    The  late  Judge 
Beeve,  of  Litchfield,  furnishes  another  remarkable  example  illustrating  the  point 
jiow  ander  consideration.    For  many  years  after  he  professed  religion  he  was  satis- 
fied to  keep  up  the  usual  routine  of  religious  observances,  but  with  little  of  the  life 
and  enjoyment  of  a  clear,  indwelling  spirit  of  piety.    Then  he  passed  through  a 
great  and  most  decided  change  in  his  Christian  experieuce  and  character,  in  which 
he  felt  as  if  old  things  bad  indeed  passed  away,  and  all  things  had  become  new  to 
him.    From  that  time  till  the  close  of  his  life  he  enjoyed  great  nearness  to  God  and 
peace  of  mind,  and  his  path  became  like  that  of  the  sun,  shining  more  and  more 
4Qnto  the  perfect  day.    III.  Why  a  second  conversion  is  necessary  to  prepare  osa 
*o  BE  truly  and  eminently  USEFUL  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE,  or  in  promoting  the 
spiritual  good  of  others.     1.  It  is  necessary  because   first  conversion  is  often 
very  superficial.     It  does  indeed  change  the  heart  and  turn  the  affections  towards 
God  and  Divine  things  ;  but  the  whole  inner  man  is  far  from  being  subdued  to  the 
obedience  of  Christ.      Much  land  remains  yet  to  be  possessed.     2.  A  second 
conversion  is  often  necessary  to  bring  the  soul  into  a  nearer  union  and  a  deeper 
sympathy  with  Christ.    3.  This  second  conversion  of  which  I  speak,  brings  those 
who  are  the  subjects  of  it  to  see  and  feel  the  miserable  condition  of  such  as  are  oat 
of  Christ  and  perishing  in  sin.    4.  Second  conversion  qualifies  those  who  are  the 
Bobjects  of  it,  to  do  good  in  the  most  acceptable  and  successful  manner.     It  begeta 
«  new  spirit  of  homUity,  tenderness,  and  love  in  the  soul ;  gives  tone  to  the  voice 
and  look  to  the  eye,  imparts  an  aspect  of  benevolence  and  kindness  to  the  whole 
manner  and  style  of  address,  and  makes  it  entirely  apparent,  when  attempting  to 
40  good  to  others,  to  converse  vriih  them  for  example  on  the  subject  of  personal 


CKAT.  xziz.]  8T.  LUKE.  529 

religion,  that  yon  are  moved  to  it  by  real  concern  for  their  salvation.  This,  beyond 
anything  else,  disarms  opposition,  subdues  prejudice,  gives  access  to  the  heart 
and  conscience,  and  is  well-nigh  sure  to  render  your  efforts  successful.  5. 
When  the  heart  is  deeply  imbued  with  the  feelings  implied  in  second  conver- 
sion, God's  presence  may  be  expected  to  be  with  you,  to  guide  and  crown  with 
success  your  endeavours  to  do  good  to  others.  {J.  Hawes,  D.D.)  Conversion 
and  strengthening : — I.  Coxvebsion.  1.  The  essential,  primary  idea  is  that  of  a 
corporeal  turning  roimd,  without  anything  to  limit  it.  But  to  this  original  notion, 
which  is  inseparable  from  the  word,  usage  in  many  cases  adds  certain  accessory 
notions.  One  of  these  is,  the  idea  of  turning  in  a  definite  direction ;  that  is, 
towards  a  certain  object.  The  difference  is  that  between  a  wheel's  turning  on  its 
axis  and  a  flower  turning  towards  the  sun.  But  in  some  connections  there  is  a  still 
further  accession  to  the  primary  idea ;  so  that  the  words  necessarily  suggest,  not 
the  mere  act  of  turning,  nor  the  act  of  turning  in  a  definite  direction,  but  the  act 
of  tarning  from  one  object  to  another,  which  are  then,  of  course,  presented  in 
direct  antithesis  to  one  another.  Thus  the  magnetic  needle,  if  mechanically  pointed 
towards  the  south,  is  no  sooner  set  at  liberty  than  it  will  turn  from  that  point  to 
the  north.  In  this  case,  however,  there  is  still  another  accessory  motion  added  to 
the  simple  one  of  turning,  namely,  that  of  turning  back  to  a  point  from  which  it 
had  before  been  turned  away.  And  this  idea  of  return  or  retroversion  may,  of 
course,  be  repeated  without  limit,  and  without  any  further  variation  of  the  meaning 
of  the  term  used,  which  is  still  the  same,  whether  the  turning  back  be  for  the  first 
or  second,  tenth  or  hundredth  time.  All  these  distinctions  or  gradations  may  be- 
traced  also  in  the  spiritual  uses  of  the  term.  As  thus  applied,  conversion  is  a 
change  of  character,  that  is,  of  principles  and  affections,  with  a  corresponding 
change  of  outward  life.  Now,  such  a  change  may  be  conceived  of,  as  a  vague,, 
unsettled,  frequently  repeated  revolution  of  the  views  and  feelings,  without  any 
determinate  character  or  end.  But  the  conversion  spoken  of  in  Scripture  is  relieved 
from  this  indefiniteness  by  a  constant  reference  to  one  specific  object  to  which  the 
convert  turns.  It  is  to  God  that  all  conversion  is  described  as  taking  place.  But 
how,  in  what  sense,  does  man  turn  to  God?  The  least  and  lowest  that  can  be  sup- 
posed to  enter  into  this  conception  is,  a  turning  to  God,  as  an  object  of  attention 
or  consideration — turning,  as  it  were,  for  the  first  time  to  look  at  Him,  just  as  we 
might  turn  towards  any  object  of  sense  which  had  before  escaped  attention  or  been 
out  of  sight.  2.  Sometimes,  again,  the  idea  is  suggested  that  we  not  only  turn  to 
God,  but  turn  back  to  Him.  This  may  at  first  sight  appear  inconsistent  with  the 
fact  just  stated,  that  our  first  affections  are  invariably  given  to  the  world  and  to 
ourselves.  But  even  those  who  are  converted,  for  the  first  time,  from  a  state  of 
total  aUenation,  may  be  said  to  turn  back  to  God,  in  reference  to  the  great  original 
apostasy  in  which  we  are  all  implicated.  As  individuals,  we  never  know  God  till 
we  are  converted.  As  a  race,  we  have  all  departed  from  Him,  and  conversion  ie 
bat  turning  back  to  Him.  But  this  expression  is  still  more  appropriate,  even  in 
its  strict  sense,  to  the  case  of  those  who  have  already  been  converted,  and  are  only 
reclaimed  from  a  partial  and  temporary  alienation,  from  relapsing  into  sin,  or  what 
is  called,  in  religious  phraseology,  declension,  and,  in  the  Word  of  God  itself» 
backsliding.  That  the  term  conversion  may  be  properly  applied  to  such  a 
secondary  restoration,  is  apparent  from  the  language  of  the  text,  where  it  is  used 
by  Christ  Himself,  of  one  who  is  expressly  said  to  have  had  faith,  and  faith  which 
did  not  absolutely  fail.  II.  Conversion  tends  to  the  btbenoxhenino  of  others. 
In  answer  to  the  question,  How  does  conversion  tend  to  this  result  ?  the  general  fact 
may  be  thus  resolved  into  three  distinct  particulars :  1.  It  enables  men  to  strengthen 
others.  2.  It  obliges  men  to  strengthen  others.  3.  It  disposes  men  to  strengthen 
others.  The  convert  is  enabled  to  confirm  or  rescue  others  by  his  knowledge  of 
their  character  and  state.  He  knows,  not  only  what  he  sees  in  them,  but  what  he- 
feels  or  has  felt  in  himself.  He  knows  the  difficulties  of  the  restoration — how 
much  harder  it  is  now  to  excite  hope  or  confirm  faith,  how  much  less  effective  either 
warning,  or  encouragement,  or  argument  is  now  than  it  once  was — how  precarious 
even  the  most  specious  reformation  and  repentance  must  be  after  such  deflections. 
This  advantage  of  experimental  knowledge  is  accompanied,  moreover,  by  a 
oorresponding  liveliness  of  feeling,  a  more  energetic  impulse,  such  as  always 
springs  from  recent  restorations  or  escapes.  Out  of  this  increased  ability  arises, 
by  a  logical  and  moral  necessity,  a  special  obligation.  This  is  only  a 
specific  application  of  a  principle  which  all  acknowledge,  and  which  the  Word 
fli  Ood  explicitly  propounds,  "  To  him  that  knowe^  to  do  good  and  doettt 
▼ou  m.  84 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xstt. 

it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."  It  needs  not  so  much  to  be  explained  or  estab- 
lished, as  to  be  exemplified  from  real  life.  The  recognition  of  the  principle 
is  there  unhesitating  and  unanimous.  He  who  has  been  recovered  from  the  power 
of  a  desperate  disease  by  a  new  or  unknown  remedy,  is  under  a  peculiar  obligation 
to  apply  it,  or  at  least  to  make  it  known,  to  all  affected  in  like  manner.  Hence  the 
ransparing,  universal  condemnation  of  the  man  who,  from  mercenary  motives,  holds 
an  his  possession  secrets  of  importance  to  the  health  or  happiness  of  others.  He 
who  is  mercifully  saved  from  shipwreck,  often  feels  especially  incumbent  on  him- 
self the  rescue  of  his  fellows.  He  must  do  what  he  can  even  though  he  be  exhausted ; 
how  much  more  if  he  is  strengthened.  The  heart  must  beat  in  concord  with  the 
reason  and  the  conscience.  And  it  does  so  in  the  case  of  the  true  convert.  (/.  A . 
Alexander,  D.D.)  Strengthening  the  brethren: — That  the  brethren  may  be  weak 
in  faith,  in  love,  in  humility,  and  in  some  departments  of  Christian  duty,  is  clearly 
implied  in  the  command  to  strengthen  them.  But  this  cannot  be  done  by  aban- 
doning them.  How,  then,  can  it  be  accomplished?  1.  By  being  always  in  the 
iplace,  and  punctually  discharging  the  duty  which  the  Lord  requires  of  you,  accord- 
ing to  your  covenant.  2.  By  the  spirituality  of  those  who  are  turned  from  any 
particular  course  of  sinfulness.  3.  The  brethren  may  be  strengthened  by  our  meek- 
ness, and  other  mild  graces.  4.  Nor  should  this  work  of  strengthening  the  brethren, 
be  a  matter  of  mere  contingence.  It  must  be  undertaken  systematically.  Each 
Christian  should  adopt  a  system  of  doing  good,  and  carry  it  out  in  all  the  branches 
of  a  Christian  life.  5.  He  should  strengthen  them,  by  meeting  with  them  in  circlea 
for  prayer.  6.  He  will  also  encourage  them,  by  praying  for  them.  7.  He  will  en- 
courage them  by  his  conversation.  (J.  Foot,  D.D. )  Peter  after  his  restoration : — 
I.  First,  it  is  his  dtjtt.  He  has  gone  astray,  and  he  has  been  brought  back ;  what 
better  can  he  do  than  to  strengthen  his  brethren  ?  1.  He  will  thus  help  to  undo 
the  evil  which  he  has  wrought.  Peter  must  have  staggered  his  brethren.  2.  Be- 
sides, how  can  you  better  express  your  gratitude  to  God  than  by  seeking  to  strengthen 
your  weak  brethren  when  you  have  been  strengthened  yourself  ?  3.  Do  you  not 
think,  too,  that  this  becomes  our  duty,  because,  doubtless,  it  is  a  part  of  the  Divine 
design  f  Never  let  us  make  a  mistake  by  imagining  that  God's  grace  is  given  to  a 
man  simply  with  an  eye  to  himself.  4.  By  the  way,  the  very  wording  of  the  text 
seems  to  suggest  the  duty :  we  are  to  strengthen  our  "  brethren."  We  must  do  so 
in  order  that  we  may  manifest  brotherly  love,  and  thus  prove  our  sonship  towards 
God.  5.  Let  as  see  to  it,  dear  friends,  if  we  have  been  restored,  that  we  try  to  look 
after  our  weak  brethren,  that  we  may  show  forth  a  zeal  for  the  honour  and  glory  of 
our  Lord.  When  we  went  astray  we  dishonoured  Christ.  II.  Now  secondly,  hb  hJiS  a 
>QnALiTicATioN  FOB  IT.  This  Peter  is  the  man  who,  when  he  is  brought  back  again, 
can  strengthen  his  brethren.  1.  He  can  strengthen  them  by  telling  them  of  the 
ibittemess  of  denying  his  Master.  He  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.  2.  Again,  Peter 
was  the  man  to  tell  another  of  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  for  he  could  say  to  him, 
'*Do  not  trust  yourself."  3.  But  he  was  also  qualified  to  bear  his  personal  witness 
to  the  power  of  his  Lord's  prayer.  He  could  never  forget  that  Jesus  had  said  to 
him,  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee."  4.  And  could  not  Peter  speak  about  the  love  of 
Jesus  to  poor  wanderers?  5.  And  could  not  Peter  fully  describe  the  joy  of  restora- 
tion? in.  And  now,  lastly,  the  restored  believer  should  strengthen  his  brethren, 
because  it  will  be  such  a  benefit  to  himself.  He  will  derive  great  personal  bene- 
ifiit  from  endeavouring  to  cherish  and  assist  the  weak  ones  in  the  family  of  God. 
1.  Brother,  do  this  continually  and  heartily,  for  thus  you  will  be  made  to  see  your 
own  wetness.  2.  But  what  a  comfort  it  must  have  been  to  Peter  to  have  such  a 
charge  committed  to  him!  3.  And,  brethren,  whenever  any  of  you  lay  your- 
selves out  to  strengthen  weak  Christians,  as  I  pray  you  may,  you  will  get 
benefit  from  what  you  do  in  the  holy  effort.  (C  H.  Spur g eon.)  Christ's 
command  to  Peter : — 1.  Here  is  an  enlargement  of  personal  conversion,  to 
fraternal  or  brotherly  confirmation.  He  that  is  converted  himself,^  he  mast 
strengthen  his  brethren.  And  that  in  divers  respects — (1)  In  a  way  of  faithfulness, 
as  closing  with  that  end  for  which  they  are  converted  themselves.  The  reason 
why  God  does  bestow  snch  a  measure  of  grace  or  comfort  upon  this  or  that  particular 
-Christian,  it  is  not  for  himself  only,  but  for  others,  that  so  they  may  be  so  much 
*he  better,  or  comf ortabler  for  his  sake.  (2)  In  a  way  of  thankfulness,  "  When  thou 
Art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren  " ;  upon  this  account  likewise,  we  cannot 
Ibetter  testify  our  acknowledgments  of  God's  goodness,  in  the  bestowing  of  grace  or 
.comfort  npon  oar  own  souls,  than  by  impartmg  and  commanioating  it  to  others, 
^rae  thankfalness,  it  hath,  for  the  most  part,  joy  with  it.    (3)  Oat  of  eeal  to  th« 


•«HAP.  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE.  531 

^017  of  God.  We  should  endeavour  others'  conversion,  that  so  God  may 
have  more  glory  by  it.  The  more  that  sinners  are  converted,  the  more  is 
God  honoured.  (4)  Out  of  love  to  ourselves  and  our  own  good.  The  more  we 
strengthen  others,  the  more  indeed  do  we  confirm  ourselves,  whether  in  grace 
or  comfort.  This  oil,  it  increases  in  the  spending ;  and  this  bread  in  the 
breaking  of  it.  And  to  him  that  thus  hath,  it  shall  be  given.  This  is  done 
divers  ways,  as — (a)  By  discovering  and  laying  open  the  flights  of  sin,  and  the 
subtilties  of  the  spiritual  enemy,  (b)  By  quickening  and  exciting  and  stirring  up 
one  another  to  good,  we  do  hereby  strengthen  our  brethren.  There  is  nothing  does 
more  strengthen  men  in  goodness,  than  the  practice  of  goodness,  (c)  By  imparting 
and  communicating  of  our  own  experiences,  we  do  hereby  likewise  strengthen  our 
brethren ;  when  we  shaU  show  them  what  good  we  ourselves  have  found  by  such 
and  such  good  courses.  This  is  a  means  not  only  to  draw  on,  but  to  confirm 
others  with  us.  To  help  us,  and  enable  us  hereunto,  we  must  labour  especially  for 
such  graces  as  are  conducing  to  the  practice  of  it,  as — (1)  A  spirit  of  discerning, 
whereby  to  judge  aright  of  the  case  and  condition  which  our  brethren  are  in.  It 
is  a  great  part  of  skill  in  a  physician,  to  be  able  to  find  out  the  disease,  and  to  know 
the  just  temper  and  constitution  of  his  patient's  body ;  and  so  is  it  also  for  a 
healer  of  souls.  (2)  A  spirit  of  love  and  tenderness  and  condescension.  There 
is  a  great  deal  of  meekness  required  in  a  spiritual  strengthener  and  restorer 
(GaL  vi.  2).  (3)  A  spirit  of  faith,  whereby  we  do  believe  ourselves  those  things 
which  we  commend  to  others.  2.  The  confinement  of  brotherly  confirmation  to 
personal  conversion.  He  that  will  strengthen  his  brethren,  he  must  himself  be 
first  of  all  converted.  Peter,  till  himself  be  converted,  he  cannot  confirm  or 
strengthen  his  brethren,  whether  in  comfort  or  grace.  When  we  say,  he  cannot  do 
it,  this  holds  good  according  to  the  notion  of  a  threefold  impossibility  which  is  ia 
it.  (1)  In  regard  of  the  performance;  he  cannot  strengthen  his  brethren  in  this 
respect,  who  is  himself  unconverted.  The  reason  of  it  is  this  :  because  persons  in 
such  a  condition,  they  are  devoid  of  those  graces  which  are  requisite  to  such  a 
performance.  ^2)  Cannot  do  it,  in  regard  of  acceptance  ;  God  will  not  take  it  so 
well  from  him,  m  his  making  and  pretending  to  do  it ;  neither  is  it  altogether  so 
satisfactory  to  men.  (3)  Cannot,  in  regard  of  success.  He  that  is  himself  uncon- 
verted and  unexperienced  in  his  own  heart,  he  cannot  speak  so  profitable  to  others, 
and  to  the  good  of  their  souls.  Nothing  goes  to  the  heart  so  much  as  that  which 
comes  from  it.     (J.  Horton,  D.D.) 

Yer.  88.  Both  to  prison  and  to  death. — Religious  emotion : — That  violent  im- 
pulse is  not  the  same  as  a  firm  determination — that  men  may  have  their  religious 
feelings  roused,  without  being  on  that  account  at  all  the  more  likely  to  obey  Qod  in 
practice,  rather  the  less  likely.  As  a  general  rule,  the  more  religious  men  become, 
the  calmer  they  become ;  and  at  all  times  the  religious  principle,  viewed  by  itself,  is 
calm,  sober,  and  deliberate.  Let  us  review  some  of  the  accidental  circumstances  I 
speak  of.  1.  The  natural  tempers  of  men  vary  very  much.  Some  men  have  ardent 
imaginations  and  strong  feelings ;  and  adopt,  as  a  matter  of  course,  a  vehement 
mode  of  expressing  themselves.  No  doubt  it  is  impossible  to  make  all  men  think 
and  feel  alike.  Such  men  of  course  may  possess  deep-rooted  principle.  All  I  would 
maintain  is,  that  their  ardour  does  not  of  itself  make  their  faith  deeper  and  more 
genuine ;  that  they  must  not  think  themselves  better  than  others  on  account  of  it ; 
that  they  must  be  aware  of  considering  it  a  proof  of  their  real  earnestness,  instead 
of  narrowly  searching  into  their  conduct  for  the  satisfactory  fruits  of  faith.  2. 
Next,  there  are,  besides,  particular  occasions  on  which  excited  feeling  is  natural, 
and  even  commendable ;  but  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  on  account  of  the  peculiar 
circumstances  under  which  it  occurs.  For  instance,  it  is  natural  for  a  man  to  feel 
especial  remorse  at  his  sins  when  he  first  begins  to  think  of  reUgion ;  he  ought  to 
feel  bitter  sorrow  and  keen  repentance.  But  aU  such  emotion  evidently  is  not  the 
highest  state  of  a  Christian's  mind ;  it  is  but  the  first  stirring  of  grace  in  him.  A 
sinner,  indeed,  can  do  no  better ;  bat  in  proportion  as  he  learns  more  of  the  power 
of  true  religion,  such  agitation  will  wear  away.  The  woman  who  had  been  a  sinner, 
when  she  came  behind  our  Lord  wept  much,  and  washed  His  feet  with  tears.  It 
was  well  done  in  her ;  she  did  what  she  could ;  and  was  honoured  with  our  Saviour's 
praise.  Tet  it  is  clear  this  was  not  a  permanent  state  of  mind.  It  was  but  the 
first  step  in  religion,  and  would  doubtless  wear  away.  It  was  but  the  accident  of 
a  season.  Had  her  faith  no  deeper  root  than  this  emotion,  it  would  soon  have  coma 
to  an  end,  as  Peter's  zeal ,    3.  And  further,  the  accidents  of  life  will  occasionally 


ftS2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [otap.  mv 

agitate  ns — affliction  and  the  pain ;  bad  news ;  though  here,  too,  the  Psalmist  describes 
the  higher  excellence  of  mind,  viz.,  the  calm  conlidence  of  the  believer,  who  "  will 
not  be  afraid  of  any  evil  tidings,  for  his  heart  standeth  fast,  and  believeth  in  the 
Lord."  In  times  of  distress  religious  men  will  speak  more  openly  on  the  subject  of 
religion,  and  lay  bare  their  feelings ;  at  other  times  they  will  conceal  them.  They 
are  neither  better  nor  worse  for  so  doing.  Now  all  this  may  be  illustrated  from 
Scripture.  We  find  the  same  prayers  offered,  and  the  same  resolutions  expressed^ 
by  good  men,  sometimes  in  a  calm  way,  sometimes  with  more  ardour.  Observe  how 
calm  Job  is  in  his  resignation :  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ; 
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  And  on  the  other  band,  how  calmly  that  same 
apostle  expresses  his  assurance  of  salvation  at  the  close  of  his  life,  who,  during  the 
struggle,  was  accidentally  agitated: — *•  I  am  now  ready  to  be  offered.  ...  I  have 
kept  the  faith.  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness." 
These  remarks  may  suffice  to  show  the  relation  which  excited  feelings  bear  to  true 
rehgious  principle.  They  are  sometimes  natural,  sometimes  suitable;  but  they  are 
not  religion  itself.  They  come  and  go.  They  will  gradually  lose  their  place  within 
us  as  our  obedience  becomes  confirmed — partly  because  those  men  are  kept  in  per- 
fect peace,  and  sheltered  from  all  agitating  feelings,  whose  minds  are  stayed  on 
God ;  partly  because  these  feelings  themselves  are  fixed  into  habits  by  the  power 
of  faith,  and  instead  of  coming  and  going,  and  agitating  the  mind  from  their  sud- 
denness, they  are  permanently  retained  so  far  as  there  is  anything  good  in  them, 
and  give  a  deeper  colour  and  a  more  energetic  expression  to  the  Christian  character. 
Now,  it  will  be  observed,  that  in  these  remarks  I  have  taken  for  granted,  as  not 
needing  proof,  that  the  highest  Christian  temper  is  free  from  all  vehement  and. 
tumultuous  feeling.  But,  if  we  wish  some  evidence  of  this,  let  us  turn  to  our  Great 
Pattern,  Jesus  Christ,  and  examine  what  was  the  character  of  that  perfect  holiness 
which  He  alone  of  all  men  ever  displayed.  And  can  we  find  anywhere  such  calm- 
ness and  simplicity  as  marked  His  devotion  and  His  obedience?  When  does  He 
ever  speak  with  fervour  or  vehemence  ?  Consider  the  prayer  He  gave  us ;  and  this 
is  the  more  to  the  purpose,  for  the  very  reason  that  He  has  given  it  as  a  model  for 
our  worship.  How  plain  and  unadorned  is  it  1  How  few  are  the  words  of  it  1  How 
grave  and  solemn  the  petitions  ?  What  an  entire  absence  of  tumult  and  feverish^ 
emotion !  To  conclude :  Let  us  take  warning  from  St.  Peter's  fall.  Let  us  not 
promise  much ;  let  us  not  talk  much  of  ourselves ;  let  us  not  be  high-minded,  nor 
encourage  ourselves  in  impetuous  bold  language  in  religion.  {J.  H.  Newman, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  39-46.  The  mount  of  Olives. — The  mount  of  Olives : — The  mountains  are 
Nature's  monuments.  Like  the  islands  that  dwell  apart,  and  like  them  that  give 
asylum  from  a  noisy  and  irreverent  world.  Many  a  meditative  spirit  has  found  in 
their  silence  leisure  for  the  longest  thought,  and  in  their  Patmos-like  seclusion 
the  brightest  visions  and  largest  projects  have  evolved ;  whilst  by  a  sort  of  over- 
mastering attraction  they  have  usually  drawn  to  themselves  the  most  memorable 
incidents  which  variegate  our  human  history.  And,  as  they  are  the  natural  haunts 
of  the  highest  spirits,  and  the  appropriate  scenes  of  the  most  signal  occurrences,  so 
they  are  the  noblest  cenotaphs.  I.  Olivet  reminds  vb  or  the  Saviodr's  pity  fob 
SUCH  AS  PERISH  (see  Luke  xix.  37-44).  That  tear  fell  from  an  eye  which  had  looked 
into  eternity,  and  knew  the  worth  of  souls.  II.  The  Mount  of  Olives  reminds  us 
OF  THE  Redeemer's  agony  to  save.  III.  The  Mount  of  Olives  is  identified  with  the 
■applications  and  intercessions  of  Immanuel,  and  so  suggests  to  us  the  Lord  Jesus 
as  thb  obeat  example  in  prater.  1.  Submission  in  prayer.  In  praying  for  His 
people,  the  Mediator's  prayer  was  absolute :  "  Father,  /  wilV  But  in  praying  for 
Himself,  how  altered  was  the  language  1  "  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup 
pass  from  Me  :  nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  2.  Perseverance  in 
prayer.  The  evangelist  tells  that  there  was  one  prayer  which  Jesus  offered  three 
times,  and  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  v.  7,  we  find  that  this  prayer  prevailed. 
3.  The  best  preparation  for  trial  is  habitual  prayer.  Long  before  it  became  the 
scene  of  His  agony,  Gethsemane  had  been  the  Saviour's  oratory.  "  He  ofttimes 
resorted  thither."  IV.  The  Mount  of  Olives  recalls  to  us  the  Saviour's  affection 
FOB  His  OWN.  I  fear  that  the  love  of  Christ  is  little  credited  even  by  those  who 
have  some  faith  in  His  finished  work,  and  some  attachment  to  His  living  person. 
{Jama  Hamilton.)  Being  in  an  agony. — Je$iu  in  the  Garden  of  Qethtenuine : — Jesus 
commenced  His  sacred  Passion  in  the  garden  for  these  reasons :  I.  Bkcausb  He 
iMTBKDU)  TO  0B8XBTX  A  PIOUS  CUSTOM.    1.  It  was  His  cnstom,  after  He  had  preached 


CBAP.  zxu.]  ST.  LUKE.  683 

und  wrought  miracles,  to  retire  and  betake  Himself  to  prayer.  2.  It  should  be  oni 
cDBtom,  too,  to  recollect  ourselves  in  prayer,  especially  when  the  day's  work  is  over. 
II.  Becacsb  chabitt  and  obedience  tJEGED  HiM.  1.  Charity  towards  the  master  ol 
the  house,  who,  having  left  the  supper-room  at  His  disposal,  should  not  be  molested 
by  the  seizure  of  Jesus.  2.  Love  and  obedience  to  His  heavenly  Father.  IH. 
Ik  ordeb  to  fulfil  the  type  of  David.  When  Absalom  had  revolted  against  his 
father,  David  and  the  people  went  over  the  brook  Kedron,  and  they  all  wept 
with  a  loud  voice.  Christ  went  over  the  same  brook  now,  accompanied  by  His 
faithful  friends.    IV.  As  second  Adam  He  would  make  satisfaction  in  a  oabden  fob 

THE  SIN  OF  THE  FIBST  AdAH  WHICH  HAD  BEEN  COMMITTED  IN  A  GARDEN.     {J.  Marchunt.) 

Gethsemane : — Now  let  us  look  at  this  scene  of  pain  and  agony  in  the  life  of  Christ, 
and  see  what  lessons  it  supplies  to  us.  And  I  remark — I.  It  was  solitaby  suffeb- 
ING.  "  He  was  removed  from  them. "  He  was  alone.  How  weird  and  sombre  the 
word  I  How  it  throbs  with  painful  life  1  And  does  not  your  experience  substantiate 
the  same  thing  ?  "What  a  recital  you  could  give  of  pain,  and  sorrow,  and  heart- 
ache, and  stern  conflict  you  have  borne  and  sustained  in  solitude  into  which  your 
dearest  earthly  friend  must  not  enter.  But  I  remark  further  that  this  scene  in  the 
life  of  Jesus  was  one  of — II.  Intense  suffering.  It  is  an  hour  of  supreme  agony  1 
TBie  betrayer  is  at  hand,  the  judgment  hall,  the  mockery,  the  ribald  jeers  of  the 
populace,  the  desertion  of  His  friends,  the  false  charges  of  His  enemies,  the  shame 
and  pain  of  the  cross  are  just  before  Him.  The  bitterness  of  death  is  upon  Him. 
IIL  Earnest  pbayeb.  "  He  prayed  the  more  earnestly."  What  I  Christ  pray  ? 
Did  He  need  the  help  of  this  provision  of  the  Infinite  Father  to  meet  the  exigencies 
of  sinful  dependent  man  ?  Yes,  the  Man  Jesus  needed  to  exercise  this  gift.  It 
was  the  human  Christ  that  was  suffering.  Prayer  is  an  arrangement  in  the 
economy  of  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness  to  meet  the  daily  needs  of  human  lives. 
But  see  again,  in  this  time  of  great  suffering  there  is — IV.  Devout  submission  to 
THE  Divine  will.  "Nevertheless  not  My  will,  but  Thine,  be  done."  Christ  here 
reveals  a  force  and  beauty  of  character  of  the  highest  and  most  perfect  kind. 
When  a  man  can  be  thus  brought  to  put  himself  into  harmony  with  the  Divine 
plan  and  purpose,  so  as  to  say  in  true  submission  and  surrender,  "  Thy  will  be 
done,"  he  gets  to  the  very  heart  of  the  saint's  "higher  life"  on  earth  ;  this  is  about 
as  full  a  "  sanctification  "  as  can  be  attained  this  side  heaven.  This  is  one  of  the 
grandest,  the  greatest,  and  hardest,  yet  the  sweetest  and  most  restful  prayers  I 
know.  "  Thy  will  be  done."  This  prayer  touches  all  things  in  human  life  and 
history  from  centre  to  circumference,  nothing  is  left  outside  its  sweep  and  compass. 
It  is  the  hfe  of  heaven  lived  on  earth — the  soul  entering  into  deep  and  abiding 
sympathy  with  the  character  and  will  of  God,  and  going  out  in  harmony  with  the 
Divine  plan  to  "  do  and  suffer "  all  His  righteous  wiUl  What  are  some  of  the 
lessons  suggested  by  this  suffering  scene  in  the  life  of  Christ  ?  1.  Every  true  man 
has  his  Gethsemane.  It  may  be  an  "olive  garden,"  where  is  everything  to  minister 
to  the  senses,  and  meet  the  utmost  cravings  of  the  human  heart  so  far  as  outer 
things  are  concerned.  Or,  it  may  be  out  on  the  bleak  unsheltered  moor,  where  the 
cutting  winds  and  blinding  storm  of  sickness  and  poverty  chiU  to  the  very  core  of 
his  nature :  or  in  any  of  the  intermediate  states  of  life,  but  come  it  does.  2.  To 
pass  through  Gethsemane  is  a  Divine  arrangement,  a  part  of  God's  plan  for 
perfecting  human  lives.  Christ  was  there  not  merely  because  it  was  His  "  wont " 
or  habit,  but  as  part  of  a  Divine  plan.  He  was  drawn  thither  by  unseen  forces, 
and  for  a  set  or  definite  purpose.  It  was  just  as  much  the  will  of  God  as  was  any 
other  act  or  scene  of  His  life.  3.  To  pray  for  the  cup  to  pass  from  us  should 
always  be  subject  to  Christ's  condition,  "  If  it  be  Thy  will."  4.  God  ever  answers 
true  prayer,  but  not  always  in  the  way  we  ask.  Of  this  we  may  be  sure,  that  He 
will  either  lift  us  from  the  Gethsemane  of  suffering,  or  strengthen  us  to  bear  the 
triaL  6.  In  great  suffering,  submission  to  the  Divine  will  gains  strength  for  the 
greater  trial  beyond.  6.  I  learn,  finally,  this  grand  lesson,  that  I  would  by  no 
means  miss — that  in  aU,  above,  and  beyond,  and  through  all,  the  Lord  God  reigns. 
(J.  r.  Higgint.)  Jesus  in  Gethsemane: — I.  Upon  the  very  threshold  of  our 

lesson  lies  the  weighty  truth:  Wob'b  bittebest  cup  should  bk  taeen  when  it 
IB  TBB  means  07  HIGHEST  USEFULNESS.  Wasted  Suffering  is  the  climax  of  tragedy. 
Many  broken  hearts  would  have  lived  could  it  have  been  clear  that  the  crushing 
woe  was  not  fruitless.  Unspeakable  the  boon  if  earth's  army  of  sufferers  could 
test  on  the  knowledge  that  their  pain  was  serrioe.    IL  Fboh  oub  Loan's  exampus 

WB  LXABN  THB  EELPFULNSS8  IK  BOBBOW  OT  BXLIANCS  UPON  HUMAN  AND  DiVINB  COM- 
tAKIOKSHIF  COXBIKXD.      UL  Oto  LcAD'B  OBUCIAL  OBBDIEMCX  IS  THE  OABDSM  AOOH1 


6S4  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  txa, 

REFLECTS  THE   MAJESTY  OP  THE   HUMAN    WILL    AND    ITS    POSSIBLE    MASTERY   OF   ETKBT 

tbiaIj  in  peefect  obedience  TO  THE  DiviNE  WILL.  However  superhuman  Jesus' 
Buffering,  He  was  thoroughly  human  in  it.  He  had  all  our  faculties,  and  used  them 
as  we  may  use  ours.  It  is  no  small  encouragement  that  the  typical  Man  gives  as 
an  example  of  perfect  obedience,  at  a  cost  unknown  before  or  since.  In  the  mutual 
relations  of  the  human  and  Divine  wills  all  merit  is  achieved  and  all  character 
constructed.  IV.  Jesus'  soul  could  have  beeh  "sorbowful  even  unto  death" 
ONLY  AS  His  suffeeings  were  vicarious.  V,  Gethsemane's  darkness  paints 
sin's  ouilt  akd  ruin  in  faithful  and  enduring  colour.  It  is  easy  to  think  lightly 
of  sin.  VI.  Gethsemane  throws  portentous  light  upon  the  woe  of  lost  souls. 
VII.  Our  lesson  gives  terrible  emphasis  to  the  fact  and  seriousness  op  im- 
possibilities with  God.  Our  Lord's  agonized  words,  "  H  it  be  possible,"  establish 
the  rigidity  and  absoluteness  of  governmental  and  spiritual  conditions.  God's  will 
and  plans  are  objective  realities ;  they  have  definite  and  all-important  direction 
and  demands.  (S.  L.  B.  Speare.)  The  will  of  God  the  cure  of  self-will: — Awful 
in  its  bliss,  more  awful  yet  is  the  will  in  its  decay.  Awful  power  it  is,  to  be  able  for 
ourselves  to  choose  God ;  terrible  to  be  able  to  refuse  Him.  We  have  felt,  many  of 
us,  the  strangeness  of  the  power  of  will  in  children ;  how  neither  present  strength, 
nor  persuasion,  nor  love,  nor  hope,  nor  paiu,  nor  punishment,  nor  dread  of  worse, 
nor  weight  of  authority,  can,  for  a  time,  bend  the  determined  will  of  a  little  child. 
We  are  amazed  to  see  a  power  so  strong  in  a  form  so  slight  and  a  mind  so  childish. 
Yet  they  are  faint  pictures  of  ourselves  whenever  we  have  sinned  wilfully.  Wa 
marvel  at  their  resisting  our  wisdom,  knowledge,  strength,  counsel,  authority, 
persuasiveness.  What  is  every  sinful  sin  but  a  resistance  of  the  wisdom,  power, 
counsel,  majesty,  eloquent  pleadings  of  Almighty  God  in  the  sinner's  soul  ?  What 
is  it,  but  for  the  soul  which  He  hath  made,  to  will  to  thwart  His  counsel  who  hath 
made  it,  to  mar  His  work,  to  accuse  His  wisdom  of  foolishness,  His  love  of  want  of 
tenderness,  to  withdraw  itself  from  the  dominion  of  God,  to  be  another  god  ta 
itself,  a  separate  principle  of  wisdom  and  source  of  happiness  and  providence  to 
itself,  to  order  things  in  its  own  way,  setting  before  itself  and  working  out  its  own 
ends,  making  self-love,  self-exaltation,  self-gratification,  its  object,  as  though  it 
were,  at  its  will,  to  shape  its  own  lot  as  much  as  if  there  were  no  God.  Yea,  and 
at  last,  it  must  will  that  there  be  no  God.  And  in  its  worst  decay,  it  accomplishes 
what  it  wills,  and  (awful  as  it  is  to  say)  blots  God  out  of  its  creation,  disbelieving 
that  He  is,  or  will  do  as  He  has  said,  or  that  He  will  avenge.  Whoever  wills  that 
God  wills  not,  so  far  dethrones  God,  and  sets  up  his  own  will  to  dispute  the 
almightiness  and  wisdom  of  the  eternal  God.  He  is  a  Deicide.  It  matters  not 
wherein  the  self-will  is  exerted,  in  the  very  least  things  or  the  greatest.  Antichrist 
will  be  but  the  full  unhindered  growth  of  self-will.  Such  was  the  deep  disease  of 
self-will,  to  cure  which  our  good  Lord  came,  in  our  nature,  to  fulfil  the  Father's 
will,  to  will  to  suffer  what  the  Father  willed,  to  "  empty  Himself  and  become 
obedient  unto  death,  and  that  the  death  of  the  Cross."  And  since  pride  was  the 
chief  source  of  disease  in  our  corrupted  wills,  to  heal  this,  the  eternal  Son  of  God 
came  as  now  from  His  everlasting  glory,  and,  as  a  little  Child,  fulfilled  His 
Father's  will.  And  when  He  entered  on  His  ministry,  the  will  of  His  Father  was 
the  full  contentment,  refreshment,  stay,  reward,  of  His  soul,  as  Man.  And  then, 
whereas  the  will  of  God  is  done  either  by  us,  in  active  obedience,  or  on  us  and  in 
as  by  passive  obedience  or  resignation  in  suffering,  to  suffer  the  will  of  God  is  the 
surest,  deepest,  safest,  way  to  learn  to  do  it.  For  it  has  least  of  self.  It  needeth 
only  to  be  still,  and  it  reposeth  at  once  in  the  loving  will  of  God.  If  we  have 
crippled  oarselves,  and  cannot  do  great  things,  we  can,  at  least,  meekly  bear 
chastening,  hush  our  souls  and  be  still.  Yet  since,  in  trials  of  this  sort,  the  soul 
is  often  perplexed  by  its  very  suffering,  it  may  be  for  your  rest,  when  ye  shall  be 
called  to  God's  loving  discipline  of  suffering,  to  have  such  simple  rules  as  these. 
1,  It  is  not  against  the  will  of  God  even  strongly  to  will  if  it  should  be  His  wUl, 
what  yet  may  prove  not  to  be  His  will.  Entire  submission  to  the  will  of  God 
requireth  absolutely  these  two  things.  Wholly  will  whatsoever  thoa  knowest  God 
to  will ;  wholly  reject  whatsoever  thou  knowest  God  willeth  not.  Beyond  these 
two,  while  the  will  of  God  is  as  yet  not  clear  unto  thee,  thou  art  free.  We  most 
indeed,  in  all  our  prayers,  have  written,  at  least  in  our  hearts,  those  words  spoken 
by  our  dear  Lord  for  us,  "  Not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou."  We  shall,  in  whatever 
degree  God  hath  conformed  our  will  to  His,  hold  our  will  in  suspense,  even  while 
yet  uncertain,  ready  to  follow  the  balance  of  His  gracious  will  even  while  we, 
tremblingly  watch  its  motions,  and  our  dearest  earthly  hopes,  laid  therein,  seern^ 


OUF.  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE.  SSS 

ready  gradually  to  sink,  for  the  rest  of  this  life,  in  dust  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10).  And  so 
thou,  too,  whatever  it  be  which  thou  wiUest,  the  health  and  life  of  those  thou  lovest 
as  thine  own  soul,  the  turning  aside  of  any  threatened  scourge  of  God,  the  healing 
of  thine  aching  heart,  the  cleansing  away  of  harassing  thoughts  or  doubts  entailed 
upon  thee  by  former  sin,  or  coldness,  or  dryness,  or  distraction  in  prayer,  or  dead- 
ness  of  soul,  or  absence  of  spiritual  consolation,  thou  mayest  without  fear  ask  it 
of  God  with  thy  whole  heart,  and  will  it  wholly  and  earnestly,  so  that  thou  will 
therein  the  glory  of  God,  and,  though  with  sinking  heart,  welcome  the  will  of  God, 
when  thou  knowest  assuredly  what  that  will  is.  2.  Nor  again  is  it  against  the  will 
of  God  that  thou  art  bowed  down  and  grieved  by  what  is  the  will  of  God.  And  even 
when  the  heaviness  is  for  our  own  private  griefs,  yet,  if  it  be  patient,  it,  too,  ia 
according  to  the  will  of  God.  For  God  hath  made  us  such  as  to  suffer.  He  willeth 
that  suffering  be  the  healthful  chastisement  of  our  sins.  3.  Then,  whatever  thy 
grief  or  trouble  be,  take  every  drop  in  thy  cup  from  the  hand  of  Almighty  God. 
Thou  knowest  well  that  all  comes  from  God,  ordered  or  overruled  by  Him.  How 
was  the  cup  of  thy  Lord  filled,  which  He  drank  for  thee  ?  4.  Again,  no  trouble  is 
too  small,  wherein  to  see  the  will  of  God  for  thee.  Great  troubles  come  but  seldom. 
Daily  fretting  trials,  that  is,  what  of  thyself  would  fret  thee,  may  often,  in  God'» 
hands,  conform  thee  more  to  His  gracious  will.  They  are  the  daily  touches, 
whereby  He  traces  on  thee  the  likeness  of  His  Divine  will.  There  is  nothing  too 
slight  wherein  to  practise  oneness  with  the  will  of  God.  Love  or  hate  are  the 
strength  of  will ;  love,  of  the  will  of  God ;  hate,  of  the  will  of  devils.  A  weak 
love  is  a  weak  will ;  a  strong  love  is  a  strong  wilL  Self-will  is  the  antagonist  of  the 
will  of  God ;  for  thou  wert  formed  for  God.  If  thou  wert  made  for  thyself,  be  self 
thy  centre  ;  if  for  God,  repose  thyself  in  the  will  of  God.  So  shalt  thou  lose  thy 
self-will,  to  find  thy  better  will  in  God,  and  thy  self-love  shall  be  absorbed  in  the 
love  of  God.  Tea,  thou  shalt  love  thyself,  because  God  hath  loved  thee  ;  take  care 
for  thyself,  because  thou  art  not  thine  own,  but  God  careth  for  thee ;  will  thine  own 
good,  because  and  as  God  willeth  it.  "  Father,  nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as 
Thou."  So  hath  our  Lord  sanctified  all  the  natural  shrinkings  of  our  lower  will. 
He  vouchsafed  to  allow  the  natural  will  of  His  sacred  Manhood  to  be  "  amazed  and 
very  heavy  "  at  the  mysterious  sufferings  of  the  cross,  to  hallow  the  "  mute  shrink- 
ing "  of  ours,  and  guide  us  on  to  His  all-holy  submission  of  His  will.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.) 
Christ's  preparation  for  death : — 1.  The  prayer  of  Christ.  In  a  praying  posture  He 
will  be  found  when  the  enemy  comes ;  He  will  be  taken  upon  His  knees.  _He  was 
pleading  hard  with  God  in  prayer,  for  strength  to  carry  Him  through  this  heavy 
trial,  when  they  came  to  take  Him.  And  this  prayer  was  a  very  remarkable  prayer, 
both  for  the  solitariness  of  it,  "  He  withdrew  about  a  stone's  cast "  (verse  41)  from 
His  dearest  intimates — no  ear  but  His  Father's  shall  hear  what  He  had  now  to 
say — and  for  the  vehemency  and  importunity  of  ft ;  these  were  those  strong 
cries  that  He  poured  out  to  God  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  (Heb.  y.  7).  And  for  the 
humility  expressed  in  it :  He  fell  upon  the  grotmd.  He  rolled  Himself  as  it  were  in 
dust,  at  His  Father's  feet.  2.  This  Scripture  gives  you  alge  an  account  of  the 
agony  of  Christ,  as  well  as  of  His  prayer,  and  that  a  most  strange  one ;  such  as  in 
all  respects  never  was  known  before  in  nature.  3.  You  have  here  His  relief  in  this 
His  agony,  and  that  by  an  angel  dispatched  post  from  heaven  to  comfort  Him.  The 
Lord  of  angels  now  needed  the  comfort  of  an  angel.  It  was  time  to  have  a  little 
refreshment,  when  His  face  and  body  too  stood  as  full  of  drops  of  blood  as  the  drops 
of  dew  are  upon  the  grass.  1.  Did  Christ  pour  out  His  soul  to  Ood  so  ardently  in 
the  garden,  when  the  hour  of  His  trouble  was  at  hand  ?  Hence  we  infer  that 
prayer  is  a  singular  preparative  for,  and  rehef  under,  the  greatest  troubles.  2.  Did 
Christ  withdraw  from  the  disciples  to  seek  God  by  prayer  ?  Thence  it  follows  that 
the  company  of  the  best  men  is  not  always  seasonable.  The  society  of  men  is 
beautiful  in  its  season,  and  no  better  than  a  burden  out  of  season.  I 
have  read  of  a  good  man,  that  when  his  stated  time  for  oloset-prayer 
was  come,  he  would  say  to  the  company  that  were  with  him,  whatever 
they  were,  "  Friends,  I  must  beg  your  excuse  for  a  while,  there  is  a  Friend  waits  to 
speak  with  me."  The  company  of  a  good  man  is  good,  bat  it  ceases  to  be  so,  when 
it  hinders  the  enjoyment  of  better  company.  One  hour  with  God  is  to  be  preferred 
to  a  thousand  days'  enjoyment  of  the  best  men  on  earth.  3.  Did  Christ  go  to  God 
thrice  ujwn  the  same  account?  Thence  learn  that  Christians  should  not  be  dis- 
couraged, though  they  have  sought  God  once  and  again,  and  no  answer  of  Peace 
eomes.  If  God  deny  yea  in  the  things  you  ask.  He  deals  no  otherwise  with  you  than 
He  did  with  Christ.     4.  Was  Christ  so  eatnest  in  prayer  that  He  prayed  Himself 


f8«  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap. 

into  a  very  agony?  Let  the  people  of  God  bloBk  to  think  how  anlike  their  spirits 
are  to  Christ,  as  to  their  prayer-frames.  Oh,  vrhat  lively,  sensible,  quick,  deep,  and 
tender  apprehensions  and  sense  of  those  things  abont  which  He  prayed,  had  Christ! 
Though  He  saw  His  very  blood  starting  out  from  His  hands,  and  His  clothes  dyed 
in  it,  yet  being  in  an  agony,  He  prayed  the  more  earnestly.  I  do  not  say  Christ  is 
imitable  in  this ;  no,  but  His  fervour  in  prayer  is  a  pattern  for  us,  and  serrea 
severely  to  rebuke  the  laziness,  dulness,  torpor,  formality,  and  stupidity  that  is  in 
our  prayers.  Oh,  how  imlike  Christ  are  we  1  His  prayers  were  pleading  prayers, 
full  of  mighty  arguments  and  fervent  affections.  Oh,  that  His  people  were  in  this 
more  like  Him  !  5.  Was  Christ  in  such  an  agony  before  any  hand  of  man  was 
upon  Him  merely  from  the  apprehensions  of  the  wrath  of  God  with  which  He  now 
contested  ?  Then  surely  it  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 
God,  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.  6.  Did  Christ  meet  death  with  such  a  heavy 
heart  ?  Let  the  hearts  of  Christians  be  the  lighter  for  this  when  they  come  to  die. 
The  bitterness  of  death  was  all  squeezed  into  Christ's  cup.  He  was  made  to  drink 
Tip  the  very  dregs  of  it,  that  so  our  death  might  be  the  sweeter  to  us.  {J.  Flavel.) 
The  agony  in  Gethsemane : — L  Meditating  upon  the  agonizing  scene  in  Gethsemane 
we  are  compelled  to  observe  that  our  Saviour  there  endured  a  grief  unknown  to  any 
previous  period  of  His  life,  and  therefore  we  will  commence  our  discourse  by  raising 
the  question,  what  was  the  cause  of  the  peculiab  gbief  of  Gethsemane  ?  Do 
you  suppose  it  was  the  fear  of  coming  scorn  or  the  dread  of  crucifixion?  was  it 
terror  at  the  thought  of  death  ?  Is  not  such  a  supposition  impossible  7  It  does 
not  make  even  such  poor  cowards  as  we  are  sweat  great  drops  of  blood,  why  then 
should  it  work  such  terror  in  Him  ?  Eead  the  stories  of  the  martyrs,  and  you  will 
frequently  find  them  exultant  in  the  near  approach  of  the  most  cruel  sufferings. 
The  joy  of  the  Lord  has  given  such  strength  to  them,  that  no  coward  thought  has 
alarmed  them  for  a  single  moment,  but  they  have  gone  to  the  stake,  or  to  the  block, 
with  psalms  of  victory  upon  their  lips.  Our  Master  must  not  be  thought  of  as 
inferior  to  His  boldest  servants,  it  cannot  be  that  He  should  tremble  where  they 
were  brave.  I  cannot  conceive  that  the  pangs  of  Gethsemane  were  occasioned  by 
any  extraordinary  attack  from  Satan.  It  is  possible  that  Satan  was  there,  and  that 
his  presence  may  have  darkened  the  shade,  but  he  was  not  the  most  prominent 
cause  of  that  hour  of  darkness.  Thus  much  is  quite  clear,  that  our  Lord  at  the 
commencement  of  His  ministry  engaged  in  a  very  severe  duel  with  the  prince  ol 
darkness,  and  yet  we  do  not  read  concerning  that  temptation  in  the  wilderness  a 
single  syllable  as  to  His  soul's  being  exceeding  sorrowful,  neither  do  we  find  that 
He  "  was  sore  amazed  and  was  very  heavy,"  nor  is  there  a  solitary  hint  at  anything 
approaching  to  bloody  sweat.  When  the  Lord  of  angels  condescended  to  stand  foot 
to  foot  with  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  he  had  no  such  dread  of  him  as  to 
utter  strong  cries  and  tears  and  fall  prostrate  on  the  ground  with  threefold  appeals 
to  the  Great  Father.  What  is  it  then,  think  you,  that  so  peculiarly  marks  off 
Gethsemane  and  the  griefs  thereof  ?  We  believe  that  now  the  Father  put  Him  to 
grief  for  ns.  It  was  now  that  our  Lord  had  to  take  a  certain  cup  from  the  Father's 
hand.  This  removes  all  doubt  as  to  what  it  was,  for  we  read,  «'  It  pleased  the 
Lord  to  bruise  Him,  He  hath  put  Him  to  grief :  when  thou  shalt  make  His  soul 
an  offering  for  sin."  "  The  Lord  hath  made  to  meet  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
Yet  would  I  exhort  you  to  consider  these  griefs  awhile,  that  you  may  love  the 
Sufferer.  He  now  realized,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  what  it  was  to 
be  a  sin  bearer.  It  was  the  shadow  of  the  coming  tempest,  it  was  the 
prelude  of  the  dread  desertion  which  He  had  to  endure,  when  He  stood 
where  we  ought  to  have  stood,  and  paid  to  His  Father's  justice  the  debt  which  was 
due  from  ns ;  it  was  this  which  laid  Him  low.  To  be  treated  as  a  sinner,  to  be 
smitten  as  a  sinner,  though  in  Him  was  no  sin — this  it  was  which  caused  Him  the 
agony  of  which  our  text  speaks.  U.  Having  thus  spoken  of  the  cause  of  His 
peculiar  grief,  I  thmk  we  shall  be  able  to  support  our  view  of  the  matter,  while  we 
lead  yon  to  consider,  what  was  the  character  of  the  orief  itself  ?  Trouble  of 
spirit  is  worse  than  pain  of  body ;  pain  may  bring  trouble  and  be  the  incidental 
cause  of  sorrow,  but  if  the  mind  is  perfectly  nntroubled,  how  well  a  man  can  bear 
pain,  and  when  the  soul  is  exhilarated  and  lifted  up  with  inward  joy,  pain  of  body 
is  almost  forgotten,  the  soul  conquering  the  body.  On  the  other  band  the  soul's 
sorrow  will  create  bodily  pain,  the  lower  nature  sympathizing  with  the  higher.  III. 
Our  third  question  shall  be,  what  was  oub  Loan's  solace  in  all  this  ?  He 
resorted  to  prayer,  and  especially  to  prayer  to  God  under  the  character  of  Father. 
Ill  oonolasion :  Learn — 1.  The  real  humanity  of  oar  Lord.    8.  Tb«  siatchlesg  lavs 


CBAP.  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE,  687 

of  Jesus.  3.  The  excellence  and  completeness  of  the  atonement.  4.  Last  of  all* 
what  must  be  the  terror  of  the  punishment  which  will  fall  upon  those  men  wha 
reject  the  atoning  blood,  and  who  will  have  to  stand  before  God  in  their  own  proper 
persons  to  suffer  for  their  sins.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Gethsemane : — I.  Coma 
hither  and  behold  the  Saviour's  unutterable  wok.  We  cannot  do  more  than 
look  at  the  revealed  causes  of  grief.  1.  It  partly  arose  from  the  horror  of  His  soul 
when  fully  comprehending  the  meaning  of  sin.  2.  Another  deep  fountain  of  grief 
was  found  in  the  fact  that  Christ  now  assumed  more  fully  His  official  position  with 
regard  to  sin.  3.  We  believe  that  at  this  time,  our  Lcrd  had  a  very  clear  view  of 
•U  the  shame  and  suffering  of  His  crucifixion.  4.  But  possibly  a  yet  more  fruitful 
tree  of  bitterness  was  this — that  now  His  Father  began  to  withdraw  His  presence 
from  Him.  5.  But  in  our  judgment  the  fiercest  heat  of  the  Saviour's  suffering  in 
the  garden  lay  in  the  temptations  of  Satan.  "  This  is  your  hour  and  the  power  of 
darkness."  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh."  IL  Turn  we  next  to  contemplate 
THE  TEMPTATION  OF  OUR  LoRO.  1.  A  temptation  to  leave  the  work  unfinished.  2. 
Scripture  implies  that  our  Lord  was  assailed  by  the  fear  that  His  strength  would 
not  be  sufficient  He  was  heard  in  that  He  feared.  How,  then,  was  He  heard  ? 
An  angel  was  sent  onto  Him  strengthening  Him.  His  fear,  then,  was  probably 
produced  by  a  sense  of  weakness.  3.  Possibly,  also,  the  temptation  may  have 
arisen  from  a  suggestion  that  He  was  utterly  forsaken.  I  do  not  know — there  may 
be  stern er.trials  than  this,  but  surely  this  is  one  of  the  worst,  to  be  utterly  forsaken. 
4.  We  think  Satan  also  assaulted  our  Lord  with  a  bitter  taunt  indeed.  You  know 
in  what  guise  the  tempter  can  dress  it,  and  how  bitterly  sarcastic  he  can  make  the 
insinuation — "  Ah  !  Thou  wilt  not  be  able  to  achieve  the  redemption  of  Thy  people. 
Thy  grand  benevolence  will  prove  a  mockery,  and  Thy  beloved  ones  will  perish. " 
IIL  Behold,  the  bloody  sweat.  This  proves  how  tremendous  must  have  been  the 
weight  of  sin  when  it  was  able  so  to  crush  the  Saviour  that  He  distilled  drops  of 
blood  1  This  proves,  too,  my  brethren,  the  mighty  power  of  His  love.  It  is  a  very 
pretty  observation  of  old  Isaac  Ambrose  that  the  gum  which  exudes  from  the  tree 
without  cutting  is  always  the  best.  This  precious  camphire-tree  yielded  most  sweet 
spices  when  it  was  wounded  under  the  knotty  whips,  and  when  it  was  pierced  by  the 
nails  on  the  cross ;  but  see,  it  giveth  forth  its  best  spice  when  there  is  no  whip,  no 
nail,  no  wound.  This  sets  forth  the  voluntariness  of  Christ's  sufferings,  since 
without  a  lance  the  blood  flowed  freely.  No  need  to  put  on  the  leech,  or  apply  the 
knife  ;  it  flows  spontaneously.  IV.  The  Saviour's  prater.  1.  Lonely  prayer.  2. 
Humble  prayer.  3.  Filial  prayer.  4.  Persevering  prayer.  5.  Earnest  prayer.  6. 
The  prayer  of  resignation.  V.  The  Saviour's  prevalence.  His  prayers  did  speed, 
and  therefore  He  is  a  good  Intercessor  for  us.  "How  was  He  heard  ?  "  1 .  His  mind  was 
suddenly  rendered  calm.  2.  God  strengthened  Him  through  an  angel.  3.  God 
heard  Him  in  granting  Him  now,  not  simply  strength,  but  a  real  victory  over 
Satan.  I  do  not  know  whether  what  Adam  Clarke  supposes  is  correct,  that  in  the 
garden  Christ  did  pay  more  of  the  price  than  He  did  even  on  the  cross ;  but  I  am 
quite  convinced  that  they  are  very  foolish  who  get  to  such  refinement  that  they 
think  the  atonement  was  made  on  the  cross,  and  nowhere  else  at  all.  We  believs 
that  it  was  made  in  the  garden  as  well  as  on  the  cross ;  and  it  strikes  me  that  in 
the  garden  one  part  of  Christ's  work  was  finished,  wholly  finished,  and  that  was 
His  conflict  with  Satan.  I  conceive  that  Christ  had  now  rather  to  bear  the  absence 
of  His  Father's  presence  and  the  revilings  of  the  people  and  the  sons  of  men,  than 
the  temptations  of  the  devil.  I  do  thiiik  that  these  were  over  when  He  rose  from 
His  knees  in  prayer,  when  He  lifted  Himself  from  the  ground  where  He  marked  His 
visage  in  the  clay  in  drops  of  blood.  (Ibid.)  The  agony  of  Christ: — 
L  The  person  or  the  illustrious  Sufferer.  1.  The  dignified  essential  Son  of 
God.  2.  Truly  and  properly  the  Son  of  Man.  Had  oar  nature,  body,  soul.  II. 
Tee  aoont  which  He  endured.  1.  The  agony  itself.  (1)  Deep,  Intense  mental 
suffering.  (2)  Overwhelming  amazement  and  terror.  2.  The  cause  of  Christ's 
agony.  It  arose — (1)  From  the  pressure  of  a  world's  guilt  upon  Him.  (2)  From 
the  attacks  of  the  powers  of  darkness.  (3)  From  the  hiding  of  the  Divine  counten- 
ance. 3.  The  effects  of  the  agony.  He  fell  to  the  ground,  overwhelmed,  prostrated, 
and  sweat  as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood.  IH.  The  peayeb  which  He  offered. 
♦•  He  prayed  more  earnestly."  Observe — 1.  The  matter  of  His  prayer.  It  was  for 
the  removal  of  the  cup  (verse  42).  As  man,  He  had  a  natural  aversion  to  pain  and 
■offering.  2.  The  spirit  of  His  prayer  was  that  of  holy  sabmission,  devout  resig- 
nation. 8.  The  manner  of  His  prayer.  4.  The  intensity  of  His  prayer.  The 
(HMcesi  of  His  prayer.     Application :  1.  Learn  the  amazing  evil  of  sin.     3.  Tha 


j(38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn. 

expensiveness  of  our  redemption.  3.  The  sympathy  of  Christ  (Heb.  iv.  15).  4. 
The  necessity  of  resignation  to  the  will  of  God.  (J.  Bunw,D.D.)  The  Saviour'$ 
bloody  sweat: — I.  The  causes  of  the  bloody  sweat.  1.  A  vehement  inward 
struggle.  (1)  On  the  one  hand  He  was  seized  by  fear  and  horror  of  His  passion 
and  death.  (2)  On  the  other  hand  He  was  burning  with  zeal  for  the  honour  o£ 
God  and  redemption  of  men.  (3)  How  great  will  be  the  anguish  of  the  sinner  at 
the  sight  of  everlasting  death  and  the  endless  pains  of  hell  I  2.  The  representation 
of  all  the  sins  of  the  past,  present,  and  future.  3.  The  consideration  that  His 
passion  would  prove  useless  to  so  many.  U.  Thb  mannek  of  His  sweating  blood. 
1.  He  sweat  blood  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  (1)  Natural  blood.  (2)  In  a 
natural  way.  2.  He  was  full  of  sorrow.  3.  He  fell  upon  His  face.  (J.  Marchant.) 
The  witness  to  the  power  of  prayer  : — I.  An  act  of  beal  prayeb  is  great,  powebfuIj, 
AND  BEATJTiFtJii  *,  a  Spirit  in  an  energy  of  pure,  subdued,  but  confident  desire,  rising 
up  and  embracing,  and  securing  the  aid  of  the  mighty  Spirit  of  God.  If  we  can 
believe  the  power  of  prayer,  we  may  put  forth  the  force  of  the  soul  and  perform  that 
act.  How  then  can  we  learn  that  power?  My  answer  is.  From  Christ.  Every- 
where Christ  is  the  Representative  Man.  This  in  two  senses.  1.  He  is  human 
nature  in  sum  and  completeness  as  it  ought  to  be.  To  see  humanity  as  God 
imaged  and  loved  it,  to  see  humanity  at  its  best,  we  must  see  onr  Master.  2.  And 
Christ  represents  to  us  perfect  human  conduct.  To  see  how  to  act  in  critical  situa- 
tions we  must  study  Christ.  In  critical  situations  ?  Yes  1  there  is  the  difficulty, 
there  also  the  evidenced  nobleness  of  a  lofty  human  character.  I  need  hardly  say 
(for  you  know  who  Christ  was)  the  most  critical  moments  in  human  history  were 
the  moments  of  the  Passion.  Oh,  perfect  example  1  Oh,  severe  and  fearful  trial  I 
Christ  knelt  alone  amidst  the  oUves,  in  the  quiet  garden,  in  the  lonely  night,  and 
near,  His  weary,  sleepy  followers.  It  is  a  simple  scene,  but  Christ's  spirit  was  in 
action.  What  was  the  significance  of  the  act?  It  was  very  awfuL  It  was  an 
"  agony,"  a  life-struggle,  a  contest.  Much  was  involved  in  that  moment  of  apparent 
quietude,  of  real  struggle ;  but  one  lesson  at  any  rate  is  important.  Examine  it. 
Here  we  have  a  witness  to  the  power  of  prayer.  II.  The  agonv  was  liteballt  a 
contest.  "What  was  the  nature  of  the  struggle  f  It  was  a  contest  with  evil ;  of  that 
we  are  certain,  although  the  depth  and  details  are  wrapped  in  mystery.  Anyhow 
the  struggle  was  with  a  force  of  which,  alas  !  we  ourselves  know  something.  No  one 
can  live  to  the  age  of  five-and-twenty,  and  reflect  with  any  degree  of  seriousness  on 
himself  or  on  the  world  around  him,  without  knowing  that  evil  is  a  fact.  "We  find 
its  cruel  records  in  the  blood-stained  pages  of  history.  We  listen,  and  amidst  what- 
ever heavenly  voices,  still  the  wail  of  its  victims  is  echoing  age  after  age  down  the 
"  corridors  of  time."  Our  own  faults  and  follies  will  not  efface  themselves  from 
the  records  of  memory  ;  in  the  brightness  of  the  flaring  day  of  life  they  may  fade 
into  dim  and  shadowy  outline,  but  there  are  times  of  silence — on  a  sick-bed,  in  iba 
Btill  house  at  midnight,  in  the  open  desolation  of  the  lonely  sea — when  they  rise 
like  living  creatures,  spectral  threateners,  or  blaze  their  unrelenting  facts  in  charac- 
ters of  fire.  Their  force  was  not  realized  in  the  moment  of  passion.  But  conscience 
bides  its  time,  bears  its  stern,  uncompromising  witness  when  passion  is  asleep  or 
dead.  Sin  is  a  matter  of  experience.  It  has  withered  life,  in  fact,  in  history,  with 
the  deathly  chill  and  sadness  of  the  grave.  Somehow  all  feel  it,  but  it  is  prominent 
and  stern  before  the  Christian,  He  can  never  forget,  nor  is  it  well  he  should,  that 
we  are  in  a  world  in  which,  when  God  appeared  in  human  form.  He  was  subjected 
to  insult  and  violence  by  His  creatures.  That  is  enough.  That  is,  without  con- 
troversy, the  measure  of  the  power,  the  intensity  of  evil.  If  there  is  to  be  a  contest 
with  evil,  it  is  clearly  a  contest  with  a  serious  enemy.  III.  How  can  we  thbow 
BACK  so  FiEBCE  A  powEB  ?  The  ANSWER  BBOADLV  IS,  RELIGION.  RcUglon  is  a  personal 
matter ;  it  must  hold  a  universal  empire  over  the  being  of  each  of  os  ;  it  must  rouse 
natural  forces  only  by  being  in  possession  of  supernatural  power.  ^  Brothers,  to 
possess  a  religion  which  can  conquer  sin  we  must  follow  our  Master  in  the  severity 
of  principle,  of  conviction,  of  unflinching  struggle.  The  external  scene  of  His  trial 
was  simple,  but  He  fought,  and  therefore  conquered.  Certainly  He  fought  with 
evil,  "being  in  an  agony."  IV.  "Fought  with  evil."  "What  do  yon  mean  ?'* 
yon  ask.  Evil  1  Is  evil  a  thing,  an  object,  like  the  pyramids  of  Egypt,  or  the  roar- 
ing ocean,  or  an  advancing  army  ?  Evil  is  the  act  of  choice  of  a  created^  wilL  It 
is  the  rejection  by  the  creature  of  the  laws  of  life  laid  down,  not  as  tyrannical  rules, 
but  as  necessary  truths,  by  the  Creator.  Evil  takes  three  active  forms,  so  says 
Scripture,  so  we  have  learned  in  the  Catechism  :  the  aocnmnlated  force  of  bad 
opinion,  that  b  "  the  world  " ;  or  the  uncertain  revolt  of  our  own  corrupt  desires. 


«KAr.  xxn.)  ST.  LVKS,  638 

that  is  "  the  flesh  "  ;  or  a  living  being  wholly  surrendered  to  hatred  of  the  Creator, 
that  is  "  the  devil."  Think  of  the  last.  You  realize  the  severity  of  the  contest  in 
remembering  that  you  fight  with  a  fiend.  Satan  is  a  person.  In  this  is  he  like  our- 
selves. Of  man  it  is  said  "  he  has  thoughts  of  himself."  This  is  true  of  Satan ;  he 
can  think  of  himself,  he  can  purpose  v?ith  relentless  will,  he  can  plan  with 
unparalleled  audacity.  There  are  three  specific  marks  of  his  character — 1.  He  ia 
inveterate  in  his  hatred  of  truth.  He  is  a  liar.  2.  He  is  obstinate  in  his  abhor- 
rence of  charity,  pure  intention,  and  self-sacrificing  devotion.  He  is  a  murderer. 
3.  He  shrinks  from  the  open  glory  of  goodness.  He  is  a  coward.  To  "  abide  in  the 
truth,"  to  "  love  good,"  and  "  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart  fervently,"  and  to 
have  holy  fearlessness  in  the  power  of  God  is  to  be  in  direct  opposition  to  him. 
From  this  it  is  evident  that  our  contest  is  with  a  tremendous  enemy,  and  that 
against  us  he  need  never  be  victorious.  My  brothers,  there  are  two  shadows  pro- 
jected over  human  life  from  two  associated  and  mysterious  facts — from  sin,  &om 
death.  In  that  critical  moment  when  the  human  will  is  subjected  to  the  force  of 
temptation  and  yields  to  its  sway,  in  that  solemn  moment  when  the  human  spirit 
is  wrenched  away  for  a  time  from  its  physical  organism,  there  is  a  special  power 
dangerously,  not  irresistibly,  exercised  by  the  being  who  is  devoted  to  evil.  A  hint 
of  this  is  given  in  Scripture  in  the  allusion  to  the  spirit  "that  now  worketh  in  the 
children  of  disobedience,"  a  hint  of  this  dark  realm  certainly  in  the  prayer  by  the 
grave-side  that  we  may  not  "for  any  pains  of  death  fall  "  from  God.  There  is  a 
shadow-land.  How  may  we  contemplate  it  without  hopeless  shuddering,  how  think 
of  entering  it  without  despairing  fear  ?  Now  here  is  a  palmary  fact.  Christ  our 
strength  as  well  as  our  example  boldly  entered,  and  in  the  depths  of  its  deepest 
blac^ess  conquered  the  fiend.  "  He  was  made  sin  "  ;  "  He  became  obedient  unto 
death  "  ;  and  for  all  who  will  to  follow  Him,  His  love.  His  devotion  is  victorious. 
"  We  are  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  who  loved  us."  Yes  I  In  union  with 
Christ  we  can  do  what  He  did.  0  blessed  and  brave  One  1  We  may  follow  His 
example  and  employ  His  power.  His  power  I  How  may  we  be  possessed  of  it  ?  In 
many  ways.  Certainly  in  this  way.  It  is  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  soul  that 
prays.  This  is  in  effect  the  answer  of  Christ's  revelation  to  the  question.  Why 
should  we  pray  ?  Two  facts  let  us  remember  and  act  upon  with  earnestness.  1. 
The  value  of  a  formed  habit  of  prayer.  Crises  are  sure  to  come,  and  then  we  are 
equally  sure  to  act  on  habitual  impulse.  Christ  learned  in  His  humanity  and 
practised  Himself  in  the  effort  of  prayer,  and  when  the  struggle  reached  its  cUmax, 
the  holy  habit  had  its  fulfilment.  "  Being  in  an  agony  He  prayed."  And — 2.  It  is 
in  moments  of  contest  that  real  prayer  rises  to  its  height  and  majesty.  "  When  my 
heart  is  hot  within  me,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "I  will  complain  "  ;  and  of  Christ  it  is 
written,  "  Being  in  an  agony  He  prayed  more  earnestly."  Prayer,  too,  as  the 
Christian  knows,  is  not  always  answered  now  in  the  way  he  imagines  most  desirable, 
but  it  is  always  answered.  If  the  cup  does  not  pass,  at  least  there  is  an  angel 
strengthening  the  human  spirit  to  drain  it  bravely  to  the  dregs.  Subjectively,  there 
is  comfort ;  objectively,  there  is  real  help.  What  might  have  been  a  tragedy 
becomes  by  prayer  a  blessing  ;  desire  which  if  misdirected  might  have  crushed  and 
overwhelmed  us,  becomes  when  truly  used  with  the  Holy  Spirit's  assistance  a  raw 
material  of  sanctity.  Certainly  from  prayer  we  gain  three  things:  a  powerful 
stimulus,  and  strength  for  act  or  suffering  ;  a  deep  and  real  consolation  ;  and  the 
soothing  and  ennobling  sense  of  duty  done.  {Canon  Knox  Little.)  Our  Lord's 
bloody  sweat : — There  are  some  who  only  suppose  that  by  this  phraseology  the  mere 
size  of  the  drops  of  perspiration  is  indicated.  But  the  plain  meaning  of  the 
language  is  that  the  sweat  was  bloody  in  its  nature ;  that  the  physical  nature  of  our 
Lord  was  so  deranged  by  the  violent  pressure  of  mental  agony  that  blood  oozed 
irom  every  pore.  Such  a  result  is  not  uncommon  in  a  sensitive  constitution.  The 
face  reddens  with  blood  both  from  shame  and  anger.  Were  this  continued  with 
intensity,  the  blood  would  force  its  way  through  the  smaller  vessels,  and  exude  from 
the  skin.  Kannigiesser  remarks,  "If  the  mind  is  seized  with  a  sudden  fear  of  death, 
the  sweat,  owing  to  the  excessive  degree  of  constriction,  often  becomes  bloody." 
The  eminent  French  historian,  De  Thou,  mentions  the  case  of  an  ItaUan  cfiScer  who 
commanded  at  Monte-Mars,  a  fortress  of  Piedmont,  during  the  warfare  in  1552 
between  Henry  II.  of  France  and  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  The  officer,  having  been 
treacheroasly  seized  by  order  of  the  hostile  general,  and  threatened  with  pubUo 
execution  unless  he  surrendered  the  place,  was  so  agitated  at  the  prospect  of  an 
ignominious  death  that  he  sweated  blood  from  every  part  of  his  body.  The  same 
trriter  relates  a  similar  occurrence  in  the  person  of  a  young  Florentine  at  Borne, 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rm, 

nnjustly  pat  to  death  by  order  of  Pope  Sixtns  V.,  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  and 
concludes  the  narrative  as  follows  :  "  When  the  youth  was  led  forth  to  ezeoution, 
he  excited  the  commiseration  of  many,  and,  throagh  excess  of  grief,  was  observed 
to  shed  bloody  tears,  and  to  discharge  blood  instead  of  sweat  from  his  whole  body." 
Medical  experience  does  so  far  corroborate  the  testimony  of  the  Gospels,  and  shows 
that  cutaneous  hemorrhage  is  sometimes  the  result  of  intense  mental  agitation. 
The  awful  anguish  of  Him  who  said,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto 
death,"  was  sufficient  cause  to  produce  the  bloody  perspiration  on  a  cold  night  and 
in  the  open  air.  (J.  Eadie,  DJ).)  The  angel  vho  ttrengthened  Jesiu  : — On  a 
certain  occasion,  when  the  Bev.  J.  Bobertson  had  been  preaching  one  of  a  series  of 
sermons,  on  "Angels  in  their  revealed  connection  with  the  work  of  Christ,"  Dr. 
Duncan  came  into  the  vestry  and  said  :  "  Will  you  be  so  kind  as  to  let  me  know 
when  you  are  going  to  take  up  the  case  of  my  favourite  angel  ?  "  *•  But  who  is  he. 
Doctor  ?  "  "  Oh  1  guess  that."  "  Well,  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  enumerate  all 
those  whose  names  we  have  given  us."  "  But  I  can't  tell  you  his  name,  he  is  an 
anonymous  angeL  It  is  the  one  who  came  down  to  Gethsemane,  and  there 
strengthened  my  Lord  to  go  through  His  agony  for  me,  that  He  might  go  forward 
to  the  cross,  and  finish  my  redemption  there.  I  have  an  extraordinary  love  for  that 
one,  and  I  often  wonder  what  I'll  say  to  him  when  I  meet  him  first."  This  was  a 
thought  Dr.  Duncan  never  wearied  of  repeating,  in  varied  forms,  whenever  the  sub> 
ject  of  angels  turned  up  in  conversation.  Succoured  by  an  angel: — In  the 
Ecclesiastical  History  of  Socrates  there  is  mention  made  of  one  Theodoras,  a  martyr 
put  to  extreme  torments  by  Julian  the  Apostate,  and  dismissed  again  by  him  when 
he  saw  him  unconquerable.  Bufinus,  in  his  History,  says  that  he  met  with  this 
martyr  a  long  time  after  his  trial,  and  asked  him  whether  the  pains  he  felt  were  not 
insufferable.  He  answered  that  at  &cst  it  was  somewhat  grievous,  but  after  awhile 
there  seemed  to  stand  by  him  a  young  man  in  white,  who,  with  a  soft  and  comfort* 
able  handkerchief,  wiped  off  the  sweat  from  his  body  (which,  through  extreme 
anguish,  was  little  less  than  blood),  and  bade  him  be  of  good  cheer,  insomuch  that 
it  was  rather  a  punishment  than  a  pleasure  to  him  to  be  taken  off  the  rack.  When 
the  tormentors  had  done,  the  angel  was  gone.  Angelic  ministry  :■ — The  only  child 
of  a  poor  woman  one  day  fell  into  the  fire  by  accident,  and  was  so  badly  burned  that 
he  died  after  a  few  hours'  suffering.  The  clergyman,  as  soon  as  he  knew,  went  to 
see  the  mother,  who  was  known  to  be  dotingly  fond  of  the  child.  To  his  great  sur- 
prise, he  found  her  calm,  patient,  and  resigned.  After  a  little  conversation  she  told 
him  how  she  had  been  weeping  bitterly  as  she  knelt  beside  her  child's  cot,  when 
suddenly  he  exclaimed,  "  Mother,  don't  you  see  the  beautiful  man  who  is  standing 
there  and  waiting  for  me  ?  "  Again  and  again  the  child  persisted  in  saying  that 
"  the  beautiful  man  "  was  waiting  for  him,  and  seemed  ready,  and  even  anxious,  to 
go  to  him.  And,  as  a  natural  consequence,  the  mother's  heart  was  strangely 
cheered.  (W.  Baxendale.)  The  safeguard  against  temptation: — "  Satan,"  says 
Bishop  Hall,  "  always  rocks  the  cradle  when  we  sleep  at  our  devotions.  If  we  would 
prevail  with  God,  we  must  wrestle  first  with  our  own  dulness."  And  if  this  be  need- 
ful, even  in  ordinary  times,  how  much  more  so  in  the  perilous  days  on  which  we  are 
entering  7  Whatever  we  come  short  in,  let  it  not  be  in  watchfulness.  None  like  to 
slumber  who  are  expecting  a  friend  or  fearing  a  foe.  Bunyan  tells  us  "  that  when 
Hopeful  came  to  a  certain  country,  he  began  to  be  very  dull  and  heavy  of  sleep. 
Wherefore  he  said,  *  Let  us  lie  down  here,  and  take  one  nap.'  *  By  no  means,'  said 
the  other,  '  lest  sleeping,  we  wake  no  more.'  *  Why,  my  brother?  Sleep  is  sweet 
to  the  labouring  man ;  we  may  be  refreshed,  if  we  take  a  nap.'  •  Do  you  not  remem- 
ber,' said  the  other, '  that  one  of  the  shepherds  bid  us  beware  of  the  Enchanted 
Ground  ?  He  meant  by  that,  that  we  should  beware  of  sleeping.' "  "  Therefore  let 
us  not  sleep,  as  do  others  ;  but  let  as  watch  and  be  sober."  Slumbering  and  back- 
sliding are  closely  allied.    {R.  Macdonald,  D.D.) 

Vers.  47-63.  Judas,  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  Man  with  a  Usb. — T?ie  traitor't 
kiss : — I.  A  TRAITOR  AUONO  THE  DisciFLEB.  Many  of  them  were  weak  in  faith  and 
carnal  in  apprehension,  but  only  one  a  traitor.  U.  Thb  chabactkbistio  or  his 
TREASON.  Betrayed  Lord  into  cruel  hands  of  foes.  Professed  followers  of  Christ 
may  betray  Him  to  the  scorn  of  the  world,  giving  the  sceptic  arguments  for  hia 
infidelity,  and  the  worldly  excuses  for  rejection  of  Christ.  lU.  The  hannzb  or 
THE  BETBAYAU  A  kiss.  1.  It  was  the  accepted  token  of  affection.  2.  It  was  here 
prostituted  to  the  basest  of  ases.  8.  It  was  received  with  lamblike  meekness  by 
Him  who  knew  it  meant  treachery.     lY.  Thet  betbay  the  Son  of  Mam  wm  4 


CHAT.  ruL]  8T.  LUKE.  641 

SI88  WHO — 1.  Compliment  and  deny  Him  with  the  same  lips.  2.  Profess  to  be 
nnited  with  Him  at  His  table,  and  then  act  as  lovers  and  servants  of  the  world. 
3.  Exalt  His  humanity  to  the  skies,  and  deny  His  rightful  divinity  and  the  efficacy 
of  the  atonement.  {Homiletic  Eeview.)  Christ  betrayed  by  Judas : — I.  By  whom 
Chbist  was  bbtbated.  "  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve."  Not  an  occasional  disciple 
who  had  fastened  himself  upon  the  Lord's  company,  not  one  of  the  seventy  who 
had  been  sent  forth  by  two  and  two ;  one  of  the  called,  the  chosen ;  one  singled  ont 
from  the  great  mass  of  mankind  for  the  office  of  a  foundation-stone  in  the  Church 
of  God.  II.  Let  ns  consider  some  of  the  aqgbavations  or  this  febfidious 
CONDUCT  ON  THB  PABT  OF  JuDAS.  Judas  was  Hot  Only  squal  with  the  rest  of  the 
apostles,  but  he  was  allowed  to  carry  the  bag,  which  would  certainly  appear  to 
invest  him  with  a  sort  of  official  superiority.  III.  The  ends  fob  which  Chbibt's 
BETBAYAL  WAS  PEBUiTTED.  That  it  was  of  mere  permission  we  know.  God  has 
abundance  of  snares  for  taking  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness ;  He  has  ten 
thousand  accidents  at  command  by  which  to  mar  a  well-concerted  plot.  Yea,  even 
after  the  capture  had  been  effected,  twelve  legions  of  angels  waited  the  bidding  of 
Christ  to  rescue  Him  from  the  traitor's  power.  But  God  will  not  avail  Himself  of 
theae  means.  IV.  Let  us  now  consider  some  of  the  mobal  lessons  which  seem  to 
be  conveyed  to  us  by  this  history.  1.  We  see  how  needful  it  is  that  we,  each  one 
of  OB,  look  well  to  the  state  of  our  own  hearts.  Here  is  a  man  who  knew  the  truth, 
who  had  preached  the  truth,  who  had  wrought  miracles  for  the  sake  of  the  truth ; 
and  yet  became  a  castaway.  Now,  why  was  this?  He  "held  the  truth  in 
unrighteousness."  The  man  who  has  been  a  hypocrite  in  religion  is  very  rarely 
recovered;  he  deceives  others,  but  yet  more  fatally  does  he  deceive  himself. 
2.  Again :  the  history  teaches  us  how  little  security  against  our  falhng  away,  there 
is  in  the  possession  of  eminent  spiritual  advantages.  "Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the 
twelve."  3.  Again :  we  learn  from  this  history  how  insensible  and  unperceived  is 
the  progress  of  the  downward  course  in  sin.  When  a  man  once  enters  on  the  way 
of  transgression,  he  can  never  tell  where  he  shall  stop.  Neither  wickedness  nor 
holiness  attain  to  their  full  stature  all  at  once.  We  cannot  suppose  that  Judas  had 
the  remotest  thought  of  his  treachery  when  he  first  accepted  the  invitation  to 
become  one  of  the  apostles.  4.  The  enslaving  power  of  the  love  of  this  present 
world.  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  The  treason  of  Judas : — 1.  Hence  in  the  first  place  we 
learn,  that  the  greatest  professors  had  need  be  jealous  of  their  own  hearts,  and  look 
well  to  the  grounds  and  principles  of  their  professions.  2.  Learn  hence  also,  that 
eminent  knowledge  and  profession  puts  a  special  and  eminent  aggravation  upon 
sin.  To  sin  against  clear  light  is  to  sin  with  a  high  hand.  It  is  that  which  makes 
a  sad  waste  of  the  conscience.  3.  Learn  hence,  in  the  third  place,  that  unprin- 
cipled professors  will  sooner  or  later  become  shameful  apostates.  4.  Moreover  in 
this  example  of  Judas  you  may  read  this  truth — that  men  and  women  are  never  in 
more  imminent  danger  than  when  they  meet  with  temptations  exactly  suited  to 
their  master-lusts,  to  their  own  iniquity.  O  pray,  pray,  that  ye  may  be  kept  from 
a  violent  suitable  temptation.  Satan  knows  that  when  a  man  is  tried  here,  he  faUs 
by  the  root.  5.  Hence,  in  like  manner,  we  are  instructed,  that  no  man  knows 
where  he  shall  stop  when  he  first  engages  himself  in  a  way  of  sin.  6.  Did  Judas 
sell  Christ  for  money  ?  What  a  potent  conqueror  is  the  love  of  this  world !  How 
many  hath  it  cast  down  wounded  ?  What  great  professors  have  been  dragged  at  its 
ohariot-wheelB  as  its  captives  ?  Pliny  tells  us  that  the  mermaids  delight  to  be  in 
green  meadows,  into  which  they  draw  men  by  their  enchanting  voices ;  but  saith 
he,  there  always  lie  heaps  of  dead  men's  bones  by  them.  A  lively  emblem  of  a 
bewitching  world  1  Good  had  it  been  for  many  professors  of  religion  if  they  had 
never  known  what  the  riches,  and  honours,  and  pleasures  of  this  world  meant.  7. 
Did  Judas  fancy  so  much  happiness  in  a  little  money,  that  he  would  sell  Christ  to 
get  it  ?  Learn,  then,  that  which  men  promise  themselves  much  pleasure  and  con- 
tentment in,  in  the  way  of  sin,  may  prove  the  greatest  curse  and  misery  to  them 
that  ever  befel  them  in  the  world.  8.  Was  there  one,  and  but  one,  of  the  twelve 
that  proved  a  Judas,  a  traitor  to  Christ  ?  Learn  thence,  that  it  is  a  most  unreason- 
able thing  to  be  prejudiced  at  religion,  and  the  sincere  professors  of  it,  because 
some  that  profess  it  prove  naught  and  vile.  9.  Did  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  do 
BO  ?  Learn  thence,  that  a  drop  of  grace  is  better  than  a  sea  of  gifts.  Gifts  hava 
some  excellency  in  them,  but  the  way  of  grace  is  the  more  excellent  way  (1  Cor.  xiL 
81).  Gifts,  as  one  saith,  are  dead  graces,  but  graces  are  living  gifts.  There  is 
many  a  learned  head  in  hell.  These  are  not  the  things  that  accompany  salvation. 
It  is  better  for  thee  to  feel  one  Divine  impression  from  God  upon  thy  heart  than  to 


643  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxo, 

have  ten  thousand  fine  notions  floating  in  thy  head.  Jndas  was  a  man  of  parts, 
but  what  good  did  they  do  him  ?  10.  Did  the  devil  win  the  consent  of  Jadas  ta 
such  a  design  as  this  ?  Could  he  get  no  other  but  the  hand  of  an  apostle  to  assist 
him  ?  Jjearn  hence,  that  the  policy  of  Satan  lies  much  in  the  choice  of  his  instru- 
ments he  works  by.  No  bird,  saith  one,  like  a  living  bird  to  tempt  others  into 
the  net.  Austin  told  an  ingenious  young  scholar  the  devil  coveted  him  for  an 
ornament.  He  knows  he  hath  a  foul  cause  to  manage,  and  therefore  will  get  the 
fairest  hand  he  can  to  manage  it  with  the  less  suspicion.  11.  Did  Judas,  one  of 
the  twelve,  do  this  ?  Then,  certainly,  Christians  may  approve  and  join  with  such 
men  on  earth  whose  faces  they  shall  never  see  in  heaven.  12.  Did  Judas,  one  of 
the  twelve,  a  man  so  obliged,  raised,  and  honoured  by  Christ,  do  this  ?  Cease  then 
from  man,  be  not  too  confident,  but  beware  of  men.  "  Trust  ye  not  in  a  friend,  put 
no  confidence  in  a  guide,  keep  the  door  of  thy  lips  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy 
bosom"  (Mic.  vii.  5).     (J.  FUivel.)         The  betrayal: — I.  Lkt  us  tajkbt  awhile, 

AND   SEE   OUB  LOBD   UNQBATEFULLY   AND   OASTABDLY    BETBAYED.        1.    It    is    appointed 

that  He  must  die,  but  how  shall  He  fall  into  the  hands  of  His  adversaries  ?  Shall 
they  capture  Him  in  conflict  ?  It  must  not  be,  lest  He  appear  an  unwilling  victim. 
Shall  He  flee  before  His  foes  until  He  can  hide  no  longer  ?  It  is  not  meet  that  ^ 
sacrifice  should  be  hunted  to  death.  Shall  He  offer  Himself  to  the  foe  ?  That 
were  to  excuse  His  murderers,  or  be  a  party  to  their  crime.  Shall  He  be  taken 
accidentally  or  unawares?  That  would  withdraw  from  His  cup  the  necessary 
bitterness  which  made  it  wormwood  mingled  with  galL  (1)  One  reason  for  the 
appointment  of  the  betrayal  lay  in  the  fact  that  it  was  ordained  that  man's  sin 
should  reach  its  culminating  point  in  His  death.  (2)  Beyond  a  doubt,  however, 
the  main  reason  for  this  was  that  Christ  might  offer  a  perfect  atonement  for  sin. 
We  may  usually  read  the  sin  in  the  punishment.  Man  betrayed  his  Ood.  There- 
fore must  Jesus  find  man  a  traitor  to  Him.  There  must  be  the  counterpart  of  the 
sin  in  the  suffering  which  He  endured.  Tou  and  I  have  often  betrayed  Christ.  It 
seemed  most  fitting,  then,  that  He  who  bore  the  chastisement  of  sin  should  be 
reminded  of  its  ingratitude  and  treachery  by  the  things  which  He  suffered.  (3^ 
Besides,  brethren,  that  cup  must  be  bitter  to  the  last  degree  which  is  to  be  the  equiva- 
lent for  the  wrath  of  God.  (4)  Moreover,  we  feel  persuaded  that  by  thus  suffering 
at  the  hand  of  a  traitor  the  Lord  became  a  faithful  High  Priest,  able  to  sympathize 
with  us  when  we  fall  under  the  like  affliction.  2.  Now  let  us  look  at  the  treason 
itself.  You  perceive  how  black  it  was.  (1)  Judas  was  Christ's  servant,  what  if  I 
call  him  His  confidential  servant.  (2)  Judas  was  more  than  this :  he  was  a  friend, 
a  trusted  friend.  (3)  The  world  looked  upon  Judas  as  a  colleague  of  our  Lord's. 
(4)  Our  Lord  would  look  upon  Judas  as  a  representative  man,  the  portraiture  of 
many  thousands  who  in  after  ages  have  imitated  his  crime.  3.  Observe  the 
manner  in  which  Christ  met  this  affliction.  (1)  His  calmness.  (2)  His  gentle- 
ness. II.  Grant  me  your  attention  while  we  make  an  estimate  of  the  man  by  whom 
the  Son  of  Man  was  betrayed — Jcdas  the  bkteaybe.  1.  I  would  call  your  atten- 
tion, dear  friends,  to  his  position  and  public  character.  (1)  Judas  was  a  preacher ; 
nay,  he  was  a  foremost  preacher,  "  he  obtained  part  of  this  ministry,"  said  the 
Apostle  Peter.  (2)  Judas  took  a  very  high  degree  officially.  He  had  the  dis- 
tinguished honour  of  being  entrusted  with  the  Master's  financial  concerns,  and 
this,  after  aU,  was  no  small  degree  to  which  to  attain.  The  Lord,  who  knows  how 
to  use  all  sorts  of  gifts,  perceived  what  gift  the  man  had.  (3)  You  will  observe 
that  the  character  of  Judas  was  openly  an  admirable  one.  I  find  not  that  he  com 
mitted  himself  in  any  way.  Not  the  slightest  speck  defiled  his  moral  character  so 
far  as  others  could  perceive.  He  was  no  boaster,  like  Peter.  2.  But  I  call  yonr 
attention  to  his  real  nature  and  sin.  Judas  was  a  man  with  a  conscience.  He 
could  not  afford  to  do  without  it.  He  was  no  Sadducee  who  could  fling  religion 
overboard ;  he  had  strong  religious  tendencies.  Bat  then  it  was  a  conscience  that 
did  not  sit  regularly  on  the  throne ;  it  reigned  by  fits  and  starts.  Conscience  was 
not  the  leading  element.  Avarice  predominated  over  conscience.  3.  The  warning 
which  Judas  received,  and  the  way  in  which  he  persevered.  4.  The  act  itself.  He 
sought  out  his  own  temptation.  He  did  not  wait  for  the  devil  to  come  to 
him ;  he  went  after  the  devil.  He  went  to  the  chief  priests  and  said,  "  What  will 
ye  give  me  ? "  Alas  1  some  people's  religion  is  grounded  on  that  one  question. 
4.  We  conclude  with  the  repentance  of  Judas.  He  did  repent;  but  it  was  the 
repentance  that  worketh  death.  The  man  who  repents  of  consequences  does  not 
repent  The  ruffian  repents  of  the  gallows  but  not  of  the  murder,  and  that  is  no 
lepentanoe  at  aU.    Haman  law,  of  course,  mast  measure  sin  by  consequences,  but 


ciur.  rm,]  ST.  LUKE,  6« 

God's  law  does  not.  There  is  a  pointsman  on  a  railway  who  neglects  his  duty  ; 
there  is  a  collision  on  the  line,  and  people  are  killed  ;  well,  it  is  manslaughter  to 
this  man  through  his  carelessness.  But  that  pointsman,  perhaps,  many  times 
before  had  neglected  his  duty,  but  no  accident  came  of  it,  and  then  he  walked  home 
and  said,  "  Well,  I  have  done  no  wrong."  Now  the  wrong,  mark  yon,  is  never  to 
be  measured  by  the  accident,  but  by  the  thing  itself,  and  if  you  have  committed  an 
offence  and  you  have  escaped  undetected  it  is  just  as  vile  in  God's  eye ;  if  you  have 
done  wrong  and  Providence  has  prevented  Uie  natural  result  of  the  wrong,  the 
honour  of  that  is  with  God,  but  you  are  as  guilty  as  if  your  sin  had  been  carried 
out  to  its  fullest  consequences,  and  the  whole  world  set  ablaze.  Never  measure 
sin  by  consequences,  bat  repent  of  them  as  they  are  in  themselves.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Treachery  to  Christ: — I.  Observe,  the  person  addbessed— -Judas. 
One  on  whom  the  Saviour  had  conferred  many  benefits,  and  who  had  made 
an  open  profession  of  His  name.  Betrayest  thou  I  II.  Observe,  the  pebsoii 
SPEAKING  —  Jesus.  The  title  which  Jesus  here  assumes,  in  calling  Himself 
the  Son  of  Man,  may  teach  us  the  following  things — 1.  That  He  is  really 
and  properly  Man,  as  well  as  truly  Divine.  2.  The  phrase,  Son  of  Man,  seems 
intended  to  denote  the  meanness  of  Christ's  origin,  and  the  poverty  of  His  outward 
condition.  3.  Christ's  assumption  of  this  character  may  teach  us  to  consider  Him 
as  the  Saviour  of  all  nations ;  or  of  all  that  ever  wUl  be  saved,  out  of  every 
kindred,  tongue,  and  people.  He  is  not  the  Son  of  this  or  that  particular  people, 
but  the  Son  of  Man,  and  the  Saviour  of  all  them  that  believe,  by  whatever  name 
they  may  be  distinguished.  4.  The  term  Son  of  Man  seems  to  have  been  pre- 
figured and  foretold  as  a  title  which  belonged  to  the  expected  Messiah.  lU.  Thb 
QUESTION  WHICH  Jesub  PUIS  TO  THB  TBAiTOB  I  "  Betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  Maa 
with  a  kiss  ?  "  Improvement :  1.  We  have  here  a  loud  call  to  be  jealous  of  our  owi* 
hearts,  and  to  exercise  a  holy  watchfulness  over  them.  More  especially,  if  we  regard 
our  immortal  interests,  let  us  carefully  avoid  the  following  things — (1)  Self-confi- 
dence. The  fear  of  falling  is  a  good  security  against  it.  (2)  The  secret  indulstence- 
of  any  sin :  this  was  the  ruin  of  Judas.  (3)  Beware  of  a  profession  without 
principle,  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power.  Those  who  have  no  root  in 
themselves  will  soon  wither  away.  2.  We  see  how  far  a  person  may  go  in  the  way 
to  heaven,  and  yet  fall  short  of  it.  3.  Let  us  admire  and  adore  the  infinite  wisdom- 
of  God,  who  brought  so  much  real  good  out  of  so  much  aggravated  evil.  {B. 
Beddome,  M.A.)  He  touched  his  ear,  and  healed  him. — Jesus  the  Restorer : — 
Jesus  wrought  a  miracle  to  repair  the  mischief  which  Peter  had  done.  Thus,  by 
one  act,  in  one  moment,  Christ  made  Himself  the  repairer  of  the  breach.  The  evil^ 
which  His  follower  had  done,  was  cancelled  ;  and,  through  the  kind  interposition 
of  a  special  act,  the  injured  man  was  none  the  worse — but  rather  the  better — and 
the  harm,  of  which  a  Christian  had  been  the  occasion,  was  neutralized  by  his 
Master.  I  do  not  know  what  we  should  any  of  us  do  if  we  might  not  hope  that 
this  is  still  one  of  the  blessed  offices  of  Christ.  We  go  through  life  meaning  to  do 
good ;  but  oh !  how  often — through  some  ignorance,  or  indiscretion,  or  self-will — 
doing  exactly  the  reverse !  Happy  is  it  for  us  if  we  might  believe  that  Christ 
comes  after  us  to  undo  the  harm — nay,  that  by  one  of  His  gracious  transformations. 
He  comes  afterwards  to  turn  to  benefit  the  very  thing  which  we  have  dona 
hortingly.  In  the  retrospect  of  life  there  was,  it  may  be,  a  long  period  before  you 
knew  God — ^when  your  influence  was  all  on  the  wrong  side ;  your  example  and  your 
words  were  always  for  the  world,  and  sometimes  for  what  was  positively  sinful  1 
How  many  a  bad  and  well-nigh  deadly  "  wound "  must  you  have  been  making 
during  those  years  upon  the  minds  of  those  among  whom  your  remarks  and  your 
actions  were  being  flung  about  with  such  utter  carelessness  I  How  many  a  young 
companion,  years  back,  may  have  learnt  then  to  cany  with  him  a  life-long  scar 
through  some  idle  word  of  yours.  Through  the  infinite  patience,  and  tho 
abounding  grace  of  our  God  and  Saviour,  you  have  become  a  Christian ;  and  yoa 
now  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  you  love  nothing  else  in  earth  or  heaven ;  and, 
at  this  moment,  yoa  could  not  have  a  bitterer  thought  than  to  think  that  yoa 
had  ever  done  anything  to  keep  a  sool  from  Jesns ;  or  to  give  a  moment's  pain  to 
one  of  His  little  ones.  Now,  may  you  take  it  as  one  of  the  wonderful  provisions  of 
your  new  state — as  one  of  the  blessings  into  which  yoa  have  been  admitted — that 
the  Christ,  whom  you  now  call  yours,  will  prevent  the  consequences  of  what  yoa  did 
in  those  days  of  sinful  blindness — that  He  will  restore  what  yoa  destroyed,  that  fine 
bloom  to  that  delicate  conscience,  it  may  be,  of  one  of  yoor  early  friends ;  that  Ha 
will  rectify  the  ill — that  He  will  "  toaoh  "  with  Hit  own  virtoe  the  afflicted  part. 


$44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  xxiu 

and  that  He  will  "  heal  "  all  that  "  wound."  Why  may  we  not  believe  all  thia  f 
Was  not  that  the  spirit  of  the  Man,  that  night,  when  He  stood  upon  the  Mount  of 
Olives  ?  And  is  He  not  the  same  Restorer  now  ?  Do  not  think  because  man  made 
your  trouble,  therefore  God  will  not  deal  with  the  trouble.  It  rests  with  you.  If 
you  bring  a  sin  to  Christ  believingly,  He  will  take  away  that  sin.  If  you  bring  a 
sorrow  to  Christ  believingly,  He  will  take  away  that  sorrow.     (/.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

"Vers.  55-62.  Peter  followed  afar  oflF. — Deciiion  of  character  enforced : — I.  What 
us  IMPLIED  IN  FOLLOWING  THE  LoBD  AFAB  OFF.  Not  giving  the  whole  heart's  affection 
to  Him.  11.  What  csuallt  induces  ant  persons  to  do  so.  1.  The  fear  of  man. 
2.  The  love  of  the  world.  III.  Why  we  should  determine  to  follow  Him  fullt. 
1.  It  is  dishonourable  to  God  to  follow  Him  afar  off.  2.  It  is  ruinous  to  our  peace 
to  be  undecided  in  religion.  8.  To  follow  the  Lord  afar  off  is  injurious  to  the 
general  interests  of  religion.  Allow  me,  in  closing,  to  inquire — 1.  Do  you  follow 
the  Lord  at  all  ?  2.  If  you  are  following  the  Lord,  how  are  you  following  Him  ? 
Is  your  heart  in  your  professed  subjection  to  Jesus  Christ?  What  motive 
influences  your  conduct  ?  (W.  Mudge.)  Peter: — I.  The  ma».  A  man  of  great 
natural  audacity  and  force ;  coarse,  homely,  rugged,  stout,  tenacious,  powerful,  of 
that  class  of  men,  not  large,  who  break  down  old  walls,  and  bring  in  new  ages. 
And  yet  a  man  of  variable  impulses,  and  of  changeful  moods.  Under  strong  excite- 
ment, he  stood  firm  as  a  granite  rock.  Hence  his  surname,  "  Peter."  But  the 
quick  heat  might  be  quickly  chiUed.  And  then  the  granite  crumbled.  The  rock 
became  a  sand-heap.  His  judgment  could  not  always  be  trusted.  His  greatest 
strength  was  sometimes  his  greatest  weakness.  His  large,  warm  heart  over- 
mastered him.  It  was  hard  for  him  to  be  parted  from  his  friends.  It  was  hard  foi 
him  to  go  against  the  wishes  and  opinions  of  his  associates.  Even  those  with  whom 
iie  might  be  casually  in  contact,  had  undue  power  over  him ;  not  from  lack  of 
positive  convictions  of  his  own,  but  because  his  great,  hungry  heart  craved  sympathy 
and  fellowship.  He  wanted  men  to  think  well  of  him,  and  feel  kindly  towards  him. 
An  over-weening  love  of  approbation  was  his  one  great  weakness.  And  so  he  lay, 
as  such  men  always  do,  very  much  at  the  mercy  of  his  companions  and  his 
circumstances.  II.  Thk  sin  of  Peter.  There  was  really  no  excuse  for  it.  He  was 
in  no  personal  danger.  All  he  had  to  fear  was  a  momentary  contempt  from  servants 
and  soldiers.  Yet  the  paltry  desire  of  standing  well  in  the  estimation  of  those  who 
happened  to  be  about  him,  menials  as  they  were,  caused  him  to  prove  false  to  his 
Lord.  Miserable  man  1  It  makes  us  blush  to  think  of  him ;  so  brave  in  meeting 
swords  and  clubs,  so  cowardly  in  meeting  sneers.  III.  His  bepentamoe.  The  re- 
proving look  of  Christ,  standing  meek  among  His  buSeters,  and  soon  to  start  foi 
Cavalry,  was  too  much  for  the  false  and  recreant  disciple.  "He  wept  bitterly,^' 
they  tell  us ;  and  we  may  well  believe  it,  for  he  was  at  heart  a  good,  true,  brave 
man,  and  when  he  came  to  himself  he  despised  and  abhorred  himself  for  the 
momentary  weakness  which  had  allowed  him  so  basely  to  deny  his  Lord.  .  .  . 
And  so  his  character  stands  before  us  in  proportions  that  do  not  appal  and  mock 
XLS  as  something  quite  miraculous  and  above  our  reach.  While  we  stand  in  awe  of 
him  as  an  apostle,  we  are  able  to  embrace  him  as  a  man,  and  walk  on  after  him 
towards  heaven.  Nay,  our  interest  in  him  is  altogether  peculiar.  Majestic  in  his 
original  endowments,  we  admire  him.  Inexcusable  in  his  fall,  we  pity  him. 
Elastic  and  fearless  in  his  subsequent  career,  we  accept  it  as  a  full  and  glorious 
atonement  for  every  slip  and  every  error  of  his  life.  If  he  was  cowardly  in  the 
courtyard  of  Caiaphas,  he  made  up  for  it  by  being  a  hero  at  his  crucifixion,  when  ha 
asked  his  tormentors  to  nail  him  to  the  cross  with  his  feet  turned  upwards  into 
heaven.  lY.  The  practical  bbabimg  or  our  subject  is  direct  and  obvious.  It 
might  not  be  quite  right  theologically,  to  thank  God  for  Peter's  sin.  But  since  he 
<lid  sin,  we  certainly  ought  to  be  very  thankful  for  the  record  of  it.  Had  Judas 
alone  offended,  afterwards  perishing  by  his  own  hands,  and  sinking  to  his  own  place. 
Christians,  once  sinning,  might  well  grow  desperate.  Had  Peter  stood,  as  John 
did,  unshaken  and  unsuUied,  our  hard  struggle  with  manifold  infirmities  would  be 
far  harder  than  it  is.  But  now  we  have  a  sinning  Peter  before  us ;  an  apostle 
grievously  sinning,  but  grandly  recovered.  And  while  we  blush  to  look  upon  him, 
there  is  comfort  in  tiie  sight.  Be  encouraged,  my  feeble,  imperfect,  wavering 
brother,  not  indeed  to  sin,  nor  yet  to  think  lightly  of  sin;  bat  if  yoa  fuive 
sinned,  to  go  and  sin  no  more.  Bemorse  belongs  to  Judas.  Penitence  to 
Peter.  Penitence,  and  a  better  life.  (R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.)  The  Lord 
<tani6d  and  looked  upon  Peter. — Pettr't  tin  and  rettoration: — I.   A  aaniTooa 


CHAP,  xxn.]  ST.  LUKE.  545 

BIN.  1.  Its  elements.  (1)  Falsehood.  (2)  Cowardice.  (3)  Profanity.  (4) 
Persistence.  2.  Its  aggravations.  (1)  His  close  connection  with  Christ.  (2) 
His  recent  special  privileges.  (3)  The  repeated  warnings  given  him.  (4)  His 
strong  professions  of  devotion.  (5)  The  urgent  demands  of  the  time  and  place. 
3.  Its  instigations.  (1)  The  failure  was  surprisingly  sudden ;  (2)  of  brief  duration  ; 
(3)  never  repeated.  4.  Its  chief  causes.  (1)  Self-confidence.  (2)  Blindness  to 
near  danger.  (3)  Neglect  of  precautions.  (4)  The  fear  of  derision.  H.  Aobacious 
BE8TOBA.TION.  1.  How  was  it  brougbt  about?  (1)  By  a  predicted  coincidence 
(ver.  60).  (2)  By  the  Saviour's  penetrating  glance  (ver.  61).  (3)  By  the 
action  of  memory.  2.  What  proof  have  we  of  its  genuineness  ?  (1)  His 
contrite  sorrow.  (2.)  His  amended  life.  Learn:  1.  The  weakness  of  the 
strongest.    2.  The    sufficiency   of    Christ's    grace.      (M.    Braithioaite.)  The 

repentance  of  St.  Peter: — First  w«  learn  the  possibility  of  perfect  repentance 
after  grace  has  been  forfeited ;  of  a  return  to  God  from  sin  committed  after  special 
favours  and  gifts  of  love.     Further,  there  was  a  wonderful  mercy  overruling  St. 
Peter's  fall,  bringing  out  of  it  even  greater  good.     It  was  made  to  teach  him  what 
otherwise  he  seemed  unable  to  learn.     He  needed  to  learn  distrust  of  self.    And 
thou  who  despondest  at  some  past  fall,  hast  thou  no  similar  lesson  to  learn  of 
deeper  humility,  of  closer  dependence  on  God?     Hast  thou  had  no  self-trust? 
Has  thy  strength  always  been  in  prayer  and  watching  ?     And  the  key-note  of  his 
Epistles  is — "Be  clothed  with  humility."     "Be  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer." 
May  not  this  be  thy  case— that  the  foundations  of  thy  life  need  to  be  laid  lower,  i» 
a  more  perfect  self-abasement ;  a  deeper  humility  :  a  more  entire  leaning  upon  God» 
a  more  complete  abandonment  of  all  high  thoughts,  independence  of  will,  self- 
glorying,  vanity,  spirit  of   contradiction,  and  such-like;    that  beginning  afresh^^ 
these  hindrances  being  removed,  thou  mayest  hide  thyself  from  thyself,  hide  thy- 
self in  a  perpetual  recollection  of  the  Divine  presence  and  support,  as  the  only  stay 
and  safeguard  of  thy  frail,  ever-falling  humanity  ?      Moreover,  St.  Peter  is  not 
merely  the  assurance  to  us  of  the  possibility  of  a  perfect  restoration  after  falling 
from  God,  he  is  also  the  model  of  all  true  penitents.     The  first  main  element  of 
St.  Peter's  recovery  was  a  spirit  of  self-accusation,  a  ready  acknowledgment  of  sin 
and  error.     Here,  then,  is  one  essential  element  of  true  repentance — self-accusa- 
tion at  the  feet  of  Jesus.    And  how  needful  a  lesson  to  learn  well.     The  saddest 
part  of  our  sin  is,  that  we  are  so  slow  to  confess  it.     Sin  ever  gathers  round  it  an 
array  of  self-defences.    Subtleties  and  evasions,  special  pleadings,  shrinkings  from 
humiliation,  Ungerings  of  pride,  all  gather  round  the  consciousness  of  sin,  and 
rise  up  instantly  to  hinder  the  only  remedy  of  guilt,  the  only  hope  of  restoration. 
Again,  from  St.  Peter  we  learn  that  faith  is  a  main  element  of  restoration,  pre- 
served to  him  through  the  intercession  of  his  Lord — "I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that 
thy  faith  fail  not."    Now  faith  is  not  the  belief  of  any  particular  dogma,  nor  is  it 
the  same  as  a  spirit  of  assurance,  neither  is  it  any  peculiar  feeling  appropriating 
some  special  promise ;  but  it  is  the  bent,  the  aim  of  the  whole  soul.     It  is  the 
prevailing  direction  of  all  the  powers  of  man  toward  God ;  it  is  the  apprehension 
of  the  inner  man  embracing,  grasping  the  invisible ;  living  in  things  which  are 
unseen  and  eternal,  and  raising  him  out  of  the  sphere  of  sight  which  lives  in 
things  that  are  temporal.  Faith  may  lay  hold  of  one  particular  promise  at  one  time, 
of  another  at  another.  And  thus  he  had  learnt  to  regard  sin  in  the  light  of  another 
world — sin  abstractedly  in  itself,  as  a  loss  of  spiritual  life,  as  a  thing  abhorrent  to 
God,  as  an  utter  contrariety  to  all  that  his  soul  was  aspiring  after.    To  rise  thus 
above  all  the  worldly  consequences  of  sin,  all  its  mere  temporal  effects,  to  read 
one's  sin  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  to  view  it  as  we  shall  view  it  on  oar 
death-bed,  stripped  of  all  accidents,  with  its  awful  consequences,  as  we  pass 
into  eternity — this  is  the  attribute  of  faith ;  and  through  the  preservation  of  his 
faith,  as  our  Lord  assures  us,  St.  Peter  arose  from  his  fall.    Oh  1  how  much  need 
have  we  to  pray,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith";  that  we  may  see  our  sina  in  their 
true  form  and  colour.     The  sense  of  sin  depends  on  our  view  of  sanctity.    As  we 
grow  better,  we  see  sin  clearer.    As  we  have  more  of  God,  we  realize  evil  more 
vividly.    The  greatest  saints  are  therefore  the  deepest  penitents.    The  bright  light 
of  purity  in  which  they  live  sets  oft  more  vividly  the  darkness  of  the  spots  which 
stain  thie  field  of  their  souls'  life.    The  more  they  advance,  the  more  truly  they 
repent.    As,  e.g.,  we  see  more  the  power  of  truth,  tiie  more  we  are  ashamed  of  oar 
deceits.    As  we  perceive  love  and  largeness  of  heart,  so  we  despise  oor  selfishness. 
The  more  God  shines  into  us,  the  more  we  loathe  our  own  vileness.    We  judge  by 
the  contrast.     There  is  one  more  feature  of  a  true  repentance  which  is  exhibited 
VOL.  HL  dfi 


g4e  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xxn, 

in  St.  Peter.  His  repentance  turned  upon  his  love  ol  the  person  of  Christ.  Thii 
had  been  long  the  moving  principle  of  his  life.  His  indignation  at  the  idea  o£  hi« 
Master's  suffering :  his  refusing  to  be  washed  before  the  administration  of  the 
blessed  Sacrament ;  his  taking  the  sword,  and  then  striking  with  it ;  his  entering 
the  judgment-hall— were  all  impulses  of  a  fervent,  though  nnchastened,  love — a 
love  to  our  Lord's  person.  And  this  was  the  secret  power  of  that  look  which  our 
Lord,  when  He  turned,  cast  upon  him.  It  may  seem  as  though  St.  Peter's  love  to 
our  Lord  were  too  human,  too  much  that  of  a  man  toward  his  fellow.  It  did 
indeed  need  chastening,  increased  reverence,  more  of  that  deep,  adoring  awe  which 
St.  John  earher  learnt ;  and  which  St.  Peter  learnt  at  last  in  the  shame  and  humi- 
liations of  his  fall.  But  love  to  our  Lord  must  needs  be  human — human  in  its 
purest,  highest  form.  The  Incarnation  of  (Jod  has  made  an  essential  change  in 
the  relations  between  God  and  man,  and  so  in  the  love  that  binds  us.  He  took  our 
nature,  and  abideth  in  that  nature.  He  is  Man  eternal,  as  He  is  God  eternal.  He 
loves,  and  will  evermore  love  us,  in  that  nature,  and  through  its  sensations,  and 
He  draws  ub  to  love  Him  through  the  same  nature,  with  the  impulse  of  which 
humanity  is  capable.  He  loved  with  a  human  love,  and  He  is  to  be  loved  in  return 
with  a  human  love.  He  consecrated  the  human  affections  to  Himself  in  His 
human  form  as  their  proper  end,  so  that  through  His  humanity  they  might  centra 
upon  the  eternal  Godhead.  Love  is  of  the  very  essence  of  repentance,  and  love  ia 
ever  associated  with  a  person,  and  the  true  movement  of  the  deepening  and 
enduring  love  of  penitents  circles  around  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ  and  Him 
crucified.  In  conclusion,  I  would  briefly  point  out  two  habits  of  devotion  necessary 
to  be  cherished,  in  order  that  the  grace  of  such  a  repentance  as  we  have  been  con- 
templating may  be  the  more  worked  in  us.  One  is  the  habit  of  meditation  on  the 
Person  of  Jesus  Christ  Again,  love  can  be  cherished  only  by  habitual  intercourse, 
or  ever-renewed  inward  feeding  on  the  beloved  object.  If  there  be  no  converse,  or 
communion  of  thought,  love  must  decline  and  die.  And  how  can  an  invisible 
person  become  the  object  of  love,  except  by  inward  contemplation  ?  But  it  is  not 
in  the  nature  of  the  human  heart  to  love  another,  unless  that  other  become  a 
constant  companion,  or  unless  his  beauty  and  amiableness  become  strongly 
impressed  on  the  soul,  and  be  borne  always  in  remembrance.  The  grace  of  God 
moves  and  operates  according  to  the  laws  of  humanity.  Grace  is  above  nature,  but 
it  is  according  to  nature.  It  acts  on  nature,  and  raises  nature  up  to  the  level  of 
God,  but  is  human  still.  What,  then,  would  stir  the  heart  to  love  according  to 
nature,  the  same  wUl  stir  the  heart  to  love  above  nature.  And  what  is  this  but  the 
contemplation  of  the  object,  followed  by  an  habitual  feeding  upon  it  ?  The  second 
point  is  this :  we  must  learn  to  measure  the  guilt  of  our  sins  by  the  sorrows  of  God 
in  the  flesh.  We  have  no  proper  rule  of  our  own  by  which  to  measure  the  guilt 
or  sin.  Sin  has  ruined  this  lower  creation  of  God.  Sin  brought  the  flood  and  the 
fire  of  Sodom,  and  it  has  in  its  train  disease,  and  famine,  and  war.  It  has  created 
death,  and  made  death  eternal.  All  these  are  as  certai*  rules  and  proportions  by 
which  we  can  form  some  estimate  of  the  guilt  of  sin.  But  they  are  partial  and 
imperfect  measures,  after  all.  The  only  true  and  adequate  measure  is  the  blood 
of  God  Incarnate  and  the  sorrows  of  His  sacred  heart.  Learn,  then,  to  look  at 
Bin  in  this  connection — not  sin  in  the  aggregate,  but  individual  sins.  Measure  by 
this  price  the  special  besetting  sin  of  thy  nature.  Weigh  it  in  the  scale  against  the 
weight  of  the  sacrifice  which  bowed  to  the  cross  the  Incarnate  God.  (Canon 
T,  T.  Carter).      Peter's  presumptuous  sin  and  sorrowful  repentance: — I.  Conitobnck 

AND   FBK8XJMPTI0N  ABB  VKBT  UNPEOMISING   SIGNS  OF   STEDFASTNBSS   AND  PEBSBVEBAMCB 

n»  BBLiaioN.  Trust  in  God  is  one  thing,  and  trust  in  ourselves  is  another ;  and 
there  is  reason  to  think  that  they  will  differ  as  much  in  the  success  that  attends 
them  as  they  do  in  the  powers  upon  which  they  are  founded.  It  is  in  vain  for  you  to 
promise  yourselves  a  superiority  under  trials  and  temptations,  uilless  you  lay  the 
right  foundation,  by  imploring  the  aid  and  assistance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  whose 
province  only  it  is  to  confirm  the  faithful  to  the  end.  II.  From  this  example  of 
St.  Peter  we  may  learn  also  what  little  reason  there  is  to  promise  ourselves 
SUCCESS  AGAINST  TEMPTATIONS  WHICH  ABB  o»  OCR  OWN  SEEKING.  St.  Peter  had  warning 
given  him,  and  was  told  by  One  whose  word  he  might  have  taken,  that  he  was  not 
able  to  undergo  the  trial,  which  he  seemed  so  much  to  despise.  But  try  he  would, 
end  learnt  to  know  his  own  weakness  in  his  miscarriage.  God  knows  our  strength 
better  than  we  ourselves  do ;  and  therefore,  when  He  has  warned  us  to  avoid  the 
occasions  of  sin,  and  to  fly  from  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  it  is  presumption  t(V 
think  oarselves  able  to  stand  the  attack,  and  oar  preparations  to  meet  the  dang«K 


'.  jxa.]  ST.  LUKE.  547 

mast  be  rain  and  ine£fectu»l.  When  we  strive  not  lawfully,  even  victory  is  dia- 
hoT]oarable,  and  no  saccess  can  justify  disobedience  to  orders.  IIL  From  thd 
example  of  St.  Peter  we  may  learn  how  gbeat  the  asvantaqes  of  bbottub  and 
BABiTDAL  HOLINESS  ABE.  Good  Christians,  thongh  they  may  fall  like  other  men 
through  passion,  or  presumption,  or  other  infirmities,  yet  the  way  to  their  repent- 
ance is  more  open  and  easy ;  their  minds,  not  being  hardened  by  sin,  are  awakened 
by  the  gentlest  calls,  and  the  sense  of  virtue  revives  upon  the  first  motion  and 
suggestions  of  conscience.  St.  Peter  fell,  and  his  fall  was  very  shameful ;  but  his 
repentance  was  as  surprising  and  remarkable  as  his  fall.    lY.  You  may  observe 

that  THE   SINS   OF   THE    BEST   MEN  ABE  EXPUTED  WITH  THE  OBEATEST  SENSE  OF  SOBBOW 

AND  AFFLICTION.  It  is  impossible  to  have  a  sense  of  religion,  to  think  of  God  and 
ourselves  as  we  ought  to  do,  without  being  affected  with  the  deepest  sorrow  for  our 
offences.  When  men  are  truly  concerned,  they  do  not  consider  what  they  are  to 
get  by  their  tears,  or  what  profit  their  sorrow  will  yield.  The  soul  must  vent  its 
grief ;  and  godly  sorrow  is  as  truly  the  natural  expression  of  an  inward  pain  as 
worldly  sorrow,  however  they  differ  in  their  causes  and  objects.  {Bishop  Sherlock.) 
Peter'$  $in,  and  Peter'a  repentance : — I.  Peteb's  sin.  1.  The  sin  itself.  It  was  the 
denial  of  his  Lord.  He  denied  that  be  knew  Jesus.  He  was  ashamed  to  own  his 
connection  with  Jesus.  And  he  yielded  to  the  impulse  of  his  shame  and  base  fear. 
2.  But,  secondly,  let  us  attend  to  the  circumstances  of  Peter's  sin.  We  cannot 
take  the  measure  of  it,  or  see  it  in  a  just  light,  till  these  are  considered.  The  cir- 
cumstances are  of  two  sorts.  (1)  In  the  first  place,  there  are  the  aggravating  cir- 
cumstances— (a)  The  first  circumstance  of  an  aggravating  nature  was  the  rank  ha 
held  among  tbe  followers  of  Jesus.  Peter  was  more  than  an  ordinary  disciple.  He 
was  one  of  the  twelve.  He  was  an  apostle.  Moreover,  he  was  one  of  the  three 
nearest  to  the  Lord  in  intercourse  and  love,  (b)  The  second  circumstance  of  aggra- 
vation was,  that  Peter  had  been  warned  of  his  danger,  (c)  It  was  also  an  aggrava- 
ting circumstance  in  the  case,  that  Peter  had  made  great  professions.  When  we 
read  the  sad  story  of  his  threefold  denial,  we  are  disposed  to  exclaim,  What  can 
this  mean  7  Is  this  the  bold  confessor  wbo  was  the  first  to  avow  his  faith  in  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus?  (d)  Fourthly,  Peter's  sin  took  an  aggravation  from  the 
4urcumstance  that  it  was  committed  in  the  presence  of  Jesus,  (e)  Peter  denied  his 
Lord  at  a  time  of  love.  He  had  just  received  the  Holy  Communion.  And  now 
the  Passion  of  the  Saviour  was  begun.  (2)  The  extenuating  circumstances  in 
Peter's  case.  It  is  no  less  important  to  mark  these,  than  to  consider,  as  has  been 
done,  such  as  were  of  an  aggravating  nature,  (a)  First,  then,  it  was  an  extenuating 
circumstance  tbat  he  was  surprised  into  the  commission  of  his  sin.  The  denial 
of  his  Lord  was  not  deliberate.  (&)  Secondly,  an  important  circumstance  of 
extenuation  was,  that  the  sin  was  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  Peter's  life,  (c)  It 
should  not  be  overlooked,  that  it  seems  to  have  been  Peter's  love  for  Christ  that 
exposed  him  to  the  temptation  by  which  he  was  overcome,  (d)  Fourthly,  Peter 
was  comparatively  ignorant.  Some  allowance  must  be  made,  m  the  case  of  our 
apostle,  for  the  prejudices  which  affected  the  universal  Jewish  mind.  We  must  not 
judge  him  as  if  he  had  understood,  as  we  do,  or  as  he  himself  did  afterwards,  by  what 
means  it  was  that  the  peculiar  work  of  Jesus,  as  the  Messiah,  was  to  be  accom- 
plished, (e)  It  is  fit  we  should  remember  that  the  hour  and  the  power  of  darkness 
were  come.  II.  Peteb's  bepentance.  1.  Its  origin.  (1)  Christ's  prayer  was  the 
procuring  cause  of  it.  (2)  The  instrumental  cause,  (a)  Christ's  look,  (b)  Christ's 
word.  (3)  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  was  the  efficient  cause.  2.  The 
-signs,  tokens,  and  manifestation  of  Peter's  repentance.  (1)  He  went  out.  A  change 
came  over  his  feelings,  and  he  could  remain  no  longer  in  the  society  of  the  irreli- 
gious servants  and  officers.  (2)  He  deeply  mourned  for  his  sin.  (3)  He  sought 
the  society  of  Christ's  disciples.  (4)  His  love  to  the  Lord  revived.  3.  The  accept- 
ance of  Peter's  repentance.  (1)  A  message  sent  through  the  holy  women.  (2) 
Christ's  interview  with  him  alone.  (3)  The  more  public  interview  in  Galilee.  4. 
Peter's  repentance  thus  graciously  accepted,  what  were  the  issues  of  it?  He  was 
the  boldest  of  the  bold,  from  that  time  forward,  in  confessing  Christ.  There  was 
iess  boasting  than  there  had  been  before ;  but  he  never  flinched  again.  There  were 
no  more  denials.  {A.  Gray.)  Peter*s  restoration: — L  First,  let  us  look  at  the 
LoBD.  WHO  LOOKED  UPON  Petsb.  1.  I  SCO  in  that  look,  first,  that  which  makes  me 
«xclaim — What  thoughtful  love  I  Jesus  is  bound,  He  is  accused,  He  has  just  been 
smitten  on  the  face,  but  His  thought  is  of  wandering  Peter.  He  looked  to  others, 
but  He  never  looked  to  Himself.  I  see,  then,  in  oar  Lord's  looking  upon  Peter,  a 
irondronsly  thoughtful  love.     2.  I  exclaim  next,  what  a  boondless  oondesoenaion  t 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  XX« 

He  had  acted  most  shamefully  and  ciHelly,  and  yet  the  Master's  eye  songht  him 
out  in  boundless  pity  1  3.  But  then,  again,  What  tender  wisdom  do  I  see  here  t 
"The  Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon  Peter."  He  knew  best  what  to  do;  He  did 
not  speak  to  him,  but  looked  upon  him.  4.  As  I  think  of  that  look  again,  I  am 
compelled  to  cry  out,  "  What  Divine  power  is  here  !  This  look  worked  wonders. 
I  sometimes  preach  with  all  my  soul  to  Peter,  and,  alas  I  he  likes  my  sermon  and 
forgets  it.  I  have  known  Peter  read  a  good  book  full  of  most  powerful  pleading, 
and  when  he  has  read  it  through,  he  has  shut  it  up  and  gone  to  sleep.  I  remember 
my  Peter  when  he  lost  his  wife,  and  one  would  have  thought  it  would  have  touched 
him,  and  it  did,  with  some  natural  feeling ;  yet  lie  did  not  return  to  the  Lord,  whom 
he  had  forsaken,  but  continued  in  his  backsliding.  See,  then,  how  our  Lord  can  do 
with  a  look  what  we  cannot  do  with  a  sermon,  what  the  most  powerful  writer 
cannot  do  with  hundreds  of  pages,  and  what  affliction  cannot  do  with  even  its 
heaviest  stroke.  U.  Let  us  look  into  the  look  which  the  Lobd  gate  to 
Peteb.  Help  us  again,  most  gracious  Spirit !  1.  That  look  was,  first  of  all,  a 
marvellous  refreshment  to  Peter's  memory.  "  The  Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon 
Peter."  He  saw  the  Man  whom  he  loved  as  he  had  never  seen  Him  before.  This 
was  He  who  called  him,  when  he  was  fishing,  to  become  a  fisher  of  men ;  this  was 
He  who  bade  him  spread  the  net,  and  caused  him  to  take  an  incredible  quantity  of 
fishes,  insomuch  that  the  boat  began  to  sink,  and  he  cried  out,  "  Depart  from  me  ; 
for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord  " ;  this  was  He  who  had  made  him  walk  on  the  water, 
and  at  other  times  had  rebuked  the  winds,  and  raised  the  dead.  This  was  He  with 
whom  Peter  had  been  upon  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  I  2.  Next,  that  turning 
of  the  Master  was  a  special  reminder  of  His  warning  words.  Jesus  did  not  say  it 
in  words,  but  He  did  more  than  say  it  by  His  look.  "  Ah,  Peter  1  did  not  I  tell  you 
it  would  be  so  ?  "  3.  Surely  it  was,  also,  a  moving  appeal  to  Peter's  heart.  4.  What 
do  you  think  that  look  chiefly  said  ?  My  thought  about  it,  as  I  turned  it  over,  was 
this :  When  the  Lord  looked  upon  Peter,  though  He  did  refresh  his  memory,  and 
make  an  appeal  to  his  conscience,  yet  there  was  still  more  evidently  a  glorious 
manifestation  of  love.  If  I  may  be  permitted  humbly  and  reverently  to  read  what 
was  written  on  my  Master's  face,  I  think  it  was  this — "And  yet  I  love  thee,  Peter, 
I  love  thee  still  t  Thou  hast  denied  Me,  but  I  look  upon  thee  still  as  Mine.  I 
cannot  give  thee  up."  6.  Again,  this  look  penetrated  Peter's  inmost  heart.  It  is 
not  every  look  that  we  receive  that  goes  very  deep.  6.  One  fact  may  not  escape 
our  notice :  our  Lord's  look  at  Peter  was  a  revival  of  all  Peter's  looking  unto  Jesus. 
The  Lord's  look  upon  Peter  took  effect  because  Peter  was  looking  to  the  Lord.  Do 
you  catch  it  ?  If  the  Lord  had  turned  and  looked  on  Peter,  and  Peter's  back  had 
been  turned  on  the  Lord,  that  look  would  not  have  reached  Peter,  nor  affected  him. 
The  eyes  met  to  produce  the  desired  result.  7.  This  look  was  altogether  between 
the  Lord  and  Peter.  Nobody  knew  that  the  Lord  looked  on  Peter,  except  Peter 
and  his  Lord.  That  grace  which  saves  a  soul  is  not  a  noisy  thing ;  neither  is  it 
visible  to  any  but  the  receiver.  III.  Now  I  must  go  to  my  third  point :  Let  us 
liOOK  at  Peteb  afteb  the  Lord  had  looked  at  him.  What  is  Peter  doing  ?  1. 
When  the  Lord  looked  on  Peter  the  first  thing  Peter  did  was  to  feel  awakened. 
Peter's  mind  had  been  sleeping.  2.  The  next  effect  was,  it  took  away  all  Peter's 
foolhardiness  from  him.  Peter  had  made  his  way  into  the  high  priest's  hall,  bat 
now  he  made  his  way  out  of  it.  3.  The  look  of  Christ  severed  Peter  from  the 
crowd.  He  was  no  longer  among  the  fellows  around  the  fire.  He  had  not  another 
word  to  say  to  them  ;  he  quitted  their  company  in  haste.  It  is  well  for  believers  to 
feel  that  they  are  not  of  the  world.  Oh,  that  the  arrows  of  the  great  Lord  would 
this  morning  pierce  some  soul  even  as  a  huntsman  wounds  a  stag  I  Oh,  that  the 
wounded  soul,  like  Peter,  would  seek  solitude  1  The  stag  seeks  the  thicket  to  bleed 
and  die  alone ;  but  the  Lord  will  come  in  secret  to  the  wounded  heart,  and  draw- 
out  the  arrow.  4.  That  look  of  Christ  also  opened  the  sluices  of  Peter's  heart ; 
he  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly.  There  was  gall  in  the  tears  he  wept,  for  they  were 
the  washings  of  his  bitter  sorrow.  6.  Yet  I  want  you  to  notice  that  that  look  of  Christ 
gave  him  relief.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  able  to  weep.  Those  who  cannot  weep  are  the 
people  that  suffer  most.  A  pent-up  sorrow  is  a  terrible  sorrow.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Condemned  by  a  look  : — ^When  Sapores,  Kling  of  Persia,  raised  a  violent  persecution 
against  the  Christians,  Usthezanes,  an  old  nobleman,  a  courtier,  that  had  served  ia 
Sapores'  government  in  his  minority,  being  a  Christian,  was  so  terrified  that  he  left  off 
bis  profession.  But  he,  sitting  at  the  court-gate  when  Simon,  an  aged  holy  bishop, 
was  leading  to  prison,  and  rising  up  to  salute  him,  the  good  bishop  frowned  apon 
Aim,  and  turned  away  his  face  with  indignation,  as  being  loth  to  look  upon  a  maa 


CHAP,  isa.]  ST.  LUKE.  548 

that  had  denied  the  faith :  Usthezanrs  fell  a  weeping,  went  into  his  chamber,  put 
off  his  courtly  attire,  and  broke  out  into  these  words:  "Ah,  how  shall  I  appear 
before  the  great  God  of  heaven  whom  I  have  denied,  when  Simon,  but  a  man,  will 
not  endure  to  look  upon  me;  if  he  frown,  how  will  God  behold  me  when  I  come 
before  his  tribunal  ?  "  The  thought  of  God's  judgment-seat  wrought  so  strongly 
upon  him,  that  he  recovered  his  spiritual  strergth,  and  died  a  glorious  martyr. 
{SpeTicer.)  Peter'g  penitence: — Dr.  Moody  Stewart  was  once  praising  some 
preacher  to  Dr.  Duncan,  who  said,  "  He's  too  unbroken  for  me ;  plenty  of  learning 
and  talents,  but  too  unbroken  yet."  You  speak  about  being  broken  in  business,  do 
you  know  anything  of  being  broken  in  heart  ?  The  man  who  has  been  broken  him- 
self will  be  tender  to  other  broken  men.  There  is  a  story  told  in  the  Early  Church 
how,  if  the  cock  crowed  when  Peter  was  preaching  and  the  echoes  came  into  tha 
Church,  he  could  go  no  further.  The  sermon  was  cat  short;  but  when  he  began 
again  there  would  be  an  unction  and  tenderness  in  it  which  would  satisfy  the  most 
broken  sinner  in  the  congregation.  {J.  Whyte.)  God  connects  His  moral  com- 
mands with  natural  objects : — Instead  of  giving  His  moral  command  as  a  mere 
abstract  announcement  addressed  only  to  the  ear,  which  would  then  be  in  danger 
of  being  forgotten.  He  linked  His  words  with  objects  which  appealed  to  the  eye, 
and  were  fitted  to  call  up,  when  the  eye  rested  upon  them,  the  moral  ideas  con- 
nected with  them.  Though  driven  out  of  Eden,  God  has  pursued  the  same  plan  in 
educating  and  disciplining  man  out  of  the  consequences  of  the  fall,  as  He  pursued 
in  Eden  to  keep  him  from  falling.  He  connected  his  whole  moral  history  as 
closely  as  before  with  the  objects  around  him.  Everything  with  which  he  deals 
preaches  to  him.  The  thorns  and  thistles  coming  up  in  his  cultivated  fields  remind 
him  of  the  curse ;  and  the  difficulties  and  disabilities  which  he  finds  in  earning  his 
daily  bread  are  proofs  and  punishments  to  him  of  his  sin.  As  truly  as  God  made 
the  tree  of  life  to  be  a  sacrament,  as  it  were,  in  the  midst  of  Eden,  to  keep  alive  in 
Adam's  heart  perpetually  the  conditions  of  life ;  as  truly  as  Jesus  associated  the 
moral  lesson  to  Peter  with  the  crowing  of  the  cock,  so  truly  does  God  still  make 
nature  one  of  the  great  powers  by  which  dead  consciences  and  sluggish  memories 
are  awakened.  Our  moral  experiences  and  actions  are  thus  as  closely  linked  with 
the  trees  and  flowers  as  they  were  in  Paradise.  In  our  progress  through  life  we  are 
continually  impressing  our  own  moral  history  upon  the  objects  around  us ;  and 
these  objects  possess  the  power  of  recalling  it,  and  setting  it  before  us  in  all  its  vivid- 
ness, even  after  the  lapse  of  many  years.  Our  feelings  and  actions  pass  from  our- 
selves and  become  a  part  of  the  constitution  of  nature,  become  subtle  powers 
pervading  the  scenes  in  which  we  felt  and  performed  them.  They  endow  the 
inanimate  earth  itself  with  a  kind  of  consciousness,  a  kind  of  moral  testimony 
which  may  afterwards  witness  for  or  against  us.  We  cannot  live  in  any  place,  or 
go  through  any  scene,  without  leaving  traced  of  ourselves  behind  in  it ;  without 
mixing  up  our  own  experiences  with  its  features,  taking  its  inanimate  things  into 
our  confidence,  unbosoming  ourselves  to  them,  colouring  them  with  our  own  nature, 
and  placing  ourselves  completely  in  their  power.  They  keep  a  silent  record  of 
what  we  are  and  do  in  the  associations  connected  with  our  thoughts  and  actions ; 
and  that  record  they  unfold  for  us  to  read  when  at  any  time  we  come  into  contact 
with  them.  And  hence  the  significance  of  God's  own  words,  "  He  shall  call  to  the 
heavens  from  above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  He  may  judge  His  people."  There  is  a 
moral  purpose,  as  I  have  said,  in  all  this.  It  is  not  for  the  mere  vivifying  of  our 
feelings  of  pleasure  or  pain  that  the  objects  of  nature  are  endowed  with  this  strange 
power  of  association.  God  meant  it  to  perform  a  most  important  part  in  our 
moral  training.  He  meant  it  to  remind  us  of  sins  which  we  should  otherwise  have 
forgotten,  and  to  awaken  our  consciences  that  would  otherwise  have  slumbered. 
By  associating  our  sinful  thoughts  and  actions  with  outward  objects.  He  designed 
that  they  should  be  brought  and  kept  before  us  in  all  their  reality  in  order  to  pro- 
duce the  proper  impression  upon  us,  instead  of  allowing  them  to  sink  into  the 
vague,  ghostly  abstractions  which  past  sins  are  apt  to  become  in  the  mind.  And 
not  seldom  has  this  silent  power  of  witness-bearing,  which  lurks  in  the  scenes  and 
objects  of  nature,  been  felt  by  guilty  men,  bringing  them  to  a  sense  of  their  guilt. 
{H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  The  effect  of  an  external  agency,  in  order  to  quicken  a 
dead  conscience  and  route  a  torpid  memory : — George  MacDonald,  in  his  story  of 
**  Bobert  Falconer,"  relates  a  well-authenticated  incident  of  a  notorious  convict  in 
one  of  our  colonies  having  beeen  led  to  reform  his  ways,  through  going  one  day 
into  a  church,  where  the  matting  along  the  aisle  happened  to  be  of  the  same  pattern 
•■  that  in  the  little  English  church  where  be  worshipped  with  his  mother  when  • 


500  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XXXU 

boy.    That  old  familiar  matting  vividly  recalled  the  memories  of  childhood,  "  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  innocence,"  which  had  long  been  hid  and  overpowered 
by  the  sins  and  sufferings  of  later  years.    An  unfortunate  outcast,  sunk  in  misery 
and  vice,  wandering  in  the  streets  of  a  large  city,  meets  suddenly  a  child  carrying 
a  bunch  of  some  common  wild  flowers — hawthorn,  cowslips,  or  violets.     A  chord 
is  touched  which  has  long  slumbered  in  the  outcast's  bosom.    The  innocent  past 
comes  back ;  the  little  child  sitting  on  the  fond  mother's  knee ;  the  long,  happy 
wanderings  in  the  summer  woods  and  hawthorn- shaded  lanes ;  the  cottage  home, 
with  all  its  old-fashioned  ways  and  dear  delights  ;  all  this  sweeps  over  her  like  a 
blissful  dream  at  the  sight  or  smell  of  these  humble  wild  flowers.     Overpowered  by 
the  recollections  of  the  past,  and  the  awful  contrast  between  what  she  was  and 
might  have  been  and  what  she  is  now,  she  turns  away  and  weeps  bitterly,  perhaps 
to  see  at  that  moment  the  tender,  reproachful  eye  of  Him  whom  she  has  long  denied, 
fixed  upon  her,  and  to  hear  His  words  of  pity,  "  Go  in  peace,  and  sin  no  more." 
Two  young  men  are  spending  their  last  evening  together  amid  the  rural  scenes  ia 
which  they  have  been  bred.    They  are  going  up  to  the  great  city  on  the  morrow  to 
push  their  fortunes,  and  are  talking  over  their  plans.    While  they  are  conversing, 
one  of  those  little  Italian  boys  who  penetrate  to  the  remotest  nooks  with  their 
hurdy-gurdies,  comes  up  and  plays  several  tunes,  which  attract  their  attention,  and 
draw  from  them  a  few  coins.     The  young  men  part.     One  prospers  by  industry  and 
talent ;  the  other  gives  himself  up  to  dissipation,  is  sent  adrift,  and  becomes  a 
wreck.    Worn  out  with  debauchery,  and  in  the  last  stage  of  disease,  he  sends  for  hia 
former  friend.     They  meet ;  and  at  that  moment  the  sound  of  a  hurdy-gurdy  ia 
heard  in  the  street.     It  is  the  little  Italian  boy  playing  the  same  tunes  which  ha 
played  on  that  well-remembered  evening  when  the  friends  bade  farewell  to  the 
country.     It  wanted  but  this  to  fill  up  the  cup  of  the  dying  man's  shame  and 
sorrow.     All  that  he  has  hazarded  for  the  pleasures  of  the  city  comes  rushing  upoa 
his  memory.    He  has  lost  his  money,  his  health,  his  character,  his  peace  of  mind, 
and  his  hope  of  heaven ;  and  he  has  gained  in  exchange  sorrow,  pain,  privation, 
an  insupportable  weariness  of  life,  and  a  dread  of  death.    That  sound  of  the  Italian 
hurdy-gurdy  comes  to  him  like  the  crowing  of  the  cock  to  Peter.     It  is  the  turning 
point  of  his  life.     It  awakens  within  him  '•  the  late  remorse  of  love  ";  and  he  dies 
in  the  peace  of  Divine  pardon  and  acceptance.    All  these  are  not  mere  fancy 
pictures ;  they  are  true  to  life  ;  they  have  often  happened,  and  the  number  of  them 
might  be  indefinitely  increased.     Such  examples  impress  upon  our  minds  the 
solemn  truth  that  there  is  nothing  really  forgotten  in  this  world.    [Ibid.)      Lessons 
from  the  fall  of  St.  Peter : — 1.  Mark  and  admire  the  honesty  and  impartiality  of 
the  sacred  historians.    All  four  state  this  blot  on  Peter's  character ;  and  their 
combined  account  presents  it  fully  and  with  many  dreadful  aggravations.     2.  Let 
the  example  of  Christ,  in  this  case,  teach  us  to  pity  and  to  seek  to  restore  the  fallen. 
3.  Let  us  consider  Peter's  denial  of  his  Lord  as  a  warning  to  us  all.    We  may  soon 
become  very  guilty,  and  be  exposed  to  shame  in  an  unguarded  moment ;  and  there 
is  hardly  any  sin  we  may  not  be  guilty  of,  if  left  to  ourselves.    4.  Let  us  be  on  otu: 
guard  against  the  particular  causes  that  led  more  immediately  to  Peter's  fall.    (1) 
Self-confidence.     (2)  Indecision.     (3)  Fear  of  man.      (4)  False  shame.     (5)  Bad 
company.    5.  Let  those  who,  like  Peter,  have  fallen,  imitate  Peter  in  his  repentance. 
{Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)        The  repentance  of  Peter: — I.  Peteb's  bepentance.    1.  The 
repentance  of  Peter  is  ascribed,  in  the  first  instance,  to  a  circumstance  apparently 
unimportant.  The  crowing  of  a  cock.   How  observant  then  ought  we  to  be  of  all  which 
Burronnds  or  befals  us ;  and  how  anxious  to  obtain  from  it  instruction  in  righteous- 
ness I    2.  The  text  ascribes  it  also  to  the  interposition  of  Christ.     Without  this,  the 
warning  voice  of  the  cock  would  have  been  heard  in  vain.     3.  But  what  followed  the 
look  which  the  compassionate  Saviour  directed  towards  His  fallen  apostle  ?    It  was 
a  look  of  the  mildest  reproof  and  the  tenderest  pity,  but  the  lightning's  flash  could  not 
have  done  more.    Piercing  his  heart,  it  produced  there  that  serious  reflection  from 
which  his  contrition  sprung.    II.  Peter's  sorrow.     1.  ffis  sorrow  was  of  a  softening 
nature.    "  He  wept."    It  was  not  that  horror  of  soul,  which  has  its  origin  solely  in 
fear,  and  leaves  the  heart  as  hard  as  it  finds  it      It  was  the  sorrow  which  springs 
from  love,  and  fill  the  breast  with  the  tenderest  emotions,  while  it  disquiets  and 
humbles  it.    2.  But  the  sorrow  of  Peter  was  acute,  as  well  as  softening.    He  not 
only  wept,  but  he  wept "  bitterly."    And  bitterly  does  every  sinner  weep,  who  really 
bewails  his  transgressions.    3.  The  sorrow  of  Peter  was,  further,  a  secret  sorrow  ; 
a  grief  which  sought  retirement.     "He  went  out "  when  he  wept.    Not  that  he  wa« 
now  afraid  to  acknowledge  Christ,  or  onwilling  to  condemn  himself  for  the  orima 


iMAr.  rm.]  ST.  LUKE.  651 

which  he  had  committed ;  bat  like  penitent  Ephraim,  "  he  was  ashamed,  yea,  evea 
confounded  "  ;  and  he  sought  where  to  give  vent  to  his  sorrow  onseen,  and  to 
implore  undisturbed  that  mercy  which  he  so  greatly  needed.  And  every  real  peni- 
tent is  often  "  sitting  alone."  Flying  from  scenes  of  vanity  which  he  once  loved, 
and  from  society  which  his  folly  once  enUvened,  he  retires  to  his  closet,  and  there, 
when  he  has  shut  his  door,  he  communes  with  his  heart,  prays  to  his  offended 
Father,  and  weeps.  IIL  What  bffects  Peteb's  repentance  ArrBBWABDS  produced. 
1.  An  increasing  love  for  his  Lord.  2.  Greater  zeal  and  boldness  in  the  service  of 
Christ.  (C  Bradley,  M.A.)  Peter's  repentance: — I.  The  look  of  Jestjs.  We 
cannot  picture  to  ourselves  the  countenance  he  exhibited,  or  the  point  and 
pungency  of  the  sentiment  it  conveyed;  but  I  observe  it  was  doubtless  the 
look  of  offended  dignity;  it  was  the  look  of  insulted  friendship;  it  was  the 
look  of  betrayed  confidence  ;  it  was  the  look  of  keen  and  humiliating 
reproof,  and  such  reproof  the  whole  of  Peter's  conduct  justly  merited. 
I  observe,  further,  that  the  look  of  Jesus  was  a  look  which  conveyed  conviction. 
And,  once  more,  it  was  a  look  of  compassion.  What  a  conflict  of  feeling  must  have 
been  produced  by  the  emotions  displayed  on  this  deeply  interesting  occasion. 
Humbled  by  reproof,  pursued  by  conviction,  melted  by  love,  what  tongue  can 
describe  his  grief,  or  what  artist  give  a  hue  sufficiently  deep  to  the  manifestation 
of  his  contrition  I  These  are  the  feeUngs — a  knowledge  of  which  must  be  acquired 
in  the  most  impressive  and  affecting  school  in  the  world.  These  are  feelings — a 
knowledge  of  which  must  be  acquired  on  Mount  Calvary.  The  man  who  has  been 
brought  to  look  on  Him  whom  he  has  pierced  has  an  idea  more  clear,  a  conception 
more  strong  of  the  feelings  of  Peter  than  the  art  of  eloquence,  or  the  line  of  the 
pencil  can  convey.     II.  The  recollections  which  the  look  o»  Jesus  revived. 

1.  The  recollection  of  previous  obligation.  2.  The  recollection  of  oft-repeated  and 
solemn  protestations  of  fidelity  and  affection.  3.  The  recollection  of  the  scene  at 
the  Last  Supper.  III.  The  effects  produced.  1.  The  retirement  he  sought. 
True  repentance  flies  to  solitude,  and  shrinks  even  from  sympathy.  2.  The  depth 
of  his  sorrow.  Concluding  lessons :  1.  Consolation  to  those  who,  like  Peter,  weep 
bitterly  in  secret.  Special  news  of  Christ's  resurrection  sent  to  Peter  :  '•  Seek  him 
in  his  solitude,  and  tell  him  that  the  Lord  waits  with  open  arms  to  receive  him." 

2.  But  remember  that  the  great  moral  of  the  whole  is  caution.  Learn,  therefore, 
by  way  of  application  in  the  first  place,  the  necessity  of  guarding  vigilantly 
against  the  approaches  of  temptation.  Learn,  secondly,  from  this  subject, 
the  necessity  of  prudence  in  making  a  profession,  bat  of  integrity  in  acting 
ap  to  it  when  it  is  made.  Learn,  then,  in  the  last  place,  the  necessity  of 
decision  of  character  in  matters  of  religion.  (J.  Thorp.)  The  Saviour's 
look  upon  Peter: — Doubtless  it  was  a  look  of  blended  significance.  There  must 
have  been  in  the  Saviour's  ooantenance  an  expression  of  mingled  emotions.  At  a 
single  glance  there  may  have  been  conveyed  to  Peter  what  would  have  required 
many  words  to  express.  I.  It  doubtless  spoke  to  him  reproof.  An  impressive 
reminder  of  the  great  wrong  he  had  done.  II.  It  was,  too,  a  grieved  look.  Such 
a  look  as  a  kind  mother  turns  upon  a  wayward  son  who  has  wronged  her.  III.  It 
was,  at  the  same  time,  a  pitying  look.  The  Saviour  felt  for  Peter  in  his  wretched 
condition.  Forgetting  His  own  great  impending  sorrows,  He  had  it  in  His  heart  to 
sympathize  with  poor,  unhappy  Peter.  He  knew  that,  notwithstanding  all  he  had 
done,  he  was  a  genuine  disciple,  and  that  the  time  of  reflection  would  soon  come, 
when  he  would  be  overwhelmed  with  grief.  IV.  And,  still  further,  it  was  a  for- 
oiviNO  look.  The  Lord  knew  how  deep  would  be  Peter's  self-reproach  and  anguish 
of  soul  when  he  came  to  himself,  and  that  he  would  be  tempted  to  despair  of  for- 
giveness. So  by  this  look  he  would  inspire  him  with  hope.  (Christian  at  Work.) 
Knowledge  of  self  through  Christ : — He  remembered.  He  realized  under  the  eye  of 
Jesas  what  he  had  been  doing.  A  glance  of  God  into  his  soul  revealed  his  loss  of 
himself.  Beholding  his  Lord,  as  he  stood  in  the  calm  triumph  of  His  Divine  man- 
hood looking  into  his  timid  soul,  he  could  not  help  knowing  himself  in  his  weakness 
ftnd  shame.  Not  a  word  was  spoken.  God  does  not  need  to  speak  to  judge  us.  He 
will  only  need  to  look  upon  us.  One  look  of  divinity  is  enough  to  convince  of  sin. 
Peter  the  denier,  under  the  eye  of  the  Son  of  God,  became  at  once  Peter  the  peni- 
tent. And  we  know  how  afterwards  Peter  the  penitent  became  Peter  the  man — 
firm  as  the  rook— the  true  Peter,  hero  of  faith,  and  made  worthy  at  last  of  meeting 
and  retaming  with  joy  the  look  of  the  risen  and  ascended  Lord  among  the  sons  of 
Ood  on  higlC  These  effects  of  Jesas'  flashings  of  God  upon  Peter  show  very 
■imply  and  plainly  Jesus'  method  of  eonvincing  men  of  sin,  and  of  lifting  them  ap^ 


852  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  Iohap.  xxn, 

through  repentance  to  real  and  everlasting  manliness.  No  man  ever  felt  Jesas* 
eye  upon  him,  and  went  away  without  a  look  into  his  own  heart  which  he  had 
never  had  so  clearly  bef oi  e.  Some  men  went  away  from  Christ  to  the  judgment. 
The  thoughts  of  many  hearts,  as  Simeon  foresaw,  were  revealed  by  him.  Jesus* 
gospel,  therefore,  being  thus  intensely  personal,  real,  and  revealing,  is  the  most 
honest  thing  in  thi»  whole  world.  It  is  no  form,  no  fiction  of  life,  no  exaggeration 
of  feeling,  no  mere  speech  about  God  and  tbe  world  to  come;  it  is  the  one  essen- 
tially and  perfectly  honest  thing  in  this  world  of  words  and  forms  and  fictions  of 
life.  Now  let  me  specify  two  or  three  particulars  which  are  brought  out  in  Jesus' 
revelation  of  men  to  themselves.  He  made  men,  whom  Hia  divinity  searched, 
understand  that  they  were  personally  responsible  for  their  own  real  characters. 
He  did  not  allow  His  disciples  to  condemn  men  for  their  misery,  or  their  misfor- 
tunes, or  the  consequences  of  their  circumstances,  or  any  of  those  influences  which 
meet  from  beyond  their  own  wills  in  men's  lives.  Bat  He  made  every  soul  of  man 
realize  tbat  within  life's  circumstances  there  is  a  living  centre  of  personal  responfii- 
bility.  Jesus  made  men  understand,  also,  that  in  their  sinning  they  have  to  do 
with  personal  beings.  We  do  not  sin  against  abstractions,  or  against  a  system  of 
commandments  only ;  we  are  persons  in  a  society  of  persons  of  which  God  is  the 
centre  and  the  source.  AU  sin  is  against  the  realities  of  a  most  personal  universe. 
Sin  strikes  against  beings.  Peter  sinned  against  the  Lord  who  had  chosen  him, 
and  who  was  about  to  die  for  him.  The  sinfulness  of  sin  is  not  that  it  is  simply  a 
transgression  of  a  law ;  but  it  beats  against  love.  All  sin  is  against  love,  against  all 
love ;  for  it  is  sin  against  the  living,  personal  being  of  God.  Again,  as  Jesus  Christ 
showed  men  themselves  in  their  sins,  he  showed  them  also  that  those  sins  of  theirs 
are  something  which  God  cannot  endure  for  ever.  They  must  not  be.  They  shall 
not  be.  God  cannot  always  endure  them,  and  be  the  God  He  is.  Jesus  said  He 
did  not  come  to  judge  the  world ;  and  yet  again  He  said,  "  Now  is  the  judgment  of 
this  world."  God  on  high  cannot  suffer  us  to  go  on  in  this  way  for  ever.  He  must 
redeem  us  and  make  us  like  Himself,  or  He  must  do  something  else  worthy  of 
Himself  with  us.  This  is  morally  certain.  And  one  thing  more  is  clear  as  a  star 
in  the  mystery  of  Godliness.  There  is  one  thing  more  which  we  need  to  know  which 
Jesus  makes  as  bright  as  day  in  His  gospel  of  God  to  man.  When  Peter  was  at 
Jesus'  knees  saying  in  the  first  honest  instinct  of  a  man  who  saw  himself,  *'  I  am  a 
sinful  man,"  Jesus  stood  over  him  radiant  like  a  God,  and  said,  "  Fear  not."  Such 
is  God's  lovely  attitude  towards  every  penitent  at  the  feet  of  His  Almightiness  I 
Pear  not !  Sin  is  forgiven  and  all  its  darkness  made  bright  in  the  love  which 
reveals  it.  The  cloud  of  our  sky  becomes  a  glory  at  the  touch  of  the  sun.  If  we 
will  not  come  to  the  light  to  be  made  known  and  to  be  forgiven,  then  we  remain  in 
the  darkness.  Penitence  is  holding  ourt^elves  up  in  God's  pure  and  infinite  light, 
and  letting  Him  shine  our  darkness  away.  Fear  not ;  sin  is  vouchsafed  forgive- 
ness in  the  same  love  which  it  shows  to  sin,  and  condemns  it.  {Newman  Smyths 
D.D.)  Peter  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly. — Peter'$  repentance: — I.  Obsebvb 
HOW  NEAR  THB  SIN  OF  Peteb  COMES  TO  THAT  OF  JuDAS.  1.  Peter,  like  Judas,  sur- 
renders his  Lord  to  His  foes.  2.  The  sin  of  Peter,  hke  that  of  Judas,  was  the  act 
of  an  intimate  and  confidential  friend.  3.  This  denial  by  Peter  occurred  immedi* 
ately  after  the  Supper,  and  after  witnessing  the  agony  of  Christ  in  the  garden.  4. 
Peter's  denial  was  in  the  face  of  his  own  protestations  to  the  contrary,  and  of 
Christ's  recent  and  explicit  warning.  5.  Peter's  denial  was  aggravated  by  repeti- 
tion, and  at  each  repetition  he  contracted  deeper  guilt.  6.  This  sin  of  Peter  waa 
committed  in  the  very  presence  and  hearing  of  the  Lord.    II.  Yet,  wrrn  all  thebk 

AOORAVATIONS,  THE   SIN   OF  PeTEB  MUST   BE   DISCKIKINATED   FBOU  THAT  OF  JUDAS.       1. 

For  instance,  Peter's  sin  was  sudden,  under  strong  temptation ;  while  the  sin  of 
Judas  was  deliberate  and  long-premeditated.  2.  Then,  too,  the  motives  by  which 
the  two  were  prompted — Peter,  by  a  natural  fear  and  the  instinctive  love  of  life ; 
Judas,  by  the  most  sordid  of  all  the  passions  that  move  the  human  heart — the  base 
love  of  gold.  3.  In  Peter's  case  there  was  no  heart-denial  of  his  Lord ;  it  was  only 
of  the  lips.    4.  In  Peter  there  was  only  the  suppression  of  his  discipleship.     III. 

CONSIDEB   THE    C0NTKA8T   BETWEEN    THE   TWO    MEN    AFTER    THEY    ARE    BROUGHT    TO   A 

BBCOONiTiON  OF  THEIR  oxnLT.  1.  Judas  is  judicially  abandoned ;  Peter,  only  tem- 
porarily deserted.  2.  In  the  case  of  Judas  there  was  only  remorse ;  in  that  of  Peter, 
sincere  repentance.  3.  In  Judas  there  was  a  total  and  final  rejection  of  Christ ;  in 
Peter,  a  loving  return  to  Him.  4.  Judas  sealed  his  guilt  by  his  suicide ;  Peter 
eealed  his  repentance  by  a  life  of  consecration  to  his  Master's  service.  Concluding 
ireflections    1.  You  have  the  plainest  evidence,  in  all  the  actions  of  Jodas  and  of 


OBAP.  xxiii.]  ST.  LUKE,  iSi 

Peter,  that  they  were  free  and  responsible,  acting  under  the  power  of  motives.  2. 
We  see  in  Peter's  fall  the  wonderful  discipline  by  which  he  was  graciously  prepared 
for  his  work,  revealing  to  us  that  paradox  of  the  gospel,  how  grace,  in  its  power, 
brings  evil  out  of  good,  and  transmutes  the  poor,  fallen,  erring  sinner  into  the 
accepted  messenger  of  Ood.  8.  These  two,  Judas  and  Peter,  are  the  types,  respec- 
tively, of  the  only  two  classes  of  sinners.  The  difference  between  sinner  and  saint 
is  found  in  the  behaviour  of  the  two  in  respect  to  their  sins — the  one  persisting  in 
it,  the  other  weeping  bitterly.    {B.  M.  Palmer ^  D.D.) 


CHAPTER   XXin. 


VxBi.  1-7. — Then  said  Pilate. — The  conduct  of  Christ  contrasted  with  the  conduct 
of  other  public  characters : — I.  Amongst  the  philosophers  of  the  heathen  world 
not  one  can  be  named,  who  did  not  admit  some  favourite  vice  into  his  system 
of  good  morals ;  and  who  was  not  more  than  suspected  of  some  criminal  indulgence 
in  his  own  practice ;  not  one,  whose  public  instructions  were  without  error,  and 
whose  private  conduct  was  without  reproach.  In  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ  no 
such  imperfection  can  be  traced.  In  His  addresses  to  His  followers.  He  taught 
virtue  unpolluted  by  impurity :  and  in  His  practice  He  exemplified  what  He 
taught.  IL  In  the  most  distinguished  of  our  contemporaries,  we  always  find 
some  weakness  to  pity  or  lament,  or  only  some  single  and  predominant  excellence 
to  admire.  In  each  individual  the  learning  or  the  activity,  the  counsel  or  the 
courage,  only  can  be  praised.  We  look  in  vain  for  consistency  or  perfection. 
The  conduct  of  Christ  betrays  no  such  inequality.  In  Him  no  virtue  is  shaded 
by  its  correspondent  infirmity.  No  pre-eminent  quality  obscures  the  rest. 
Every  portion  of  His  character  is  in  harmony  with  every  other.  Every  point 
in  the  picture  shines  with  great  and  appropriate  lustre.  III.  In  the  heroes, 
which  our  fables  delight  to  pourtray,  we  are  continually  astonished  by  such 
exploits  as  nothing  in  real  life  can  parallel ;  by  the  achievements  of  sagacity 
that  cannot  be  deceived,  and  of  courage  that  caimot  be  resisted.  We  are  either 
perplexed  by  the  union  of  qualities  and  endowments  incompatible  with  each 
other,  or  overpowered  by  the  glare  of  such  excellencies  and  powers,  as  nature 
with  all  her  bounty  never  bestowed  npon  man.  Jesus  Christ  has  surpassed 
the  heroes  of  romance.  In  contemplating  His  character  we  are  not  less  surprised 
by  the  variety  of  His  merits,  than  delighted  by  their  consistency.  They  always 
preserve  their  proportion  to  each  other.  No  duty  falls  below  the  occasion  that 
demands  it.  No  virtue  is  carried  to  excess.  IV.  In  the  most  exalted  of  our 
fellow-creatures,  and  even  in  the  practice  of  their  most  distinguished  virtues, 
we  can  always  discover  some  concern  for  their  personal  advantage ;  some  secret 
hope  of  fame,  of  profit,  or  of  power ;  some  prospect  of  an  addition  to  their  present 
enjoyments.  In  the  conduct  of  Christ  none  of  the  weakness  of  self-love  can  be 
discovered.  "  He  went  about  doing  good,"  which  He  did  not  appear  to  share,  and 
from  which  He  did  not  seem  to  expect  either  immediate  or  future  advantage. 
His  benevolence,  and  His  alone,  was  without  self-interest,  without  variation  and 
without  alloy.  Y.  It  is  a  very  general  and  a  very  just  complaint,  that  every 
man  occasionally  neglects  the  duties  of  his  place  and  station.  The  character 
of  Christ  is  exposed  to  no  such  imputation.  The  great  purpose  of  His  mission 
indeed,  appears  to  have  taken  entire  possession  of  his  thoughts.  YI.  The 
pretended  prophet  of  Arabia  made  religion  the  sanction  of  his  licentiousness,  and 
the  cloak  of  his  ambition.  YII.  An  impostor,  of  whatever  description,  though 
he  has  but  one  character  to  support,  seldom  supports  it  with  such  uniformity 
as  to  procure  ultimate  success  to  his  imposition.  Jesus  Christ  had  a  great  variety 
of  characters  to  sustain  ;  and  He  sustained  them  all  vrithout  failure  and  without 
reproach.  YOI.  Men  in  general  are  apt  to  deviate  into  extremes.  The  lover 
of  pleasure  often  pursues  it  till  he  becomes  its  victim  or  its  slave.  The  lover 
of  Ood  sometimes  grow  into  an  enthusiast,  and  imposes  upon  himself  self-denial 
without  virtue,  and  mortification  without  use  or  value.  From  such  weakness 
and  such  censure  the  character  of  Christ  most  be  completely  exempted.  He  did 
Bot  disdain  the  social  interooorse  of  life,  or  reject  its  innocent  enjoyments. 


654  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xhh. 

IX.  "While  we  are  displaying  the  various  merits  which  adorned  the  personal 
character  of  Christ,  one  excellence  more  must  not  be  passed  in  silence;  the 
rare  union  of  active  and  passive  fortitude ;  the  union  of  courage  with  patience  ; 
of  courage  without  rashness,  and  patience  without  insensibility.  X.  Such,  then, 
is  the  unrivalled  excellence  of  the  personal  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  Such 
is  the  proof  which  it  affords  that  He  was  "  a  teacher  sent  from  God  "  ;  and  such 
is  "  the  example  which  He  has  left  us,  that  we  should  follow  His  steps."  {W. 
Barrow.)  Pontius  Pilate: — I.  Pilatk  was  weak — moballt  weak.  He  sinned 
in  spite  of  his  better  self.  He  was  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  inuocence  of 
his  prisoner.  His  conscience  forbad  him  to  inflict  punishment.  He  made 
strenuous  efforts  to  save  Him.  And  yet,  after  all.  He  gave  Him  up  to  death, 
and  furnished  the  soldiers  needed  for  carrying  out  the  sentence.  How  many 
in  our  day  resemble  him !  Are  not  some  of  you  as  weak  as  he  was  ?  Have 
you  not  had  convictions  of  duty  as  strong  as  his,  and  maintained  them  for  a 
while  as  stoutly  as  he  did,  and  yet  failed  at  last  to  carry  them  out  ?  Bemember 
that  convictions  of  sin  and  duty  do  not  keep  men  from  sin ;  nor  do  they  excuse 
sin.  Beware  of  substituting  religious  knowledge  or  sentiment  for  religious  prin- 
ciple. II.  Pilate  was  worldly.  This  explains  his  weakness.  EQs  feelings  were 
overpowered  by  a  selfish  regard  to  his  own  interest.  HI.  Pilate  was  ibreligiocs 
Here  was  the  secret  of  that  fatal  power  which  the  world  exerted  upon  him.  Ha 
was  worldly  because  his  life  was  not  guided  and  governed  by  true  religion. 
'^  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world  —  even  your  faith."  {R.  P. 
Pratten,  B.A.)  Pontius  Pilate : — Let  us  consider,  then,  the  strange  behaviour 
of  Pontius  Pilate  after  our  Lord's  formal  acquittal.    I.  Hs  declares  the  Saviocb 

TO  BE  innocent,  BUT  HE  DOES  NOT  SET  HiM  FREE.  II.  Hb  DOES  NOT  SET  HiM 
FREE,  BUT  ENDEAVOURS  TO  BE  FREE  FROM  HiM — tO  get  rid  Of  Him.  lU.  ELb 
ENDEAVOURS  TO  GET  FREE  FROM  HiM,  BUT  RECEIVES  HiM  AGAIN  AND  AGAIN.   I.  "  I 

find  no  fault  in  this  Man  " — Pilate  has  minutely  and  thoroughly  investigated  the 
case  of  Him  who  was  so  eagerly  accused  by  the  people,  and  the  result  of  this 
examination  was  the  Lord's  acquittal.  Well  done,  Pilate!  you  have  taken  the 
right  way  ;  only  one  step  more,  and  the  case  will  be  honourably  concluded  I 
As  a  just  judge  you  are  bound  to  follow  up  your  verdict  by  release.  The  little 
bit  of  nobleness  which  Pilate  showed  on  his  first  appearance  was  fast  declining, 
as  generally  happens  when  it  is  not  founded  on  the  fear  of  God.  When  a  man 
has  gone  as  far  as  to  question  what  truth  is,  he  will  soon  follow  up  his  questioning 
with.  What  is  justice  ?  what  is  faith  ?  what  is  virtue  ?  The  inevitable  result 
of  a  perverse  state  of  heart  is  that  it  must  daily  beget  new  perversities.  Because 
Pilate  was  not  moved  by  love  of  truth,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  be  moved 
for  any  length  of  time  by  a  sense  of  justice.  He  declares  the  Saviour  to  be  free 
from  guilt,  but  he  does  not  set  Him  free.  Even  since  the  times  have  become 
Christian,  and  since  men  have  become  members  of  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ, 
it  is  an  universal  fact  that  Pilate's  conduct  has  been  repeated.  Men  have  declared 
the  Saviour  free,  but  have  not  set  Him  free.  Pilate  was  a  Boman,  and  a  Boman 
maxim  it  has  ever  been  in  Christianity  to  pay  every  possible  outward  respect 
to  the  Saviour,  but  not  to  set  Him  free.  The  Bomish  Church  especially  bound 
what  ought  especially  to  be  free — the  Word  of  Jesus  Christ — the  Bible — the  gospel. 
They  declare  the  Word  of  the  Saviour  to  be  free,  but  do  not  set  it  free.  In  the 
Middle  Ages,  under  plea  of  its  preciousness,  they  bound  it  with  iron  chains. 
At  present  they  bind  it  by  the  approval  of  bishops,  by  episcopal  approbation. 
Even  in  these  days  this  Church  has  dared  to  brand  Bible  Societies  as  plague  sores. 
Pontius  Pilate  was  a  Boman  to  whom  truth  was  nothing,  justice  little,  his  own 
interest  everything  ;  therefore  he  did  not  set  the  Saviour  free,  though  he  declared 
Pim  to  be  entitled  to  freedom.  And  a  Boman  maxim  it  has  been  to  this  very 
day  to  declare  the  Saviour  free,  but  not  to  free  Him.  It  is  to  the  glorious 
Beformation  that  the  honour  belongs  of  having  broken  the  chains  by  which 
Bome  bound  the  Saviour.  In  the  Church  of  the  Beformation,  our  dear  evangelical 
Church,  Jesus  is  not  only  declared  to  be  free,  but  is  free.  Freely  He  governs 
our  Church ;  freely  He  commonicates  with  every  believing  soul.  May  we,  there* 
fore,  say  that  Pilatism  exists  no  longer  in  evangelical  Christianity?  Ah  I  no, 
dearly  beloved,  we  must  sorrowfully  confess  that  Satan  did  not  fail  to  find 
an  entrance  again  through  a  back  door.  For,  among  the  numerous  Christians 
who  glory  in  Protestant  freedom,  many  do  not  allow  the  Saviour  to  speak  except 
at  church  on  Sunday.  He  is  not  allowed  to  raise  His  voice  daring  the  week,  nor 
in  their  own  homes.  What  is  this  but  declaring  the  Saviour  to  be  free,  and  keeping 


OTAF.  rxm.l  ST.  LUKE.  665 

ffivn  boimd  ?    They  bind  Him  to  altar  and  pulpit ;  they  hear  Him  every  week  or 

fortnight,  but  further  advance  is  denied  their  Saviour.    He  is  not  permitted  to 

leave  the  church  nor  go  with   them   to  their  home.    Mere  church  attendanc* 

is  Pilatism  ;  the  Saviour  is  declared  to  be  free,  but  He  is  not  set  free.     "  Behold, 

I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  ;  if  any  man  hear  My  voice,  and  open  the  door, 

I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me."    But,  my  friends, 

for  us  who  have  given  up  our  heart  to  the  Saviour,  to  occupy  a  place  in  His 

throne-room,  would  it  not  be  a  subtle  Pilatism  if  we  lock  the   Saviour  within 

the  heart,  and  not  set  Him  free  for  the  whole  life  ?    Not  only  in  the  heart  is  the 

Saviour  to  have  free  range,  but  in  the  home,  in  your  nursery  and  drawing-rooms, 

in  your  workshop,  in  your  society,  in  your  daily  life  and  conversation.  He  is 

to  be  free,  and  the  free  ruler  of  your  life.     Oh,  my  friends,  strive  against  Pilatism  1 

Do  not  lock  your  Saviour  in  your  church,  nor  in  your  heart,  but  allow  Him  to 

dispose  of  you  how  He  will  and  where  He  will.     The  more  He  is  allowed  to  shape 

a  man's  life,  the  more  freedom  will   that  man  enjoy.    Therefore,  once  again, 

away  with  Pilatism !    Do  not  only  declare  the  Saviour  to  be  free,  but  set  Him 

free  indeed!    II.  Pilate  does  not  set  the   Savioub  fbbb,  but    bndeavodes   to 

GET  FREE    FBOM  HiM.    He  docs  not  give  Jesus  His  liberty,  for  fear  of  the  people. 

He  endeavours  to  get  free  from  Jesus  because  he  fears  Jesus.     The  quiet  dignity 

of  the  King  of  Truth  grows  more  and  more  painful  to  him.    The  whole  matter, 

which  at  first  he  thought  a  great  ado  about  nothing,  is  taking  such  a  turn  thai 

he  feels  quite   uneasy.     "  Is  He  a  Galilsean  ?  "  he   asks.     The  Saviour  was  no 

Galilsean.     It  is  from  Bethlehem  of  Judaea  that  the  Messiah  of  Israel  has  come ! 

but  the  people  say  He  is  a  Galilsean.     This  is  sufficient  for  Pilate.     He  had 

oftentimes  trenched  upon  Galilee,  and  had  thereby  become  the   bitter  enemy 

of  Herod,  the  tetrarch  of  Galilee.    But  now  it  is  most  opportune  to  him,  that 

Galilee  is  a  province  beyonds  his  jurisdiction.     Let  Herod  burn  his  fingers  in  this 

affair.     At  least,  he,  Pilate,  will  be  rid  of  a  case  which  is  getting  more  and  more 

troublesome.    Do  you  know  those  people  that  practise  in  our    day  the  most 

contemptible  kind  of  Pilatism  ?    They  cannot  explain  the  powerful  impression 

which  the  exalted  personage  of  the  God-man  makes  upon  man.    The  pale  beauty 

of  His  cross  appears  an  unnatural  rebuke  to  the  frivolous  ideal  of  life  which  they 

have    entertained.     His    stretched-ont    pierced    hands   are   quivering  hints  and 

points  of  interrogation,  and  signs  of  pain  and  sorrow.    His  humiliating  crucifixion 

bears  so  loud  an  evidence  against  their  pride  of  ancestry,  pride  of  culture,  and  pride 

of  riches,  that  they  endeavour  to  get  free  from  Him  at  any  cost."    "He  is  a 

Galilsean " :  thus  runs  the  old  Jewish  lie,  which  history  confuted  long  ago.    A 

Galilsean  Babbi  could  never — no,  never — become  so  potent,  that  eighteen  centuries 

would  circle  around  him  like  planets    round  the    sun.     But  those  men  who 

endeavour  to  get  free  from  the  God-man,  will  always  grasp  at  this  straw  of 

a   miserable  fiction.     He    is  a  Galilsean!     He  is  a  Galilsean,  and  they  think 

they  have  discovered  the  magic  spell  by  which    they  can   with  some    show 

of  reason  get   rid   of    their  belief  in  the  God-man,  who  has   given  His    Ufe 

a  ransom  for  a  sinful  world.     "  He  is  a  Galilsean,"  they  say,  and  with  that 

they    send    the    Saviour  away.     They  send    Him    to    sceptical   philosophers, 

urging,  "  Natural  philosophy  has  explained  this,  and  teaches  us  that  miracles 

are  impossible.    Philosophy  is  a  competent  judge  of  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ, 

and  of  His  miracles ;  and  philosophers,  not  we,  have  to  decide.    And  we  submit 

to  their  judgment. "    It  makes  them  somewhat  uneasy  to  know  that  there  are 

likewise    believing  philosophers;   that    a   Copernicus  begged  from  the   Crucified 

no  other  mercy  than  was  received  by  yonder  malefactor ;  that  a  Kepler,  a  Newton 

were  true  followers  of  Jesus,  and  believed  in  His  miracles,  and  had  faith  in  His 

words.     On   this  point,  therefore,  they  maintain  a  silence  as  deep  as  that  of 

the  tomb.    Or  they  send  the  Saviour  to  sceptical  historians,  saying,  "  It  is  by 

history  that  the  authenticity  of  the  Bible  is  to  be  tested,  and  this  science  has 

broken  a  staff  over  the  Scriptures."    It  is  nothing  to  their  purpose  that  believing 

historians  place  a  high  value  on  the  Bible,  that  one  of  them  has  pronounced 

Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  very  key  of  history.    This  testimony,  however,  they  care- 

fully    overlook.     Or    they  send    the    Lord    Jesus    to    sceptical    theologians, 

saying,    "There  are   so    many    theologians  who  deny  the  divinity  of  Jesus, 

and    tiieologians    ought   certamly  to    bis   possessed    of    the    true    knowledge." 

They  OTerlook    the    believing   cuTines   who   exist   too,    and    who    ought    to 

know   at   Knj  rate    u  well    •■   they.     In    short,    fidelity   and   justioe    eon- 

eeming  the  Lonl  Jesas  are  quite  oat  of  the  questioo  with  those  people.    They 


656  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  |[chap.  xxm, 

will  get  free  from  the  Lord  Jesns  at  any  hazard ;  therefore  they  seek  for  Heroda 
wherever  they  may  be  found.  III.  Impotent  STBUooLiNal  Foolish  prudence  t 
After  all,  they  wiU  not  get  free  from  the  Savioar.  Having  entered  a 
man's  life,  Jesus  comes  again  and  again,  this  way  or  that  way,  whatever  may 
have  been  the  turnings  and  windings  of  that  life.  Pilate  endeavours  to  get  free 
from  the  Saviour,  but  gets  Him  again  and  again.  Pilate  gets  Jesus  again  from 
Herod,  and  receives  Herod's  friendship  besides.  Pilate,  on  his  part,  to  be  sura 
would  fain  have  renounced  his  friendship  for  Herod,  if  by  bo  doing  he  had  only 
got  rid  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  his  new  friend  had  sent  back  the  Saviour,  and 
thus  Pilate  was  obliged,  much  against  his  will,  to  concern  himself  further  with 
the  Saviour,  and  bring  to  an  end  a  case  which  to  himself  was  becoming  more 
and  more  painfuL  And  in  the  same  condition  in  which  Pilate  was  will  all  those 
who  think  and  act  like  him  ever  be.  Having  once  met  the  Saviour,  they  never 
get  entirely  free  from  Him,  however  they  may  struggle  and  whatever  cunning 
devices  they  may  make  to  accomplish  this  end.  In  the  end  they  will  avail 
nothing.  Jesus  comes  again.  His  form  assumes  a  more  and  more  sorrowful 
aspect.  His  face  becomes  more  grave  and  clouded.  Jesus  comes  again.  Each 
sound  of  the  church  bell  reminds  them,  each  Sunday  admonishes  them  of  Him. 
Jesus  comes  again.  They  do  not  get  free  from  Him.  They  anxiously  debar 
their  home,  their  family,  from  His  influences.  Nevertheless,  since  the  Spirit 
bloweth  where  it  listeth,  they  cannot  prevent  their  wives,  nor  daughters, 
nor  sons  from  being  converted ;  and  every  converted  one  is  a  living  reproach 
to  the  unconverted.  They  cover,  as  it  were,  their  heart  with  a  coat  of  mail ; 
they  palisade  their  conscience ;  they  fall  into  the  habit  of  smiling  at  holy  things ; 
they  affect  the  utmost  indifference  towards  the  God-man.  Thus  they  Uve,  thus 
they  die ;  and  when  they  are  dying,  again  Jesus  Christ  is  there ;  and  in  their 
dying  moments  His  word  sounds :  Son  of  man,  how  often  would  I  have  drawn 
thee  nnto  Me,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  thou 
wouldst  not  I  {Emil  Qtiandt.)  The  character  of  Pilate : — The  estimate  which 
history  has  pat  upon  Pilate  is  fair.  We  talk  of  artistic  combinations  and  poetical 
justice.  But  no  art  and  no  poetry  can  come  up  to  that  dramatic  intensity  of 
contrast  in  which  history  makes  such  a  man  as  Pilate  jndge  and  executioner  of 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  as  in  another  generation  when  such  a  man  as  Nero  sits  as 
judge  of  such  a  man  as  St.  Paul.  We  know  Pilate  by  ten  years  of  his  jurisdiction. 
A  cruel  Boman  viceroy,  he  had  created  and  had  quelled  more  than  one  rebellion 
by  his  hard  hand.  He  is  one  of  a  type  of  men  such  as  you  find  in  Napoleon's 
history,  who  have  their  eye  always  on  the  Emperor,  and  always  mean  to  win  his 
favonr.  For  the  Pilates  of  the  world  this  backward  look  to  their  chief  suppUes 
the  place  of  law.  Does  Tiberius  wish  it?  Then  one  answers  "Yes."  Does 
Tiberius  dislike  it  ?  Then  one  answers  "  No."  In  the  long  run  such  a  second- 
hand conscience  fails  a  man.  It  failed  Pilate.  Tiberius  recalled  him.  But 
Tiberias  died  before  Pilate  could  appear  at  court.  And,  then,  neglected  by 
everybody,  scorned,  I  think,  by  those  who  knew  him  best,  Pilate,  who  had  no 
conscience  now  he  had  no  Tiberius,  killed  himself.  Was  there,  in  tiiat  loathsome 
despair  of  the  life  of  a  favourite  whose  game  is  played  through,  was  there  always 
the  memory  of  one  face,  of  one  prisoner,  of  one  execution?  Did  he  remember  that 
day  when  he  tried  to  wash  off  guilt  with  water  ?  Did  he  remember  how  the  sky 
blackened  on  ^at  day,  and  men  said  nature  itself  testified  against  the  wrong 
which  that  day  saw?    {E.  E.  Hall,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8-12.  When  Herod  saw  Jesns,  he  was  exceeding:  glad. — Divine  reserve ; 
or,  Chrittianity  in  relation  to  our  mental  moods: — I.  That  all  subjects  beveal 

THEMSELVES  ACOOBDINO   TO    THB    MENTAL  MOOD   IN  WHICH  THEY  ABB  EXAMINED.      That 

which  is  looked  for,  is  found  or  thought  to  be  found.  The  same  person  or  principle 
examined  through  the  respective  media  of  sympathy  and  antipathy,  will  reveal 
aspects  the  most  different.  It  is  of  vital  importance  to  remember  this  fact  in  all 
our  investigations  of  creeds,  or  balancings  of  contradictory  evidence,  so  that  we 
may  escape  both  the  traductions  of  prejudice  and  the  blindings  of  partiality.  The 
non-recognition  of  this  truth  has  induced  the  grossest  misrepresentations  of  social 
life,  of  individual  belief,  and  of  denominational  doctrine.  II.  That  the  Divine 
Beino  dibcbiminateb  oub  mental  moods.  Apparently,  Herod  was  in  a  pleasing 
state  of  mind.  Superficial  observers  wonld  have  been  delighted  with  his  animated 
and  cordial  bearing.  What  could  be  more  gratifying  to  Christ  than  that  Herod 
was  "  exceeding  gUd  "  to  see  Him  f    There  was  no  royal  hauteor,  no  cold  reboll^ 


«BA».  xnii.]  ST.  LUKE.  657 

CO  vengeful  triumph.  Why,  then,  that  awful  silence  ?  Could  Herod  have  dona 
more  to  conciliate  the  favour  of  his  renowned  prisoner  ?  Was  it  not  an  act  of 
incomparable  condescension  for  Herod  to  wear  a  smile  in  the  presence  of  a  reputed 
blasphemer  and  seditionist  7  For  Christ's  significant  reserve  there  must  be  soma 
peculiar  but  satisfactory  reason.  It  was  not  fear  of  the  judge,  for  He  was  the 
judge's  Creator  and  Sovereign  ;  it  was  not  contempt,  for  He  entertains  a  just  regard 
-for  all  the  creatures  of  Hia  hand ;  it  was  not  constitutional  sullenness,  for  none 
could  be  more  open  and  engaging  than  He ;  it  was  not  consciousness  of  guilt,  for 
His  most  rancorous  foes  failed  in  their  attempts  at  crimination.  Why,  then,  did 
Christ  thus  treat  a  man  who  was  "  exceediug  glad  "  to  "  see  Him  "  ?  The  only 
satisfactory  answer  which  we  can  suggest  is  that  Herod's  gladness  did  not  arise 
from  a  proper  cause ;  or,  in  other  words,  was  no  true  index  to  his  mental  mood. 
Christ  looked  deeper  than  the  smile  which  lighted  Herod's  countenance,  or  the 
mere  blandishment  of  his  manner ;  He  discriminated  the  mood  of  mind,  and  acted 
accordingly.  III.  That  certain  mental  moods  deprive  men  of  the  bichest 
BLESsiNOB  op  CHRISTIANITY.  Why  that  solcmu  silence  on  the  part  of  Christ  ? 
Because  of  Herod's  mental  mood.  The  judge  wished  his  curiosity  gratified,  he 
had  heard  of  the  great  wonder-worker,  and  longed  to  behold  His  feats  of  skill,  or 
His  displays  of  power.  Christ  knew  the  treatment  proper  for  the  oblique-minded 
judge,  and  acted  accordingly:  He  would  not  work  miracles  to  gratify  a  king;  He 
"would  smile  on  a  child,  or  dry  the  tear  of  misery,  but  He  would  not  court  the 
applause  or  solicit  the  patronage  of  royalty.  To  whom,  then,  will  the  Lord  Jesus 
deign  to  reveal  Himself  in  tender  speech  or  loving  vision  ?  Is  there  any  intellect  on 
whose  conflicts  with  scepticism  He  wiU  bestow  His  attention  ?  Is  there  any  heart 
on  whose  strugglings  with  sin  He  will  lift  up  the  light  of  His  countenance  ?  Since 
He  was  silent  before  Herod,  will  He  be  communicative  to  any  of  His  creatures  ? 
He  shall  answer  for  Himself,  "  To  this  man  will  I  look."  Suppose  the  Divine 
speaker  had  paused  here,  what  inquisitiveness  and  suspense  would  have  been 
occasioned  !  *•  To  this  man  "  ;  to  which  man,  blessed  Lord,  wilt  Thou  look  ?  to  the 
man  who  has  slain  kings,  and  wandered  to  the  throne  of  power  through  the  blood 
of  the  warrior  and  the  tears  of  the  widow  ?  to  the  man  who  has  enrolled  his  name 
among  the  proudest  of  conquerors  7  to  the  man  who  boasts  attachment  to  the 
cold  exactitudes  of  a  heartless  theology?  to  the  man  arrayed  in  purple,  and 
■enshrined  in  the  splendour  of  a  palace  ?  is  this  the  man  to  whom  Thou  wilt  look  ? 
Nay  I  'Tis  a  grander  spectacle  which  attracts  the  Divine  eye — to  the  man  "  that  is 
poor,  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  that  trembleth  at  My  vrord"  (Isa.^  Ixvi.  2). 
Here,  then,  we  have  two  conditions  of  Divine  communion,  viz.,  contrition  and 
reverence :  apart  from  these  there  can  be  no  spiritual  fellowship.  In  Herod  these 
<x)nditions  were  not  found ;  hence  Christ  was  dumb  1  So  with  us :  if  we  would  truly 
worship  God  we  must  fulfil  the  conditions  herein  demanded.  To  be  more  distinct 
on  this  part  of  the  subject,  I  may  enumerate  a  few  classes  of  hearers,  whose  mental 
moods  deprive  them  of  spiritual  enjoyment :  1.  Men  of  violent  personal  antipa- 
thies. Such  persons  confound  the  minister  with  his  message ;  so  that  if  any  whim 
has  been  assaulted,  or  any  favourite  dogma  contravened,  they  forthwith  resort  to 
misinterpretation,  they  turn  every  appeal  into  a  personality,  and  that  which  was 
intended  as  a  blessing  they  pervert  into  a  curse !  God  will  not  commune  with 
them  :  they  fulfil  not  the  conditions  of  fellowship — they  are  neither  contrite  nor 
reverent — and  Christ  answers  them  nothing  1  2.  Men  of  large  speculative  curiosity. 
Herod  belonged  to  this  class.  They  wish  to  pry  into  the  secrets  of  the  Infinite  : 
not  content  with  the  ample  disclosures  which  the  Divine  Being  has  graciously 
granted,  they  would  penetrate  into  the  deepest  recesses  of  His  nature,  and  scale  th« 
loftiest  altitudes  of  His  universe.  They  conceive  a  philosophio  dislike  for  the 
common-place  truths  of  Christianity;  and  regard  with  patronising  pity  the  minister 
who  hngers  on  the  melancholy  hill  of  Calvary.  Such  men  would  understand  all 
mystery :  they  would  break  the  silence  of  the  stars,  or  detain  the  whirlwind  ia 
converse  :  they  would  summon  angels  from  their  high  abode  and  extort  the  secrets 
of  heaven,  they  would  even  dare  to  cross-examine  the  Deity  Himself  on  the  pro- 
priety of  His  moral  government  I  God  will  answer  them  nothing.  3.  Men  who 
accept  rationalism  as  their  highest  guide.  They  reject  all  that  reason  cannot 
comprehend.  Their  own  intellect  mast  see  through  every  subject,  otherwise  they 
consider  it  as  worthy  only  of  repudiation.  They  read  the  New  Testament  as  they 
woold  read  a  work  on  mathematics,  or  a  treatise  on  physical  science,  expecting 
demonstration  of  every  point.  Such  men  leave  the  Bible  with  dissatisfaotion. 
Christ  treats  them  with  silence :  their  ^ppant  questions  eUoit  no  response :  their 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATQR.  [chap.  xtm. 

feeble  reason  plunges  in  hopeless  confusion — Infinitude  refuses  to  be  grasped  in  s 
human  span,  and  Eternity  disdains  to  crowd  into  one  little  intellect  its  stupendous 
and  magnificent  treasures.  4.  Men  who  delight  in  moral  darkness.  Such  men 
have  no  objection  to  theological  discussion ;  they  may  even  delight  in  an  exhibition 
of  their  controversial  powers,  and,  at  the  same  time,  hate  the  moral  nature  and 
spiritual  requirements  of  the  gospel  So  long  as  attention  is  confined  to  an 
analysis  of  abstract  doctrines  they  listen  with  interest,  but  the  moment  the  gospel 
tears  away  the  veil  from  their  moral  condition — reveals  their  depravity — upbraids 
their  ingratitude — smites  their  pride — and  shakes  their  soul  with  the  assurance  of 
judgment  and  eternity,  they  sink  back  into  sullenness,  they  take  refuge  in  infi- 
delity, or  they  curse  and  blaspheme  1  Your  Herods  care  not  for  moral  betterance ; 
they  wish  their  fancies  gratified — they  desire  their  questions  answered,  but  they 
persist  in  following  the  devices  of  their  imagination,  and  imprisoning  themselves 
in  the  bond-house  of  bestial  passion.  The  text  suggests — IV.  That  mek  so 
DEPBivBD  RESOKT  TO  OPPOSITION.  "  And  Hcrod  with  his  men  of  war  set  Him  at 
naught,  and  mocked  Him,  and  arrayed  Him  in  a  gorgeous  robe,  and  sent  Him 
again  to  Pilate."  This  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  the  truth 
has  been  treated  in  all  ages.  Men  have  approached  the  Bible  with  foregone  con* 
elusions,  and  because  those  conclusions  have  not  been  verified  they  have  revolted,, 
and  assumed  an  antagonistic  attitude.  Ample  illustration  of  the  proposition  might 
be  adduced  from  the  history  of  infidelity,  bigotry,  and  persecution  :  but  instead  of 
lingering  on  this  department  of  the  subject  we  hasten  to  indicate  the  practical- 
bearing  of  the  thesis  on  the  matter  more  immediately  in  hand.  As  an  assembly  of 
men  responsible  in  some  degree  for  the  dissemination  of  Christian  truth,  it  is  im- 
portant to  understand  how  we  can  best  fulfil  our  mission.  In  prosecuting  this 
inquiry  let  me  remind  you  of  three  things:  1.  That  the  Bible  is  God's  appointed 
representative.  What  Christ  was  to  Herod,  the  Scriptures  are  to  us,  viz.,  th» 
embodiment  of  Divine  truth  and  love.  The  very  fact  of  our  having  the  Bible, 
involves  a  tremendous  responsibility.  2.  That  the  Bible  must  be  approached  in  a 
sympathetic  spirit.  3.  That  we  are  responsible  for  our  manner  of  reproducing  the 
Bible.  (J.  Parker,  D.B.)  Imitating  the  silence  of  Christ t — There  lived  in  a 
village  near  Burnley  a  girl  who  was  persecuted  in  her  own  home  because  she  was  a 
Christian.  She  struggled  on  bravely,  seeking  strength  from  God,  and  rejoicing 
that  she  was  a  partaker  of  Christ's  sufferings.  The  struggle  was  too  much  for  her, 
but  He  willed  it  so  ;  and  at  length  her  Bufferings  were  ended.  When  they  came  ta 
take  off  the  clothes  from  her  poor  dead  body,  they  found  a  piece  of  paper  sewn 
inside  her  dress,  and  on  it  was  written,  *'  He  opened  not  His  mouth."  {W,  Boxen- 
dale.)  Remarkable  reticence  : — Moltke,  the  great  strategist,  is  a  man  of  lowly 
habits  and  few  words.  He  has  been  described  as  a  man  •'  who  can  hold  his  tongue 
in  seven  languages  !  "  {H.  0.  Mackey.)  Herod  Antipas  :  religious  curiosity: — 
Most  of  us  will  admit  that  this  is  an  age  of  much  curiosity  about  religion.  The 
phrase  would  seem  to  include  three  things.  First,  curiosity  about  religion  as  an 
interesting  phase  of  human  thought.  Then,  curiosity  about  religion  as  exhibited  in 
the  picturesque  and  commanding  personages  who  have  founded  new  faiths.  But 
yet  again  there  may  be  curiosity  about  religion  as  a  possible  manifestation  of  th& 
extra-natural  or  supernatural.  Eevivalism  and  spiritualism  make  the  flesh  creep 
not  altogether  unpleasingly.  August  and  ancient  ceremonials  haunt  the  imagina- 
tion with  their  weird  magnificence.  The  verses  which  I  have  read  bring  before  us 
the  very  type  of  irreligious  or  non-religious  curiosity  about  religion,  and  of  the 
punishment  which  awaits  it.  I.  In  the  passage  itself  let  us  note,  in  the  first  place, 
THE  DEALINGS  OF  Hebod  Antipas  WITH  Jesus.  1.  Herod  did  not  take  any  active 
part  in  the  greatest  tragedy  of  time.  2.  It  will  be  necessary  for  our  purpose  to  con- 
sider, secondly,  Herod's  position  in  the  religious  world  of  his  day.  That  he  was  a 
Sadduoee  would  seem  to  be  certain  from  profane  history,  and  from  a  comparison  of 
St.  Matthew  with  St.  Mark.  3.  The  character  of  Herod  Antipas  may  be  thoaght 
too  black  to  contain  even  a  warning  for  any  of  us.  He  was  but  a  promising  pupil 
in  the  school  of  which  Tiberius  was  a  master  ;  a  meaner  trickster,  a  punier  liar,  a 
feebler  murderer.  He  was  "  the  fox,"  as  our  Lord  called  him,  not  the  wolf.  Yet 
in  one  respect  he  was  not  so  unlike  some  of  us.  A  mist  of  superstition  hung  over 
the  unclean  pool  of  lust  and  hatred  which  he  had  made  his  soul.  He  was  alter- 
nately repelled  and  attracted  by  Christ.  That  he  was  not  incapable  of  religiou» 
curiosity  the  text  sufficiently  witnesses.  Some  in  our  day  might  exelaim  that  it 
yt&»  perhaps  unfortunate  that  an  opportunity  was  lost  of  gratifying  the  curiosity  of 
B  person  so  interesting — as  if  Christ  was  Incarnate  to  amuse  dilettanti.    Bat  He 


•HAP.  xxm.]  ST.  LUKE.  S59 

who  knows  all  men  and  what  is  in  man  knew  better.  The  blood-stained  hands  arc 
held  out  "  half  caressingly."  The  voice  which  commanded  the  head  of  Johm 
Jiaptist  to  be  given  to  the  daughter  of  Herodias  pours  forth  its  flood  of  superficial 
questions.  He  will  not  waste  one  miracle  or  one  word.  As  they  of  old  loved  to 
teach,  the  silent  Jesus,  working  no  sign,  is  a  prophecy  and  a  sign  to  us.  "  He 
answered  him  nothing."  II.  The  whole  incident  thus  becomes  full  of  lessons  to 
as.  A  thoughtful,  meditative  reader  stops  in  awe.  If  we  feel  the  awfulness  of 
that  silence,  we  shall,  I  think,  recognize  the  truth  of  that  which  I  am  about  to  say. 
There  is,  no  doubt,  a  sort  of  curiosity  about  religion  which  is  the  necessary  result 
of  quickened  intellectual,  nay,  of  quickened  spiritual  life.  But  the  smiting  of  the 
people  of  Beth-shemesh  is  not  recorded  for  nothing.  Free  inquiry  is  one  thing, 
free-and-easy  inquiry  is  another.  If  we  play  with  God,  it  is  at  our  own  risk.  The 
question  is — what  do  you  believe  ?  We  stand  fronting  eternity,  not  with  the  many 
propositions  which  we  affect  to  believe  or  think  we  beUeve,  but  with  the  few  which 
we  do  believe.  Can  we  make  an  act  of  faith  in  God?  We  see  Him  standing  mute 
before  the  curiosity  of  Herod  Antipas,  and  we  say,  "  Save  us,  oh  save  us,  from  that 
silence  I"  {Bishop  Wm.  Alexander.)  Our  Lord  before  Herod: — I.  Heroe> 
BEFORE  Jesus.  1.  See  idle  curiosity  at  its  best.  2.  Idle  curiosity  disappointed. 
(1)  Our  Lord  came  not  into  this  world  to  be  a  performer.  (2)  Herod  had  already 
silenced  the  Voice ;  no  wonder  he  could  not  now  hear  the  Word.  (3)  Herod  might 
have  heard  Christ  hundreds  of  times  before  if  he  had  chosen  to  do  so.  (4)  Christ 
had  good  reason  for  refusing  to  speak  to  Herod  this  time,  because  He  would  not 
have  it  supposed  that  He  yielded  to  the  pomp  and  dignity  of  men.  3.  Idle 
curiosity  curdles  into  derision.  II.  Jesus  in  the  presence  of  Herod.  Although, 
no  blows  are  recorded,  I  greatly  question  whether  our  Divine  Master  suffered  any- 
where more  than  He  did  in  the  palace  of  Herod.  1.  Fully  in  earnest  for  th& 
salvation  of  souls,  and  in  the  midst  of  His  grievous  passion,  He  is  looked  upon  a» 
a  mountebank  and  a  mere  performer,  who  is  expected  to  work  a  miracle  for  the 
amusement  of  an  impious  court.  2.  Then  to  think  of  our  Lord's  being  questioned 
by  such  a  fop  as  Herod !  3.  Then  the  ribaldry  of  the  whole  thing  1  4.  It  was  no 
small  pain  to  our  Lord  to  be  silent.  5.  Think  of  the  contempt  that  was  poured 
upon  Him.  (C\  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  silence  of  Jesus  : — I.  Prejudice,  whatever 
BE  ITS  SOURCE,  GETS  NOTHING  OUT  OF  THE  ScHiPTUBEs.  If  you  bring  a  full  pitcher  to 
a  spring,  you  can  get  nothing  from  that  spring.     U.  Habitual  indulgence  in  sin 

WILL    PREVENT    US    FROM   GETTING    ANT    ANSWER    TO   OUB   INQUIRIES    FROM    SCRIPTURE. 

When  you  want  an  answer  from  the  telephone,  you  not  only  put  your  ear  to  the 
instrument,  but  you  also  say  to  those  about  you,  "  Hush !  I  want  to  hear."  If  you 
would  hear  Christ  you  must  say  "  Hush  "  to  the  murmuring  of  sin.     III.  Thb 

IKFLUKNCB  OF  SCEFTICISU  MAKES  THB  SCRIPTUBEB  8ILBMT.      (W.  M,  TaylOT,  D.D.) 

Yer.  18.  Release  onto  us  Barabbaa. — Barabbas  or  Ckrut  f — We  speak  of  the 
choice  in  the  Lord's  passion,  which  is — L  A  siom  or  thb  Lobd's  obacb  ani> 

VATIENCE.       II.   A   sign   Or   THE    PEOPLB'S    DEEP    SBAUB   AND    QUILT.        1.    It   WaS  Six 

o'clock  in  the  morning.  Conscience-smitten,  as  never  before,  Pilate  perceives 
the  mob — the  Lord  in  their  midst,  with  a  White  garment,  and  the  crown  of 
thorns  on  His  head — returning  from  Herod,  and  approaching  his  palace.  "  Suf- 
fered under  Pontius  Pilate  " — thus  it  runs  in  our  imperishable  creed,  surely  not  to 
erect  a  monument  to  a  weak  man,  but  to  warn  us  every  Sunday.  Christ  suffered 
under  indecision  and  doubt,  under  fear  of  man  and  flattery  of  man.  We 
speak,  however,  of  the  people's  choice.  It  was  the  custom  to  release  unto 
them  a  prisoner  at  the  feast.  Pilate  tries  to  avail  himself  of  that  custom. 
They  shall  decide  with  perfect  clearness  and  consciousness.  The  decision 
shall  be  made  as  easy  as  possible  for  them.  They  shall  examine  and 
compare.  "Whether  of  the  twain  will  ye  that  I  release  unto  you?" — thus 
asks  Pilate.  We  have  to  make  the  same  decision.  Here,  Christ,  with  the  word  of 
truth  and  life,  which  answers  the  deepest  cravings  of  our  heart;  a  light  in  oar  path 
which  has  never  deceived  any  one.  Thert,  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  with  ita 
devious  ways  and  vain  speech ;  with  its  final  bankruptcy  of  all  knowledge,  asking. 
What  is  truth  ?  Here,  a  love  that  seeks  our  salvation,  that  remains  always  true, 
even  when  human  love  is  wavering ;  a  love  that  never  suffers  the  redeemed  to  be 
torn  from  its  hand.  There,  selfishness,  falsehood,  and  cunning ;  and  finally,  the 
comfortless  advice.  See  thou  to  that !  Here,  forgiveness  and  peace ;  there,  in  spito 
of  OQtward  prosperity  and  splendour,  a  sting  in  the  conscience  that  cannot  be 
removed.    Here,  even  in  times  of  tribulation,  the  conviction :  "  The  Lord  is  with 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

me;  His  rod  and  His  staff,  they  comfort  me."  There,  in  times  cf  want  and 
distress,  murmuring  obstinacy  and  despair.  Here,  hope  that  lasts  beyond  death, 
and  that  anchors  itself  in  the  mercy  and  promises  of  God,  therefore,  even  in  dying, 
able  to  triumph  :  *'  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory?  " 
There,  illusion  upon  illusion,  for  we  never  know  what  may  happen,  until  death  at 
last  dispels  every  illusion  1  Who  could  still  be  doubtful  about  the  choice  7  It  is 
true  many  for  a  time  allow  others  to  decide  for  them.  They  move  along  as  they 
are  directed ;  they  believe  because  others  have  told  them  so.  Many  avoid  the 
decision  even  when  commanded  by  the  Word  of  God.  But  this  is  sure :  There  will 
come  serious  hours  for  each  one,  according  to  God's  design  and  will,  when  he  mast 
decide  of  his  own  free  will,  when  the  refusal  to  decide  will  be  practically  a  decision. 
There  is  only  the  question :  Are  we  capable  of  choosing  ?  Are  we  really  free  ? 
Does  the  decision  he  in  our  hand  ?  Indeed,  there  arise  unbidden  so  many  voices 
in  the  heart  against  it;  so  many  evil  influences  act  upon  us  from  childhood.  The 
heart  is  by  nature  deceitful  above  all  things — now  most  exultant,  now  afflicted 
onto  death.  Luther,  as  you  know,  wrote  a  little  book  on  the  bondage  of  the  will, 
or  "  that  free  will  is  nothing."  He  compared  it  to  a  staff  without  life,  a  hard,  cold 
stone.  In  this  Luther  is  right,  and  is  on  the  side  of  Paul,  who  says,  "  So  then  it  is 
not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy  " 
{Bom.  ix.  16).  It  is  true  that  deep  in  our  hearts  there  is  a  tendency  to  resist  the 
truth,  a  pronenes8  to  sin  and  sensuality,  a  spirit  that  says  "  No  "  to  the  word  and 
will  of  God.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  God  embraces  us  with  His  unseen  arms,  and 
in  spirit  speaks  to  as.  Conscience  can  be  silenced,  bat  not  killed ;  the  hunger  for 
the  life  and  peace  of  God  will  be  felt  again  and  again.  As  the  flower  is  attracted 
toward  the  sun,  the  bird  of  passage  to  the  south,  the  iron  to  the  magnet,  so  the 
human  heart  is  drawn  to  God  and  His  Word.  Both  are  destined  for  each  other. 
We  can  and  ought  to  choose ;  that  is  our  privilege  and  responsibility:  our  salvation 
is  left  in  oar  own  hands.  II.  A  bion  of  thb  feoplb's  deep  shame  akd  guilt. 
Israel  also  had  a  choice.  But  in  choosing  it  incurred  the  deepest  shame  and  guilt. 
"  And  they  cried  out  all  at  once,  saying,  Away  with  this  Man,  and  release  unto  us 
Barabbas  1 "  There  is  no  wavering  nor  delay,  no  answer  to  the  question,  "  What 
evil  hath  He  done?"  There  is  no  inward  struggle,  and  no  examination,  bat  the 
most  frivolous  levity,  which  is  swift  to  condemn,  even  in  the  holiest  and  most 
important  cause.  Indeed,  Pilate  warns  them  several  times,  and  God's  voice  warns 
them  through  him,  to  think  and  to  deliberate  once  more.  But  their  levity  turns 
into  stubbornness  and  hardening  of  the  heart.  How  many  still  decide  for  unbelief 
without  hesitation,  without  having  carefully  examined  1  They  merely  repeat  what 
others  maintain;  they  merely  follow  their  own  natural  inclination.  They  are 
opponents  of  faith,  not  because  they  reflect  too  much,  but  because  they  reflect  too 
little.  It  is  a  simple  condition  of  equity  that  one  should  examine  before  rejecting, 
and  that  one  should  compare  what  Jesus  gives  with  what  the  world  offers.  Levity, 
however,  does  not  examine,  it  postpones.  It  finds  pleasure  in  the  moment,  and 
avoids  all  that  is  disagreeable.  When  hours  of  distress  and  helplessness  again 
come  apon  us,  our  only  resources  are  falsehood  and  deceit — human  help  and 
human  counsel,  which  soon  shall  be  changed  into  shame.  Alas  I  how  many  there 
are  whose  thoughtlessness  turns  into  stubbornness,  and  from  that  into  entire  Bar- 
ren der  to  the  power  of  darkness.  (W.  Hdhnelt.)  Barabbas  orJenu: — ^All  time 
is  one  history  of  this  one  manifold  choice.  Every  evil  deed  since  Adam's  fall  has 
been  belief  iu  Satan  and  disbeUef  in  God,  a  choice  of  Satan,  his  service,  his  wages, 
his  kingdom,  his  sins,  and  his  everlasting  doom,  instead  of  the  glad  obedience,  the 
beauty  of  holiness,  the  sweet  harmony,  the  everlasting  glory  of  the  ever-blessed 
God.  Even  heathens,  from  the  relios  of  paradise,  knew  of  this  choice.  They  pic- 
tured to  themselves  man,  at  the  outset  of  life,  standing  where  two  ways  parted, 
pleasure  alluring  him  to  "  a  way  full  of  all  ease  and  sweetness  "  ;  virtue,  with  a  holy 
majesty,  calling  him  to  present  toil,  and  an  inheritance  with  God.  And  they 
unknowing  I  They  knew  that  they  made  an  evil  choice,  they  owned  of  themselves 
sorrowfully,  "  I  know  and  approve  what  is  best,  I  follow  what  is  worst."  "  I  knew 
what  I  ought  to  be ;  onhappily,  I  could  not  do  it."  They  knew  what  they  chose, 
bot  not  whom  they  chose,  or  whom  they  denied.  More  fearful  is  the  contest  in 
Israel,  because  they  knew  more.  "They  chose,"  Scripture  says,  ** new  gods." 
"  If  it  seem  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord,"  says  Joshua,  when  his  own  warfare 
was  accomplished,  "  ohoose  yon  this  day  whom  you  will  serve ;  but  as  for  me  and 
my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord."  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?  " 
aa^  Elijah ;  "  if  the  Lord  he  Ood,  follow  Him ;  bat  if  Baal,  then  follow  him." 


CHAP,  mn.]  8T.  LUKE.  661 

Darker  still  and  more  evil  was  the  choice,  when  Holiness  Itself,  "  God,  was 
manifest  in  the  flesh."  "  This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  was  come  into  the 
world,  and  men  loved  darlmess  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil." 
But  His  Godhead  was  still  veiled  in  the  flesh.  His  glory  was  not  yet  revealed, 
"  the  Spirit  was  not  yet  given."  More  deadly  the  choice  became,  when  the  weak- 
ness of  His  human  nature  was  taken  up  in  the  glory  of  His  Divine,  and  He  was 
■'declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  Holiness,  by 
the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  Hence  the  evil  of  some  subtle  sin,  which  the  soul 
perhaps  knows  not  to  be  sin,  only  it  knows  that,  were  its  parents  by,  it  would  not 
do  it.  It  has  made  an  evil  choice ;  and  that  choice  cleaves  to  it,  perhaps,  through 
years  of  helpless  strife  and  misery.  The  first  evil  choice  is  the  parent  of  all  which 
follows.  It  has  chosen  Satan  instead  of  God ;  and  now,  before  it  cdn  again  choose 
arign»,  ft  must  undo  that  first  choice,  and  will  tliat  all  had  been  unohosen  which 
it  ever  chose  out  of  God.  Bat  there  is  no  safety  against  making  the  very  worst 
choice,  except  in  the  fixed,  conscious  purpose  in  all  things  to  make  the  best. 
The  last  acts  are  mostly  not  in  a  person's  own  power.  They  "  who  compass  them- 
selves about  with  sparks  "  cannot  themselves  quench  the  burning.  They  who 
make  the  first  bad  choice  are  often  hurried  on,  whether  they  will  or  no.  Each 
choice,  so  far,  involves  the  whole  character.  The  one  choice  is  manifoldly  repeated. 
The  roads  part  asunder  slightly;  yet,  unmarked,  the  distance  between  them  is  ever 
widening,  until  they  end  in  heaven  or  in  hell.  Each  act  of  choice  is  a  step  toward 
either.  It  is  a  bitter  memory  to  think  that  we  have  so  often  chosen  out  of  God. 
But  we  can  never  amend  our  choice,  unless,  in  bitterness  of  soul,  we  own  that  it 
has  been  amiss.  We  can  never  come  to  true  penitence  unless  we  learn  the  intense 
evil  of  the  manifold  wrongness  of  our  choice.  Hard  is  it  to  own  this,  that  all  has 
to  be  undone  and  begun  anew,  that  the  whole  choice  is  to  be  reformed  ;  and  there- 
fore  it  is  hard  truly  to  turn  to  God  and  be  saved.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Renouncinrf 
Christ : — Albert,  Bishop  of  Mayence,  had  a  physician  attached  to  his  person,  who, 
being  a  Protestant,  did  not  enjoy  the  prelate's  favour.  The  man  seeing  this,  and 
being  an  avaricious,  ambitious  world-seeker,  denied  his  God,  and  turned  back  to 
Popery,  saying  to  his  associates,  "  I'll  put  Jesus  Christ  by  for  a  while  till  I've  made 
my  fortune,  and  then  bring  Him  out  again."  This  horrible  blasphemy  met  with 
its  just  reward ;  for  next  day  the  miserable  hypocrite  was  found  dead  in  his  bed, 
his  tongue  hanging  from  his  mouth,  his  face  as  black  as  a  coal,  and  his  neck 
twisted  half  round.  I  was  myself  an  ocular  witness  of  this  merited  chastisement 
of  impiety.     (M.  Luther.) 

Ver.  25.  He  delivered  Jesus  to  their  wllL — The  illegal  trial  and  condemnation  of 
our  Lord : — I.  The  tbial  of  Christ  for  His  life  was  manaqed  host  MAiiiciousitT 
ASD  iLLEOALiiT  AGAINST  Hiu,  BT  Hi8  uNBioHTEOUB  JUDGES.  1.  Was  Christ  thus  used 
when  He  stood  before  the  great  Council,  the  Scribes  and  Elders  of  Israel  ?  Then 
Burely  great  men  are  not  always  wise,  neither  do  the  aged  understand  judgment.. 
(Job  xxxii.  9.)  2.  Hence  also  we  learn,  that  though  we  are  not  obUged  to  answer 
every  captious,  idle,  or  ensnaring  question,  yet  we  are  bound  faithfully  to  own  and 
confess  the  truth,  when  we  are  solemnly  called  thereunto.  3.  Once  more,  hence  it 
follows,  that  to  bear  the  revilings,  contradictions,  and  abuses  of  men,  with  a  meek, 
composed,  and  even  spirit,  is  excellent  and  Christ-like.     II.  Although  nothino 

COULD  BE  PROVED   AGAINST   OUB    LOBD    JeSUS    ChBIST  WORTHY  OF   DEATH  OB  OF    BONDS  J 
TBT   WAS    He   condemned  to  be    nailed  to  THE    CROSS,  AND    THERE  TO    HANG    TILL   He 

DIED.  1.  A  most  onjust  and  unrighteous  sentence:  the  greatest  perversion  of 
judgment  and  equity  that  was  ever  known  to  the  civilized  world,  since  seats  of 
judicature  were  first  set  up.  Pilate  should  rather  have  come  down  from  his  seat  of 
judgment,  and  adored  Him,  than  sat  there  to  judge  Him.  Oh  1  it  was  the  highest 
piece  of  injustice  that  ever  our  ears  heard  of.  2.  As  it  was  an  unrighteous,  so  it 
was  a  cruel  sentence,  delivering  up  Christ  to  their  wills.  This  was  that  misery 
which  David  so  earnestly  deprecated — "  0  deliver  me  not  over  to  the  will  of  mine 
enemies"  (Psalm  ixvii.  12).  But  Pilate  delivers  Christ  over  to  the  will  of  Hi& 
enemies ;  men  full  of  enmity,  rage,  and  malice.  3.  It  was  also  a  rash  and  hasty 
sentence.  Trial  of  many  a  mean  man  hath  taken  np  ten  times  more  debates  and 
time  than  was  spent  about  Christ.  They  that  look  but  slightly  into  the  cause, 
easily  pronounce  and  give  sentence.  4.  As  it  was  a  rash  and  hasty,  so  it  was  an, 
extorted,  forced  sentence.  They  squeeze  it  out  of  Pilate  by  mere  clamour,  impor- 
tunity, and  suggestions  of  danger.  In  courts  of  judicature,  such  arguments  should 
signify  but  little ;  not  importunity,  but  proof,  shonld  carry  it.  Bat  timorooa  Pilate 
▼01..  m.  86 


S62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tsm, 

bends  like  a  willow  at  this  breath  of  the  people ;  he  had  neither  such  a  sense  of 
Jastice,  nor  spirit  of  courage,  as  to  withstand  it.  5.  As  it  waa  an  extorted,  so  it 
was  a  hypocritical  sentence,  masking  horrid  murder  under  a  pretencb  and  formality 
of  law.  6.  As  it  was  a  hypocritical,  so  it  was  an  unrevoked  sentence.  It  admitted 
not  of  a  reprieve,  no,  not  for  a  day ;  nor  doth  Christ  appeal  to  any  other  judicature, 
<or  once  desire  the  least  delay ;  but  away  He  is  hurried  in  haste  to  the  execution. 
Blush,  0  ye  heavens !  and  tremble,  0  earth !  at  such  a  sentence  as  this.  In  what 
ananner  did  Christ  receive  this  cruel  and  unrighteous  sentence  ?  He  received  it  like 
Himself,  with  admirable  meekness  and  patience.  He  doth  as  it  were  wrap  Himself 
^p  in  His  own  innocency,  and  obedience  to  His  Father's  will,  and  stands  at  the  bar 
with  invincible  patience  and  meek  submission.  1.  Do  you  see  what  was  here 
done  against  Christ,  under  pretence  of  law  1  What  cause  have  we  to  pray 
for  good  laws,  and  righteous  executioners  of  them  ?  2.  Was  Christ  condemned  in  a 
court  of  judicature?  How  evident  then  is  it,  that  there  is  a  judgment  to  come  after 
this  life  ?  When  you  see  Jesus  condemned,  and  Barabbas  released,  conclude  that 
A  time  will  come  when  innocency  shall  be  vindicated,  and  wickedness  shamed.  3. 
Here  you  see  how  conscience  may  be  overborne  and  run  down  by  a  fleshly  interest. 
4.  Did  Christ  stand  arraigned  and  condemned  at  Pilate's  bar  ?  Then  the  believer 
«hall  never  be  arraigned  and  condemned  at  God's  bar.  Christ  stood  at  this  time 
•before  a  higher  Judge  than  Pilate ;  He  stood  at  God's  bar  as  well  as  his.  Pilate  did 
but  that  which  God's  own  hand  and  counsel  had  before  determined  to  be  done.  {J. 
Flavel.)        The  act  of  a  moment  and  its  results: — I.   It  was  only  the  act  of  4 

MOMENT  THIS  DELIVERING  OP   JeSUS  TO  THE  JeWS,  BUT  IT  SEALED  THE  DOOM  OF   PlLATK. 

Of  many  important  acts  it  may  be  said  that  they  are  done  both  suddenly  and  slowly. 
In  one  way  or  another  the  decision  must  be  made  in  a  moment :  and  yet  these 
momentary  acts  are  not  so  isolated  from  all  the  life  as  they  seem.  Our  life  is  truly 
one;  all  parts  and  all  events  of  it  are  closely  joined  together.  Each  event  is  at  once 
a  cause  and  an  effect — a  link  which  grows  out  of  a  former  link,  and  out  of  which  in 
turn  a  new  link  is  formed.  Thus  it  happens  that  we  could  account  for  any  strange- 
seeming  word  a  man  speaks,  or  act  he  does,  if  we  could  only  go  back  far  enough 
Into  his  history,  and  see  deeply  enough  into  his  character.  His  life  has  been  slowly 
3uoving  round  towards  the  point  it  now  has  reached.  Into  the  house  which  had 
been  slowly  preparing  to  receive  him,  the  guest  has  suddenly  stepped.  There  has 
been  a  removal  of  obstacles  which  would  have  hindered,  or  a  heaping  up  of  obstacles 
whioh  make  it  impossible  to  proceed.  In  a  word,  character  and  habit  decide  a 
man's  action  at  any  moment  of  test  and  trial ;  and  character  and  habit  are  not 
ithings  of  a  moment.  It  is  not  always  imfair,  therefore,  to  judge  a  man  by  the  act 
of  a  moment,  or  by  his  attitude  under  sore  and  sudden  temptation.  These  things 
iveveal  the  secrets  of  his  character  and  life,  perhaps  to  himself,  certainly  to  other 
<3uen  ;  well  if  only  he  is  willing  to  learn  at  the  first  lesson  where  his  weakness  is, 
:and  BO  make  np  the  breach  before  the  next  assault.  Peter  was  walking  carelessly 
for  hours,  or  days,  before  that  terrible  stumbling  and  fall  in  whioh  his  very  heatt 
was  broken,  and  all  his  fancied  righteousness  and  courage  fell  in  a  moment  into 
ruins  about  him.  In  one  of  the  western  towns  of  the  United  States,  a  young  man 
stood  one  day  in  the  midst  of  a  group  of  gay  companions.  A  public  house  was  open 
<on  the  one  side  of  the  street,  and  the  building  of  the  Y.M.C.A.  on  the  other.  He 
■was  being  pressed  to  go  into  the  tavern,  but  suddenly  he  turned  from  all  his  com< 
|>anionB,  and  amid  their  jests  and  laughter,  entered  the  Y.M.C.A.  rooms.  From 
«that  moment  his  path  in  life  was  plain ;  he  had  committed  himself  on  the  right 
side.  But  was  there  no  preparation  for  the  sudden  act  ?  I  am  sure  there  was.  It 
we  knew  all  the  story,  we  would  And  there  was  a  godly  home  behind  him.  Many  a 
■warning  conscience  had  given  him.  In  a  moment  Pilate  yielded  to  the  request  of 
'the  chief  priest,  and  did  this  fatal  act ;  but  a  whole  life  of  selfishness  and  self- 
indulgence  and  cruelty  had  prepared  him  for  that  moment,  and  made  it  certain  that 
when  the  time  of  trial  came,  he  would  do  the  wrong  thing.  Toung  men  may  be  sure 
of  it  that  there  will  come  a  time  when  they  will  be  suddenly  put  to  the  test.  U. 
Pilate  tried  to  bid  himself  of  the  besponsibilitt  of  this  act,  but  he  could  not 
so  n.  There  are  some  things  of  whioh  we  can  easily  divest  ourselves.  We  can 
teaa  tiiem  off  and  throw  them  away  in  a  few  moments.  I  can  change  my  dress  and 
(make  myself,  in  outward  appearance,  another  man.  There  are  some  things  that 
'4jleave  to  as  always  and  everywhere.  I  cannot  destroy  my  personality ;  through  all 
changes  1  remain  myself,  conscious  of  my  own  personal  identity.  One  of  the 
loommonest  excuses  men  make  in  such  circumstances  is,  I  did  it  under  pressure. 
A>me  men  are  sensitive  to  th*  pressure  of  daty,  of  honour,  of  obligation,  of  trutb. 


CHAP,  xnn.]  ST.  LUKE.  56» 

©f  love,  of  pity.  This  pressure  is  irresistible.  When  these  influences  are  behind 
ihem,  they  must  go  on,  no  matter  what  lies  in  front.  It  was  in  this  way  that 
Christ  was  pressed  to  the  cross,  and  many  of  Christ's  servants  to  the  scaffold  and 
the  fire.  "I  cannot  do  otherwise,  God  help  me,"'  were  Luther's  words  when  this 
pressure  was  strong  upon  hira.  There  are  many,  however,  who  scarcely  feel  such 
pressure  at  all,  but  who  are  keenly  alive  to  every  touch  of  popular  applause,  of  the 
blame  of  men,  of  the  sharp  edge  of  ridicule,  of  the  fear  of  loss  and  pain.  By  the 
force  of  popular  opinion,  they  could  be  pressed  anywhere,  into  anything.  It  is 
putting  the  same  thing  in  other  words  to  say,  that  men  try  to  get  rid  of  their 
respousibility  for  wrong-doing  by  throwing  the  blame  upon  others,  and  npon  God. 
"  It  is  the  way  I  was  brought  up."  "  You  see  I  was  led  into  it."  •'  A  man  in  my 
position  must  do  such  things."  "  Every  one  does  it,  and  you  may  as  well  be  out 
of  the  world  as  out  of  the  fashion."  "  It  is  a  weakness  incidental  to  my  constitution." 
"  Circumstances  shut  me  in,  so  that  I  could  do  nothing  else  "  ;  as  if  a  man  should 
not  rather  die  than  do  the  wrong !  Pilate  washed  his  hands.  He  tried,  in  the 
most  public  and  solemn  way,  to  cast  off  his  responsibility ;  but  though  he  had  a 
better  excuse  than  thousands  have  who  sin  against  conscience  and  a  sense  of  duty, 
we  see,  as  we  look  back  upon  his  case,  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  put  the 
blame  on  any  one  else.  When  he  delivered  Jesus  to  the  Jews,  it  was  his  own 
deliberate  act,  done  against  his  conscience,  not  to  speak  of  any  supernatural 
wammg  ;  and  he  must  take  the  consequences.  And  Pilate's  future  history  was  very 
ead  and  hopeless.  Eesponsibility  is  a  thing  I  cannot  get  rid  of.  The  gospel  of 
Christ  does  not  remove  it.  "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden."  "  Every  one 
of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  unto  God."  If  I  have  done  wrong,  let  me  bravely 
confess  it,  and  seek  the  grace  of  God  to  avoid  the  temptation  again.  Thus  out  ot 
weakness  I  shall  rise  to  strength,  and  my  very  errors  and  mistakes  may  be  stairs 
leading  me  up  to  God.  III.  Pilate's  odilt  was  great,  but  not  so  obeai  as  that 
OF  THE  Jews,  who  chose  Bababbas  and  bejected  Jesus.  That  there  are  degrees  of 
guilt  is  clearly  taught  by  our  Lord  Jesus.  Some  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes, 
and  some  with  few.  Christ  does  not  exculpate  Pilate,  but  He  tells  him,  "  He  that 
delivered  Me  unto  thee  hath  tbe  greater  sin."  Such  choices — not  sudden  decisions 
like  Pilate's  on  partial  knowledge  and  under  pressure,  but  calm,  quiet,  almost 
unconscious  acts  of  choice — we  are  making  day  by  day.  (W.  Park,  M.A.)  Jems 
delivered  to  tJieir  will: — I.  What  was  this  well?  What  was  the  moving  spring  of 
their  fierce  resolution  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  should  die  ?  1.  It  was  their  will  that 
this  stern  censor  of  their  manners  and  morals  should  die.  2.  They  willed  that  tha 
witness  to  the  truth  should  die.  The  Lord  belonged  to  another  world,  which  they 
did  not  care  to  enter  ;  a  world  which  troubled  their  selfish,  sensual  lives.  It 
distracted  them  with  visions,  it  oppressed  them  with  dread.  3.  They  willed  that 
this  teacher  of  the  people,  this  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners,  should  die.  They 
were  a  ruling  olass,  almost  a  caste.  And  such  rulers  hate  none  so  bitterly  as  those 
who  speak  loving,  quickening,  emancipating  words  to  the  poor.  As  society  was  then 
constituted  in  Judsea,  that  meant  that  He  or  the  rulers  must  fall.  4.  There  was 
something  deeper  and  more  malignant  than  this.  It  was  their  will  that  their 
Saviour  should  die.  One  cannot  shake  off  the  impression,  reading  the  gospel 
narrative,  that  the  rulers  knew  Him.  This  was  the  will  of  the  Jews.  But — ^11. 
What,  meanwhile,  was  the  will  of  QodJ  St.  Peter  explains  it  (Acts  ii.  23).  To 
understand  this,  we  must  consider — 1.  That  it  was  not  possible  that  the  God-man 
should  be  holden  of  death.  The  flesh,  the  outer  man,  they  killed.  But  what  is  the 
outer  man,  and  what  is  death  ?  They  willed  that  He  should  die,  but  what  He  was, 
what  they  hated,  could  not  die.  God  delivered  it  into  their  hands  that  they  might 
see  that  they  were  powerless,  that  what  they  hated  and  had  arrayed  themselves 
against  was  eternal.  His  death  made  His  life  immortal,  His  witness  to  the  truth 
eternal.  2.  Through  death  the  power  of  Christ,  His  witness  to  the  truth.  His 
witness  against  sin.  His  redemptive  work  for  mankind,  became  living,  nay,  all- 
pervading  and  almighty  realities  in  the  world.  Hidden  for  a  moment  by  His  death, 
the  power  reappeared,  and  reappeared  to  reign.  Jesus  delivered  to  their  will  was 
slain ;  but  the  world  was  soon  filled  with  men  who  were  charged  with  the  spirit  of 
Jesus,  and  who  made  His  death  the  gospel  of  salvation  to  mankind.  (/.  B. 
Brown,  B.A.) 

Ver.  26.  Simon,  a  Syreolan. — The  Crou-bearer: — There  is  a  series  of  rerj 
beautiful  pictures  in  the  cathedral  at  Antwerp,  which  represent  Christ  bearing  Hu 
cross  from  the  Prsetorium  to  Calvary.    These  pictures  embody  the  popular  idea  of 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  miv 

Christ's  weakness  and  exhaustion.  In  one  He  stands  calm  and  erect,  in  another 
He  is  bending  under  the  weight  of  the  cross,  and  in  another  He  has  fallen  beneath 
the  load  that  was  laid  upon  Him.  It  is  at  this  stage  of  the  proceedings  that 
Simon,  who  is  passing  by,  is  arrested,  and  compelled  to  bear  the  cross  after  Christ. 
L  This  was  a  compulsobt  oboss.  Simon  had  no  choice  but  to  bear  it.  And  so  it  is  still. 
No  life  without  a  cross.  1.  Suffering  is  a  cross  we  are  compelled  to  bear.  To  some  life 
is  a  perpetual  cross-bearing.  It  may  be  a  physical  cross,  or  a  mental  cross,  or  a 
spiritual  cross,  but  day  by  day  they  must  bear  it.  2.  Death  is  a  cross  we  are  com- 
pelled to  bear.  3.  Every  attempt  to  follow  Christ  and  to  bear  His  cross  will  be  a 
determined  struggle.  II.  This  was  an  unexpected  cross.  The  trials  we  antici- 
pate in  life  seldom  overtake  us,  but  those  we  least  expect  are  laid  upon  us.  The 
cross  ia  often  laid  upon  us  at  an  unexpected  time,  and  in  an  unexpected  place ;  but 
there  is  no  escape,  it  must  be  borne.  1.  Sometimes  the  cross  we  bear  is  self- 
appointed.  It  is  so  with  much  of  the  physical  pain  and  social  distress  we  sefr 
around  us.  These  afflictions  come  upon  us  unexpectedly,  but  they  are  often  the 
fruit  of  our  own  folly  and  sin.  2.  Sometimes  the  cross  we  bear  is  divinely  appointed. 
If  Simon's  cross  was  unexpected,  Christ's  was  foreseen.  The  cross  was  not  a 
surprise  to  Christ.  If  Simon's  cross  was  compulsory,  Christ's  was  voluntary. 
ni.  This  was  an  honourable  cross.  "To  bear  His  cross."  Had  not  Simon 
rendered  this  brief  service  to  Christ,  his  name  might  never  have  been 
known  ;  but  now  it  shall  be  held  in  everlasting  remembrance.  The  cross  ennobles 
man  both  for  time  and  eternity ;  it  is  an  honourable  cross.  1.  This  was  a  cross 
borne  for  Christ.  We  often  hear  of  Christ  bearing  the  cross  for  sinners,  but  here 
is  a  sinner  bearing  the  cross  for  Christ.  The  value  of  the  cross  depends  upon 
the  spirit  in  which  we  take  it  up.  2.  There  is  something  very  beautiful  in  the 
thought  that  the  cross  borne  for  Christ  is  borne  with  Christ.  Whether  it  be  Hi» 
cross  or  ours,  we  share  His  companionship.  (J.  T.  Woodhoiise.)  Bearing 
Christ's  cross  : — The  memorable  thing  is,  that  it  is  Christ's  cross  which  must  be 
borne.  Yea  are  not  to  think  that  every  cross  is  the  cross  which  the  Saviour 
requires  you  to  take  up.  Many  a  cross  is  of  our  own  manufacture ;  our  troubles 
are  often  but  the  consequences  of  our  own  sins ;  and  we  may  not  dignify  these  by 
supposing  them  the  cross  which  is  to  distinguish  the  Christian.  Crosses  they  may 
be ;  but  they  are  not  the  cross  which  was  laid  upon  Simon,  and  which  had  first 
been  borne  by  Christ.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  endurance  for  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  futherance  of  the  gospel.  "  This  is  thankworthy,"  says  St.  Peter,  "if  a  man 
for  conscience  towards  God  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully."  But  our  oocafort 
is,  that  the  cross  which  we  must  carry  has  been  already  carried  by  Christ ;  and 
therefore,  like  the  grave  which  He  entered,  been  stripped  of  its  hatefulneas.  It 
might  almost  be  said  to  have  changed  its  very  nature,  through  being  laid  on  the 
Son  of  God ;  it  left  behind  it  its  terribleness  and  oppressiveness.  And  now  it  is 
transferred  to  the  disciple ;  it  is  indeed  a  cto^s,  but  a  cross  which  it  is  a  privilege 
to  bear — a  cross  which  God  never  fails  to  give  strength  to  bear ;  a  cross  which,  as 
leading  to  a  crown,  may  justly  be  prized,  so  that  we  would  not  have  it  off  our 
shoulders  until  the  diadem  is  on  our  brow.  "If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of 
Christ " — and  this  is  a  cross — "  happy  are  ye,  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God 
resteth  upon  you."  Together  with  this  memorial,  he  would  show,  by  a  powerful 
instance,  that  in  religion  a  temporizing  policy  is  sure  to  defeat  itself ;  so  that,  to 
fiy  from  the  cross  ia  commonly  to  meet  it  dilated  in  size,  and  heavier  in  materiaL 
Ajid  he  had  one  more  truth  to  represent  at  the  same  time — the  beautifully  com- 
forting truth,  that  He  has  borne  what  His  followers  have  to  bear,  and  thereby  so 
lightened  it,  that  as  with  death,  which  He  made  sleep  to  the  believer,  the  burden 
but  quickens  the  step  towards  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory ;  and  that 
He  might  effectually  convey  all  this  through  one  great  significative  action,  was  it 
ordered,  we  may  believe,  in  the  providence  of  God,  that  as  they  led  away  Jesus 
carrying  the  cross,  like  Isaac  with  the  wood  for  the  burnt-offering,  the  soldiers  laid 
hold  on  one  Simon  of  Cyrene,  and  compelled  him  to  bear  the  cross.  {H.  Melvill, 
B.D.) 

Vers.  27-31.  Daughters  of  Jerusalem. — The  daughters  of  Jerutalem : — I.  Wht 
DID  the  dauohtebs  of  Jebusaleh  wbep?  1.  He  was  innocent.  All  they  had 
heard  about  Him  was  favourable.  2.  He  was  benevolent.  His  gifts  were  un- 
common and  priceless.  Wherever  He  went.  He  left  behind  Him  the  footprint  of 
mercy.  8.  He  was  the  hope  of  the  people.  The  glory  had  departed ;  the  land' 
was  under  a  corse,  and  the  people  groaned  under  the  Boman  yoke.    But  Jesns, 


OBAP.  xzm.]  ST.  LUKE.  66S 

although  opposed  to  every  public  demonstration  in  His  favour,  had,  by  His  teach- 
ing and  example,  aroused  the  pablio  aspiration.  II.  Why  did  Jesus  befuse  theib 
BTMPATHT? — "Weep  not  for  Me."  1.  Weep  not,  My  death  is  a  necessity.  It  ia 
not  an  accident,  or  the  effect  of  unrestrained  animosity,  but  the  fulfilment  of  an 
old  covenant,  older  than  the  earth  or  the  heaven.  Justice  demands  it  before  the 
prisoners  of  hope  can  come  forth.  2.  Weep  not,  I  can  bear  it  all.  Hard  as  it  may 
Heem  to  bear  the  reproach  as  an  evil-doer,  and  to  suffer  the  enmity  of  those  whom 
I  have  not  offended,  yet,  my  heart's  desire  is  to  suffer  in  the  sinner's  room.  3. 
Weep  not,  tears  will  avail  nothing  now.  The  plea  of  the  tear  is  the  most  effective. 
Had  the  appeal  of  the  tear  been  made  before  Pilate,  humanly  speaking,  the 
evidence  might  have  been  taken,  and  the  prisoner  acquitted,  but  then  it  was  too 
late.  Weeping  did  not  make  the  cross  lighter,  or  the  pains  of  death  any  the  less. 
4.  Weep  not,  the  course  I  am  to  take  will  ultimately  wipe  away  all  tears.  The 
sorrow  of  to-day  will  be  exchanged  for  peace  and  joy  hereafter.  The  death  on  the 
cross  will  remove  sorrow  from  the  heart  of  the  penitent,  and  tears  will  cease  to 
flow.  ni.  Which,  then,  is  thb  bight  channel  of  teabs?  "Weep  for  your- 
selves and  for  your  children."  Sin  is  the  cause  of  sorrow.  (The  Weekly  Pulpit.) 
Weep  not  for  Me,  <&c.  : — I.  Let  us  consider  them  as  addressed  to  that  part  of  the 
multitude  who  had  believed  in  His  Divine  mission,  and  submitted  to  His 
authority.  Their  sorrow  for  our  Lord  did  not  spring  from  the  proper  source.  His 
truest  disciples  partook  of  the  common  misapprehensions  of  their  countrymen 
about  the  nature  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  Yet  sorrow  was  their  proper  mood  of 
feeling.  And  why,  my  friends,  should  they  have  wept  for  themselves  and  their 
children,  in  looking  upon  the  sufferings  of  their  Lord?  1.  We  reply,  because 
their  sins  occasioned  Christ's  sufferings.  It  were  well  for  us  oftener  to  weep  thus 
for  ourselves.  2.  They  should  have  wept  for  themselves  and  their  children, 
because  they  should  no  more  hear  Christ's  instructions.  II.  Anotheb  class, 
besides  tbue  believers,  uinqled  in  the  cbowd,  which  attended  Chbist  towards 
Calvabt.  Let  us  consider  the  application  of  our  text  to  them.  It  was  the  natural 
feelings,  which  prompt  us  to  take  part  in  any  circumstances  with  the  distressed, 
and  which  are  pained,  when  innocence,  or,  at  least,  benevolence  is  oppressed,  that 
caused  their  tears  to  pour  down.  Bight  and  worthy  were  these  emotions,  so  far  as 
they  went ;  but  they  had  deeper  cause  for  sorrow  than  anything  they  thought  of 
when  they  wept.  They  should  have  wept  for  themselves  and  for  their  children. 
1.  Because  away  from  them  were  about  to  be  taken  the  word  of  salvation,  the 
admonitions  and  warnings  of  the  Lord.  2.  They  should  have  wept  for  themselves 
and  for  their  children,  because  this  act  by  which  Christ  was  taken  away  would  speedily 
bring  judgment  upon  their  nation.  To  this  our  Lord  had  most  express  reference, 
as  He  showed  by  the  language  which  follows  the  text.  [S.  Martin.)  Wherefore 
should  I  weep  ? — These  words  are  especially  noteworthy,  because  they  constitute  the 
last  connected  discourse  of  the  Saviour  before  He  died.  All  that  He  said  after- 
wards was  fragmentary  and  mainly  of  the  nature  of  prayer.  A  sentence  to  John, 
and  to  His  mother,  and  to  the  dying  thief :  just  a  word  or  two  looking  downward, 
but  for  the  most  part  He  uttered  broken  sentences,  which  flew  upwards  on  the 
wings  of  strong  desire.  I.  He  said  to  the  weeping  women,  "  Weep  not.  "  There 
are  some  cold,  calculating  expositors  who  make  it  out  that  our  Lord  reproved  these 
women  for  weeping,  and  that  there  was  something  wrong  in  their  sorrow — I  think  they 
call  it  •'  the  sentimental  sympathy  "  of  these  kind  souls.  Blame  these  women  I 
No,  bless  them  again  and  again.  It  was  the  one  redeeming  trait  in  the  dread 
march  along  the  Via  Dolorosa ;  let  it  not  be  dreamed  that  Jesus  could  have 
censured  those  who  wept  for  Him.  These  gentle  women  appear  in  a  happy  con- 
trast to  the  chief  priests,  with  their  savage  mahce,  and  to  the  thoughtless  multitude 
with  their  fierce  cry  of  "  Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him  1 "  They  seem  to  me  to  have 
shown  a  noble  courage  in  daring  to  express  their  sympathy  with  one  whom  every- 
body else  hunted  to  death.  1.  There  can  be  nothing  ill  about  the  weeping  of  these 
women,  and  therefore  let  us  proceed  to  say,  first,  that  their  sorrow  was  legitimate 
and  well  founded.  It  is  little  marvel  that  they  should  weep  and  bewail  when  they 
uw  the  innocent  one  about  to  die.  2.  I  think,  too,  that  this  weeping  on  the  part 
of  the  women  was  a  very  hopeful  emotion.  It  showed  some  tenderness  of  heart, 
and  tenderness  of  heart,  though  it  be  bat  natural,  may  often  serve  as 
a  groundwork  npon  which  better  and  holier  and  more  spiritual  feelings 
maj  be  placed.  8.  Having  said  this  much,  we  now  add  that  on  our  Lord's 
part  Keh  sorrow  was  fitly  repressed ;  becaase  after  all,  though  naturally 
good,   it  u    not    more    than    natoral,    and    falls   short    of   spiritual   excel* 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

lence.  It  is  no  proof  that  yon  are  truly  saved,  becanse  you  are  moved  to  great 
emotions  whenever  you  hear  the  details  of  the  crucifixion,  for  the  Bulgarian 
atrocities  excited  you  equally  as  much.  I  think  it  good  that  you  should  be  moved, 
as  I  have  said  before,  but  it  is  only  naturally  and  not  spiritually  good.  This 
feeling,  too,  may  stand  in  the  way  of  something  a  great  deal  bett«.  Jesus  would 
not  have  these  women  weep  for  one  thing,  because  they  were  to  weep  for  another 
thing  which  far  more  seriously  demanded  their  weeping.  Te  need  not  weep 
because  Christ  died  one-tenth  so  much  as  because  your  sins  rendered  it  necessary 
that  He  should  die.  To  weep  over  a  dying  Saviour  is  to  lament  the  remedy ;  it 
were  wiser  to  bewail  the  disease.  II.  Now  we  pass  on  from  "  Weep  not "  to 
"  WEEP."  Though  Jesus  stops  one  channel  for  tears,  He  opens  another  and  a 
wider  one.  Let  us  look  to  it.  1.  First,  when  He  said,  "  Weep  for  yourselves  "  He 
meant  that  they  were  to  lament  and  bewail  the  sin  which  had  brought  Him  where 
He  was,  seeing  He  had  come  to  suffer  for  it;  and  He  would  have  them  weep 
because  that  sin  would  bring  them  and  their  children  into  yet  deeper  woe.  2.  I 
beg  you  now  to  look  again  into  the  reason  why  our  Lord  bade  them  weep.  It  was, 
first,  for  their  sin,  but  it  was  next  for  the  impending  punishment  of  their  sins. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "  Weep  for  yourselves  "  ; — One  who  knew  Whitefield  well,  and 
attended  his  preaching  more  frequently,  perhaps,  than  any  other  person,  said  he 
hardly  ever  knew  him  go  through  a  sermon  without  weeping :  his  voice  was  often 
interrupted  by  his  tears,  which  sometimes  were  so  excessive  as  to  stop  him  from 
proceeding  for  a  few  moments.  "  You  blame  me  for  weeping,"  he  would  say ; 
"  but  how  can  I  help  it  when  you  will  not  weep  for  yourselves,  though  your  im- 
mortal souls  are  on  the  verge  of  destruction,  and  for  aught  you  know,  you  are 
hearing  your  last  sermon,  and  may  never  more  have  an  opportunity  to  have  Christ 
offered  to  you  ?  "  {J.  R.  Andrews.)  The  grace  of  tears  : — When  Christ  was 
bearing  His  cross.  He  saw  some  women  with  their  children  in  their  arms, 
and  He  said  to  them,  "  Weep  not  for  Me,  weep  for  yourselves."  Am  I  wrong 
in  saying  He  is  looking  down  at  this  congregation  now  and  saying,  "  Weep  for 
yourselves  "  ?  Yes,  we  will  and  must  compassionate  ourselves.  The  further  from 
the  heart  religion  is  for  some  of  you  the  better ;  and  I  don't  wonder  at  it.  I  can 
apologize  for  you,  for  I  know  something  of  the  disenchantment,  humiliation,  and 
bewildering  experience  which  comes  to  a  man  when  he  is  sent  to  pity  himself.  Let 
our  prayer,  believing  brothers  and  sisters,  be  the  prayer  of  St.  Agustine:  "  Lord  Jesus, 
give  me  the  grace  of  tears. "  Those  are  the  tears  God  will  one  day  wipe  away  from  our 
eyes — £1,000  for  one  of  them !  (W.  Whyte.)  What  shall  be  done  In  the  dry  ? — 
The  green  tree  and  the  dry  : — A  word  in  explanation.  The  green  tree  is  Christ ; 
the  dry  tree  in  the  first  judgment  is  the  Jewish  nation ;  and  the  dry  tree  in  the 
last  judgment  is  the  unconverted  world.  By  a  "  green  tree  "  Christ  does  not  mean 
a  young  and  tender  tree,  but  rather  one  full  grown  and  flourishing.  By  "  the  dry," 
He  means  a  tree  withered,  worthless,  and  dead.  With  respect  to  the  first  judgment 
He  may  mean  this :  "  If  the  Eomans  so  treat  the  innocent  Jesus,  how  will  they 
treat  the  guilty  Jerusalem  ?  "  or  He  may  mean,  "  If  the  Jews  so  punish  Me,  how 
will  God  punish  them  ?"  With  respect  to  the  second  judgment.  He  surely  means 
— "  If  God  so  bruise  the  innocent  for  the  transgressions  of  others,  how  will  He 
punish  the  guilty  for  their  own  iniquities  ? "  I  will  now,  with  God's  help,  try  to 
open  up  to  you  this  solemn  text.  We  have  here  two  trees :  one  green — the  other 
dry.  I  will  show  you,  first,  the  glory  and  destruction  of  the  green  tree ;  and  then, 
the  shame  and  end  of  the  dry.  I.  The  olobt  and  destbuction  of  the  oreen 
TREE.  In  meditating  upon  the  glory  of  the  green  tree,  we  had  better  keep  the 
substance  of  it  and  the  shadow  of  it  apart  from  each  other.  To  do  so,  we  will  look 
first  at  the  natural  tree,  and  next  at  the  Saviour,  who  is  represented  by  it.  In  the 
midst  of  yonder  wilderness,  overrun  with  all  manner  of  weeds  and  poisonous  plants, 
there  lies  an  humble  patch  of  dry,  bare  ground.  From  the  midst  of  the  dry,  barren 
ground,  where  nothing  ever  grew  before,  there  rises  up  a  young  tree,  tall  and  fair 
to  look  upon.  Higher  and  higher  it  grows,  until  its  shadow  falls  upon  the  tops  of 
the  loftiest  trees  around  it ;  higher  and  higher,  until  all  the  trees  in  the  wilderness 
are  but  weeds  when  compared  with  it.  Now  turn  to  the  reality.  Christ  is  that 
tree  of  God.  In  his  birth,  He  grew  out  of  ground  that  was  barren.  As  a  man.  He 
grew  in  stature,  and  wisdom,  and  favour,  and  glory,  until  there  was  none  such 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth ;  until  He  stood  alone  as  the  great  tree  of  life  in  the 
midst  of  the  perishing ;  until  He  bid  fair  to  stretch  forth  His  branches  to  the 
attermost  ends  of  the  world.  Look  back  to  the  green  tree.  How  beautiful  it  is  t 
It  ha«  no  crooked  boughs,  or  twisted  branches.     There  are  no  worm-eaten  or 


dmr.  xxin.]  ST.  LURE.  567 

withered  leaves :  every  leaf  is  as  fresh  as  when  first  nnfolded  from  the  bud.  There 
are  do  weather-beaten,  time-stained  flowers  :  every  flower  is  perfect.  There  are  no 
bitter  or  rotten  fruits  :  all  its  fruits  are  ripe  and  uninjured.  From  the  lowest  root 
to  the  highest  leaf,  it  is  without  a  fault.  Behold  in  this  some  faint  picture  of 
Jesus.  His  birth  was  as  pure  as  the  creation  of  an  angel.  His  childhood  was  as 
spotless  as  sunshine.  His  thoughts  were  as  clear  as  the  river  of  God.  His  heart 
was  a  well  of  love.  His  soul  was  a  great  deep  of  light.  His  life  was  unstained  by 
the  shadow  of  evil.  He  was  the  admiration  of  angels.  He  was  the  joy  of  God  I 
Look  back  again  to  tbe  green  tree.  Mark  its  promise.  Leave  that  tree  untouched, 
and  what  will  it  become  ?  Will  it  not  reach  up  to  heaven,  and  spread  till  it  over- 
shadows the  world  ?  Who  will  it  leave  without  a  shelter  ?  What  diseases  will  it 
not  cure  ?  What  hunger  wiU  it  not  satisfy  ?  Will  it  not  grow  into  a  universal 
blessing  ?  Behold  in  this  the  shadow  of  Jesus  1  Had  He  dwelt  upon  earth  until 
now,  what  would  He  not  have  done  for  mankind  1  If  in  three  years  He  healed 
such  crowds  of  diseased  persons,  what  multitudes  would  He  have  cured  in  eighteen 
centuries  1  Oh,  when  we  think  of  it,  the  glory  of  that  green  tree  of  God  I 
Wonderful,  wonderful  Jesus  I  how  can  we  now  turn  from  the  brightness  of  Thy 
glory,  to  the  gloom  of  Thy  sorrow  ?  Oh !  who  shall  tell  the  tale  of  destruction  ? 
The  axe  and  the  flame  from  beneath,  and  the  glittering  arrows  from  above, 
stripped  and  rent,  and  levelled  all  Thy  glory.  Thou  wast  slain  and  buried  off  the 
face  of  the  earth  I  II.  And  now  I  pause ;  and  turn  from  Christ's  cross  to  Chbist's 
<jOE8TioN — "  What  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?  "  We  have  looked  for  a  few  moments 
at  the  glory  and  destruction  of  the  green  tree.  We  turn  to  the  shame  and  end  of 
the  dry.  Look  then,  0  unconverted  man  or  woman,  at  that  dry  tree.  It  is  spring- 
time :  thousands  of  plants  around  are  putting  forth  green  leaves ;  bat  not  a  leaf 
appears  upon  it.  It  is  summer :  the  gardens  are  white,  and  many-coloured  with 
flowers ;  but  it  stands  as  bare  as  it  stood  in  spring.  It  is  autumn :  the  orchards 
are  golden  and  red  with  fruit ;  but  it  remains  black  and  dead.  Sinner  !  thou  art 
that  dry  tree.  Thousands  around  you  are  fruitful  trees  in  the  garden  of  God ; 
they  bring  forth  ripe  faith,  and  tender  love,  and  sweet  hope,  and  mellow  peace, 
and  the  fruits  of  joy  and  humility.  God  gathers  their  fruit  in  its  season,  and 
rewards  Ihem  an  hundredfold.  But  you  are  barren,  without  faith,  without  love, 
without  hope,  without  peace,  without  joy,  without  humility ;  you  stand  unmindful 
alike  of  God's  commands,  of  God's  warnings,  and  of  God's  forbearance — a  withered 
cumberer  of  the  ground.  But  the  evil  is  still  worse.  You  are  taking  up  the  room 
which  others  might  occupy  with  advantage  to  the  world,  were  you  but  removed. 
Look  again,  0  unconverted  man  or  woman,  at  that  dry  tree.  The  showers  that 
soften  the  folded  buds,  and  spread  open  the  tender  leaves  of  living  trees  in  spring- 
time, rain  down  upon  it  in  abundance ;  but,  alas ;  it  only  rots  the  more.  The 
Bonshine  that  ripens  many  a  flower  into  fruit,  and  sweetens  many  a  fruit  into 
maturity,  beams  down  upon  it  from  day  to  day ;  but,  alas  1  it  oidy  decays  the 
faster.  Sinner  1  thou  art  that  dry  tree.  The  gospel,  which  has  softened  many 
hard  hearts,  has  made  yours  more  callous.  God's  mercies  help  to  make  you  worse. 
Like  the  cross,  the  chief  of  all  His  gifts  to  you,  they  are  "  the  savour  of  death  unto 
death."  Before  I  conclude,  I  would  give  you  all  a  word  of  warning,  and  a  word  of 
encouragement.  Remember,  O  unconverted  man  or  woman,  that  this  fearful 
question,  *•  What  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?  "  remains  still  unanswered.  As  certain 
as  I  see  the  sufFerings  of  Jesus,  I  see  the  sufferings  of  the  lost.  I  can  doubt  no 
more.  Penitent,  a  word  to  thee.  In  my  bitter  text  there  is  some  sweetness  for 
thee.  Penitent,  if  they  have  done  these  things  in  the  green  tree,  why  should  you 
die  ?  If  Jesus  died,  why  should  not  you  live  ?  What  if  He  died  for  you  1  (H.  G. 
Guinness.)  The  miseries  of  lost  souls  exceed  those  of  Christ : — I  suppose  He  meant, 
"  If  I,  who  am  no  rebel  against  Caesar,  suffer  so,  how  will  those  suffer  whom  the 
Romans  take  in  actual  rebellion  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  ?  "  And  He  meant  next 
to  say,  "  If  I  who  am  perfectly  innocent,  must  nevertheless  be  put  to  such  a  death 
as  this,  what  will  become  of  the  guilty?  "  If  when  fires  are  raging  in  the  forest, 
the  green  trees  full  of  sap  and  moisture  crackle  like  stubble  in  tbe  flame,  how  will 
the  old  dry  trees  bum,  which  are  already  rotten  to  the  core  and  turned  to  touch- 
wood, and  so  prepared  as  fuel  for  the  furnace.  If  Jesus  suffers  who  hath  no  sin, 
but  is  fuU  of  the  life  of  innocence,  and  the  sap  of  holiness,  how  will  they  suffer  who 
have  long  been  dead  in  sin,  and  are  rotten  with  iniquity  f  As  Peter  puts  it  in 
another  place,  "  For  the  time  is  come  that  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of 
God :  and  if  it  first  begin  at  us,  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  God  ?    And  U.  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  whera  shall  the  ungodlji 


568  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  xxin, 

and  the  einner  appear?"  Note  well  that  the  snfferingB  of  our  Lord,  though  in 
eome  respects  far  beyond  all  conceivable  woes,  have  yet  some  points  about  them 
in  which  they  differ  with  advantage  from  the  miseries  of  lost  souls.  For,  first,  our 
Lord  knew  that  He  was  innocent,  and  therefore  His  righteousness  upheld  Him. 
"Whatever  He  suffered  He  knew  that  He  deserved  none  of  it :  He  had  no  stings  of 
conscience,  nor  agonies  of  remorse.  Now,  the  sting  of  future  punishment  will  lie 
in  the  indisputable  conviction  that  it  is  well  deserved.  The  finally  impenitent  will 
be  tormented  by  their  own  passions,  which  will  rage  within  them  like  an  inward 
hell ;  but  our  Lord  had  none  of  this.  There  was  no  evil  in  Him,  no  lusting  after 
evil,  no  sell-seeking,  no  rebellion  of  heart,  no  anger,  or  discontent.  Pride,  ambi- 
tion, greed,  malice,  revenge,  these  are  the  fnel  of  hell's  fire.  Men's  selves,  not 
devils,  are  their  tormentors ;  their  inward  lusts  are  worms  that  never  die,  and  fires 
that  never  can  be  quenched:  there  could  be  none  of  this  in  our  Divine  Lord. 
Again,  lost  souls  hate  God  and  love  sin,  but  Christ  ever  loved  God  and  hated  sin. 
Now,  to  love  evil  is  misery ;  when  undisguised  and  rightly  understood  sin  is  hell. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  knew  that  every  pang  He  suffered  was  for  the  good  of  others :  He 
endured  cheerfully,  because  He  saw  that  He  was  redeeming  a  multitude  that  no 
man  can  number  from  going  down  to  the  pit :  but  there  is  no  redeeming  power 
about  the  sufferings  of  the  lost,  they  are  not  helping  any  one,  nor  achieving  a 
benevolent  design.  The  great  God  has  good  designs  in  their  punishment,  but  they 
are  strangers  to  any  such  a  purpose.  Our  Lord  had  a  reward  before  Him,  because 
of  which  He  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame  ;  but  the  finally  condemned 
have  no  prospect  of  reward  nor  hope  of  rising  from  their  doom.  How  can  they 
expect  either?  He  was  full  of  hope,  they  are  fuU  of  despair.  *'  It  is  finished"  wae 
for  Him,  but  there  is  no  "  It  is  finished  "  for  them.  Their  sufferings,  moreover, 
are  self-caused,  their  sin  was  their  own.  He  endured  agonies  because  others  had 
transgressed,  and  He  willed  to  save  them.  They  torment  themselves  with  sin,  to 
■which  they  cleave,  but  it  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  the  Son,  and  the  necessity 
for  His  bruising  lay  not  in  Himself,  but  in  others.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  33.  There  they  crucified  Him. — Tht  erueifixion  :—l.  The  place  whebb  ocb 
LoBD  8UFFEEED.  Calvary,  or  Golgotha :  a  small  eminence,  half  a  mile  from  Jeru- 
salem; the  conmion  place  of  execution,  where  the  vilest  offenders  were  put  to  death. 
1.  The  place  where  Jesus  suffered  marks  the  malignant  design  of  His  enemies.  2. 
The  place  as  mentioned  by  the  evangelist  marks  His  strong  affection.  3.  We  may 
also  add  that  this  directs  us  to  the  place  where  we  must  look  for  mercy.  IL  The 
NATUEB  OP  Christ's  butteeings — "they  cettcieied  Him."  1.  The  death  of  the 
cross,  though  selected  by  Jewish  malignity,  would  be  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  2. 
In  our  Lord's  suffering  the  death  of  the  cross  there  was  something  analogous  to 
what  we  as  sinners  had  deserved  ;  and  probably  it  was  with  a  view  to  represent  this 
that  the  Jews  were  suffered  to  crucify  Him.  1.  A  lingering  death.  2.  A  most 
painful  death.  3.  A  death  attended  with  reproach  and  infamy.  4.  The  death  of 
the  cross  was  an  accursed  death,  both  in  the  esteem  of  God  and  man  (Gal.  ili.  13). 
III.  The   company   in  which  He  bufpebed  :  they  cbucified  with  Him  ••  two 

XALEFACTOBS,    ONE   ON   THB   BIOHT   HAND,  AND   THE   OTHEB  ON   THE   LEFT."      1.    On  the 

part  of  His  enemies  this  was  designed  to  render  His  death  still  more  ignominious 
and  shameful,  and  was  no  doubt  contrived  between  Pilate  and  the  chief  priests.  2. 
But  on  the  part  of  God  we  may  see  something  of  the  wisdom  of  this  appointment. 
Prophecy  was  hereby  fulfilled,  which  said  that  He  should  be  numbered  with  trans- 
gressors (Isa.  liii.  11;  Mark  xv.  27,  28).  (Theological  Sketch-book.)  The  eros$  a 
revelation  of  human  sinfulness : — There  is  a  picture  I  have  seen  somewhere,  painted 
by  a  celebrated  artist,  in  which  one  aspect  of  the  crucifixion  is  very  significantly 
represented,  or  rather  suggested.  It  is  intended  to  bring  before  the  mind  the  after 
scenes  and  the  after  hours  of  that  memorable  day,  when  the  crowd  had  gone  back 
again  to  pursue  its  wonted  business  in  Jerusalem,  when  the  thick  gloom  bad  been 
dispelled,  and  the  clear  light  shone  once  more  on  that  fatal  spot  called  Calvary. 
The  body  of  the  Master  had  been  conveyed  to  the  sepulchre,  the  cross  itself  lies 
extended  on  the  ground,  and  a  band  of  little  children,  bright  with  the  glow  of  child- 
hood's innocence,  led  thither  by  curiosity  or  accident,  are  represented  as  bending 
over  the  signs  left  around  of  the  bloody  deed  which  has  that  day  been  accomplished. 
One  of  the  children  holds  in  his  hand  a  nail,  but  a  short  time  ago  piercing  the  hand 
or  the  foot  of  the  patient  Sufferer,  and  stands,  spell-bonnd  with  horror,  gazing  at  it. 
And  upon  every  face  the  painter  has  plainly  depicted  the  verdict  which  innocenc« 
inast  ever  give  with  regard  to  that  dreadful  tragedy.    It  is  so  we  would  desire  to 


OHAP.  xxuLl  ST.  LUKE.  669 

•onsider  the  subject  and  the  scene.  The  heart,  conceiving  aright  the  amazing 
impiety  culminating  at  the  cross,  may  well  take  this  attitude  of  wonder,  surprise, 
horror.  The  cross  comes  to  be  God's  great  indictment  against  man.  I.  The  first 
word  of  the  text  may  be  looked  upon  as  furnishing  us  with  the  first  count  of 
this  indictment  against  man.  It  supplies  localitt,  fixes  the  scene  of  thb 
DREADFUL  TRAGEDY  AS  HERE  UPON  EARTH.  "  There  they  orucified  Him."  The  place 
where  the  commonest  criminals  were  led  out  to  die  a  Ungering  death.  Earth  has 
her  mysteries,  and  this  is  one  of  them.  The  mystery  of  iniquity  culminates  here. 
It  has  lifted  up  its  impious  hands  against  God.  II.  The  second  word  of  the  text 
furnishes  us  with  a  further  point  in  the  indictment,  as  indicating  hcman  agency. 
"  There  they  crucified  Him."  The  actors  in  this  eventful  drama  were  men,  those 
among  whom  Christ  had  wrought  His  miracles  and  exercised  His  pure  and  bene- 
ficent ministry.  And  it  was  a  typical  act — such  an  act  as  man  perpetrates  every 
day.  Envy,  hatred,  indifference,  nailed  Christ  to  the  tree ;  and  while  these  exist 
in  the  heart,  what  spirit  shall  stand  excused  ?  III.  The  third  word  of  the  text  may 
be  looked  upon  as  enforcing  the  indictment,  since  it  implies  a  definite  and  dk- 
liiBEEATK  ACT.  "  There  they  crucified  Him."  What  hardness  and  callousness  of 
heart  was  exhibited  here  1  It  was  necessary  that  sin  should  show  its  exceeding  sin- 
lulness,  once  and  for  all,  truly  detestable  that  it  might  be  detested,  heinous  and  black 
as  perdition,  that  even  our  sinful  spirits  might  shrink  back  in  awe  and  trembUng. 
For  this  is  what  all  sin  is  tending  to :  contempt  and  callousness  at  the  sight  of 
suffering  worth,  scorn  of  innocence,  hatred  of  a  purity  which  condemns  our  darker 
deeds,  rejection  of  God  Himself  if  His  claims  interfere  with  our  selfish  schemes. 
IV.  The  final  and  hopeful  word  of  the  text  sheds  a  light  upon  this  indictment,  as 
indicating  a  Divine  Redeemer  working  amid  all.  "  There  they  crucified  Him." 
Strangely  enough,  it  is  the  Victim  Himself  who  invests  all  else  with  worth,  and 
makes  the  contemplation  of  such  a  deed  alone  profitable  to  us.  When  Socrated 
entered  into  prison,  they  said  of  it  that  it  was  a  prison  no  longer ;  the  dishonour 
and  the  infamy  had  passed  away  in  the  presence  of  such  resplendent  worth.  So, 
but  more  memorably,  it  is  at  the  cross.  The  place  is  nothing  ;  the  actors  sink  into 
insignificance ;  and  of  the  act  itself  we  care  nothing,  save  as  it  stands  associated 
with  Him.  There  is  a  law  of  compensation  in  all  things.  Bend  the  bough  of  the 
giant  oak  for  a  moment,  and  it  springs  back  with  a  momentum  proportionate  to  its 
strength.  And  so  it  is  with  this  Divine  One  who  has  bent  before  the  strong  blast  of 
the  adversary,  for  of  Him  it  is  written,  •'  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto 
Me."    {Walter  Baxendale.)         Christ  lifted  up: — I.  Remember  that  Jesus  had 

BAD   THB   CHANCE   OF  BEING   LIFTED  UP  AS  A  MONARCH  ALREADY,  AND   HAD  DECLINED  IT. 

1.  Men  offered  it  to  Him  (John  vi.  15 ;  xii.  13).  2.  The  devil  offered  to  make  Him 
a  king  also  (Matt.  iv.  9).  3.  Jesus  has  been  offered  the  true  dominion  of  the  whole 
world  in  this  showy  sort  of  way,  over  and  over  again  in  human  history  since.  ^  II. 
Understand  that  Jesus  was  to  be  ufted  up  as  a  sacrifice  fob  sm ;  hence,  lifted 
on  a  cross,  not  on  a  throne.  1.  Consider  the  spectacle  which  is  proposed  for  our 
imagination.  Let  us  seem  to  see  the  Saviour  already  nailed  in  crucifixion.  Christ 
was  lifted  up  as  an  object  of  scorn  and  contumely  (see  Luke  x.  35,  36).  Christ  was 
lifted  up  as  an  object  of  pity  and  love.  At  the  foot  of  the  cross  a  faithful  few  still 
lingered :  men  and  women  who  believed  in  Him,  and  clung  to  Him  even  in 
these  fallen  fortunes  to  the  very  last.  2.  Consider,  once  more,  the  force  exerted  by 
this  spectacle.  In  the  announcement  of  our  Lord  already  quoted,  He  says  that  it 
He  be  lifted  up  He  will  draw  all  men  unto  Him  ;  but  in  our  version  the  single  word 
nun  is  printed  in  italics.  Some  have  wasted  time  in  asserting  that  Jesus  meant 
what  they  name  as  "  the  elect " ;  some  have  said  that  He  meant  all  Jews ;  and 
others  have  declared  that  He  intended  to  include  all  things  whatsoever,  as  well 
as  men,  unto  His  uses  and  His  sovereignty.  He  would  gather  all  money ;  He  would 
collect  all  commerce ;  He  would  subjugate  aU  power ;  He  would  attract  all  art ;  He 
would  receive  the  trophies  of  all  science ;  He  would  bring  in  to  Himself  the  gains 
of  all  enterprise.  In  a  word,  the  kingdoms  of  a  united  world  should  become  the 
kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  His  Christ.  UI.  Recollect  that  the  final  oloby  or 
JssuB  Christ  will  be  to  be  lifted  up  as  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Prince  or 
Life.  1.  God  raised  Him  up  from  the  grave,  having  loosed  the  pains  of  death. 
This  was  the  great  argument  of  Simon  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The  raising 
of  Jesus  from  the  grave  was  the  pledge  of  His  exaltation  to  the  throne  of  heaven 

}Bee  Acts  ii.  30-32).  2.  The  Lord  has  lifted  Christ  up  to  a  place  at  EUs  right  hand 
see  Phil.  iL  9-11).  Satan's  kingdom  is  to  be  subdued  (see  Bev.  xiL  10).  All  the 
realms  of  this  world  are  to  give  their  tribute  V>  that  of  Christ  (see  Bev.  xi.  16). 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  xnit. 

The  kings  of  the  earth  are  to  bring  their  honour  in  to  beautily  His  capital  city. 
The  Church  is  to  be  the  Lamb's  wife.  The  King's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within. 
3.  Believers  must  lift  Him  up  as  the  one  Saviour  of  lost  souls.  It  is  just  Christ  crucified 
■who  is  the  only  Saviour,  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)      The  crucifixion  of  Christ : — I.  Wb 

PKOrOSE    TO    NOTICE  THE    CIRCUMSTANCES  UNDER  WHICH    THE  CRUCIFIXION    OF  OUB  LORD 

Jesus  was  PERFORMED.  1.  It  wiU  be  observed  that  the  place  at  which  He  suffered 
deserves  our  notice :  "  The  place  which  is  called  Calvary."  This  place  appointed  for 
the  death  of  Jesus,  to  use  the  language  of  Bishop  Taylor,  "  was  a  place  eminent  for 
the  publication  of  shame,  a  hill  of  death  and  of  dead  bones,  polluted  and  impure." 
Nor  must  we  account  it  to  be  a  trifling,  insignificant  circumstance  in  the 
Redeemer's  humiliation  that  this  was  the  spot  upon  which  we  find  He  passed  His  last 
moments,  and  that  He  was  to  bow  the  head,  and  to  give  up  the  ghost.  2.  You  will 
observe  that  the  mode  of  death  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  endured  at  this  place 
also  deserves  our  notice :  ' '  When  they  were  come  to  the  place  which  is  called 
Calvary,  there  they  crucified  Him."  (1)  A  most  painful  death.  (2)  An  exceedingly 
ignominious  death.  3.  It  must  also  be  observed  that  the  society  in  which  our 
Redeemer  at  this  place  suffered  deserves  notice.  4.  The  conduct  of  the  spectators 
who  witnessed  the  sufferings  of  our  Saviour  also  demands  our  notice.     II.  The 

CONNECTION    WHICH   THE   CRUCIFIXION    OF   THE   LoRD    JeSUS    HAS   WITH    THB   COUNSELS 

OF  Divine  mercy  and  the  welfare  of  the  human  race.  Here  there  are  three 
important  facts  to  be  noticed.  1.  The  crucifixion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  special 
result  of  the  Divine  foreknowledge  and  determination.  2.  And  more  particularly. 
The  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  was  a  perfect  and  efficacious  atonement  for 
human  sin.  3.  The  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  being  clearly  the  result  of  the 
Divine  foreknowledge  and  determination,  and  being  a  proper  and  efficacious  atone- 
ment for  human  sin,  "  it  was  at  the  foundation  of  the  mighty  mediatorial  empire." 
in.  The  practical  views  in  which  the  crucifixion  of  oub  Lobd  Jesus  should 
BE  contemplated.  1.  We  shall  contemplate  it  as  affording  the  most  affecting 
exhibition  of  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  2.  We  must  contemplate  our  Lord's 
crucifixion  as  being  an  astonishing  display  of  the  riches  of  Divine  love.  3.  We 
must  contemplate  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  as  furnishing  the  grand  theme 
for  ministerial  proclamation.      (J.  Parsons.)  Emphasis : — Scripture  depends 

more  upon  the  power  of  facts  than  of  figures  and  illustrations.  In  human  litera- 
ture  big  words  are  used  to  overlay  small  ideas ;  verbiage  is  laid  on  as  paint ;  the 
theme  is  smothered  under  the  gaudy  clothing  ;  and  sense  is  rendered  tributary  to 
soond.  Not  BO  here.  When  the  sacred  writers  have  anything  to  describe,  they 
depend  upon  the  force  of  the  thing  itself,  and  not  upon  the  manner  of  its  telling. 
All  they  seem  to  strive  at  is  plainness ;  simply  to  chronicle  the  event,  and  let  it 
speak  for  itself.  I.  There  they  crucified  Him.  Where  7  What  land  contracted 
the  disgrace  of  such  an  act  as  crucifying  the  Lord  of  glory  ?  Surely  some  land 
where  He  had  not  become  known ;  some  foreign  country  where  His  holy  words  had 
never  fallen  on  the  people's  ears  ;  some  distant  principality  where  the  mnsio  of  His 
voice  had  never  touched  the  echoes  into  sympathy.  It  must  have  been  in  some 
uncultured  territory  where  no  temples  were  erected ;  where  civilization  left  no  foot- 
print, and  where  no  god  was  known.  Was  it  in  some  savage  wild  where  barbarism 
revelled  ?  and  where  untrained  passion  clamoured  for  a  holocaust,  and  for  drink- 
offerings  of  blood  ?  No ;  it  was  not  in  such  a  land  that  they  crucified  Him.  It  was 
in  the  land  where  He  was  best  known — the  land  He  had  hallowed  by  His  advent, 
and  blessed  with  His  ministry ;  the  land  of  His  labours,  where  His  mightiest 
miracles  had  been  done,  and  His  tenderest  teachings  had  been  uttered.  Not  in  a 
godless  realm  without  a  temple  or  a  shrine  ;  but  where  they  bowed  the  knee,  and 
built  the  altar,  and  burned  the  sacrifice.  A  realm  where  they  cried,  "  Lord,  Lord"  ; 
■where,  with  broad  phylactery,  the  Pharisee  rehearsed  the  law ;  and  where  the  temple 
lifted  its  golden  vanes  beneath  the  sky,  as  the  tribes  went  np  with  offerings  to  Uie 
Lord.  It  was  in  no  barbarous  seclusion,  but  in  a  region  where  the  borrowed  arts  of 
tutored  Borne  flourished,  and  where  the  legacies  of  Solomon  were  respected  and 
enshrined.  It  was  in  Galilee,  on  whose  soil  He  made  His  first  alighting,  and  whose 
fields  and  lanes,  gardens  and  mountain  groves,  He  had  hallowed  with  His  public 
ministries  and  His  private  communions.  In  Jewry,  whose  coasts  were  consecrated 
by  His  labours,  there  they  crucified  Him  1  II.  There  they  crucified  Him.  Who 
are  •'  they  "  ?  Who  did  this  deed?  What  wicked  hands  were  red  with  this  precioos 
blood  t  Were  they  those  of  some  hireling  assassins  from  afar,  who  were  running 
riot  in  Jerusalem  for  a  time?  Hi,d  violence  got  the  upper  hand  of  law  and  order, 
and  was  Jesus  the  victim  of  a  turbulent  incursion  of  foreign  maraoders  ?    Or  had 


CBAP.  xxui.]  8T.  LUKE.  671 

the  Roman  tyrant  despatobed  some  myrmidon  to  put  to  death  a  teacher  of  doctrines 
■which  wrapped  up  liberty  in  their  articles,  lest  men  should  grow  too  free  in  mind  to 
brook  subserviency  as  citizens  T  No  ;  neither  hypothesis  is  right.  The  execution 
bore  the  imprimatur  of  the  government.  It  was  a  State  transaction.  Preceded  by 
a  trial,  and  surrounded  with  all  the  pomps  and  formulas  of  law.  It  was  the  act  of 
the  piople.  What  people?  The  Jews.  The  very  men  whom  He  had  chosen  as 
His  own  peculiar  and  anointed  ones.  III.  There  they  ceucifibd  Him.  Look  at 
the  deed.  Crucified  Him  I  In  a  place  which  should  have  for  ever  resounded  with 
the  praises  of  His  name ;  and  by  a  people  who  should  have  enshrined  Him  in 
their  hearts,  and  handed  down  His  worship  to  their  children's  children.  He  was 
crucified.  They  did  not  decorate  the  land  with  sculptured  memorials  of  His 
fame;  they  did  not  build  altars  to  His  praise;  they  did  not  wait  upon  Him, 
adore  Him,  love  Him.  No;  they  crucified  Him.  IV.  Once  more  we  shift  the 
emphasis  from  the  deed  to  the  victim.  There  they  crucified  Him.  0  look  at 
Him— Him  who  is  thus  pierced;  look  at  Him,  and  mourn  1  Whom  did  they 
crucify  ?  It  was  customary  to  wreak  this  punishment  upon  their  greatest  crimi- 
nals. But  here  is  Barabbas  walking  free;  the  notable  robber,  suspected  of  crimes 
untold,  loose  on  the  pavements  of  Jerusalem.  Yet,  "He,"  this  Jesus,  is  handed 
over  to  be  crucified.  What  1  then  is  He  a  greater  robber  than  Barabbas,  that  He  is 
to  be  crucified  ?  Is  this  why  He  may  not  be  released  ?  He  has  stolen  away  that 
which  Barabbas  could  not  touch.  He  has  taken  from  the  law  its  curse.  He  has 
torn  from  death  its  sting.  He  has  despoiled  the  grave  of  its  terror  and  its  victory. 
Is  not  this  a  notable  robber  ?  But,  0  unnatural  retribution  which  clamours  for  the 
cross,  for  such  an  One  as  this  1  Yet  so  it  is.  They  crucified  "  Him  " — Him,  "  the 
Lord  of  life  and  glory."  The  meek,  the  kind,  the  gentle,  Man  of  Nazareth  ;  they 
crucified  Him — who  goes  about  teaching  good,  spreading  good,  doing  good  ;  lifting 
the  fallen,  helping  tibe  needy,  lighting  the  dark ;  they  crucify  Him.  And,  alas  I 
brethren,  Calvary  is  not  merely  at  Jerusalem  ;  the  place  of  a  skull  is  not  only  at 
Golgotha.  Look  over  the  arena  you  have  crossed  during  the  last  week  of  your  life, 
and  yoQ  will  traverse  a  Calvary  there.  You  may  see  the  place  where  the  cross  has 
been  reared  afresh  there.  You  may  trace  the  details  of  the  drama  there.  Oh  1 
think  not,  ye  daily  trifiers  with  the  grace  of  the  loving  God,  that  there  is  no  place 
near  you  where  Jeflus  is  not  crucified.  Every  spot  you  stain  by  sin ;  everywhere 
where  you  have  trampled  on  the  fair  commands  of  God ;  everywhere  where  the 
Spirit  has  been  quenched,  and  the  restraint  neglected — is  a  Calvary ;  and  thkke,  in 
that  unwilling  and  listless  heart  of  yours — there  you  "  crucify  afresh  the  Lord  of 
glory,  and  put  Him  to  an  open  shame."  {A.  Mursell.)  The  death  of  Jesus,  and 
Its  effects : — In  meditating  upon  these  words,  I  would  direct  your  attention,  first,  to 
the  MANKEB  of  Jesus'  death,  and  then  to  its  effects.  1.  Jesus  dies  with  a  sense  of 
inward  freedom.  The  Bible  speaks  of  the  bondage  of  death.  What  a  sad  impres- 
sion does  a  death-bed  give  of  the  bondage  of  man,  how  painfully  does  it  bring  home 
to  us  the  fact  that  man  is  not  free,  that  he  is  in  servitude  to  death !  Hence  men 
have  given  Death  a  sceptre  and  a  sword,  have  put  a  scythe  into  his  hand  and  a 
crown  upon  his  head.  But  in  the  death  of  our  Lord  we  see  nothing  of  all  this. 
Very  different  is  His  death  from  ours.  When  death  comes  upon  us,  it  generally 
takes  us  by  surprise,  and  herein  too  does  it  prove  its  might,  in  that  it  makes  men 
its  captives  and  its  prey,  before  ever  they  are  aware  of  its  approach.  In  most  cases, 
Death  administers  a  sleeping-draught  before  he  deals  the  final  blow ;  and  it  is  in  a 
state  of  sleep  and  of  dreaminess  that  by  far  the  greater  proportion  of  the  dying  go 
their  way  into  that  long  slumber.  But  when  death  came  to  Jesus,  it  found  Him 
waking.  How  regal  is  the  impression  it  conveys  1  And  let  me  here  remind  you,  to 
what  an  apparent  chance  it  is  we  owe  it,  that  we  see  Jesus  die  in  such  a  kingly  way. 
2.  Christ  dies  with  the  clearest  consciousness.  Would  that  the  experience  of  each 
of  you  in  that  hour  may  be,  that  when  all  earthly  lights  have  faded  from  your 
view,  God,  as  a  great  sun,  will  fill  the  eye  of  your  soul  I  What  a  genial  warmth 
would  then  be  shed  upon  the  cold  last  hour !  how  would  the  thought  of  God  bridge 
the  gulf  which  separates  time  from  eternity  1  Even  Christ  had  thoughts  of  His 
own  in  the  closing  hours  of  His  life ;  He  thought  on  'Bis  people  ;  He  thought  on  all 
the  past  of  His  earthly  history.  But  when  the  last  moment  came,  the  thought  with 
which  He  bowed  His  head  was  the  thought  of  Qoi.  He  died  with  a  clear  conscious- 
ness of  what  lay  before  Him.  3.  He  dies  with  the  fullest  assurance.  This  is 
testified  by  His  dying  cry.  He  knows  that  it  is  into  the  hands  of  the  Father  that 
He  is  giving  up  His  Spirit.  We  are  not,  God  be  praised!  without  instances  of 
blessed  deaUx-beds  among  ourselves.    IL  Saoh  a  death  cannot  be  nrithoat  effeot 


578  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATCH.  [chap.  xxm. 


upon  those  who  witness  it.  It  will  quicken  the  pioas  and  susceptible  ;  it  will  swa 
the  hard-hearted  and  ungodly.  When  the  centurion  of  the  Boman  guard  saw  what 
had  happened,  he  glorified  God,  saying,  "Truly  this  was  a  righteous  man,"  or 
"  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God."  To  die  with  perfect  consciousness,  like  Jeaus, 
is,  indeed,  a  privilege  which  is  not  granted  to  every  child  of  God  ;  and  it  is  this 
that  makes  death  so  sad,  if  not  to  him  who  suffers,  at  least  to  the  relatives  and 
friends  who  stand  by.  To  witness  a  Christian  die  f  uUy  conscious  and  self -possessed, 
is  such  a  sublime  and  elevating  scene !  And  the  full  assurance  on  a  bed  of  death 
with  which  Christ  commended  His  spirit  to  His  Father,  He  grants  in  mercy  to  His 
children  too.  (A.  Tholuck.)  The  Passion  of  our  Lord  : — I.  We  should  notice 
that  these  sufferings  of  our  blessed  Lord  were  most  beal;  that  He  did  indeed  suffer 
all  this,  most  truly;  that  in  that  body  which  "  was  prepared  "for  Him,  He  did 
bear  every  possible  sting  of  physical  agony;  that  He  was  held  up  in  this  fierce  strife 
with  pain,  until  He  had  explored  all  its  secrets.  His  mind  and  human  spirit  were 
really  the  seat  of  every  storm  of  deepest  sorrow  which  the  heart  of  man  could 
know.  II.  Next  to  it  we  should  ever  hear  in  mind,  beneath  the  Cross,  that  all  these 
sufferings  were — fob  ds.  We  must  "  look  on  Him  whom  we  have  pierced."  III. 
That  these  sufferings  were  needful.  It  becomes  us  to  speak  with  the  deepest 
reverence  when  we  say  that  anything  is  rendered  needful  by  the  character  of  God, 
Bather  is  it  the  truest  reverence  to  see  that  thus  it  must  have  been,  if  man  were  to 
be  redeemed  at  all ;  that  there  was,  in  the  very  perfection  of  God's  character — the 
one  fixed  centre  of  all  being — a  necessity  for  this  infinite  suffering ;  that  the  nature 
which  had  sinned  must  pay  the  price  of  sinning,  must  bear  the  wrath  it  had 
deserved ;  that  without  it  there  could  not  be,  in  the  world  of  God's  holy  and 
righteous  love,  forgiveness  and  restoration  for  the  fallen  and  the  separated ;  that 
"  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered."  {Bishop  Samuel  Wilberforce.)  The  cruci- 
fixion:— I.  The  CBUCIFIXION  of  ChBIST,  as  ILLUSTBAXINa  TEK  FEABFUIi  POSSIBILITIBS 

OF  the  hatbed  of  man.     1.  This  is  seen  in  the  central  act  of  this  awful  tragedy. 

(1)  The  most  painful  of  all  forms  of  punishment.  (2)  The  most  degrading.  Not 
a  Jewish,  but  heathen,  punishment,  and  that  on  the  worst  of  criminals.  2.  This  is 
shown  in  the  scene.  (1)  The  place  (Heb.  ziii.  11-13).  (2)  The  companionship. 
(3)  The  insulting  taunts.  II.  The  cbccifixion  of  Chbist,  ab  illustbatino  His 
ALL-powEBFCL  LOVE.  1.  As  Seen  in  the  infinite  contrast  between  Christ  and  His 
taunting  murderers.  (1)  The  nature  of  the  contrast.  (2)  The  elevation  and 
matchlessness  of  the  spirit  of  this  conquest  of  love.  2.  As  seen  in  Christ's  readi- 
ness and  ability  to  save.  (1)  The  contrast  in  the  spirit  of  the  two  thieves.  (2) 
The  contrast  in  the  eternal  destiny  of  the  thieves.  (3)  The  condition  on  which 
their  respective  destiny  hung.    III.  The  ceucifixion  of  Chbist,  as  illostbated  is 

ITS  BEABIKO  ON  TEE  MATEBIAL  DESTINY  OF  THIS  GLOBE,  AND  ON  THE  PBESENT  SALVATION 

OF  UEM.  1.  The  illustration  which  the  darkness  furnishes  in  respect  to  the  changes 
which  this  earth  is  to  undergo.     (1)  The  greatness  of  the  change  (2  Pet.  iiu  8-12). 

(2)  The  purpose  of  the  change  (2  Pet.  iii.  13  ;  Bom.  viii.  19-22).  2.  The  illustration 
which  the  rending  of  the  temple's  veil  furnishes  in  respect  to  present  salvation 
(Heb.  z.  19,  20).  Lessons  :  1.  The  ignorance  of  sinners  of  the  possibilities  of  the 
evil  nature  within  them.  2.  The  ignorance  of  sinners  of  the  real  enormity  of  their 
sins.  3.  The  ignorance  of  sinners  of  what  God  is  doing  for  them,  even  when  they 
are  hating  Him.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  A  look  at  the  three  crosses  : — Jnst  look 
at  the  one  on  the  right.  Its  victim  dies  scoffing.  More  tremendons  than  his 
physical  anguish  is  his  scorn  and  hatred  of  Him  on  the  middle  cross.  If  the 
scoffer  could  get  one  hand  loose,  and  He  were  within  reach,  he  would  smite  the 
middle  sufferer  in  the  face.  He  hates  Him  with  a  perfect  hatred.  I  think  he 
wishes  he  were  down  on  the  ground,  that  he  might  spear  Him.  He  envies  the 
mecnanics  who,  vrith  their  nails,  have  nailed  Him  fast.  It  was  in  some  such  hate 
that  Voltaire,  in  his  death  hour,  because  he  thought  he  saw  Christ  in  his  bedroom, 
got  up  on  his  elbow,  and  cried  out :  "  Crush  that  wretch ! "  What  had  the  middle 
cross  done  to  arouse  up  this  right-hand  cross  ?  Nothing.  Oh,  the  enmity  of  the 
natural  heart  against  Christ  1  The  world  likes  a  sentimental  Christ  or  a  philanthropio 
Christ ;  but  a  Christ  who  comes  to  snatch  men  from  their  sins,  away  with  Him  t 
Men  say :  "  Back  with  Him  from  the  heart.  I  will  not  let  Eiim  take  my  sins. 
If  He  will  die,  let  Him  die  for  Himself,  not  for  me."  There  has  always  been  a  war 
between  this  right  hand  cross  and  the  middle  cross,  and  wherever  there  is  an  un- 
believing heart,  there  the  fight  goes  on.  Here  from  the  right-hand  orosa  I  go  to 
the  left.  Paaa  clear  to  the  other  aide.  That  victim  also  twists  himself  upon  the 
naila  to  look  at  the  centre  cross — yet  net  to  aooff.    It  is  to  worship.   He,  too,  would 


flHAJ?.  xxni.]  ST.  LUKE.  67* 

like  to  gftt  his  hand  loose,  not  to  smite,  but  to  delirer  the  sufferer  of  the  middle 
«roBS.  He  cries  to  the  railer  cursing  on  the  other  side  :  "  Silence  !  between  us  is 
innocence  in  agony.  We  Buffer  for  our  crimes.  Silence  1 "  Gather  around  this 
left-hand  cross.  O !  je  people,  be  not  afraid.  Bitter  herbs  are  sometimes  a  tonic 
for  the  body,  and  the  bitter  aloes  that  grow  on  this  tree  shall  give  strength  and  life 
to  thy  soul.  This  left-hand  cross  is  a  repenting  cross.  Likewise  must  we  repent. 
Yon  say:  "I  have  stolen  nothing."  I  reply:  We  have  all  been  guilty  of  the 
mightiest  felony  of  the  universe,  for  we  have  robbed  God — robbed  Him  of  our  time, 
robbed  Him  of  our  talents,  robbed  Him  of  our  services.  This  left-hand  cross  was  a 
believing  cross.  There  was  no  guess-work  in  that  prayer ;  no  *•  if  "  in  that  suppli- 
cation. The  left-hand  cross  flung  itself  at  the  foot  of  the  middle  cross,  expecting 
mercy.  Faith  is  only  just  opening  the  hand  to  take  what  Christ  offers  us.  Tap 
not  at  the  door  of  God's  mercy  with  the  tip  of  your  fingers,  but  as  a  warrior,  with 
gauntleted  flsts,  beats  at  the  castle  gate,  so,  with  all  the  aroused  energies  of  our 
souls,  let  us  pound  at  the  gate  of  heaven.  That  gate  is  locked.  You  go  to  it  with 
a  bunch  of  keys.  You  try  philosophy :  that  will  not  open  it.  You  try  good  works : 
that  will  not  open  it.  A  large  door  generally  has  a  ponderous  key.  I  take  the 
Oross  and  place  the  foot  of  it  in  the  socket  of  the  lock,  and  by  the  two  arms  of  the 
Cross  I  turn  the  lock  and  the  door  opens.  Now  come  to  the  middle  cross.  We 
stood  at  the  one  and  found  it  yielded  poison.  We  stood  at  the  other  and  found  it 
yielded  bitter  aloes.  Come  now  to  the  middle  cross,  and  shake  down  apples  of 
love.  You  never  saw  so  tender  a  scene  as  this.  You  may  have  seen  father,  or 
mother,  or  companion,  or  child  die,  but  never  so  affecting  a  scene  as  this.  It  was 
a  suffering  cross.  It  was  a  vicarious  cross — the  right-hand  cross  suffered  for  itself ; 
the  left-hand  cross  for  itself ;  but  the  middle  cross  for  you.  My  hand  is  free  now, 
because  Christ's  was  crushed.  My  brow  is  painless  now,  because  Christ's  was  torn. 
My  soul  escapes,  because  Christ's  was  bound.  When  the  Swiss  were,  many  years 
ago,  contending  against  their  enemies  they  saw  these  enemies  standing  in  solid 
phalanx,  and  knew  not  how  to  break  their  ranks ;  but  one  of  their  heroes  rushed 
out  in  front  of  his  regiment  and  shouted — "  Make  way  for  liberty ! "  The  weapons 
of  the  enemy  were  plunged  into  his  heart,  but  while  they  were  slaying  him  of  course 
their  ranks  were  broken,  and  through  that  gap  in  the  ranks  the  Swiss  marched  to 
victory.  Christ  saw  all  the  powers  of  darkness  assailing  men.  He  cried  out : 
"Make  way  for  the  redemption  of  the  world."  All  the  weapons  of  infernal  wrath 
struck  Him,  but  as  they  struck  Him  our  race  marched  out  free.  To  this  middle 
oross,  my  dying  hearers,  look,  that  your  souls  may  live.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  The  Cross : — 
I.  The  CBUciFnuoN.  The  horrible  fact.  (1)  This  form  of  punishment  was  most 
painful,  lingering,  ignominious.  (2)  In  the  case  of  our  Lord,  in  every  sense,  unjust, 
unpardonable,  and  an  exhibition  of  frenzied  selfishness  and  cruelty.  2.  The 
prophetic  place — "Calvary."  (1)  Outside  the  city  (Heb.  xiii.  11,  12 ;  Lev.  xvi.  27). 
8.  The  wonderful  prayer.  (1)  The  lovingness  of  its  plea.  (2)  The  strength  of  its 
argument.  (3)  A  model  for  all  Christians.  (4)  A  proof  of  Christ's  interest  in  all 
sinners.  4.  The  meanness  of  human  nature  ^vers.  35-37,  39).  5.  The  significant 
superscription.  (1)  Significant  in  the  title  given  to  Jesus.  (2)  Significant  in  the 
languages  in  which  it  was  written.  II.  Lkssoks.  1.  The  crucifixion  of  Christ 
reveals  the  fearful  prerogative  of  free  agency.  2.  The  unfathomable  depths  of 
human  depravity.  8.  What  horrible  crimes  may  be  perpetrated  in  name  of  holiest 
principles.  4.  How  God's  most  gracious  purposes  may  be  wrought  out  by  man's 
most  heinous  malevolence.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Who  crucified  Jetui  t — He 
that  says  he  did  not  crucify  Christ  is  His  greatest  crucifier ;  he  that  will  confess 
that  they  were  his  blasphemies  which  spat  upon  His  face,  his  briberies  that  nailed 
His  hands  to  the  cross,  his  gluttony  and  drunkenness  that  gave  Him  gall  to  drink, 
his  wrath  and  malice  that  pierced  Him  in  the  side,  his  disobedience  against  magis- 
trates that  bruised  Him  in  the  head,  his  wanton  apparel  that  stripped  Him  of  His 
robe,  he  that  will  not  only  die  with  Christ  in  his  arms,  as  old  Simeon  did,  but 
acknowledge  that  Christ  died  by  his  arms,  he  shall  find  peace  at  the  last,  and 
righteousness  with  the  God  of  his  salvation.  What  became  of  our  Saviour's  reed, 
and  of  His  robe,  we  find  in  holy  Scripture— they  were  taken  from  Him  by  the 
soldiers;  but  it  is  not  written  whether  any  man  took  up  the  crown  of  thorns,  as  if 
that  were  our  share,  or  any  man's  else  who  is  goaded  with  true  compunction. 
And  to  say  truth,  all  the  sins  which  we  do  commit,  let  us  make  the  best  of  them, 
are  but  thorns  and  briers ;  but  if  we  eonfess  them  in  humihty,  and  ask  pardon  in 
tears  and  contrition,  then  they  are  corona  tpinea,  a  crown  of  thorns.  {Bi$lum 
Haeket.) 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xnn, 

Ver.  34.     Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not.— Tfu  unknown  depths  of 
fin : — I.  How  do  sinneks  come  at  thbib  notion  that  sin  is  so  trifling  an  atfaib  T 

1.  They  have  a  very  limited  view  of  their  own  feelings  and  purposes  while  in  a 
course  of  sin ;  and  infer  that  they  cannot  be  very  guilty,  because  they  have  never 
been  conscious  of  a  very  evil  intention.  2.  Many  derive  their  limited  views  of  their 
sins  from  their  meagre  conceptions  of  the  Divine  law.  3.  Others  erect  a  bar  to  con- 
viction of  personal  guilt  out  of  materials  taken  from  infirmities  incident  to  human 
nature.  4.  Others  diminish  their  conceptions  of  their  guilt,  by  comparing  them- 
selves with  greater  sinners.  5.  Sin  appears  very  different  according  to  the  different 
light  and  circumstances  in  which  it  is  seen.  6.  Again,  delay  of  punishment  goes  to 
confirm  men  in  the  opinion  that  sin  is  a  trifle.     II.  That  their  views  of  sin  are 

EZCEEDINOLT  lilMITED,  OB  THAT  SIN  IS  QUITE  ANOTHER  THIMO  IN  FACT,  FROM  WHAT  IT  IS 

IN  THE  sinner's  ESTIMATION,  1.  It  is  Very  different  in  its  effects  from  what  they 
esteem  it.  2.  Sin  is  very  different  if  we  consider  the  state  of  heart  which  gives 
birth  to  iti  3.  The  costly  expiation  for  sin  shows  it  to  be  no  trifle.  4.  The 
retributions  of  eternity  will  make  sin  to  appear  quite  another  thing  from  what  it 
is  here  esteemed.  (P.  Cooke.)  Prayer  for  a  murderer : — Joseph  Bobbins  wa» 
a  bridge  watchman  on  a  railway.  He  was  murdered  by  a  neighbour  who  wanted  to 
get  his  money.  The  murderer  was  caught  directly  after.  During  the  trial  he  mado 
this  confession  in  open  court : — "  I  knew  that  Bobbins  had  just  received  his 
month's  wages,  and  I  resolved  to  have  his  money.  I  got  a  shot-gun  and  went  to 
the  bridge.  As  I  came  near  to  the  watch-house,  on  looking  through  the  window, 
I  saw  Bobbins  sitting  inside.  His  head  and  shoulders  only  could  be  seen.  I  raised 
the  gun,  took  aim  and  fired.  I  waited  a  few  minutes  to  see  if  the  report  of  the  gun 
had  alarmed  any  one,  but  all  was  still.  Then  I  went  up  to  the  watch-house  door, 
and  found  Bobbins  on  his  knees  praying.  Very  plainly  I  heard  him  say :  *  Oh, 
God,  have  mercy  on  the  man  who  did  this,  and  spare  him  for  Jesus'  sake.'  I  was 
horrified ;  I  did  not  dare  to  enter  the  house.  I  couldn't  touch  that  man's  money. 
Instead  of  this,  I  turned  and  ran  away,  I  knew  not  whither.  His  words  have 
haunted  me  ever  since."  Christ's  pardoning  mercy : — "  God  is  great  in  Sinai.  The 
thunders  precede  Him,  the  lightnings  attend  Him,  the  earth  trembles,  the  moun* 
tains  fall  in  fragments.  But  there  is  a  greater  God  than  this.  On  Calvary,  nailed 
to  a  cross,  wounded,  thirsting,  dying.  He  cries,  *  Father,  forgive  them,  they  know 
not  what  they  do  ! '  Great  is  the  religion  of  power,  but  greater  is  the  religion  of 
love.  Great  is  the  religion  of  implacable  justice,  but  greater  is  the  religion  of 
pardoning  mercy."  {Senor  Castclar.)  The  first  word  of  the  dying  Jesus  : — Let  the 
first  word  of  the  dying  Jesus  be  the  subiect  of  our  meditation.  It  is — I.  A  word  of 
peace  in  the  storm  of  suffering.  U.  A  word  of  love  in  the  tumult  of  hatred.  III. 
A  word  of  excuse  amid  the  depths  of  wickedness.  {A  St'dcker.)  Christ's  inter- 
cession on  the  cross : — I.  Observe  the  petition  itself.  1.  The  magnitude  of  the 
blessing  prayed  for.  2.  The  extreme  unworthiness  of  the  objects.  3.  The  heinous 
nature  of  their  offence.  4.  The  efficacy  of  the  petition  in  securing  the  blessing 
prayed  for.  II.  The  plea  by  which  the  petition  is  enforced — "  they  know  not 
what  they  do."    1.  It  is  such  as  would  have  not  been  found  by  any  other  advocate. 

2.  It  is  a  plea  which  shows  that  sin  has  different  degrees  of  guilt,  according  to  the 
circumstances  nnder  which  it  is  committed.  3.  It  is  a  plea  which  teaches  us  that 
for  some  there  was  no  mercy,  though  there  might  be  for  those  on  whose  behalf  it 
was  offered.  There  is  a  sin  unto  death,  which  has  no  forgiveness  in  this  world, 
nor  in  that  which  is  to  come  (Matt.  xii.  32).  4.  Though  their  ignorance  afforded  \ 
plea  for  mercy,  they  were  not  to  be  pardoned  without  repentance.    Application 

1.  We  see  there  is  that  in  tVk  nature  of  sin  which  surpasses  all  our  conceptions 

2.  Still,  we  learn  that  notwithstanding  the  evil  nature  of  sin,  there  is  no  reason  foi 
despair,  not  even  for  the  chief  of  sinners.  3.  The  conduct  of  our  blessed  Lord  is 
set  before  us  in  this  instance  as  an  example,  teaching  us  what  mast  be  our  spirit 
towards  onr  enemies  and  persecutors.  Stephen  followed  this  example,  and  we  must 
learn  to  do  the  same  (Acts  vii.  60 ;  Matt.  t.  44,  45).  {Theological  Sketch-book.) 
Christ's  prayer  for  ignorant  sinners  : — I.  Sin  is  founded  in  much  ionobancb.  1. 
Men  are  ignorant  of  its  extreme  evil  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  Men  are  ignorant  of 
the  baneful  influence  of  sin  upon  themselves.  They  are  not  aware  how  it  hardens 
the  heart,  stupifies  the  conscience,  settles  into  habit,  and  at  length  gains  complete 
ascendency.  3.  Men  are  ignorant  of  the  pernicioas  effect  of  sin  on  others.  Few 
sins  are  confined  to  the  transgressor  only :  they  have  a  relative  influence.  4.  Mea 
are  ignorant  of  the  dreadful  consequences  of  sin  in  another  world.  There  is  a  futnrt 
state  of  gracious  reward  for  the  righteous,  and  of  awful  retribution  for  the  wicked. 


CMAP.  xii/*.]  ST.  LUKE.  615 

n.  loNOBANCE  IS  MO  scTFiciENT  EXCUSE  FOR  SIN.  In  some  instances  it  mitigates 
offence.  1.  Ignorance  itself  is  sin.  In  all  cases  it  is  so,  where  the  capacity  and 
opportunity  of  knowledge  are  afforded.  2.  The  law  of  God  condemns  all  sin,  every 
kind  and  degree  of  sin.  3.  Every  act  of  sin  implies  a  sinful  nature :  it  springs 
from  a  depraved  heart.  III.  Fobgiveness  of  sin  is  an  act  of  Divink  mebcy,  ani> 
THE  FRCiT  OF  THE  Savioub's  INTERCESSION.  From  the  subject  learn — 1.  To  regard 
the  intercession  of  Jesus  iu  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  2.  To  imitate  Jesus  in  the- 
forgiveness  of  injuries.  {T.  Kidd.)  Father,  forgive  them  I — I.  We  see  the  love 
or  Jesds  enddbino.  II.  We  see  that  love  bbvealino  itself.  Love  can  use  nc» 
better  instrument  than  prayer.  To  this  present  our  Lord  Jesus  continues  to  bless 
the  people  of  His  choice  by  continually  interceding  for  them  (Eom.  viii.  34 ;  Heb. 
vii.  25).  III.  Wb  see  fob  what  that  love  pbats.  Forgiveness  is  the  first,  chief, 
and  basis  blessing.  Forgiveness  from  the  Father  can  even  go  so  far  as  to  pardon 
the  murder  of  His  Son.  Forgiveness  is  the  great  petition  of  our  Lord's  sacrifice. 
Love  admits  that  pardon  is  needed,  and  it  shudders  at  the  thought  of  what  must 
come  to  the  guilty  if  pardon  be  not  given.  IV.  We  see  how  the  loving  Jesus 
PRATS.  Are  there  any  so  guilty  that  Jesus  would  refuse  to  intercede  for  them  ? 
V.  Wk  see  how  His  prateb  both  wabns  and  woog.  It  warns,  for  it  suggests  that 
there  is  a  limit  to  the  possibility  of  pardon.  Men  may  so  sin  that  there  shall 
remain  no  plea  of  ignorance;  nay,  no  plea  whatever.  It  woos,  for  it  proves  that  if 
there  be  a  plea,  Jesus  will  find  it.  VL  Wb  seb  how  He  instructs  from  the  cbosb. 
He  teaches  us  to  put  the  best  construction  on  the  deeds  of  our  fellow-men,  and  to 
discover  mitigating  circumstances  when  they  work  us  grievous  ill.  He  teaches  na 
to  forgive  the  utmost  wrong  (Mark  xi.  25).  He  teaches  us  to  pray  for  others  to  our 
last  breath  (Acts  vii.  59,  60).  That  glorious  appeal  to  the  Divine  Fatherhood,  once 
made  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  still  prevails  for  us.  Let  the  chief  of  sinners  come  unto 
God  with  the  music  of  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  sounding  in  their  ears.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  prayer  of  Christ  for  His  murderers: — You  have  in  these  worda 
an  affecting  prayer,  enforced  by  a  plea  equally  affecting.  I.  Your  attention  is 
invited  to  the  prayer,  which,  in  whatever  light  regarded,  is  fitted  to  awaken  profound 
emotion  and  salutary  reflection.  1.  Observe  the  persons  on  whose  behalf  it  was 
presented — the  men  who  perpetrated  the  most  flagitious  and  sanguinary  deed  that 
ever  stained  with  its  pollutions  the  face  of  the  earth — the  men  who  crucified  the 
Son  of  God.  The  moral  turpitude  of  their  crime  was  aggravated  by  two  con- 
siderations. In  the  first  place,  the  victim  of  their  ferocity  was  guiltless  of  the 
smallest  offence.  They  were  guilty  of  innocent  blood  1  In  the  next  place,  their 
conduct  was  aggravated  by  the  more  than  ordinary  rancour,  the  pitiless  hatred  with, 
which  they  pursued  Him  to  the  grave.  2.  Not  less  remarkable  is  the  subject  of  the- 
prayer  itsel£  It  amounts  to  nothing  less  than  that  the  men  who  nailed  Him  to  the- 
cross  might  live  to  put  off  the  savage  nature  which  could  revel  in  the  blood  of 
innocence,  and,  through  repentance  and  faith,  be  qualified  for  an  eternal  alUance 
with  Himself  in  the  glory  of  His  mediatorial  kingdom.  Such  is  the  compassion  of 
Jesus  Christ.  3.  The  time  and  the  circumstances  of  this  prayer  render  it  peculiarly 
interesting.  That  which  renders  it  worthy  of  particular  notice,  as  illustrative  of 
the  grace  of  Christ,  is,  that  He  offered  it  up  just  at  the  time  of  His  suspension  on 
the  cross,  at  the  moment  when  His  agonies  were  most  severe,  when  His  nerves 
were  racked  with  keenest  suffering.  His  languor  and  exhaustion  might  be  greater 
afterwards,  but  His  sensibility  to  pain  was,  perhaps,  most  exquisite  at  this  critical 
moment.  Yet  this  is  the  point  of  time  at  which  He  breathes  forth  the  desires  of 
His  soul  for  mercy  on  His  destroyers.  There  are  two  observations  suggested  by  % 
this  fact.  In  the  first  place,  the  calmness,  the  self-possession,  the  sustainecl 
dignity  of  the  mind  of  the  Eedeemer  at  this  appalling  crisis,  demonstrate  the  fixed 
resolution  with  which  He  was  bent  on  the  design  of  His  death.  In  the  second  place, 
I  observe,  that  there  was  a  remarkable  fitness  in  the  prayer  of  Jesus  Christ,  pre- 
sented by  Himself  at  this  awful  season.  He  suffered  and  He  died  as  the  Lamb  of 
the  great  sacrifice  for  the  expiation  of  human  guilt.  And  being  Himself  both  the; 
victim  and  the  priest,  there  was  a  peculiar  fitness  in  His  also  interceding  on  behali 
of  the  guilty,  at  the  time  when,  as  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession.  He  wa» 
offering  the  blood  of  atonement.  IL  This  prayer  is  accompanied  by  a  plea  not  les» 
remarkable  and  affecting.  •'  For  they  know  not  what  they  do  1 "  1.  How  far  were 
the  men  who  crucified  our  Lord  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  transaction  in  which 
theiy  were  engaged  ?  That  they  were  implicated  in  innocent  blood  they  knew ;  bni 
that  their  crime  was  still  more  deeply  coloured  from  the  supernatural  dignity  o£ 
their  yictim,  of  this  tbey  were  ignorant.    2.  How  far,  then,  was  this  their  ignorance  m 


S76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxra. 

plea  for  their  forgiveness  ?  The  plea  does  not  proceed,  I  conceive,  on  the  con- 
cession o)  their  comparative  innocence,  but  upon  the  hopeless  and  inevitable  rain 
into  which  these  blinded  wretches  were  hastening  to  plunge.  It  was  the  dreadful 
ruin  to  which  the  blind  madness  of  these  men  was  hurrying  them  onwards,  that 
awakened  the  pity  of  the  Eedeemer,  even  amidst  the  agonies  of  His  own  broken 
heart,  and  drew  from  His  suppliant  voice  that  prayer,  "Forgive  them,  Father! 
they  know  not  what  they  do  I "  Oh,  how  mysterious,  how  ineffable,  the  com- 
passion of  Jesus  Christ!  The  prayer  itself  contained  a  teaching  proof  of  the 
infinite  mercy  of  the  Eedeemer ;  but,  if  possible,  the  plea  by  which  He  enforces 
that  prayer,  multipUes  that  proof,  and  places  His  love  to  miserable  men  in  a  hght 
still  more  affecting  and  overwhelming.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Chriat's  prayer  for 
His  murderers : — The  words  of  the  dying  are  wont  to  be  much  observed.  When  men 
depart  out  of  the  body,  they  are  usually  more  serious  and  divine,  and  speak  with 
greater  weight.  Especially  the  speeches  of  the  godly  dying  are  to  be  regarded, 
who,  having  laid  aside  worldly  affairs  and  earthly  thoughts,  are  wholly  exercised  in 
the  contemplation  of  heavenly  things.  Now  certainly,  if  any  man's  dying  speeches 
are  to  be  observed,  Christ's  are  much  more.     I.  Christ's  request^  *•  Father,  forgive 

vthem."  "Father"  is  a  word  of  confidence  towards  God  and  of  love  to  His 
^enemies ;  He  mentioneth  the  sweetest  relation.  "  Father  "  is  a  word  of  blandish- 
ment, as  children,  when  they  would  obtain  anything  at  their  parent's  hands,  cry, 
""Father!"  Christ  speaks  as  foreseeing  the  danger  and  punishment  which  they 
would  bring  on  themselves  as  the  fruit  of  their  madness  and  folly,  and  therefore 
He  prays,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  This  act  was  provocation  enough  to  move  God 
io  dissolve  the  bonds  of  nature,  to  cleave  the  earth,  that  it  might  swallow  them  up 
quick,  or  to  rain  hell  out  of  heaven  upon  them.  Lesser  offences  have  been  thus 
punished,  and  one  word  from  Christ's  mouth  had  been  enough.  But,  "  Father, 
forgive  them."  We  hear  nothing  but  words  of  mild  pity.  When  He  says,  "  For 
give,"  He  means  also  convert  them  ;  for  where  there  is  no  conversion  there  can  be 
no  remission.  I  shall  look  upon  this  prayer  under  a  twofold  consideration.  I.  Let 
us  look  upon  it  AB  A  mobal  action.  He  doth  not  threaten  fearful  judgments,  but 
prayed  for  His  enemies;  there  was  no  stain  of  passion  and  revenge  upon  His 
sufferings  (1  Peter  ii.  21).  One  great  use  of  Christ's  death  was  to  give  us  lessons 
of  meekness  and  patience  and  humble  suffering.  In  this  act  there  is  an  excellent 
lesson.  Let  us  look  upon  the  necessary  circumstances  that  serve  to  set  it  off — 
(1)  For  whom  He  prays ;  (2)  When  He  prays  ;  (3)  Why  He  prays ;  (4)  In  what 
manner.     Information  :   1.  It  informeth  us  that  the  love  of  Christ  is  greater  than 

-we  can  think  or  understand,  much  less  express.  2.  That  all  sins,  even  the  greatest, 
except  that  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  pardonable.  3.  That  remission  of  sins  ia 
'the  free  gift  of  God,  and  the  fruit  of  His  pity  and  grace.  Christ  asketh  it  of  His 
Tather.  4.  That  pardon  of  sins  is  a  special  benefit.  Christ  asked  no  more  than, 
"  Father,  forgive  them."  It  is  a  special  benefit,  because  it  freeth  us  from  the 
{greatest  evil,  wrath  to  come  ^1  Thes.  i.  10).  And  it  maketh  us  capable  of  the 
greatest  blessing,  eternal  life  (Titus  iii.  7).  5.  That  love  of  enemies,  and  those  that 
have  wronged  us,  is  an  high  grace,  and  recommended  to  us  by  Christ's  own  example. 
Sure  it  is  needful  that  we  should  learn  this  lesson,  to  be  like  God  (Luke  vi.  36). 
^.  Beproof  of  those  that  are  cruel  and  revengeful.  How  different  are  they  from 
Christ  who  are  all  for  unkindness  and  revenge,  and  solicit  vengeance  against  Gh>d's 
eoffering  servants  with  eager  aggravations !  Oh,  how  can  these  men  look  upon 
<3hrist'8  practice  without  shame  !  How  can  they  look  upon  these  prodigies  of  love 
and  grace,  and  not  blush  I    II.  The  next  consideration  of  this  prayer  of  Christ  is 

AS  A  TASTE   AND   PLEDOB   OP  HiS  MEDIATION   AMD   INTEBCESSION.       So  it  is  prophCSied: 

"  He  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors,  and  He  bare  the  sins  of  many,  and 
tmade  intercession  for  the  transgressors"  (Isa.  liii.  12).  1.  It  is  an  instance  of 
'Christ's  love  and  bowels  to  sinners ;  He  loved  mankind  so  well  that  He  prayed  for 
them  that  crucified  Him.  Look  on  the  Lord  Jesus  as  praying  and  dying  for 
enemies,  and  improve  it  as  a  ground  of  confidence.  2.  See  what  is  the  voice  and 
merit  of  His  sufferings,  "Father,  forgive  them."  This  is  the  speech  that  Christ 
ottered  when  He  was  laid  on  the  cross.  Abel's  blood  was  clamorous  in  the  ears  of 
4}oi  (Gen.  iv.  10).  Christ's  blood  hath  another  voice,  it  speaketh  to  God  to  paoifj 
Sis  wrath,  and  to  pardon  us,  if  penitent  and  believing  sinners ;  it  speaketh  to 
^eonsoienoe  to  be  qniet,  God  hath  fonnd  out  a  ransom.  8.  In  the  mediatory  con* 
sideration  it  hinteth  the  conpling  of  His  intercession  with  His  satisfaction.  On  th« 
oroes,  there  He  dieth  end  there  He  prayeth ;  He  was  both  priest  and  saorifioe. 
4.  Thia  ii  a  pledge  of  His  constant  intercesaion  in  heaven.    6.  It  shows  the  natnra 


CBAT.xxmO  ST.  LUKE.  677 

of  His  intercession.  6.  The  success  of  Christ's  intercession,  "  Father,  forgive 
them."  Was  He  heard  in  this  ?  Yes  ;  this  prayer  converts  the  centurion,  and  those 
above  "three  thousand  "  (Acts  ii.  41),  and  presently  after  five  thousand  more  (Acts  iv. 
4).  In  the  compass  of  a  few  days  above  eight  thousand  of  His  enemies  were  con- 
verted. Christ  is  good  at  interceding  ;  His  prayers  are  always  heard  (John  xi.  42).  II. 
I  come  now  to  the  argument  used, "  They  know  not  what  they  do."  (T.  Manton,  D.D.} 
A  prayer  for  ignorant  $inners  : — I.  That  ignorance  is  the  usual  cause  or  enmity  to 
Christ.  "  These  things  "  (saith  the  Lord)  "will  they  do,  becaasethey  have  not  known 
the  Father,  nor  Me  "  (John  xvi.  3).  1.  What  was  their  ignorance,  who  crucified 
Christ  ?  Ignorance  is  two-fold,  simple  or  respective.  Simple  ignorance  is  not  snp- 
posable  in  these  persons,  for  in  many  things  they  were  a  knowing  people.  But  it 
was  a  respective  particular  ignorance,  "Blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  Israel" 
(Bom.  xi.  25).  They  knew  many  other  truths,  but  did  not  know  Jesus  Christ.  In 
that  their  eyes  were  held.  Though  they  had  the  Scriptures  among  them,  they  mis- 
understood them,  and  did  not  rightly  measure  Christ  by  that  right  rule.  (1)  They 
supposed  Christ  to  arise  out  of  Galilee,  whereas  He  was  of  Bethlehem,  though  mncb 
conversant  in  the  parts  of  Galilee.  And  (2)  they  thought,  because  they  could 
find  no  prophet  had  arisen  out  of  Galilee,  therefore  none  should.  Another  mistake 
that  blinded  them  about  Christ,  was  from  their  conceit  that  Christ  should  not  die, 
but  live  for  ever  (John  xii.  34).  Thus  were  they  blinded  about  the  person  of 
Christ,  by  misinterpretations  of  Scripture-prophecies.  2.  Another  thing  occasioning 
their  mistake  of  Christ,  was  the  outward  meauness  and  despicableness  of  His 
condition.  3.  Add  to  this,  their  implicit  faith  in  the  learned  rabbles  and  doctors, 
who  utterly  misled  them  in  this  matter,  and  greatly  prejudiced  them  against 
Christ.  Let  us  see,  in  the  next  place,  how  this  disposed  them  to  such  enmity 
against  Christ.  And  this  it  doth  three  ways.  (1)  Ignorance  disposes  men  to  enmity 
and  opposition  to  Christ,  by  removing  those  hindrances  that  would  otherwise  keep 
them  from  it.  As  checks  and  rebukes  of  conscience,  by  which  they  are  restrained 
from  evil ;  but  conscience  binding  and  reproving  in  the  authority  and  virtue  of  th& 
law  of  God  ;  where  that  law  is  not  known,  there  can  be  no  reproofs,  and  therefore 
we  truly  say,  that  ignorance  is  virtually  every  sin.  (2)  Ignorance  enslaves  and 
subjects  the  soul  to  the  lusts  of  Satan,  he  is  "  the  ruler  of  the  darkness  of  this 
world  "  (Eph.  vi,  12).  There  is  no  work  so  base  and  vile,  but  an  ignorant  man 
will  undertake  it.  (3)  Nay,  which  is  more,  if  a  man  be  ignorant  of  Christ,  Hi& 
truths,  or  people,  he  will  not  only  oppose,  and  persecute,  but  he  will  also  do  it  con- 
scientiously, i.e.,  he  will  look  upon  it  as  his  duty  so  to  do  (John  xvi.  3).  1.  How 
falsely  is  the  gospel  charged  as  the  cause  of  discord  and  trouble  in  the  world.  It 
is  not  light,  but  darkness,  that  makes  men  fierce  and  cruel.  As  light  increases,  so 
doth  peace  (Isa.  xi.  6,  9).  2.  How  dreadful  is  it  to  oppose  Christ  and  His  truths 
knowingly,  and  with  open  eyes  ?  Christ  pleads  their  ignorance  as  an  argument  ta 
procure  their  pardon.  3.  What  an  awf  ol  majesty  sits  unon  the  brow  of  holiness, 
that  few  dare  to  oppose  it  that  see  it  I  4.  The  enemies  ^of  Christ  are  objects  of 
pity.  Alas,  they  are  bUnd,  and  know  not  what  they  do.  5.  How  needful  is  it  before 
we  engage  ourselves  against  any  person  or  way,  to  be  well  satisfied  and  resolved 
that  it  is  a  wicked  person  or  practice  that  we  oppose.  II.  Thai  there  is  foeoivb- 
ness  with  God  fob  such  as  ofposx  Christ  out  or  ignorance.  I  have  two  things 
here  to  do  :  1.  To  open  the  nature  of  the  forgiveness,  and  show  you  what  it  is. 
2.  To  evince  the  possibility  of  it,  for  such  as  mistakingly  oppose  Christ.  For — 
1.  Forgiveness  is  God's  gracious  discharge  of  a  beheving  penitent  sinner  from  the 
guilt  of  all  his  sin,  for  Christ's  sake.  2.  Now,  to  evince  the  possibility  of  forgivenesa 
for  such  as  ignorantly  oppose  Christ,  let  these  things  be  weighed.  (1)  Why  should 
any  poor  soul,  that  is  now  humbled  for  its  enmity  to  Christ  in  the  days  of  ignor- 
ance, question  the  possibility  of  forgiveness,  when  this  effect  doth  not  exceed  the 
power  of  the  cause ;  nay,  when  there  is  more  eflficacy  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  the 
meritorious  cause,  than  is  in  this  effect  of  it  ?  (2)  And  as  this  sin  exceeds  not  the- 
power  of  the  meritorious  cause  of  forgiveness,  so  neither  is  it  anywhere  excluded 
from  pardon  by  any  word  of   God.      III.   That  to  foboive  enemies,   and  beo 

FORGIVENESS    FOB  THEM,    IS   THE   TBUB    CHARACTER  AND   FROPEBTZ   OF   THE    CbBISTIAN 

SPIRIT.  1.  Let  ns  inquire  what  this  Christian  forgiveness  is.  And  that  the  nature 
of  it  may  the  better  appear,  I  shall  show  you  both  what  it  is  not  and  what  it  is. 
(1)  It  consists  not  in  a  stoical  insensibility  of  wrongs  and  injuries.  (2)  Christian 
forgiveness  is  not  a  politic  concealment  of  our  wrath  and  revenge  becanse  it  will 
be  a  reproach  to  discover  it,  or  because  we  want  opportunity  to  vent  it.  This  i» 
carnal  policy,  not  Christian  meekness.  (3)  Nor  is  it  that  moral  virtue  for  whiob 
▼ou  m.  87 


S78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciur.  Tim. 

we  are  beholden  to  an  easier  and  better  nature  and  the  help  of  moral  rales  and 
documents.  (4)  Christian  forgiveness  is  not  an  injurious  giving  up  of  our  rights 
and  properties  to  the  lusts  of  every  on«  that  hath  a  mind  to  invade  them.  But, 
then,  positively,  it  is  a  Christian  lenity  or  gentleness  of  mind,  not  retaining,  but 
freely  passing  by  the  injuries  done  to  us,  in  obedience  to  the  command  of  God. 
This  is  forgiveness  in  a  Christian  sense.  2.  And  this  is  excellent,  and  singularly 
becoming  the  profession  of  Christ,  is  evident,  inasmuch  as  this  speaks  your 
religion  excellent  that  can  mould  your  hearts  into  that  heavenly  frame  to  which 
they  are  so  averse,  yea,  contrarily  disposed  by  nature.  Inference  1.  Hence  we 
clearly  infer  that  Christian  religion,  exalted  in  its  power,  is  the  greatest  friend  to 
the  peace  and  tranquillity  of  states  and  kingdoms.  2.  How  dangerous  a  thing  la 
it  to  abuse  and  wrong  meek  and  forgiving  Christians  ?  3.  Let  us  imitate  our  pattern 
Christ,  and  labour  for  meek  forgiving  spirits.  I  shall  only  propose  two  inducements 
to  it — the  honour  of  Christ,  and  your  own  peace :  two  dear  things  indeed  to  a  Chris- 
tian. {J.  Flavel.)  The  first  cry  from  the  cross  : — I.  Let  us  look  at  this  very  won- 
derful text  as  iLLUsTRATrvE  OF  ouB  Lobd's  intercession.  1.  The  first  point  in  which 
we  may  see  the  character  of  His  intercession  is  this — it  is  most  gracious.  Those 
for  whom  our  Lord  prayed,  according  to  the  text,  did  not  deserve  His  prayer.  2.  A 
second  quality  of  His  intercession  is  this — its  careful  spirit.  You  notice  in  the 
prayer,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do,"  our  Saviour 
did,  as  it  were,  look  His  enemies  through  and  through  to  find  something  in  them 
'sfthat  He  could  urge  in  their  favour  ;  but  He  could  see  nothing  until  His  wisely 
affectionate  eye  lit  upon  their  ignorance :  "  they  know  not  what  they  do."  3.  We 
must  next  note  its  earnestness.  4.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  in  the  fourth  place, 
that  the  prayer  here  offered  helps  us  to  judge  of  His  intercession  in  heaven  as  to  its 
continuance,  perseverance,  and  perpetuity.  5.  Think  yet  again,  this  prayer  of  oar 
Lord  on  earth  is  like  His  prayer  in  heaven,  because  of  its  wisdom.  He  seeks  the 
best  thing,  and  that  which  His  clients  most  need,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  That 
was  the  great  point  in  hand  ;  they  wanted  most  of  all  there  and  then  forgiveness 
from  God.  6.  Once  more,  this  memorable  prayer  of  our  crucified  Lord  was  like 
to  His  universal  intercession  in  the  matter  of  its  prevalence.  11.  The  text  is 
iNSTBCCTivE  OF  THE  Chuech'b  wobk.  As  Christ  was,  so  His  Church  is  to  be  in  this 
world.  1.  Christ's  prayer  on  the  cross  was  altogether  an  unselfish  one.  He  does 
not  remember  Himself  in  it.  Such  ought  to  be  the  Church's  Ufe-prayer,  the 
Church's  active  interposition  on  the  behalf  of  sinners.  She  ought  to  live  never  for 
I  her  ministers  or  for  herself,  but  ever  for  the  lost  sons  of  men.  2.  Now  the  prayer 
I  of  Christ  had  a  great  spirituality  of  aim.  You  notice  that  nothing  is  sought  for 
these  people  but  that  which  concerns  their  souls,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  3.  Our 
Saviour's  prayer  teaches  the  Church  that  while  her  spirit  should  be  unselfish,  and 
her  aim  should  be  spiritual,  the  range  of  her  mission  is  to  be  unlimited.  4.  So, 
too,  the  Church  should  be  earnest  as  Christ  was ;  and  if  she  be  so,  she  will  be 
quick  to  notice  any  ground  of  hope  in  those  she  deals  with,  quick  to  observe  any 
plea  that  she  may  use  with  God  for  their  salvation.  5.  She  must  be  hopeful  too, 
and  surely  no  Church  ever  had  a  more  hopeful  sphere  than  the  Church  of  this  present 
age.  If  ignorance  be  a  plea  with  God,  look  on  the  heathen  at  this  day — millions 
of  them  never  heard  Messiah's  name.  Forgive  them,  great  God,  indeed 
they  know  not  what  they  do.  III.  A  word,  in  conclusion,  to  the  unconverted. 
Eemember  your  ignorance  does  not  excuse  you,  or  else  Christ  would  not  say, 
**  Forgive  them  " ;  they  must  be  forgiven,  even  those  that  know  not  what  they 
do,  henoe  they  are  individually  guilty ;  but  still  that  ignorance  of  yours  gives  yoa 
just  a  little  gleam  of  hope.  ••  Bring  forth,  therefore,  fruits  meet  for  repentance." 
But  there  are  some  here  for  whom  even  Christ  Himself  could  not  pray  this 
prayer,  in  the  widest  sense  at  any  rate,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do,"  for  you  have  known  what  you  did,  and  every  sermon  you  hear,  and 
especially  every  impression  that  is  made  upon  your  understanding  and  conscience 
by  the  gospel,  adds  to  your  responsibility,  and  takes  away  from  you  the  excuse  of 
not  knowing  what  you  do.  Yoa  know  that  there  is  sin  and  God,  and  that  yoa  oannot 
serve  both.  You  know  that  there  are  the  pleasures  of  evil  and  the  pleasures  of 
heaven,  and  that  you  cannot  have  both.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ's  forgiveness : — 
This  prayer  included  many.  It  included  all  who  had  any  share  in  the  mockery, 
and  crucifixion,  and  death  of  Christ.  It  included  the  Roman  governor,  who  had 
given  authority  to  crucify  Him ;  the  Boman  soldiers,  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  the 
sentence  carried  out  into  execution ;  the  Jewish  priests  and  rulers,  who  cried  out  for 
judgment ;  the  multitade,  who  were  stirred  ap  by  their  religioos  guides  and  ruleza. 


cair.  xzm.]  ST.  LUKE.  S79 

All  these  Tarions  classes  were  ignorant  of  the  trae  nature  of  the  deed  which  they 
were  committing,  bat  all  were  not  eqnally  ignorant.  Some  knew  more  than  others ; 
and  according  to  their  greater  knowledge  was  their  guilt,  according  to  their  ignor- 
ance was  their  personal  share  in  the  prayer  offered  at  the  cross.  Not  one  of  these 
knew  altogether  what  he  was  doing,  or  how  great  was  the  sin  in  which  he  was 
taking  part ;  and  each  of  these  individuals  or  groups  of  individuals  has  some  one 
or  many  to  correspond  to  them  in  our  own  day  and  amongst  ourselves  in  this  age. 
The  cross  is  for  ever  the  sign  of  the  world's  darkest  crime :  it  reveals  what  is  lying 
at  the  root  of  all  sin  ;  and  it  opens  np  the  nature  of  that  dread  conflict  which  is 
ever  going  on  between  the  kingdom  of  darkness  and  the  kingdom  of  God.  Christ's 
prayer  to  His  Father  is  to  be  regarded  in  the  further  light  of  a  declaration  of 
forgiveness,  and  an  assurance  of  it.  Forgiveness  is  easier  for  God  to  give  than 
for  man  to  take.  Forgiveness  cannot  be  received  by  every  one.  If  a  man  says  he 
forgives  me,  I  can  only  accept  his  word  if  I  believe  that  I  need  his  forgiveness — 
in  other  words,  if  I  am  conscious  that  I  have  offended  him  and  done  something 
wrong.  If  I  am  in  my  own  mind  sure  that  I  have  not  injured  him,  I  decline  to 
place  myself  on  the  footing  of  a  forgiven  man.  I  put  away  his  forgiveness,  I  refuse 
to  take  the  benefit  of  it,  and  I  stand  towards  him  as  one  claiming  to  have  as  mnch 
right  to  forgive  him  as  he  to  forgive  me.  And  if  we  transfer  this  comparison  from 
earth  to  heaven,  and  inquire  into  the  forgiveness  which  comes  from  God,  we  shall 
find  that  the  only  channel  through  which  we  can  receive  it  is  by  accepting  forgive- 
ness as  men  who  have  done  wrong,  and  who  know  the  wrong  they  have  done,  and 
have  confessed  it  and  hated  it.  There  are  many  who  have  passed  a  long  way 
through  the  journey  of  life  before  they  find  out  what  they  have  been  doing.  Yoath 
has  often  to  pass  into  age  before  a  man  truly  says,  "  Bemember  not  the  sins  of  my 
youth  "  ;  the  hour  of  anger  has  to  pass  away  before  a  man  hears  the  voice  of  con- 
science, ♦•  Doest  thon  well  to  be  angry."  Perhaps  it  is  only  to-day  that  we  see 
yesterday's  faults,  and  not  until  another  year  may  we  see  the  faults  of  this ;  the 
scales  fall  away  from  our  eyes,  and  we  marvel  that  follies  which  are  now  so  plain 
were  not  observed  by  us ;  we  wonder  how  it  was  possible  for  us  to  do  what  we  did, 
and  not  see  its  true  character  all  the  while.  Conscience  does  not  arouse  us,  and  it  ia 
often  not  until  the  voice  of  memory  cries  aloud  that  the  soul  of  a  man  is  awakened, 
and  his  past  life  looks  to  him  as  if  he  had  been  walking  in  his  sleep.  Is  it  not  time 
for  every  one  to  bestir  himself,  and  ask  whether  he  knows  what  his  present  life  and 
actions  mean  ?  Bat  there  is  another  turn  which  we  may  give  to  the  words.  We  may 
accept  them  as  expressing  our  own  spirit  and  our  own  life.  And  until  we  have  received 
them  into  onr  hearts  as  the  law  of  our  own  being,  we  have  failed  to  see  their  true 
beauty  and  power.  As  He  was  in  the  world,  so  are  we  in  the  world.  (A.  Watton,  D.D.) 
Ignorance  and  forgiveness : — What  makes  so  wide  a  difference  between  Judas  and 
those  who  carried  out  what  Judas  had  begun  ?  The  answer  is  in  the  text :  they 
knew  not  what  they  did.  Doubtless  they  knew  that  He  was  iimocent ;  but  of  His 
person,  office,  authority,  they  had  no  conception.  Their  ignorance  did  not  wipe 
out  their  sin,  but  it  did  palliate  it.  It  mitigated  the  awful  blackness  of  the  crime 
which  they  wrought.  It  brought  it  within  the  limits  of  Divine  mercy.  L  Oub 
SINS  OF  IGNORANCE  NEED  PABDON.  1.  In  matters  that  concern  the  soul,  much  of  oar 
ignorance  is  simply  the  fruit  of  neglecting  or  despising  information.  2.  A  vast 
amount  of  religious  ignorance  springs  from  a  willingness  to  be  misled.  Let  a  book 
appear  that  controverts  the  clearly  defined  truths  of  evangelical  belief.  Let  popular 
clamour  lift  its  voice  in  wild  hue  and  cry  against  creeds  and  dogmas.  Multitudes 
of  men  are  at  once  ready  to  fall  in  with  such  a  drift,  not  because  they  have  carefully 
satisfied  their  minds  that  the  current  is  bearing  them  in  the  right  direction,  but 
because  it  is  in  accord  with  what  they  wish  were  true.  IL  What  is  it  which  uen 
no  NOT  KNOW  ?  There  is  an  ignorance  of  our  own  doings  which  is  absolutely  mar* 
vellous.  Visiting  a  factory  not  long  ago  I  was  shown  a  machine  which  produces  a 
little  article  of  commerce  with  an  inconceivable  rapidity.  But  the  ingenious  inventor 
had  contrived  an  apparatus  which  registered  every  one  produced.  If  it  were  A 
hundred  in  every  minute,  each  one  was  noted  by  the  contrivance  that  created  it. 
But  it  is  a  strange  fact  that  man,  with  all  his  powers  of  consciousness,  keeps  himself 
in  utter  ignorance  of  much  that  makes  up  his  action.  Our  actions  flow  oat  from 
as  into  the  great  world  so  unheeded  that  they  are  forgotten  as  soon  as  done ;  as 
water  through  the  parted  marble  lips  of  a  statue  which  does  duty  as  a  fountain. 
1.  Men  know  not  the  origin  of  what  they  do.  Has  it  never  puzzled,  while  it 
saddened  you,  to  talk  with  some  friend  in  the  last  stages  of  consumption  f  The 
lectio  flash  is  on  his  cheek.   There  is  an  annataral  lostre  in  his  eye.    His  breathing 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  zzm. 

is  short  and  hurried.  A  hollow  cough  continually  interrupts  his  speech.  But  h* 
tells  you  that  he  is  perfectly  well.  Of  coarse  be  sees  these  symptoms.  He  freely 
acknowledges  that  they  are  unfavourable.  But  then  he  is  thankful  that  his  lungs 
are  wholly  unaffected.  It  is  the  seat  and  origin  of  the  disease  of  which  he  is 
ignorant.  Precisely  identical  is  the  way  in  which  many  treat  the  whole  question^ 
of  sin.  2.  Equally  is  it  true  that  the  vast  majority  of  men  know  not  the  effects 
of  what  they  do.  How  thoughtlessly  we  sin  I  We  may  not  think  when  we  scatter 
sparks  into  a  powder  magazine,  but  it  is  none  the  less  dangerous  to  do  so.  (Bishop 
Cheney.)  Prayer  for  murderers: — In  1831,  when  the  cholera  first  broke  out  in 
Hungary,  the  Sclavic  peasants  of  the  north,  were  fully  persuaded  that  they  had 
been  poisoned  by  the  nobles,  to  get  rid  of  them.  They  accordingly  rose  in  revolt, 
and  committed  the  most  dreadful  excesses.  A  gentleman  who,  up  to  that  moment, 
had  been  very  popular  with  the  poorer  classes,  was  seized  by  them,  dragged  from 
his  house  into  the  streets,  and  beaten  for  several  hours,  to  make  him  confess  where 
he  had  concealed  the  poison.  Weary,  at  last,  with  inflicting  blows,  the  frenzied 
mob  carried  him  to  a  blacksmith's  shop,  and  applied  hot  ploughshares  to  his  feet. 
Exhausted  with  this  excruciating  torture,  the  innocent  sufferer,  finding  all  explana- 
tions and  entreaties  vain,  fell  back  from  weakness,  apparently  about  to  expire,  when 
the  dying  prayer  of  his  Lord  and  Saviour  escaped  his  lips :  "  Father,  forgive  them ; 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do  !  "  The  savage  fury  of  the  peasantry  was  calmed 
in  a  moment,  as  if  by  a  miracle ;  and  convinced  of  the  innocence  of  their  victim, 
and  the  enormity  of  their  crime,  they  fled  in  terror  from  the  place.  And  cast  lots. — 
On  gambling  : — Christ  had  been  condemned  to  death,  and  His  property  was  being 
disposed  of.  He  had  no  real  estate.  He  was  born  in  a  stranger's  barn,  and  buried 
in  a  borrowed  sepulchre.  His  personal  property  was  of  but  little  value.  His  coat 
was  the  only  thing  to  come  into  consideration.  His  shoes  had  been  worn  out  in  the 
long  journey  for  the  world's  redemption.  Who  shall  have  His  coat  ?  Some  one 
Bays :  "  Let  us  toss  up  in  a  lottery  and  decide  this  matter."  •'  I  have  it  I "  said  one 
of  the  inhuman  butchers.  "  I  have  it  1 "  "  Upon  My  vesture  did  they  cast  lots." 
And  there,  on  that  spot,  were  born  all  the  lotteries  the  world  has  seen.  On  that 
spot  of  cruelty  and  shame  and  infamy  there  was  born  the  Royal  Havana  lottery, 
in  which  some  of  you  may  have  had  tickets.  There  was  bom  the  famous  New  York 
lottery,  which  pretended  to  have  over  £144,400  worth  of  cash  prizes.  There  waa 
born  the  Topeka,  Kansas,  Laramier  Citv,  Wyoming  Territory  lotteries.  There  was 
bom  the  Louisville  lottery,  with  diamonds  and  pearls,  and  watches  by  the  bushel. 
There  was  bom  the  Georgia  lottery,  for  the  east  and  the  west.  There  was  born  the 
Louisiana  lottery,  sanctioned  by  influential  names.  There  was  bom  the  Kentucky 
lottery,  for  the  city  school  of  Frankfort.  All  the  lotteries  that  have  swindled  the 
•world  were  born  there.  Without  any  exception  all  of  them  moral  outrages,  whether 
sanctioned  by  legislative  authority,  or  antagonized  by  it,  and  moral  outrages  though 
respectable  people  have  sometimes  damaged  their  property  with  them,  and  blistered 
their  immortal  eouls  for  eternity.  Under  the  curse  of  the  lottery  tens  of  thousands 
of  people  are  losing  their  fortunes  and  losing  their  souls.  What  they  call  a  "  wheel 
of  fortune  "  is  a  Juggernaut  crushing  out  the  life  of  their  immortal  nature.  In  one 
of  the  insolvent  courts  of  the  country  it  was  found  that  in  one  village  £40,000  had 
been  expended  for  lotteries.  All  the  oflBcers  of  the  celebrated  United  States  Bank 
which  failed  were  found  to  have  expended  the  embezzled  moneys  in  lottery  tickets. 
A  man  won  £10,000  in  a  lottery.  He  sold  his  ticket  for  £8,600,  and  yet  had  not 
enough  to  pay  charges  against  him  for  tickets.  He  owed  the  brokers  £9,000.  The 
editor  of  a  newspaper  writes :  *'  My  friend  was  blessed  with  £4,000  in  a  lottery,  and 
from  that  time  he  began  to  go  astray,  and  yesterday  he  asked  of  me  ninepence  to 
pay  for  a  night's  lodging."  A  man  won  £4,000  in  a  lottery.  Flattered  by  his 
success,  he  bought  another  ticket  and  won  still  more  largely.  Another  ticket  and 
still  more  largely.  Then,  being  fairly  started  on  the  road  to  ruin,  here  and  there 
a  loss  did  not  seem  to  agitate  him,  and  he  went  on  and  on  until  the  select  men  of 
the  village  pronounced  him  a  vagabond  and  picked  up  his  children  from  the  street^ 
half-starved  and  almost  naked.  A  hard-working  machinist  won  £400  in  a  lottery. 
He  was  thrilled  with  the  success,  disgusted  with  Lis  hard  work,  opened  a  rum 
grocery,  got  debauched  in  morals,  and  was  found  dead  at  the  foot  of  his  rum  casks. 
Oh,  it  would  take  a  pen  plucked  from  the  wing  of  the  destroying  angel,  and  dipped 
in  human  blood,  to  describe  this  lottery  business.  A  suicide  was  found  having  in 
his  pocket  a  card  of  address  showing  he  was  boarding  at  a  grog-shop.  Beside  that 
he  had  three  lottery  tickets  and  a  leaf  from  Seneca's  "  Morals  "  in  behalf  of  the 
lighteousness  of  self-murder.    After  a  lottery  in  England  there  were  fifty  suicide* 


.  xxm.]  ST.  LUKE.  581 

of  those  who  held  tmlncky  numbers.  There  are  people  who  have  lottery  tickets  in 
their  pockets — tickets  which,  if  they  have  not  wisdom  enough  to  tear  up  or  burn  up, 
will  b«  their  admission  tickets  at  the  door  of  the  lost  world.  The  brazen  gate  will 
swing  open  and  they  will  show  their  tickets,  and  they  will  go  in,  and  they  will  go 
down.  The  wheel  of  their  eternal  fortune  may  turn  very  slowly,  but  they  will  find 
that  the  doom  of  those  who  reject  the  teachings  of  God  and  imperil  their  immortal 
eouls  is  their  only  prize.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  What  i$  gambling  ? — Gambling  is  risking 
something  more  or  less  valuable  with  the  idea  of  winning  more  than  you  hazard. 
Playing  at  cards  is  not  gambling  unless  a  stake  be  put  up,  while  on  the  other  hand 
»  man  may  gamble  without  cards,  without  dice,  without  billiards,  without  ten-pin 
alley.  It  may  not  be  bagatelle,  it  may  not  be  billiards,  it  may  not  be  any  of  the 
ordinary  instruments  of  gambling,  it  may  be  a  glass  of  wine.  It  may  be  a  hundred 
shares  in  a  prosperous  railroad  company.  I  do  not  care  what  the  instruments  of 
the  game  are,  or  what  the  stakes  are  that  are  put  up — if  you  propose  to  get  anything 
without  paying  for  it  in  time,  or  skill,  or  money,  unless  you  get  it  by  inheritance, 
you  get  it  either  by  theft  or  by  gambling.  A  traveller  said  he  travelled  one  thou- 
sand miles  on  Western  waters,  and  at  every  waking  moment,  from  the  starting  to 
the  closing  of  his  journey,  he  was  in  the  presence  of  gambling.  A  man,  if  he  is 
disposed  to  this  vice,  will  find  something  to  accommodate  him ;  if  not  in  the  low 
restaurant  behind  the  curtain,  on  the  table  covered  with  greasy  cards,  or  in  the 
steamboat  cabin,  where  the  bloated  wretch  with  rings  in  his  ears  winks  in  an  un- 
suspecting traveller,  or  in  the  elegant  parlour,  the  polished  drawing-room,  the 
mirrored  and  pictured  halls  of  wealth  and  beauty.  This  vice  destroys  through  un- 
healthy stimulants.  We  all  at  times  like  excitements.  There  are  a  thousand  voices 
within  us  that  demand  excitements.  They  are  healthful,  they  are  inspiriting,  they 
are  God-given.  The  desire  is  for  excitement ;  but  look  out  for  any  kind  of  excite- 
ment which,  after  the  gratification  of  the  appetite,  hurls  the  man  back  into 
destructive  reactions.  Then  the  excitement  is  wicked.  Beware  of  an  agitation  which, 
like  a  rough  musician,  in  order  to  call  out  the  tune,  plays  so  hard  he  breaks  down 
the  instrument.  God  never  yet  made  a  man  strong  enough  to  endure  gambling 
excitements  without  damage.  It  is  no  surprise  that  many  a  man  seated  at  the 
game  has  lost  and  then  begun  to  sweep  off  imaginary  gold  from  the  table.  He  sat 
down  sane.  He  rose  a  maniac.  The  keepers  of  gambling  saloons  school  themselves 
into  placidity.  They  are  fat,  and  round,  and  roUicking,  and  obese  ;  but  those  who 
go  to  play  for  the  sake  of  winning  are  thin,  and  pale,  and  exhausted,  and  nervous, 
and  sick,  and  have  the  hesut-disease,  and  are  liable  any  moment  to  drop  down  dead. 
That  is  the  character  of  nine  out  of  ten  of  the  gamblers.  You  cannot  be  healthy 
and  practise  that  vice.  It  is  killing  to  all  industry.  Do  you  notice  that,  just  a3 
soon  as  a  man  gets  that  vice  on  him,  he  stops  his  work  ?  Do  you  not  know  that 
this  vice  has  dulled  the  saw  of  the  carpenter,  and  cut  the  band  of  the  factory-wheel, 
and  sunk  the  cargo,  and  broken  the  teeth  of  the  farmer's  rake,  and  sent  a  strange 
lightning  to  the  battery  of  the  philosopher.  What  a  dull  thing  is  a  plough  to  a 
faimer,  when,  in  one  night  in  the  village  restaurant,  he  can  make  or  lose  the  price 
of  a  whole  harvest !  The  whole  theory  of  gambling  is  hostile  to  industry.  Every 
other  occupation  yields  something  to  the  community.  The  street  sweeper  pays  for 
what  he  gets  by  the  cleanliness  of  the  streets ;  the  cat  pays  for  what  it  eats  by 
clearing  the  house  of  vermin ;  the  fly  pays  for  the  sweets  it  extracts  from  the  dregs 
of  a  cop  by  purifying  the  air  and  keeping  back  pestilence ;  but  the  gambler  gives 
nothing.  I  recall  that  last  sentence.  He  does  make  a  return,  but  it  is  in  the 
destroction  of  the  man  whom  he  fleeces,  disgrace  to  his  wife,  rain  to  his  children, 
death  to  his  soul.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  35-37.  He  saved  others,  let  Him  save  Himself. — God  in  sovereignty  often 
selects  as  His  instruments  those  wlw  have  no  desire  to  be  subordinate  to  His  will : — 
Some  passengers  on  the  ship's  deck  may  be  walking  forward,  and  some  walking  aft, 
and  some  standing  still ;  but  all,  and  aU  alike,  are  borne  onward  to  their  destiny 
by  the  breath  of  heaven  in  the  sails,  and  according  to  the  will  of  the  pilot  who 
holds  the  helm  in  his  hand.  This  world  in  space  is  like  a  ship  on  the  sea.  Of  the 
teeming  multitudes  that  crowd  its  surface,  some  intelligently  and  willingly  walk  in 
the  way  of  God's  commandments,  others  violently  resist,  and  others  cleave 
sluggishly  to  the  dust  like  clods  of  the  earth ;  bat  our  Father  is  at  the  helm — he 
will  make  all  subservient  to  His  purpose.  Every  atom  will  be  compelled  to  take 
its  place  and  contribute  its  own  share  to  the  establishment  of  His  kingdom  and  the 
redemption  of  P'««  people.    The  sovereignty  of  God  is  a  preciooB  doctrine.    Pro- 


582  TH3  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.      .  [chap,  xxm. 

vidence  ib  sweet  to  them  that  believe  :  "  Casting  all  yonr  care  upon  Him ;  for  H< 
careth  for  you."  Apart  from  the  meaning  of  their  words,  the  scoffing  of  these 
scribes  was  overruled  by  God  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  purpose.  By 
their  conduct  they  unconsciously  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Scripture  regarding  the 
Messiah.  This  reviling  constituted  one  of  the  marks  by  which  those  who  waited 
for  redemption  in  Israel  should  know  the  Redeemer  when  He  came.  "  A  root  out 
of  a  dry  ground  :  no  form  nor  comeliness — no  beauty  that  He  should  be  desired : 
rejected  and  despised :  they  shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  have  pierced."  (W, 
Arnot.)  Himself  He  cannot  save  : — The  King's  Son  has  offered  Himself  as 
hostage  for  certain  subjects  that  were  held  in  captivity  by  a  foreign  power.  He 
has  gone  into  their  place,  and  they  have  on  the  faith  of  this  transaction  been  set 
free.  Precisely  because  they  have  been  set  free,  He  cannot  now  escape.  Ho  has 
saved  others  by  the  substitution  of  Himself  in  their  stead,  and  therefore  Himself 
He  cannot  save.  In  order  to  explain  fully  how  Jesus,  having  saved  others,  could 
not  also  save  Himself,  we  must  refer  to  the  history  of  redemption.  Bear  in  mind 
that  we  live  under  a  Divine  administration  that  has  been  well  ordered  from  the 
beginning.  When  an  architect  begins  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a  building,  he  has 
the  perfect  plan  already  before  his  eye.  Although  it  be  only  a  man's  covenant,  it 
is  not  carried  forward  by  fits  and  starts  according  to  the  changing  circumstances  of 
the  times.  The  design  is  completed  from  the  first,  and  its  execution  is  carried  for- 
ward, it  may  be  from  generation  to  generation,  all  in  accordance  with  the  first 
design.  Much  more  certain  and  evident  it  is  that  God,  who  sees  the  end  from  the 
beginning,  framed  His  plan  at  first,  and  conducts  His  administration  from  age  to 
age  according  to  that  plan.  The  way  of  salvation  for  sinful  men  is  not  left 
uncertain,  to  be  modified  by  the  accidents  of  the  day.  The  gospel  does  not  take  its 
character  from  passing  events.  It  is,  indeed,  a  transaction  between  the  unchangC' 
able  God  and  erring  man ;  but  it  takes  its  character  from  the  Source  whence  il 
springs,  and  not  from  the  objects  to  which  it  is  directed.  It  partakes  of  the  immut- 
ability of  its  Author :  it  has  nothing  in  common  with  the  caprice  of  men.  It  has 
come  from  heaven  to  earth,  not  to  receive,  but  to  give  an  impression.  The  sun's 
rays  when  they  reach  the  earth  meet  with  a  various  reception.  At  one  time  they 
are  intercepted  before  they  touch  its  surface  by  an  intervening  subordinate  orb  ;  at 
another  time  the  earth  itself  keeps  out  the  light  from  that  side  of  it  whereon  we 
Htand :  at  one  place,  even  when  the  rays  are  permitted  to  reach  us,  they  stir  cor- 
ruption into  greater  energy ;  at  another  time  they  paint  the  flowers  and  ripen  the 
fruit,  stimulating  life  and  gilding  the  landscape  with  varied  beauty.  But  whether 
they  are  kept  at  a  distance  or  received,  whether  when  received  they  make  corrup- 
tion more  corrupt,  or  make  beauty  more  beautiful,  the  sun's  rays  are  ever  the 
same  ;  they  remain  true  to  their  celestial  character,  and  are  never  changed  by  the 
changing  accidents  of  earth.  They  retain  all  the  purity  of  the  heaven  they  come 
from,  and  contract  none  of  the  defilement  of  the  earth  they  come  to.  (Ibid.)  If 
Christ  had  saved  Himself,  man  would  have  been  left  unsaved : — A  traveller  in  an 
Asiatic  desert  has  spent  his  last  bit  of  bread  and  his  last  drop  of  water.  He  has 
pursued  his  journey  in  hunger  and  thirst  until  his  limbs  have  given  way,  and  he 
has  at  length  lain  down  on  the  ground  to  die.  Already,  as  he  looks  on  the  hard 
dry  sky,  he  sees  the  vultures  swooping  down,  as  if  unwilling  to  wait  till  his  breath 
go  out.  But  a  caravan  of  travellers  with  provisions  and  camels  comes  up.  Hope 
revives  in  his  fainting  heart.  They  halt  and  look ;  but  as  the  poor  man  cannot 
walk,  they  are  unwilling  to  burden  themselves,  and  coldly  pass  on.  Now  he  is  left 
to  all  the  horrors  of  despair.  They  have  saved  themselves,  but  left  him  to  die.  A 
ship  has  caught  fire  at  sea.  The  passengers  and  crew,  shot  up  in  one  extremity  of 
the  burning  ship,  strain  their  eyes  and  sweep  the  horizon  round  for  sight  of  help. 
At  length,  and  just  in  time,  a  sail  appears  and  bears  down  npon  them.  But  the 
stranger,  fearing  fire,  does  not  venture  near,  but  puts  about  her  helm,  and  soon  is 
out  of  sight.  The  men  in  the  burning  ship  are  left  to  their  fate.  How  dreadful 
their  situation,  when  the  selfish  ship  saved  itself  from  danger,  and  left  them  to 
sink  1  Ah  1  what  heart  can  conceive  the  misery  of  human  kind,  if  the  Son  of  God 
had  saved  Himself  from  suffering,  and  left  a  fallen  world  to  the  wrath  of  God  I 
{Ibid.)  Refusing  to  save  himself: — A  soldier  on  duty  ftt  the  palaoe  of  the 
Emperor  at  St.  Petersburg,  which  was  burnt  a  few  years  ago,  was  stationed,  and 
had  been  forgotten,  in  one  suite  of  apartments  that  was  in  flames.  A  Greek  priest 
was  the  last  person  to  rush  through  the  burning  rooms,  at  the  imminent  risk  of  his  life, 
to  save  a  crucifix  in  a  chapel,  and,  returning,  he  was  hailed  by  the  sentry,  who  must 
in  a  few  instants  more  have  been  suffocated.     '*  What  do  yon  want  7  "  cried  the 


our.  zxm.]  ST.  LUKE.  533 

priest.  "  Save  yourself,  or  you  will  be  lost."  "  I  can't  leave,"  replied  the  sentry, 
"  because  I  am  unrelieved ;  but  I  called  to  you  to  give  me.  your  blessing  before  I 
die."  The  priest  blessed  him,  and  the  soldier  died  at  his  post.  Happiruu  in 
saving  others : — One  of  the  Eussian  emperors,  Alexander,  when  hunting,  and  riding 
in  front  of  his  suite,  heard  a  groan  which  arrested  him ;  he  reined  in  his  horse, 
alighted,  looked  round,  and  found  a  man  at  the  point  of  death.  He  bent  over  him, 
chafed  his  temples,  and  tried  to  excite  him.  A  surgeon  was  called,  but  he  said 
'•  He  is  dead."  "  Try  what  you  can  do,"  said  the  Emperor.  "  He  is  dead," 
replied  the  surgeon.  '*  Try  what  you  can  do."  At  this  second  command,  the 
Burgeon  tried  some  processes ;  and  after  a  time  a  drop  of  blood  appeared  from  a 
vien  which  had  been  opened  ;  respiration  was  being  restored.  On  seeing  this  the 
Vsmperor,  with  deep  feeling,  exclaimed,  "  This  is  the  happiest  day  of  my  life  ;  I 
have  saved  the  life  of  a  fellow-creature."  If  being  thus  useful  in  saving  a  man  from 
death  imparted  such  happiness  to  the  Emperor,  how  much  greater  will  our  joy  and 
satisfaction  be  if  any  of  our  efforts  result  in  saving  a  soul  from  death.  Let  us  try 
what  we  can  do.  There  is  the  greatest  encouragement  for  the  largest  faith,  for 
Christ  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  unto  God  through  Him. 
Saving  others  by  sacrifice  of  self : — The  plague  was  making  a  desert  of  the  city  of 
Marseilles ;  death  was  everywhere.  The  physicians  could  do  nothing.  In  one  of 
their  counsels  it  was  decided  that  a  corpse  must  be  dissected ;  but  it  would  be  death 
to  the  operator.  A  celebrated  physician  of  the  number  arose,  and  said,  *'  I  devote 
myself  for  the  safety  of  my  country.  Before  this  numerous  assembly,  I  swear  in 
the  name  of  humanity  and  religion,  that  to-morrow,  at  the  break  of  day,  I  will 
dissect  a  corpse,  and  write  down  as  I  proceed  what  I  observe."  He  immediately 
left  the  room,  made  his  will,  and  spent  the  night  in  religious  exercises.  During  the 
day  a  man  had  died  in  his  house  of  the  plague  ;  and  at  daybreak  on  the  following 
morning,  the  physician,  whose  name  was  Guyon,  entered  the  room  and  critically 
made  the  necessary  examinations,  writing  down  all  his  surgical  observations.  He 
then  left  the  room,  threw  the  papers  into  a  vase  of  vinegar,  that  they  might  not 
convey  the  disease  to  another,  and  retired  to  a  convenient  place,  where  he  died  in 
twelve  hours.  Before  the  battle  of  Hatcher's  Kun,  a  Christian  soldier  said  to  his 
comrade,  "You  are  detailed  to  go  to  the  front,  while  I  am  to  remain  with  the  baggage. 
Let  us  change  places.  I'll  go  front,  you  remain  in  camp."  "  What  for  ?  "  said  the 
comrade.  "Because  I  am  prepared  to  die,  I  think;  but  you  are  not."  The 
exchange  was  made.  The  thought  of  the  self-sacrifice  of  his  friend,  and  his 
readiness  for  the  exposure  of  life  or  the  realities  of  death,  led  the  unsaved  soldier 
to  repentance  and  a  like  preparation  for  life.  A  vessel  had  driven  on  the  rocks  in 
a  storm,  and  was  hopelessly  lost.  Another  vessel  had  gone  out  in  the  blind  desire 
to  do  something,  bat  a  long  way  oS  she  stopped  and  watched.  That  was  all,  but  it 
was  not  very  much.  The  men,  however,  dared  venture  no  further ;  it  would  be  life 
for  life,  and  they  were  not  great  enongh  for  that.  Nelson,  the  ship's  lad,  said, 
•'  Cap'n,  I'm  going  to  try  and  save  those  men."  And  the  captain  said,  "  Nelson,  i£ 
yon  do,  you'll  be  dbrowned."  And  Nelson  replied — no  nobler  reply  was  ever  given — 
"Cap'n,  I'm  not  thinking  of  being  drowned,  I'm  thinkin'  of  savin'  those  men."  So 
he  and  a  shipmate  took  the  boat,  and  went  to  the  wreck,  and  saved  every  man  who 
was  there.  Saving  others : — A  few  years  ago  a  vessel  was  wrecked  on  the  south- 
west coast  of  this  country ;  and  with  these  words  I  close.  It  became  known  to  the 
hamlets  and  villages,  the  towns  and  districts,  that  this  vessel  was  wrecked,  that 
men  were  seen  clinging  to  the  rigging.  The  life-boat  was  latmched,  and  away  the 
men  went,  and  were  a  long  while  at  sea.  Darkness  set  in,  but  the  people  on  the 
coast  lighted  fires ;  they  kindled  great  fames  so  that  the  sailors  might  be  aided, 
that  the  hfe-boat  might  be  guided  on  its  return  to  shore.  After  awhile  they 
saw  it  returning,  and  a  great  strong  man,  of  the  name  of  John  Holden,  who  was  on 
the  coast,  cried  aloud,  as  with  a  trumpet,  to  the  Captain  of  the  life-boat,  "  Hi  I  hi ! 
have  you  saved  the  men  ?  "  The  Captain  answered, "  Ay,  ay,  I  have  saved  the  men," 
and  all  hearts  were  filled  with  gladness.  But  when  the  boat  reached  the  coast  it  was 
found  that  one  man  was  left  clinging  to  the  mast.  "  Why  did  not  you  save  him?  " 
said  Holden ;  "  why  did  not  you  save  him?  "  "Because  we  were  exhausted,"  said 
the  Captain,  "  and  we  thought  it  better  to  attempt  to  get  safely  to  shore  for  those 
we  had  rescued  and  for  ourselves.  We  should  all  have  perished  if  we  had  remained 
another  five  minntes  attempting  to  save  one  man."  "  But  yon  will  go  back — ^yoa 
will  go  back  to  the  rescue  ?  **  "They  said  no,  they  had  not  the  strength,  the  storm 
was  so  fierce.  Holden  threw  himself  on  the  shingle,  and  lifted  up  a  prayer  to  Qoi, 
louder  than  the  storm  that  God  would  pat  it  into  the  hearts  of  some  of  those  people 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ma 

to  go  to  the  rescue  of  this  one  man,  just  as  Jesus  Christ  came  to  rescue  one  lost 
•world.  When  he  had  ceased  praying  six  men  volunteered  to  accompany  him,  and 
John  Holden,  with  six  men,  were  prepared  to  go  and  rescue  that  one  man.  If  seven 
men  will  go  to  the  rescue  of  one  man,  how  many  men  shall  we  send  to  save  Africa  f 
These  men  were  preparing  to  start  when  the  good  old  mother  of  John  Holden  came 
rushing  down,  and  threw  her  arms  around  his  neck,  and  said,  "  John,  you  must  not 
go.  What  can  I  do  if  you  perish  ?  You  know  your  father  was  drowned  at  sea,  and 
it  is  just  two  years  since  your  brother  William  left ;  we  have  never  heard  a  word  of 
him  since.  No  doubt  he,  too,  has  perished.  John,  what  shall  I  do  if  you  perish  ?  " 
John  said,  "  Mother,  God  has  put  it  in  my  heart  to  go,  and  if  I  perish  He  wiU  take 
care  of  you."  And  away  he  went ;  and  after  awhile  the  life-boat  returned,  and  when 
he  neared  the  coast  a  loud  voice  was  raised,  "  Hi !  hi  1  John,  have  you  saved  the 
man?  "  John  answered  in  a  trumpet  voice,  "  Yes,  we  have  saved  the  man;  and 
tell  my  mother  it  is  my  brother  William  we  have  saved."  Now,  there  ia  your 
brother  man  the  wide  world  over ;  haste  to  the  rescue  even  if  you  perish  in  the 
attempt.  {J.  S.  Balmer.)  Self-sacrificing  love : — The  helmsman  who  stood  at 
the  wheel  in  the  burning  steamer  till  he  brought  her  to  the  shore,  and  then  dropped 
backed  into  the  flames,  conscious  that  he  had  saved  the  passengers ;  the  soldier 
who,  to  save  his  fugitive  comrades,  blew  up  the  bridge  over  which  they  had  crossed, 
though  he  knew  that  he  himself  would  be  blown  up  with  the  bridge ;  the  Arab, 
dying  of  thirst  in  the  desert,  yet  giving  his  last  drop  of  water  to  his  faithfol  camel, 
may  be  cited  as  types  of  Christ  in  his  self-sacrificing  love.  Not  many  years  ago 
there  was  a  colliery  accident  in  the  north  of  England.  The  mine  was  flooded,  and 
there  were  still  some  of  the  miners  imprisoned  below.  Rescue  parties  were  made 
np  and  sent  down.  It  was  a  hard  piece  of  work,  and  they  had  to  work  in  relays. 
One  man,  however,  it  was  noticed,  kept  working  all  the  time.  Others  told  him 
that  he  would  kill  himself,  and  asked  him  to  stop  and  rest.  But  he  answered : 
"  How  can  I  stop  ?  There  are  some  of  my  own  down  there."  Is  it  not  in  some 
such  way  that  Christ  came  down  to  seek  His  own  on  earth,  and  to  give  His  life  for 
them?     (Sunday  School  Times.) 

Ver.  38.  A  superscription  also  was  written  over  Him. — The  superscription 
affixed  to  the  cross  of  Christ : — It  was  the  custom  of  the  Romans,  that  the  equity  oi 
their  proceedings  might  more  clearly  appear  when  they  crucified  any  man,  to  pub- 
lish the  cause  of  his  death  in  a  table  written  in  capital  letters,  and  placed  ov«  the 
head  of  the  crucified.  And  that  there  might  be,  at  least,  a  show  and  face  of  justice 
in  Christ's  death,  He  also  shall  have  His  title  or  superscription.  The  worst  and 
most  unrighteous  actions  labour  to  cover  and  shroud  themselves  under  pretentions 
of  equity.  Sin  is  so  shameful  a  thing  that  it  cares  not  to  own  its  name.  Christ 
shall  have  a  table  written  for  Him  also.  1.  The  character  or  description  of  Christ 
contained  in  that  writing  :  "  The  King  of  the  Jews."  2.  The  person  who  drew 
His  character  or  title.  Pilate,  who  was  His  judge,  becomes  now  His  herald  to  pro- 
claim His  glory.  3.  The  time  when  this  honour  was  done  Him.  When  at  the 
lowest  ebb ;  amid  shame  and  reproach.  I.  The  katxjbe  and  qcamtt  of  Christ's 
TITLE  OB  INSCRIPTION.  1.  An  extraordinary  title.  Instead  of  proclaiming  Christ's 
crime,  it  vindicates  His  innocence.  2.  Public.  Written  in  three  languages.  8. 
Honourable.  Thus  the  cross  became  a  throne  of  majesty.  4.  A  vindicating  title. 
6.  A  predicting  and  presaging  title.  6.  An  immutable  title.  II.  What  hand  thk 
DrviNE  PROVIDENCE  HAD  IN  THIS  BUSINESS.  1.  In  Overruling  the  heart  and  hand  of 
Pilate  in  the  draught  and  style  of  it,  and  that  contrary  to  his  own  inclination.  2. 
Herein  the  wisdom  of  Providence  was  gloriously  displayed,  in  applying  a  present, 
proper,  public  remedy  to  the  reproaches  and  blasphemies  which  Christ  had  then 
newly  received  in  His  name  and  honour.  The  superstitious  Jews  wound  Him,  and 
heathen  Pilate  prepares  a  plaster  to  heal  Him  :  they  reproach,  he  vindicates ;  they 
throw  the  dirt,  he  washes  it  off.  Oh,  the  profound  and  inscrutable  vrisdom  of  Pro- 
vidence 1  3.  Moreover,  Providence  eminently  appeared  at  this  time,  in  keeping  so 
timorons  a  person,  a  man  of  so  base  a  spirit,  that  would  not  stick  at  anything^  to 
please  the  people,  from  receding  or  giving  ground  in  the  least  to  their  importunities. 
4.  Herein  also  much  of  the  wisdom  of  Providence  appeared,  in  casting  the 
ignominy  of  the  death  of  Christ  upon  those  very  men  who  ought  to  bear  it.  Pilate 
was  moved  by  Divine  instinct  at  once  to  clear  Christ  and  accuse  them.  5.  The 
Providence  of  God  wonderfully  discovered  itself  (as  before  was  noted)  in  fixing  this 
title  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  when  there  was  so  great  a  confluence  of  all  Borto  of 
people  to  take  notice.    Inference  1.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  Providenoe  of  oxu 


CHAP,  zxm.]  57.  LUKE.  58S 

Qodi  can  and  often  doth  overmle  the  eooniels  and  actions  of  the  worst  of  men  to 
His  own  glory.  He  is  never  at  a  loss  for  means  to  promote  and  serve  His  own  ends. 
2.  Hence  likewise  it  follows,  that  the  greatest  services  performed  to  Christ  acci- 
dentally  and  undesignedly,  shall  never  be  accepted  nor  rewarded  of  God.  Pilate  did 
Christ  an  eminent  piece  of  service.  He  did  that  for  Christ  that  not  one  of  His  own 
disciples  at  that  time  durst  do ;  and  yet  this  service  was  not  accepted  of  God, 
because  he  did  it  not  designedly  for  His  glory,  but  from  the  mere  overrulings  of 
Providence.  3.  Would  not  Pilate  recede  from  what  he  had  written  on  Christ'3 
behalf  ?  How  shameful  a  thing  is  it  for  Christians  to  retract  what  they  have  said 
or  done  on  Christ's  behaU?  4.  Did  Pilate  afflx  such  an  honourable,  vindicatiug 
title  to  the  cross  ?  Then  the  cross  of  Christ  is  a  dignified  cross.  How  did  the 
martyrs  glory  in  their  su£fering3  for  Christ  ?  Calling  their^  chains  of  iron,  chains 
of  gold;  and  their  manacles,  bracelets.  I  remember  it  is  storied  of  Ludovicus 
Marsacus,  a  knight  of  France,  that  when  he,  with  divers  other  Christians  of  an 
inferior  rank  and  degree  in  the  world,  were  condemned  to  die  for  religion,  and  the 
jailor  had  bound  them  with  chains,  but  did  not  bind  him,  being  a  more  honourable 
person  than  the  rest,  he  was  offended  greatly  by  that  omission,  and  said,  "  Why 
do  you  not  honour  me  with  a  chain  for  Christ  also,  and  create  me  a  knight  of  that 
illustrious  order  ?  "  5.  Did  Pilate  so  stiffly  assert  and  defend  the  honour  of  Christ  ? 
What  doubt  can  then  be  made  of  the  success  of  Christ's  interest,  and  the  pros- 
perity of  His  cause,  when  the  very  enemies  thereof  are  made  to  serve  it  f  Eather 
than  Christ  shall  want  honour,  Pilate,  the  man  that  condemned  Him,  shall  do  Him 
honour.  And  as  it  fared  with  His  person,  just  so  with  His  interest  also.  6.  Did 
Pilate  vindicate  Christ  in  drawing  up  such  a  title  to  be  affixed  to  His  cross,  then 
hence  it  follows  that  God  will,  sooner  or  later,  clear  up  the  innocence  and  integrity 
of  His  people  who  commit  their  cause  to  Him.    {J.  Flavel.) 

Vers.  39-43.  And  one  of  the  malefactors  which  were  hanged  railed  on  Him. — 

The  impenitent  malefactor : — L  This  man's  treatment  of  Cheist  suggests  several 
things  for  our  consideration.  "  He  railed  on  Him."  1.  What  inhumanity.  The 
Buffering  of  Jesus  ought  surely  to  have  moved  his  heart  to  pity.  2.  The  friendless- 
ness  of  the  majestic  Sufferer  touched  him  not.  3.  His  like  condition  to  the  Sufferer 
by  his  side  touched  no  chord  of  sympathy  in  his  breast.  IL  The  malefactor  was 
AK  unbeliever.  He  had  probably  never  seen  Christ  before.  On  this  account  he 
was  less  guilty  than  many  at  Calvary  that  day ;  and  less  guilty  than  thousands  who 
hear  the  gospel  to-day,  but  still  reject  Christ.  According  to  light  and  privileges  is 
our  responsibility.  But  this  robber  had  ground  enough  to  warrant  his  belief  in 
Christ  His  companion  had,  yet  he  joined  those  who  railed  upon  Jesus.  HI. 
Christ's  treatment  of  the  malefactor.  Pitying  silence.  He  will  answer  no  man's 
prayer  to  prove  His  power.  His  word,  His  Church,  the  Christian,  are  the  miracles 
that  must  testify  to  His  power  to  save.     (6.  E.  Jones.)        The  impenitent  thief: — 

I.   HCMAN  LIFE   ENDINO  AN   CTTER   MORAL  WRECK.      U.    HUMAN   LIFE   BNSINO  ON   THE 

OALLOws.  in.  Human  life  endinq  ts  sioht  of  the  cross.  IV.  Human  lite  endinq 
IN  DESPAIR.  {The  Lay  Preacher.)  The  two  malefactors  : — L  Reflections.  Hera 
we  have  a  true  picture  of  human  nature  as  it  appears  amidst  difEiculties,  and 
dangers,  and  sufferings,  the  appropriate  fruits  of  sin.  A  care  to  avoid  pain  is 
universally  prevalent,  but  a  care  to  avoid  sin  is  comparatively  of  rare  occurrence. 
Of  this  conduct  one  of  the  malefactors  crucified  with  Christ  afforded  a  lamentable 
example.  But  the  other,  however  bad  he  had  previously  been,  however  much  har- 
dened or  debased,  was  brought  to  true  repentance.  There  was  an  invisible  energy 
touching  his  soul  and  melting  it  into  contrition ;  the  power  of  the  cross  of  Christ 
was  felt,  and  it  proved  the  Bedeemer  to  be  great  in  sufferings.  Yes,  this  criminal 
became  humble,  his  heart  believed,  and  his  faith  penetrated  the  vail  of  the 
incarnation,  realizing  what  was  concealed  from  an  eye  of  sense,  even  a  ground  of 
hope  for  his  guilty  souL  II.  Application.  1.  Let  as  see  the  greatness  and  the 
glory  of  the  Saviour's  character.  What  power  1  what  grace  I  what  dominion  over 
the  invisible  world  1  2.  The  language  of  the  text  supplies  a  plain  proof  of  the 
separate  and  happy  existence  of  the  spirits  of  just  men  after  death.  6.  The  suffi- 
ciency of  the  sacrifice  for  sin  made  by  the  death  of  Christ,  is  illustrated  by  the 
case  we  have  considered.  He  contemplated  sinners,  the  chief  of  sinners,  when  ha 
offered  Himself  to  God.  4.  What  different  effects  may  result  amidst  a  sameness  of 
circamstances  and  opportuuities.  Here  were  two  of  similar  character,  both 
exceedingly  wicked,  with  death  in  immediate  prospect;  one  becomes  a  penitent 
seeking  bus  salvation,  the  other  remains  hardened  in  his  sins.    6.  The  aubjeot,  sug- 


£86  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xrm, 

geets  the  language  of  encouragement  and  of  eantion.  (Essex  Remembrancer.) 
The  two  robbers  : — To  defer  the  time  of  conversion,  and  as  a  pretext  for  persevering 
in  the  ways  of  sin,  the  worldly-minded  flatter  themselves  with  three  prinoipsJ 
delusions.  1.  One  delays  bis  conversion  because  he  imagines  that  a  time  of  sick- 
ness and  suffering  will  present  a  more  favourable  opportunity  to  think  of  it.  He 
flatters  himself  that  he  will  not  be  carried  away  by  a  violent  or  sudden  death ;  that 
a  long  and  slow  malady,  during  the  course  of  which  he  will  have  time  to  reflect, 
and  to  make  an  account  of  his  ways,  will  permit  him  to  prepare  himself  for  the 
meeting  with  his  God.  But  how  does  he  know  whether  a  malady,  under  the  weight 
of  which  the  very  organism  of  the  constitution  sinks,  will  not  oppress  his  senses, 
dull  his  spirit,  take  from  his  mind  its  energy,  and  paralyze  his  faculties  ?  Who  can 
be  ignorant  that,  in  such  a  case,  nothing  is  more  usual  than  hesitations,  adjourn- 
ments, and  delays,  seeing  the  man  has  accustomed  himself  to  the  deceitful  hope  ot 
a  recovery,  sooner  or  later  ?  2.  A  second  reason,  as  I  said,  for  which  the  worldly- 
minded  defer  their  conversion  is,  that  they  suppose  that  at  the  hour  of  death 
Providence  will  work  miracles  of  salvation,  other  and  more  efficacious  than  those 
which  they  have  been  able  to  enjoy  during  their  life  ;  and  that  the  most  pressing 
invitations  of  grace,  the  most  irresistible  attractions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  most 
powerful  manifestations  of  Divine  love  will  be  afforded.  Where  has  God  promised 
such  manifestations  ?  Nowhere.  But  so  be  it ;  what  does  this  prove  7  When  the 
heart  is  hardened  by  a  long  course  of  sin,  will  it  not  resist  the  evidence  of  truths 
the  best  established,  and  facts  the  most  palpable,  even  the  most  powerful  miracles 
of  salvation  ?  3.  Lastly,  impenitent  sinners  defer  their  conversion  upon  the  pre- 
test that,  at  the  time  when  they  shall  see  death  to  be  near,  love  of  the  world  will 
disappear  from  the  heart,  carnal  passions  will  be  extinguished,  and  the  soul  will 
open  itself  to  the  influence  of  the  truths  of  the  Word  of  Life.  But  if  the 
experience  of  many  centuries  is  not  sufi^cient  to  attest  that  such  a  time  has  not 
upon  the  soul  that  regenerating  power  which  is  supposed  ;  that,  instead  of  detaching 
\iimself  from  the  things  of  earth,  the  unregenerated  man  will  strive  to  attach  him- 
self more,  and  to  cling  more  strongly,  to  measures  which  may  prolong  his  existence 
in  this  world ;  that  so  far  from  becoming  more  susceptible  to  the  beauty  of  truth 
and  love,  a  long  course  of  resistance  renders  the  heart  incapable  of  feeling  their 
attractions,  surely  the  example  of  the  dying  robber  will  be  sufficient  to  dispel  for 
ever  those  fatal  delusions.  Not  only  is  this  robber  not  touched  by  the  truth,  bat 
he  repels  it ;  not  only  does  he  continue  to  sleep  in  the  seciurity  of  sin,  but  he  is 
incensed  against  the  Word ;  and  whilst  shame  and  remorse  should  have  closed  hia 
lips,  he  unites  with  the  multitude  to  insult  the  Saviour  of  the  world :  and  to  all 
his  other  sins  he  adds  an  impudent  irony  against  the  Son  of  God ;  he  crowns  all 
his  crimes  by  blasphemy.  After  that,  will  you  still  count,  0  all  you  who  defer  your 
conversion,  on  the  changes  that  accompany  death,  as  if  they  could  miraculously 
break  the  chain  of  your  sins,  or  promote  your  eternal  salvation  t  Three  things 
have  struck  ns  in  the  history  of  the  unconverted  robber :  first,  that  death  was  not 
startling;  second,  that  extraordinary  succour  of  grace  was  not  received;  third, 
that  he  aggravated  his  condemnation  and  hardened  himself  in  circumstances, 
which  it  seems  should  have  ameliorated  his  state.  The  conversion  of  his  com- 
panion  in  iniquity  presents  to  ns  reflections  of  quite  another  nature.  And  can  yoo 
doubt,  that  if  in  this  moment  some  one  had  been  able  to  bring  down  the  converted 
thief  from  the  cross,  had  been  able  to  lavish  upon  him  the  succours  of  art, 
and,  in  the  end,  cicatrize  his  wotmds:  if  one  could  have  contrived  to  arrest 
the  fever  to  which  he  was  a  prey,  to  give  him  the  use  of  his  members ;  to 
restore  him  to  life ;  can  yon  doubt  that,  such  being  his  feelings,  the  remainder 
of  his  earthly  existence  would  have  been  other  than  a  noble  demonstration  of 
the  power  of  the  faith  and  love  which  lived  in  his  soul?  (Dr.  Orandpierre.) 
The  erueified  maUfaetors : — I.  Let  us  consider  wherein  these  two  sulefaotobs  webb 
ALIKE.  1.  They  were  alike  in  respect  to  depravity  of  heart.  2.  They  were  alike  in 
respect  to  their  knowledge  of  Christ.  3.  They  were  alike  in  practice — both  male- 
factors.  4.  They  were  alike  in  condemnation.  II.  When  they  beoam  to  ditfeb. 
Apparently  it  was  when  the  darkness  began.  And  we  can  easily  believe  that  such 
an  unexpected  and  solemn  miracle,  on  such  an  awful  occasion,  did  make  a  deep 
impression  npon  the  minds  of  all  the  spectators  of  the  crucifixion  of  the  Lord  of 
filory,  and  more  upon  some  than  others.  III.  Wherein  tbet  eventuau.y  and 
riNALLT  differed.  Here  it  may  be  observed — 1.  That  one  realized  the  wrath  of 
God  abiding  npon  him,  whilst  the  other  did  not.  This  poor,  perishing  criminal 
was  thoronghly  awakened  from  his  long  and  habita»I  stopidity,  and  clearly  saw  his 


flHAF.  mn.]  ST.  LUKE.  M7 

langerous  condition  ;  which  ii  nsually  the  first  step  to  conversion.    He  might, 
however,  have  seen  and  felt  Bnch  danger,  and  with  his  eyes  open  gone  to  destruc- 
tion.    But— 2.  His  awakening  was  followed  with  conviction.     He  not  only  realized 
that  he  was  exposed  to  everlasting  misery,  but  was  convinced,  in  his  conscience, 
that  he  deserved  it.     3.  He  renounced  his  enmity  to  God,  and  became  cordially 
reconciled  to  His  vindictive  justice.     4.  Having  exercised  true  love,  repentance,  and 
submission  towards  God,  he  exercised  a  saving  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Thus  the  two  malefactors  began  to  differ  while  hanging  on  the  cross ;  and  they 
continue  to   differ  as  long  as  they  lived,   and  will  continue  to  differ  as  long 
as  they  exist.      What   has  been  said  in    this    discourse  may   serve  to  throw 
light  upon  some  important  subjects  which  have  been  supposed  to  be  dark  and 
difficult  to  understand.      1.  It  appears  from  the  conduct  of  the  penitent  male- 
factor, that  the  doctrine  of   unconditional  submission  is  founded  in  fact.     He 
really  felt  and  expressed  a  cordial  and  unreserved  submission  to  God,  when  be 
expected  in  a  few  moments  to  sink  down  into  the  pit  of  endless  deBtruction.     2.  It 
appears  from  the  views  and  exercises  of  the  penitent  malefactor,  that  the  doctrine 
of  repentance  before  faith  is  founded  in  fact.     3.  It  appears  from  the  views  and 
feelings  of  the  penitent  malefactor,  that  the  doctrine  of  instantaneous  regeneration 
is  founded  in  fact.    4.  It  appears  from  the  conduct  of  God  towards  the  two  male- 
factors, that  He  acts  as  a  Sovereign  in  renewing  the  hearts  of  men.     5.  The  con- 
duct of  the  impenitent  malefactor  shows  that  no  external  means  or  motives  are 
sufficient  to  awaken,  convince,  or  convert  any  stupid  sinner.    6.  It  appears  from 
the  fate  of  the  impenitent  malefactor,  that  impenitent  sinners  have  no  ground  to 
rely  upon  the  mere  mercy  of  Christ  in  a  dying  hour.    It  is,  therefore,  presumption 
in  any  sinners  to  live  in  the  hope  of  a  death-bed  repentances.    7.  It  appears  from 
the  conduct  and  the  condition  of  the  penitent  malefactor,  that  sinners  may  be 
saved  at  the  eleventh  or  last  hour  of  life,  if  they  reaUy  repent  and  believe  in  Christ. 
(N.  Emmom,  D.D. )        Lessons  from  tJie  three  crosses  on  Calvary : — I.  The  wages 
OF  SIN  IS  DEATH.    1.  Death  to  the  sinner — the  death  of  the  body,  and  afterwards  the 
death  of  the  soul  in  hell.   2.  Death  to  the  Saviour,  who  knew  no  sin,  but  bears  our 
iniquities  on  the  cross.     3.  Death  to  the  saint ;  for  though  on  him  the  second  and 
more  awful  death,  the  death  of  the  soul,  hath  no  power,  yet  he  cannot  escape  the 
death  of  the  body ;  for  all  saints  since  Abel  have  had  to  pass  through  the  river 
Jordan,  save  two,  Enoch  and  Elijah.    God  must  be  just ;  and  nothing  short  of 
death  is  sin's  just  recompense.     Oh  that  you  would  turn  to  Him  whose  ••  gift  is 
eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord !  "    II.  Another  lesson  we  learn  from 
this  solemn  scene  is,  that  the  unconvebted  grow  wobse  and  wobse.    Perhaps  the 
lost  thief  was  brought  up  by  pious  parents ;  most  likely  he  was  taught  to  kneel 
before  God  by  bis  mother,  and  was  led  up  to  the  temple,  and  heard  the  sweet  music 
echo  among  its  marble  arches,  when  the  worshippers  sang  God's  praises.     Often 
had  he  wondered,  and  perhaps  wept,  when  hearing  the  history  of  Joseph,  and 
Samuel,  and  Daniel.    But,  alas !  he  was  led  away  by  little  and  little,  adding  sin  to 
sin,  until  sinning  became  a  habit,  and  habit  became  confirmed  and  strengthened,  till 
he  walked  openly  with  the  ungodly,  stood  in  the  way  of  sinners,  and  at  last  sat 
down  in  the  seat  of  the  scomer;  and  though  rebuked,  remained  hardened,  and 
went  down  a  doomed  man  to  hell.   You  cannot  indulge  one  sin  without  opening  the 
door  for  others.    The  man  who  begins  by  walking  in  the  downhill  path  of  sin,  goes 
on  to  running,  until  he  falls  headlong  into  hell.    HI.  Thebb  abe  noxe  too  bad  to 
BB  roBGivEN.    Art  thou  a  thief  7    As  the  thief  on  the  cross  was  saved,  so  mayest 
thon ;  take  heart,  and  cry  to  Jesus.    Art  thou  a  blasphemer  7    The  blasphemer, 
Bunyan,  was  saved,  and  so  mayest  thon ;  take  heart,  and  cry  to  Jesus.    Art  thou 
a  harlot  ?    The  harlot,  Mary,  was  saved,  and  so  mayest  thou ;  take  heart,  and  cry 
to  Jesns.    Art  thou  a  murderer  ?    There  may  be  some  such  here ;  for  God  knows 
there  are  not  only  murders  that  never  saw  the  light,  but  "  he  that  hateth  his 
brother  is  a  murderer."    But  oh  I  the  murderer  David  was  saved,  and  so  mayest 
thou ;  take  heart,  and  cry  to  Jesus.     Saul  of  Tarsus,  whose  hands  were  dyed  with 
the  blood  of  Stephen,  was  washed  with  the  blood  of  Jesus.     I  saw,  not  long  since, 
lying  on  the  bed  of  sickness  and  death,  a  poor  outcast  woman,  whose  spirit  has 
since  departed.     She  spoke  to  this  effect  to  a  dear  friend  of  mine : — **  I  have  been, 
not  five,  not  ten,  not  fifteen,  bnt  twenty  years  living  in  open  and  loathsome  nn ; 
but  I  have  found  that  Christ  will  oast  out  none — no,  not  the  most  hell-deserring 
sinner  who  cries  to  Him.    And  now  I  am  dying ;  but  I  am  happy,  for  "  the  blood 
of  Jesns  Christ,  His  Son,  oleanseth  me  from  all  sin.*    And  when  I  am  gone  let 
these  words  be  written  on  my  tombstone — " '  So  foolish  was  L  and  ignoiaat,  I  wa« 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Trtn. 

as  a  beast  before  Thee.  Nevertheless  I  am  continually  with  Thee :  Thou  hast  holden 
me  by  my  right  hand.  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  Thy  counsel  and  afterward  receive 
me  to  glory.'  "  Oh,  whoever  you  are,  Christ  can  save  you  !  IV.  Learn,  too,  from 
Calvary,  that  when  a  sinner  is  savbd,  it  is  by  faith  in  Jesus.  How  can  I  prove  to 
you  the  faith  of  the  penitent  thief  ?  By  his  wonderful  prayer.  {H.  O.  Guinness,  B.A.) 
Dost  not  thou  fear  God  7 — Tfie  restraining  principle  ; — And  what  is  this  fear  ?  This 
fear  is  a  solemn  dread  of  the  creature  in  presence  of  the  Creator.  Well,  then,  with 
real  thought  on  the  Passion,  why  must  we  feel,  as  a  prominent  principle,  a  fear  ot 
God?  1.  The  Cross,  my  brothers,  witnessed  to  two  things — God's  awful  and 
necessary  judgments  on  human  sin.  It  must  be  so.  God  could  not  be  God  if  it 
were  otherwise.  The  atonement  is  nothing  else  but  the  fearful  statement  of 
Divine  holiness  in  relation  to  sin.  Our  first  clear  intimations  of  Ood,  it  has  been 
truly  argued,  are  not  conclusions  from  reasoning  on  final  causes,  or  evidences  from 
the  harmonies  of  a  material  world.  No ;  they  are  the  voice  of  conscience,  and  the 
self-evident  consistency  of  the  moral  law.  It  is  always  possible  to  conceive,  so  it 
has  been  wisely  said,  all  sorts  of  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  material  world, 
and  we  find  no  difficulty  to  the  intellect,  whatever  may  be  said  about  the  imagina- 
tion in  the  revelation  of  its  final  transformation  by  fire — that  unimagined  and  yet 
inevitable  catastrophe.  Bat  one  thing  is  impossible — we  cannot  conceive  right 
being  otherwise  than  right,  and  wrong  than  wrong;  we  cannot  imagine  created 
dissonances  in  the  harmony  of  the  moral  law,  and  what  is  that  but  saying  that 
there  are  eternal  necessities  in  the  being  of  our  Creator  ?  And  if  so,  being  good. 
His  judgment  must  be  severe,  must  be  awful,  on  persistent  sin.  We  say  so  in  our 
saner  moments,  but  how  are  we  to  feel  the  truth  of  onr  saying  ?  The  answer  is — 
Calvary.  2.  But  this  fear  is  also  a  serious  apprehension  of  the  dreadfulness  of  evil 
in  itself.  The  Cross  showed  the  intensity  of  the  love  of  God,  and,  by  the  form  of 
the  revelation,  was  revealed  His  knowledge  of  our  fearful  danger.  The  genius 
of  Michael  Angelo  made  the  Sibyls  splendid  on  the  ceiling  of  the  Sistine  from  the 
magnificence  of  proportion  quite  as  much  as  from  the  softness  of  colour.  Propor- 
tion is  the  secret  of  lasting  charm.  It  is  holy  fear  that  is  the  principle  of  proportion 
in  the  relation  of  the  creature — the  fallen  creature — to  his  Creator.  To  see  God 
in  suffering  is,  by  grace,  to  have  a  proportionate  affection.  By  it  we  are  restrained, 
by  it  we  are  awed  and  solemnized,  by  it  we  act  as  men  should  in  the  felt  presence 
of  their  Maker,  by  it  we  learn,  in  fact,  our  proper  place.  (Canon  Knox  Little.) 
The  fear  of  God  gives  harmony  to  life : — As  the  glow  of  a  solemn  sunrise  gives  to 
the  tracts  of  impenetrable  vapour  a  splendour  which  illumines  and  transforms, 
changing  into  awful  beauty  the  cloud-folds  of  the  slate-grey  morning  on  the 
mountains,  which  were  otherwise  but  the  draperies  of  a  sulking  storm,  so  the 
fear  of  God  gives  harmony  and  colour  to  the  more  murky  cloudlands  of  the  inner 
life.  It  is,  it  is  indeed,  to  each  of  us  a  distinct  and  necessary  element  in  that  solid 
and  faithful  perseverance  to  which,  and  to  which  alone,  is  promised  the  reward  of 
victory.  Amidst  the  mysteries  and  miseries  of  this  lower  life  ;  amidst  its  simple 
joys,  its  unspeakable  sorrows ;  amidst  the  delirium  of  ambition,  the  intoxication 
of  pleasure,  the  heart-corroding  of  daily  care,  the  numbing  frosts  of  encroaching 
worldliness,  the  blinding  mists  of  severe  temptations,  we  may  be — if  we  will  to 
realize  its  meaning — we  may  be  arrested  by  the  spectacle  of  the  Passion;  and 
among  its  fruitful  and  tremendous  lessons,  it  teaches  restraint  of  the  tempest 
of  our  lower  desires,  brings  us  some  sense  of  the  vast  issues  of  eternity,  and-  says 
to  us  in  accents  which  we  may  hear  above  the  surge  of  the  surf  and  the  breaking 
of  the  bUlows,  "  Look  to  your  Eepresentative  ;  contemplate  the  dignity,  the  mystery 
of  His  sorrow ;  whether  high  in  rank  or  among  (what  the  world  calls)  the  dregs  of 
society,  whether  with  great  gifts  or  with  few  attainments,  walk  as  a  creature  in 
presence  of  his  Creator  ;  have  a  care  what  you  are  doing ;  live  as  those  who  live, 
but  who  have  to  die,  or  those  who  now  in  time  must  soon  feel  the  pressure  of 
eternity.  Child,  child  of  such  an  awful,  such  a  splendid  sacrifice,  fear  God ! 
.{Ibid.)  Nothing  amiss. — The  dying  thief s  testimony  to  our  Lord: — "Nothing 
'  amiss  " — ^what  does  that  mean,  as  used  here  ?  Literally,  it  means  "  nothing  out 
of  place  " — unsuitable,  nnbecoming,  improper.  Does  it  mean,  then,  "  He  has  not 
been  guilty  of  crimes  like  ours — of  robbery,  violence,  insurrection,  murder "  ? 
With  nothing  of  that  sort  was  He  ever  charged ;  and  none  in  the  city,  good  or  bad, 
could  be  a  stranger  to  the  one  charge  brought  against  Him  ;  for  the  whole  country, 
as  well  as  the  crowded  streets  of  the  metropolis,  was  fall  of  it.  He  was  dying 
nnder  the  charge  of  high  treason  against  heaven — of  blasphemy — of  not  only 
laying  claim  to  royid  honoaxs,  bat  making  Himself  equal  with  God.    I  take  i^ 


■CHAP.  rsm.J  ST.  LUKE.  689 

•therefore,  that  in  saying,  ••  This  Man  has  done  nothing  amiss,"  his  words  mast  mean, 
"He  has  made  no  false  claim:  He  said,  'I  am  the  Christ,'  but  in  that  He  did 
nothing  amiss ;  •  I  am  the  King  of  Israel,'  but  in  that  He  did  nothing  amiss ;  He 
called  Himself  the  Son  of  God,  the  Light  of  the  world,  the  Rest  of  the  weary,  the 
Physician  of  the  sick  at  heart,  but  in  this  He  did  nothing  amiss."  Not  that  1  for 
A  moment  suppose  that  this  penitent  criminal  had  knowledge  enough  to  say  all 
this  as  I  have  said  it ;  but  I  feel  confident  that  he  had  gleams  of  it,  and  that  I  have 
not  gone  beyond  the  spirit  of  his  testimony  to  the  innocence  of  our  Lord.  Amidst 
the  buzzings  about  this  new  kind  of  criminal — innocent,  by  universal  consent,  of 
ail  the  ordinary  crimes,  yet  charged  with  a  crime  never  before  laid  to  the  charge  of 
any — some  account  of  the  marvellous  works  ascribed  to  Him,  and  of  the  words 
of  heavenly  grace  He  was  said  to  have  uttered,  might  easily  reach  this  man's  ear  ; 
and  just  as  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  hsteth,  so  that  grace  which  is  the  Spirit's 
breath  upon  the  soul  might  send  what  he  heard  like  arrows  into  a  softened  breast — 
as  not  seldom  it  does  even  still.     (D.  Brown,  D.D.) 

Ver.  42.  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom. — The 
penitent  robber's  faith  and  prayer : — I.  His  wonderful  faith.  "  When  Thou 
comest  into  Thy  kingdom."  When  Charles  I.  of  England,  or  Maximilian,  the 
brilliantly  brief  Mexican  emperor,  were  about  to  suffer  death,  suppose  such  an 
expectation  had  been  expressed  to  them  !  It  would  have  been  considered  a  sickly 
taunt.  Not  so  this.  II.  His  remarkable  request.  "Eemember  me."  "God  is 
not  imrighteous  to  forget "  Christian  labour  of  love,  but  here  was  a  miserable 
«ulprit  who  had  never  done  Jesus  any  good  turn.  Charles  II.  and  Louis  Napoleon 
rewarded  friends  of  their  exile,  but  how  about  this  request  ?  What  could  he 
expect  to  be  remembered  for  ?  1.  As  a  penitent  sinner.  2.  As  one  who  has  trust 
in  a  perfect  Saviour.  (Cliarles  M.  Jones.)  The  dying  thief  : — I.  This  narra- 
tive  PRESENTS    FAITH    TO   US    AS    CONSISTING    IN    A    FIRM    AND    TRUSTING    PERSUASION 

THAT  Jesus  is  the  Christ  ;  that  He  has  power  to  help  ;  and  that  the 
HELP  He  gives  is  spiritual  help.  On  one  side  of  Christ  was  a  believer,  on 
the  other  an  unbeliever.  Both  in  their  pain  pleaded  with  their  more  august 
and  noble  fellow-Sufferer.  What  said  the  unbeliever ?  "If  Thoa  be  the  Christ, 
Bave  Thyself  and  us."  Contrast  with  this  the  appeal  which  faith  presents. 
It  at  once  addresses  Christ  as  Lord :  "  L;u;d,  remember  me  when  Thoa  comest 
into  Thy  kingdom."  The  unbeliever  refused  to  regard  Jesus  as  the  Christ, 
except  on  the  condition  of  a  temporal  deliverance.  Had  Christ  commanded  the 
nails  to  loose  their  hold,  and  the  cross  to  fall ;  had  He  healed  the  wounds  and 
assuaged  the  pain ;  he  might  then  in  his  turn  bave  acknowledged  Him  as  Lord.  But 
the  believer  imposes  no  condition,  he  asks  no  proofs ;  but  with  the  iron  smarting 
in  his  flesh,  and  the  death-pain  thrilling  through  his  frame,  he  finds  a  voice  to  caU 
his  Saviour  by  His  rightful  name.  Mark,  too,  the  confidence  of  the  penitent  in  the 
power  of  God  to  save.  You  meet  with  no  dubious  •'  if  " ;  the  prayer  he  offers 
18  simple  in  its  trustfulness.  "Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy 
kingdom."  He  saw  the  triumphal  arches  decked  with  bright  garlands  from  the 
tree  of  life,  and  angels  waiting  with  the  regal  diadem,  for  the  King  of  glory  to 
oome  in  and  take  His  crown.  And  mark,  too,  the  spirituality  of  his  faith.  He 
knew  that  Christ  had  the  power  to  save  his  body  from  the  pangs  of  death ;  yet  it 
was  for  no  such  boon  as  this  he  asked.  He  hankered  not  after  what  he  wa^ 
leaving  in  the  past.  He  thought  of  that  with  shame,  and  shuddered  to  recall 
it.  He  wanted  to  forget  it  in  the  brightness  of  a  future  kingdom,  whence  sin  is 
banished,  and  shame  is  barred  from  entering.  He  felt  for  his  soul.  His  faith 
looked  above  and  beyond ;  above,  to  God's  right  hand,  and  to  the  throne  where 
angels  worshipped,  and  the  spirits  of  the  just  bowed  down ;  and  beyond,  further 
than  mortal  gaze  can  soar,  further  than  dwarfish  time  can  reach,  into  the  eternal 
ages.  n.  This  narrative  teaches  cs  something  of  the  difficulties  or  faith.  It 
bas  often  to  contend  both  against  experience  and  example.  If  ever  there  was  a 
time  when  there  seemed  to  be  a  strong  excuse  for  disbelief,  it  was  at  the  time  that 
this  dying  malefactor  displayed  bis  faith.  Speaking  humanly,  was  it  likely  that 
that  should  be  the  Christ  ?  What  had  the  prophets  said  concerning  Him,  oentoriea 
before  His  coming?  They  had  toned  trumpet  and  harp  and  voice  to  loudest, 
sweetest  sound  to  tell  of  the  dignity  of  His  person,  and  the  glor7  of  His  reign. 
They  had  depicted  in  vivid  hues  the  splendour  of  His  conquests,  and  His  royal 
majesty.  And  what  have  we  here  ?  llie  convicted  malefactor  of  man's  tribunal, 
the  poppet  of  man's  small  authority,  belying,  as  it  seemed.  His  own  high  pt«t«n- 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxnt 

eioDs,  by  the  very  weakness  which  He  shows,  and  swallowing,  if  we  may  so  say,  Hia 
asseverations  of  immortality  by  His  obedience  to  such  a  death.  What  1  thig  the 
Christ !  This  bleeding,  groaning,  suffering,  expiring  clay ;  is  this  the  royal  King, 
the  heaven-sent  Messiah  ?  Is  there  any  might  to  save  within  that  pallid  arm  ?  Is 
there  any  light  under  that  glazing  eye  to  scare  the  king  of  terrors  from  hia 
prey?  These  were  the  thoughts  which  made  the  Jews  refuse  belief,  and  pour 
derision  upon  Christ.  These  were  the  semblances,  in  spite  of  which  the  dying 
thief  believed,  and  called  his  dying  Master,  "Lord."  The  conduct  of  others,  as 
well  as  the  condition  or  predicament  of  Christ,  was  against  his  faith.  He  knew  that 
Jesus,  while  hanging  on  the  cross,  had  heard  the  taunts  of  the  rulers,  the  insults  of 
the  soldiery,  and  the  ribald  mockery  of  the  common  people.  As  yet,  the  sack- 
clothed  veiling  of  the  sun  had  not  abashed  them ;  the  crimson  blushing  of  the 
indignant  sky  had  not  rebuked  them  to  forbear  ;  the  shuddering  earthquake,  and 
the  gathering  pall  of  night  had  not  chid  their  railing  tongues  to  silence.  Amazing 
faith  1  Ihis  man  believed  when  all  others  disbelieved.  He  worshipped  when 
all  the  resl  were  mocking.  He  adored  when  all  the  universe  seemed  in  arms. 
III.  But  the  narrative  shows  us,  too,  the  victories  of  faith  ;  and  with  a  olancb 
AT  THESE  WB  CLOSE.  The  faith  of  the  dying  thief  secured  a  favourable  response 
from  Christ ;  was  afterwards  verified  by  facts ;  and  is  now  triumphant  in  heaven. 
What,  think  you,  accounts  for  the  difference  between  these  two  thieves  ?  Why  was 
the  heart  of  one  a  thief's  heart  to  the  last,  hard  as  the  millstone,  reviling  Christ, 
and  hissing  forth  his  last  breath  in  insult  at  the  Sufferer,  while  that  of  the  other 
softened  into  a  heart  of  fiesh,  and  surged  with  sympathy  for  the  innocence  of  the 
expiring  Lord  ?  Ij  was  faith  in  Christ  which  made  the  difference  ;  the  faith  which 
worketh  by  love,  and  is  the  condition  of  the  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus ;  this 
accounted  for  the  change  wrought  upon  the  penitent,  and  it  justified  the  sinner. 
His  guilt  was  removed  ;  his  iniquities  were  pardoned.  The  moment  that  the 
Master  said,  "  This  day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise,"  that  moment  he  found 
peace  with  God,  and  felt  the  "  great  calm  "  deep  in  his  soul.  What  recked  he  of 
the  cross,  the  pain,  the  wounds  ?  Here  was  a  victory  for  his  faith.  Let  yours  gain 
equal  conquests,  and  it  shall  lead  you  to  a  like  inheritance.  We  spoke  just  now  of 
the  apparent  unreasonableness  of  this  man's  faith.  Let  us  here  speak  a  word  of 
its  justification,  and  therefrom  let  reason  learn  to  reserve  her  verdicts  and  her 
judgments  till  the  time  be  ripe.  Had  those  sage  reasoners,  who  thought  the 
Saviour  dead  because  His  clay  was  cold,  waited  but  three  short  days,  and  then 
looked  into  His  tomb,  they  would  have  seen  the  faith  of  the  dying  thief 
justified  in  the  vacant  vault,  the  empty  shroud,  and  the  unknotted  bands.  {A. 
Mursell.)  The  dying  robber  saved  : — I.    Consider   the   peeviotjs   characteB' 

OF  THIS  MAN.  1.  He  was  not  a  pagan,  but  a  Jew  —  a  believer  in  the  true- 
Ood.  2.  A  believer  in  future  existence  and  retribution.  3.  He  had  become 
a  hardened  wretch.  II.  Notice  his  trite  repentance.  This  is  evidenced — 
1.  In  his  viewing  sin  in  its  relation  to  God.  2.  In  his  acknowledgment  of 
his  own  guilt.  3.  In  his  reproving  the  conduct  of  the  other  robber,  and  his 
anxiety  for  his  welfare.  III.  His  strong  faith.  He  believed — 1.  That  Christ 
had  a  kingdom.  2.  That  He  would  hear  requests.  3.  That  He  would  grant 
blessings.  IV.  His  praveb.  1.  Short;  but  a  single  sentence.  2.  Humble;  he- 
only  asked  to  be  remembered.  3.  Beliant.  Bemember  all  my  past  bad  life ;  but 
remember,  too,  that  I  am  dying  trusting  in  Thy  grace.  4.  Earnest.  The  petition' 
of  an  awakened  sinner  on  the  brink  of  eternity.  5.  It  included  all  he  needed. 
V.  Christ's  answer.  Conclusions :  1.  If  Christ  heard  prayer*  when  passing 
through  His  awful  suffering  upon  the  cross,  will  He  not  hear  now  that  He  is 
exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  t  2.  The  conversion  of  this  man  shows  how 
quickly  Christ  can  save.  3.  Salvation  is  all  of  grace,  and  not  of  works  or  merit. 
4.  Christ  can  not  only  justify  and  give  us  a  title  to  heaven  in  a  short  time ;  He  oan 
also  quickly  sanctify  and  make  us  "  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light."  5.  One  robber  was  taken  and  the  other  left.  6.  This  is  the  only 
case  of  death-bed  conversion  recorded  in  the  Bible.  {J.  L,  Campbell.)  Marks  of 
an  accepted  faith : — I.  True  faith  is  belf-condemnatory  ;  it  is  bootbd  ahD' 
eBOUNDBD  IN  SINCERE  BEPBNTANCB.  If  I  merit  uot  Condemnation,  I  need  no 
pardon;  and  until  I  discern  distinctly  and  fully  that  I  am  guilty,  and  righteously^ 
condemned,  I  cannot  feel  my  need  of  pardon;  and  not  feeling  my  need  of  it,  E 
cannot  desire  it.  The  thief  hanging  at  the  Saviour's  side  did  feel  his  guilt.  IL 
Bdt  his  faith  was  also  VNHKsiTATnta,  FULL,  ooNFmiNO.  He  sees  his  guilt;  he 
feels  his  peril ;  he  thinks  that  be  discerns  in  Jesus  evidence  of  power  to  help  him  ; 


OHif .  xxm.J  BT,  LUKE.  191 

ftnd  at  once  and  earnestly  his  suit  is  urged,  "  Lord,  remember  me."  No  conditions 
are  proposed,  no  terms  offered ;  he  throws  his  hopes  on  the  mere  mercy  of  Him  he 
styles  Lord.  And  truly  this  is  the  genuine  temper  of  true  faith.  HL  His  faith 
WAS  rBANK  AND  OPEN.  There  is  a  noble  ingenuousness  in  this  appeal  of  the  dying 
thief  that  is  worthy  of  all  admiration,  and  of  all  imitation  too.  He  spake  not  to 
one  courted,  admired,  and  applauded,  but  to  one  despised,  calumniated,  condemned, 
and  hanging  beside  Him  on  a  cross.  There  is  here  discovered  a  matchless  moral 
grandeur  in  this  dying  thief.    IV.  His  faith  was  spibituai.;  it  looked  thbouob 

AND  OYER  ALL  UBBB  OUTWABO  CIBCnMSTANCES.  Y.  ThB  OBJECT  PETITIONED  FOK 
HAS    BESFECT     EXCLUSIVELY    TO     THB     HIOHEB     INTBBESTS     OF    A    LIFE    BEYOND    THB 

OBAVE.  (IF.  T.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  penitent  malefactor: — I.  Notice  in  th© 
dying  thief  the  opebations  of  oenuinb  bepentanob.  1.  He  begins  to  rebuke 
the  reviling  malefactor.  2.  He  confesses  his  sin,  and  acknowledges  the  equity 
of  his  sentence.  3.  He  vindicates  the  character  of  Christ,  while  he  unequi- 
vocally condemns  himself.  4.  His  repentance  is  accompanied  by  faith  in 
Christ.  6.  And  earnest  prayer  to  Him.  II.  View  the  conduct  of  cub  Lobd 
TOWABDS  Hiu.  1.  Though  Christ  would  ttike  no  notice  of  a  reviler,  nor  give 
any  answer  to  the  language  of  reproach,  yet  He  would  attend  to  the  plea 
of  mercy;  and  to  the  plea  of  one  of  the  most  unworthy,  and  the  least  likely  to- 
obtain  it.  He  would  hear  the  prayer  of  a  perishing  sinner  whose  heart  was  con- 
trite, even  in  the  hour  of  death.  What  condescension,  and  what  love!  2.  He 
answered  him  without  delay.  3.  As  the  petition  had  implied  much,  so  did  the 
answer.  4.  The  promise  is  pronounced  with  a  solemn  asseveration ;  ♦•  Verily,  I  say 
nnto  thee."  This  bears  the  form  of  an  oath,  and  gives  the  fullest  assurance  for  the 
performance  of  the  promise  (Heb.  vi.  18).  Reflections :  1.  We  may  observe,  that 
there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  conduct  of  this  dying  malefactor,  and  that 
of  many  dying  penitents  who  are  supposed  to  be  converted.  They  often  speak  con- 
fidently of  their  state,  and  of  their  going  to  heaven ;  but  this  poor  man  did  not»^ 

I  though  Chiist  said  so  of  him.  He  prayed  that  he  might  be  saved ;  and  after  what 
Christ  said,  he  might  believe  that  he  should ;  but  he  himself  said  not  a  word  of  that. 
The  strong  language  that  was  used  was  Christ's,  and  not  his.  2.  There  is  a  request 
on  Christ's  part  as  well  as  on  ours :  He  desires  to  be  remembered  by  us  (1  Cor.  xi. 
24).  He  does  not  need  it  as  we  do;  but  love  desires  it,  and  wishes  to  live  in  the 
mind  of  its  objects.  {Theological  Sketch-hook.)  The  dying  thief: — 1.  The  triumph 
of  faith  over  great  difSculties.  2.  How  Christ  honours  the  exercise  of  faith.  3. 
How  the  favour  of  Christ  abates  the  force  of  earthly  trouble.  4.  The  way  to  the 
kingdom  of  glory  is  by  a  suffering  Saviour.  5.  Necessity  gives  life  to  prayer.  (J. 
S.  Bright.)  The  penitent  thief: — I.  The  mabvellous  petition  pbesented  by  thb 
dying  penitent.  1.  Marvellous,  coming  from  such  a  petitioner.  2.  Marvellous,, 
being  offered  in  such  circumstances.  3.  Marvellous,  in  the  spirit  it  revealed.  4. 
Marvellous,  in  its  substance  and  purport.  II.  The  yet  mobb  mabvellous  beply  of 
Chbist.  1.  The  manner  in  which  it  was  given  excites  our  wonder ;  no  delay  or 
suspense,  no  conditions  or  qualifications.  2.  When  we  look  into  the  answer  itself, 
we  are  amazed  at  its  fulness,  richness,  and  appropriateness.  (1)  The  place  in  which 
the  delightful  meeting  was  to  occur :  "  Paradise."     (2)  The  society  of  which  the 

'  dying  penitent  was  assured:  "With  Me."  (3)  The  immediacy  of  the  happiness 
promised :  "  To-day."  Suggestions :  1.  A  blessed  prospect  is,  in  this  language  of 
our  Divine  Lord,  opened  up  before  those  who  are  looking  forward  to  death  as  the 
step  into  life.  2.  A  suitabh  prayer  is,  in  the  language  of  the  penitent,  suggested  to 
our  hearts.  3.  The  narrative  affords  encouragement  to  those  who  have  long  sinned, 
but  who  now  sincerely  rrpent  and  earnestly  desire  salvation.  {J.  R.  Thomson^ 
M.A.)  The  saved  malefactor: — I.  His  chabacteb.  A  malefactor,  a  criminal 
of  the  basest  sort,  proba?>ly  selected  for  crucifixion  on  this  very  account,  to  put 
greater  shame  upon  Jesuj.  Then,  none  need  despair.  II.  No  one  has  any  bight 
to  pbesume.  While  this  one  is  taken,  the  other  is  left.  All  do  not  repent  at  the 
eleventh  hour.  IH.  No  man  has  a  bight  to  expect  salvation  without  givino 
EviOENOB  OF  FAITH  AND  BitPENTANCB.  In  the  OBSe  of  the  penitent  thief,  there  was — 
1.  A  conviction  of  sin.  2.  Faith  in  the  Son  of  God.  3.  Prayer.  4.  Concern  for 
others.  6.  Testimony  t<)  Jesus.  {Canon  Fremantle.)  The  penitent  thief: — I. 
The  example  of  the  penitent  thief  is  adapted  to  excite,  even  in  obbat  offendebs, 
A  bsliance  on  the  goodness  and  compassion  of  God,  if  they  will  betubn  to  Him 
AMD  to  theib  duty.  Here  was  a  man  who  had  committed  a  crime  for  which  by  hie 
own  confession  he  deserved  to  die.  His  faith,  and  the  manner  in  which  he  showed 
it,  were  doubtless  Teiy  commendable ;  and  yet  they  seem  to  have  been  rather  too 


89S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ran. 

highly  extolled.  The  behaviour  of  Christ  under  His  sufferings,  and  the  wonderful 
circumstances  attending  His  crucifixion,  might  easily  induce  an  unprejudiced  man 
to  think  that  He  could  be  no  ordinary  person,  much  less  a  malefactor ;  and  these 
things,  joined  to  the  knowledge  which  this  man,  being  of  the  Jewish  nation,  might 
have  had  before  of  Christ  and  of  His  ministry,  might  well  induce  him  to  acknow- 
ledge  Him  for  the  Messias.  But  then  it  is  likewise  to  be  considered  that  he  ran  no 
risk,  as  to  his  worldly  concerns,  in  so  doing ;  the  world  could  not  use  him  worse ; 
and  his  miseries  had  placed  him  beyond  earthly  fear  and  hope,  beyond  the  reach 
ol  malice  and  cruelty.  To  his  repentance,  then,  is  to  be  ascribed  the  gracious  recep- 
tion which  he  found ;  his  repentance  was  sincere,  and  God  was  pleased  to  accept 
the  will  for  the  deed.  For,  since  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  w^ero  the  Bam«! 
dispositions  are  found,  the  same  favour  will  be  extended.  The  consequence  thus 
far  seems  to  be  just.  II.  The  second  use  of  the  text,  which  ought  always  to  be 
joined  with  the  first,  is  to  dissuadb  men  from  habitual  vice,  and  a  deiay  of  rkfoe- 

MATION,  BT  SHOWING  THEM  HOW  LITTLE  EEASON  BUCH  OFFENDERS  HAVE  TO  EXPECT  THAT 
THET  SHALL  EVER  SO  QUALIFY  THEMSELVES,  AS   TO   BECOMB   FIT   TO   OBTAIN   THE    FAVOUB 

WHICH  WAS  EXTENDED  TO  THIS  MAN.  1.  To  abuse  and  provoke  the  lenity  and  long- 
suffering  of  God  in  this  manner,  to  be  wicked  because  He  is  good,  is  monstrously 
base  and  perverse,  and  shows  a  very  dangerous  depravity.  2.  Sin,  if  it  be  not 
resisted,  grows  daily  upon  us,  and  makes  the  return  to  righteousness  more  and  more 
difficult  and  improbable ;  and  he  who  cannot  find  in  his  heart  to  amend,  even  whilst 
be  is  a  novice  in  iniquity,  will  be  less  disposed  to  it  when  time  and  custom  have 
hardened  him.  3.  Sin  is  of  a  most  infatuating  nature,  and  corrupts  not  only  the 
heart,  but  the  understanding ;  and  who  knows  where  it  may  end  ?  4.  As  all  other 
habits  can  no  other  way  be  removed  than  by  introducing  contrary  habits,  which  is 
the  work  of  patience,  resolution,  and  repeated  attempts  ;  the  same  must  hold  true 
concerning  sinful  habits.  So  that  though  a  change  of  mind  and  a  purpose  of 
amendment  may  be  wrought  soon  and  suddenly,  yet  a  change  of  behaviour,  which 
is  the  only  sure  proof  of  amendment,  requires  time  and  labour ;  and  it  is  hard  to 
conceive  how  a  late  repentance  can  change  bad  habits,  unless  we  suppose  that  the 
alteration  for  the  better,  which  is  just  beginning  in  this  world,  may  be  carried  on 
and  completed  in  the  next.  But  concerning  this  the  Scriptures  are  silent ;  and  who 
would  risk  his  soul  upon  conjectural  hopes  ?  5.  Since  sinners  have  perhaps  often 
designed  and  purposed,  and  resolved,  without  performing,  they  will  have  too  much 
reason  to  suspect  the  sincerity  of  their  own  hearts,  and  to  rely  but  httle  on  a  change 
of  purpose  which  present  and  pressing  danger  extorts  from  them.  Add  to  this,  that 
a  sinner  may  be  removed  out  of  this  world  suddenly  and  without  any  warning,  or 
that  many  infirmities  of  body  or  mind  may  deprive  him  in  a  great  measure  of  his 
understanding,  and  render  him  incapable  of  performing  any  rational  act  of  any 
kind,  and  consequently  the  act  of  repenting.  6.  The  gospel  requires  from  all  men 
improvement  and  perseverance.  A  late  repentance,  such  as  it  is,  at  the  close  of  a 
bad  life,  can  seldom  exert  the  first  of  these  duties,  and  never  the  second.  7.  An 
intention  to  do  just  enough  to  save  ourselves  from  perdition,  and  no  more,  is  putting 
ourselves  in  a  very  dangerous  situation.  A  cold  and  faint  attempt  to  enter  in  mast 
be  attended  with  the  hazard  of  being  shut  out.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.)  A  tintur't 
repentance : — ^The  word  repentance  does  not  mean  simple  regret.  It  is  a  change  of 
mind ;  an  alteration  of  thought,  feeling,  and  conduct.  When  a  sinner  truly  repents 
he  does  more  than  lament  the  past,  dread  the  future,  and  ask  for  mercy.  He  hates 
his  sin,  not  only  for  the  punishment  it  brings,  but  for  itself.  It  is  no  longer  in 
harmony  with  his  taste.  Holiness  is  no  longer  his  aversion.  However  sudden  may 
have  been  the  dying  thief's  repentance,  it  was  an  entire  change  of  heart  and  cha- 
racter, and  would  have  resulted  in  an  entire  change  of  conduct  had  his  life  been 
prolonged.  In  proof  of  this,  consider  some  of  the  elements  of  this  repentance.  I. 
There  was  reverence  for  God.  He  said  to  his  companion  ♦•  Dost  thou  not  fear 
God."  The  absence  of  this  fear  is  the  main  characteristic  of  the  ungodly.  "  There 
is  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes."  II.  The  dying  thief  indicated  contrition  for 
his  former  life  of  sin.  "  We  indeed  justly,  for  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our 
deeds."  He  was  suffering  the  agonies  of  crucifixion.  But  the  torture  did  not  pro- 
voke him  to  complain  of  the  severity  of  the  sentence.  He  felt  himself  to  be  a 
oriminal.  He  confessed  it  before  his  companion  and  the  crowd.  We  infer  from  the 
entire  narrative  that  he  was  a  sincere  penitent.  He  did  honestly  lament  his  wicked- 
ness, n  was  more  than  regret  for  the  consequences ;  it  was  remorse  for  the  sin. 
This  is  an  element  in  all  true  repentance.  III.  In  the  repentance  of  the  dying  thief 
there  was  atpbeciation  of  qoodnbss.    He  said  of  Jesus,  "  Bat  this  man  hath  done 


CHAP,  xxin.]  ST.  LVKE.  693 

nothing  amiss."  False  penitence,  M-hich  laments  only  the  discovery,  the  shame, 
the  punishment  of  sin,  and  not  sin  itself,  may  regret  the  lack  of  virtues  which  bring 
rewards,  bnt  dots  not  really  appreciate  and  admire  goodness  for  its  own  sake.  It 
is  otherwise  with  those  who  "unfeignedly  repent."  IV.  This  repentance  included 
a  CONFESSION  OF  Ghbist.  The  dying  thief  testified  to  all  around  his  admiration  of 
Christ's  character.  By  what  he  had  h'eard  from  others,  by  what  he  had  himself 
witnessed,  he  felt  assured  that  Jesus  was  innocent.  And  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
declare  this.  A  faithful  confession  of  Christ  will  always  follow  sincere  repentance. 
But  how  much  such  confession  involves  I  V.  Faith  was  illustriously  manifested  in 
this  repentance.  The  dying  thief  said,  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  in; 
Thy  kingdom."  He  called  Jesus  '•  Lord  " — as  possessing  authority,  a  right  to  rule.. 
He  ascribed  to  Him  kingship,  for  he  spoke  of  His  kingdom.  This  was  wonderful^ 
There  was  no  outward  indication  of  lordship,  there  were  no  insignia  of  royalty, 
Jesus  was  a  captive,  condemned,  insulted,  crucified ;  yet  does  the  dying  thief  salute 
Him  as  a  king  I  King  ?  Where  are  His  royal  robes  ?  They  have  torn  from  Hira 
even  His  ordinary  dress  1  Bling  ?  Where  is  His  throne  ?  That  cross  of  shame  on 
which  He  hangs !  Yet  poor,  vanquished,  insulted,  murdered,  the  dying  thief  haa 
faith  to  recognize  Him  as  a  king,  and  able  to  confer  royal  gifts !  VI.  The  repen- 
tance of  the  dying  thief  manifested  itself  in  peatbb.  Where  there  is  true  repentance 
there  will  be  true  prayer.  In  every  case  of  conversion  it  may  be  said,  as  was  said 
of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  "  Behold  he  prayeth."  Such  prayer  will  be  humble,  believing, 
and  obedient.  And  our  prayers  will  not  be  merely  for  benefits  we  are  to  receive 
passively,  but  for  strength  and  opportunity  to  serve  God  actively.  We  shall  regard 
.  it  as  the  best  of  all  benefits  to  be  numbered  with  His  subjects,  to  be  employed  as 
His  servants,  to  be  remembered  in  His  kingdom.  Can  repentance,  when  it  iucludeB 
such  a  spirit  of  prayer,  be  a  trifling  change  in  one  who  has  neglected  prayer,  dis- 
believed its  efficacy,  disliked  its  exercise  ?  VII.  The  repentance  of  the  dying  thief 
already  began  to  bring  forth  the  good  wokks  of  zeal  for  God  and  charity  towards  man. 
He  honoured  Christ  before  the  world,  and  proclaimed  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom.  He 
also  felt  for  the  sad  state  of  his  companion  in  crime,  and  sought  with  his  dying  breath 
to  lead  him  to  repentance.  However  recent  his  own  convictions  he  must  make  them 
known.  He  could  not  let  his  companion  die  impenitent  without  a  word  of  remon- 
strance. He  could  not  withhold  the  discovery  he  had  made  of  a  Saviour  who  could  do 
more  for  them  both  than  take  them  down  from  the  cross.  (Newman  Hall,  LL.B.) 
The  penitent  robber : — Hike  Luke's  description  of  these  two  men  better  than  any 
other.  He  does  not  call  them  thieves:  he  calls  them  malefactors — that  is,  doers  of 
evil,  without  specifying  the  exact  form  of  crime  to  which  they  had  committed 
themselves,  and  which  had  brought  upon  them  the  agonies  of  crucifixion.  I 
am  quite  willing  that  one  of  them  should  be  called  a  thief :  he  was  small  and  mean 
of  mind,  and  there  was  nothing  in  his  speech  that  did  not  become  a  very  low  and 
vulgar  order  of  intellectual  and  moral  conception.  But  the  one  who  is  usually 
spoken  of  as  the  penitent  thief  proved  himself  in  this  last  distress  to  be  one  of  the 
greatest  men  that  ever  lived  in  the  world.  If  you  analyze  his  speech  you  will  find 
that  in  philosophy,  in  audacity  of  thought,  in  vndth  and  penetration  of  conception, 
no  greater  speech  was  ever  made  by  human  lips,  I  am,  therefore,  prepared  to 
defend  this  malefactor  on  the  intellectual  side,  and  to  redeem  him  from  the  debase- 
ment of  his  association  with  a  man  of  a  nutshell  mind  and  of  a  foal  tongue.  This 
is  one  of  the  stories  in  the  Bible  that  must  be  true,  by  the  mere  force  of  its 
audacity.  It  never  could  have  entered  the  mind  of  a  romancist  that  such  a  man, 
under  such  circumstances,  could  have  made  such  a  speech.  All  the  disciples  are 
mean  men,  intellectually,  compared  with  this  dying  malefactor.  They  never  dis- 
covered, up  to  the  time  of  the  crucifixion,  intellectual  vigour  enough  to  conceive  a 
figure  like  this.  They  have  painted  women  weU,  they  have  done  justly  by  a  thon- 
sand  beautiful  incidents  in  the  life  of  their  great,  sweet  Lord,  but  no  man  like  this 
have  they  ever  dreamed  into  being.  He  was  real — he  did  say  these  words.  They 
stand  out  from  all  other  words  so  grandly  as  to  be  their  own  best  testimony  and 
vindication.  What  did  this  dying  malefactor  do  to  prove  his  intellectual  greatness* 
He  saw  the  Lord  in  the  victim.  What  did  all  the  other  minds  round  about  him  T 
What  vulgarity  always  does  and  must  do — ^reviled,  derided,  scorned  the  weak,  defied 
the  impotent,  crushed  the  worm.  It  was  like  them,  worthy  of  them ;  in  so  doing 
they  did  not  debase  Christ ;  they  wrote  themselves  little  men.  It  is  a  great  thing 
for  thee,  poor  coward,  to  revile  a  man  both  of  whose  hands  are  nailed,  and  whose  feet 
are  pierced  with  iron,  and  whose  temples  are  bleeding  because  of  the  cruel  thorn  f 
Art  thou  very  witty,  mighty  in  mind,  very  chivalrous  and  nobly  heroio  to  speak 
VOL.  m.  88 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  xnn. 


derisive  words  of  any  man  in  such  circumstances  ?  Observe  how  all  other  men 
looked  upon  Christ  just  then.  All  the  disciples  had  forsaken  Him,  and  fled  away. 
The  women  were  standing  in  helpless  tears,  dejected  and  speechless.  All  the  people 
round  about,  big  and  little,  were  mocking  and  deriding  the  great  Sufferer.  One  of 
the  malefactors  was  saying,  "If  Thou  be  the  Christ,  save  Thyself  and  us."  Little 
minds  have  all  little  scales  of  proof.  If  Jesus  had  come  down  from  the  cross  and 
taken  the  two  thieves  with  Him,  that  would  have  settled  everything  in  the  mind  ol 
the  malefactor,  but  it  would  have  only  settled  it  for  the  moment.  He  would  have 
taken  from  that  wider  liberty  to  repeat  his  petty  felonies.  He  must  be  a  thief,  that 
man,  and  he  would  have  made  his  calling  and  election  sure.  But  in  the  midst  of 
all  this  abandonment  on  the  one  hand,  derision,  contempt,  and  acorn  on  the  other, 
an  unexpected  and  unlikely  voice  says  "Lord"  to  the  dying  Nazarene,  It  was  a 
great  thought,  it  was  an  audacious  utterance.  Viewed  in  relation  to  the  time  and 
all  the  convergent  circumstances  of  the  case,  to  have  said  "  Lord  "  then  was  to 
have  seen  the  sun  amid  the  darkness  of  midnight,  to  have  penetrated  the  gloom  of 
countless  generations  and  ages,  and  to  have  seen  all  the  stars  in  their  keenest  glitter 
of  light  far  away  above  the  dense  and  lowering  gloom.  Dost  thou  see  big  things  in 
Ihe  dark,  my  friend,  or  art  thou  terrified  by  thine  own  shadow  ?  What  mind  hast 
thou  ?  A  forecasting  and  prophetic  mind,  a  seeing  mind,  a  prophetic  brain ;  or  art 
thou  dazed  by  lights  that  seem  to  have  no  relation  and  harmony,  and  confounded 
by  voices  coming  from  a  thousand  different  quarters  at  once  ?  Hast  thou  shaping 
power  of  mind,  a  grand  power,  all  but  creative,  which  orders  chaos  into  Cosmos, 
which  makes  the  darkness  reveal  its  jewellery  of  stars  ?  Where  are  thou  in  thia 
great  religious  thinking  ?  Learn  from  a  strange  teacher  that  Victim  and  Lord  are 
compatible  terms.  Learn  that  a  man  may  transiently  be  at  the  very  depth  of  his 
history,  that  he  may  come  up  from  that  with  a  completer  strength  and  a  fuller 
lustre  to  the  height  of  his  power.  "  He  made  Himself  of  no  reputation  ;  He  took 
upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant;  He  became  obedient  unto  death."  Dost  thou  only 
know  a  king  when  he  is  upon  a  throne  ?  Dost  thoa  require  a  great  label  in  red 
letters  to  be  put  around  a  man's  neck  to  know  just  what  he  is?  Dost  thou  know  no 
man  can  be  a  great  man  who  lives  in  a  little  house  ?  Sayest  thou  of  thy  small 
vulgarized  mind,  *•  The  man  who  lives  amid  all  these  bricks  must  be  a  huge  man  "  ? 
Dost  thou  never  see  a  third-class  passenger  in  a  first-class  carriage  ?  What  sort  of 
mind  hast  thou?  O  that  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  and  EUsha  would  open  thine 
eyes,  poor  servant,  to  see  within  the  thronging  soldier-host  a  circle  of  augels,  keen 
as  lightning,  terrible  as  fire,  defensive  as  almightiness  1  This  malefactor,  a  man 
who  could  have  played  with  thrones  and  nations,  did  more  than  see  the  Lord  in 
<the  victim,  and  yet  it  was  something  exactly  on  the  same  line  of  thought.  He  saw 
life  beyond  death.  Consider  where  he  is  :  on  the  cross,  bleeding,  his  life  oozing 
out  of  him  in  red  drops;  bis  breath  will  presently  be  gone.  Is  he  throttled, 
killed  ? — is  he  a  beast  thrust  through  that  will  baptize  the  earth  with  red  water,  and 
exhale  and  blend  with  the  infinite  azure  ?  He  is  not  conquered  :  he  dies  to  live. 
**Lord,"  said  he,  "remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom."  "  But 
yoa  are  dying." — "No."  "You  are  to  be  buried." — "No."  "It  is  your  last 
nonr."— •"  No.  I  cannot  die  ;  if  this  Man  take  me  in  charge,  death  will  be  but  a 
momentary  shadow.  I  will  come  up  into  a  larger  life.  This  Man  breathes 
«temity,  and  creates  kingdoms,  and  sets  up  empires,  and  gives  away  thrones.  I 
cannot  die  if  He  take  charge  of  me."  Whoever  made  so  grand  a  speech  in  circam- 
«tances  so  unlikely  to  have  suggested  such  an  outcome  ?  What  is  your  speech  ?  A 
oad  farewell — something  little  better  than  a  whine — the  whimper  of  a  subdued 
■nature — the  tremulous  breath  of  one  whose  strength  is  all  gone?  Or  dost  thou 
languish  into  life  ?  Dost  thou  hear  the  angels  singing,  "  Sister  spirit,  come  away  "? 
What  is  thy  faith  doing  for  thee  ?  Be  not  shamed  by  a  malefactor.  The  dying 
<inai(;factor  spoke  up  for  Christ.  Into  what  strange  circumstances  we  are  often 
•drawn — our  friends  gone  or  dumb,  our  enemies  deriding  and  mocking,  and  our 
defence  spoken  by  a  strange  tongue  1  We  are  better  known  than  we  think  for ;  all 
our  help  comes  from  unexpected  quarters.  The  true  man  is  not  utterly  deserted  : 
some  one  will  arise  from  a  comer  unthought  of  to  speak  a  kind  word  for  him.  The 
txualef actor  said,  "  This  Man  hath  done  nothing  amiss."  It  was  a  bold  thing  to 
flay :  the  court  had  condemned  Him,  the  High  Priest  had  reyiled  Him,  the  senti- 
<ment  of  the  times  was  against  Him,  the  mob  had  hustled  Him  to  Golgotha;  and  the 
>inalefactor  undertook  from  that  high  court  to  reverse  the  decree,  and  to  pronounce 
the  Son  of  Ood  to  be  unworthy  of  such  a  death  1  We  have  our  chances  of  speaking 
lor  Christ— how  do  we  use.  them  7  He  is  still  upon  the  cross — who  speaks  for  Him? 


OHAP.  xxiu.]  ST.  LUKE.  595 

I  have  heard  men  speak  for  Christ  whose  way  of  doing  it  I  have  envied,  and  who 
were  the  very  last  men  in  the  world,  I  thought,  who  coudd  ever  have  spoken  up  for 
such  a  Lord.  They  have  spoken  with  the  pathos  of  gratitude  ;  they  have  spoken 
with  the  directness  of  a  burning  and  earnest  conviction,  W*«re  they  ministers  in 
the  usnal  sense  of  the  term  ?  No,  but  they  were  ordained  prophets  of  God.  We 
can  be  exemplars  where  we  cannot  be  advocates  :  we  can  live  a  life  where  we  cannot 
make  a  speech :  every  man  amongst  us  can  do  something  to  proclaim,  not  the  inno- 
cence only,  but  the  infinite  and  incorruptible  holiness  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  male- 
factor saw  the  kingdom  beyond  the  cross.  Great  man  — piercing  mind — audacious 
thinker.  Is  there  a  man  here  of  such  spirit  and  temper  ?  It  is  not  in  man  ;  it  is 
a  revelation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  God  opens  strange  mouths  to  speak  His  truth. 
Just  see,  then,  how  our  selfishness  differs.  The  Uttle  thief  said,  "  Save  me,  take 
me  down  from  the  cross,"  the  big  thief  said,  "  Never  mind  the  present :  let  it  be  a 
kingdom  when  it  comes — an  ulterior  salvation,  an  ulterior  destiny."  Selfishness 
indeed,  bat  on  a  nobler  scale.  The  small  mind  wanted  an  immediate  benefit ;  the 
great  mind  said,  "  Let  us  go  through  this  tmmel  into  the  great  kingdom,  into  the 
beautiful  landscape.  When  we  shoot  out  of  this  darkness — Lord,  remember  me  ! " 
Perhaps  not  selfish  either.  Did  not  this  dying  malefactor  say  more  in  that  inter- 
view with  Christ  than  some  of  us  have  ever  said  in  our  lives  ?  He  defended  Him, 
he  hailed  Him  Lord,  he  ascribed  to  Him  a  kingdom,  he  triumphed  over  death,  he 
saw  the  crown  above  the  cross.  Christianity  invites  and  encourages  vigour  of 
intellect.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  dying  thief: — I.  We  see  here  an  illustration 
of  THE  CBOss  m  ITS  POWER  OF  DRAWING  MEN  TO  ITSELF.  It  is  strangc  to  think  that, 
perhaps,  at  that  moment  the  only  human  being  that  thoroughly  believed  in  Christ 
was  that  dying  robber.  The  disciples  are  all  gone.  The  most  faithful  of  them  are 
recreant,  denying,  fleeing.  Brethren,  it  is  just  the  history  of  the  gospel  wherever 
it  goes.  It  is  its  history  now,  and  in  this  congregation.  The  gospel  is  preached 
equally  to  every  man.  The  same  message  comes  to  us  all,  offering  us  the  same 
terms.  And  what  is  the  consequence  ?  A  parting  of  the  whole  mass  of  us,  some 
on  one  side  and  some  on  the  other.  As  when  you  take  a  magnet,  and  hold  it  to 
an  indiscriminate  heap  of  metal  filings,  it  will  gather  out  all  the  iron,  and  leave 
behind  all  the  rest !  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,"  said  He,  "  will  draw  all  men  unto 
Me,"  The  attractive  power  will  go  out  over  the  whole  race  of  His  brethren  ;  bat 
from  some  there  will  be  no  response.  In  some  hearts  there  will  be  no  yielding  to 
the  attraction.  Some  will  remain  rooted,  obstinate,  steadfast  in  their  place  ;  and 
to  some  the  lightest  word  will  be  mighty  enough  to  stir  all  the  slumbering  pulses  of 
their  sin-ridden  hearts,  and  to  bring  them,  broken  and  penitent,  for  mercy  to  His 
feet.  To  the  one  He  is  "  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  and  to  the  other  a  savour  of 
death  unto  death."  And  now,  there  is  another  consideration.  If  we  look  at  this 
man,  this  penitent  thief,  and  contrast  him,  his  previous  history,  and  his  present 
feelings,  with  the  people  that  stood  around,  and  rejected  aud  scoffed,  we  get  some 
light  as  to  the  sort  of  thing  that  unfits  men  for  perceiving  and  accepting  the  gospel 
when  it  is  offered  to  them.  Why  was  it  that  scribes  and  Pharisees  turned  away 
from  Him  ?  For  three  reasons.  Because  of  their  pride  of  wisdom.  "  We  are  the 
men  who  know  all  about  Moses  and  the  traditions  of  the  elders ;  we  judge  this  new 
phenomenon  not  by  the  question.  How  does  it  come  to  our  consciences,  and  how 
does  it  appeal  to  our  hearts?  but  we  judge  it  by  the  question.  How  does  it  fit  our 
rabbinical  learning  ?  They  turned  away  from  the  cross,  and  their  hatred  darkened 
into  derision,  and  their  menaces  ended  in  a  crucifixion,  not  merely  because  of  a 
pride  of  wisdom,  but  because  of  a  caajElacent  self-righteousness  that  knew  nothing 
of  the  factxii-sia,  that  never  had  learned  to  believe  itself  to  be  full  of  evil,  that  had 
gofso  wrapped  up  in  ceremonies  as  to  have  lost  the  life ;  that  had  degraded  the 
Divine  law  of  God,  vidth  all  its  lightning  splendours,  and  awful  power,  into  a  matter 
of  •*  mint  and  anise  and  cummin."  They  turned  away  for  a  thn;dxfiason.  BeUgion 
had  become  to  them  a  mere  set  of  traditional  dogmas,  to  think  accurately  or  to 
reason  clearly  about  which  was  all  that  was  needful.  Still  it  is  not  sin  in  its 
outward  forms  that  makes  the  worst  impediment  between  a  man  and  the  cross,  but 
it  is  sin  plus  self-righteousness  which  makes  the  insurmountable  obstacle  to  all 
faith  and  repentance.  And  then  we  see  here,  too,  the  elements  of  which  acceptable 
faith  consists.  Mark  what  it  was  that  he  believed  and  expressed — I  am  a  sinful 
man ;  all  punishment  that  comes  down  upon  me  is  richly  deserved :  This  man  is 
pure  and  righteous ;  "  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom  1 " 
That  is  all — that  is  all.  That  is  the  thing  that  saves  a  man.  How  much  He  did 
know — whether  he  knew  all  the  depth  of  what  he  was  saying,  when  he  said. 


B96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxii 

"  Lord !  "  is  a  question  that  we  cannot  answer ;  whether  he  nnderstood  what  the- 
"kingdom"  was  that  he  was  expecting,  is  a  question  that  we  cannot  solve;  but 
this  is  clear — the  intellectual  part  of  faith  may  be  dark  and  doubtful,  but  the  moral 
and  emotional  part  of  it  is  manifest  and  plain.  "My  Saviour  1  My  Saviour t  He- 
is  righteous :  He  has  died — He  lives !  I  will  stay  no  longer ;  I  will  cast  myself 
upon  Him  ! "  II.  This  incident  reminds  us  not  only  of  the  attractive  power  of  the- 
cross,  but  of  the  prophetic  power  of  the  cross.  We  have  here  the  ceoss  ab  pointing 
TO  AND  FORETELLING  THE  KINGDOM.  Pointing  out,  and  foretelling :  that  is  to  say,  of 
course,  and  only,  if  we  accept  the  scriptural  statement  of  what  these  sufferings 
were,  the  Person  that  endured  them,  and  the  meaning  of  their  being  endured.  But 
the  only  thing  I  would  dwell  upon  here,  is,  that  when  we  think  of  Christ  as  dying^ 
for  us,  we  are  never  to  separate  it  from  that  other  solemn  and  future  coming  of 
which  this  poor  robber  catches  a  glimpse.  The  crown  of  thorns  proclaims  a 
sovereignty  founded  on  sufferings.  The  sceptre  of  feeble  reed  speaks  of  power 
wielded  in  gentleness.  The  cross  leads  to  the  crown.  He  who  was  hfted  up  to  the 
cross,  was,  by  that  very  act,  lifted  up  to  be  a  Euler  and  Commander  to  the  peoples. 
"Herein  is  our  love  made  perfect,  that  we  may  have  boldness  before  Him  in  th& 
day  of  judgment."  *'  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom." 
III.  Here  is  the  cboss  as  bevealino  and  opening  the  tbue  pabadise.  "  This  day 
shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise."  It  is  of  more  practical  worth  to  note:  the- 
penitent's  vague  prayer  is  answered,  and  over-answered.  Eemember  thee  1  thou 
shalt  be  with  Me,  close  to  My  side.  Eemember  thee  wh£n  I  come  !  this  day  shalt 
thou  be  with  Me.  And  what  a  contrast  that  is — the  conscious  blessedness  rushing 
in  close  upon  the  heels  of  the  momentary  darkness  of  death.  At  the  one  moment 
there  hangs  the  thief  writhing  in  mortal  agony ;  the  wild  shouts  of  the  fierce  mob 
at  his  feet  are  growing  faint  upon  his  ear:  the  city  spread  out  at  his  feet,  and  all  the 
familiar  sights  of  earth  are  growing  dim  to  his  filmy  eye.  The  soldier's  spear 
comes,  the  legs  are  broken,  and  in  an  instant  there  hangs  a  relaxed  corpse;  and  the 
spirit,  the  spirit — is  where  ?  Ah  !  how  far  away ;  released  from  all  its  sin  and  its 
Bore  agony,  struggling  up  at  once  into  such  strange  divine  enlargement,  a  new  star 
swimming  into  the  firmament  of  heaven,  a  new  face  before  the  throne  of  God, 
another  sinner  redeemed  from   earth  I     {A.   Maclaren,   D.D.)  The  penitent 

malefactor : — I.  The  chabacteb  and  circumstances  op  this  man.  The  Evangelists 
St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  describe  him  as  a  "  thief  "  ;  and  in  the  text  St.  Luke 
denominates  him  a  '•  malefactor."  It  may  not,  therefore,  be  improper  to  trace  the 
progress  of  iniquity  in  such  persons ;  and  to  show  the  causes  which  contribute  to- 
form  their  mischievous  and  wretched  characters.  By  this  means  inexperienced 
persons  may  be  warned  against  the  beginnings  of  evil,  and  the  guardians  of  youth 
reminded  of  the  responsibilities  under  which  they  lie.  Among  these  causes  wo 
may  specify — 1.  The  "'""^^f  ft  nnw^  voi;g;r.i^o  and  moral  education.  2.  The  vio- 
lation of  the  Sabbath  is  another,  fruitful  source  of  eviL  3.  The  keeping  9^  bad 
company,  which  is  another  frightful  source  of  evil.  4.  Habiis-ei  intemperance. 
The  circumstances  of  the  man  who  is  described  in  our  text  were  awful  indeed.  His 
end  was  actually  come.  Even  to  the  hohest  of  men  death  is  an  affair  of  awful 
moment.  It  dissolves  our  earthly  frame  ;  it  severs  our  connection  with  every  person 
and  object  beneath  the  sun  ;  it  ends  our  short  day  of  trial ;  and  it  forces  us  into  w 
state  which  eternity  will  never  reverse.  The  fear  and  trepidation  which  naturally 
arise,  even  in  a  good  mind,  at  the  arrival  of  death,  are  terribly  heightened  by  that 
consciousness  of  guilt  which  the  malefactor  before  us  must  have  felt.  II.  His  con- 
duct DPON  THIS  MOMENTOUS  OCCASION.  1.  He  reproved  the  rashness  and  impiety  of 
his  impenitent  fellow-sufferer.  2.  He  acknowledged  the  justice  of  the  sentence 
under  which  he  lay.  "  We  indeed,"  said  he,  suffer  death  "  justly."  It  is  an  ill  sign 
when  persons  who  are  punished  for  their  faults  are  loud  in  their  complaints  of 
undue  severity.  3.  He  bore  witness  to  the  innocence  of  Jesus.  "  This  man,"  said 
he,  "hath  done  nothing  amiss.  '  4.  He  made  a  direct  application  to  Christ  for 
mercy.  Turning  his  languid  eyes  to  Jesus,  he  said,  "  Lord,  remember  me  when 
Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom."  III.  The  answzb  which  Chbist  gbaciouslt 
VOUCHSAFED :  "  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  To-day  shalt  thou  be 
with  Me  in  paradise."  1.  This  answer  secured  to  the  man  the  requisite  preparation 
for  future  glory.  If  he  was  to  be  in  paradise  that  day,  he  must  on  that  day  be 
qualified  for  its  joys  and  employment.  That  this  great  work  should  be  instan* 
taneously  wrought  is  not  at  all  surprising  when  we  consider  its  Author.  2.  The 
Answer  of  our  Lord  marks  the  true  nature  of  man.  3.  Our  Lord's  answer  teaches 
□s  that  those  who  die  in  Him  immediately  enter  into  rest.    No  longer  period  of 


ORAV.  xxni.]  ST.  LUKE,  597 

time  elapsea  after  the  believing  soul  has  left  the  body  before  its  superior  happinesa 
begins.  (J.  Jackson.)  Folly  of  trusting  to  a  death-bed  repentance  : — Do  not  trust 
a  death-bed  repentance,  my  brother.  I  have  stood  by  many  a  death -bed,  and  few 
indeed  have  there  been  where  I  could  have  believed  that  the  man  was  in  a  condition 
physically  (to  say  nothing  of  anything  else)  clearly  to  see  and  grasp  the  message  ol 
the  gospel.  I  know  that  God's  mercy  is  boundless.  I  know  that  a  man,  going — 
swept  down  that  great  Niagara — if,  before  his  little  skiff  tilts  over  into  the  awful 
rapids,  he  can  make  one  great  bound  with  all  his  strength,  and  reach  the  solid 
ground — I  know  he  may  be  saved.  It  is  an  awful  risk  to  run,  A  moment's  mis- 
calculation, and  skiff  and  voyager  alike  are  whelming  in  the  green  chaos  below,  and 
come  up  mangled  into  nothing,  far  away  down  vender  upon  the  white  turbulent 
foam.  "  One  was  saved  upon  the  cross,"  as  the  old  divines  used  to  tell  us, 
"  that  none  might  despair  ;  and  only  one  that  none  might  presume."  (Ma^laren.) 
A  wonderful  prayer : — What  JLthe  two  greatest  believprp  ^^°*  °^'"'  1^'^°^  mam  at 
that  moment  hanging  side  bv  side  !  What  if  the  faith  of  the  far  greater  Believer, 
more  sorely  tried  than  it  had  ever  been  before,  was  strengthened  in  that  hour  of 
deepest  need  by  the  unshaken  faith  of  the  dying  criminal  beside  Him,  as  He  had  before 
been  strengthened,  whether  in  mind,  or  body,  or  both,  by  an  angel  in  the  garden  1 
What  if  the  faith  expressed  in  that  prayer  encouraged  the  Saviour  of  the  world  to 
believe  in  Himself  and  in  His  Father,  by  showing  that  some  one  else  believed  in 
Him  still !  What  if  the  words,  "  When  Thou  comest  in  Thy  kingdom,"  brought 
the  kingdom  as  a  living  reality  for  a  fmoment  before  His  mind,  and  put  life  into 
His  fainting  spirit !  Why,  then,  if  this  were  so,  we  can  understand  why  such  faith 
should  be  given  to  such  a  man.  He  would  have  an  opportunity  of  manifesting  it 
as  no  one  else  ever  had  before  or  since,  and  by  so  manifesting  it,  of  rendering  to 
the  Incarnate  Son  of  God  perhaps  the  greatest  help  that  He  ever  received  from 
any  human  being.     (S.   Minton,  M.A.)  Great  faith  manifested: — Oh  1  what 

wondrous,  yea,  miraculous  faith  !  How  much  had  it  to  contend  against !  1.  Against 
the  circumstances  of  the  case.  Admit  that  the  converted  thief  had  witnessed  Jesus' 
miracles,  and  had  heretofore  conceived  high  notions  of  our  Lord's  divinity  and 
power ;  now  when  he  saw  that  very  Jesus,  his  Companion  in  death,  nailed  to  the 
cross  by  his  side,  surely  (humanly  speaking),  it  was  enough  to  stagger  his  faith, 
and  lead  him  to  join  in  the  godless  taunts  of  the  godless  men  around  him.  2.  His 
faith  had  to  contend  against  the  voice  of  the  times.  For  the  whole  national  spirit 
was  against  Jesus,  crying,  "Away  with  Him,  crucify  Him."  3.  Example  was 
against  him.  All  around  him  are  unbelievers  ;  and  we  know  well  how  con- 
taminating is  the  society  of  unbelievers.  And,  further,  his  faith  leads  him  to  re- 
prove sin  in  others :  "  Dost  thon  not  fear  God,  seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  condem- 
nation " — even  in  the  very  man  who  in  all  probability  was  his  accomplice  in  crime; 
for  he  adds,  "  We  indeed  justly,  for  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds  "  (Luke 
xxiii.  41).  Well,  I  think  his  faith  canmt  be  accounted  for  upon  any  principle 
derived  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  What  would  you  think  of  some  politician 
now-a-days  clinging  to  some  favourite  scheme  of  reform,  when  the  spirit  of  the 
age  was  against  him,  the  voice  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  his  friends,  and  his 
neighbours  pronounced  his  cherished  scheme  Utopian  and  ridiculous  7  The  man 
would  not  be  able  to  withstand  all ;  and  very  likely  he  would  abandon  his  project 
for  ever  as  he  finds  himself  thus  alone  in  bis  views,  or  gain  for  himself  the  no  very 
enviable  appellation  of  a  man  of  unsound  mind.  How,  then,  I  ask,  can  you  account 
for  his  unflinching  faith  ?  Oh  1  he  was  taught  by  God's  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  Spirit 
supplies  with  strength  in  the  hour  of  need,  with  comfort  in  trouble  and  tribulation. 
And  He  only  can  make  us  call  Jesus  "Lord,  even  the  Lord  of  our  salvation." 
{F.  McGlynn,  M.A.)  A  wonderful  request ;— It  was  a  wonderful  request.  What 
a  faith  did  it  exhibit  1  He  recognized  a  King  in  the  dying  Man,  and  saw  that  the 
Cross  was  the  high  road  to  His  throne ;  he  felt  and  proclaimed  his  own  immortality, 
and  knew  himself  no  destructible  thing,  though  the  ministry  of  death  was  breaking 
down  the  fleshly  tabernacle  ;  but  once  assured  that  he  had  yet  to  enter  on  untried 
and  unlinn'tpd  destinies,  he  therefore  asked  to  be  remembered  when  all  this  sin  and 
suffering  should  have  passed  away,  and  another  and  a  wider  range  of  being  should 
spread  before  him.  And  "  remember  me."  He  only  asked  to  be  remembered ;  but 
it  was  the  memory  of  a  King,  and  that  King  Messiah,  Lord  of  the  invisible  world, 
in  whose  chambers  he  solicited  a  place ;  and  thus  he  evinced  a  thorough  faith  in 
the  saving  power  of  Jesus.  What  advantage  in  the  being  remembered  by  Jesus, 
nnless  Jesus  could  procure  for  him  that  pardon  which  He  had  been  asking  for  His 
nvcifien  7    What  advantage  the  being  remembered  by  a  king,  except  that  as  king 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohai.  xxm. 

he  must  have  authority  to  portion  out  allotments  of  happiness  ?  So  that  it  is  no 
overwrought  or  exaggerated  statement  that  the  dying  thief  exhibited  all  the  tokens 
which  can  ever  be  demanded  of  a  genuine  conversion.  There  was  confession  of 
sin,  there  was  spirituality  of  mind,  there  was  anxiety  for  others,  there  was  the 
fullest  recognition  of  Christ's  power  to  deliver,  and  there  was  a  mighty  faith  which, 
nothing  daunted  by  all  the  circumstances  of  apparent  helplessness  and  defeat,  were 
sufficient  to  confound  and  overcome  distance,  sprang  beyond  the  hne  of  death  and 
shame,  and  seemed  to  gaze  on  the  palace  and  the  crown ;  and  though  he  had  not 
an  opportunity  of  showing  by  an  altered  life  that  his  heart  was  renewed,  yet  hia 
faith  in  Christ  was  so  stupendous  an  act,  that  no  one  can  doubt  that,  had  space 
been  allowed  for  development,  every  action  would  have  proved  its  reality.  {H. 
Melvillt  B.D.)  "  Lord,  remember  me !  " — Legh  Bichmond,  the  author  of  "  The 
Dairyman's  Daughter,"  in  one  of  his  visits  to  the  Young  Cottager,  found  the  little 
girl  asleep,  with  her  finger  lying  on  a  Bible,  which  lay  open  before  her,  pointing  at 
these  words,  " Lord,  remember  me,  when  Thou  comest  in  Thy  kingdom  1"  "la 
this  casual,  or  designed  ?  thought  I.  Either  way  is  remarkable.  But,  in  another 
moment,  I  discovered  that  her  finger  was  indeed  an  index  to  the  thoughts  of  her 
heart.  She  half  awoke  from  her  dozing  state,  but  not  sufficiently  bo  to  perceive 
that  any  person  was  present,  and  said  in  a  kind  of  whisper,  '  Lord,  remember  me — 
remember  me — remember — remember  a  poor  chUd;  Lord,  remember  me  1 '"  Chrut 
as  Saviour : — The  last  hoars  of  Jesus  were  spent  almost  in  silence.  Teaching  is  at  an 
end.  His  prophetic  office  is  fulfilled.  EUs  priestly  work  has  begun.  The  time  has 
come  to  endure.  But  in  the  few  words  which  He  did  utter  He  seemed  to  be  aU 
Saviour — never  before  bo  affectingly  and  impressively  Saviour.  I.  Thebb  is  a 
CRUCIFIED  MALEFACTOB.  Could  Jcsus  interest  Himself  in  such  an  one  ?  Is  he  not 
beneath  His  notice?  Ah!  the  Saviour  can  only  know  man  as  man.  It  la 
our  nature  as  men,  with  all  its  mysterious,  dread,  and  ineffable  possibilities,  that 
Jesus  came  to  redeem.  A  dying  malefactor  contrite,  is  nearer  to  Jesus  than  a  living 
king  impenitent  and  estranged  from  God.  II.  The  Lord  is  vert  gracious.  He 
did  not  breathe  a  word  about  that  past  guilty  life.  You  and  I  would  probably  have 
recalled  to  the  malefactor  his  terrible  career,  and  would  have  felt  it  our  duty  to 
impress  upon  him  a  due  sense  of  that  evil  state.  A  Saviour  could  not  do  that. 
Well,  the  Lord  knew  that  no  one  ever  turns  to  God  whose  heart  is  not  already 
bruised  and  broken.  When  poor  souls  go  to  the  Lord,  it  is  not  smiting  which  they 
need,  but  healing.  Jesus  blotted  oat  the  dreadful  past,  and  unrolled  the  vision  of 
the  future.  Our  Lord  seemed  to  say,  "  Yes,  I  will  remember  thee,  but  thy  *sinB 
and  thine  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more.' "  III.  How  anxious  oub  blessed 
Satiour  was  to  assdbb  the  penitent  or  the  mercy  which  hb  coveted  1  "  Verily 
I  say  unto  thee."  It  was  only  in  moods  of  special  intensity  and  on  occasions 
peculiarly  solemn  that  oar  Lord  resorted  to  the  asseveration.  '•  Verily  I  say  unto 
thee.  How  the  all-pitying  Saviour  shone  forth  in  this  emphatic  expression  I  IV. 
The  great  Bedeeueb  was  absorbed  to  the  last  moment  in  the  welfare  of 
others.  V.  It  was  right  to  prat  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  (H.  Batehelor.)  To-day 
Shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise. — The  mercy  of  Christ  to  the  penitent  thief: — 
I.  Let  us  consider  the  repentance  and  conversion  of  the  malefactor  mentioned 
IN  this  passage.  1.  As  to  the  means  of  his  conversion.  He  was  a  Jew,  and  had 
probably  some  general  knowledge  of  the  prophecies  concerning  the  Messiah.  And 
no  doubt  what  he  witnessed  of  our  Lord's  extraordinary  meekness  and  patience 
under  His  sufferings,  and  His  prayer  for  His  murderers,  greatly  confirmed  his  faith 
in  Him,  as  the  Bedeemer  promised  to  the  fathers.  This  shows  us  the  importance 
of  maintaining  a  becoming  temper  under  all  the  provocations  we  are  called  to  meet 
with,  in  the  respective  situations  in  which  we  are  placed,  that  if  any  obey  not  the  Word, 
they  may,  without  the  Word,  be  won  by  our  good  conversation  in  Christ.  2.  Observe 
the  evidence  he  gave  of  the  reality  of  the  change.  3.  The  prayer  which  he  presents 
to  our  dying  Lord.  We  see  in  his  prayer  the  exercise  of  faith  in  the  Bedeemer, 
and  of  hope  in  His  mercy.  His  genuine  humility  is  also  apparent.  All  he  presumes 
to  ask  is  to  be  remembered  by  Christ.  He  says  nothing  about  receiving  the  brightest 
crown  He  has  to  bestow,  or  the  largest  mansion  He  has  at  His  disposal.  4.  The 
gracious  answer  which  our  Lord  made  to  his  urgent  request.  And  was  ever  answer 
so  satisfactory,  gracious,  and  consolatory?  U.  Some  of  the  lessons  the  con- 
version OF  the  dying  thief  is  INTENDED  TO  TEACH  US.  1.  It  shows  US  the  sovereignty 
and  freeness  of  the  Divine  mercy.  2.  We  have  here  a  striking  proof  of  the  un- 
speakable efficacy  of  the  atoning  blood  of  Christ.  3.  It  becomes  us  to  admire  the 
almighty  power  of  Christ,  in  subduing  the  hearts  of  sinners,  and  bringing  the  di»- 


OTAP.  xsai.]  ST,  LUKE.  59J 

obedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just.  4.  We  shall  do  well  to  notice  the  prevalency 
of  prayer,  in  the  instance  before  us.  For  this  convinced,  praying  sinner  no  sooner 
asks  than  he  receives,  no  sooner  seeks  than  he  finds,  and  no  sooner  knocks  than 
the  door  of  mercy  is  opened  unto  him,  5.  The  subject  furnishes  us  with  a  epeci- 
men  of  the  nature  of  true  conversion,  in  every  age.  6.  This  rich  display  of  grace 
is  intended  to  animate  us  in  our  endeavours,  under  the  most  discouraging  ciroum- 
Btances,  to  bring  sinners  to  repentance.  {Essex  Remembrancer.)  Christ's  greatest 
trophy  : — I.  Chkist's  powee  and  willingness  to  save  sinners.  I  believe  the 
Lord  Jesus  never  gave  so  complete  a  proof  of  His  power  and  will  to  save  as 
He  did  upon  this  occasion.  In  the  day  when  He  seemed  most  weak,  He  showed 
that  He  was  a  strong  deliverer.  In  the  hour  when  His  body  was  racked  with 
pain.  He  showed  that  He  could  feel  tenderly  for  others.  At  the  time  when 
He  Himself  was  dying,  He  conferred  on  a  sinner  eternal  life.  II.  If  some  are 
SAVED  IN  THE  VERT  HOUR  OF  DEATH,  OTHERS  ARE  NOT.  There  is  Warning  BS  Well 
as  comfort  in  these  verses,  and  that  is  a  very  solemn  warning  too.  They  tell 
me  loudly,  that  though  some  may  repent  and  be  converted  on  their  death-beds,  it 
does  not  at  all  follow  that  all  will.  A  death-bed  is  not  always  a  saving  time.  They 
tell  me  loudly  that  two  men  may  have  the  same  opportunities  of  getting  good  for  their 
souls,  may  be  placed  in  the  same  position,  see  the  same  things,  and  hear  the  same 
things — and  yet  only  one  of  the  two  shall  take  advantage  of  them,  repent,  believe, 
and  be  saved.  They  tell  me,  above  all,  that  repentance  and  faith  are  the  gifts  of 
God,  and  are  not  in  a  man's  own  power ;  and  that  if  any  one  flatters  himself  he 
can  repent  at  his  own  time,  choose  his  own  season,  seek  the  Lord  when  he  pleases, 
and,  Uke  the  penitent  thief,  be  saved  at  the  very  last — he  may  find  at  length  he  is 
greatly  deceived.  I  want  you  to  beware  of  letting  slip  good  thoughts  and  godly 
convictions,  if  you  have  them.  Cherish  them  and  nourish  them,  lest  you  lose  them 
for  ever.  Make  the  most  of  them,  lest  they  take  to  themselves  wings  and  flee  away. 
Have  you  an  inclination  to  begin  praying  ?  Put  it  in  practice  at  once.  Have  you  an 
idea  of  beginning  really  to  serve  Christ  ?  Set  about  it  at  once.  III.  The  Spibxt  always. 
liEADS  SAVED  SOULS  IN  ONE  WAT.  Every  saved  soul  goes  through  the  same  experience, 
and  the  leading  principles  of  the  penitent  thief's  religion  were  just  the  same  as 
those  of  the  oldest  saint  that  ever  lived.  1.  See,  then,  for  one  thing,  how  strong 
was  the  faith  of  this  man.  He  called  Jesus  "  Lord."  He  declared  his  belief  that 
He  would  have  "  a  kingdom."  2.  See,  for  another  thing,  what  a  right  sense  of  sin  the 
thief  had.  He  says  to  his  companion,  "  We  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  deeds." 
Would  you  know  if  you  have  the  Spirit  f  Then  mark  my  question — Do  you  feel 
your  sins?  3.  See,  for  another  thing,  what  brotherly  love  the  thief  showed  to  hia 
companion.  He  tried  to  stop  his  railing  and  blaspheming,  and  bring  him  to  a 
better  mind.  "  Dost  not  thou  fear  God,"  he  says,  •'  seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  con- 
demnation ?  "  There  is  no  surer  mark  of  grace  than  this  1  Grace  shakes  a  man 
oat  of  his  selfishness,  and  makes  him  feel  for  the  souls  of  others.  lY .  Believers 
IN  Christ  whxn  thet  die  are  with  the  Lord.  It  was  a  true  saying  of  a 
dying  girl,  when  her  mother  tried  to  comfort  her  by  describing  what  para- 
dise would  be.  "  There,"  she  said  to  the  child,  "  there  you  will  have  no 
pains,  and  no  sickness;  there  you  will  see  your  brothers  and  sisters,  who  have 
gone  before  yon,  and  will  be  always  happy."  "Ah,  mother!"  was  the  reply, 
but  there  is  one  thing  better  than  all,  and  that  is,  Christ  will  be  there."  V. 
The  eternal  portion  of  evert  man's  soul  is  close  to  him.  "  To-day,"  says 
oar  Lord  to  the  penitent  thief,  "to-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  paradise."  He 
names  no  distant  period ;  He  does  not  talk  of  his  entering  into  a  state  of  happi- 
ness as  a  thing  "  far  away,"  He  speaks  of  to-day — "  this  very  day  in  which  thou 
art  hanging  on  the  cross."  How  near  that  seems  1  The  very  moment  that  believers 
die  they  are  in  paradise.  Their  battle  is  fought ;  their  strife  is  over.  They  have 
passed  through  that  gloomy  valley  we  mast  one  day  tread ;  they  have  gone  over 
that  dark  river  we  must  one  day  cross.  They  have  drank  that  last  bitter  cup 
which  sin  has  mingled  for  man ;  they  have  reached  that  place  where  sorrow  and 
sighing  are  no  more.  Surely  we  should  not  wish  them  back  again !  We  are  warring 
still,  but  they  are  at  peace.  We  are  labouring,  but  they  are  at  rest.  We  are 
wearing  our  spiritual  armour,  but  they  have  for  ever  put  it  off.  We  are  still  at 
sea,  but  they  are  safe  in  harbour.  We  have  tears,  but  they  have  joy.  (Bithop 
EyU.)  Conversion  of  the  dying  thief: — I.  The  prominent  features  of  this 
stbikino  conversion.  1.  The  former  character  of  this  person.  2.  The  means 
whereby  the  change  was  accomplished.  Conversion  is  God's  work,  bat  He  nsually 
employs  certain  means  in  effecting  it.    (1)  The  words  which  the  Savionr  uttered. 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLIISTBATOR.  [chap.  txni. 

(2)  The  spirit  which  the  Saviour  displayed.  3.  The  evidences  he  manifested  of  the 
reality  of  his  conversion.  (1)  He  warned  and  reproved  his  fellow-sufferer.  (2)  He 
made  an  open  confession  of  his  guilt,  and  acknowledged  the  justice  of  his  sentence. 

(3)  He  vindicates  the  character  of  Christ.  (4)  He  prays  to  Christ,  and  exercises 
unbounded  confidence  in  Him.  II.  What  those  lessons  are  which  we  should 
LEABN  FBOM  THIS  WONDERFUL  EVENT.  1.  Let  US  admire  the  riches  of  Divine  grace. 
Oh  how  great,  how  unexpected,  and  especially  how  rapid  was  the  change.  2.  How 
striking  a  proof  is  here  afforded  of  the  Saviour's  power.  What  must  that  energy 
he,  which,  under  such  circumstances,  could  snatch  this  man  as  a  brand  from  the 
burnings.  3.  The  danger  of  delay  is  another  lesson  we  may  deduce  from  this 
narrative.  Suppose  a  person  had  once  leaped  unhurt  from  some  projecting  rock 
into  the  deep  precipice  below,  would  that  justify  others  in  running  the  same  risk  ? 
Madness  of  the  maddest  kind  would  it  be.  {Expository  Outlines.)  The  great 
moral  miracle  of  the  Cross : — I.  The  scene   of   this  moral  miracle.      II.    The 

CHAEACTERB  PROMINENTLT  BROUGHT  BEFORE  US  ON  CaLVARY.   III.  ThE  PETITION 

PRESENTED  BY  THE  DTiNG  SINNER.  "  Lord,  remember  me,  when  Thou  comest  into 
yThy  kingdom."  1.  It  is  a  prayer  that  is  offered  up.  The  first  prayer  ever  offered 
X  by  him.  The  prayer  of  this  penitent  malefactor  was  sincere.  2.  It  was  the  prayer 
of  faith ;  he  believed  in  the  power  and  willingness  of  the  Saviour  to  bless  Him. 
3.  It  recognizes  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Saviour  as  a  King.  4.  In  this  prayer 
we  see,  too,  his  faith  in  the  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  6.  This  prayer 
is  distinguished  by  humility.  6.  This  prayer  is  distinguished  by  fervour.  IV.  The 
ANSWER  OF  THE  DiviNE  Savioub.  This  auswer  directs  our  thoughts  to  the  home  of 
the  righteous  after  death — paradise.  In  this  answer  of  the  Saviour,  another  great 
doctrine  is  implied — That  the  soul  of  man  is  immaterial ;  that  it  lives  and  acts 
when  the  frail  body  lies  in  the  silent  tomb.  In  this  answer  of  the  Saviour  we  are 
taught  that  the  righteous  soul,  in  leaving  the  body,  ascends  immediately  to  God. 
In  this  answer  of  the  Saviour,  too,  we  see  His  power  and  willingnes  to  save — to 
save  "  to  the  uttermost."  (H,  P.  Bowen.)  Christ  preaching  on  the  cross : — 
You  are  all  aware  that  God's  ordinary  engine  for  the  conversion  of  sinners 
is  the  preaching  of  His  Word.  We  think  that  it  was  so  here.  Lifted  on 
the  cross,  Christ  used  it  not  only  as  an  altar,  but  as  a  pulpit,  from  which  to 
deliver  the  most  touching  of  sermons.  It  was  not  merely  that  He  preached 
by  the  beauty  of  His  patience  and  His  meekness ;  there  must  indeed  have  been  a 
•voice  in  this  which  ought  to  have  spoken  to  the  most  hardened  of  the  multitude, 
producing  conviction  of  His  innocence,  and  contrition  for  the  share  taken  in  His 
condemnation  and  crucifixion  ;  but  we  may  consider  the  prayer  which  Christ  uttered 
for  His  murderers  as  most  strictly  the  sermon  which  the  malefactor  heard,  and 
xrhich,  carried  home  to  his  heart  by  the  Spirit  of  God?  wrought  in  him  the  change 
BO  quickly  and  strikingly  developed.  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do."  These,  we  think,  were  the  words  which  penetrated  the  conscience 
of  the  thief,  and  assured  him  that  the  being  who  hung  at  his  side  was  none  other 
than  the  promised  Saviour  of  the  world ;  for  there  was  contained  in  that  prayer  a 
distinct  claim  to  the  being  the  Christ — for  since  the  Jews  crucified  Him  for  pre- 
tending to  be  the  Messiah,  Christ's  saying  that  they  knew  not  what  they  did, 
•mounted  to  an  assertion  that  He  actually  was  the  Messiah.  If  there  were  pardoo 
for  those  who  crucified  Christ,  there  must  be  also  for  every  offender ;  and  hence  the 
thief,  if  once  led  to  believe  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  would  be  further  led  to  cee 
forgiveness  possible,  and  thus  apply  to  his  fellow-sufferer  for  salvation.  So  that  in 
that  short  prayer  which  we  have  characterized  as  the  sermon  of  Christ,  there  was 
all  the  publication  of  the  gospel,  which  is  ordinarily  made  effectual,  by  God's 
Spirit,  to  conversion.  There  was  a  distinct  announcement  that  every  sin  may  be 
pardoned  through  the  intercession  of  Christ,  and  what  is  this  but  the  sum  and 
substance  of  the  gospel?  And  this  preaching  it  was  which,  without  indulging  in 
fanciful  supposition,  we  may  believe  to  have  been  instrumental  to  change  of  heart 
in  the  malefactor.  The  Spirit  of  God  took  the  prayer  of  Christ,  as  it  often  does  a 
■entenee  or  a  text  from  the  mouth  of  one  of  His  ministers,  and,  winging  it 
with  power,  sent  it  into  the  very  soul  of  the  man  who  had  just  reviled  the  Eedeemer. 
(IT.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  state  of  the  righteous  after  death  .-—I.  The  souls  o» 
SAINTS  survive  tebib  BODIES.  1.  Scrfpture  plainly  represents  the  soul  to  be 
different  and  distinct  from  the  body.  2.  The  death  of  the  body  has  no  tendency  to 
destroy  the  life  of  the  soul.  3.  Death  has  no  more  tendency  to  obstruct  the  free, 
▼oluntary,  rational  exercise  of  the  soul,  than  to  destroy  it.  II.  The  souls  of  the 
•aintfl  after  deaUi  oo  nauxniATELT  to  pabadisx.    1.  They  are  essentially  prepared 


mAr.  xxm.]  ST.  LUKE.  601 

to  go  there.  2.  The  Scriptnre  gives  no  account  of  any  other  place  than  heaven  or 
hell,  to  which  the  souls  of  men  go  after  death.  3.  That  the  Scripture  assures  n« 
that  many  saints  have  actually  gone  to  heaven  immediately  after  they  left  this 
vporld.  Improvement :  1.  This  subject  teaches  the  error  of  those  who  hold  that 
the  souls  of  all  men  are  annihilated  at  death.  2.  This  subject  teaches  the  error  of 
those  who  maintain  that  the  souls  of  men  sleep  during  the  intermediate  state  be- 
tween death  and  the  resurrection.  3.  This  subject  teaches  the  enormous  error  of 
those  who  maintain  that  many  of  the  souls  of  saints  are  at  their  death  sent  im- 
mediately to  purgatory,  and  there  confined  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time,  before  they 
are  allowed  to  go  to  heaven.  4.  This  subject  teaches  us  the  immense  value  of  the 
human  soul.  It  is  distinct  from,  and  superior  to,  the  body,  in  all  its  rational 
powers  and  faculties,  and  can  e>ist  in  its  full  vigoar  and  activity  in  a  state  of 
separation  from  the  body.  It  is  in  its  nature  immortal,  and  no  other  power  than 
that  which  gave  it  existence  can  destroy  it.  5.  If  the  soul  survives  the  body,  and 
as  soon  as  it  leaves  it  goes  into  a  state  of  everlasting  happiness  or  misery,  then 
this  life  is  the  most  important  period  in  human  existence.  6.  If  the  souls  of  men 
survive  their  bodies,  then  the  office  of  the  ministry  is  a  very  serious  and  responsible 
office.  It  is  the  peculiar  and  appropriate  business  of  ministers  to  watch  for  sonls. 
{N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Christ's  word  to  the  penitent  thief: — I.  There  is  a  ruToaK 
ETEBNAii  STATE,  INTO  WHICH  SOULS  PASS  AT  DEATH.  This  is  a  principal  fouudation- 
Btone  to  the  hopes  and  happiness  of  souls.  And  seeing  our  hopes  must  needs  be  aa 
their  foundation  and  ground-work  is,  I  shall  briefly  establish  this  truth  by  these 
live  arguments.  1.  The  being  of  a  God  evinces  it.  2.  The  Scriptures  of  truth 
plainly  reveal  it.  The  consciences  of  all  men  have  resentments  of  it.  4.  The 
incarnation  and  death  of  Christ  is  but  a  vanity  without  it.  5.  The  immortality  of 
human  souls  plainly  discovers  it.    II.  Au.  belietebs  abb  at  theib  death  imiib- 

DIATELT  BECEIVED   INTO  A   STATE   OT   OLOBY  AND   ETEBNAii  HAPPINESS.         Inference   1. 

Are  believers  immediately  with  God  after  their  dissolution  ?  Then  how  surprisingly 
glorious  will  heaven  be  to  believers  1  Not  that  they  are  in  it  before  they  think  ot 
it  or  are  fitted  for  it ;  no,  they  have  spent  many  thoughts  upon  it  before,  and  been 
long  preparing  for  it ;  but  the  suddenness  and  greatness  of  the  change  is  amazing  to  our 
thoughts.  Who  can  tell  what  sights,  what  apprehensions,  what  thoughts,  what  frames 
believing  souls  have  before  the  bodies  they  left  are  removed  from  the  eyes  of  their  dear 
surviving  friends  ?  2.  Are  believers  immediately  with  God  after  their  dissolution  ? 
Where,  then,  shall  unbelievers  be,  and  in  what  state  will  they  find  themselves 
immediately  after  death  hath  closed  their  eyes  ?  Ah  !  what  will  the  case  of  them 
be  that  go  the  other  way  I  To  be  plucked  out  of  house  and  body,  from  among 
friends  and  comforts,  and  thrust  into  endless  miseries  into  the  dark  vault  of  hell ; 
never  to  see  the  light  of  this  world  any  more ;  never  to  see  a  comfortable  sight ; 
never  to  hear  a  joyful  sound ;  never  to  know  the  meaning  of  rest,  peace,  or  delight 
any  more.  O  what  a  change  is  here  1  3.  How  little  cause  have  they  to  fear  death, 
who  shall  be  with  God  so  soon  after  their  death  !    III.  God  may,  thouoh  He 

BELDOU   DOES,    PBEPABE  UBN  rOB  OLOBY  IMMEDIATELY  BEFOBB  TBEIB   DISBOLDTION  BY 

DEATH.  Many,  I  know,  have  hardened  themselves  in  ways  of  sin,  by  this  example  of 
mercy.  But  what  God  did  at  this  time,  for  this  man,  cannot  be  expected  to  ba 
done  ordinarily  for  ns :  and  the  reasons  thereof  are — Beason  1.  Because  God  bath 
vouchsafed  us  the  ordinary  and  standing  means  of  grace  which  this  sinner  had  not; 
and  theiefore  we  cannot  expect  such  extraordinary  and  unusual  conversions  as  he 
had.  2.  Such  a  conversion  as  this  may  not  be  ordinarily  expected  by  any  man, 
because  such  a  time  as  that  will  never  come  again.  It  is  possible,  if  Christ  were  to 
die  again,  and  thou  to  be  crucified  with  Him,  thou  mightest  receive  thy  conversion 
in  such  a  miraculous  and  extraordinary  way ;  but  Christ  dies  no  more ;  such  a  day 
as  that  will  never  come  again.  3.  Such  a  conversion  as  this  may  not  ordinarily 
be  expected ;  for  as  such  a  time  will  never  come  again,  so  there  wUl  never  be  the 
like  reason  for  such  a  conversion  any  more,  Christ  converted  him  upon  the  cross, 
to  give  an  instance  of  His  Divine  power  at  that  time,  when  it  was  almost  wholly 
clouded.  4.  None  hath  reason  to  expect  the  like  conversion  that  enjoys  the 
ordinary  means  ;  because,  though  in  this  convert  we  have  a  pattern  of  what  free 
grace  can  do,  yet  as  divines  pertinently  observe,  it  is  a  pattern  without  a  promise ; 
God  hath  not  added  any  promise  to  it  that  ever  He  will  do  so  for  any  other  ;  and 
where  we  have  not  a  promise  to  encourage  our  hope,  our  hope  can  signify  bat  little 
to  as.  Inference  1.  Let  those  that  have  found  mercy  in  the  evening  of  their  life 
admire  the  extraordinary  grace  that  therein  hath  appeared  to  them.  O  that  ever 
God  should  accept  the  bran,  when  Satan  hath  had  the  fiour  of  thy  days  I    2.  Let 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATCR.  [chat    ran. 

this  convince  and  startle  such  as,  even  in  their  grey  hairs,  remain  in  an  uncon- 
verted  state.  3.  Let  this  be  a  call  and  caution  to  all  young  ones  to  begin  with  Go(i 
betime,  and  take  heed  of  delays  till  the  last,  so  as  many  thousands  have  done  before 
them  to  their  eternal  ruin.  1.  0  set  to  the  business  of  religion  now,  because  this 
is  the  moulding  age.  2.  Now,  because  this  is  the  freest  part  of  your  time.  It  is  in 
the  morning  of  your  life,  as  in  the  morning  of  the  day.  If  a  man  have  any  business 
to  be  done,  let  him  take  the  morning  for  it ;  for  in  the  after  part  of  the  day  a  hurry 
of  business  comes  on,  so  that  you  either  forget  it  or  want  opportunity  for  it.  3.  Now, 
because  your  life  is  immediately  uncertain.  4.  Now,  because  God  will  not  spare 
you  because  you  are  but  young  sinners,  little  sinners,  if  you  die  Christless.  5.  Now, 
because  your  life  will  be  the  more  eminently  useful  and  serviceable  to  God  when 
you  know  Him  betime,  and  begin  with  Him  early.  6.  Now,  because  your  life  will 
be  the  sweeter  to  you  when  the  morning  of  it  is  dedicated  to  the  Lord.  (J.  Flavel.) 
Scriptural  mention  of  paradise : — This  is  the  only  occasion  dnring  the  days  of  His 
flesh  on  which  (so  far  at  least  as  we  know)  paradise  was  made  mention  of  by  our 
Lord.  Once,  too,  He  mentions  it  in  His  glory  (Rev.  ii.  7),  and  once  it  is  on  the  lips 
of  His  chief  apostle  (2  Cor.  xii.  4).  These  are  the  only  times  that  it  occurs  in  the 
New  Testament.  Hanging  on  the  accursed  tree,  His  thoughts  may  well  have 
travelled  back  to  another  tree,  even  the  tree  of  life,  standing  in  the  paradise  of 
God  :  in  that  paradise,  which  by  all  this  sore  agony  He  was  at  this  instant  winning 
back  for  the  children  of  men — opening  for  them  the  gates  of  another  paradise. 
(Archbishop  Trench.)  The  Saviour's  grace  : — I.  There  is  a  reference  to  plaok. 
"  Thou  shaltbe  in  paradise."  The  royal  garden  of  an  Oriental  palace  was  called  a 
paradise.  The  word  suggests  the  ideas  of  abundance,  security,  beauty,  and  delight. 
Paradise  has  been  regained  by  Christ — a  better  paradise  than  our  first  parents  ever 
knew  ;  for  the  sei^pent  shall  never  creep  into  it,  the  tempter's  trail  shall  never 
pollute  it,  Satan  shall  not  approach  it  nor  taint  its  purity  by  his  poisonous  breath. 
There  flows  the  river  of  the  water  of  Ufe,  issuing  clear  as  crystal  from  the  throne  of 
God  and  of  the  Lamb.  There  grows  the  tree  which  bears  twelve  manner  of  fruits, 
and  whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  No  law  forbids  those  who 
enter  there  to  pluck  and  eat.  No  sword  of  the  cherubim  turns  every  way  to  debar 
access.  There  the  rose  is  without  a  thorn.  II.  The  gracious  answer  of  Christ 
referred  to  compant  as  well  as  place.  "  Thou  shalt  be  with  Me."  The  dying  thief 
might  have  had  doubts  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  paradise."  "Where  is  it? 
What  are  its  occupations  and  its  joys?  Who  will  be  my  companions ?  But,  to 
prevent  all  painful  perplexity,  our  Lord,  in  addition  to  the  promise  of  paradise, 
added  that  of  Himself — "Thou  shalt  be  with  Me."  To  be  with  Christ  is  repre- 
sented throughout  the  New  Testament  as  the  climax  of  the  believer's  hope.  Jesus 
said,  as  the  greatest  reward  He  could  offer — "  Where  I  am,  there  shall  also  My 
servant  be."  He  consoled  His  disciples  with  the  assurance,  "  I  will  come  again, 
and  take  you  unto  Myself ;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  He  interceded 
on  their  behalf,  saying — ••  Father,  I  will  that  they  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  be 
with  Me  where  I  am."  Stephen's  hope  in  death  was  expressed  in  the  prayer — 
"  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  St.  Paul  said  he  was  in  a  strait  betwixt  two, 
"  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  And  Jesus 
promised  this  to  the  dying  thief — "  Thou  shalt  be  with  Me."  The  promise  of  being 
with  Christ  includes  perfect  pardon,  perfect  purity,  and  perfect  bliss.  The  father 
of  the  preacher,  now,  for  some  years,  in  the  presence  of  that  Sinner's  Friend  whom 
he  so  loved  to  publish,  used  to  tell  of  a  soldier  he  well  knew,  who,  in  reward  for 
character  and  long  services,  received  from  the  commander-in-chief  a  captain's 
commission.  But  he  did  not  feel  comfortable  in  his  rank,  for  he  fancied  he  was 
looked  down  upon  by  bis  new  companions  on  account  of  his  origin.  There  can  be 
nothing  more  vulgar  than  to  treat  with  dishonour  those  who  have  risen  to  a  higher 
station.  It  needs  no  brains  to  possess  money  acquired  by  one's  ancestors,  and  rank 
attained  by  birth  is  not  necessarily  allied  to  genius,  virtue,  or  achievements.  To 
affect  to  despise  those  who,  by  rising  from  a  humble  origin,  prove  that  they  have 
merit  as  well  as  rank,  is  a  mark  of  a  mean  and  little  mind.  We  will  hope  the 
soldier  was  mistaken,  for  British  officers  are  gentlemen.  But  he  felt  uncomfortable, 
and  asked  to  be  restored  to  his  former  position.  The  commander-in-chief,  guessing 
the  reason,  ordered  a  grand  parade  at  the  garrison,  then,  calling  him  by  his  title, 
walked  up  and  down  with  him  in  familiar  conversation.  After  this  he  no  longer 
imagined  that  he  was  regarded  with  disfavour  by  his  new  associates.  If  we  may 
compare  the  poor  paltry  distinctions  of  earth  with  those  of  heaven,  this  is  what 
^esns  did  to  the  dying  thief.    He  said — "Thou  shalt  be  with  Me."    I  will  welcome 


CHAP.  xxiii.J  ST.  LUKE.  603 

thee  at  the  threshold ;  I  will  learl  thee  by  the  hand  into  the  palace ;  I  will 
introduce  thee  to  its  glorious  inhabitants,  the  angels  and  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect;  thou  shalt  be  with  Me.  III.  Our  Lord's  reply  related  to  time. 
"  To-day."  1.  This  proves  the  continued  conscious  existence  of  the  Boul  after 
death.  Surely  if  the  dying  thief  had  been  about  to  fall  into  ft  deep  sleep  for 
hundreds  or  thousands  of  years  the  promise  of  being  that  day  in  paradise  with 
Jesus  would  have  been  inappropriate  and  delusive.  2.  We  also  learn  that  the  soul 
of  a  believer  is  at  death  fitted  to  ba  at  onsa  with  Jesus.  There  must  have  been 
plenary  and  immediate  absolution  for  the  penitent  thief.  If  on  that  very  day  with 
Jesus,  on  that  very  day  fit  to  be  with  Him,  and  therefore  purified  from  all  sin.  (1) 
But  is  it  just  that  a  man  who  has  lived  in  wickedness  should,  on  repentance,  be 
taken  at  once  to  paradise,  as  though  he  had  never  sinned  ?  This  would  indeed  be 
a  difficulty  were  it  not  that  Jesus  died  for  sinners.  A  crucified  Christ  solves  the 
mystery.  Because  His  perfect  obedience  and  atoning  death  satisfied  the  claims  of 
law,  those  who  trust  in  Him  are  delivered  from  the  condemnation  of  that  law.  "  He 
was  wounded  for  our  transgressions.  He  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities."  (2)  But 
apart  from  considerations  of  justice,  is  it  suitable  and  fit  that  a  man  who  has  all 
his  life  been  a  wilful  transgressor,  should,  on  repentance,  go  to  dwell  with  Jesus  f 
Certainly,  if  he  is  no  longer  what  he  was.  Consider.  You  have  a  ship  about  to 
sail  with  a  valuable  cargo ;  but  she  cannot  leave  the  harbour  till  the  tide  turns. 
Presently  she  swings  round  with  the  altered  current.  Now  weigh  anchor  and  set 
saill  If  some  one  were  to  say  "  No,  not  yet,  you  are  too  hasty,  the  tide  has  only 
jast  turned,"  would  you  not  despise  the  folly  of  such  an  objection?  And  in  this 
dying  thief  the  stream  of  his  soul,  which  had  been  nmning  down  to  death,  had 
turned  and  was  now  flowing  up  to  life,  and  why  should  not  he  take  it  at  the  tide  and 
with  it  enter  heaven  7  3.  We  learn  that  earth  is  very  near  to  heaven.  *'  How  glorious 
the  hope — there  nmy  be  but  a  step  between  me  and  paradise  !  "  (1)  Let  us  then 
be  patient  in  affliction.  Are  we  repining  because  of  trials,  murmuring  at  some 
difficult  duty,  some  painful  sacrifice  ?  What  ?  when  angels  and  departed  friends 
may  be  weaving  our  chaplet  of  victory,  tuning  our  golden  harp  of  praise,  and 
gathering  round  the  threshold  to  bid  us  welcome  !  Shall  we  give  way  to  impatience, 
when  this  very  day  we  may  be  in  paradise  ?  (2)  Let  this  nearness  make  us  stead- 
fast in  resisting  temptation.  Shall  we  give  up  the  fight  when  on  the  point  of 
winning  the  victory  ?  Shall  we  turn  back  in  the  journey  when  round  the  rock 
just  before  us  we  may  be  within  sight  of  home?  (Newman  Hall,  LL.B.) 
The  extraordinanf  penitence  of  the  thief  on  the  cross  no  argument  for  delaying 
repentance : — I.  There  is  obound  of  hope  for  trembling  sinners.  And  We  may 
learn  from  this  instance  these  following  lessons.  1.  They  may  go  long  on,  and  far 
on  in  the  way  to  hell,  whom  yet  God  may  bring  home  to  Himself.  Here  is  a  man, 
a  thief,  whose  course  brought  him  to  an  ill  end,  to  a  violent  death,  and  yet  grace 
reaches  him.  2.  Grace  sometimes  catches  them  that  in  appearance,  and  to  the 
eyes  of  the  world,  are  farthest  from  it.  3.  Grace  makes  a  vast  difference  betwixt 
those  in  whom  it  finds  none.  4.  While  there  is  life  there  is  hope.  (1)  Let 
those  that  seek  God  early  be  encouraged  from  this,  that  they  shall  find  Him  (Prov. 
viii.  17).  (2)  Let  not  those  whose  day  is  almost  gone,  before  they  have  begun 
their  work,  despair.  (3)  Let  us  sow  beside  all  waters,  in  the  morning  and  in  the 
evening.  II.  But  there  is  mo  orodnd  here  for  the  crafty  delatino  sinneb  to 
PUT  off  bepentance,  ESPEciATiTiY  TILL  A  DYING  HOUB.  To  Set  this  matter  in  a  true 
light,  consider  these  following  things.  1.  It  is  a  most  rare  example.  (1)  As  one 
swallow  makes  not  spring,  so  neither  can  this  one  event  make  a  general  rule  that 
you  or  I  may  trust  to.  (2)  Are  there  not  eminent  instances  to  the  contrary,  wherein 
men  living  in  their  sin  have  been  struck  down  in  a  moment,  getting  no  time  to 
repent  of  them,  but  fiery  wrath  has  put  an  end  to  their  days  ?  Consider  the  case 
of  Nadab  and  Abihu  (Lev.  z.  1,  2),  of  whom  it  is  thought  they  had  erred  through 
drink  (ver.  9) ;  Eorah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  (Num.  xvi.  31),  <&c. ;  Ananias  and 
Sapphira  (Acts  v.),  who  died  instantly  with  a  lie  in  their  mouth.  But  why  do  I 
instance  in  particular  persons  ?  Did  not  millions  die  together  in  their  sins,  by  the 
deluge  that  swept  away  the  old  world,  the  fire  and  brimstone  that  burned  up 
Sodom,  Gomorrha,  Admah,  and  Zeboim?  (3)  The  most  that  this  so  rare  an 
example  can  amount  to  is  a  possibility.  It  is  not  to  so  much  as  a  probability  or 
likehhood.  2.  Though  there  were  two  thieves  on  the  cross  at  that  time,  yet  it  was 
bat  one  of  them  that  got  grace  to  repent.  (1)  Is  it  not  possible  that  thou  mayest 
die  blaspheming  if  thou  do  not  repent  now  in  time  ?  (2)  It  is  at  least  an  equal 
Tentore,  that  thoa  mayest  die  impenitent,  as  that  thou  mayest  die  a  penitent.    (3) 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0Hi».  zxui. 

It  is  inconsistent  with  common  sense,  to  leave  that  thing  to  a  venture,  which  may 
be  made  sure,  where  a  hit  or  a  miss  is  of  the  utmost  concern.  (4)  Nay,  but  the 
venture  is  very  unequal ;  for  it  is  far  more  likely  that  delaying  thou  mayest  die 
impenitent,  than  that  thou  mayest  die  penitent.  Few  took  part  with  the  good  thiel 
amongst  all  the  crowd  of  spectators;  the  multitude  went  the  other  thief's  way, 
mocking  (ver  35).  3.  There  is  no  evidence  that  this  thief  had  before  such  meana 
of  grace  as  you  have.  4.  This  thief  was  converted,  when  by  the  hand  of  public  justice 
he  was  to  die.  He  was  cut  oS  perhaps  in  the  midst  of  his  days  ;  at  least  he  died 
not  by  the  course  of  nature,  nor  by  any  sickness,  but  was  executed  for  his  evil  deeds. 
5.  The  conversion  of  the  thief  on  the  cross  was  an  extraordinary  manifestation  of 
our  Lord's  power,  made  for  special  reasons.  And  therefore  though  it  shows  what 
the  Lord  can  do  ;  it  does  not  show  what  ordinarily  He  will  do.  Consider  here,  to 
evince  this,  that — (1)  It  was  done  in  such  a  juncture  of  time,  as  the  like  never  waa, 
and  the  like  never  will  be  again  ;  namely,  when  the  Lord  of  glory,  the  Saviour  of 
the  world,  was  actually  hanging  upon  the  cross,  paying  the  ransom  for  the  Iwt 
elect  world  (Rom.  vi.  9).  (2)  It  was  a  wonder  wrought  in  a  time  allotted  in  a 
pat  ticular  manner  beyond  all  times,  for  God's  working  wonders.  6.  The  penitent 
tiiief  on  the  cross  was  not  only  sincere,  but  he  glorified  Christ  more  in  his  late 
repentance,  than  thou  art  capable  to  do  by  thine,  nay  more  than  if  thou  hadst  hved 
a  penitent  all  thy  days.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  No  encouragement  to  defer  repent- 
a  nee : — A  man  must  be  able  to  show  that  when  stretched  on  a  death-bed,  he  shall  be 
in  the  same  moral  position  as  the  thief  when  nailed  to  the  cross.  It  is  clear  that 
nothing  can  be  more  unwarranted  than  his  arguing  from  the  certainty  of  the  thief 
repenting,  to  the  likelihood  of  himself  repenting ;  and  we  are  confident  that  you 
cannot  possibly,  when  your  death-bed  draws  nigh,  stand  morally  in  the  same  posi- 
tion, and  hear  the  gospel  for  the  first  time  on  your  death-bed?  Yet  this  in  all 
probability  was  the  case  with  the  thief.  The  man  who  professedly  puts  oS  repen- 
tance, must  necessarily  smother  conviction  ;  he  will  therefore  carry  with  him  to  his 
dea(±i-bed  a  seared  and  a  blunted  conscience ;  be  will  have  refused  Christ  fifty,  or  a 
hundred,  or  a  thousand  times ;  he  will  have  grieved  the  Spirit,  and  possibly  have 
quenched  it  by  his  obstinate  resolve  to  defer  what  he  had  been  made  to  feel  essen- 
tial ;  whereas,  in  all  probability,  the  thief  had  never  determined  to  put  off  repen- 
tance ;  he  had  never  resisted  the  Spirit ;  he  had  never  heard  the  gospel ;  he  had 
never  rejected  Christ.  And  will  any  one  dare  to  think,  that  with  all  this  difference 
between  himself  and  the  malefactor,  he  can  be  warranted  in  so  identifying  the  cases 
as  to  consider  the  last  hour  of  life  well-fitted  for  the  work  of  repentance,  or  to 
bolster  himself  up  with  the  flattering  persuasion,  that  what  happened  to  the  dying 
thief  will  happen  also  to  him — that  just  as  Ufe  ebbs  away  tbere  shall  flow  in  upon 
cue  who  has  despised  a  thousand  warnings  and  steeled  his  heart  by  long  despite  to 
the  Spirit  of  God,  all  tbat  glorious  tide  of  faith  and  of  assurance  which  rolled  into 
the  soul  of  a  long-lost  prodigal,  who  had  never  before  been  invited  home,  never 
heard  the  wonderful  announcement,  that  those  condemned  justly  at  a  human 
tribunal,  might  still  find  acquittal  at  a  Divine,  and  who  still,  in  this,  his  last 
extremity,  having  shown  an  unprecedented  failh  by  giving  utterance  to  the  prayer — 
"  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom,"  was  sustained  by  those 
giacious  words  of  the  Redeemer — '*  Verily  I  say  unto  thee.  To-day  shalt  thou  ht. 
with  Me  in  paradise."  We  are  as  clear  as  upon  a  Scriptural  truth,  that  the  only 
man  who  can  think  of  repenting  on  a  death-bed  is  the  man  who  never  stood  by  a 
death-bed.  It  is  want  of  acquaintance  with  the  frightful  power  with  which  bodily 
disease  assails  the  strongest  mind — it  is  this  only  that  will  lead  men  to  harbour  the 
idea  that  such  stupendous  things  as  the  things  of  eternity  may  be  fairly  grappled 
with  in  a  fever  or  a  consumption.  We  do  not  say  sickness  throws  a  man  beyond 
the  limits  within  which  repentance  is  possible ;  but  we  do  say  that  in  sickness  there 
is  commonly  such  a  prostration  of  mind — the  mind  so  sympathizes  with  the  body, 
or  rather  is  bo  swallowed  up  in  it,  that  the  probability  is  almost  as  an  infinity  to  a 
nnit,  that  he  who  has  neglected  God  in  health  will  be  unable  to  seek  Him  under  the 
pressure  of  disease.  And  frum  all  this  mental  overthrow  the  dying  thief  was 
exempt.  Tell  me,  then,  is  it  quite  right  to  think,  that  amid  the  emaciation  of  your 
last  sickness  you  shall  have  power  and  collectedness  of  soul  tor  this  amazing 
prayer — "  Lord,  remember  me  when  Thou  comest  into  Thy  kingdom  "?  And  what 
right  have  you  to  hope  that  you  shall  be  soothed  by  the  gracious  word«,  *'  To-d&y 
.  .  .  paradise  "  ?    (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Yers.  44,  45.  There  was  a  dartmess  over  all  tlie  earth. — The  three  houn*  dmrh- 


CBiP.  xxm.J  ST.  LUKE.  60* 

tu$» : — What  a  call  must  that  mid-day  midnight  hare  been  to  the  careless  sons  ol 
men  1  They  knew  not  that  the  Son  of  God  was  among  them ;  nor  that  He  was 
working  out  human  redemption.  The  grandest  hoar  in  all  history  seemed  likely  to 
pass  by  unheeded,  when,  suddenly,  night  hastened  from  her  chambers  and  usurped 
the  day.  Every  one  asked  his  fellow,  "  What  means  this  darkness  ?  "  Business 
stood  still:  the  plough  stayed  in  mid-furrow,  and  the  axe  paused  uplifted.  It  was 
the  middle  of  the  day,  when  men  are  busiest ;  but  they  made  a  general  pause. 
Around  the  great  death-bed  an  appropriate  quiet  was  secured.  I  doubt  not  that  a 
shuddering  awe  came  over  the  masses  of  the  people,  and  the  thoughtful  foresaw 
terrible  things.  Those  who  had  stood  about  the  cross,  and  had  dared  to  insult  the 
majesty  of  Jesus,  were  paralyzed  with  fear.  I.  First,  let  us  view  this  darkness  as 
A  MiBACLB  WHICH  AMAZES  US.  1.  It  may  Seem  a  trite  observation  that  this  dark- 
ness was  altogether  out  of  the  natural  course  of  things.  Since  the  world  began  was 
it  not  heard  that  at  high  noon  there  should  be  darkness  over  all  the  land.  It  was 
out  of  the  order  of  nature  altogether.  Some  deny  miracles  ;  and  if  they  also  deny 
God,  I  will  not  at  this  time  deal  with  them.  He  may  make  certain  rules  for  His 
actions,  and  it  may  be  His  wisdom  to  keep  to  them ;  but  surely  He  must  reserve  to 
Himself  the  liberty  to  depart  from  His  own  laws,  or  else  He  has  in  a  measure  laid 
aside  his  personal  Godhead,  deified  law,  and  set  it  up  above  Himself.  2.  Further, 
this  miracle  was  not  only  out  of  the  order  of  nature,  but  it  is  one  which  would  have 
been  pronounced  impossible.  It  is  not  possible  that  there  should  be  an  eclipse  of 
the  sun  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon.  The  moon  at  the  time  when  she  is  in  her 
full  is  not  in  a  position  in  which  she  could  possibly  oast  her  shadow  upon  the 
earth.  The  Passover  was  at  the  time  of  the  full  moon,  and  therefore  it  was  not 
possible  that  the  sun  should  then  undergo  an  eclipse.  This  darkening  of  the  sun 
was  not  strictly  an  astronomical  eclipse ;  the  darkness  was  doubtless  produced  in 
Bome  other  way :  yet  to  those  who  were  present  it  did  seem  to  be  a  total  eclipse  of 
the  sun — a  thin^r  impossible.  3.  Concerning  this  miracle,  I  have  also  further  to 
remark  that  this  darkening  of  the  sun  surpassed  all  ordinary  and  natural  eclipses. 
It  lasted  longer  than  an  ordinary  eclipse,  and  it  came  in  a  diSerent  manner.  Ac- 
cording to  Luke,  the  darkness  all  over  the  land  came  first,  and  the  sun  was 
ilarkened  afterwards :  the  darkness  did  not  begin  with  the  sun,  but  mastered  the 
Bun.  It  was  unique  and  supernaturaL  4.  Again,  this  darkness  appears  to  have 
been  most  natural  and  fitting.  Like  the  earthquake  and  the  rending  of  the  veil  of 
the  temple,  it  seems  a  proper  attendant  of  the  Lord's  passion.  U.  Secondly,  I 
desire  you  to  regard  this  darkness  as  a  veil  which  concbals.  1.  What  I  see  in  that 
veil  is,  first  of  all,  that  it  was  a  concealment  for  those  guilty  enemies.  Did  yon 
ever  think  of  that  T  It  is  as  if  God  Himself  said,  "  I  cannot  bear  it.  I  will  not  see 
this  infamy  1  Descend,  0  veil  1 "  Down  fell  the  heavy  shades.  2.  But  further, 
that  darkness  was  a  sacred  concealment  for  the  blessed  Person  of  our  Divine  Lord. 
So  to  speak,  the  angels  found  for  their  King  a  pavilion  of  thick  clouds,  in  the  which 
His  Majesty  might  be  sheltered  in  its  hour  of  misery.  It  was  too  much  for  wicked 
eyes  to  gaze  so  rudely  on  that  immaculate  Person.  8.  This  darkness  also  warns 
ns,  even  us  who  are  most  reverent.  This  darkness  tells  us  all  that  the  Passion  is  a 
great  mystery,  into  which  we  cannot  pry.  God  veiled  the  cross  in  darkness,  and  in 
darkness  much  of  its  deeper  meaning  lies ;  not  because  God  would  not  reveal  it, 
but  because  we  have  not  capacity  enough  to  discern  it  all.  4.  Once  again,  this  veil 
of  darkness  also  pictures  to  me  the  way  in  which  the  powers  of  darkness  will  always 
endeavour  to  conceal  the  cross  of  Christ.  We  fight  with  darkness  when  we  try  to 
preach  the  cross.  UL  Now  we  pass  on  to  speak  of  this  darkness  as  A  symbol  which 
IKSTBDCTS.  The  veil  falls  down  and  conceals ;  but  at  the  same  time,  as  an  emblem, 
it  reveals.  1.  The  darkness  is  the  symbol  of  the  wrath  of  God  which  fell  on  those 
who  slew  His  only  begotten  Son.  God  was  angry,  and  His  frown  removed  the  light 
of  day.  2.  The  symbol  also  tells  us  what  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  endured.  The 
darkness  outside  of  Him  was  the  figure  of  the  darkness  that  was  within  Him.  In 
Gethsemane  a  thick  darkness  fell  upon  our  Lord's  Spirit,  His  day  was  the  light  of 
His  Father's  face :  that  face  was  hidden  and  a  terrible  night  gathered  around  Him. 
8.  Again,  I  think  I  see  in  that  darkness  also  what  it  was  that  Jesus  was  battUng 
with ;  for  we  must  never  forget  that  the  cross  was  a  battle-field  to  Him,  wherein  He 
triumphed  gloriously.  He  was  fighting  then  with  darkness ;  with  the  powers  of 
darkness  of  which  Satan  is  the  head;  with  the  darkness  of  homan  ignorance, 
depravity  and  falsehood.  lY.  I  come  to  my  fourth  point,  and  my  closing  words 
will  deal  with  the  sympathy  wbioh  vbophesies.  Do  you  see  the  sympathy  of 
nature  irith  her  Lord — the  sympathy  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens  with  the  Sua  of 


e06  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn^ 

EighteousneBS?  It  was  not  possible  for  Him  by  whom  all  things  were  made  to  b« 
in  darkness,  and  for  nature  to  remain  in  the  light.  1.  The  first  sympathetic  fact  I 
see  is  this :  all  lights  are  dim  when  Christ  shines  not.  2.  Next,  see  the  depen- 
dence of  all  creation  upon  Christ,  as  evidenced  by  its  darkness  when  He  withdraws. 
It  was  not  meet  that  He  who  made  all  worlds  should  die,  and  yet  all  worlds  should 
go  on  just  as  they  had  done.  If  He  suffers  eclipse,  they  must  suffer  eclipse  too ;  if 
the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  be  made  to  set  in  blood,  the  natural  sun  must  keep  toacb 
with  Him.  There  is  no  light  for  any  man  except  in  Christ ;  and  till  you  believe  in 
Him  thick  darkness  shall  blind  you,  and  you  shall  stumble  in  it  and  perish. 
3.  Another  practical  lesson  is  this :  If  we  are  in  the  dark  at  this  time,  if  our  spirits 
are  sunk  in  gloom,  let  us  not  despair,  for  the  Lord  Christ  Himself  was  there.  (<7. 
B..  Spurgeon.)  The  veiled  cross  : — I.  The  suggestions  of  this  dabeness.  1. 
It  indicated  tne  going  out  of  the  world's  Light.  2.  It  represented  the  ignorance  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  the  malignity  of  the  Jews.  3.  It  reminds  us  of  the  mystery  of 
the  Atonement.  H.  The  effects  op  the  dabknesb  upon  those  who  surrounded  thb 
CROSS.  1.  It  increased  the  solemnity  of  the  event.  2.  It  veiled  His  agony  from  thoso' 
who  were  around.    3.  It  whispered  warning  to  the  impenitent.    {A.  Rowland,  LL.B.y 

Ver.  45.  The  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent — The  rent  veil : — This  miraculous  event 
was  plainly  typical  of  several  important  things.  1.  This  was  a  type  of  the  violent 
rending  of  Christ's  body  on  the  cross.  2.  This  typified  our  Lord's  own  entrance  into 
lieaven.  3.  This  miracle  intimated  that,  by  the  death  of  Christ,  the  ceremonies  of 
the  law  were,  at  once,  explained  and  abolished.  4.  This  miracle  intimated  that  the 
distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile  was  at  an  end.  5.  The  rending  of  the  veil 
typified  evangelical  freeness  of  access  to  the  throne  of  grace.  6.  The  miraculous 
rending  of  the  veil  was  typical  of  Christ's  having  opened  up,  by  His  death,  an 
entrance  into  heaven  for  all  His  followers.  {Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)  The  rent  veil  of 
the  temple : — I.  The  veil  is  removed  from  humanitv.  Surrounded  by  this 
ethereal  light,  how  pale  and  sickly  is  the  lamp  of  philosophy — how  shallow  are  the 
findings  of  human  reason — how  contemptible  and  unintelligible  are  the  mutterings 
of  infidelity  1  Both  for  the  reach  and  the  grandeur  of  its  discoveries,  Christianity 
stands  alone.  Not  only  is  it  a  mighty  advance  on  all  which  went  before,  but  it 
includes  within  itself  that  which  will  take  infinite  ages  to  evolve.  II.  Nature  is 
UNVEiiiED.  It  is  a  fact  of  which  we  ought  never  to  lose  sight,  that  there  is  no 
discrepancy  between  the  readings  of  Nature  and  the  higher  readings  of  the  Chris- 
tian Book.  Christianity  did  not  come  to  ignore  nature,  but  rather  to  unveil  her 
more  hidden  life  and  beauty.  Amid  those  disturbing  forces  which  we  everywhere 
find  to  be  at  work,  we  are  remindsd  that  the  present  condition  of  our  world  does 
not  correspond  with  its  original  integrity  ;  that  all  nature  stands  in  need  of  a  grand 
renovation ;  that  this  change  must  be  brought  about  by  the  exertion  of  Divine 
power ;  and  that  the  present  throes  of  creation  will  result  in  some  mightier  birth. 
All  nature  will  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption ;  and  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God  will  be  preceded  by  making  all  things  new.  Such 
is  the  light  which  Christianity  sheds  over  the  constitution,  design,  and  final  con- 
dition of  this  material  world.  III.  Truth  is  unveiled.  We  say  not  that  this 
rending  of  the  veil  has  left  no  mystery  in  the  great  wide  field  of  revelation.  Such 
a  result  would  have  been  no  positive  advantage.  Progress  in  discovery  and  in 
knowledge  seems  to  be  involved  in  the  idea  of  mental  existence  and  activity.  Mind 
is  endued  with  exhaustless  power,  and  that  power  must  be  directed  to  pursuits  and 
employments  corresponding  with  the  dignity  of  its  nature,  and  the  elevation  of  the 
ground  tu  which  it  is  raised.  For  this  element  of  our  nature,  provision  is  made  in 
that  fulness  of  revelation  which  is  reserved  for  another  state  of  being.  Heaven  is 
a  world  of  everlasting  development.  IV.  The  veil  is  leftsd  from  the  grave. 
For  the  revelation  of  this  immortality  we  are  indebted  to  the  advent  and  the  ministry 
of  Christ.  He  brought  life  and  incorruption  to  light.  V.  Thk  glorious  future 
IS  unveiled.  It  was  like  a  morning  without  a  dawn  on  which  the  Saviour  rose 
from  the  dead.  His  resurrection  was  not  only  the  triumph  of  Life  over  Death,  but 
it  became  the  pledge  and  assurance  of  a  glorious  immortality.  (R.  Furguson, 
LL.D.) 

Ver.  46.  Father,  Into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit — That  dying  believert  are 
loth  warranted,  and  encouraged,  by  Christie  example,  believingly  to  commend  their 
tmils  into  the  hande  ofOod  : — I.  Whaz  is  ihplibd  a  a  belbtxb's  ooMUENniNo  ob 
co&niixTiMO  Hn  sooit  orao  tbx  haitd  or  Goo  at  dkatb  ?     1.  That  the  soul  out- 


•HAP.  xxin.]  ST.  LUKE.  60T 

lires  the  body.  2.  That  the  soal's  true  rest  is  in  God.  8.  The  great  value- 
believers  have  lor  their  souls.  He  thinks  but  little  of  his  body  comparatively.  4 
These  words  imply  the  deep  sense  that  dying  believers  have  of  the  great  change 
that  is  coming  upon  them  by  death ;  when  all  visible  and  sensible  things  are 
shrinking  away  from  them  and  faiUng.  They  feel  the  world  and  the  best  comforts . 
in  it  failing;  every  creature  and  creature-comfort  failing :  For  at  death  we  are  said  to 
fail  (Luke  xvi.  9).  Hereupon  the  soul  clasps  the  closer  about  its  God,  cleaves 
more  close  than  ever  to  Him  :  "Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit."  5. 
It  implies  the  atonement  of  God,  and  His  full  reconciliation  to  believers,  by  the 
blood  of  the  great  Sacrifice ;  else  they  durst  never  commit  their  souls  into  His 
hands  :  "  For  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  "  (Heb. 
xii.  29).  6.  It  implies  both  the  efficacy  and  excellency  of  faith,  in  supporting  and 
relieving  the  soul  at  a  time  when  nothing  else  is  able  to  do  it.     IL  What  wabbant 

OB  ENCOXJBAOEMBNT   BAVB   OBACIOUS   SOCLS    TO   COMMIT   THEMSELVES,   AT  DEATH,   INTO 

THE  HANDS  OP  GoD  ?  I  answer,  much  every  way ;  all  things  encourage  and  warrant 
its  80  doing :  for — 1.  This  God,  to  whom  the  believer  commits  himself  at  death,  is- 
its  Creator :  the  Father  of  its  being :  He  created  and  inspired  it,  and  so  it  hatb 
relation  of  a  creature  to  a  Creator ;  yea,  of  a  creature  now  in  distress,  to  a  faithful 
Creator  (1  Fet.  iv.  19).  2.  As  the  gracious  soul  is  His  creature,  so  it  is  His  redeemed 
creature ;  one  that  He  hath  bought,  and  jthat  with  a  great  price,  even  with  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  (1  Pet.  i.  18).  This  greatly  encourages  the  departing 
soul  to  commit  itself  into  the  hands  of  God ;  so  you  find  (Fsa.  xxxi.  5).  3.  The 
gracious  soul  may  confidently  and  securely  commit  itself  into  the  hands  of  God 
when  it  parts  with  its  body  at  death ;  not  only  because  it  is  His  creature.  His 
redeemed  creature,  but  because  it  is  His  renewed  creature  also.  All  natural  excel- 
lency and  beauty  goes  away  at  death  (Job.  iv.  ult.),  but  grace  ascends  with  the  soul ; 
it  is  a  sanctified,  when  a  separate  soul ;  and  can  God  shut  the  door  of  glory  upon 
such  a  soul,  that  by  grace  is  made  meet  for  the  inheritance  ?  Oh,  it  cannot  be !  4^ 
As  the  gracious  soul  is  a  renewed  soul,  so  it  is  also  a  sealed  soul ;  God  hath  sealed 
it  in  this  world  for  that  glory,  into  which  it  is  now  to  enter  at  death.  Surely,  if 
God  have  sealed,  He  will  not  refuse  you  ;  if  He  have  given  His  earnest.  He  will  not 
shut  you  out ;  God's  earnest  is  not  given  in  jest.  5.  Moreover,  every  gracious  soul 
may  confidently  cast  itself  into  the  arms  of  its  God,  when  it  goes  hence,  with 
"  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit."  Forasmuch  as  every  gracious  soul 
is  a  Eoul  in  covenant  with  God,  and  God  stands  obliged,  by  His  covenant  and 
promise  to  such,  not  to  cast  them  out,  when  they  come  unto  Him.  As  soon  as  evec 
thou  became  His,  by  regeneration,  that  promise  became  thine  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  6. 
But  this  is  not  all ;  the  gracious  soul  sustains  many  intimate  and  dear  relations  to 
that  God  into  whose  hands  it  commends  itself  at  death.  It  is  His  spouse,  and  the 
consideration  of  such  a  day  of  espousals  may  well  encourage  it  to  cast  itself  into 
the  bosom  of  Christ,  its  head  and  husband.  It  is  a  member  of  His  body,  flesh  and 
bones  (Eph.  t.  30).  It  is  His  child,  and  He  its  everlasting  Father  (Isa.  ix.  6).  It 
is  His  friend.  "Henceforth,"  saith  Christ,  "I  call  you  not  servants,  but  friends  "  (John 
XV.  15).  What  confidence  may  these,  and  all  other  the  dear  relations  Christi 
owns  to  the  renewed  soul,  beget,  in  such  an  hour  as  this  is  I  7.  The  unchangeable- 
ness  of  God's  love  to  His  people  gives  confidence  they  shall  in  no  wise  be  cast  out. 
They  know  Christ  is  the  same  to  them  at  last  as  He  was  at  first ;  the  same  in  the 
pangs  of  death  as  He  was  in  the  comforts  of  life.  Having  loved  His  own  which> 
were  in  the  world,  He  loved  them  to  the  end  (John  xiii.  1),  He  doth  not  love  as  the 
world  loves,  only  in  prosperity ;  but  they  are  as  dear  to  Him  when  their  beauty  and 
strength  are  gone,  as  when  they  were  in  the  greatest  flourishing.  If  we  live,  we  live 
to  the  Lord  ;  and  if  we  die,  we  die  to  the  Lord.  So  then,  whether  we  live  or  die,  we 
are  the  Lord's  (Bom.  xiv.  8).  Deduction  1.  Are  dying  believers,  only,  waiTantedand 
encouraged  thus  to  commend  their  souls  into  the  hands  of  God  ?  What  a  sad 
strait,  then,  must  all  dying  unbelievers  be  in  about  their  souls  ?  Such  souls  will 
fall  into  the  hands  of  God,  but  that's  their  misery,  not  their  privilege.  They  are 
not  put  by  faith  into  the  hands  of  mercy,  but  fall  by  sin  into  the  hands  of  justice. 
2.  Will  God  graciously  accept,  and  faithfully  keep  what  the  saints  commit  to  Him> 
at  death  ?  How  careful  then  should  they  be  to  keep  what  God  commits  to  them,  to 
be  kept  for  Him  while  they  live.  3.  If  believers  may  safely  commit  their  souls  into- 
the  hands  of  God,  how  confidently  may  they  commit  all  lesser  interests,  and  lower 
coucemments  into  the  same  hand.  4.  Is  this  the  privilege  of  believers,  that  they 
can  commit  their  souls  to  God  in  a  dying  hour  7  Then  how  precious,  how  useful  a 
grace  ia  faith  to  the  people  of  God,  both  living  and  dying  t  5.  Do  the  soula  of  dying 


m»  THE  hTBLlCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnn. 

believers  commend  themselves  into  the  hands  of  God  ?  Then  let  not  the  surviving 
relatione  of  such  sorrow  as  men  that  have  no  hope  (J.  Flavel.)  The  last  words 
of  Christ : — Jesus  Christ  did  not  die  for  Himself,  any  more  than  He  lived  for  Him- 
self;  and  He  not  only  "  died,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God,"  but  th» 
manner  of  His  dying  was  a  lesson  and  a  pattern  for  us.  That  is  the  Christian  way 
of  dying — the  way  for  all  to  die ;  and  who  would  wish,  or  could  imagine,  any  fitter 
■or  happier  way  ?  Who  would  not,  in  this  sense,  say,  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  my 
Saviour,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  His  !  "  And  how  it  disarms  our  helplessness 
of  its  terrors  1  "  I  am  powerless,"  it  seems  to  say,  "  and  therefore  I  commend  to 
Thine  omnipotence  this  frail  and  sensitive  soul,  which  came  at  first  from  Thy 
creating  hand.  I  do  so  reverently,  but  I  do  so  confidently,  for  I  do  so  as  a  child 
■who  calls  Thee, '  My  Father.'  "  I  have  said  it  expresses  dependence — and  so  it  does  ; 
but  in  Christ's  case,  and  even  in  our  own,  the  confidence  expressed  is  more  promi- 
nent still.  In  His  case  there  seems  a  suggestion  of  the  words,  ••  No  man  taketh 
My  life  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself  "  ;  "  I,  as  My  own  act,  commend  it. 
Father,  to  Thee."  We  do  not  possess  that  power :  our  souls  are  "  required  "  of  us. 
But,  more  than  that,  we  are  accustomed  to  think  of  dying  as  the  most  terrible 
crisis  of  oar  history  ;  the  hour  of  supreme  peril  to  our  souls ;  the  appalling  event 
which  decides  our  fate  for  ever.  It  is  a  great  mistake.  Our  dying  does  not  decide 
our  future  fate :  it  is  our  living  which  does  that ;  the  course  we  have  taken,  the 
choices  we  have  made  when  opportunities  were  in  our  hands,  and  we  used  them,  or 
threw  them  away  1  And  therefore,  I  say,  the  peril  of  living  is  greater  far  than  any 
peril  there  can  be  in  dying.  I  commend  My  spirit  into  Thy  hands  to  be  delivered. 
Consider  any  human  spirit  now;  consider  your  own.  Before  it  are  great  possi- 
hilities  of  good  and  of  evil.  It  must  be  so.  If  we  can  be  God's  true  children,  and 
live  with,  and  become  like  our  Father,  it  is  terrible  to  fail  of  this  ;  and  it  ia  mora 
dreadful  still — it  is  an  indescribable  degradation — not  even  to  care  about  it.  Since, 
then,  we  are  in  this  case ;  capable  of  being  God's  children,  but  hindered  and  pre- 
vented from  being  so  by  our  evil,  there  is  supreme  need  for  us  each  to  cry,  "  Father, 
hear  me,  deliver  me  1  Into  Thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit — my  sin-stained 
spirit.  I  am  Thine.  Save  me ! "  I  commend  my  spirit  into  Thy  hands,  to  be 
made  pure.  The  deliverance  and  reformation  which  the  Scriptures  say  that  we 
require,  they  describe  by  the  strong  expressions  •♦  a  new  birth,"  *'  a  new  creation." 
They  say  that  is  needed  in  order  that  we  may  stand  "  without  blame"  before  God. 
Does  not  our  sad  experience  say  the  same  ?  God  prescribes  it.  God  promises  to 
perform  it,  and  on  us.  (T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.)  Sovl-resignation  into  the  hands  of 
God : — ^Yea,  and  it  is  a  very  profitable  thing  for  us  to  do  it,  hereby  we  make  a  virtue 
of  necessity  ;  and  where  can  we  lodge  our  souls  in  safer  hands  ?  If  a  man  cannot 
keep  a  thing  himself,  but  must  betrust  and  deposit  it  in  other  hands,  will  he  not  do 
it  in  the  safest  hands  that  he  can  find  *  Now  three  things  there  are  that  are  required 
to  a  safe  hand :  power,  wisdom,  and  love.  If  I  deposit  a  thing  in  a  man's  hand  to 
keep,  he  must  be  able  to  keep  it  for  me  against  violence,  else  his  hand  is  no  safe 
hand ;  though  he  be  able  and  have  power  to  keep  it  for  me,  yet  if  he  be  prodigal 
and  lavish,  and  not  wise,  I  shall  not  count  hia  hand  a  safe  hand  to  keep  my 
depositum :  but  though  he  be  never  so  wise,  yet  if  he  be  not  my  friend,  I  shall  not 
betrust  him  with  any  great  matter :  but  if  a  man  be  able,  wise  and  friendly,  then 
his  hand  is  a  safe  hand  to  keep  my  depositum.  And  again  if  we  do  not  commend, 
commit,  and  resign  ourselves  and  souls  into  His  hands,  we  must  be  responsible  for 
them  ourselves.  What  benefit  shall  we  get  thereby?  Much  every  way.  This 
resignation  of  our  souls  and  selves  unto  God  is  an  inlet  to  many  mercies,  graces, 
and  comforts.  As  for  mercies  and  blessings;  what  greater  blessing  can  there  be  in 
in  this  world  than  to  enjoy  one's-self ;  under  God  to  enjoy  one's-self,  and  to  be  free 
from  all  things  ?  As  it  is  an  inlet  unto  many  blessings,  so  it  is  an  inlet  unto  many 
{graces  and  duties.  What  grace  or  duty  will  ye  instance  in  ?  Will  ye  instance  in 
prayer  T  It  opens  the  sluices  of  prayer ;  and,  as  one  speaks  well,  though  you  pray 
never  so  long  or  loud,  yet  if  you  do  not  resign  up  your  soul  and  will  unto  God,  your 
prayer  is  but  nonsense,  and  a  contradiction  in  re.  As  it  is  an  inlet  unto  many 
graces,  so  it  is  an  inlet  also  unto  many  comforts ;  yea,  indeed,  unto  all  our  comforts : 
for  what  comfort  can  a  man  have  in  himself  or  condition,  till  he  hath  truly  resigned 
«nd  giTren  up  himself  and  soul  and  will  unto  God  ?  but  being  done,  ye  may  freely  go 
about  your  business.  If  a  man  have  a  suit  in  law,  and  have  left  his  cause  in  the 
hand  of  an  able,  careful  friend  and  lawyer,  he  is  quiet ;  much  more  may  we  oa 
qoiet,  when  we  have  left  and  lodged  our  case  and  way  and  soul  with  God.  Well, 
Irat  then  how  is  this  work  to  be  done  that  we  may  truly  resign  and  give  ap  ooxMlTeii 


OUF.  xxin.]  ST.  LVRE.  609 

our  souls,  and  our  wills  unto  God  ?  It  is  not  to  be  done  slightly  and  overly,  but 
seriously  and  solemnly.  It  is  an  ordinary  thing  with  men  to  say,  "  The  will  of  tha 
Lord  be  done."  As  this  work  is  not  to  be  done  slightly  and  overly,  so  neither  is  it 
to  be  done  forcedly  and  lastly,  but  freely  and  firstly.  As  it  is  not  to  be  done  lastly 
and  forcedly,  so  it  is  not  to  be  done  partially,  and  by  halves,  but  fully  and  totally. 
♦•  I  am  Thine,"  saith  David  to  God,  "  Oh,  save  me  "  (Psa.  cxix.  94).  As  this  resig- 
nation must  not  be  done  partially,  and  by  halves,  so  it  must  not  be  done  con- 
ditionally, but  absolutely.  As  this  resignation  is  not  to  be  done  conditionally,  so  it 
is  not  to  be  done  passively,  and  in  a  way  of  submission  only,  but  actively.  It  ia 
one  thing  for  a  man  to  submit  unto  God's  will,  and  another  thing  to  resign  up 
himself  and  will  to  the  will  of  God.  As  this  resignation  is  not  to  be  done  passively, 
so  it  is  not  to  be  done  deceitfully  and  feignedly,  but  in  all  plainness  and  sincerity. 
Well,  but  when  is  this  work  to  be  done  ?  It  is  to  be  done  daily.  There  are  some 
special  times  and  seasons  which  do  call  for  this  work.  I  will  name  five.  When  a 
man  doth  convert  and  turn  unto  God.  When  a  man  is  called  forth  unto  any  great 
work,  or  service,  or  employment,  especially  if  it  be  beyond  his  own  strength  and 
power.  When  a  man  is  in  any  great  danger,  distress,  and  affliction,  then  he  is  to 
resign  and  give  up  himself  and  will  unto  God.  And  if  you  would  be  able  to  dothia 
work  of  soul-resignation  in  the  day  of  your  death  rightly,  then  use  yourself  to  do  it 
everyday.      That  is  easily  done  which  is  often  done.      {W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  The 

soul  given  to  God  : — Be  sure  that  you  do  not  give  away  your  soul  from  God  to  any- 
thing else  whilst  you  live.  If  you  have  given  away  your  soul  unto  other  thing* 
whilst  you  live,  it  will  be  a  vain  thing  for  you  to  say  Christ's  words  whea 
you  come  to  die.  When  men  come  to  their  death,  ye  know  they  do  ordinarily  make 
their  wills ;  and  in  the  first  place  they  say,  I  give  my  soul  unto  God  ;  then  if  they 
have  lands,  or  houses,  or  money,  they  give  them  to  their  wives,  children,  relations 
and  friends,  according  to  their  pleasure.  But  suppose,  now,  that  a  man  shall  give 
land  or  house  to  such  or  such  a  child  or  friend,  which  he  hath  sold  or  given  away 
before,  shall  his  will  stand  in  force  ?  Will  not  all  men  say,  This  he  could  not  give 
away,  for  he  had  sold  that  or  given  that  before?  So  in  regard  of  one's  soul; 
though  upon  my  death  I  say,  As  for  my  soul,  I  give  that  to  God  ;  yet  if  I  have  sold 
away  my  soul  before,  for  unjust  gain,  or  have  given  away  my  soul  before  unto  filthy 
pleasures,  how  can  I  resign  and  give  that  to  God  when  I  die ;  will  not  the  Lord  say. 
Nay,  this  is  none  of  yours  to  give,  this  you  had  sold  or  given  away  before  ?  Oh» 
then,  be  sure  of  this,  that  whilst  yon  live,  you  do  not  sell  or  give  away  your  soul 
from  God,  for  then  death-bed  resignation  will  be  but  as  the  act  and  deed  of  a  man 
that  makes  his  will  when  he  is  not  compos  mentis.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  47-49.  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  aan. — The  Cross,  the  source  of  com- 
punction : — Many  reasons  have  been  given  to  account  for  that  providence  of  God 
which  determined  that  the  Cross  should  be  the  kind  of  death  that  Chnst  should 
die ;  and  that  He  should  not  end  His  life  by  sword  or  fire,  by  which  the  animal 
victims  in  the  Old  Testament  which  were  types  of  Him  were  slain  and  offered.  It 
is  usual  to  explain  the  choice  of  this  mode  of  death  by  showing  its  correspondence 
with  various  types  and  prophecies.  Christ  could  not  have  been  the  antitype  of  the 
brazen  serpent  which  was  lifted  up;  neither  could  the  prophecy — "they  pierced 
My  hands  and  My  feet "  have  been  fulfilled  by  Him,  unless  He  died  by  crucifixion. 
This  reply,  however,  only  removes  the  inquiry  another  step  off ;  to  prove  that  our 
Lord's  death  is  the  accomplishment  of  type  and  prophecy  may  be  useful  as  an  argu- 
ment whereby  to  identify  Him  as  the  Messiah,  but  it  can  cast  no  light  upon  the 
events  themselves.  The  revealing  beforehand  of  that  which  was  to  come  to  pass, 
was  a  merciful  provision  to  aid  our  faith  and  lead  our  minds  to  Christ,  but  it  did 
not  determine  the  things  which  should  happen  ;  any  form  of  death  might  have  been 
equally  revealed  by  prophet  and  lawgiver.  Passing  by  without  mention  many 
mystical  expositions,  the  extreme  torture  of  this  kind  of  death  has  been  assigned  a» 
a  cause  for  its  selection.  Some  have  considered  it  the  most  painful  death  which  a 
human  being  could  undergo.  Moreover,  the  Cross  added  to  actual  pain  another, 
and  an  extremely  dehcate  kind  of  torment — shame  and  humiliation.  We  can  con- 
ceive another  reason  why  our  Lord  died  by  crucifixion,  and  one  with  which  in  the 
line  of  thought  we  are  pursuing  we  are  especially  concerned ;  Christ  willed  to  die  by 
a  death  which  was  itself  a  spectacle.  They  "  came  together  to  that  sight."  The 
brazen  serpent  was  lifted  up  for  the  express  purpose  of  being  looked  upon.  Christ 
ascribes  power  to  the  fact  of  His  elevation  upon  the  Cross — "  I,  if  I  be  hfted  np, 
wiU  draw  all  men  unto  Me."    His  death  became  an  object  of  attraction,  because  ii 

VOL.  m.  89 


«10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxnt, 

was  an  object  of  eontemplation  ;  the  eye  of  sense,  and  the  eye  of  a  devout  imagina* 
tion  could  gaze  upon  His  crucified  form.  The  text  describes  the  effects  produced 
apon  those  persons  who  were  standing  before  the  Cross,  when  Christ  died.  Both 
the  centurion  and  the  people  were  deeply  moved.  They  were  representatives  of 
different  nations ;  and  they  illustrate  the  impressions  which  the  Cross  would  make 
upon  the  mind  and  heart  of  man ;  there  must  be  convictions  in  the  mind  concerning 
the  person  of  the  Sufferer  before  the  heart  can  be  touched  with  compunction.  la 
the  centurion  we  see  the  working  of  the  Cross  upon  the  human  mind :  in  the  people, 
apon  the  human  heart.  Together  these  represent  the  Cross  as  "  the  source  of 
compunction."  I.  The  centubion  passed  through  a  mental  revolution  as  hb 
WATCHED  Jesus.  St.  Mark  says  the  centurion  "  stood  over  against  Him  " — that  is — 
was  in  full  view  of  the  Cross ;  he  was  able  then  to  see  very  distinctly  the  end.  He 
was  probably  closer  to  Christ  than  any  one  else,  for  he  was  stationed  there  for  the 
purpose  of  watching  Him.  The  power  of  this  sight  may  be  estimated  by  considering 
the  man  who  was  impressed  by  it — his  calling,  race,  and  position.  He  was  an 
onhkely  person  to  be  affected  by  such  a  sight.  He  was  not  present  from  any  motive 
•of  curiosity,  like  many  who  were  in  that  crowd.  He  was  there  on  duty.  Further, 
the  centurion  was  not  likely  to  be  convinced  through  previous  instruction ;  he  did 
not  come  to  the  Cross  with  the  religious  training  of  the  Jew.  Another  element  in 
reckoning  the  power  of  the  Cross  upon  the  mind  of  the  centurion  is  his  position ; 
he  was  the  subject  of  an  unprecedented  impression.  It  was  not  a  current  of  sensa- 
tion with  which  he  fell  in,  but  which  he  seems  to  have  led  and  inaugurated.  Ha 
stands  out  as  the  first  and  prominent  exponent  of  the  thought  and  feeling  which 
the  Cross  had  stirred.  Whilst,  however,  we  are  trying  to  form  some  estimate  of  the 
power  of  the  Cross  from  the  extreme  unlikelihood  of  the  person  who  was  affected  by 
it ;  we  must  on  the  other  hand  take  notice  of  certain  events  which,  accompanying 
Christ's  death,  aroused  the  mind  of  the  centurion.  His  faith  was  an  intelligent 
faith,  and  not  the  product  of  a  passing  excitement  or  heated  imagination ;  it  rested 
on  evidences.  We  must  look  to  these,  or  otherwise  we  shall  be  in  danger  of  regard- 
ing his  faith  as  a  sort  of  unreasoning  impulse ;  and  besides  this,  the  inquiry  will 
lead  to  some  very  solemn  thoughts  concerning  our  Lord's  death.  The  loud  cry 
which  Christ  uttered  when  He  died,  astonished  the  centurion.  When  he  "  saw  that 
He  so  cried  out,  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  he  said,  Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of 
God."  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God,  but  God  gives  also  sensible  helps  to  create  disposi- 
tions for  receiving  His  gifts.  External  grace  appeals  through  the  senses,  whilst 
internal  grace  acts  on  the  mind  and  will.  The  man  was  by  this  cry  aroused  either 
from  indifference  or  hostility  or  contempt,  and  brought  into  a  condition  of  receptive- 
ness  of  Divine  truth.  There  was  another  ground  of  faith  connected  with  this  cry, 
which  also  had  its  share  in  convincing  the  centurion.  In  the  text  St.  Luke  says 
when  he  "saw  what  was  done,  he  glorified  God."  St.  Matthew  is  more  explicit, 
and  mentions  the  earthquake  as  causing  fear.  Christ  was  Uke  Samson,  He  mani- 
fested His  strength  more  in  His  death  than  in  His  life.      II.  But  besides  thb 

EFFECT  UPON  THE  CENTUBION,  THE  CrOSS  MANIFESTED  ITS  POWBB  UPON  THB  CROWD  Of 
fERSONS  WHO  HAD  GATHERED  TOGETHER  TO  WITNESS  THE  CRUCIFIXION.       They  had  crfed, 

-"  Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him !  "  when  Pilate  had  brought  Him  forth.  His  raiment 
dripping  with  the  precious  blood ;  but  death  produced  a  reaction,  which  pity  could 
not  excite.  When  the  murderer  sees  death  written  upon  the  face  of  his  victim,^ the 
passion  which  had  prompted  the  deed  melts  into  fear  and  remorse.  The  people  felt 
that  they  had  a  share  in  that  passion,  had  been  instrumental  in  causing  it ;  and 
the  result  was  a  new  sorrow — new,  as  an  experience,  yet  long  ago  predicted.  Their 
sorrow  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy — "  They  shall  look  on  Me  whom  they 
have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  Him  " ;  it  was  an  epoch  in  the  history  of 
moral  convictions.  Their  compunction  was  a  result  of  grace,  and  not  the  mere 
cooling  of  vindictive  passion.  Those  people  had  assembled  out  of  curiosity  and 
malice ;  they  had  come  hither  without  any  dispositions  for  receiving  grace,  but  the 
Cross  overcame  them.  The  Spirit  of  God  used  that  Cross  as  the  instrument  of  a 
•deep  conviction  of  sin ;  and  they  became  the  first-fruits,  the  earnest  of  that  which 
should  afterwards  be  the  normal  effect  of  the  Passion.  Mourning  for  sin  would 
henceforth  be  excited  by  the  thought — "Jesus,  my  love,  is  crucified."  Compunc- 
tion was  a  great  grace.  At  the  moment  when  the  sin  of  man  had  culminated,  for 
Ood  to  unlock  £Us  treasures  and  begin  to  bestow  them  is  an  astounding  evidence  of 
His  quenohlesB  love  I  That  those  very  persons  who  had  rejected  Him  should  tha3 
be  visited  inwardly  with  a  subduing  and  softening  unction  from  the  Holy  One  is  a 
ourval  of  Divine  forbearance.    Cokclusion  :  There  are  three  thoughts,  whioh  ace 


CHAP,  xxni.]  ST.  LUKE.  611 

of  practical  importance  in  enabling  us  now  to  experience  the  power  of  the  Cross  aa 
a  Bource  of  compunction.  1.  Our  sins  caused  the  Passion.  We  did  not  drive  the 
nails  into  His  hands  or  pierce  His  side,  but — ♦'  He  hath  borne  our  griefs  and  carried 
our  sorrows  ...  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  He  was  bruised  for  our 
iniquities  .  .  .  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  He  "  bare  our 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  As  the  crowd  who  smote  their  breasts  returned, 
they  each  one  felt  "  I  had  a  part  in  that."  What  the  outward  share  in  thai  Passioa 
was  to  the  actual  offender,  that  our  sins  are  in  relation  to  the  Cross  as  a  mystery. 
2.  Again,  the  Cross  was  not  endured  for  mankind  as  for  a  multitude  indiscriminately, 
but  for  each  individually.  Every  human  being  might  truly  say,  "  He  loved  me,  and 
gave  Himself  for  mf."  3.  Once  more — as  the  constant  recurrence  to  the  thoaght  of 
Christ's  omniscience  seems  to  bring  the  Cross  close  to  us;  so  to  regard  His  remem- 
brance of  all  that  happened  on  Calvary,  now  that  He  is  in  glory,  is  another  help  to 
meditation  on  the  Passion.  The  memory  of  Christ,  uninfluenced  by  the  passage  of 
time,  can  look  back  on  every  detail  of  the  Passion.  He  is  not  capable  of  forgetful- 
ness,  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever ;  each  event,  each  sorrow, 
«ach  pang  is  treasured  up  in  His  memory  with  a  recollection  more  vivid  than  the 
creature  can  possess.  Though  in  His  glory.  He  is  the  same  Jesus  who  suffered ; 
and  the  marks  of  suffering  abide — the  sacred  wounds,  which  are  the  perpetual 
memorials  of  His  Passion.  As  with  the  eye  of  the  soul  we  now  behold  Him  and 
hold  communion  with  Him,  the  remembrance  of  Calvary  will  pass  from  Him  to  us, 
and  the  spirit  of  compunction  cause  the  heart  to  mourn  over  sin.  Such  thoughts 
may  help  us  to  gaze  upon  the  Cross  with  a  true  sorrow.  Whether  it  be  the  con- 
version of  a  whole  Ufe  we  need,  or  the  renewal  of  some  part  of  it,  or  victory  over 
some  habit  of  sin,  we  must  place  ourselves  with  the  crowd  before  the  Cross  and  pray 
for  the  manifestation  of  its  power  on  our  own  minds  and  hearts.  If  there  is  the 
sense  of  lack  of  dispositions,  the  Cross  can  create  them ;  only  let  us  continue  to 
contemplate  it.  Fire  melts  ice ;  the  sun  unfolds  the  flowers  ;  the  Cross  can  melt 
the  hardened  heart,  and  draw  out  from  it  new  graces.     (W.  H.  Hutchings,  M.A.) 

Ver.  48.  Smote  their  breasts. — The  spectatort  of  the  crucifixion  smiting  their 
breasts : — I.  Beholdikq  Christ  on  the  Cross.  Look  on  the  multitude  now — see  how 
they  who  before  had  triumphed  in  His  misery,  are  struck  with  deep  astonishment. 
One  says,  "  Surely  this  was  a  righteous  man."  Another  says,  "  This  is  the  Son  of  God," 
**  And  all  the  people  who  came  together  to  that  sight  seeing  what  had  passed,  smote 
their  breasts  and  returned."  They  came  to  the  execution  with  eager  haste  and 
bitter  zeal.  They  retired  slow,  silent,  and  pensive,  with  downcast  looks  and 
labouring  thoughts.  Their  smiting  their  breasts  indicated  some  painful  sensa- 
tions within.  1.  It  expressed  their  conviction  of  the  innocence  and  divinity 
of  this  wonderful  sufferer.  Whatever  sentiments  they  had  entertained  in  the 
morning,  they  had  now  seen  enough  to  extort  from  them  an  acknowledgment  that 
this  was  a  "  righteous  man  " — this  was  the  "  Son  of  God."  This  character  Jesus 
had  openly  assumed  ;  and  with  unwavering  constancy  He  maintained  it  to  the  last. 
(1)  Observe  His  cahnness.  Amidst  the  rudest  and  most  provoking  insults,  He  dis- 
covered no  malice  or  resentment  toward  His  enemies ;  but  all  His  language  and 
behaviour  was  mild  and  gentle.  When  He  was  reviled.  He  reviled  not  again ;  but 
committed  Himself  to  Him  who  judgeth  righteously.  (2)  See  His  benevolence.  He 
attended  to  the  case  of  His  afflicted  mother,  and  commended  her  to  the  care  of  His 
beloved  disciple.  He  wrought  a  miracle  to  heal  an  enemy  wounded  in  the  attempt 
to  seize  Him.  He  extended  mercy  to  a  malefactor  who  was  suffering  by  His  side. 
/3)  Consider  His  humble  piety.  He  maintained  His  confidence  in  God ;  called  Him 
His  God  and  His  Father ;  and  into  His  hands  committed  His  Spirit.  Such  dis- 
tinguished piety,  benevolence,  and  constancy,  under  trials  like  His,  showed  Him  to 
be  a  righteous  man — to  be  more  than  man.  And  heaven  itself  bare  solemn  testi- 
mony in  His  favour.  The  darkness  which  overspread  the  land  was  evidently  super- 
natural. 2.  Their  smiting  their  breasts  was  expressive  of  their  compassion  for  this 
innocent  and  glorious  Sufferer.  Their  rage,  which  had  been  wrought  up  to  the  highest 
Btrain,  now  began  to  subside,  and  give  way  to  the  tender  feelings  of  humanity.  3. 
This  action  expressed  a  deep  remorse  of  conscience.  II.  Beholding  Christ  in  thk 
Holt  Coitmunion.  To  behold  this  Divine  Saviour  in  the  flesh,  and  to  eee  Him 
expire  on  the  cross,  was  the  lot  only  of  those  who  Uved  in  His  day.  But  the 
frequent  contemplation  of  His  death  is  a  matter  of  so  much  importance,  that  He 
was  pleased,  just  before  He  suffered,  to  appoint  an  ordinance  for  the  purpose  of 
exhibiting  His  death  to  our  view,  and  bringing  it  to  our  remembrance.    Here  He  ia  - 


«I2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxuu 

Bet  forth  crucified  before  our  eyes.  Do  we  turn  away  from  this  ordinance  ?  We 
have  httle  reason  to  think  we  should  have  attended  the  crucifixion  on  any  higher 
motive  than  mere  curiosity.  If  a  real  regard  to  Him  would  have  invited  us  to  follow 
Him  to  the  cross,  the  same  regard  will  invite  us  to  come  and  see  Him  at  His  table. 
1.  Have  any  of  you  entertained  indifferent  notions  of  Christ  and  His  religion  ? 
Come  here,  and  reflect  on  those  characters  of  divinity  which  He  exhibited.  2.  Hera 
meditate  on  the  worth  of  your  souls.  3,  Here  behold  the  great  evil  of  sin.  4.  Here 
meditate  on  the  wonderful  mercy  of  God.  5.  Look  here  and  behold  an  instructive 
example  of  patience  and  resignation.  6.  Look  to  Christ  and  learn  to  despise  the 
world.  7.  Look  to  Christ,  and  learn  meekness  and  forgiveness.  (J.  Lathrap,  D.D.) 
The  great  sight : — I.  The  sight.  It  is  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  You 
have  often  heard  of  it ;  have  you  thought  of  it  until  you  could  see  it  ?  Have  its  dif- 
ferent incidents  been  grouped  in  your  mind  so  as  to  form  a  complete  picture  ?  Try 
to  realize  it.  II.  The  lessons  of  the  sight.  1,  The  first  lesson  to  which  we  beg 
your  attention  is  the  antagonism  of  sin  to  God.  As  if  to  show  to  the  universe  the 
true  nature  and  tendency  of  sin  in  all  its  forms,  all  classes  of  worldlings  were  grouped 
around  the  Cross ;  each  had  an  opportunity  of  expressing  its  feelings ;  and  how 
awfully  significant  and  awfully  condemnatory  was  the  part  which  they  acted  1  All 
classes — the  religious  world,  and  the  learned  world,  and  the  sceptical  world,  and 
the  fashionable  world,  and  the  money-loving  world,  ay,  and  the  ordinary  working 
world — all  combined  to  show  the  murderous  nature  and  the  God-defiant  attitude  of 
sin.  2.  But  if  this  sight  teaches  the  antagonism  of  sin  to  God,  it  also  teaches  us 
God's  hatred  of  sin.  We  cannot  account  for  the  Saviour's  sufferings  if  they  have 
not  some  connection  with  the  sin  of  man.  Even  a  heathen  could  understand,  that 
if  sn  innocent  being  suffers,  it  must  be  because  of  the  sins  of  others.  Kajamak,  a 
chieittain  inhabiting  the  mountains  of  Greenland,  notorious  for  the  robberies  and 
murders  he  had  perpetrated,  came  down  to  where  a  missionary  in  his  hut  was  trans- 
lating the  Gospel  of  John.  His  curiosity  being  excited  by  the  process,  he  asked  to 
have  it  explained ;  and  when  the  missionary  told  him  how  the  marks  he  was  making 
were  words,  and  how  a  book  could  speak,  he  wished  to  hear  what  it  said.  The  mis- 
sionary read  to  him  the  narrative  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings,  when  the  chief  imme- 
diately asked,  "What  has  this  Man  done?  Has  He  robbed  anybody — has  He 
murdered  anybody?"  "  No,"  replied  the  missionary,  "He  has  robbed  no  one,  mur- 
dered no  one ;  He  has  done  nothing  wrong."  "  Then  why  does  He  suffer  ?  why 
does  He  die?"  "Listen,"  said  the  missionary;  "this  Man  has  done  no  wrong,  but 
Eajarnak  has  done  wrong ;  this  Man  has  not  robbed  any  one,  but  Kajarnak  haa 
robbed  many;  this  Man  has  murdered  no  one,  but  Eajarnak  has  murdered — 
Kajarnak  has  murdered  his  wife,  Kajarnak  has  murdered  his  brother,  Kajarnak 
has  murdered  his  child ;  this  Man  suffered  that  Kajarnak  might  not  suffer ;  died 
that  Kajarnak  might  not  die."  "Tell  me  that  again,"  said  the  astonished  chief- 
tain ;  and  by  the  repetition  of  the  story  the  hard-hearted  murderer  was  brought  in 
contrition  and  tears  to  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  Even  so  the  Bible  tells  us,  "  He  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities  ;  He  bore  our  sins  in 
His  own  body  on  the  tree."  3.  But  if  this  sight  teaches  such  a  fearful  lesson  in 
reference  to  God's  hatred  of  sin,  thank  God  it  also  teaches  that  a  way  has  been 
prepared  by  which  men  may  escape  from  sin's  consequences.  He  who  became  oar 
Sin-bearer  did  not  lay  down  the  load  till  He  had  borne  our  sins  away.  He  did  not 
cease  to  suffer  until  He  could  say,  "  It  is  finished."  HI.  The  feelings  which  thb 
contemplation  of  the  sight  is  fitted  to  awaken.  1.  The  first  feeling  which 
it  naturally  excites  is  that  of  which  the  bystanders  were  the  subjects,  when, 
"  beholding  the  things  which  were  done,  they  smote  their  breasts,  and  returned  " 
— a  feeling  of  shuddering  horror  at  the  magnitude  of  their  offence.  2.  But  the 
sight  is  also  fitted  to  awaken  the  apprehension  of  danger.  This  feeling,  in  the  case 
of  His  murderers,  mingled  with  the  horror  with  which  they  regarded  their  crime. 
They  did  not  understand  the  doctrine  of  the  Messiahship  sufficiently  to  know  that 
even  His  death  might  become  the  ground  of  their  pardon ;  and  a  fearful  foreboding 
of  punishment,  as  well  as  an  appalling  consciousness  of  guilt,  led  them  to  smite 
their  breasts  when  they  beheld  the  things  that  were  done.  And,  no  doubt,  the 
Cross  is  fitted  to  awaken  this  feeling  in  every  sinner  to  whom  it  has  not  imparted 
the  hope  of  salvation.  For  nowhere  is  the  evil  desert  of  sin  so  strikingly  exhibited. 
8.  But  the  sight  is  also  fitted  to  awaken  hopeful  feelings.  Whether  any  of  the 
men  who  smote  their  breasts  were  led  to  cherish  the  hope  of  pardon,  the  narrative 
does  not  say ;  but  we  doubt  not  that  some  of  them  were  among  the  three  thousand 
who,  CD  the  day  of  Pentecost,  found  that  the  blood  which  thry  had  shed  was  & 


CHAP,  xxin.1  ST.  LUKE.  61* 

sufficient  atonement  for  the  sin  of  shedding  it,  and  that  the  death  which  they  had 
been  instrumental  in  effecting  was  the  occasion  of  their  endless  life.  Even  so  doe* 
the  Cross  proclaim  pardon  to  you,  and  by  it  all  who  believe  are  justified  from  all 
things.  The  same  sight  which  awakens  in  you  an  appalling  sense  of  sin,  and  a 
fearful  apprehension  of  punishment,  tells  you,  that  though  you  have  done  so 
wickedly  and  deserved  to  endure  such  suffering,  there  is  pardon  in  Christ  for  yon. 
Look  at  it  until  the  peace  which  it  speaks  takes  possession  of  your  souls — look 
until  you  understand  what  Christ  has  done  for  you — look  until  your  fears  are 
dispelled — look  until  the  boundless  love  which  it  reveals  awakens  in  you  the 
beginnings  of  a  new  and  better  life — look  with  the  assurance  that  you  cannot  look 
in  vain,  for  He,  whose  promise  never  fails,  has  said,  "  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye 
saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  {W.  Landels.)  Mourning  at  the  sight  of  the 
Crucified: — L  First,  then,  let  us  analize  the  general  motjkning  which  this  text 
describes.  "  All  the  people  that  came  together  to  that  sight,  beholding  the  things 
which  were  done,  smote  their  breasts,  and  returned."  They  all  smote  their  breasts, 
but  not  all  from  the  same  cause.  Others  amongst  that  great  crowd  exhibited 
emotion  based  upon  more  thoughtful  reflection.  They  saw  that  they  had  shared  in 
the  murder  of  an  innocent  person.  No  doubt  there  were  a  few  in  the  crowd  who 
emote  upon  their  breasts  because  they  felt,  "  We  have  put  to  death  a  prophet  of 
God."  In  the  motley  company  who  all  went  home  smiting  on  their  breasts,  let  us 
hope  that  there  were  some  who  said,  "  Certainly  this  was  the  Son  of  God,"  and 
mourned  to  think  He  should  have  suffered  for  their  transgressions,  and  been  put 
to  grief  for  their  iniquities.  Those  who  came  to  that  point  were  saved.  II.  We 
shall  now  aek  you  to  join  in  the  lamentation,  each  man  according  to  his  sincerity 
of  heart,  beholding  the  Cross,  and  smiting  upon  his  breast.  I  shall  ask  you  first 
to  smite  your  breasts,  as  you  remember  that  you  see  in  Him  your  own  sins. 
Looking  again — changing,  as  it  were,  our  st&nd-point,  but  still  keeping  our  eye 
upon  that  same,  dear  crucified  One,  let  us  see  there  the  neglected  and  despised 
Bsmedy  for  our  sin.  Still  keeping  you  at  the  cross  foot,  every  believer  here  may 
well  smite  upon  his  breast  this  morning  as  he  thinks  of  Who  it  was  that  smarted  so 
upon  the  Cross.  Who  was  it?  It  was  He  who  loved  us  or  ever  the  world  was  made. 
III.  Eemember  that  at  Calvabt,  dolorous  notes  are  not  the  only  suitable 
MUSIC.  After  all,  you  and  I  are  not  in  the  same  condition  as  the  multitude  who 
had  surrounded  Calvary ;  for  at  that  time  our  Lord  was  still  dead,  but  now  He  is 
risen  indeed.  Look  up  and  thank  God  that  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over 
Him.  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us,  and  He  shall  shortly  come  with 
angelic  bands  surrounding  Him,  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead.  The  argument  for  joy 
overshadows  the  reason  for  sorrow.  Lastly,  there  is  one  thing  for  which  we  ought 
always  to  remember  Christ's  death  with  joy,  and  that  is,  that  although  the 
crucifixion  of  Jesus  was  intended  to  be  a  blow  at  the  honour  and  glory  of  our  God 
— though  in  the  death  of  Christ  the  world  did,  so  far  as  it  was  able,  put  God  Him- 
self to  death,  and  so  earn  for  itself  that  hideous  title,  "  a  deicidal  world,"  yet  never 
did  God  have  such  honour  and  glory  as  He  obtained  through  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus.  Oh,  they  thought  to  scorn  Him,  but  they  lifted  His  name  on  high  I  {C.  H. 
Sjmrgeon.)  Lesions  at  Calvary : — 1.  See  here  accumulated  evidence  of  the  truth 
of  Christianity.  Think  of  the  fulfilled  prophecies  already  noticed.  2.  See  here 
the  true  atonement  for  sin,  and  receive  it  by  faith.  3.  See  here,  and  admire,  the 
love  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son  to  perishing  sinners.  This  display  of  the 
Father's  love  far  surpasses  any  other  which  He  has  given.  4.  See  here  the  certainty 
and  the  dreadful  nature  of  the  punishment  of  the  obstinately  wicked  in  the  other 
world.  6.  See  here  your  example.  What  I  chiefly  refer  to  at  present  is  His  patient 
submission  to  His  sufferings.  6.  See  here  the  most  powerful  motives  to  repentance, 
the  mortification  of  sin,  and  the  prosecution  of  holiness.  In  the  last  place,  see 
here  every  encouragement  to  perishing  sinners  to  come  to  Christ  for  safety,  and  to 
believers  to  rejoice  more  and  more  in  confidence  in  His  merits.     (Jos.  Foote,  M.A.) 

Verg.  50-56.  A  man  named  Joseph. — Joseph  of  Arimathea : — 1.  We  have 
here  an  illustration  of  the  slow  process  by  which  some  are  brought  to  the  full 
aknowledgment  of  the  truth.  2.  An  illustration  of  how  the  very  extremity  of 
a  cause  brings  fresh  adherents  from  unexpected  quaiters.  3.  An  illustration 
of  how  the  true  character,  the  real  spirit  and  power  of  a  man,  may  be  mani- 
fested in  a  single  act.  {M.  Hutchison.)  Joseph  of  Arimathea  : — L  He  was  ▲ 
oiBoiPLB  or  Jebus  becbetlt.  IL  Hi  was  lu>  to  boldlt  and  openly  acknow- 
XtBoaa  CBmisi.     A  great  trial  brought  oat  his  ch&rscter  mor»  dearly.     Wbea 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxm, 

most  of  those  who  had  followed  Jesus  during  His  ministry  had  forsaken  TTirn 
and  fled,  then  the  weak  one  was  made  strong.  III.  Hb  was,  all  this  time, 
WAiTiNO  FOR  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD.  Quletlj  preparing  himself  for  full  development 
of  Christian  character.  And  he  was  blessed  in  so  doing.  In  His  own  good  time 
God  revealed  Himself  to  this  timid,  yet  faithful,  disciple.  (H.  G.  Hird,  B.A.) 
LaifL  It  In  a  sepulcbre. — Significance  of  Christ's  burial : — The  burial  of  the  Lord  is 
aaiart  of  the  gospel.  Thus  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv.  4).  1.  His  burial  was  an  assurance 
fnat  His  resurrection  was  a  reality :  for  His  Body  was  taken  down  by  friends  in  th« 
presence  of  foes  who  knew  that  He  was  dead,  and  deposited  by  them,  not  in  a 
common  tomb,  but  in  a  cave,  hollowed  out  of  a  hillside,  with  a  great  stone  rolled 
to  block  up  the  entrance,  which  was  guarded  by  the  soldiers  of  Pilate.  2.  His 
burial  also  was  the  last  humiliation  offered  to  Him;  for,  though  Joseph  and 
Nicodemus  and  the  women  who  assisted  performed  it  as  a  work  of  piety  and  love, 
yet  in  it  He  was  not  the  less  associated  with  us,  whose  bodies  must  be  committed 
to  the  ground,  earth  to  earth,  ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust.  He  was  the  In- 
corruptible, and  yet  was  buried,  and  they  prepared  to  embalm  Him  as  if  He  had 
been  corruptible.  In  birth  from  a  womb,  and  in  burial  in  a  tomb,  He  was  one  with 
His  sinful  brethren.  3.  His  burial  is  in  a  remarkably  mysterious  way  connected 
with  our  baptism.  The  font  represents  the  grave  of  the  Lord,  in  which,  as  having 
died  with  Him,  we  are  mystically  and  sacramentally  buried,  and  from  which  we 
rise  again,  endued  with  new  life  from  Him,  as  He  rose  from  His  grave  endued  with 
new  life  (Col.  ii.  12;  Bom.  vi.  1-4).  {M.  F.  Sadler.)  Our  Lord's  burial: — It  is 
strange  that  so  few  have  preached  on  the  subject  of  our  Kedeemer's  burial. 
I.  Supposing  ourselves  to  be  sitting  in  the  garden  with  our  eyes  fixed  upon  the 
great  stone  which  formed  the  door  of  the  tomb,  we  first  of  all  admire  that  He  had 
A  GRAVE  at  all.  We  wondci  how  that  stone  could  hide  Him  who  is  the  brightness 
of  His  Father's  glory ;  how  the  Life  of  all  could  lie  among  the  dead  ;  how  He  who 
holds  creation  in  His  strong  right  hand  could  even  for  an  hour  be  entombed. 

1.  Admiring  this,  we  would  calnjly  reflect,  first,  upon  the  testimony  of  His  grave 
that  He  was  really  dead.  Those  tender  women  could  not  have  been  mistaken ; 
their  eyes  were  too  quick  to  suffer  Him  to  be  buried  alive,  even  if  any  one  had 
wished  to  do  so.     Jesus  was  a  real  Man,  and  truly  tasted  the  bitter  pangs  of  death. 

2.  The  testimony  of  the  grave  to  Christ's  union  with  us.  Before  me  rises  a  picture. 
I  see  the  cemetery,  or  sleeping  place,  of  the  saints,  where  each  one  rests  on  his  lowly 
bed.  They  lie  not  alone,  but  like  soldiers  sleeping  round  their  captain's  pavilion, 
where  He  also  spent  the  night,  though  He  is  up  before  them.  The  sepulchre  of  Jesus 
is  the  central  grave  of  God's  acre ;  it  is  empty  now,  but  His  saints  lie  buried 
all  around  that  cave  in  the  rock,  gathered  in  ranks  around  their  dear  Bedeemer's 
resting-place.  Surely  it  robs  the  grave  of  its  ancient  terror  when  we  think  that  Jesus 
slept  in  one  of  the  chambers  of  the  great  dormitory  of  the  sons  of  men.  3.  Very 
much  might  be  said  about  the  tomb  in  which  Jesus  lay.  (1)  It  was  a  new  tomb, 
wherein  no  remains  had  been  previously  laid,  and  thus  if  He  came  forth  from  it 
there  would  be  no  suspicion  that  another  had  arisen,  nor  could  it  be  imagined  that 
He  rose  through  touching  some  old  prophet's  bones,  as  he  did  who  was  laid  in 
Elisha's  grave.  As  He  was  bom  of  a  virgin  mother,  so  was  He  buried  in  a  virgin 
tomb,  wherein  never  man  had  lain.  (2)  It  was  a  rocky  tomb,  and  therefore  nobodj 
could  dig  into  it  by  night,  or  tunnel  through  the  earth.  (3)  It  was  a  borrowed 
tomb ;  so  poor  was  Jesus  that  He  owed  a  grave  to  charity ;  but  that  tomb  wm 
spontaneously  offered,  so  rich  was  He  in  the  love  of  hearts  which  He  had  won. 
That  tomb  He  returned  to  Joseph,  honoured  unspeakably  by  His  temporary  sojourn 
therein.  4.  Now,  note  that  our  Lord's  tomb  was  in  a  garden ;  for  this  is  typically 
the  testimony  of  His  grave  to  the  hope  of  better  things.  Just  a  little  beyond  the 
garden  wall  you  would  see  a  little  knoll,  of  grim  name  and  character,  the  Tybnm 
of  Jerusalem,  Golgotha,  the  place  of  a  skull,  and  there  stood  the  Cross.  That 
rising  ground  was  given  up  to  horror  and  barrenness  ;  but  around  the  actual  tomb 
of  our  Saviour  there  grew  herbs  and  plants  and  flowers.  A  spiritual  garden  still 
blooms  around  His  tomb  ;  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  are  glad  for  Him, 
and  the  desert  rejoices  and  blossoms  as  the  rose.  He  hath  made  another  paradise 
for  us,  and  He  Himseif  is  the  sweetest  flower  therein.  5.  Sitting  over  against  the 
sepulchre,  perhaps  the  best  thought  of  all  is  that  now  it  is  empty,  and  so  bears 
testimony  to  our  resurrection.  6.  Yet  another  thought  comes  to  me,  "  Can  I  follow 
Christ  as  fully  as  these  two  women  did  ?  That  is  to  say,  can  I  still  cling  to  Him 
though  to  sense  and  reason  His  cause  should  seem  dead  and  laid  in  a  rocky 
•epukhre?  Can  I  like  Joseph  and  Magdalene  be  a  disciple  of  a  dead  Christ?  Could 


«HAP.  XXIV,]  ST.  LUKE.  615 

I  follow  Him  even  at  His  lowest  point  ?  "  II.  We  rejoice  in  the  honours  of 
Christ's  bprlil.  1.  Its  first  effect  was  the  development  of  timid  minds.  Joseph 
and  Nicodemas  both  illustrate  the  dreadful  truth  that  it  is  hard  for  them  that  have 
riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  but  they  also  show  us  that  when  they  do 
enter  they  frequently  excel.  If  they  come  last  they  remain  to  the  last.  If 
cowards  when  others  are  heroes,  they  can  also  be  heroes  when  even  apostles  are 
cowards.  Brave  are  the  hearts  which  stand  up  for  Jesus  in  Uis  burial.  I  like  to 
remember  that  the  burial  of  the  Lord  displayed  the  union  of  loving  hearts.  The 
tomb  became  the  meeting-place  of  the  old  disciples  and  the  new,  of  those  who  had 
long  consorted  with  the  Master,  and  those  who  had  but  newly  avowed  Him. 
Magdalene  and  Mary  had  been  with  the  Lord  for  years,  and  had  administered  to 
Him  of  their  substance ;  but  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  as  far  as  his  pubUc  avowal  of 
Christ  is  concerned,  was,  like  Nicodemus,  a  new  disciple ;  old  and  new  foUowera 
united  in  the  deed  of  love,  and  laid  their  Master  in  the  tomb.  A  common  sorrow 
and  a  common  love  unite  us  wondrously.  III.  I  must  now  pass  to  a  third  point. 
While  sitting  over  against  the  sepulchre  we  observe  that  His  enemies  were  not 
AT  REST.  They  had  their  own  way,  but  they  were  not  content ;  they  had  taken 
the  Saviour,  and  with  wicked  hands  they  had  crucified  and  slain  Him ;  but  they 
were  not  satisfied.  They  were  the  most  uneasy  people  in  the  world,  though  they 
had  gained  their  point  (see  Matt,  xxvii.  62-66).  Christ  is  dead,  but  they  are  afraid 
of  Him  I  He  is  dead,  but  they  cannot  shake  off  the  dread  that  He  will  vanquish 
them  yet.  They  are  full  of  agitation  and  alarm.  Nor  was  this  all ;  they  were  to 
be  made  witnesses  for  God — to  sign  certificates  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of  His 
Anointed.  In  order  that  there  might  be  no  doubt  about  the  resurrection  at  all, 
there  must  be  a  seal,  and  they  must  go  and  set  it ;  there  must  be  a  guard,  and  they 
must  see  it  mustered.  The  disciples  need  not  trouble  about  certifying  that  Jesus  is 
in  the  grave,  these  Jews  will  do  it,  and  set  their  own  great  seal  to  the  evidence. 
These  proud  ones  are  sent  to  do  drudges'  work  in  Christ's  kitchen,  to  wait  upon  a 
dead  Christ,  and  to  protect  the  Body  which  they  had  slain.  IV.  And  now  our  last 
thought  is  that  while  these  enemies  of  Christ  were  in  fear  and  trembling  we  notb 
THAT  HiB  FOLLOWERS  WERE  RESTING.  It  was  the  Seventh  day,  and  therefore  they 
ceased  from  labour.  The  Marys  waited,  and  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  refrained  from 
visiting  the  tomb ;  they  obediently  observed  the  Sabbath  rest.  I  am  not  sure  that 
they  had  faith  enough  to  feel  very  happy,  but  they  evidently  did  expect  something, 
and  anxiously  awaited  the  third  day.  They  had  enough  of  the  comfort  of  hope  to 
remain  quiet  on  the  seventh  day.  Now,  beloved,  sitting  over  against  the  sepulchre 
while  Christ  lies  in  it,  my  first  thought  about  it  is,  I  will  rest,  for  He  rests.  What 
a  wonderful  stillness  there  was  about  our  Lord  in  that  rocky  grave.  The  great 
Btone  shuts  out  all  noise,  and  the  Body  is  at  peace.  Well,  if  He  rests,  I  may.  If 
for  a  while  the  Lord  seems  to  suspend  His  energies,  His  servants  may  cry  unto 
Him,  but  they  may  not  fret.  He  knows  best  when  to  sleep  and  when  to  wake.  Aa 
I  see  the  Christ  resting  in  the  grave,  my  next  thought  is.  He  has  the  power  to  come 
forth  again.  The  rest  of  the  Christian  lies  in  believing  in  Christ  ander  all  circom- 
Btances.  Once  more,  it  will  be  well  if  we  can  obtain  peace  by  having  fellowship 
with  our  Lord  in  His  burial.  Die  with  Him,  and  be  buried  with  Hun ;  there  is 
nothing  like  it.  I  desire  for  my  soul  while  she  lives  in  the  Lord  that,  as  to  tha 
world  and  all  its  wisdom,  I  may  be  as  a  dead  man.    {C.  H.  Sturgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Tsiui.  l-IO.  Now  npcn  the  first  day  of  the  week,  very  eatly  In  t&e  morning, 
they  came  nnto  the  Bepnlcbre. — The  first  Eaater  morning  : — The  realm  of  nature  a 
symbol  of  the  realm  of  grace.  1.  The  gloomy  night.  2.  The  much-promising 
dawn.  8.  The  breaking  day.  {Van  Oosterzee.)  The  first  pilgrims  to  the  Holy 
Sepulchre: — 1.  How  mournful  they  go  thither.  2.  How  joyful  they  return. 
UMd.)  Easter  brightness: — How  on  Easter  morning  it  began  to  be  bright — 1. 
In  the  garden.  2.  In  human  hearts.  3.  Over  the  cross.  4.  For  the  world.  6. 
In  ^e  realm  of  the  dead.  (Ibid.)  Easter  mxyming ;- ^The  first  rays  of  the  glory 
«t  Christ  in  the  dawn  of  the  Easter  morning.     1.  The  stone  rolled  away.    2.  Tha 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxit. 

glittering  angels.  3.  The  hastening  women.  (Amdt.)  The  open  grave : — The 
open  grave  of  the  Risen  One — 1.  An  arch  of  His  triumph.  2.  A  bow  of  peace 
denoting  heavenly  favour  and  grace.  3.  A  door  of  life  for  the  resurrection  of  our 
spirit  and  our  body.  (Eofacker.)  Easter  among  the  graves: — 1.  The  stone  of 
the  curse  is  rolled  away  therefrom.  2.  There  dweU  angels  therein.  3.  The  dead 
are  gone  out  therefrom.  {Rautenberg. )  The  Easter  festival : — A  festival  of — 1. 
The  most  glorious  joy.  2.  The  most  glorious  victory.  3.  The  most  glorious 
faith.  4.  The  most  glorious  hope.  (Schmid.)  The  Lord's  Day: — Stations  on 
the  line  of  your  journey  are  not  your  journey's  end,  but  each  one  brings  yon 
nearer.  A  haven  is  not  home  ;  but  it  is  a  place  of  quiet  and  rest,  where  the  rough 
waves  are  stayed.  A  garden  is  a  piece  of  common  land,  and  yet  it  has  ceased  to 
be  common  land  ;  it  is  an  effort  to  regain  paradise.  A  bud  is  not  a  flower,  but  it 
is  the  promise  of  a  flower.  Such  are  the  Lord's  Days ;  the  world's  week  tempts 
you  to  sell  your  soul  to  the  flesh  and  the  world.  The  Lord's  Day  calls  yoo  to 
remembrance,  and  begs  you  rather  to  sacrifice  earth  to  heaven  and  time  to  eternity, 
than  heaven  to  earth  and  eternity  to  time.  The  six  days  not  only  chain  you  as 
captives  of  the  earth,  hut  do  their  best  to  keep  the  prison  doors  shut,  that  you  nmy 
forget  the  way  out.  The  Lord's  Day  sets  before  you  an  open  door.  Samson  has 
carried  the  gates  away.  The  Lord's  Day  summons  you  to  the  threshold  of  your 
house  of  bondage  to  look  forth  into  immortality — your  immortality.  The  true 
Lord's  Day  is  the  eternal  life ;  but  a  type  of  it  is  given  to  you  on  earth,  that  you  may 
be  refreshed  in  the  body  with  the  anticipation  of  the  great  freedom  wherewith  the 
Lord  will  make  you  free.  (J.  Pulsford.)  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead  T 
— The  living  not  among  the  dead: — I.  The  pact  announced  by  the  angel  ib,  as 

WB   CAN   BEE  WHEN  WE  LOOK  BACK  ON  IT,  AMONG  THE  BEST  ATTESTED  IN  HUMAN   HIBTOBT. 

For  forty  days  the  apostles  continually  saw  Jesus  Christ  risen,  touched  Him,  spoke 
with  Him,  ate  and  drank  with  Him  as  before  His  death.  They  staked  everything 
upon  this  fact.  It  was  to  them  a  fact  of  experience.  One  or  two  people  may  be 
hallucinated,  but  not  a  multitude.  A  large  number  of  people  will  not  easily  be  so 
swayed  by  a  single  interest  or  a  single  passion  as  to  believe  simultaneously  in  a 
story  that  has  no  foundation  in  fact.  II.  The  fact  of  the  resurrection  is  the 
ground  of  the  bemonstbancb  of  the  angels  with  the  holy  women — "  Why  seek  ye 
the  Uving  among  the  dead  7  "  But  is  this  question  applicable  only  to  them  during 
that  pause  when  they  felt  the  shock  of  the  empty  tomb?  Let  us  consider.  1. 
First  of  all,  then,  it  would  seem  that  we  may  literally  seek  the  living  among  the 
dead  if  we  seek  Christ  in  a  Christianity,  so  termed,  which  denies  the  resurrection. 
If  Christ's  body  never  left  the  grave,  if  it  has  somewhere  mingled  with  the  dust  of 
earth,  then,  however  we  may  be  attracted  by  His  moral  teaching,  we  have  no 
ground  for  hoping  in  Him  as  our  Eedeemer  :  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  He  was 
the  Son  of  God  in  the  way  He  pointed  out,  or  that  He  has  established  any  new 
relation  between  earth  and  heaven.  2.  But  nearly  the  same  thing  may  happen  in 
cases  where  the  resurrection  is  not  denied,  but,  nevertheless,  men  fail  to  see  what 
habits  of  thought  about  our  Lord  it  involves.  His  life  is  continued  on  among  us ; 
only  its  conditions  are  changed.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,"  &c.  "I  am  He 
that  liveth,  and  was  dead ;  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  To  think  of 
Him  as  only  one  of  the  great  teachers  of  the  world,  who  have  come  and  dis- 
appeared, is  to  lose  sight  of  the  significance  of  His  resurrection  from  the  grave ;  it 
is  to  rank  Him  in  thought  with  men  whose  eminence  has  not  saved  them  from  the 
lot  of  mortality,  and  whose  dust  has  long  since  mouldered  in  the  tomb.  It  is  to 
lose  sight  of  the  line  which  parts  the  superhuman  from  the  human.  It  is  to  seek  the 
living  among  the  dead.  3.  Yet  more  literally  do  we  seek  the  living  among  the 
dead,  if  without  formally  rejecting  Christianity  we  give  the  best  of  our  thought,  of 
our  heart,  of  our  enthusiasm,  to  systems  of  thought,  or  to  modes  of  feeling, 
which  Jesus  Christ  has  set  aside.  4.  We  may  not  be  tempted  in  these  ways  to 
seek  the  living  among  the  dead  teachers  or  dead  elements  of  old  or  untrustworthy 
ways  of  thinking.  But  there  is  a  risk  of  our  doing  so,  certainly  not  less  serious 
and  very  much  more  common,  to  which  we  are  all  exposed.  As  you  know,  our 
Lord's  resurrection  is  a  moral  as  well  as  an  intellectual  power.  While  it  convinces 
OB  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  it  creates  in  us  the  Christian  life.  We  are  risen 
with  Christ.  The  moral  resurrection  of  Christians  is  a  fact  of  experience. 
Besnrrection  from  the  grip  of  bad  habits,  from  the  charnel-house  of  bad  passions; 
resurrection  from  the  enervation,  corruption,  and  decay  of  bad  thoughts,  bad 
words,  bad  deeds,  to  a  new  hfe  with  Christ,  to  the  life  of  warm  and  pure  affections, 
tbe  life  of  a  ready  and  vigoroQB  will,  of  a  firm  and  buoyant  hope,  of  a  clear  strong 


CBAT.  zxnr.]  57.  LUKE.  617 

faith,  of  a  wide  and  tender  charity.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  how  do  we  risen 
Christians  really  act  ?  We  fall  back,  willingly  or  wilfully,  into  the  very  habits  we 
have  renounced.  Our  repentance  is  too  often  like  the  Lent  of  Louis  the  Four- 
teenth ;  it  is  a  paroxysm,  followed,  almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  by  the  relapse  of 
Easter.  To  do  the  great  French  monarch  justice,  he  did  not  expect  to  find  Christ's 
presence  in  sin  and  worldliness,  as  do  they  who  complain  of  the  intellectual  diffi- 
culties of  faith  and  prayer,  while  their  lives  are  disposed  of  in  such  a  manner,  that 
it  would  be  wonderful  indeed  if  faith  and  prayer  could  escape  suffocation  in  that 
chaos  o£  everything  save  the  things  which  suggest  God.  {Canon  Liddon.) 
Christ,  a  quickening  Spirit: — 1.  Observe  how  Christ's  resurrection  harmonizes 
with  the  history  of  His  birth.  Others  have  all  been  born  in  sin,  •*  after  Adam's 
own  hkeness,  in  his  image,"  and,  being  born  in  sin,  they  are  heirs  to  corruption. 
But  when  the  Word  of  Life  was  manifested  in  our  flesh,  the  Holy  Ghost  displayed 
that  creative  hand  by  which,  in  the  beginning,  Eve  was  formed;  and  the  Holy 
Child,  thus  conceived  by  the  power  of  the  Highest,  was  (as  the  history  shows) 
immortal  even  in  His  mortal  nature,  clear  from  all  infection  of  the  forbidden  fruit, 
BO  far  as  to  be  sinless  and  incorruptible.  Therefore,  though  He  was  liable  to  death, 
"  it  was  impossible  He  should  be  holden  "  of  it.  Death  might  overpower,  but  it 
could  not  keep  possession ;  "  it  had  no  dominion  over  Him."  He  was,  in  the  words 
of  the  text,  "the  Living  among  the  dead."  And  hence  His  rising  from  the  dead 
may  be  said  to  have  evinced  His  Divine  origin.  Such  is  the  connection  between 
Christ's  birth  and  resurrection ;  and  more  than  this  might  be  ventured  concerning 
His  incorrupt  nature  were  it  not  better  to  avoid  all  risk  of  trespassing  upon  that 
reverence  with  which  we  are  bound  to  regard  it.  Something  might  be  said  concern- 
ing His  personal  appearance,  which  seems  to  have  borne  the  marks  of  one  who  was 
not  tainted  with  birth-sin.  Men  could  scarce  keep  from  worshipping  Him.  When 
the  Pharisees  sent  to  sieze  Him,  all  the  officers,  on  His  merely  acknowledging  Him- 
self to  be  Him  whom  they  sought,  fell  backwards  from  His  presence  to  the  ground. 
They  were  scared  as  brutes  are  said  to  be  by  the  voice  of  man.  Thus,  being 
created  in  God's  image.  He  was  the  second  Adam :  and  much  more  than  Adam  in 
His  secret  nature,  which  beamed  through  His  tabernacle  of  flesh  with  awful  purity 
and  brightness  even  in  the  days  of  His  humiliation.  "  The  first  man  was  of  the 
earth,  earthy ;  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven."  2.  And  if  such  was 
His  visible  Majesty,  while  He  yet  was  subject  to  temptation,  infirmity,  and  pain, 
mnch  more  abundant  was  the  manifestation  of  His  Godhead  when  He  was  risen 
from  the  dead.  Then  the  Divine  essence  streamed  forth  (so  to  say)  on  every  side, 
and  environed  His  Manhood  as  in  a  cloud  of  glory.  3.  He  ascended  into  heaven, 
that  He  might  plead  our  cause  with  the  Father  (Heb.  vii.  25).  Yet  we  must  not 
suppose  that  in  leaving  us  He  closed  the  gracious  economy  of  His  Incarnation,  and 
withdrew  the  ministration  of  His  incorruptible  Manhood  from  His  work  of  loving 
mercy  towards  us.  "  The  Holy  One  of  God  "  was  ordained,  not  only  to  die  for  us. 
but  also  to  be  "the  beginning"  of  a  new  "creation"  unto  holiness  in  our  sinful 
race ;  to  refashion  soul  and  body  after  His  own  likeness,  that  they  might  be 
"  raised  up  together,  and  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus."  Blessed 
for  ever  be  His  holy  name  !  before  He  went  away  He  remembered  our  necessity,  and 
completed  His  work,  bequeathing  to  us  a  special  mode  of  approaching  Him,  a 
holy  mystery,  in  which  we  receive  (we  know  not  how)  the  virtue  of  that  heavenly 
body,  which  is  the  life  of  all  that  believe.  This  is  the  blessed  Sacrament  of  the 
Eucharist,  in  which  "  Christ  is  evidently  set  forth  crucified  among  us"  ;  that  we, 
feasting  upon  the  sacrifice,  may  be  "partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."  {J.  H. 
Newman,  D.D.)  Easter  good  news : — I.  We  take  the  angel's  declaeation  first 
as  the  grand  truth  here — "He  is  risen  !"  Who  is  thus  risen?  Who  was  dead, 
and  has  thus  sprung  from  the  grave  to  life  ?  It  is  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  who  died 
for  oar  sins,  is  risen  for  oar  justification.  The  Saviour  is  no  more  a  sufferer ;  His 
sacrificial  deed  is  done.  1.  How  deeply  instructive  and  interesting  is  the  Gospel 
history  of  this  great  resurrection  miracle  I  Take  this  great  truth  away  from  the 
Church,  all  faith  is  then  vain,  all  hope  destroyed,  and  the  whole  majestic  building 
of  Christianity  falls  and  crumbles  into  ruins  for  ever.  2.  We  delight,  then,  to  go 
with  these  godly  women  to  the  tomb  of  Christ,  and  while,  perhaps,  we  bring  too 
some  humble  offering  of  pure  hearts  to  Him,  to  find  how  little  it  is  needed,  while 
we  hear  some  glad  tidings  of  His  power,  and  rejoice  in  His  risen  glory.  II.  Ths 
AHOKU'  UPOSTULATION.  This  may  be  considered  as  twofold.  1.  As  a  gentle 
reproof  for  want  of  faith.  With  aU  their  praiseworthy  affection  for  Christ,  even 
when  dead,  these  devout  women,  last  at  the  oross,  and  first  at  the  sepolohre,  showed 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxit, 

great  forgetfulness  of  the  Redeemer's  words,  and  their  want  of  faith,  as  of  the 
other  disciples,  appears  thus  gently  reproved.  2.  This  is  a  faithful  expostulation 
to  Christians  even  now.  True  religion  gives  gladness,  not  deep  gloom.  (J.  G. 
Angley,  M.A.)  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed  : — I.  Certain  instructive  mbmobdes 
which  gather  around  the  place  where  Jesus  slept  "  with  the  rich  in  His  death." 
Though  He  is  not  there.  He  assuredly  once  was  there,  for  "  He  was  crucified,  dead, 
and  buried."  1.  He  has  left  in  the  grave  the  spices.  We  will  not  start  back  with 
horror  from  the  chambers  of  the  dead,  for  the  Lord  Himself  has  traversed  them, 
and  where  He  goes  no  terror  abides.  2.  The  Master  also  left  His  grave-clothes 
behind  Him.  What  if  I  say  He  left  them  to  be  the  hangings  of  the  royal  bed- 
chamber, wherein  His  saints  fall  asleep  ?  See  how  He  has  curtained  our  last  bed  I 
3.  He  left  in  the  tomb  the  napkin  that  was  about  His  head.  Let  mourners  use  it 
to  wipe  away  their  tears.  4.  He  left  angels  behind  Him  in  the  grave.  Angels  are 
both  the  servitors  of  living  saints  and  the  custodians  of  their  dust.  5.  What  else 
did  our  Well-beloved  leave  behind  Him  ?  He  left  an  open  passage  from  the  tomb, 
for  the  stone  was  rolled  away ;  doorless  is  that  house  of  death.  Our  Samson  has 
pulled  up  the  posts  and  carried  away  the  gates  of  the  grave  with  all  their  bars. 
The  key  is  taken  from  the  girdle  of  death,  and  is  held  in  the  hand  of  the  Prince  of 
Life.  As  Peter,  when  he  was  visited  by  the  angel,  found  his  chains  fall  from  off 
him,  while  iron  gates  opened  to  him  of  their  own  accord,  so  shall  the  saints  find 
ready  escape  at  the  resurrection  morning.  One  thing  else  I  venture  to  mention  as 
left  by  my  Lord  in  His  forsaken  tomb.  I  visited  some  few  months  ago  several  of 
the  large  columbaria  which  are  to  be  found  outside  the  gates  of  Rome.  You  enter 
a  large  square  building,  sunk  in  the  earth,  and  descend  by  many  steps,  and  as  yoa 
descend,  you  observe  on  the  four  sides  of  the  great  chamber  innumerable  little 
pigeon-holes,  in  which  are  the  ashes  of  tens  of  thousands  of  departed  persons. 
Usually  in  front  of  each  compartment  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the  ashes 
stands  a  lamp.  I  have  seen  hundreds,  if  not  thousands,  of  these  lamps,  but  they 
are  all  unlit,  and  indeed  do  not  appear  ever  to  have  carried  light ;  they  shed  no  ray 
upon  the  darkness  of  death.  But  now  our  Lord  has  gone  into  the  tomb  and 
illuminated  it  with  His  presence,  "  the  lamp  of  His  love  is  our  guide  through  the 
gloom."  Jesus  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel;  and  now 
in  the  dove-cotes,  where  Christians  nestle,  there  is  light ;  yea,  in  every  cemetery 
there  is  a  light  which  shall  burn  through  the  watches  of  earth's  night  till  the  day 
break  and  the  shadows  flee  away,  and  the  resurrection  mom  shall  dawn.  So  then 
the  empty  tomb  of  the  Saviour  leaves  as  many  sweet  reflections,  which  we  will 
treasure  up  for  our  instruction.  IL  Our  text  expressly  speaks  of  vain  seaboheb — 
"  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead?  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen."  There 
are  places  where  seekers  after  Jesus  should  not  expect  to  find  Him,  however 
dihgent  may  be  their  search,  however  sincere  their  desire.  You  cannot  find  a  man 
where  he  is  not,  and  there  are  some  spots  where  Christ  never  will  be  discovered. 
1.  In  the  grave  of  ceremonialism.  2.  Ajnong  the  tombs  of  moral  reformation.  3. 
In  the  law.  4.  In  human  nature.  6.  In  philosophy.  III.  We  will  again  change 
our  strain  and  consider,  in  the  third  place,  unsuitablb  abodes.  The  angels  said 
to  the  women,  "  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen."  As  much  as  to  say — since  He  is 
alive  He  does  not  abide  here.  Ye  are  risen  in  Christ,  ye  ought  not  to  dwell  in  the 
grave.  I  shall  now  speak  to  those  who,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  live  in  the 
sepulchre,  though  they  are  risen  from  the  dead.  1.  Some  of  these  are  excellent 
people,  but  their  temperament,  and  perhaps  their  mistaken  convictions  of  duty, 
lead  them  to  be  perpetually  gloomy  and  desponding.  2.  Another  sort  of  people 
seem  to  dwell  among  the  tombs :  I  mean  Christians — and  I  trust  real  Christians — 
who  are  very,  very  worldly.  8.  Once  more  on  this  point,  a  subject  more  grievous 
still,  there  are  some  professors  who  live  in  the  dead-house  of  sin.  Yet  they 
say  that  they  are  Christ's  people.  Nay,  I  will  not  say  they  live  in  it,  bat 
they  do  what,  perhaps,  is  worse — they  go  to  sin  to  find  their  pleasures.  IV. 
I  want  to  warn  you  against  cnbeasonablb  sebvices.  Those  good  people  to 
vhom  the  angels  said,  "  He  is  not  here,  but  is  risen,"  were  bearing  a  load, 
and  what  were  they  carrying  ?  What  is  Joanna  carrying,  and  her  servants, 
and  Mary,  what  are  they  carrying  ?  Why,  white  linen,  and  what  else  ?  Pounds 
of  spices,  the  most  precious  they  could  buy.  What  are  they  going  to  do  ?  Ah, 
if  an  angel  could  laugh,  I  should  think  he  must  have  smiled  as  he  found  they 
•were  coming  to  embalm  Christ,  "  Why,  He  is  not  here ;  and,  what  is  more.  He  is 
not  dead.  He  does  not  want  any  embalming,  He  is  alive."  In  other  ways  a  great 
many  fussy  people  do  the  same  thing.     See  how  they  come  forward  in  defence  of 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  6M 

the  gospel.  It  has  been  discovered  by  geology  and  by  arithmetic  that  Moses  was 
wrong.  Straightway  many  go  out  to  defend  Jesus  Christ.  They  argue  for  the 
gospel,  and  apologize  for  it,  as  if  it  were  now  a  little  out  of  date,  and  we  must  try 
to  bring  it  round  to  suit  modern  discoveries  and  the  philosophies  of  the  present 
period.  That  seems  to  me  exactly  like  coming  up  with  your  linen  and  precious 
epices  to  wrap  Him  in.  Take  them  away.  V.  The  amazing  news  which  these 
good  women  received — "He  is  not  here,  but  He  is  risen."  This  was  amazing 
news  to  His  enemies.  They  said,  "We  have  killed  Him — we  have  put  Him  in 
the  tomb  ;  it  is  all  over  with  Him."  A-ha  1  Scribe,  Pharisee,  priest,  what 
have  you  done  ?  Your  work  is  all  undone,  for  He  is  risen  !  It  was  amazing 
news  for  Satan.  He  no  doubt  dreamed  that  he  had  destroyed  the  Saviour, 
but  He  is  risen !  What  a  thrill  went  through  all  the  regions  of  hell  1  What 
Bews  it  was  for  the  grave !  Now  was  it  utterly  destroyed,  and  death  had 
lost  his  sting  I  What  news  it  was  for  trembling  saints.  "He  is  risen  indeed." 
They  plucked  up  courage,  and  they  said,  "  The  good  cause  is  the  right  one  still, 
and  it  will  conquer,  for  our  Christ  is  still  alive  at  its  head.  It  was  good 
news  for  sinners.  Ay,  it  is  good  news  for  every  sinner  here.  Christ  is  alive ; 
if  you  seek  Him  He  will  be  found  of  you.  He  is  not  a  dead  Christ  to  whom  I 
point  you  to-day.  He  is  risen ;  and  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them 
that  come  unto  God  by  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ: — 
Let  as  consider,  first,  the  evidences,  and,  sacond,  the  purposes  of  the  second 
life  of  Jesus — the  life  after  the  crucifixion.    I.  As  to  the  evidences  of  Chbist'b 

BESUKRECTION,  THERE  ARE  BOTH  EXTERNAL  AND  INTERNAL  LINES  OP  PROOF  WHICH 
OrARD    THIS    GREAT    AND     SUBLIME    DOCTRINE    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    FAITH.        1.     JeSUS 

Christ  actually  died.  A  million  and  a  half  of  awe-stricken  witnesses  saw  Him  die. 
2.  The  second  fact  in  the  series  of  proofs  is  that  Christ  was  buried.  Interment 
is  not  often  granted  to  crucified  criminals.  But  Providence  overruled  the  sordidness 
of  the  cautious  scribes  and  priests,  in  order  to  multiply  the  witnesses  to  the 
resurrection.  3.  The  next  fact  is  that  the  sepulchre  somehow  or  other  was  emptied 
on  the  third  day.  How  came  the  sepulchre  to  be  emptied  ?  There  are  only  two 
theories.  The  rulers  said  the  body  was  stolen  out  of  it.  The  disciples  said  the 
body  had  risen  from  it.  It  is  manifest  that  the  enemies  would  not  steal  the  body  of 
Christ,  and  how  improbable  it  is  that  His  disciples  should  have  done  it.  How  could 
it  have  been  done  by  twelve  men  against  sixty,  when  Jerusalem  was  filled  with  an 
excited  crowd,  when  the  moon  shone  clearly  in  a  cloudless  oriental  sky  ?  No ;  it 
cannot  be  believed,  and  we  are  driven  back  therefore  to  the  theory  that  He  actually 
rose.  4.  The  internal  evidence  is  equally  convincing.  Consider  the  existence  and 
the  spread  of  persecution  for  the  testimony  as  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  II, 
Consider  the  practical  purposes  which  the  resurrection  is  intended  to  work 
OUT  IN  oxncsELVES.  1.  It  is  a  manifestation,  a  vindication  of  ancient  prophecy  and 
of  the  personal  character  of  the  Messiah  as  well.  2.  It  is  a  seal  of  the  acceptance 
of  the  sacrifice  of  Jesns,  and  by  consequence  of  infinite  moment  to  confirm  the  hopes 
of  the  world.  3.  It  is  an  earnest  of  our  own  rising,  a  pledge  of  immortality  for  the 
race  for  which  the  Second  Adam  died.  4.  Look  at  the  resurrection  as  an  encou- 
ragement. There  is  a  great  error,  brethren,  in  Christendom  just  now,  and  that  is 
that  we  believe  in  a  dead  Christ.  He  is  not  dead.  He  is  living — living  to  listen  to 
your  prayers,  living  to  forgive  your  sins.  (W.  M.  Pumhon,  D.D.)  The  living 
Chritt : — I.  A  surprising  fact.  Jesus  among  the  dead !  1.  The  Saviour's  perfect 
humanity.  2.  The  Saviour's  perfect  identity  with  the  cause  of  man.  II.  A  uork 
suBPBisDio  FACT.  Jesus  no  longer  among  the  dead  1  1.  His  mission  to  the  tomb 
was  accomplished.  2.  His  vision  of  immortality  was  realized.  8.  The  tme  object 
of  faith  was  secured.  {Th£  Weekly  Pulpit.)  An  Easter  sermon: — I.  The  signi- 
ficance or  THE  RESURRECTION.  1.  If  Jesus  really  died  and  then  rose  from  the  dead, 
materialism  is  completely  overthrown.  2.  Pantheism  receives  its  death-blow  with 
the  establishment  of  Christ's  resurrection.  8.  All  far-reaching  scepticism  is 
nndermined.  IE.  The  fact  of  the  resurrection.  Conclusion :  1.  We  should  live 
less  in  tombs.  The  grave  is  not  half  as  large  as  we  think.  No  life  is  baried  there. 
Everything  Christ-like  is  risen.  Let  life,  not  death,  be  oar  companion.  2.  We 
must  trust  Christ  implicitly.  The  living  way  has  been  set  before  as.  He  who  is 
the  life  of  the  world  has  lighted  its  highway  from  the  cradle,  not  to,  but  through 
the  tomb.  (D.  O.  Clark.)  I.  The  living  dead: — The  dead  are  the  Lrvnia 
Language,  which  if  more  accustomed  and  adapted  to  express  the  appearances 
than  the  realities  of  things,  leads  ns  astray  very  much  when  we  use  the  phrase 
**  the  dead  "  M  if  it  expressed  the  continoance  of  the  condition  into  which 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxrr. 

men  pass  in  the  act  of  dissolution.  It  misleads  us  no  less,  when  we  nse  it 
as  if  it  expressed  in  itself  the  whole  truth  even  as  to  that  act  of  dissolution, 
"The  dead"  and  "the  living"  are  not  names  of  two  classes  which  exclude 
each  other.  Much  rather,  there  are  none  who  are  dead.  Oh,  how  solemnly 
sometimes  that  thought  comes  up  before  us,  that  all  those  past  generations  which 
have  stormed  across  this  earth  of  ours,  and  then  have  fallen  into  still  forgetfulness, 
live  yet.  Somewhere  at  this  very  instant,  they  now  verily  are  1  We  say,  they  were, 
they  have  been.  There  are  no  have  beens !  Life  is  hfe  for  ever.  To  be  is  eternal 
being.  Every  man  that  has  died  is  at  this  instant  in  the  full  possession  of  all  his 
faculties,  in  the  intensest  exercise  of  all  his  capacities,  standing  somewhere  in  God's 
great  universe,  ringed  with  the  sense  of  God's  presence,  and  feeling  in  every  fibre  of 
his  being  that  life,  which  comes  after  death,  is  not  less  real,  but  more  real ;  not  leea 
great,  but  more  great ;  not  less  full  or  intense,  but  more  full  and  intense,  than  the 
mingled  life  which,  lived  here  on  earth,  was  a  centre  of  life  surrounded  with  a  crust 
and  circumference  of  mortality.  The  dead  are  the  living.  They  lived  whilst  they 
died ;  and  after  they  die,  they  live  on  for  ever.  And  so  we  can  look  upon  that 
ending  of  life,  and  say,  "  it  is  a  very  small  thing ;  it  only  cuts  off  the  fringes  of  my 
life,  it  does  not  touch  me  at  all."  It  only  plays  round  about  the  husk,  and  does 
not  get  at  the  core.  It  only  strips  off  the  circumferential  mortality,  but  the  soul 
rises  up  untouched  by  it,  and  shakes  the  bands  of  death  from  off  its  immortal  arms, 
and  flutters  the  stain  of  death  from  off  its  budding  wings,  and  rises  fuller  of  Ufa 
because  of  death,  and  mightier  in  its  vitality  in  the  very  act  of  submitting  the  body 
to  the  law,  "  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return."  Touching  but  a  part 
of  the  being,  and  touching  that  but  for  a  moment,  death  is  no  state,  it  is  an  act.  It 
is  not  a  condition,  it  is  a  transition.  Men  speak  about  life  as  "  a  narrow  neck  of 
land,  betwixt  two  unbounded  seas  "  :  they  had  better  speak  about  death  as  that.  It 
is  an  isthmus,  narrow  and  almost  impalpable,  on  which,  for  one  brief  instant,  the 
soul  poises  itself ;  whilst  behind  it  there  lies  the  inland  lake  of  past  being,  and 
before  it  the  shoreless  ocean  of  future  life,  all  lighted  with  the  glory  of  God,  and 
making  music  as  it  breaks  even  npon  these  dark,  rough  rocks.  Death  is  but  a 
passage.  It  is  not  a  house,  it  is  only  a  vestibule.  The  grave  has  a  door  on  its 
inner  side.  God  has  taken  our  dead  to  Himself,  and  we  ought  not  to  think  (if 
we  would  think  as  the  Bible  speaks)  of  death  as  being  anything  else  than  the 
transitory  thing  which  breaks  down  the  brazen  walls  and  lets  us  into  liberty.  II. 
Since  they  have  died,  they  live  a  betteb  life  than  odrs.  In  what  particulars  is 
their  life  now  higher  than  it  was  ?  First,  they  have  close  fellowship  with  Christ ; 
then,  they  are  separated  from  this  present  body  of  weakness,  of  dishonour,  of 
corruption ;  then,  they  are  withdrawn  from  all  the  trouble,  and  toil,  and  care  of  this 
present  life ;  and  then,  and  not  least,  surely,  they  have  death  behind  them,  not 
having  that  awful  figure  standing  on  their  horizon  waiting  for  them  to  come  up 
with  it  I  These  are  some  of  the  elements  of  life  of  the  sainted  dead.  What  a 
wondrous  advance  on  the  life  of  earth  they  reveal  if  we  think  of  them  1  They  who 
have  died  in  Christ  live  a  fuller  and  a  nobler  life,  by  the  very  dropping  away  of  the 
body ;  a  fuller  and  a  nobler  life  by  the  very  cessation  of  care,  change,  strife  and 
struggle  ;  and,  above  all,  a  fuller  and  nobler  life,  because  they  "  sleep  in  Jesus," 
and  are  gathered  into  His  bosom,  and  wake  with  Him  yonder  beneath  the  altar, 
clothed  in  white  robes,  and  with  palms  in  their  hands,  "waiting  the  adoption,  to 
wit,  tbe  redemption  of  the  body."  For  though  death  be  a  progress — a  progress  to 
the  spiritual  existence ;  though  death  be  a  birth  to  a  higher  and  nobler  state ; 
though  it  be  the  gate  of  life,  fuller  and  better  than  any  which  we  possess ;  though 
the  present  state  of  the  departed  in  Christ  is  a  state  of  calm  blessedness,  a  state  of 
perfect  communion,  a  state  of  rest  and  satisfaction ;  yet  it  is  not  the  final  not? 
perfect  state,  either.  III.  The  betteb  life,  which  the  dead  in  Cubist  abe 
LIVING  Kow,  LEADS  ON  TO  A  STILL  FULLER  LITE  when  they  get  back  their 
glorified  bodies.  The  perfection  of  man  is,  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  That  is 
man,  as  God  made  him.  The  spirit  perfected,  the  soul  perfected,  without  the 
bodily  life,  is  but  part  of  the  whole.  For  the  future  world,  in  all  its  glory,  we  have 
the  fixm  basis  laid  that  it,  too,  is  to  be  in  a  real  sense  a  material  world,  where  men 
once  more  are  to  possess  bodies  as  they  did  before,  only  bodies  through  which  the 
spirit  shall  work  conscious  of  no  disproportion,  bodies  which  shall  be  fit  servants 
and  adequate  organs  of  the  immortal  souls  within,  bodies  which  shall  never  break 
down,  bodies  which  shall  never  hem  in  nor  refuse  to  obey  the  spirits  that  dwell  in 
them,  but  which  shall  add  to  their  power,  and  deepen  their  blessedness,  and  draw 
them  closer  to  the  God  whom  ^ey  serve  and  the  Christ  after  the  likeness  of  whose 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  621 

glorious  body  they  are  fashioned  and  conformed.  "Body,  Boul,  and  spirit," — the 
old  combination  which  was  on  earth  is  to  be  the  perfect  humanity  of  heaven.  W© 
have  nothing  to  say,  now  and  here,  about  what  that  bodily  condition  may  be — 
about  the  differences  and  the  identities  between  it  and  our  present  earthly  house  of 
this  tabernacle.  Only  this  we  know — reverse  all  the  weakness  of  flesh,  and  you  get 
some  faint  notion  of  the  glorious  body.  Why,  then,  seek  the  living  among  the 
dead?  "  God  giveth  Hia  beloved  sleep";  and  in  that  peaceful  sleep,  realities,  not 
dreams,  come  round  their  quiet  rest,  and  fill  their  conscious  spirits  and  their  happy 
hearts  with  blessedness  and  fellowship,  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D. )  A  present  Christ : — 
I.  The  tendency  to  think  of  Christ  as  past  rather  than  present.  1.  In  His 
■work  of  redemption.  2.  In  His  converting  power.  3.  In  His  Pentecostal  influences. 
4.  In  His  administration  of  earthly  affairs.  II.  The  harmfoi,  effects  of  this 
TENDENCY  upou  the  Church,  collectively  and  individually,  when  indulged.  1.  It 
tends  to  the  exaltation  of  the  purely  dogmatic  over  the  practical  and  experimental 
confession  of  Christ.  2.  It  encourages  the  substitution  of  speculative  theories  of 
Christ's  atoning  work,  for  the  actual  power  and  continuance  of  that  work  itself  in 
its  application  to  human  needs.  3.  It  deprives  the  Church  of  its  ^reat  incentive  to 
an  active  co-operation  in  the  saving  work  of  the  Redeemer.  III.  The  grounds  and 
THE  conclusions  of  the  higher  and  absolutely  true  view  of  Jesus  Christ  as  personally 
present  at  all  times  with  His  people,  in  the  power  and  richness  of  His  Divine  life. 
Hia  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world."  Observe 
therefore — 1.  The  necessity  and  comfort  of  habitually  thinking  of  Christ  as 
personally  with  us  in  the  present  varied  needs  and  trials  and  duties  of  life.  2.  The 
cheering  prospect  that  death  will  only  set  us  free,  as  it  set  Him  free,  from  the 
restraints  and  limitations  of  this  mixed  world,  and  usher  us  into  a  state  of  boundless 
spiritual  activity.  3.  The  uniqueness  and  authority  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  as  the 
revelation  of  this  life  of  the  spirit,  and  as  the  power  which  can  effectually  save  us 
from  the  fear  and  power  of  death,  (ff.  R.  Harris.)  Christ  is  risen  : — ^I.  Christ  is 
risen,  and  the  last  opposing  monarchy  has  fallen.  Death  reigns  no  more.  Sin 
has  been  vanquished  by  Christ's  Cross,  and  the  empire  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness 
has  been  for  ever  destroyed.  II.  He  has  risen,  and  His  own  Divine  words  have 
been  fulfilled.  Christ  claimed  to  be  supernatural  in  every  sphere  of  being. 
Easter  substantiates  His  claim  to  mastery  over  death.  If  this  promise  has  been 
fulfilled,  so  will  all  others  be.  III.  He  has  risen,  and  the  dead  have  not  perished. 
Personal  immortality  for  each  of  us,  and  reunion  with  the  loved  and  lost.  IV. 
Christ  is  risen,  and  no  lastino  Christian  Church  can  rest  on  a  closed  tomb.  (JT. 
M.  Statham,  B.A.)  The  resurrection  of  Christ : — As  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is 
believed  chiefly  on  the  authority  of  His  disciples,  it  is  desirable  to  inquire  respecting 
the  circumstances  in  which  they  spoke.     I.  They  did  not  expect  that  He  would 

BI8E  from  the   dead,  NOB  BELIEVE  THAT  He   HAD    BISEN,  EVEN  WHEN   IT  WAS   TOLD   TO 

THEM.  II.  They  could  gain  nothing  by  asserting  it,  if  it  were  untrue.  As  a 
consequence  of  declaring  His  resurrection,  they  could  foresee  only  affliction, 
reproach,  and  death.     HI.  The  disciples  were  as  well  qualified  as  any  otheb 

MEN,  TO  KNOW  WHETHER  THE   THINGS  WHICH   THEY   AFFir.MED  WEBE    80.       The   SUbjectS 

respecting  which  they  testified  were  cognizable  by  the  senses.  Had  they  been  dark, 
abstruse  principles — had  they  been  some  rare  phenomena  in  the  material  world,  bat 
removed  from  inspection  by  the  several  senses,  there  would  have  been  reason  for 
suspecting  their  capacity  to  know,  and  fully  to  comprehend  lUem.  IV.  Chbist 
APPE.UIED  TO  THEM  MANY  TIMES.  Not  ouce  OT  twice  Only,  but  80  oftcn  as  to  leave  no 
room  for  donbt.  V.  There  is  one  more  circumstance  which  gives  weight  to  the 
evidence  that  He  had  risen.  This  relates  to  the  manner  in  which  He  at  vabious 
TTMBS  APPEARED  to  His  disciples  and  others,  who  were  associated  with  Him.  The 
circumstances  in  which  men's  imaginations  are  wrought  into  the  belief  that  they 
have  seen  spirits,  are  very  peculiar.  Except  in  cases  of  disease,  they  are  not 
infested  with  these  unfounded  notions  in  open  day,  and  in  the  society  of  their 
friends.  The  regions  of  the  dead,  the  burial  places  of  our  acquaintance,  and  the 
scenes  of  some  tragical  event,  are  the  favoured  retreats  of  these  terrors.  But  never 
in  the  enjoyment  of  health,  in  open  day,  and  amongst  tried  friends,  have  men  been 
known  to  be  afflicted  by  these  creations  of  their  own  minds.  Now,  it  was  not  in 
scenes  like  these  that  Christ  appeared  to  His  disciples.  And  in  most  of  these 
circumstances  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  the  imaginations  of  men  to  form  images 
which  they  might  mistake  for  living  beings.  Nothing  but  a  living  man  could 
perform  the  various  things  which  the  disciples  have  attributed  to  Christ.  In  con- 
dasion:  1.    Christ's  resurrection  most  have  been  a  matter  of  great  joy  to  Hia 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  xxxr. 

disciples.  Now,  instead  of  looking  forward  only  to  days  of  shame,  and  years  of 
disgrace,  they  began  to  anticipate  glory,  and  honour,  and  immortality.  2. 
The  resurrection  of  Christ  establishes  the  truth  of  Christianity.  3.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  victory  over  the  power  of  death.  4.  If  our  resurrection 
be  demonstrably  established  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  it  becomes  us  to 
be  cautious  how  we  use  these  bodies  in  the  present  life.  (J.  Foot,  D.D.) 
Lessons : — 1.  In  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  we  have  the  great  proof  of  His 
Divine  mission,  and  a  call  to  submit  to  Him  as  our  teacher  and  Lord.  2.  Let  us 
improve  this  event  as  a  demonstration  that  Christ's  sacrifice  was  accepted,  and  an 
encouragement  to  trust  in  His  righteousness  for  justification.  3.  The  resurrection 
of  Christ  is  connected  with  the  observance  of  the  first  day  of  the  week  as  the  Chris- 
tian Sabbath.  4.  Let  us  see  that  this  event  has  its  proper  purifying  effect  on  our 
heart  and  conduct.  We  are  called  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  Christ  in  general, 
and  we  are  particularly  called  to  be  conformed  to  Him  in  His  death  and  resurrection^ 
6.  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  presents  the  pattern  and  pledge  of  the  happy 
and  glorious  resurrection  of  all  His  followers.  There  will  be  a  resurrection  "  both 
of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust."  6.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  should  keep  us  in 
mind  that  we  shall  stand  before  Him  as  our  judge.  (Jot.  Foote,  M.A.)  Angels 
at  remembrancers : — But  now  it  should  be  more  carefully  observed  that  this  re- 
minding the  women  of  what  had  been  said  to  them  by  Christ  is  probably  but  an 
example  of  what  continually  occurs  in  the  ministration  of  angels.  The  great  object 
of  our  discourse  is  to  illustrate  this  ministration,  to  give  it  something  of  a  tangible 
character ;  and  we  gladly  seize  on  the  circumstance  of  the  angels  recalling  to  the 
minds  of  the  women  things  which  had  been  heard,  because  it  seems  to  place  under 
a  practical  point  of  view  what  is  too  generally  considered  mere  useless  speculation. 
And  though  we  do  not  indeed  look  for  any  precise  repetition  of  the  scene  given  in 
our  text,  for  angels  do  not  now  take  visible  shapes  in  order  to  commime  with  men» 
we  know  not  why  we  should  not  ascribe  to  angeUc  ministration  facts  accurately 
similar,  if  not  as  palpable,  proceeding  from  supernatural  agency.  We  think  that 
we  sb»Jl  be  borne  out  by  the  experience  of  every  believer  in  Christ  when  we  aflSrm> 
that  texts  of  Scripture  are  often  suddenly  and  mysteriously  brought  into  the  mind,, 
texts  which  have  not  perhaps  recently  engaged  our  attention,  but  which  are  most 
nicely  suited  to  our  circumstances,  or  which  furnish  most  precisely  the  material 
then  needed  by  our  wants.  There  will  enter  into  the  spirit  of  a  Christian,  on  whom, 
has  fallen  some  unexpected  temptation,  a  passage  of  the  Bible  which  is  just  as  a 
weapon  wherewith  to  foil  his  assailant ;  or,  if  it  be  an  unlooked-for  difliculty  intO' 
which  he  is  plunged,  the  occurring  verses  will  be  those  best  adapted  for  counsel  and. 
guidance ;  or,  if  it  be  some  fearful  trouble  with  which  he  is  visited,  then  will  there 
pass  through  all  the  chambers  of  the  soul  gracious  declarations  which  the  inspired 
writers  will  seem  to  have  uttered  and  registered  on  purpose  for  himself.  And  it. 
may  be  that  the  Christian  will  observe  nothing  peculiar  in  this ;  there  may  appear 
to  him  nothing  but  an  effort  of  memory,  roused  and  acted  on  by  the  circumstances 
in  which  he  is  placed ;  and  he  may  consider  it  as  natural  that  suitable  passagp* 
should  throng  into  his  mind,  as  that  he  should  remember  an  event  at  the  place 
where  he  knows  it  to  have  happened.  But  let  him  ask  himself  whether  he  is  not, 
on  the  other  hand,  often  conscious  of  the  intrusion  into  his  soul  of  what  is  base 
and  defiling  ?  Whether,  if  he  happen  to  have  heard  the  jeer  and  the  blasphemy^ 
the  parody  on  sacred  things,  or  the  insult  upon  moral,  they  will  not  be  frequently 
recurring  to  his  mind  ?  recurring,  too,  at  moments  when  there  is  least  to  provoke 
them,  and  when  it  had  been  most  his  endeavour  to  gather  round  him  an  atmosphere 
of  what  is  sacred  and  pure.  And  we  never  scruple  to  give  it  as  a  matter  of  conso- 
lation to  a  Christian,  harassed  by  these  vile  invasions  of  his  soul,  that  hd  may 
justly  ascribe  them  to  the  agency  of  the  devil ;  wicked  angels  inject  into  the  mind 
the  foal  and  polluting  quotation  ;  and  there  is  not  necessarily  any  sin  in  receiving 
it,  thongh  there  must  be  if  we  give  it  entertainment  in  place  of  casting  it  instantly 
out.  But  why  should  we  be  so  ready  to  go  for  explanation  to  the  power  of  memory, 
and  the  force  of  circumstances,  when  apposite  texts  occur  to  the  mind,  and  then 
resolve  into  Satanic  agency  the  profanation  of  the  spirit  with  what  is  blasphemous 
and  base.  It  were  far  more  consistent  to  admit  a  spiritual  influence  in  tbe  one 
case  as  well  as  in  the  other ;  to  suppose  that,  if  evil  angels  syllable  to  the  soul  what 
may  have  been  heard  or  read  of  revolting  and  impure,  good  angels  breathe  into  its 
recesses  the  sacred  words,  not  perhaps  recently  perused,  but  which  apply  mos^ 
accurately  to  our  existing  condition.  We  do  not  wish  to  draw  you  away,  in  the 
least  degree,  from  the  truth  that  "  the  etex-nal  uncreated  Spirit  of  Gk>d  alone,  that 


CHAP,  xxiv.l  ST.  LVKE.  621 

Holy  Gbost,  is  the  author  of  our  sanctification,  the  infuser  into  ns  of  the  principle 
cf  Divine  life,  and  He  only  is  able  to  overrule  our  wills,  to  penetrate  the  deepest 
eecrets  of  our  hearts,  and  to  rectify  our  most  inward  faculties."  But  surely  it  does 
not  infringe  the  ofl&ce  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  suppose,  with  Bishop  Bull,  that  "  good 
angels  may,  and  often  do,  as  instruments  of  the  Divine  goodness,  powerfully  operate 
upon  our  fancies  and  imaginations,  and  thereby  prompt  us  to  pious  thoughts, 
affections,  and  actions."  They  were  angels,  as  you  will  remember,  which  came  and 
tainistered  to  our  Lord  after  He  had  been  exposed  in  the  wilderness  to  extraordinary 
assaults  from  the  devil.  He  had  the  Spirit  without  measure ;  but,  nevertheless,  as 
though  to  mark  to  us  the  agency  which  this  Spirit  is  often  pleased  to  employ,  it 
was  in  and  through  angels  that  consolation  was  imparted ;  even  as,  in  the  dread 
hour  of  His  last  conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  ••  there  appeared  an  angel 
unto  Him  from  heaven,  strengthening  Him."  Not  only,  therefore,  can  I  regard  it  aa 
credible  that  angels  stir  up  our  torpid  memories  and  bring  truths  to  our  recollection, 
as  they  did  to  the  women  at  the  sepulchre  of  Christ — I  can  rejoice  in  it  as  fraught 
with  consolation,  because  showing  that  a  created  instrumentality  is  used  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  renewing  our  nature.  And  surely  it  may  well  excite  gladness 
that  there  is  around  the  Christian  the  guardianship  of  heavenly  hosts ;  that,  whilst 
his  pathway  is  thronged  by  malignant  spirits,  whose  only  effort  is  to  involve  him 
in  their  everlasting  shame,  it  is  also  thronged  by  ministers  of  grace,  who  long  to 
have  him  as  their  companion  in  the  presence  of  God ;  for  there  is  thus  what  we 
might  almost  dare  to  call  a  visible  array  of  power  on  our  side,  and  we  may  take  all 
that  confidence  which  should  result  from  being  actually  permitted  to  look  on  the 
antagonists,  and  to  see  that  there  are  more  with  us  than  there  are  against.  But  it 
is  hardly  possible  to  read  these  words  of  the  angels  and  not  to  feel  how  reproachfully 
they  must  have  fallen  on  the  ears  of  the  women  !  how  they  must  have  upbraided 
them  with  want  of  attention  and  of  faith.  For  had  they  but  listened  heedfully  ta 
what  Christ  had  said,  and  had  they  but  given  due  credence  to  His  words,  they 
would  have  come  in  triumph  to  welcome  the  living,  in  place  of  mournfully  with 
spices  to  embalm  the  dead.  But  God  dealt  more  graciously  with  these  women 
than  their  inattention,  or  want  of  faith,  had  deserved ;  He  caused  the  words  to  be 
brought  to  their  remembrance,  whilst  they  might  yet  inspire  confidence,  though  they 
could  hardly  fail  also  to  excite  bitter  contrition.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Risen : — ^A  rising 
Saviour  demands  a  rising  Ufe.  For  remember,  brethren,  there  are  two  laws.  One 
law,  by  which  all  men  gravitate,  like  a  stone,  to  the  earth — another  law,  equally 
strong,  the  law  of  grace,  by  which  every  renewed  man  is  placed  under  the  attractive 
influence  of  an  ascending  power,  by  which  he  must  be  always  drawn  higher  and 
higher.  For  just  as  when  a  man,  lying  upon  the  ground,  gets  up  and  stands  up- 
right, his  upright  posture  draws  up  with  it  all  his  limbs,  so  in  the  mystical  body  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  risen  Head  necessarily  draws  up  all  the  mystical  members.  The 
process  of  elevation  is  one  which,  beginning  at  a  man's  conversion  to  God,  goes  on 
day  by  day,  hour  by  hour,  in  his  tastes,  in  his  judgments,  in  his  affections,  in  his 
habits.  First  it  is  spiritual,  then  it  is  material.  Now,  in  the  rising  spirit  of  the 
,  man,  first  he  sees  higher  and  higher  elevations  of  being,  and  gradually  fits  for  the 
\fellowship  of  the  saints  and  the  presence  of  God.  And  presently,  on  that  great 
, Easter  morning  of  the  resurrection,  in  his  restored  body,  when  it  shall  wake  up,, 
and  rise  satisfied  with  its  Bedeemer's  likeness,  made  pure  and  ethereal  enough  to 
Boar,  and  blend  and  co-operate  with  the  spirit  in  all  its  holy  and  eternal  exercises. 
But  what  I  wish  to  impress  upon  you  now  is,  that  this  series  in  the  ever-ascending 
scale  begins  now ;  that  there  is,  as  every  believer  feels,  a  daily  dying,  so  there  is  also^ 
as  our  baptism  tells  us,  a  daily  resurrection.  It  is  always  well  to  take  advantage 
of  particular  seasons  to  do  particular  proper  things.  Now  to-day  the  proper  thing 
is  to  rise,  to  get  up  higher.  This  Easter  day  ought  not  to  pass  without  every  one 
of  us  beginning  with  some  new  affection,  some  new  work.    {J,  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  13-35.    Two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to  a  village  called  Emmaus. — 
The  jmirney  to  Emrruius : — I.  Wb  see  in  this  appearanck,  as  in  the  others,  bomb- 

THING  VBRY  CHABACTEBISTIC  0»  OCR  LoRD*S   HABITS  AND   WAYS   DURING  HiS  LIFETIUB. 

His  disciples  and  followers  were  always  craving  for  publicity  and  display.  He  wa» 
always  retiring  from  too  much  of  that,  carrying  on  His  work  as  quietly  as  possible. 
And  so  here.  Jesus  rises  alone — at  the  break  of  day.  No  mortal  sees  Him  put  oa 
immortality.  Bright  angels  stand  as  sentinels  while  He  arrays  Himself.  It  vt 
enough  that  His  ^soiples  see  ihe  empty  tomb,  the  grave-clothes,  and  '*  the  plao» 
where  the  Lord  lay."    II.  Wb  mat  sbb  how  basilt  still,  nt  that  eisbm  ufb,  Ha 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xrrr, 

BNTEK8  INTO  COMMUNICATION  WITH  MEN  ;  HOW  LITTLE  DIFFICULTY  He  HAS  IN  JOININa 
ANY  COMPANY,  OB  ANY  TWO  OB  THESE  WITH  WHOM  He  WISHES  TO  BE  !  III.  ThIS 
APPEARANCE  OF  ChRIST  IS  LIKE  A  MESSAGE  OF  FRATERNITY  AND  DiVINE  REGARD,  ESPE- 
CIALLY TO  PLAIN,  SIMPLE,  ORDINARY  MEN — to  what  We  may  call  common  men,  who 
wear  no  distinction  and  possess  no  advantage  whatever  over  their  fellows.  For 
who  were  these  two  men  ?  No  one  knows  anything  about  them.  In  all  probability 
there  was  not  much  to  know,  except  that  they  were  disciples,  that  they  loved  Him. 
rV.  We  have  an  instance  herb  of  the  attractive  power  of  sorrow  to  Him.  They 
walked,  and  talked,  and  were  sad.  And  then  He  drew  near  and  went  with  them. 
V.  This,  however,  we  must  observe,  that  it  is  not  to  every  kind  of  trouble  and 
BADNESS  THAT  Hb  GRANTS  IMMEDIATE  ASSUAGEMENT.  Here  you  SCO  He  draws  near  at 
once  to  two  sad  men.  But  what  are  they  saying?  They  are  talking  of  Him. 
Why  are  they  sorrowing  ?  They  are  sorrowing  about  Him.  So  our  sorrow,  if  it  is 
to  be  sanctified  and  turned  into  joy,  must  have  Christ  in  it.    VI.  There  is  a  borrow 

AND  A  DARKNESS  EXPRESSLY  SENT   BY  ChRIST,  OB,  AT    ANY   RATE,  HELD   BY    HiM   AROUND 

His  PEOPLE.  A  sorrow  kept,  as  it  were,  beyond  the  time  when  it  might  naturally  be 
ended,  kept  for  the  accomplishment  of  some  purposes  of  grace  which  could  not  ba 
so  well  attained,  perhaps  not  attained  at  all,  if  the  darkness  were  melted  away. 
To  take  the  language  of  the  passage,  "  Our  eyes  are  holden  that  we  should  not 
know  Him,"  even  when  He  is  with  us.  So,  oftentimes,  our  eyes  are  holden  that 
we  should  not  know  Him.  Strange  things  happen  to  us,  and  we  think  not  that 
His  hand  is  upon  them  all.  All  the  instruction  we  get  in  the  darkness  is  from 
Him ;  but  we  do  not  know  that  it  is  from  Him  directly,  and  immediately,  until  the 
darkness  is  over.  VII.  It  is  a  blessed  moment  in  life  when  we  know  Him,  comb 
when,  and  how,  and  where  it  may — when  wb  abb  sure  that  He  is  near  1  In  those 
moments  we  are  glad  of  the  present,  and  we  look  to  the  future  without  a  fear. 
VIIL  They  abb  brief,  they  are  tbansient  as  the  glow  of  the  morning — not 
SETTLED  AS  THE  RADIANCE  OF  THB  DAY.  " They  knew  Him  and" — what  next?  A 
long  happy  conversation,  until  the  evening  wore  into  the  night,  and  the  stars  came 
out  on  high  ?  A  journey  into  Jerusalem  again  the  next  morning,  with  still  mora 
delightful  discourse,  to  meet  His  surprised  and  rejoicing  disciples  there?  Not  so. 
"  And  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  knew  Him,  and  He  vanished  out  of  their 
eight  1  "  Such  is  the  end  of  all  high  communion  times,  of  all  vision-hours  in  this 
life.  They  are  but  brief.  They  can  but  be  brief ;  there  is  more  work  to  do,  and 
more  sorrow  to  drink,  and  more  time  to  travel  through ;  and  Jesus  in  His  glory 
retires,  that  these  things  may  be  done,  and  that  He  may  come  again  when  need 
shall  be  1  He  comes  down  to  lift  ns  up,  to  intensify  our  longings  for  heaven,  to  entice 
us  home.  And  of  course  He  does  not  stay.  He  is  always  coming,  and  always 
"  vanishing  "  out  of  our  sight,  that  we  may  the  more  long  for  and  labour  after  the 
place,  the  glory,  the  life  in  which  He  would  have  us  for  ever  be.  (A,  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
The  walk  to  Emmaus  : — I.  The  way.  1.  To  these  two  disciples  that  was  the  way  of 
sadness  and  gloom.  2.  The  sadness  of  those  two  disciples  sprang  from  doubt  or 
unbelief.  3.  Though  that  was  the  way  of  sadness  and  doubt  to  those  two  disciples, 
yet  they  communed  and  reasoned  together  on  the  best  themes.  II.  The  method  o» 
Christ's  communications  by  thb  way.  "  He  talked  with  us,"  "  and  opened  to  oa 
the  -Scriptures."  The  manner  was  simple,  clear,  and  cogent.  Two  or  three  thing* 
about  Christ's  method  of  communing  with  these  disciples  are  worth  a  little  atten- 
tion. 1.  It  was  sympathetic.  He  strikes  a  chord  in  their  troubled  hearts  that 
vibrates  at  the  touch  of  His  matchless  sympathy.  2.  It  was  instructive.  Seek 
instruction  rather  than  rapture.  3.  This  talk  by  the  way  was  animating.  Not 
only  did  it  relieve  their  gloom  and  sadness,  it  cheered,  revived,  and  filled  them  with 
ardent  joy,  "  for  they  said  one  to  another,  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us  while 
He  talked  with  us  by  the  way?"  IH.  Thb  best  and  the  bevelation  which 
AWAITED  the  DISCIPLES  AT  THB  BOT)  OF  THB  WAY.  1.  A  triumphant  joy.  2.  An 
intelligent  faith  in  Him  as  the  Bedeemer  of  Israel.  3.  The  disclosure  of  Christ 
to  those  two  disciples  filled  their  hearts  with  confident  hope.  {J.  T.  Higgins.) 
*  The  disclosure  at  Emmaus: — I.  We  note,  in  the  beginning,  thb  naturalness 
ow  A  POSTURE  OF  HIND  AKIN  TO  DOUBT  AND  CONFUSION.  Heavy  provideuces  bear 
OB  down  under  them.  Sudden,  almost  inexplicable,  depressions  settle  upon  our 
souls.  The  devil  watches  always  for  these  opportunities,  and  plies  us  with  adroit 
attack.  II.  Next,  we  see  here  thb  positive  value  of  fratebnal  conference  and 
bxchamgb  of  views.  The  larger  part  of  our  seasons  of  hypochondria  are  to  be 
dispersed  by  a  frank  conversation  with  sympathetic  friends  in  relation  to  the 
matters  of   supreme  interest  to  as  both.    III.  Thb  actual  nearness  of  Christ 


CHAP.  rxiT  ]  ST.  LUKE,  621 

AiiWATB,  TO  THOSE  WHO  NEED  HiM.  Would  it  alarm  US,  if  we  suddenly  discovered 
we  had  been  talking  with  Him  in  person,  instead  of  some  boon  companion  we  had 
met  in  our  freedom?  IV.  Then  we  have  a  fine  lesson  concerning  the  Ditins 
EEMEDT  FOB  ALL  DOUBTS  AS  TO  ouB  Saviour  AND  oTJB  SALVATION,  Thcse  bewildered 
disciples  are  led  directly  to  the  Divine  Word  (see  verses  25-27).  V.  In  the  next  place, 
we  may  note  here  the  pebsonal  inteeest  Jesus  has  in  eveey  teue  believeb  who  la 
IN  need  op  His  help.  A  whole  afternoon  did  our  Lord  give  of  those  forty  days  He 
had  left  to  these  disciples  who  were  not  known  enough  even  to  be  described.  Lot  in 
life  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  estimate  which  the  Saviour  forms  of  His  followers. 
He  came  with  those  modest  brethren  to  their  destination.  VI.  We  have  now  a  lesson 
from  the  story  which  might  give  a  help  to  any  Christian  at  the  communion  table  ; 

THE  BEAIi  JOT  IN  EVEBY  8PIBITUAL  FEAST  IS  TO  HAVE  THE  LoRD  JeSUS  ChKIST  DIS- 
CLOSED TO  US.  "  Jesus  has  kept  coming  again  ever  since  He  went  away."  VII.  A 
single  lesson  more  remains  :  we  see  that  the  first  delighted  impulse  of  a  soul, 

BBJOICING   at   having  FOUND   JeSUS,  18  TO   GO    AND    TELL    OTHERS    OF    HiS    PRESENCE 

AT  the  FEA8T(see  verses  32-35).  These  happy  disciples  could  not  wait  even  till  morn- 
ing. The  Lord  had  vanished,  but  His  argument  remained  ;  "  while  they  were  musing 
the  fire  burned."  Now  they  began  to  remember  peculiar  experiences  along  the  way. 
Oftentimes  a  new  disclosure  of  Christ's  presence  turns  the  believer  back  upon  hours  in 
which  he  now  sees  the  Holy  Spirit  was  dealing  with  him  ;  why  did  he  not  recognize 
it  sooner  ?  Memories  of  communions  are  always  precious,  if  the  joy  has  remained. 
Life  gathers  a  fresh  impulse  from  the  disclosure.  We  are  sure  that  walk  out  to 
Emmaus  with  Jesus  in  companionship  was  wonderfully  sweet ;  but  the  walk  in 
back  again  over  the  same  path  was  not  without  comfort.  Every  stone  and  bush 
would  make  them  think  of  Him.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Easter  Monday  : — 
L  Notice  the  chabactebs  brought  to  view.  Two  men.  Devout  Jews.  Disci- 
ples of  Jesus.  They  were  in  great  perplexity  and  trouble  of  heart.  Their  faith 
had  received  a  blow  under  which  it  greatly  staggered.  They  reasoned  the  case  with 
each  other ;  but  reason  was  too  weak  an  instrument  to  give  them  relief.  Mere 
earthly  reason,  when  it  comes  to  matters  of  faith  and  salvation,  can  do  very  little 
for  us.  They  were  moving  through  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  beautiful  dis- 
tricts. Their  way  from  Jerusalem  to  Emmaus  lay  by  the  tombs  of  the  ancient 
Judges,  by  the  old  dwelling-place  of  Samuel,  and  through  mountainous  scenery  as 
attractive  as  any  in  the  Holy  Land.  But  no  charms  of  nature,  however  inter- 
mingled with  sacred  story,  could  soothe  the  trouble  that  was  upon  their  souls. 
Those  scenes  of  blood  and  murder  which  had  been  enacted  at  Jerusalem,  and  the 
sore  disappointment  which  those  scenes  had  entailed  upon  their  most  precious 
hopes,  followed  them,  and  clung  to  them,  in  spite  of  all  the  pleasant  things  around 
them.  Nature,  in  all  its  loveliness,  cannot  supply  the  place  of  Christ,  or  give 
comfort  to  the  soul  that  has  lost  Him.  Yet  the  Saviour  was  with  them,  all  unknown 
to  themselves.  In  the  form  of  a  common  traveller,  journeying  the  same  way,  and 
after  the  same  manner  with  themselves,  He  overtook  them,  and  made  one  in  their 
little  company.  There  are  many  ways  in  which  He  comes  to  His  people.  He  comes 
to  them  sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  plain  gardener,  or  a  servant.  He  comes  some- 
times in  the  form  of  a  fellow-traveller.  He  comes  sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  poor 
beggar.  But,  in  some  shape  or  other.  He  is  never  far  from  those  who  are  in 
spiritual  earnest,  and  devoutly  struggling  for  the  light.  In  our  earthly  way  of 
looking  at  things,  we  do  not  always  recognize  the  presence  of  our  Saviour,  and  our 
eyes  are  holden  that  we  do  not  know  Him.  It  is  the  fault  of  our  feeble  faith,  that 
we  only  think  of  Christ  as  far  away — as  hidden  in  the  grave — or  in  some  remote 
w«Tld  to  which  the  grave  is  the  mysterious  doorway.  Hence  so  much  of  our  trouble 
and  doubtfulness.  But  it  is  an  erroneous  way  of  thinking  of  Him.  He  is  not  n 
the  grave.  He  is  not  far  off  in  some  realm  which  separates  Him  for  ever  from  all 
eonnection  with  this  present  world.  He  is  risen.  He  is  not  far  from  every  one  of 
as.  Wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  His  name,  there  He  is.  He  is 
in  the  city,  and  He  is  in  the  country.  He  is  in  the  garden  among  the  flowers,  and 
He  is  in  the  dusty  highway.  He  is  in  our  assemblies  for  devotion,  and  He  journeys 
with  us  in  oar  travels.  He  is  with  as,  and  speaking  to  us,  even  when  we  do  not  at 
sU  saspect  that  it  is  He.  II.  Notice  how  the  bisen  Jesus  deals  with  these 
pbbplexed  and  sobbowino  ones.  1.  He  "  drew  near,  and  went  with  them."  It  is 
the  will  of  our  gracious  Saviour  to  be  near  as,  and  to  have  us  near  EUm.  "  We 
have  not  an  high  priest  which  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feelings  of  our  infirmi- 
ties "  (Heb.  iv.  15).  When  grief  and  trouble  are  upon  His  disciples,  He  takes  it 
io  heart,  and  is  drawn  towards  them  in  loving  sympathy.  But,  in  addition  to  their 
VOL.  m.  40 


S26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oair.  xnv, 

mental  troubles,  these  pilgiims  were  earnestly  engaged  with  each  other,  trying  to 
solve  and  master  them.  Earnestness  of  spirit  is  never  unnoticed  in  heaven. 
2.  He  questioned  them  as  to  their  troubles  and  sadness.  "  He  said  unto  them. 
What  manner  of  communications  are  these  that  ye  have  one  to  another  as  ye  walk  ? 
and  why  are  ye  sad  ?  It  was  a  call  to  review  the  character  of  their  trouble,  as  the 
basis  for  the  formation  of  a  better  judgment.  They  had  not  looked  at  matters 
xightly.  They  had  not  gone  deep  enough  into  the  facts  for  the  proper  conclusions. 
The  cure  for  their  disturbance  was  in  the  very  things  that  disturbed  them,  if  they 
would  only  learn  to  see  them  in  their  true  aspects  and  relations.  Did  Christian 
people  but  view  their  anxieties  aright,  they  would  find  in  them  cause  for  joy  rather 
than  discomfiture.  Desponding  soul,  Jesus  asks  thee.  Why  art  thou  sad  ?  Canst 
thou  give  Him  a  reason  for  thy  disheartenment  at  what  has  happened  ?  Review 
thy  ground,  and  come  to  a  better  mind.  3.  Having  drawn  out  their  story.  Ha 
directed  them  to  the  Bible.  After  all,  there  is  nothing  that  can  so  settle,  satisfy, 
and  comfort  our  troubled  hearts  and  anxious  doubts,  as  the  records  of  the  holy 
prophets.  There  the  portrait  of  the  Christ  is  fully  drawn,  and  all  that  concemeth 
Him  is  amply  disclosed.  From  them  these  disciples  might  have  fortified  themselves 
against  all  such  sorrowful  perplexities  over  their  Master's  death.  The  very  first 
promise  that  was  made  of  Him,  told  of  a  suffering  as  well  as  a  triumphing  Saviour. 
He  was  to  be  bruised,  as  well  as  to  bruise.  All  the  appointments  of  the  law  pointed 
to  death  and  bloodshedding  as  the  only  possible  way  of  remission  of  sins  or  re- 
covery from  condemnation.  Precious  indeed  are  these  blessed  Scriptures.  Herein 
is  light  which  giveth  understanding  to  the  simple,  and  which  maketh  wise  unto 
salvation.  Herein  is  balm  for  the  troubled  heart  more  than  Gilead  can  furnish. 
Are  we  shaken  in  faith,  and  disturbed  in  our  hopes  ?  Jesus  directs  as  to  the  Bible. 
4.  And  having  set  them  right  in  their  reading  of  the  Sciiptures,  the  Saviour  yielded 
to  their  entreaties,  entered  with  them  into  their  home,  and  made  Himself  known  to 
them  in  the  breaking  of  bread.  Those  who  love  the  truth  will  be  kindly  disposed 
toward  those  who  teach  it ;  and  those  who  admit  Christ  into  their  hearts  will  be 
anxious  also  to  have  Him  abide  in  their  homes.  And  those  who  in  grateful  con- 
sideration of  His  kindness  receive  Him  into  their  houses,  though  they  should  not 
yet  know  with  whom  they  are  dealing,  will  soon  have  Him  disclosed  to  them  in  all 
the  certainties  of  an  unmistakable  faith.  {J,  A.  Seiei,  D.D.)  The  walk  to 
Emmaus : — I.  Thb  sobbows  and  doubts  of  the  two  disciples.    IL  The  sobbows 

AMD   DOUBTS   OV    THB    DISCIPLES    ABE    MET    BT    A    DiVIMB    EXPLANATION.      1.     He    first 

rebukes  their  spiritual  ignorance  and  unwillingness  to  believe.  2.  They  were,  with- 
out being  aware  of  it,  mourning  over  the  very  things  which  formed  Christ's  peculiar 
glory  and  their  own  redemption.  3.  To  show  this.  He  began  at  Moses,  and 
«zplained  in  regular  succession  what  the  prophets  had  foretold  concerning  Himself. 
111.  Thb  sobbows  and  doubts  of  thb  disciples  wbbe  lost  in  the  supreme  jot 
<OF  THB  BiSEN  Jesus  FULLY  BBVEALED.  Lessous :  1.  This  narrative  is  an  irrefragable 
f>roof  of  the  reality  of  our  Lord's  resurrection.  He  was  not  an  apparition  nor  A 
subjective  vision.  2.  God  is  ever  near  us,  if  we  only  had  the  spiritual  vision  to 
'discern  His  presence.  3.  To  talk  of  Jesus  and  the  things  of  the  kingdom,  is  wise. 
At  such  seasons  He  draws  near,  and  by  His  Spirit  communes  with  us  until  our 
hearts  burn  with  new  hopes,  and  our  eyes  are  filled  with  a  revelation  of  His  pre- 
sence. 4.  The  Old  Testament  prophecies,  inclusive  of  everything  relating  to  Christ's 
Church,  are,  according  to  His  own  showing,  an  integral  part  of  the  Scriptures. 
•6.  Failure  to  believe  the  Scriptures  was  the  cause  of  the  disciples'  blindness  and 
•Borrows.  6.  How  precious  is  a  Christian's  company.  {T.  S.  Doolittle,  D.D.) 
The  walk  to  Emmaus : — I.  Two  bepeesentative  disciples.  1.  They  were  on  a 
journey.  So  are  we  all.  2.  They  were  in  earnest  conversation.  (1)  To  converse 
as  natural.  (2)  Our  conversation  should  be  wise,  spiritual,  helpful.  3.  They  were 
€ull  of  iadness.  (1)  Their  sadness  was  natural,  (a)  Bright  hopes  were  blasted. 
\h)  An  awful  tragedy  had  been  enacted.  (2)  But  tneir  sadness  was  sinful,  (a)  Be- 
«auBe  it  arose  from  their  unbelief  in  the  testimony  of  the  prophets.  (6)  Because 
it  arose  from  their  unbelief  in  the  testimony  of  Christ  Himself,  (c)  Yet  how  com- 
mon is  such  unbelief  among  Christians?  H.  Christ  in  His  bepeesentative 
<ohabacteb.  1.  As  ever  near  His  sorrowing  disciples.  2.  As  ever  entering  into 
4heir  experience.  3.  As  rebuking  their  unbelief.  4.  As  the  opener  up  of  the 
^Scriptures.  (1)  Christ  ever  honours  the  Scriptures.  (2)  Christ  ever  testifies  to  the 
genuineness  and  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.  (3)  Christ  ever  teaches  that  H« 
Himself  is  the  central  subject  of  the  Scriptures.  5.  As  unexpectedly  revealing 
fiimself.     (1)  While  their  hearts  were  full  of  doubts,  "  their  eyes  were  holden  that 


OHAP.  rent.]  ST.  LUKE.  637 

they  should  not  know  Him.*  (2)  The  expounding  of  the  Scripture  restored  them 
to  a  believing  condition.  (3)  Their  quickened  faith  resulted  in  hearts  that  burned. 
<4)  Hearts  that  bum  alone  can  see  Jesus  to  know  Him.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.) 
The  walk  to  Emmaus : — I.  This  walk  to  Emmaus  suqqests  thb  strange  MiNOLiKa 
or  uNBBUEr  AND  FAITH  IN  THE  SAME  BBBAST.  1.  The  faot  of  their  unbelief. 
2,  The  unreasonableness  of  their  unbelief,  3.  The  reality  of  their  faith.  IL  This 
WALK  to  Emmaus  suggests  the  Loan's  interest  in  His  perplexed  but  inquibino 
DISCIPLES.  III.  This  walk  to  Emmaus  suggests  the  chabaoteb  of  the  true 
inquirer,  though  perplexed.  1.  He  is  ever  interested  in  those  who  nnfold  the 
Scriptures.  2.  He  is  ever  open  to  conviction.  3.  His  heart  ia  ever  stirred  by  the 
truth.  4.  When  he  learns  the  truth,  he  is  ever  anxious  to  proclaim  it  to  others. 
Lessons :  1.  We  learn  that  unbelief  arises  from  the  heart,  and  is  an  evidence  of 
unwisdom.  2.  That  unbelief  not  only  brings  trouble  to  the  heart,  but  blindness  to 
the  mind.  8.  That  perplexities  are  not  solved  by  reasoning,  but  by  the  study  of 
God's  Word.  4.  If  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  found  in  Moses  and  tha 
prophets  evidences  of  His  Messiahship,  why  may  not  we  f  {Ibid.)  The 
journey  to  Emmaus : — After  He  has  comforted  the  weeping,  disconsolate  Magdalene, 
and  graciously  restored  the  fallen  Peter,  He  hastens  to  lay  hold  of  those  sad 
wanderers  who  have  ignorantly  turned  away  from  where  they  might  have  found 
light  and  consolation.  The  first  word  He  addressed  to  them,  after  He  had  drawn 
out  their  thoughts  and  feelings  by  two  questions  which  He  needed  not  to  ask,  but 
which  it  was  well  they  should  answer,  was  a  word  of  rebuke — "  O  fools,  and  slow  of 
heart  to  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken."  Thus  do  chiding  and  reproof 
oftentimes  precede  the  most  gracious  manifestations.  Our  faults  must  be  corrected 
before  any  real  and  lasting  comfort  can  be  administered.  To  remove  all  discomfort 
*nd  distress,  without  touching  the  evil  state  of  mind  from  which  they  spring,  would 
be  Uke  relieving  the  patient's  pain  at  the  expense  of  aggravating  his  disease ;  it 
would  be  to  countenance  and  encourage  us  in  the  wrong  thoughts  and  feelings 
which  it  behoves  us  to  abandon.  Not  thus  does  the  Great  Physician  deal  with  the 
souls  whom  He  lovea.  Injudicious  earthly  teachers  may  try  to  minister  relief  to 
distempered  minds,  by  simply  soothing  their  sorrows  without  correcting  their  faults, 
making  them  believe  that  all  their  troubles  spring  from  something  without  them- 
selves which  will  shortly  be  put  right,  instead  of  leading  them  to  look  within  that 
they  may  correct  what  is  wrong  there ;  pleasing  them  with  flattery  when  they 
should  first  pain  them  by  rebuke;  and  thus,  for  the  sake  of  yielding  them  a  little 
momentary  pleasure,  inflicting  on  them  a  permanent  injury.  Not  so  the  Saviour. 
How  prone  we  are  all  to  close  our  eyes  to  the  things  which  we  dislike — to  believe 
only  in  those  we  like  1  The  disciples  were  ready  enough  to  listen  to  what  seemed 
to  justify  their  hopes  of  a  coming  kingdom  :  when  He  spoke  of  His  sufferings  they 
were  equally  ready  to  say,  •*  Be  it  far  from  Thee,  Lord."  Whatever  we  may  think 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  Old  Testament  writers  were  inspired — a  question  on 
which  bold  theorising  is  but  a  bold  mistake,  the  conduct  of  our  Lord  on  this  occa- 
sion places  the  fact  of  their  inspiration  beyond  all  dispute  among  those  who  recog- 
nuse  His  authority.  "  Abide  vrith  us,"  tbey  said,  "  for  it  is  towards  evening,  and 
the  day  is  far  spent. '  The  reason  of  this  request  was  the  fascination  of  His  speech 
— the  effect  it  had  produced  on  them  in  dispelling  their  doubts,  reviving  their  droop- 
ing hopes,  and  quickening  their  languid  affections.  Such  is  the  invariable  eon- 
sequence  of  converse  with  the  Saviour.  Such  experience  naturally  awakens  the 
desire  that  the  fellowship  may  be  prolonged.  From  souls  who  thus  earnestly  leek 
Him  the  Saviour  will  not  withhold  His  gracious  presence.  •*  He  went  in  to  tarry 
with  "  these  disciples,  and  "  sat  at  meat  with  them  "  ;  thus  oondescending  not  only 
to  become  their  guest,  but  toplace  Himself  somuchonanequaUty  with  them, asto  sit 
at  the  same  table  and  partake  of  the  same  meal.  Be  this  as  it  may,  this  portion  of 
the  narrative  is  beautifully  representative  of  what  often  takes  place  in  the  experience 
of  believers.  Where  the  Saviour's  presence  is  earnestly  desired  and  prayed  for.  He 
not  only  grants  the  request,  but  enters  into  more  intimate  fellowship  with  the 
longing  soul.  But  delightful  as  fellowship  with  Christ  is  to  the  truly  Christian 
Boul,  the  passage  may  very  well  remind  us  that  there  is  something  for  us  to  do 
besides  gratifying  our  desire,  even  for  the  highest  spiritual  enjoyment.  Peter,  on 
the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  though  he  said,  "  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,"  was 
not  permitted  to  build  tabernacles  as  he  desired,  because  at  the  foot  of  the  moim- 
tain  there  were  distresses  to  be  relieved.  The  two  disciples,  though  they  would 
fain  prolong  their  interview  with  the  Lord,  must,  just  when  their  gratification  is  at 
the  highest,  be  deprived  of  His  presence,  and  return  to  Jerusalem  to  share  theii 


623  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [6HA».  xxih. 

joy  with  others.  And  so  we,  sometimes,  when  we  might  greatly  prefer  quiet  medi< 
tation  and  devotion  to  active  service,  must  nevertheless,  because  the  world  need® 
onr  ministrations,  go  forth  from  communion  with  our  Master  to  do  the  Master'* 
•work.  I  cannot  conclude  without  calling  attention  to  that  which  appears  so  con- 
spicuously throughout  the  whole  of  the  narrative — the  marvellous  condescension 
of  our  Lord.  These  are  but  weak  disciples  when  He  finds  them — foolish,  slow  of 
heart  to  understand  the  Scriptures — their  faith  much  clouded,  though  it  does  not 
relinquish  its  hold  of  Him.  And  how  He  condescends  to  their  weakness,  suits  His 
instruction  to  their  case,  gradually  leads  them  to  a  full  preception  of  the  truth  and 
apprehension  of  Himself.  Tenderly  He  deals  with  them,  not  breaking  the  bruised 
reed,  nor  quenching  the  smoking  flax ;  but  gathering  the  lambs  in  His  arms,  and 
carrying  them  in  His  bosom.     {W.  Landcls.)        Communion  with  Christ : — L  This 

CONVERSATION    SHOWS   WHAT  LITE   WOULD   BE    WITHOUT    ChEIST.      1.   When  We  fail   tO 

discern  the  presence  of  Christ  our  hearts  are  overwhelmed  with  grief.  2.  When 
we  fail  to  discern  the  presence  of  Christ  our  minds  are  clouded  with  doubt.  II. 
This  conversation  shows  what  life  mat  be  with  Christ.  1.  We  should  never 
forget  that  Christ  is  near  to  His  disciples  in  all  their  sorrow.  2.  We  should  never 
forget  that  Christ  instructs  His  disciples  in  all  their  sorrows.  IH.  This  conversa- 
tion SHOWS  WHAT  LIFE  SHOULD  BE  FOB  Chbist.  1.  What  did  these  men  do? 
"  They  rose  up  the  same  hour,  and  returned  to  Jerusalem."  It  was  night,  and  the 
distance  considerable,  but  they  went  immediately  to  proclaim  the  Saviour's  resur- 
rection. If  we  have  any  word  to  speak,  or  any  work  to  do  for  Christ,  let  us  do  it 
at  once ;  for  time  is  short,  and  life  is  uncertain.  2.  What  did  these  men  find  f 
' '  And  found  the  eleven  gathered  together."  Men  are  drawn  together  by  common 
sympathies  and  common  beliefs.  Why  were  they  together  ?  For  counsel  and 
prayer.  Why  together  at  midnight?  For  secrecy  and  security.  Seasons  of 
personal  danger  should  be  seasons  of  united  communion  with  God,  3.  What  did 
these  men  hear  ?  "  The  Lord  hath  risen  indeed."  What  joyful  tidings  these  must 
have  been  I  They  not  only  heard  of  Christ's  resurrection  from  others,  but  they  had 
seen  Him  themselves.  This  is  love's  reward.  The  givers  were  receivers.  Thus 
experience  answers  experience  in  the  Divine  life.  4.  What  did  these  men  say  ? 
"  Told  what  things  were  done  in  the  way,"  &c.  Personal  testimony  to  the  fact  of 
Christ's  resurrection.  If  Christ  has  appeared  to  you,  rise  up  at  once,  and  acknow- 
ledge Him  before  His  people.  It  will  cheer  them,  and  confirm  you.  (J.  T.  Wood- 
home.)  The  ab-^ent  Lord  appears : — I.  Though  Jesus  be  absent,  His  disciplb» 
MAKE  Him  their  theme.  II.  The  absent  Jesus  comes  near  while  His  disciples  talk 
of  Him.  Blessed  sequel  to  their  saintly  converse.  And  so  it  is  to-day.  •'  Where 
two  or  three,"  &c.  It  was  a  tender  superstition  which  our  fathers  held — that  to 
speak  much  of  the  absent  or  the  dead  brings  them  near.  And  the  beautiful  fiction 
becomes  blessed  fact,  when  we  refer  it  to  Jesus.  He  is  the  true  Mentor  whom 
Homer  ignorantly  celebrated.  We  have  but  to  think  of  Jesus,  talk  of  Jesus,  wish 
for  Jesus — and  He  is  by  our  side.  {A.  A.  Ramsey.)  Jesus  near,  but  unrecog- 
nized:— I.  We  shall  note,  first,  reasons  why,  in  the  vert  presence  of  their 
Master,  saints  mat  not  know  that  He  is  near.  The  first  reason,  then,  why 
these  good  men  did  not  perceive  the  presence  of  their  Master  was  that  "  their  eyes 
wereholden."  There  was  a  blinding  cause  in  them.  What  was  it?  1.  By  8om« 
mysterious  operation,  their  eyes,  which  were  able  to  see  other  things,  were  not  abl» 
to  detect  the  presence  of  their  Master,  but  they  thought  Him  to  be  some  common 
traveller.  Still  we  are  permitted  to  say  that  in  their  case,  and  in  the  case  of  a  great 
many  disciples,  eyes  have  been  holden  through  sorrow.  2.  Again,  in  their  case,  in 
addition  to  the  mysterious  operation  which  held  their  eyes,  which  we  do  not  attempt 
to  account  for,  we  have  no  doubt  their  eyes  were  holden  with  unbelief.  Had  thej' 
been  expecting  to  see  Jesus,  methinks  they  would  have  recognized  Him.  3.  What- 
ever may  have  been  mysterious  about  the  holding  of  the  disciples'  eyes,  they  were 
::lso  somewhat  holden  by  ignorance.  They  had  failed  to  see  what  is  plain  enough 
in  Scripture,  that  the  Messiah  must  suffer,  bleed,  and  die.  At  other  times  they 
may  not  see  Him,  because  of  something  in  the  Master.  Mark,  as  I  have  tdd  you, 
eays  He  appeared  unto  them  •'  in  another  form."  I  suppose  he  means  in  a  form 
in  which  they  had  not  seen  Him  before.  Perhaps  you  have  only  seen  Jesus  as  your 
joy  and  consolation  ;  under  that  aspect  may  you  always  see  Him,  but,  remember, 
"  He  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  ;  He  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Levi."  When  you  are  in 
the  furnace,  sufifering  affliction  and  trial  and  depression  of  spirit,  the  refiner  is 
Christ,  the  same  loving  Christ  in  a  new  character.  Hitherto  you  have  seen  Christ 
as  breaking  the  bread  of  life  to  you,  and  giving  yon  to  drink  of  the  water  of  life. 


HEAP.  XXIV.]  8T.  LUKE.  629 

bnt  you  mnst  yet  learn  that  His  fan  Ib  in  His  hand,  and  He  will  thronghly  purge 
the  floor  of  your  heart.  He  is  not  another  Christ,  but  He  puts  on  another  aspect, 
and  exercises  another  office,  II.  Secondly,  let  us  speak  of  the  mannebs  or  the 
SAiNrs  WHEN  THEY  ABE  IN  BDCH  A  CASE.  When  their  Master  is  with  them  and  they 
do  not  know  Him,  how  do  they  conduct  themselves  ?  First,  they  are  sad  ;  because 
the  presence  of  Christ,  if  Christ  be  unknown,  is  not  comfortable,  though  it  may 
be  edifying.  It  may  be  for  rebuke,  as  it  was  to  them  ;  but  it  certainly  is  not  for 
consolation.  For  joy  we  must  have  a  known  Christ.  Next,  these  disciples,  though 
they  did  not  know  that  their  Master  was  there,  conversed  together — a  good  example 
for  all  Christians.  Whether  you  are  in  the  full  joy  of  your  faith  or  not,  speak  ofien 
one  to  another.  He  who  is  strong  will  help  the  weak  brother ;  if  two  walk  together, 
ii  one  shall  trip  perhaps  the  other  will  not,  and  so  he  will  have  a  hand  to  spare  to 
support  his  friend.  Even  if  both  saints  are  unhappy,  yet  some  good  result  will  come 
from  mutual  sympathy.  Note,  again,  that  though  they  did  not  know  their  Master 
was  there,  yet  they  avowed  their  hopes  concerning  Him.  I  cannot  commend  all  that 
they  said,  there  was  not  much  faith  in  it,  but  they  did  confess  thai  they  were  followers 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  "  We  trusted  that  it  had  been  He  which  should  deliver  Israel. 
And,  besides  all  this,  to-day  is  the  third  day."  And  they  went  on  to  let  out  the 
secret  that  they  belonged  to  His  disciples.  "  Certain  women  of  our  company  made 
as  astonished."  They  were  under  a  cloud  and  sad,  but  they  were  not  so  cowardly 
as  to  disown  their  connection  with  the  Crucified.  They  still  avowed  their  hope. 
And  oh,  beloved,  when  your  comforts  are  at  the  lowest  ebb,  still  cling  to  your 
Master,  But,  passing  on — these  poor  people,  though  very  sad,  and  without  their 
Master  as  they  thought,  were  very  willing  to  bear  rebukes.  Although  the  word  used 
by  our  Lord  should  not  be  rendered  "  fools,"  yet  it  sounds  somewhat  hard  even  to 
call  them  inconsiderate  and  thoughtless :  but  we  do  not  discover  any  resentment  on 
their  part  because  they  were  so  severely  chided.  Souls  that  really  love  Jesus  do 
not  grow  angry  when  faithfully  rebuked.  And  then,  they  were  willing  to  learn. 
Never  better  pupils,  never  a  better  Teacher,  never  a  better  school  book,  never  a 
better  explanation.  Again,  notice  that  while  the  two  were  willing  to  learn,  they 
also  wished  to  retain  the  Teacher  and  His  instruction,  and  to  treat  Him  kindly  too. 
They  said,  "  Abide  with  us  ;  the  day  is  far  spent."  They  had  been  benefited  by 
Him,  and  therefore  they  wished  to  show  their  gratitude  to  Him.  Have  you  learned 
BO  much  that  you  are  willing  to  learn  more?  And,  once  more,  though  they  did  not 
know  that  their  Master  was  with  them,  they  were  well  prepared  to  join  in  worship. 
Some  have  thought  that  the  breaking  of  bread  that  night  was  only  Christ's  ordinary 
way  of  offering  a  blessing  before  meat ;  it  does  not  seem  so  to  me,  because  they  had 
already  eaten  and  were  in  the  middle  of  the  meal  when  He  took  the  bread  and 
blessed  it.  HI.  Lastly,  let  us  try  to  set  forth  the  actions  of  believees  when  thet 
DiscovEB  theib  Lobd.  "Their  eyes  were  opened, and  they  knew  Him."  What 
then  7  Well,  first,  they  discovered  that  there  had  been  aU  along  in  their  hearts 
evidences  of  His  presence.  "  Did  not  our  hearts  bum  within  us  while  He  spake 
with  ns  by  the  way  ?  "  This  heavenly  heartburn  never  comes  to  any  but  through  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  next  thing  they  did  was  to  compare  notes.  The 
lOne  said  to  the  other,  "Did  not  our  hearts  bum  within  us  ?"  It  is  always  a  good 
thing  for  believers  to  communicate  their  returning  enjoyment.  Somehow  we  are 
rather  chary  as  to  speaking  of  our  joys.  Ought  we  to  be  so  ?  Once  again.  These 
disciples,  when  they  saw  the  Master,  hastened  to  tell  others  about  it.  I  notice  that 
while  they  told  of  their  Lord's  appearing,  they  made  mention  of  the  ordinance 
which  had  been  blest  to  them,  for  they  especially  said  that  He  had  been  known  to 
them  in  the  breaking  of  bread.  I  like  to  see  them  mention  that,  for,  though  ordin- 
ances  are  nothing  in  themselves,  and  are  not  to  be  depended  upon,  they  are  blest  to 
us.  (C  H,  Spurgeon.)  Present,  but  unknown: — I.  The  time  when  the  wai.k 
occmiBED.  1.  On  the  first  of  the  forty  days  between  resurrection  and  ascension. 
2.  Probably  the  longest  period  of  intercourse  with  disciples  between  resurrection 
and  ascension.  II.  The  new  methods  adopted  by  oub  Lobd  to  opebats  on  thb 
HINDS  ON  THEBB  TWO  HEN.  He  makes  them  first  define  their  grief,  and  then  state 
their  belief.  Here  are  two  of  the  most  instmotive  lessons  in  tiie  Scriptures  of  the 
human  soul  as  well  as  the  Holy  Scriptures.  The  first  lesson  is :  measure  your 
Borrow,  see  its  nature  and  extent,  and  know  exactly  its  bearings  on  your  happiness. 
The  second  is :  if  you  are  in  doubt  and  apprehensions,  if  you  are  tempted  to  distrust 
Ood  and  Christ,  if  scepticism  or  the  worst  horror  of  infidelity  threaten  yoor  heart, 
go  back  to  what  you  do  assuredly  believe.  Find  honest  footing  for  yourselves.  Rest 
on  the  great  fondamentals  that  lie  imbedded  in  the  instincts,  the  granite  sabstrik 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xxiv. 

turn  of  nature  and  the  basis  of  all  real  characters.  Let  as  learn  &om  the  walk 
toward  Emmaus  what  Christ  expects  of  us  in  hours  of  darkness  and  dismay,  and 
then  we  may  hope  that,  when  we  get  to  Emmaus,  He  will  reveal  His  glory.  {A.  A. 
Lipscomb,  LL.D.)  Jesut  drawing  near : — *'  He  drew  very  near,"  solemnly  uttered 
a  youthful  believer  within  a  few  hours  of  death.  "  Who  drew  near  ?  "  anxiously 
inquired  a  friend  who  was  present,  fearful  to  hear  her  pronounce  the  word  "  death." 
"  Jesus,"  she  replied,  with  an  unutterable  earnestness  of  expression.  "  I  felt  just 
now  as  if  He  stood  close  beside  me."  Soon  after  she  was  asked  by  her  sister  if  she 
would  like  her  to  pray  with  her.  She  gladly  assented.  But  while  she  prayed  the 
countenance  of  the  dying  one  changed,  the  expression  of  supplication  was  succeeded 
by  one  of  adoring  contemplation — it  would  have  been  rapture  but  for  its  perfect 
calm.  A  kind  of  glow  sufifused  her  features,  then  faded  gradually  away,  and  before 
that  prayerwas  ended  she  was  gone.  Her  **  amen,"  to  it  was  her  first  hallelujah  in 
heaven.  Jesus  had  "  come  again  "  and  received  her  unto  Himself .  {Clerical  Library.) 
Emmaut: — I.  Christ  Himself  the  theme  of  His  disciples'  conversation.  H.  Christ 
Himself  the  expositor  of  His  own  sufferings.  HI.  Christ  Himself  the  gdbst 
OF  His  own  disciples.  IY.  Christ  Himself  the  occasion  of  His  own  recogni- 
tion. Practical  lessons :  1.  There  is  no  teacher  like  Christ.  2.  There  is  no  friend 
like  Christ.  {J.  JR.  Thomson.)  The  walk  to  Emmaus  : — It  may  be  asked,  Why 
should  not  our  Lord  have  declared  Himself  at  once  to  these  burdened  friends  ? 
Why  not  with  one  word  have  assured  them,  as  He  did  faithful  Mary  in  the  garden  ? 
The  answer  is  suggestive.  In  them  the  stupendous  miracle  of  the  resurrection 
was  to  be  established,  not  by  one  appearance,  but  by  many ;  not  by  evidence  of  one 
kind,  but  of  all  kinds.  Each  fresh  proof  of  the  fact  was  to  be  a  separate  link  in  a 
chain  of  proofs,  on  which  ages  to  come  might  hang  their  faith.  The  particular 
link  to  be  wrought  and  welded  on  the  road  to  Emmaus  was  the  complete  identity 
of  the  slain  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Messiah  of  Moses  and  Daniel,  of  David, 
Isaiah,  and  Malachi.  Had  He  too  soon  revealed  His  personality  to  these  oppressed 
disciples,  they  would  have  been  unfitted,  by  their  great  joy,  to  receive  this  lesson 
and  to  witness  its  truth.  But  now  they  take  it  in  eagerly.  Their  ears  thirst  for 
knowledge.  Such  was  the  sacred  drama  of  the  Emmaus  road,  and  from  the  whole 
story  we  may  instruct  and  comfort  ourselves  in  several  ways :  1.  It  is  good  for 
disciples  to  be  together.  Every  appearance  of  the  Lord  immediately  after  Hi8 
resurrection,  save  one,  was  made  to  disciples  in  groups.  2.  The  Lord  may  be 
much  nearer  to  doubting  disciples  than  they  dream.  3.  The  source  of  mnoh 
modem  doubt  about  Christ  is  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures  as  a  whole.  The 
real  cure  of  doubt,  therefore,  lies  in  a  more  comprehensive  study  of  the 
Word  of  God,  and  the  only  study  that  can  be  a  perfect  cure  is  that  which 
shall  "  begin  with  Moses,"  and  end  with  the  Apocalypse.  {J.  B.  Clark.) 
The  hidden  Christ : — No  more  picturesque  and  beautiful  scene  is  depicted  in  the 
life  of  Christ,  than  this  walk,  after  His  resurrection,  out  to  Emmaus.  The  innocent 
onconscionsness  of  the  disciples  pleases  us  hke  a  scene  in  a  drama.  That  trait, 
too,  in  the  Lord,  which  led  Him  to  keep  in  disguise,  is  peculiarly  interesting.  It 
interprets  much  of  the  Divine  nature.  One  would  have  looked,  according  to  the 
ordinary  ideas  of  the  Divine  mind,  and  of  its  methods,  for  an  open  and  prompt 
disclosure  of  Himself.  But  no.  It  was  pleasant  to  Him,  for  some  reason,  to  be 
with  His  disciples,  to  love  them,  to  perceive  their  embarrassments,  to  instruct 
them,  without  letting  them  know  that  He  was  there.  It  was  not  deception.  It 
was  only  a  permitting  them  to  have  their  own  notions  of  Him  undisturbed,  while 
He  exercised  the  full  mission  of  love.  This  cannot  be  an  unintended  disclosure  of 
the  Divine  nature.  I  will  not  call  it  mystic ;  and  still  less  will  I  call  it  secretive ; 
but  there  is  a  love  of  non-disclosure  of  personality  during  the  operation  of  merciful 
grace,  which  has  illustration  in  various  other  parts  of  the  Gospel.  One  cannot  but 
see  that  the  Lord  carried  Himself  to  them  just  as  in  nature  Divine  providence  is 
always  carrying  itself.  Mercies  move  with  wide-spread  benefaction ;  yet  without 
interpreting  themselves.  Nature  is  blessing  without  saying,  "  I  bless."  Messages 
are  coming  through  the  air,  and  through  Divine  providence,  from  God ;  and  yet, 
they  do  not  say  "  God."  God  is  present  in  a  silent  way  always.  A  certain  hidden 
element,  or  hiding  element,  there  is  in  the  Divine  mind,  God's  blessings  steal  into 
life  noiselessly.  They  are  neither  self-proclaiming,  nor  even  self-announcing.  L 
The  Lord's  presence  in  unperceived  ways  in  the  daily  wants  of  His  peolpe. 
He  is  to  be  found  wherever  the  soul  is  ready  to  receive  Him.  In  some  tender 
moment,  amidst  cares  and  toils  and  sorrows,  often  there  starts  ap  the  thought  of 
the  Divine  presence  with  such  majesty  and  beauty  as  ft  thousand  sabbaths  ooali 


OBAP.  xxiv.J  ST.  LUKE.  631 

not  shadow  forth  in  the  ordinary  experience  of  Christians,  Though  they  did  not 
see  the  Saviour,  yet  they  saw  His  messengers — His  blessed  angels.  Travellers  over 
wide  spaces  that  are  unpopulous,  hide  their  food  in  what  are  called  caches,  that, 
returning,  they  may  have  it  at  fit  and  appropriate  points  for  their  necessities.  God 
fills  the  world  with  these  spots  of  hidden  food  ;  and  we  meet  Him  and  His  mercies 
not  alone  in  appointed  places,  in  houses  of  entertainment,  but  in  the  wilderness — 
everywhere.  Christ  may  be  found  at  the  well,  if  you  come  there  to  draw.  Christ 
may  be  found  at  the  receipt  of  custom,  where  Matthew  found  Him.  Christ  may  be 
found  behind  the  bier,  where  the  widow  found  Him.  Christ  may  be  found  on  the 
sea,  where  the  disciples  found  Him  when  they  were  fishing.  He  is  moving  with 
world-filling  presence  everywhere.  But  notably  we  may  mention  that  God  comes 
to  His  people  in  an  undisclosed  and  unrecognized  form  in  the  hours  of  their 
despondency,  as  in  the  text.  Or,  to  put  it  in  other  words,  that  which  seems  to  us  to 
be  a  cloud  and  darkness,  is,  after  all,  but  the  garment  in  the  midst  of  which  Christ 
is  walking.  All  right  occupations  likewise,  all  duties,  all  daily  fidelities,  bring 
along  with  them  a  Divine  presence.  We  are  never  alone.  We  are  never  doing 
things  that  are  merely  secular,  if  we  know  how  to  make  them  Divine.  The  most 
menial  callings,  routine  occupations,  things  not  agreeable  in  themselves,  but 
nece  sary,  and  things  of  duty,  all  of  them  have  or  may  have  with  them  a  Christ. 
II.  The  »ull  privilegb  of  the  soul  m  God's  presence  and  providence  dis- 
cerned WHEN  THE  GIFT  18  VANISHING  AWAY.  "Man  never  is,  but  always  to  be 
blessed,"  h*-  become  a  motto.  Our  joys  are  seldom  with  us.  They  are  either 
remembered  o;  th^y  are  anticipated.  When  we  come  where  they  are,  how  few  of 
as  there  are  that  a  re  soundly  happy ;  how  few  there  are  that  are  full  of  joy  and 
know  it.  H'.w  few  there  are  that  have  a  power  in  them  of  blessing,  in  any  hour  or 
in  any  day,  :r,  si  ill  less,  series  of  days !  How  few  there  are  that  can  pluck  from  for- 
tune, or  from  providence,  or  from  Divine  grace  itself,  fruits  that  shall  be  sweet  to 
the  taste  while  they  are  walking  along  the  road  of  life !  It  is  trite,  that,  "  Men  do 
not  know  how  to  value  health  till  they  lose  it."  It  is  the  same  with  wealth.  It  is 
BO  of  youth  and  age.  For  we  take  our  measures  as  little  children  take  snowflakes 
to  examine  them,  and  they  are  gone.  They  dissolve  in  the  looking  at  them. 
Especially  is  this  true  of  moral  things — of  moral  treasures.  Hours  of  religious 
peace,  hours  of  spiritual  delight,  never  seem  so  precious  to  us,  hours  of  religious 
duty  are  never  so  dear  to  us,  while  we  have  them ;  and  they  are  as  it  were,  in  their 
ministration,  as  when  they  are  gone.  In  our  religious  life  we  are  finding  fault 
with  our  fare.  In  like  manner  is  it  in  respect  to  our  privileges  in  being  workers 
together  with  God.  While  we  have  the  privileges,  how  little  we  esteem  them  1  and 
how  much,  often,  we  reluctate  and  begrudge  both  time  and  strength  I  Now  it  is  an 
exceeding  privilege  for  any  one  to  be  a  worker  together  with  Christ  in  the  work  of 
the  Lord  in  this  world.  And  so  is  it  with  the  sanctuary.  So  is  it  with  the  bless- 
ings of  the  soul  itself.  Our  inward  thoughts,  our  inward  strifes  and  resolutions, 
our  very  tears,  our  prayers,  all  that  sacred  history  of  the  soul  that  is  inherited  upon 
earth,  but  is  more  heroic  and  more  wonderful  than  the  history  of  the  battle-field  or 
the  history  of  empires — that  lore  unexpressed,  that  literature  of  eternity,  the  soul's 
inward  life — at  the  time  how  little  is  there  to  us  in  it  1  how  little  of  Christ !  Ah  ! 
what  a  pity,  my  Christian  brethren,  it  is  that  Christ  should  vanish  out  of  sight  just 
at  the  moment  when  He  discloses  Himself  I  What  a  pity  it  is  that  just  as  our 
mercies  are  going  beyond  our  reach,  they  should  for  the  first  time  seem  to  be 
mercies  I  In  view  of  these  simple  remarks,  may  yon  not  derive  a  motive  for  the 
better  use  of  the  present  in  all  the  relations  of  your  life  than  you  have  been  accus- 
tomed to  f  And  ought  we  not,  bearing  this  in  mind,  to  make  more  of  one  another ; 
more  of  oar  children ;  more  of  our  parents ;  more  of  our  brothers  and  sisters  ; 
more  of  our  neighbours;  more  of  the  Church;  more  of  the  Bible- class ;  more  of 
the  Sabbath-school ;  more  of  all  works  by  which  we  cleanse  the  morals  of  men,  and 
raise  up  the  ignorant,  and  prosper  those  that  are  unfortunate?  May  not  life  by 
filled  fuller  of  blessings,  if  only  we  know  how  to  redeem  the  time,  and  appreciate 
the  opportunity  to  perceive  the  God  that  is  near  us?  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The 
walk  to  Emmaus : — I.  And,  first — the  first  truth  taught  us  by  narrative — see  here 
the  importance  of  searching  and  understanding  the  Scriptures,  and  how  a  neglected 
or  perverted  Bible  will  bring  sin  and  sorrow  into  the  souL  IL  As  these  two 
disciples  pursue  their  melancholy  journey — the  deepening  shadows  of  evening  a 
feeble  type  of  the  gloom  gathering  on  their  souls — ^we  have  seen  a  third  join  them. 
Lkt  ub  mow  titbit  cub  attbntiok  to  thib  stbahgeb.  His  fellow-traveUers  knew 
Him  not,  but  we  know  Him.    I  have  said  that  we  know  not  the  name  of  one  oC 


632  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn?. 

these  disciples.    But  the  name  of  this  wayfaring  man  we  know.    He  is  "The  Won- 
derful."   Wonderful  was  He  in  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was.     Wonderful  was  He  in  His  deep  humihation.    But  He  is,  above  all, 
wonderful  now,  as  He  stands  upon  the  earth,  a  mighty  conqueror  returned  from 
His  expedition  into  the  territories  of  the  King  of    Terrors — having  "  by  death 
destroyed  death,"  and  become   the  resurrection  and  the  life.     He  might  hav* 
entered  the  city  in  regal  pomp  and  equipage,  with  a  retinue  of  angelic  legions ;  but 
He  prefers  to  enter  these  desolate  hearts,  and  to  awaken  festive  joy  and  triumphal 
acclamations  there.     What  I  desire  to  mark  in  the  conduct  of  the  Redeemer  is  the 
manner  in  which  He  makes  himself  known  to  these  two  disciples.    For  observe, 
my  brethren,  in  the  first  place,  that  He  does  not  at  once  reveal  Himself  to  them ; 
and  why  not  ?    For  reasons  most  obvious.     They  had,  as  yet,  no  idea  of  the  atone- 
ment.   When  He  foretold  His  crucifixion,  declaring  that  it  was  necessary,  Peter 
was  indignant,  and  said,  "  Be  it  far  from  Thee,  Lord,  this  shall  not  be  unto  Thee." 
Had  He  not  instructed  them  before  showing  Himself,  they  would  have  been  wholly 
unprepared  rightly  to  welcome  Him ;  they  would,  perhaps,  like  the  apostles,  have 
been  "  terrified  and  affrighted,  supposing  they  had  seen  a  spirit."    It  is  certain 
they  could  not  have  been  filled  with  the  intelligent  joy  which  sprang  up  in  their 
eonls  when  He  was  made  known  to  them.     In  the  next  place,  see  how  He  prepares 
them  for  the  manifestation  He  is  about  to  make.     It  is  by  opening  the  Scriptures 
to  them.     He  will  not  let  their  faith  rest  on  the  testimony  of  men  or  of  angels. 
Convincing  as  was  the  vision  on  Mount  Tabor,  Peter,  who  was  there  and  beheld 
the  glorified  Jesus,  says,  "  We  have  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy,  whereunto  ye  do 
well  that  ye  take  heed."    And  it  is  to  this  sure  word  that  Jesus  turns  the  minds  of 
these  disciples.     He  magnifies  "  His  word  above  all  His  name."     He  teaches  them 
that  faith  comes  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God.    IIL  What  is  thh 
EFFECT  OF  THIS  INTERVIEW  UPOK  THESE  TWO  DISCIPLES  ?     Their  souls  are  first  con- 
soled, then  warmed,  then  heated.    While  Jesus  is  speaking  the  fire  kindles ;  Hii 
words  fall  upon  train  after  train  of  memory  and  hope  and  love,  until  everything  is 
in  a  glow,  and  their  hearts  are  burning  within  them.     A  burning  heart  1  what  a 
noble  expression  ;  there  is  something  contagious  in  the  very  words ;  we  cannot 
utter  them  without  feeling  a  sacred  ardour  in  our  own  hearts.    Do  you  ask  me  what 
emotions  burned  in  the  hearts  of  these  disciples  ?    I  answer,  first,  love.     In  the 
whole  account  of  the  Saviour's  resurrection,  we  see  the  difference  between  the 
nature  of  women  and  of  men.     The  former  are  less  suspicious,  more  prompt,  un- 
Lesitating,  unquestioning  in  their  confidence;  and  more  true  in  their  affection. 
Hence  Jesus  appeared  first  to  women.    It  is  to  love  that  Jesus  hastens  to  manifest 
Himself,  and  during  the  three  days  between  the  Saviour's  crucifixion  and  resurrec- 
tion it  was  only  in  the  hearts  of  women  that  love  would  know  no  abatement. 
These  disciples,  however,  had  never  ceased  to  love.     To  me  the  very  ground  of 
their  unbelief  is  a  tender  proof  of  their  affection.     "  Him  they  saw  not " — had  they 
but  seen  Him  ;  they  saw  a  vision  of  angels,  but  saw  ye  Him  whom  our  souls  love? 
No,  ••  Him  they  saw  not  "  ;  and  what  if  they  saw  thousands  of  angels,  what  if  all 
the  angels  of  heaven  should  appear,  they  cannot  console  us  for  our  bereavement. 
They  still  loved,  but  their  hearts  had  been  crushed  by  such  a  blow.     The  fire  was 
almost  extinguished;   it  is  now  fanned;    the  dying  embers  begin  to  glow,  tho 
smoking  flax  blazes  up.     They  know  not  the  stranger,  but  He  speaks  to  them  of 
One  dearer  to  them  than  life ;  how  much  sweeter  the  memory  of  Him  than  the 
presence  of  all  besides  I    Do  you  ask  me  what  emotions  burned  in  the  hearts  of 
these  disciples  ?     I  answer,  jay.     "  The  testimony  of  the  Lord  is  sure,  making  wise 
the  simple;  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart."    There  is 
vouchsafed  to  them  now  a  foretaste  of  the  Pentecostal  fire.     Their  hearts  burn 
within  them,  burn  with  joy.     In  a  word,  and  not  to  dwell  too  long  upon  this  topic, 
the  hearts  of  these  disciples  burned,  not  only  with  love  and  joy,  but  with  the 
strangest,  sweetest  surprise.      Their  astonishment  and  rapture  must  have  been 
overpowering  an  hour  later,  when  "  their  eyes  were  opened  and  they  knew  Him, 
and  He  vanished  out  of  their  sight. "     What  a  moment  that  1     What  ages  crowded 
into  that  moment !     IV.  In  finishing  this  discourse,  let  us  extract  frou  this 
HISTORY  TWO  LESSONS,  and  let  the  first  be.  The  duty  of  living  by  faith,  not  by  sight 
When  we  open  the  sacred  Volume  we  find  that  to  faith  nothing  is  impossible ;  but 
where  is  this  omnipotent  grace  ?    Yet  this  entire  narrative — the  Saviour's  rebuke 
of  tiiese  disciples — the  manner  in  which  He  instructs  them — His  sudden  vanishing- 
all  teaches  us  that  it  is  not  by  the  senses,  but  by  faith  in  revealed  truth  that  we  are 
to  walk.    He  appears  to  convince  them  of  His  resurrection,  and  to  assure  them  of 


CHAP,  xxnr.]  ST.  LUKE,  638 

His  constant  care  and  faithfulness.  He  disappears,  to  teach  that,  though  they  hav« 
known  Him  after  the  flesh,  hencelorth  they  are  only  to  know  EQm  and  commune  with 
Him  spiritually.  Another  lesson.  Let  us  seek  burning  hearts.  Faith  is  a  great  word ; 
bat  there  is  a  greater,  more  imperial  word,  it  is  Love.  The  life  of  love  is  a  truer, 
higher  life  than  that  of  faith ;  its  strength  failed  not  amidst  all  the  unbelief  of  these 
disciples  ;  and  it  will  be  perpetuated  and  perfected  in  heaven,  when  faith  shall  cease 
for  ever.  Let  us  seek  burning  hearts.  Intellect  is  good,  and  imagination  is  good  ; 
but  a  heart  on  fire,  a  heart  infiamed  with  love,  is  best  of  all.  {R.  Fuller,  D.D.) 
What  manner  of  commonlcatiouB  are  these? — Easter  consolatiom : — The  Lord's 
question  was  the  language,  not  of  reproof,  but  of  sympathy.  Something  like 
reproof  came  later  on :  but  as  yet  He  can  think  only  of  their  sadtiess.  Their 
sadness  was  written,  so  the  original  word  implies,  in  their  countenances :  but  He, 
of  course,  saw  deeper.  And  whether  the  allusion  to  the  sadness  formed  part  of  Hia 
question,  or  belongs,  as  is  probable,  to  the  evangelist's  description,  does  not  reaUy 
matter :  the  drift  of  the  early  part  of  His  question  was  plain  enough.    I.  What 

WAS  AT  THE  BOTTOM  07   THE   SADNESS   OF  THE   TWO   DISCIPLES  ?      1.   It  WaS,  first  Of   all, 

the  sadness  of  a  bereavement.  They  had  been  with  Jesus,  we  know  not  how  long ; 
they  had  seen  and  heard  Him :  He  had  conquered  a  great  place  in  their  hearts. 
They  had  seen  Him  arrested,  insulted,  crucified,  dead,  buried.  So  far  their  sadness 
was  that  of  the  Magdalene,  when  she  asked  the  supposed  gardener  where  they  had 
laid  the  sacred  body.  We  most  of  as  know  something  of  the  heartache  of  a  great 
bereavement.  2.  But,  then,  secondly,  the  sadness  of  the  disciples  was  also  caused 
by  mental  perplexity.  Here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  Gospels,  we  see  the  different 
bearing  of  men  and  women  in  the  hour  of  sorrow.  A  woman  is  most  distressed 
when  her  heart  has  lost  its  accustomed  object.  A  man  is  by  no  means  insensible 
to  this  source  of  sorrow  ;  but  he  commonly  feels  a  distress,  which  a  woman  does 
not  feel,  at  least  equally,  when  his  intelligence,  his  sense  of  truth,  is  perplexed. 
8.  Once  more,  theirs  was  the  sadness  of  a  forfeited  object  in  life,  of  a  shattered 
career.  They  had,  as  they  thought,  given  themselves  to  Jesus,  to  His  cause  and 
work,  for  good  and  all.  They  had  embarked  all  the  energy  and  resolve  of  life  ia 
that  service,  in  that  companionship,  so  full,  as  it  seemed,  of  coming  blessing  and 
triumph :  when  lo  I  as  it  appeared,  all  had  collapsed.    II.  In  oub  modebn  world 

ARE  TO  BE  SEEN,  NOT  SELDOM,  DISCIPLES  OF  CHRIST  IN  NAME,  DOWNCAST  AND  SADDENED, 
WHO  ABE  LEAVING  JERUSALEM,  AS  IF  ON  THE  POINT  OF  OIVINO  HiM  UP.      And  He,  aS  of 

old,  joins  them  in  "  another  form,"  so  that  their  eyes  are  holden,  and  they  do  not 
know  Him.  He  comes  to  them  in  His  Church,  which  is  in  their  eyes  only  a  human 
institution  ;  or  in  His  Scriptures,  which  seem  to  them  bat  a  human  literature ;  or 
in  His  Sacraments,  in  which  they  can  discern  nothing  more  than  outward  cere- 
monies. Yet  He  has  a  question  to  put  to  them,  and  a  word  of  comfort  to  address 
to  them,  if  they  will  but  listen.  For  they  are  sad ;  sad  for  nearly  the  same  reasons 
as  were  the  two  disciples  on  the  Emmaus  road.  1.  First  of  all,  there  is  the  sadness 
of  mental  perplexity.  The  understanding  has  its  fashions  as  well  as  the  heart ;  its 
fashions  of  distress  as  well  as  its  fashions  of  enjoyment.  In  our  day,  many  men, 
who  have  not  wholly  renounced  the  name  of  Christ,  are  oppressed  by  what  they 
call,  not  unreasonably,  the  mystery  of  existence.  They  see  around  them  a  world 
of  nature,  and  a  human  world  too.  Each  in  a  thousand  ways  creates  perplexity 
and  disappointment.  Whence  comes  the  natural  world  i  If  we  lose  sight  of  what 
faith  teaches  as  to  the  creation  of  all  things  out  of  nothing  by  God,  all  is  at  once 
wrapped  in  darkness.  Our  risen  Lord  offers  us  the  true  solution.  2.  Next,  there 
is  the  sadness  of  the  conscience.  Where  distinct  acts  of  wrong-doing  are  not  oon- 
etantly  and  vividly  present  to  the  memory,  there  is  a  moral  cloud  brooding  over  the 
eoul,  from  whose  shadow  escape  is  rarely  possible.  Our  risen  Lord  reveals  Himself 
to  those  who  are  weighed  down  by  sin,  as  pardoning  and  blotting  it  out.  He  bare 
our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree ;  and  it  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  which 
cleanses  us  from  all  sin.  But  what  is  it  that  gives  His  death  this  power  t  It  ia 
that  the  worth  and  merits  of  His  Person  are  incalculable,  since  He  is  the  ever- 
lasting Son  of  God.  And  what  is  the  proof  of  this  which  He  Himself  offered  to 
His  disciples  and  to  the  world  ?  It  is  His  reearrection  from  the  dead.  3.  Thirdly, 
there  is  that  sadness  of  the  soul  which  arises  from  the  want  of  an  object  in  life ;  an 
object  to  be  grasped  by  the  affections,  to  be  aimed  at  by  the  wilL  This  is  a  kind 
of  melancholy  which  is  common  enough  among  persons  who  have  all  the  advan- 
tages which  money  and  position  can  secure :  they  do  not  know  what  to  do  with 
themselves.  They  devote  themselves  to  expedients  for  diminishing  the  lassitude  of 
•ristence ;  they  apply  first  to  this  excitement,  then  to  that :  they  spend  their  Utm 


Ui  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixW. 

in  trying  to  "kill  time."  What  a  disclosure  of  the  hopeless  misuse  of  life  lies  in 
that  expression,  "killing  time"!  To  persons  who  are  thus  living  ■without  an 
object,  Christ  our  Lord  appears,  once  it  may  be  at  least ;  to  teach  them  that  there  is 
something  worth  living  for;  the  known  will  of  the  eternal  God.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Our  Lord''s  question : — 1.  This  inquiry  may  be  regarded  as  an  instance  of  our  Lord's 
tenderness  and  compassion  towards  His  disciples.  2.  Our  Lord's  question  was  an 
indication  of  His  authority.  He  speaks  not  only  as  a  friend,  but  as  their  Lord  and 
Saviour.  3.  The  question  might  be  proposed  in  order  to  teach  both  them  and 
others  the  propriety  of  frequently  putting  a  similar  inquiry  to  themselves.  1.  Is 
the  general  tenor  of  our  conversation  light  and  indifferent,  or  is  it  serious  and 
edifying  ?  2.  Does  our  conversation  never  border  upon  profaneness,  even  while  it 
is  free  from  the  grosser  expressions  of  it  ?  3.  Is  our  conversation  seasoned  with 
salt,  so  as  to  minister  edification  to  the  hearers?  4.  Are  we  careful  as  to  the 
manner  of  our  conversation,  as  well  as  to  the  matter  of  it ;  to  see  that  the  spirit  of 
it  corresponds  with  the  subject  of  discourse  ?  As  spiritual  things  can  only  be 
spiritually  discerned,  so  they  can  be  communicated  only  by  such  as  are  spiritually 
minded.  When  our  tongues  are  fluent,  are  our  hearts  warm  and  lively  ?  In  order 
that  our  conversation  may  be  as  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ,  let  us  observe  the 
following  directions :  1.  Get  a  good  treasure  in  your  hearts,  and  let  them  be  well 
stored  with  Divine  truth ;  for  it  is  out  of  this  that  the  good  householder  bringeth 
forth  good  things.  If  the  truth  dwell  in  us  richly  in  all  wisdom,  it  will  be  like  a  well 
of  water,  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.  2.  Meditate  much  upon  Divine  subjects. 
"  Whilst  I  was  musing,"  says  David,  "the  fire  burned."  What  God  communicates  to  us 
by  our  thoughts,  we  shall  be  ready  to  communicate  to  others  in  our  words.  3.  Seek 
Divine  direction,  and  say  with  the  Psalmist,  "  Open  Thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth 
shall  show  forth  Thy  praise."  If  we  were  as  full  of  matter  as  Elihu,  yet  what  we 
utter  would  not  tend  to  the  glory  of  God,  unless  we  are  ander  the  influence  of  His 
Holy  Spirit  (Psa.  li.  15 ;  Ephes.  v.  18,  19).  4.  Carefully  avoid  whatever  might 
prove  an  impediment  to  spiritual  and  edifying  conversation.  Shun  carnal  company, 
disregard  the  reproaches  of  ignorant  and  wicked  men,  and  seek  the  society  of 
experimental  Christians.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise ;  but  a 
companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed  "  (Prov.  xiii.  20 ;  Hos.  xiv.  9).  {B.  Beddome, 
M.A.)  A  wise  method  of  dealing  with  mourners : — Observe  that,  when  the  Saviour 
did  come  to  these  mourning  ones,  He  acted  very  wisely  towards  them.  He  did  not 
at  once  begin  by  saying,  "  I  know  why  you  are  sad."  No ;  He  waited  for  them  to 
speak,  and  in  His  patiends  drew  forth  from  them  the  items  and  particulars  of  their 
trouble.  You  that  deal  with  mourners,  learn  hence  the  way  of  wisdom.  Do  not 
talk  too  much  yourselves.  Let  the  swelling  heart  relieve  itself.  Jeremiah  derives 
a  measure  of  help  from  his  own  lamentations ;  even  Job  feels  a  little  the  better 
from  pouring  out  his  complaint.  Those  griefs  which  are  silent  run  very  deep, 
and  drown  the  soul  in  misery.  It  is  good  to  let  sorrow  have  a  tongue  where 
sympathy  hath  an  ear.  Allow  those  who  are  seeking  the  Lord  to  teU  yon  their 
difiiculties :  do  not  discourse  much  with  them  till  they  have  done  so.  You  will  be 
the  better  able  to  deal  with  them,  and  they  will  be  the  better  prepared  to  receive 
your  words  of  cheer.  Often,  by  facing  the  disease  of  sorrow  the  cure  is  half 
effected ;  for  many  doubts  and  fears  vanish  when  described.  Mystery  gives  a  tooth 
to  misery,  and  when  that  mystery  is  extracted  by  a  clear  description,  the  sharpness 
of  the  woe  is  over.  Learn,  then,  ye  who  would  be  comforters,  to  let  mourners  hold 
forth  their  wound  before  you  pour  in  the  oil  and  wine.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Sad 
hearts : — Samuel  Kutherford  used  to  say,  "  I  wonder  many  times  that  ever  a  child 
of  God  should  have  a  sad  heart,  considering  wnat  the  Lord  is  preparing  for  him." 
"  When  we  shall  come  home,  and  enter  into  the  possession  of  our  Brother's  fair 
kingdom,  and  when  our  heads  shall  find  the  weight  of  the  eternal  crown  of  glory, 
and  when  we  shall  look  back  to  pains  and  suffering,  then  shall  we  see  life  and 
Borrow  to  be  less  than  one  step  or  stride  from  a  prison  to  glory,  and  that  our  little 
inch  of  time-suffering  is  not  worthy  of  our  first  night's  welcome  home  to  heaven." 
What  things  7 — Faith  and  fact  .-—We  naturally  inquire,  why  did  He  ask  this 
question  ?  Not  for  His  own  sake,  certainly.  He  not  only  knew,  but  was  Himself 
the  very  subject  of  the  narrative  which  He  would  obtain  from  their  lips.  "  What 
things  r  "  He  asks.  I.  Notice,  first  of  all,  the  important  circamstance  that  He  calls 
THBiB  ATTBNTioN  TO  rAOTB.  It  t<  an  important  circumstance.  In  the  world,  fact  is 
oar  master ;  the  troth  is,  after  all,  that  which  we  need,  and  which  controls  us.  No 
alehemy  of  logic,  no  splendour  of  fancy,  can  dissolve  this.  A  man  may  live  in  an 
ideal  world  while  he  dreams,  but  waking  brings  him  to  solid  earth,  and  to  the  slow 


XMAi.  XXIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  636 

and  real  steps  of  daily  life.     The  ultimate  question  for  us,  with  reference  to  every- 
thing that  demands  our  allegiance  or  assent,  is  this :     Is  it  fact  ?     Christianity 
must  submit  to  this  test,  as  all  other  things.     Men  fancy  that  it  does  not  meet  the 
requirement.     The  impression  is  widely  prevalent.     We  may  not  stop  to  enumerate 
all  the  circumstances  that  lead  to  this  impression,  and  yet  a  few  may  be  referred  to. 
Pirst  of  all,  those  circumstances  that  have  existed  in  connection  with  widely-spread 
revivals  of  religion  have  impressed  upon  the  minds  of  many  critical  observers  the 
conclusion  that  Christianity  is  all  a  romance,  a  dream.    It  may  be  impossible,  by  any 
mere  human  criteria,  to  discriminate  between  that  which  is  passional  and  earthly  and 
that  which  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit.     God  knoweth  His  own.     It  is  not  necessary 
for  me  to  know  whether  my  neighbour  be  a  Christian ;  it  is  necessary  for  me  to 
know  that  I  am  in  communion  with  God.     I  am  not  bound  to  anatomize,  dissect, 
and  understand  the  working  of  his  heart.     I  must  deal  with  my  own  heart.    A 
second  circumstance  that  leads  to  this  impression  is  the  wide  disparity  between 
the  profession  of  Christians  and  the  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the  gospel  in 
their  lives.    They  cannot  probe  nor  underctand  hidden  life.     Christianity  seems 
unreal  to  them,  because  it  is  still  and  unobtrusive.    A  third  cause  of  the  impression 
is  the  persistent  and  earnest  efforts,  often  reiterated,  and  especially  prominent  in 
our  day,  to  do  away  with  the  historic  basis  of  Christianity,  and  to  construct  a  God 
out  of  human  consciousness.     They  tell  us  that  Christianity,  after  all,  is  only  the 
religion  of  nature  ;  it  found  a  temporary  manifestation  here  ;  but  it  existed  before, 
and  exists  now,  without  revelation.    That  it  is,  indeed,  the  religion  which  nature 
demands,  the  outcry  of  the  soul  among  all  nations,  civilized  and  barbaric,  affirms ; 
but  that  it  is  the  religion  that  nature  offers,  the  agony  of  the  crucified,  and  the  wail 
of  the  philosopher  in  the  early  ages,  and  the  burden  of  those  who  in  heathenism 
to-day  cry  out  for  light  and  confess  their  despair,  all  these  deny.     And  yet  we  have 
those  who  placidly  teU  us  that  "  religion  is  storaz,  and  chlorine,  and  rosemary  ;  a 
mountain  air,  and  the  silent  song  of  the  stars  is  it."    A  "  mountain  air,"  indeed,  is 
such  religion — very  thin  and  very  cold,  where  men  soon  gasp  and  die.     Not  thus 
did  Christ  and  His  apostles  deal  with  the  historic  facts  of  Churistianity.    Here,  you 
observe,  He  appeals  to  certain  "  things,"  upon  the  reality  of  which  all  His  further 
dealings  with  these  men,  and  all  their  hopes,  are  based.     If  these  "  things  "  have 
not  occurred — if  these  "  things  "  are  not  brought  back  vividly  to  their  memory — if 
upon  these  •*  things  "  and  their  actuality  He  cannot  build  His  subsequent  words, 
they  are  deluded  and  defrauded,  and  their  hopes  are  vain.    The  Gospels  themselves 
sure  a  compend  of  almost  naked  facts.    Men  now,  as  well  as  then,  have  to  deal  with 
concrete  actualities  in  Christianity  and  its  attendant  evidences.     Let  me  refer  to 
two  or  three.    You  remember  that  famous  answer  to  the  king  who  demanded  a 
visible  miracle :  '*  Your  Majesty — the  Jews."    They  are  an  anomaly,  a  perpetual 
miracle  among  the  nations.     Living  in  every  country,  yet  having  no  country; 
intermixed  in  trade,  yet  not  in  blood,  with  other  nations ;  preserving  their  distinct 
identity  ;  a  people  with  a  memory  and  a  hope,  who  look  longingly  and  passionately 
back  to  empty  Jerusalem,  and  claim  it  still  as  their  own,  though  for  hundreds  of 
years  they  have  been  only  permitted  to  touch  the  precious  stones  of  the  foundation 
of  their  temple.    How  shall  we  explain  their  presence  in  the  world  ?    How  are  we 
to  account  for  the  circumstances  which  environ  them  7    I  see  upon  them  the  brand 
of  blood,  and  I  remember  how,  at  the  transaction  in  Jerusalem,  they  said,  "  His 
blood  be  upon  us."    If  this  Bible  gives  the  true  history  of  the  Jews,  their  condition 
is  explained ;  if  not,  no  theorist,  no  philosopher,  no  student  of  the  science  of 
history  can  explain  it  to  me.    I  look  to  the  Church  of  God — and,  that  I  may  be 
more  specific,  to  a  single  Church — not  to  the  Church  universal,  whose  outlines  are 
not  clearly  visible.    I  look  to  a  single  Church,  as  an  existing  institution,  as  a  fact 
in  the  community.     I  put  it  alongside  of  earthly  institutions — of  those  various 
organizations  which  men  have  framed  for  benevolent,  social,  and  literary  purposes. 
I  point  to  the  perpetuity  of  the  individual  Church.     I  come  to  individuals.    It  is 
sufficient  if  there  be  a  single  man  who  realizes,  in  any  considerable  degree,  that 
which  the  gospel  promises  concerning  the  restoration  of  man  to  ideal  perfectness. 
Bead  over  that  wonderful  catalogue  which  Paul  gives  us  of  the  Christian  virtues,  in 
the  thirteenth  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.     Think  of  a  man 
who  is  wise,  and  patient,  and  pure,  and  long-suffering,  and  charitable,  and  unenvious, 
and  hopeful,  and  truthful — all  the  virtues  that  yon  can  catalogue.    But  he  tells 
you  all  this  is  built  upon  his  companionship  with  Christ — upon  the  power  of  faith 
in  actual  redemption  through  Christ.     Is  not  such  a  case  a  fact  in  life,  and  bas  not 
eneh  a  fact  come  within  your  reach  ?    But  take  another  case.     Let  it  be  a  woman. 


636  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

who,  in  her  early  womanhood,  has  given  her  heart,  full  of  overflowing  affection,  to 
the  one  she  trasted  as  her  husband.  He  has  deceived  her.  The  world  has  dealt 
uoldly  with  her.  She  has  no  longer  a  home  or  a  husband,  and  her  children  look 
despair  into  her  eyes  as  she  tarns  to  them.  Yet  there  is  a  Book  she  clings  to,  and 
a  sacred  place  of  comfort ;  and  the  heart  does  not  burst  with  agony.  Alone  I  She 
declares  she  is  not  alone.  That  which  no  human  sympathy  could  give — that  which 
no  haman  wisdom  could  teach — has  been  given  and  taught ;  strength  has  been 
put  into  that  dismayed  soul  that  makes  her  master  of  herself  and  of  the  world, 
notwithstanding  its  crushing  power.  Is  not  this  a  fact?  ^7d  now  I  insist  that 
these  facts  of  which  I  have  spoken  have  no  significance,  except  they  relate  back  to 
the  facts  to  which  these  two  men  referred.  The  Lord's  Supper,  celebrated  month 
by  month,  would  have  no  explanation  in  facts,  and  no  meaning  as  a  ceremony,  if 
it  had  not  been  an  uninterrupted  and  perpetual  memorial  of  an  event  that  tran> 
spired.  The  Church  has  no  foundation,  if  it  be  not  founded  on  a  real  Christ  and 
His  authentic  work  among  men.  You  will  find  that  this  monument  of  fact  in  the  world 
rf.p.ta  upon  Calvary ;  and  Calvary  itself  thrusts  its  deep  roots  down  to  the  earlier 
world.  A  solid  basis  of  history  is  given  us,  su3h  as  no  other  religion  has.  Cbns- 
tlanity  gives  as  a  historic  record  from  the  foundation  of  the  world;  and  the  New 
Testament  is  knit  upon  the  Old  as  the  subsequent  history  of  the  Church  is  knit 
iipon  it.  Now  I  say  that,  if  it  be  not  literal  truth,  as  these  men  reiterated  it,  that 
Christ  was  crucified ;  if  it  be  not  a  fact,  as  revealed  to  them,  that  Christ  is  risen ; 
if  this  basis  for  our  faith  be  swept  away,  then  the  Church  is  dissolved  like  the 
fabric  of  a  vision.  I  look  back  through  the  centuries  to  Paul,  and  hear  him  say : 
"  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  your  hope  is  vain  ;  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins."  I  hear  the 
army  of  martyrs  cry:  "Our  blood  is  spilt  in  vain."  I  hear  Luther  lifting  np 
his  voice,  crying :  "  I  have  deceived  the  nations,  declaring  that  the  just  shall  live 
by  faith."  But,  admitting  the  need  that  these  facts  should  exist,  why  does  He 
ask  these  men  to  recount  them  ?  Why  does  He  bid  them  go  back  again  over  those 
painful,  thorny  steps  which  they  have  just  trod,  and  view  again  those  agonizing 
scenes,  and  recall  the  moomful  words  ?  Before  we  answer  the  question,  let  as  ask 
another :  Why  did  these  facts,  so  momentous,  infiuence  so  few  7  Why  was  not  Palestine 
convulsed  morally  as  well  as  physically  by  the  mighty  earthquake  when  Christ  died 7 
"  What  things  ?  "  And,  first  of  all,  I  recognize  the  fact  that  He  would  fix  their 
attention  upon  the  events  that  have  been  transpiring.  We  must  distinguish  between 
the  mere  open  eye  npon  which  passing  objects  paint  their  unnoticed  outline,  and 
the  observing  eye.  We  must  distinguish  between  things  which  are  just  seen  and 
then  dismissed,  and  those  which  are  retained  by  voluntary  eSort.  These  men  ate 
about  to  dismiss  the  subject  of  their  thoughts.  He  calls  it  back.  "What  things  ?  " 
They  have  fallen  into  mere  musing,  mere  droning  over  the  past.  He  brings  them  back 
to  active  memory  and  active  study  again.  I.  In  the  second  place,  He  asks  them, 
•'What  things?"  that,  in  recounting,  they  may  perceive  the  belations  of  thh 
EVENTS  NABBATE©.  This  is  the  greater  part  of  knowledge.  The  mere  mob  of  motley 
transactions  that  are  fiovring  before  as  in  the  world,  cannot,  as  such,  be  of  service 
to  us.  He  who  would  learn  from  nature,  must  study  the  order  of  nature — mast 
bind  np  hke  with  like,  and  study  the  dissimilarities  of  things  that  differ.  He  who 
will  fairly  study  Christianity  in  the  earth,  must  take  the  dominant  facts  of  Chris- 
tianity,  and  impartially  weigh  them  in  their  relations.  Christianity  must  be  con- 
trasted with  error,  in  the  whole  breadth  of  each.  Things  that  are  alike  must  be 
noticed  and  marked  out,  as  the  algebraist  strikes  out,  from  the  two  sides  of  an 
equation,  elements  that  correspond,  retaining  only  those  that  differ.  The  accidental 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  necessary,  the  formal  from  the  essential ;  and  so  a 
broad  and  impartial  vision  must  measure  the  outlines.  Compare  the  godly  man 
with  the  ungodly,  and  when  you  have  sifted  the  two,  and  so  reached  radical 
character,  how  much  is  left  in  the  godly  man,  and  how  much  is  left  in  the 
ungodly  ?  These  are  the  inquiries  with  which  you  have  to  do.  In  the  history  of 
Christianity  as  a  force  among  nations — socially  and  govemmentally — in  the  historio 
development  of  doctrine,  and  its  bearings  on  hfe — in  the  history  of  individual 
Churches — it  is  the  question  for  men  fairly  to  consider  :  What  are  the  facts,  the 
residuary  facts  ?  So  comes  the '*  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter."  These  disci- 
ples had  not  forgotten,  but  remembered  confusedly  and  in  fragments.  They  must 
pass  the  whole  in  review,  in  broad  vision  see  the  relation  of  part  with  part,  lest 
they  lose  the  benefit  of  the  lesson  which  has  been  given  them.  There  are  two 
difficulties  in  attempting  fairly  to  weigh  facts.  One  is,  the  disposition  to  prejudge 
— to  test  history  by  thaory.    These  men  had  a  theory.    It  was  perfectly  elear  to 


€BAP.  xxiy.]  ST.  LUKE.  637 

them.  God  had  not  given  it  to  them ;  intuition  had  not  disclosed  it ;  but  they  had 
concluded  it — they  were  sure  that,  when  the  Messiah  should  come,  He  would  be  a 
triumphant  Saviour ;  that  He  would  march  boldly  into  Jerusalem,  lay  His  hand 
upon  the  sceptre  and  throne,  and  the  Boman  power  dissolve  before  Him.  This  had 
not  been.  They  had  seen  Him  hang  pale  and  lifeless  upon  the  cross,  and  con- 
signed to  the  tomb  stark  and  dead.  How  could  He  be  the  Messiah  f  The  matter 
was  disposed  of  in  their  minds.  A  second  difficulty  that  lay  in  their  way  is  a 
«ommon  one.  With  half  glimpses,  and  a  confused  idea  of  facts,  they  had  begun 
"reasoning  together."  This  is  almost  instinctive.  Men  get  two  facts  of  a  case, 
and  presume  a  third ;  and,  upon  the  two  facts  and  a  presumption,  go  to  work  to 
build  a  conclusion.  Here  is  a  surveyor  who  wishes  to  measure  the  height  of  yonder 
tree.  He  measures  the  base-line ;  he  knows  the  tree  is  perpendicular,  and  so  has  a 
light-angle ;  now,  he  guesses  at  the  angle  from  here  to  the  top  of  the  tree,  and  on 
these  data  seeks  to  find  the  height  of  the  tree.  Will  he  ever  get  it  f  Science  offers 
to  as  two  or  three  data ;  to  these  known,  we  add  certain  unknown  quantities, 
oounting  them  as  also  known,  and  so  set  off  to  map  out  the  heavenly  spaces.  These 
men  had  a  part  only  of  the  facts,  and  they  had  begun  at  once  to  draw  general  con- 
clusions. There  was  a  fairer  way.  They  remembered  Christ's  words — they  alluded 
to  them.  They  remembered  the  event  of  the  crucifixion,  and  that  three  days  had 
transpired,  and  they  had  heard  the  words  of  the  women,  that  He  was  gone 
from  the  tomb.  Did  they  count  this  a  mere  vision  of  enthusiasts,  who,  by  reason 
of  their  femininity,  might  be  supposed  to  be  peculiarly  imaginative  t  Still,  it  was 
confirmed  by  their  calmer  brethren.  So  far  as  the  testimony  went,  it  was  all  in  the 
direction  of  fulfilment  of  His  word.  It  was  no  time  to  deny  or  surmise,  bat  rather 
to  hope  and  wait  and  watch.  Philip  said  to  Nathaniel,  when  he  asked,  "  Can  any 
good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth?"  "Come  and  see."  So  far  as  tbe  facts  you 
have  seen  go,  do  tbey  point  to  the  truth  of  Christianity  7  Do  not  pause  at  that 
point  to  argue,  much  less  to  deny,  but,  if  you  would  have  confirmation,  "  come  and 
fiee."  It  is  God's  own  method.  Once  more.  It  was  not  sufficient  fob  them 
eiMPLT  TO  THINS  ovsB  the  facts — they  must  also  speak  them.  Now,  this  may  at  first 
Beem  strange  to  us ;  but  consider  how  vital  is  the  relation  of  human  speech  to  the 
development  of  character,  and  to  self -acquaintance.  We  see  now  the  process  by 
which  Christ  leads  these  men  out  of  their  bewilderment  into  perfect  light.  The 
facts  were  all  accessible,  bat,  though  within  reach,  they  were  not  grasped,  and 
would  soon  have  been  swallowed  up  in  forgetfulness.  He  calls  up  again  these 
flitting  forms  and  sets  them  in  array ;  and  beside  them  sets  a  prophecy  uttered  four 
hundred  years  before,  and  shows  them  how,  item  by  item,  it  corresponds  with  these. 
He  goes  farther  back,  from  Malachi  to  Isaiah,  and  from  Isaiah  to  David,  and  from 
David  to  Moses.  He  sets  a  torchlight  on  every  hill,  until  tbeir  wondering  eyes  look 
back  along  the  pathway  to  tbe  gateway  of  Eden,  and  they  see  the  glowing  words, 
"The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head";  "It  shall  bruise  thy 
head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel."  They  understand  now  the  gigantic  conflict 
which  has  transpired,  and  that  from  it  the  Messiah  must  come  forth,  "  having 
trodden  the  wine-press  alone,"  with  garments  blood-red,  to  lift  His  sceptre  over  a 
redeemed  aniverse.  His  bruised  heel  upon  the  crushed  head  of  the  monster.  Their 
hearts  bum  within  them ;  they  longed  for  the  truth,  and  now,  the  truth  being  come 
to  them,  their  hearts  are  aglow,  and  they  constrain  Him  to  abide  with  them.  They 
have  learned  the  lesson — their  faith  is  confirmed.  He  is  known  to  them,  and 
vanishes  from  their  sight.  This  method  in  the  revelation  of  Himself  to  a  soul, 
commends  itself  to  reasonable  men ;  proceeding  from  facts  to  conclusions — from 
the  known  to  the  unknown — from  the  naturfj  to  tbe  supernatural.  (Jesse  B. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  But  wo  trusted. — A  mistaken  hope  : — I.  Theib  previous  con- 
viDENCB.  1.  The  object  of  that  confidence.  They  had  formed  defective  views  as 
to  the  (1)  naedfal  atonement,  and  (2)  attendant  benefits.  2.  The  ground  of  that 
confidence.  In  part  substantially  and  in  part  visionary.  They  were  misled  by 
prevailing  misconceptions.  U.  Theib  pbesent  despondencz.  1.  Its  extent.  Heart- 
felt dejection.  2.  The  occasion  of  it  (see  ver.  20).  Lessons:  1.  To  shame  our  low 
distrust.  The  things  we  fear  are  for  us  (Bom.  viii.  28).  2.  To  confirm  our  highest 
hope.  Sufterings,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  established.  (F.  Fitch,  M.A.) 
Sunset  sorrow  and  lost  hopes : — Here  we  have  an  illustration  of  men  who  had  hoped 
great  things,  and  God  had  disappointed  them.  But  we  learn  that  God  had  dis- 
appointed them  by  making  His  fulfilment  larger  than  their  hope.  They  hoped  too 
little.  It  is  so  yet  with  many  whom  sunset  sorrow  overshadows.  It  is  not  easy  for 
ns  to  rei^ze  that  the  world  of  God  is  larger  than  oar  world.    la  ancient  timei  the 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (0HA».  xxir. 

imperfect  knowledge  of  men  reduced  the  world  to  a  mere  fraction  of  its  actual 
size  and  contents.  The  entire  globe  rested  on  the  Bhoulders  of  Atlas  then;  th» 
Mediterranean  was  the  "  Great  Sea  "  ;  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  formed  the  world'* 
end.  But  with  the  advance  of  knowledge  the  earth  widened;  Atlas  lost  the  honour 
of  being  the  supporter  of  the  globe ;  an  Atlantic  was  discovered  beyond  the  pillars- 
of  Hercules  at  Gibraltar,  stretching  immeasurable  and  unknown  towards  the  west- 
Religious  geography  has  fared  no  better.  The  gods  of  ancient  days  were  mostly 
lords,  with  uncertain  divinity  and  still  more  uncertain  morality.  Theology  was 
superstition.  Life  was  an  idle  dream.  But  are  we  sure  that  our  religious 
geography,  even  in  the  present  day,  is  so  advanced  as  to  be  as  broad  as  God's 
world  ?  Councils,  and  synods,  and  creeds  have  eagerly  striven  to  keep  enterprising 
-•  oyagers  from  passing  beyond  settled  limits.  Men  have  ever  been  frightened  of 
(tod's  open  seas.  They  prefer  a  tideless  Mediterranean  to  the  broad  swell  and 
shoreless  ranges  of  an  Atlantic.  "  We  hoped  " — what  ?  That  God  was  much  less 
than  He  has  turned  out  to  be  ;  that  His  kingdom  would  fall  peacefully  within  the- 
limits  we  had  ordained  for  it  1  A  child,  brought  up  in  a  deep  and  narrow  glen, 
rever  having  ventured  out  of  it,  has  reduced  the  sum  of  visible  things  to  a  very 
insignificant  item.  He  has  seen  the  sun  rise  over  the  hill,  the  wheel  of  its  chariot 
evidently  grazing  the  summit  before  mounting  higher ;  he  hopes  to  touch  the  sun 
some  day,  and  put  his  hand  to  hide  its  face.  And  the  stars  that  look  down  upon 
liim  at  night — such  little  things,  so  near  and  so  many — they  would  be  charming  to 
play  with.  And  the  blue  summer  sky — what  exquisite  joy  it  would  be  to  place  hii 
cheek  for  a  moment  close  to  the  cool  sweet  surface  !  The  day  arrives  ;  the  child 
stands  on  the  hill,  with  all  the  pretty  dreams  of  childhood  vanished  for  ever  in  the 
painful  and  overwhelming  surprise  of  new  thoughts.  The  sun  has  cUmbed  very- 
high,  and  the  summer  sky  is  very  far  off.  Creation  has  widened,  but  it  has  spoilt 
many  a  pleasant  hope.  His  former  world  is  judged  ;  it  is  a  very  little  place  1  This 
is  only  a  special  case  that  is  typical  of  a  great  deal  in  universal  human  history.  In' 
the  star-guesses  of  ancient  days  the  earth  was  made  out  to  be  a  planet  of  the  first 
order — it  was  the  centre  of  the  universe,  having  sun  and  moon  and  stars  under  its 
command.  It  was  the  earth — and  the  rest  of  creation.  We  have  changed  all  that. 
The  earth  has  slowly  and  quietly  sunk  into  its  proper  position,  a  little  orb  of  light 
and  shade  in  the  midst  of  a  thousand  orbs  much  larger  than  it.  But,  let  it  bar 
remembered,  it  is  not  the  earth  that  has  grown  smaller,  but  the  conception  of  the 
creation  that  has  widened.  The  same  is  true  with  regard  to  our  spiritual  attain- 
ments. Thoughts  of  God  and  of  His  kingdom  that  we  had  cherished  long  have  to 
be  given  up — not  because  they  are  too  great,  but  because  they  are  too  little.  He 
does  away  with  our  hopes  by  outshining  them,  "  We  hoped  "  that  we  might  toneh 
the  sun  and  stars  and  eternal  sky  ;  but  God  lifts  them  very  high  and  makes  the 
■world  very  large.  It  is  thus  that  God,  in  loving  wisdom,  disappoints  the  hopes  of 
men,  lest  they  should  satisfy  themselves  too  soon.  The  hand  that  breaks  our 
fondest  wishes  is  full  of  larger  mercies  than  we  had  expected  ever  to  see.  God- 
sends OS  the  pain  of  a  heavy  loss  in  order  that  we  may  be  led  out  of  our  narrow- 
ness and  self- completeness  into  broader  fields  of  thought  and  action.  Little  hopes 
make  life  little ;  great  hopes  make  a  great  life.  When  we  limit  God  we  make  our- 
selves poor ;  when  we  enlarge  our  conception  of  Him  we  enlarge  our  whole  being. 
(H.  Elvet  Lewis.)        But  Him  they  saw  not. — Him  they  saw  not : — L  Wk  hatb 

HKBB  AS  TTMBBLIEVINO  SEABCH.      II.   We  HAVE  ALSO  HEBE   FINDINQ  WITHOTJT  A  8EAB0H. 

An  anxions,  honest  doubt  will  not  shut  out  visions  of  God  from  the  souL     IIL  Wk 

BATE  HEBE  THE  DIBCOVKBY  OF   ChEIST    BY    WOMAN's  LOVE.      IV.    APPLICATIOH.      "  Him 

they  saw  not."  To  see  Him  is  the  characteristic  and  end  of  all  true  life.  1. 
"  Him  they  saw  not " — a  sad  confession  when  made  in  reference  to  our  stated 
worship  hours.  To  meet  Him  we  ostensibly  assemble  and  join  in  the  outer  forms 
of  reverence  and  worship,  and  yet  of  how  many  may  our  text  apply,  "  Him  they 
saw  not."  2.  "  Him  they  saw  not,"  a  sad  confession  when  made  in  relation  to  the 
Bervice  of  work.  We  see  the  terrible  aspects  of  human  misery,  poverty  in  • 
thousand  forms,  and  sin  in  many  of  its  loathsome  shapes.  Do  we  see  Him  in 
those  scenes  t  In  our  daily  toil  how  true  it  is  of  many — oh,  bo  many—"  Him  they 
see  not "  I  3.  **  Him  they  saw  not."  How  sad  in  relation  to  earth's  sorrows  t 
Sad,  yet  tme.  The  brotherhood  of  sorrow  and  trouble  is  a  worldwide  brother- 
hood. There  mns  a  chain  of  sorrow  through  time ;  this  is  all  dark  and  mygterious 
if  Him  the  sufleiers  see  not.  {W.  Scott.)  0  fools,  and  slow  of  heaxi,— The 
foU§  of  unbelief: — I.  Unbelief  is  folly.  L  It  is  folly  because  it  arises  from 
«Ml  «l  thought  juid jBonsideration.    Kot  to  think  is  folly.    To  gire  waj  tv 


muT.  xxiT.]  ST.  LUKE.  6S' 

sadness,  when  a  little  thought  would  prevent  it,  is  foolishness.  If  these  twc 
disciples  had  sat  down  and  said,  "  Now  the  prophets  have  said  concerning 
the  Messias  that  He  shall  be  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  thus  was 
it  with  our  Master,"  they  would  have  been  confirmed  in  their  confidence  that 
Jesus  was  the  Messiah.  In  the  Scriptures  they  would  have  found  types,  and 
figures,  and  plain  words,  in  which  the  death  and  the  rising  again,  the  shame 
and  the  glory  of  Christ  are  linked  together,  and  His  cross  is  made  the  road  to 
His  throne.  Had  they  compared  the  testimony  of  the  holy  women  with  the 
prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  they  would  have  obtained  ground  of  hope.  How 
many  a  precious  text  have  you  and  I  read  again  and  again  without  perceiving  its 
joyful  meaning,  because  our  minds  have  been  clouded  with  despondency  I  We  take 
the  telescope,  and  try  to  look  into  heavenly  things,  and  we  breathe  upon  the  glass 
with  the  hot  breath  of  our  anxiety  till  we  cannot  see  anything ;  and  then  we  con- 
clude that  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen.  2.  Unbelief  is  folly  because  it  is  inconsis- 
tent with  our  own  professions.  The  two  disciples  professed  that  they  believed  in 
the  prophets ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  they  did  do  so.  They  were  devout  Jews 
who  accepted  the  Holy  Books  as  Divinely  inspired,  and  therefore  infallible  ;  and 
yet  now  they  were  acting  as  if  they  did  not  believe  in  the  prophets  at  all.  3.  Folly, 
again,  is  clearly  seen  in  unbelisying  sadness,  because  the  evidence  which  should  cheer 
us  is  so  clear.  In  the  case  of  the  brethren  going  to  Emmaus  they  had  solid  ground 
for  hope.  They  speak,  to  my  mind,  a  little  cavalierly  of  the  holy  women  as  "  oer- 
tain  women."  I  say  not  they  speak  disrespectfully;  but  there  is  a  slurring  of 
their  witness  by  casting  a  doubt  upon  it.  If  those  who  were  at  the  empty 
sepulchre  were  to  be  believed,  why  did  they  doubt?  The  evidence  which  they 
themselves  detail,  though  we  have  it  only  in  brief  in  this  place,  was  conclusive 
evidence  that  Christ  had  left  the  tomb ;  and  yet  they  doubted  it.  Now,  you  and 
I  have  had  superabundant  evidence  of  the  faithfulness  of  Ood,  and  if  we  are  un- 
believing, we  are  unreasonable  and  foolish.  4.  Unbelief  is  folly,  because  it  very 
often  arises  out  of  our  being  in  such  a  hurry.  They  said,  "  Beside  all  this^  this_,is 
the  third  day."  Althgugb  the  Saviour  had  sai5~Inat  He  would  rise  on  the  third 
day,  Efe  had  not  said  that  He  would  appear  to  them  all  on  the  third  day.  He  told  (/  ,j 
them  to  go  into  Galilee^  and  there  they  should  see  Him ;  but  that  meeting  had  not  Mw  ^^3% 
yet  come.  "He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste"  ;  but  they  that  do  not  fv  I 
loelieve  are  always  restless.  Well  is  it  written, "  Ye  have  needof  patience."  Godja 
promises  will  be  kept  to  the  moment,  but  they  will  not  all  be  fulfilled  to-day. 
Divinff~promigifS^  are  some  of  them!  bills  which  are  payable  so  many  days  after' 
sight;  and  because  they  are  not  paid  at  sight  we  doubt  whether  they  are  good 
billi.  Is  this  reasonable  ?  Are  we  not  foolish  to  doubt  the  sure  handwriting  of 
a  God  that  cannot  lie  ?  6.  Tet,  again,  I  think  we  may  well  be  accused  of  folly 
whenever  we  doubt,  because  we  make  ourselves  suffer  needlessly.  There  are 
enough  bitter  wells  in  this  wilderness  without  our  digging  more.  There  are 
enough  real  causes  of  sorrow  without  our  inventing  imaginary  ones.  No  asp  ever 
Btung  Cleopatra  so  terribly  as  that  which  she  held  to  her  breast  herself.  6.  I  want 
you  to  notice  yet  further  that  it  was  folly,  but  it  was  nothing  more.  I  feel  so 
thankful  to  our  Lord  for  using  that  word.  Though  we  ought  to  condemn  our  own 
unbelief  with  all  our  hearts,  yet  our  Saviour  is  full  of  tenderness,  and  so  freely 
forgives,  that  He  looks  upon  our  fault  as  folly,  and  not  as  wilful  wickedness.  He 
knows  that  it  is  true  of  his  children,  as  it  is  of  ours,  that  folly  is  bound  up  in  the 
heart  of  a  child.  II.  In  the  second  place,  our  Lord  rebuked  them  for  slovtnesb  or 
BEABT  TO  BELIEVE.  1.  First,  WO  are  slow  in  heart  to  believe  our  God,  for  we  are 
much  more  ready  to  believe  others  than  to  beheve  Him.  I  am  often  amazed  with 
the  credulity  of  good  people  whom  I  had  credited  with  more  sense.  Credulity 
towards  man  and  incredulity  towards  God  are  singular  tihngs  to  find  in  the  same 
person.  Let  us  henceforth  accept  every  syllable  of  God's  Wo^d  as  infallible,  while 
we  turn  our  unbelief  towards  man  and  his  philosophies  and  infidelities  1  2.  Is  it 
not  clear  that  we  are  slow  of  heart  to  believe,  since  we  judge  this  of  others  when 
they  are  mistrustful  7  3.  There  is  another  point  in  which  we  are  very  slow  of 
beaj-t  to  believe,  namely,  that  we  do  beheve,  and  yet  do  not  believe.  We  must  be 
Tery  slow  of  heart  when  we  say  "  Yes,  I  believe  that  promise,"  and  yet  we  do  not 
expect  it  to  be  fnlfiUed.  We  are  quick  of  mind  to  believe  mentally,  bat  we  are 
slow  of  heart  to  believe  practically.  The  very  heart  of  onr  believing  is  slow.  They 
talk  about  believing  in  tiie  Lord  for  eternity,  but  for  this  day  and  next  week  tbey 
are  full  of  fear.  True  faith  is  every-day  faith.  We  want  a  faith  which  will 
endure  the  wear  and  tear  of  life— a  practical,  realizing  faith,  which  trusts  in  God 


€40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  rxnr. 

from  hour  to  hour.  4.  These  tvro  disciples  must  have  been  slow  of  heart  to 
Relieve,  again,  because  they  had  enjoyed  so  much  excellent  teaching,  and  they 
ought  to  have  been  solid  believers.  They  had  been  for  years  with  Jesus  Christ 
Himself  as  a  tutor,  and  yet  they  had  not  learned  the  elements  of  simple  faith. 
6.  Once  more,  these  two  disciples  were  very  slow  of  heart  to  believe,  because  there 
is  so  much  in  the  Word  which  ought  to  have  convinced  them.  See  how  the 
Saviour  puts  it — "Slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken. " 
"What  a  mighty  "all"  that  is  I  Brethren,  are  you  half  aware  of  the  treasure 
hidden  in  the  field  of  Scripture  ?  III.  Now  I  want  to  speak  on  this  matter  to  the 
TJNCONVEBTKD.  Somo  of  you  are  really  seeking  the  Lord,  but  you  say  that  you 
cannot  believe  though  you  long  to  believe.  1.  This  unbelief  proves  you  to  be 
foolish,  and  slow  of  heart,  for  there  are  other  parts  of  His  Word  which  you  easily 
believe.  If  there  is  a  text  that  speaks  of  judgment  to  come  you  believe  it.  You  are 
ready  enough  to  take  in  the  hard  things,  but  the  gracious  promises  of  the  loving 
Christ  you  will  not  believe.  How  can  you  justify  this  ?  How  fooUsh  yon  are !  The 
promises  are  in  the  same  Book  as  the  threatenings,  and  if  you  believe  the  one,  believe 
the  other.  2.  Next,  you  are  very  foolish,  because  your  objections  against  believing 
ave  altogether  poor  and  puerile.  One  man  cannot  believe  in  Jesus  because  he  does 
not  feel  humble  enough ;  as  if  that  affected  Christ's  power  to  save.  If  he  felt  more 
humbled,  then  he  could  beheve  in  Jesus.  Would  not  that  be  just  believing  in 
himself,  and  trusting  in  his  own  humility  instead  of  trusting  in  Christ  ?  S.  Though 
you  find  it  so  hard  to  believe  Christ,  you  have  found  it  very  easy  to  believe  in 
yourself.  4.  Moreover,  you  are  very  apt  now  to  believe  Satan  fi  he  comes  and  says 
that  the  Bible  is  not  true,  or  that  Jesus  will  not  accept  you,  or  that  you  have 
ainned  beyond  hope,  or  that  the  grace  of  God  cannot  save  you.  6.  Then  yon  know 
how  ready  you  are,  you  seekers,  to  stop  short  of  Christ.  6.  And  then  some  of  you 
are  fooUsh  and  slow  of  heart  because  you  make  such  foolish  demands  upon  God. 
You  would  beUeve  if  yon  could  hear  a  voice,  if  you  could  dream  a  dream,  if  some 
strange  thing  were  to  happen  in  your  family.  What  1  Is  God  to  be  tied  to  your 
fancies.  7.  You  are  fooUsh  and  slow  of  heart  because,  to  a  great  extent,  you 
ignore  the  Word  of  God  and  its  suitability  to  your  case.  If  a  soul  in  distress  will 
take  down  the  Bible,  and  turn  it  over,  he  need  not  look  long  before  he  will  light 
^apon  a  passage  which  describes  himself  as  the  object  of  mercy.  Those  two 
disciples  did  not,  for  a  while,  see  how  the  prophets  met  the  case  of  the  crucified 
and  risen  Christ ;  but  as  they  did  see  it,  their  hearts  burned  within  them.  As  yoa 
also  see  how  God  has  provided  for  your  condition  in  His  Word,  in  His  covenant,  in 
His  Son,  your  sadness  will  flee  away.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Ought  not  Christ  to  liaT9 
suffered? — Gain  from  the  tufferings  of  Christ: — I.  In  consequence  of  the  suFFEBntas 

^F  ChBIST,  am  INMOMBBABLB  MUIiTITCDB  OF  OUB  BAOB  WILL  BE  BAISED  FBOM  k  STATS  OF 
SINFUL  DEOBAOATIOH  AKD  MISBBT,  AND  EXALTED  TO  THE  SOCIETY  OF  ANGELS  AND  OF  QtOI>, 

IL  In  consequbnck  of  thb  buffebinos  of  Chbist,  all  who  finally  belietb  and 
TBUST  in  Him,  as  thb  Son  of  God,  will  be  confibmed  in  a  state  of  pebfbot 

HOLINESS  AND  HAPPINESS  FOB  BVBB.      III.    In   THE  PBOPITLATOBY  SACBIFICg  OF  ChBIST, 

THE  Divine  Chabaoteb,  in  its  tabious  attbibutes,  is  olobiously  displayed. 
Reflections:  1.  From  this  subject  we  are  led  to  admire  the  character  of  God's 
government.  2.  We  are  led  to  mourn  how  exceedingly  limited  are  the  views  of 
:  those  who  think  that  the  only  object  of  Christ's  coming  into  our  world  was  **  to 
..publish  a  good  system  of  morality,  and  to  set  us  a  good  example  1 "  3.  We  learn 
,Aow  very  imperfect  are  the  views  of  those  who  suppose  that  the  only  object  of 
Christ's  coming  into  our  world  was  to  save  sinners.  But  oh !  what  is  the  salvation  of 
millions  who  creep  on  earth — what  is  this  compared  with  those  glorious  displays 
of  God's  character,  or  compared  with  that  eternal  confidence  in  His  government 
<which  is  inspired  among  the  loftier  and  wider  provinces  of  His  empire  f  4.  We 
ought  not  to  distrust  the  wisdom  of  Providence,  even  in  those  events  which  seem 
dark  and  mysterious.  6.  Let  Christians  be  provoked  to  self-denying  sacrifices  in 
the  cause  of  humanity,  and  untiring  devotedness  to  the  Saviour.  6.  Let  the 
wicked  and  the  worldling,  amid  the  blaze  of  gospel  light,  be  constrained  to  repent 
^and  believe.  7.  The  reflection  very  naturally  follows,  that  incorrigible  sinners 
must  be  punished  with  immeasurable  severity.  8.  We  learn  from  this  subject  the 
^giieat  propriety  of  frequently  commemorating  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  (A. 
Dickinson,  M.A.)  The  $uffering$  and  the  glory  of  the  Chritt : — I.  Thb  con- 
nection between  thb  buffebinos  and  the  olobt  of  Chbist.  H.  The  hobal 
OBLioATioN.  1.  In  reference  to  the  fulfilment  of  inspired  prophecy.  2.  In  refe- 
„ggus»  to  the  eternal  purpose  of  God.    8.  In  reference  to  the  conscious  needs  of  oar 


nut.  XXXV. -^  ST.  LUKE.  $43 

own  nature.  (J.  Waite,  B.A.)  Ends  proposed  in  the  sufferings  of  Chritt : — 1.  It 
was  requisite  that  Christ  sbonld  Buffer,  in  order  that  He  might  verify  His  own  pre- 
dictions. 2.  A  succession  of  prophets  had  foretold  His  sufferings.  3.  That  th» 
salvation  of  mankind  depended  on  His  death,  and  could  not  have  been  effected 
without  it.  4.  The  full  display  of  the  glorious  character  of  God  required  that 
Christ  should  suffer.  5.  A  farther  end,  a  subordinate  one,  I  confess,  was 
that  Christ,  in  suffering,  might  give  us  an  example  of  holiness  and  virtue. 
{R.  Hall,  M.A.)  The  sufferings  and  glory  of  Christ: — I.  Thb  pbdccipai. 
EusMENTs  or  Chbist's  buffebinos  fob  SIM.  1.  He  had  a  clear  view  of 
the  unspeakable  hideousness  and  odiousness  of  sin.  2.  He  was  oonscious 
of  the  Divine  displeasure  on  account  of  sin.  3.  He  was  oonscioas  of  the 
absence  of  the  Divine  favour,  and  the  presence  and  power  of  Satan.    II.  Thb 

dBCtJMSTANCES    WHICH    BENDEBED    THESE    SUFFERINGS     NECESSABT.         1.    They     Wer« 

necessary  for  the  full  manifestation  of  the  Divine  character  in  the  work  of 
redemption.  2.  They  were  necessary  to  prevent  the  salvation  of  sinners  from 
infringing  on  the  authority  and  government  of  God.  III.  The  globt  which  is  thb 
BESOLT  AND  BBWABD  OF  THB  Savioub's  suffebinqs  (see  Phil.  ii.  9-11).  1.  The 
glory  and  honour  thus  bestowed  on  Christ,  are  conferred  on  Him  in  His  character 
of  Mediator.  2.  The  glory  of  Christ  arises  from  His  superiority  over  the  hosts  of 
heaven.  3.  Christ  possesses  glory  as  the  Governor  of  the  world.  4.  Christ 
is  glorious  as  the  Sovereign  Head  of  the  Church.  {W.  L.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
He  expounded. — Christ's  first  sermon  after  His  resurrection;  or, Christ  tht  theme  of  the 
prophets  : — I.  Let  us  first  consideb  oob  Lord's  sermon  on  this  occasion.  II.  Let 
Tis  consider  the  benefits  wb  mat  derive  from  this  sebmon.  1.  It  encourages  us 
to  search  and  understand  the  Scriptures.  2.  It  encourages  us  to  preach  Scripture 
sermons.  3.  It  calls  the  people  to  listen  to  Scripture  sermons.  4.  This  sermon 
should  move  the  preachers  of  the  gospel  to  imitate  their  blessed  Master  in  preaching 
Christ,  as  suitable  opportunities  are  presented,  even  to  small  congregations.  6. 
This  sermon  strengthens  our  faith  in  the  truth  of  the  Scriptures.  6.  This  sermoa 
tends  to  increase  our  abhorrence  of  sin.  7.  This  sermon  should  increase  our  love 
to  Christ.  8.  This  sermon  should  revive  our  zeal  for  Christ's  cause,  and  for  the 
salvation  of  our  fellow-creatures.  9.  This  sermon  confirms  our  hope  of  heaven. 
10.  This  sermon  affords  great  encouragement  to  penitent,  believing  souls.  11.  This 
sermon  should  be  a  warning  to  us  that  the  threatenings  of  the  Bible  will  be 
fulfilled.  (E.  Hedding,  D.D.)  The  Bible  a  rich  storehmise : — There  are  pro- 
mises in  God's  Word  ttiat  no  man  has  ever  tried  to  find.  There  are  treasures  of 
gold  and  silver  in  it  that  no  man  has  taken  the  pains  to  dig  for.  There  are  medi- 
cines in  it  for  the  want  of  a  knowledge  of  which  hundreds  have  died.  It  seems  to 
me  like  some  old  baronial  estate  that  has  descended  to  a  man  who  lives  in  a  modem 
house  and  thinks  it  scarcely  worth  while  to  go  and  look  into  the  venerable  mansion. 
Year  after  year  passes  away,  and  he  pays  no  attention  to  it,  since  he  has  no  suspi- 
cion of  the  valuable  treasures  it  contains,  till  at  last  some  man  says  to  him, "  Have 
yon  been  up  in  the  country  to  look  at  that  estate  ?  "  He  makes  up  his  mind  that 
he  will  take  a  look  at  it.  As  he  goes  through  the  porch  he  is  surprised  to  see  the 
skill  that  has  been  displayed  in  its  construction  ;  he  is  more  and  more  impressed 
as  he  goes  through  the  halls.  He  enters  a  large  room,  and  is  astonished  as  he 
beholds  the  wealth  of  pictures  upon  the  walls,  among  which  are  portraits  of  many 
of  his  revered  ancestors.  He  stands  in  amazement  before  them.  There  is  a  Titian, 
there  is  a  Baphael,  there  is  a  Correggio,  and  there  is  a  Giorgione.  He  says,  "  I 
never  had  any  idea  of  these  before."  "  Ah  1 "  says  the  steward,  "  there  is  many 
another  thing  that  you  know  nothing  about  in  this  castle " ;  and  he  takes  him 
from  room  to  room,  and  shows  him  carved  plate  and  wonderful  statues,  and  the 
man  exclaims,  "  Here  I  have  been  for  a  score  of  years  the  owner  of  this  estate, 
and  have  never  before  known  what  things  were  in  it !  "  But  no  architect  ever 
conceived  of  such  an  estate  as  God's  Word,  and  no  artist,  or  carver,  or  sculptor, 
ever  conceived  of  such  pictures,  and  carved  dishes,  and  statues,  as  adorn  it» 
apartments.  Its  halls  and  passages  cannot  be  surpassed  for  beauty  of  architec- 
ture, and  it  contains  treasures  that  silver  and  gold  and  precious  stones  are  not  to 
be  mentioned  in  connection  with.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Abide  with  us. — Disciple* 
atEmmaui: — I.  Theeb  bequest.  "Abide  with  us."  1.  As  a  companion.  2.  Al 
a  teacher.  3.  As  a  comforter.  4.  As  a  guest.  II.  Their  plea.  "  Toward 
evening."  Christ  makes  the  night  to  be  light  about  us.  HI.  Theib  babnbstnbsb. 
"Constrained."  L  Hearty.  2.  Prompt.  3.  Persistent.  IV.  Theib  success. 
"  He  went  in."  Wonderful  power  in  prayer.  Peasants  of  earth  ean  prevail  witb 
TOL.  m.  41 


S4S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  fcHAP.  xnr. 

Prince  of  heaven.  Creatures  of  a  day  can  detain  Creator  of  universe.  (W.  Jackson.) 
Christ  constrained  to  abide : — ^I.  Christ's  peesence  is  exceedinglt  desirable  to 
THE  saints.  This  appears  from  their  earnest  desires  after  it,  and  their  sorrows 
when  deprived  of  it.  1.  The  presence  of  Christ  is  an  evidence  of  His  love. 
Fellowship  is  the  frait  of  friendship.  2.  Christ's  presence  is  attended  with  the 
most  desirable  effects  ;  none  can  enjoy  it  without  deriving  the  greatest  advantages 
from  it.  It  conveys  light  into  the  understanding,  as  well  as  warmth  into  the 
affections ;  so  that  in  proportion  to  the  measure  of  Christ's  revealing  Himself  to 
as  will  be  the  measure  of  our  profiting  in  the  knowledge  of  Him.  3.  Present  com- 
munion with  Christ  is  an  earnest  of  everlasting  fruition.  IL  A  seemimoly  departino 
Savioub  mat  be  constrained,  as  it  were,  to  abide  with  His  people.  Speaking 
after  the  manner  of  men,  there  are  three  ways  of  constraining  Christ  to  abide  with 
us.  1.  By  the  exercise  of  a  lively  faith.  2,  By  fervent  prayer.  3.  By  a  suitable 
conduct  towards  Him.  If  we  would  have  Christ  abide  with  as,  we  must  do  what 
we  can  to  delight  Him  and  make  His  stay  pleasant.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The 
blessed  Guest  detained: — I.  Companions  likely  to  part.  1.  Observe  the  reason 
of  parting.  If  Jesus  had  gone  further,  it  would  have  been  entirely  because  they 
forgot  to  invite  Him  or  failed  to  urge  Him  to  stay.  2.  The  point  at  which  they 
were  at  all  likely  to  part  company  with  Christ.  (1)  A  point  of  change.  (2)  A  point 
where  something  had  been  accomplished.  (3)  They  were  now  about  to  rest  for  a 
tima  3.  Had  they  parted  company,  the  act  would  have  been  most  blameworthy 
on  their  part.  II.  The  Gdbbt  needing  to  be  pressed.  1.  He  could  not  very 
well  have  tarried  otherwise.  2.  This  is  a  characteristic  of  the  Son  of  God  at  all 
times.  (!)  He  is  jealous  of  our  love.  (2)  Another  reason  is  His  anxiety  to  do  as 
good.  He  wisely  wishes  that  we  should  value  the  mercy  which  He  gives,  by  being 
led  to  consider  what  a  case  we  should  be  in  if  He  did  not  give  it.    III.  A  Guest 

WORTH   PBESSINO.        IV.   An  ARGUMENT   WITH    WHICH   TO   HOLD   HiM.       1.    They   WOuld 

be  dreary  and  lonely  without  Him.  2.  The  night  was  coming  on,  and  they  coald 
not  think  of  His  being  out  in  it.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  evening  prayer  of 
Christ's  friends : — I.  Notice  some  of  the  feelings  which  must  have  been  in 
THE  hearts  of  THOSE  WHO  PRESENTED  THIS  PRAYER.  1.  Grateful  interest  in  a 
spiritaal  benefactor.  When  a  soal  has  become  truly  alive  to  God,  and  to  eternal 
things,  there  is  no  tie  so  pare  and  deep  as  that  which  binds  it  to  the  scenes  and 
instruments  which  opened  its  view  to  the  higher  life.  It  is  when  Churches  and 
families  and  friendships  are  held  together  by  such  ties  as  these^by  helping  one 
another  in  the  way  of  God  and  life  eternal — that  they  are  united  and  strong,  that 
they  can  feel  there  is  no  nightfall  which  has  any  right  or  power  to  part  them,  and 
that  they  must  tarn  in  at  the  journey's  close,  and  dwell  together  in  the  same 
abiding  home.  One  of  the  enjoyments  of  that  home  will  be  to  review  and  renew 
the  intercourse  of  the  journey,  and  to  discover  how  the  ties  were  deeper  and  the 
benefits  higher  than  oar  hearts  at  the  time  anderstood,  and  how  these  sojourning 
associations  were  preparing  the  way  for  the  unending  union  of  souls.  And  Christ 
desires  to  have  a  personal  share  in  these  ties  of  grateful  affection.  He  is  the 
Author  of  spiritual  light  and  life  to  all  who  receive  it,  bat  here  He  becomes  also 
the  direct  instrument — He  is  the  channel  as  well  as  the  foantain — teaching  us  that 
His  heart  lies  hidden  behind  every  other  heart  that  is  made  a  source  of  blessing  to 
us,  and  also  that  He  wishes  to  attach  us  to  Himself  as  "  a  man  speaketh  to  his 
friend."  2.  A  desire  to  have  such  conversation  continued.  He  who  has  had  saoh 
fellowship  in  the  thoughts  of  God  on  the  way  will  desire  to  have  them  also  in  the 
house  at  nightfall.  He  cannot  surrender  them  at  the  setting  of  any  earthly  snn, 
but  will  pray  as  these  disciples  did,  "  Abide  with  us,  for  it  is  toward  evening."  3. 
The  last  feeling  we  mention  in  the  hearts  of  these  friends  of  Christ  was  the  pre* 
sentiment  of  something  more  than  they  had  yet  seen  or  heard.  They  had  gratitude 
to  the  speaker,  they  had  love  to  the  theme,  but  they  felt  that  there  was  still  a 
mysteiy  behind.  They  had  learned  much,  but  their  heart  told  them  they  had  not 
learned  all.  The  sense  of  a  great  presence  hovered  near  them ;  a  great  truth 
floated  before  them  ere  yet  it  disclosed  itself  to  their  eyes.  They  fear  to  ask  Him 
of  it ;  they  shrink  from  whispering  it  to  themselves  ;  but  there  is  a  beam  of  light 
in  the  stranger's  look  which  promises  to  lead  to  fuller  revelation,  a  tone  of  hopeful 
confidence  in  His  words  that  reminds  them  of  a  voice  which  once  before  spoke  from 
the  gloom.  What  if  now,  amid  a  severer  storm  and  out  of  a  denser  darkness,  thai 
beloved  form  should  step  forth  again,  and  the  words  be  heard,  *'  It  is  I ;  be  not 
afraid"  7  Such  a  hope  of  a  risen  Saviour,  and  that  this  was  He,  unuttered  evea 
to  themselves  deep  down  in  their  sool,  and  fighting  with  fears  as  once  their  ship 


-mir.  xziT.]  ST.  LUKE,  64f 

did  with  waves,  was  sarely  present  in  their  hearts  when  they  arged  this  reqatst : 
"Abide  with  as,  for  it  is  toward  evening."  IL  Some  of  thb  circumstances  m 
WHICH  THIS  BEQUEST  UAT  BE  OFFEBED  BT  US.  It  maj  be  Said  to  be  soitable  to  tha 
whole  earthly  life  of  every  Christian.  The  Ghorch  of  Christ,  and  every  member 
of  it  in  this  world,  is  pursuing  this  Emmaus  joamey — travelling  from  the  death  of 
■Cbilst  on  to  the  house  where  He  shall  give  the  manifestation  of  His  resurrection. 
We  feel  that  He  who  sustains  us  on  the  way,  and  drops  into  our  soul  great  desires 
and  deep  presentiments,  will  answer  them  when  ve  reach  the  heavenly  house,  and 
show  us  there  things  which  eye  hath  not  seen,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  man's 
heart  to  conceive.  Our  life  is  now  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  but  •'  when  He  who  is 
our  life  shall  appear,  then  shall  we  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory,"  and  therefore 
we  hold  Him  fast  to  the  close.  "  Abide  with  us."  Next,  it  is  suitable  to  those  who 
are  suffering  under  some  special  despondency  of  spirit.  It  is  then  we  need  to  cling 
to  Him  most,  and  then  that  He  is  accustomed  to  reveal  Himself.  It  is  His  "to 
lighten  men's  darkness,  lest  they  sleep  the  sleep  of  death."  If  He  seems  to  ba 
passing  by,  constrain  Him.  "Abide  with  us,  for  it  is  toward  evening."  "I  will 
not  let  Thee  go  until  Thou  bless  me."  Oh,  faithful  heart,  thou  hast  wrestled  and 
overcome.  Another  time  suitable  for  presenting  this  request  is  in  approaching  tha 
evening  of  life.  Last,  we  remark  that  this  request  is  suitable  to  those  who  live  in 
Ba  age  of  the  world  such  as  ours.  It  would  be  unwarrantable  to  say  that  this  is 
the  evening  of  our  earth's  history,  and  that  we  are  close  upon  the  second  coming 
of  Christ.  The  world  has  probably  much  to  look  on  yet  before  the  final  end.  But 
ihere  are  various  days  and  nights  in  God's  dispensations,  and  one  of  these  evenings 
seems  now  creeping  in  upon  us.  There  is  a  cold  vapour  of  materialism  spreading 
over  the  minds  of  many,  chilling  their  conviction  of  a  living  God  who  made  and 
fiuperintends  His  world.  There  is  only  one  duty  and  one  source  of  safety  for  any 
man  who  wishes  to  hare  a  life  that  rises  above  the  most  barren  materialism ;  it  is 
to  seek  a  close  and  personal  contact  with  the  Saviour  as  the  life  of  His  Spirit,  to 
know  Christ  as  the  risen  Son  of  God,  who  quickens  dead  souls.  These  evening 
shades  and  doubts  and  trembling  fears,  that  settle  down  ever  and  again  on  the 
world's  way,  are  permitted,  to  compel  us  to  this — to  urge  us  to  seek  His  fellowship 
with  a  closer  access,  and  to  constrain  Him  to  enter  the  house  with  us  and  reveal 
Himself  in  such  Uving  power  that  we,  for  our  parts,  can  never  doubt  His  truth  any 
more.  We  need  not  fear  for  the  gospel  of  Christ,  whatever  dangers  threaten  it. 
Calvary  has  still  its  Olivet;  the  shades  of  the  Cross,  the  ascension  glory;  and 
every  night  of  trouble  in  its  history,  a  brighter  day-dawn.  (/.  Ker,  DJ).)  How 
to  detain  Jesus  in  tlie  soul : — I.  Doubts  as  to  the  use  of  holy  things  we  do,  or  of 
Ood's  gifts  to  us,  or  even  of  the  faith,  and  of  the  reality  of  every  thing  unseen,  are 
parts  of  Satan's  assaults  against  us.  Men  cannot  but  see  that  God  does  promise, 
in  His  Word ,  that  He  will  hear  prayer,  bless  fasting,  enrich  those  who  give  alms ; 
that  by  baptism  we  are  clothed  with  Christ,  in  the  Holy  Eucharist  are  made  one 
with  Him  ;  that  the  Church  is  the  appointed  channel  of  His  gifts  and  of  salvation. 
But  men  come  short  of  God's  gracious  vrill  for  them  ;  and  so  they  are  tempted  to 
donbt  of  His  promises  altogether.  Just  so  the  disciples  of  Emmaus.  The^  had 
believed  that  Jesus  was  "  He  who  should  redeem  Israel."  But  He  redeemed  it  not 
in  the  way  they  looked  for.  He  had  foretold  that  He  should  arise  from  the  dead 
on  the  third  day ;  "  To-day,"  they  say,  "  is  the  third  day  since  these  things  were 
done,"  and  He  had  not  appeared.  Had  they,  upon  this,  gone  away.  He  never 
-would  have  appeared  unto  them.  They  were  saddened,  perplexed,  yet  still  they 
mused  on  Jesus  and  His  promises.  And  so,  as  and  when  they  looked  not,  relief 
came.  "  Jesus  drew  near,  and  went  with  them,"  while  they  knew  not,  hoped  not, 
that  it  was  He.  And  so  in  the  like  cases  now,  doubts  will  have  no  real  hold  upon 
OB  while  we  hold  fast  to  Jesus.  II.  Then,  while  thus  communing  with  Jesus,  take 
we  heed  that  we  act  as  He  teacheth.  Our  deeds  are  the  fruits  of  onr  faith,  but 
they  fix  it  and  secure  it  in  our  souls.  Without  deeds  love  grows  chilled,  and,  with 
it,  faith.  Nothing  shall  hurt  thy  faith  while  thy  heart  is  whole  with  God ; 
nothing  shall  warp  thy  heart  while,  for  love  of  Christ,  thou  dost  deeds  of  love. 
ni.  There  is  yet  another  and  larger  teaching  of  this  history,  which  extends  over 
the  whole  of  life,  relates  to  every  communion,  to  every  fervent  prayer  which  any, 
by  God's  grace,  prays,  to  every  melting  of  the  hard  heart,  to  every  drawing  of  the 
soul  to  serve  God  better.  So  is  it  with  the  soul.  Jesns  visits  it  many  ways. 
jBvery  visitation  of  God,  in  awe  and  mercy,  is  a  visit  of  Jesus  to  the  sonl.  It  feels 
His  presence.  It  is  troubled,  and  turns  to  Him ;  it  is  alarmed  at  itself,  or  with 
aears  of  heU,  and  flees  to  Him;  or  He  brings  before  it  its  own  orooked  ways  and 


644  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xof. 

the  loathsomeness  of  its  sin,  and  it  would  fain  escape  out  of  itself  to  Him ;  or  Hfl 
gives  it  thoughts  of  His  own  everlasting  love,  and  the  bliss  of  ever  loving,  ever 
being  beloved ;  and  kindles  some  longing  for  Him.  Everything  which  deadens  the 
Boul  to  the  world,  or  quickens  it  to  heavenly  things,  is  a  visit  of  Jesus.  And  now, 
what  should  we  do,  when,  in  this  fleeting  world,  nothing,  not  even  virtue,  abidetb 
at  one  stay  ?  What  should  be  our  hope,  when  all  fleeteth,  but  in  Him  who  alone 
abideth,  who  alone  is  our  stay  ?  "  And  now,  Lord,  what  is  my  hope  ?  Truly,  my 
hope  is  even  in  Thee."  "  Abide  with  us.  Lord."  He  giveth  His  grace,  that  we 
may  know  His  sweetness ;  He  seemeth  to  withdraw  it,  that  He  may  draw  us  up 
after  it  to  Himself.  He  showeth  Himself,  that  we  may  love  Him  ;  He  hideth  Him> 
self,  that  we  may  long  for  Him,  and  the  more  we  seek  Him  the  more  may  find 
Him.  •* '  Abide  with  us.  Lord  ! '  For  without  Thee  this  world's  light,  and  all  the 
purest  joys  of  the  whole  world,  were  but  a  false  glare,  cold  and  comfortless  to  the 
soul.  With  Thee,  who  art  light  and  love,  all  darkness  is  light  and  joy."  Precious, 
above  the  price  of  the  whole  world,  is  every  moment  in  which  Christ  speaks  to  the 
BOuL  Only,  in  all  we  say,  think,  do,  fear,  hope,  enjoy,  let  us  say,  "  Abide  with  ua» 
Lord."  We  fear  our  own  unsteadfastness  ;  "  Lord,  abide  with  us  1 "  The  foe  ia 
strong,  and  we,  through  our  sins,  weak  ;  "  Lord,  abide  with  us,"  and  be  our 
strength.  We  are  ever  subject  to  change,  and  ebb,  and  flow ;  "  Abide  with  us. 
Lord,"  with  whom  *'  is  no  change."  The  pleasures  of  the  world  would  lead  u» 
from  Thee ;  "  Abide  with  us.  Lord,"  and  be  Thou  our  joy.  The  troubles  of  the 
world  would  shake  our  endurance ;  "  Abide  with  us.  Lord,"  and  bear  them  in  Ds> 
as  Thou  didst  bear  them  for  us.  Thou  art  our  refreshment  in  weariness ;  Tboo 
our  comfort  in  trouble ;  Thou  our  refuge  in  temptation  ;  Thou  in  death  our  life ; 
Thou  in  judgment  our  Redeemer.  If  our  Lord  give  thee  any  fervour  in  prayer, 
say  to  Him,  "  Abide  with  me.  Lord  I  "  Use  the  fervour  He  giveth,  to  stretch  on  to 
some  higher  fervour,  to  long  for  some  more  burning,  deeper  love ;  not  as  though 
thou  couldest  gain  it  for  thyself,  but,  as  emboldened  by  Him  who  hath  "held 
out  His  golden  sceptre  of  His  righteousness  and  mercy  unto  thee,  that 
thou  mayest  "touch  it,"  and  ask  what  thou  wilt.  If  Satan  would  withdraw 
thee  from  prayer  by  weariness,  hold  thou  on  the  firmer.  Say,  "Abide  with 
me.  Lord,"  and  He  will  be  with  thee  in  thy  prayer.  (E.  B.  Pmey,  D.D.y 
As  He  sat  at  meat  with  them,  He  took  hre&d.— The  meal  at  Evimaus : — I.  Thk 
BKEAKiNO  AND  DisTBiBUTioN  OF  BBEAD.  1.  The  old,  familiar,  blessed  intercourse 
between  Christ  and  His  disciples  had  not  been  put  an  end  to,  then,  by  all  that  had 
passed  during  those  three  mysterious  days.  Death  vanishes  as  a  nothing  in  their 
intercourse ;  they  stand  where  they  were ;  the  fellowship  is  unbroken  ;  the  society 
is  the  same  ;  all  that  there  used  to  be  of  love  and  friendship,  of  peaceful  concord, 
of  true  association — it  abides  for  ever.  2.  The  true  idea  of  the  relation  which 
results  from  Christ  and  His  presence  is  that  of  the  Family.  He  takes  His  place  at 
the  head  of  the  table ;  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  household,  though  it  be  but  the 
household  of  two  men,  and  they  belong  to  the  family  and  the  society  which  He 
founds.  3.  Where  Christ  is  invited  as  a  Guest,  He  becomes  the  Host.  Our  Master 
never  comes  empty-handed.  Where  He  is  invited.  He  comes  to  bestow ;  where  He 
is  welcomed,  He  comes  with  His  gifts ;  when  we  say,  "  Do  Thou  take  what  I  offer," 
He  says,  "  Do  thou  take  Myself."  II.  The  discovert.  The  consequence  of  tWt^ 
assumption  of  the  position  of  Master,  Host,  Bestower,  is  that  "  their  eyes  were 
opened,  and  they  knew  Him."  Where  Christ  is  loved  and  desired,  the  veriest  trifle* 
of  common  life  may  be  the  means  of  His  discovery,  There  is  nothing  so  small 
but  that  to  it  there  may  be  attached  some  filament  which  will  bring  after  it  the 
whole  majesty  and  grace  of  Christ  and  His  love.  IIL  The  disappkarancb  of  thb 
Lord.  1.  When  Christ's  presence  is  recognized,  the  senses  may  be  put  aside.  We 
have  lost,  it  is  true,  the  bodily  presence  of  our  Master ;  but  it  is  more  than  made 
up  to  us  by  the  clearer  knowledge  of  His  spiritual  verity  and  stature,  the  deeper 
experience  of  the  profounder  aspects  of  His  mission  and  message,  the  indwelling 
Spirit,  and  the  knowledge  of  Him  working  evermore  for  us  all.  2.  When  Christ  is 
discerned,  there  is  work  to  be  dotie.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Their  eyes  were 
opened. — The  spiritual  eye  : — It  is  quite  certain  that  there  is  an  inward  faculty  in 
the  mind  which  accurately  corresponds  to  the  natural  eye.  It  is  the  power  by 
which  we  morally  see  and  morally  apprehend  truth.  And  that  eye,  just  like  the 
bodily  eye,  admits  of  being  either  closed  or  opened.  This  eye  of  the  soul  is  a  part 
ef  man's  original  constitution.  Familiarly  we  have  known  it  under  the  name  of 
faith.  Faith  is  that  eye  of  the  soul.  This  eye  is  bom  blind.  But  while  nature* 
in  this  matter  of  oar  blindness,  has  done  much,  we  ourselves  have  done  mnob  mor^ 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  LVKE.  645 

The  closed  eye  is  being  continnally  closed  more  and  more,  and  sealed  in  its  close- 
ness.   The  mistakes  of  education — the  bad  early  training — youthful  prejudice — 
every  neglect  of  a  duty,  and  every  violence  done  to  conscience — the  grievings  of  the 
spirit,  each  secret  sin  and  wilful  act  of  disobedience — all  our  proud  tempers,  and 
impure  desires,  and  self-willed  thoughts — all  that  has  not  God  in  it — the  whole 
contact  with  this  wicked  world — almost  every  act,  and  word,  and  imagination  of 
our  lives — all  has,  every  day,  been  fastening  up  the  fast  eye  faster  and  faster.     And 
so  at  last  it  comes,  that  a  man  can  really  see  nothing  but  what  is  material.    He 
has  no  perception  of  Divine  things.     Jesus  is  practically  hidden.     Neither  his  sin, 
nor  its  pardon,  nor  its  punishment,  nor  peace  of  mind,  nor  the  higher  love,  nor  the 
heavenly  life,  nor  another  world,  nor  God,  does  he  descry.    And  yet,  all  the  while, 
all  these  things  are  near  him  and  about  him  every  moment — he  moves  in  that 
beautiful  circle,  heaven  is  round  him,  but  there  is  a  thick  curtain  before  him,  it  is 
an  unknown  thing,  it  is  all  to  him  as  if  it  were  not.     How  is  the  shut  eye  opened  ? 
Now,  it  might  be  enough  to  say  that  it  is  done  by  an  act  of  sovereign  grace  and 
power.     That  is  true  ;  but  that  would  not  practically  help  you.     You  would  then 
say,  "  I  must  wait  till  that  act  of  sovereign  power  passes  upon  me."    Therefore, 
let  me  look  at  it  rather  diSerently.     There  is  the  eye  of  the  body,  which  you  shut 
and  which  you  open.    How  does  the  physical  eye  open  ?     There  is  an  act  of  will  in 
the  brain,  and  that  act  of  will  in  the  brain  moves  the  organ.     It  is  a  perfect 
mystery  how  the  will  can  take  effect  upon  the  nerves,  and  so  upon  the  muscles,  of 
any  part  of  our  body ;  but  it  is  done.     The  will  acts  naturally  ;  but  there  is  another 
power,  an  appointment,  and  a  secret  omnipotence,  which  is  wanted.     So  it  is  with 
the  opening  of  the  spiritual  eye.     There  must  be  will.     True,  God  gives  the  will ; 
but  He  is  always  giving  it,  and  you  are  always  resisting  it.     The  will  begins — the 
will  produces  an  effort — the  effort  puts  certain  things  in  motion — and  God  being  in 
it  all — in  the  will  which  He  has  created,  and  in  the  effort,  and  in  the  process — the 
thing  is  done — the  eye  opens,  vision  is  restored.    It  may  be  gradually,  it  may  be 
with  more  or  less  of  clearness  and  growth,  but  it  is  vision — the  eye  is  opened — and 
things  which  were  invisible  come  in  through  the  new  avenue,  and  make  their  mark, 
and  stamp  their  impression  on  the  inner  man.    And  the  man,  the  highest  part  of 
the  man,  sees  ;  he  finds  he  is  in  a  new  world,  and  because  he  is  in  a  new  world,  he 
is  a  new  creature.     (J.  Vaughan,  BI.A.)        Did  not  ourjieart  bum  within  us. — 
Christ  talking — hearts  burning  : — I.  Christ's  method  of  bevealing  Himself.     1. 
Scripture  exposition.     2.  Talking.      The  grandest   things  demand  the  simplest 
presentation.    II.  Look  now  at  some  of  the  effects  of  this  revelation  on  Hia 
DisciPLEB.     1.  The  first  effect  was  deeply  interior  and  experimental.     "  Their  hearts 
began  to  bum  within  them."     There  was  an  unusual  interest— a  feeling  they  had 
never  had  till  now — a  longing  and  a  love,  and  a  begun  enthusiasm  which  all  their 
after-life  was  to  express.     What  effect  can  be  finer  than  this?  or  more  desirable? 
— the  effect  of  the  burning  heart.     It  is  well  enough  to  have  an  idea,  and  a  sight 
of  things ;  to  see  the  things  that  can  be  seen,  and  know  the  truth  that  can  be 
known.     But  it  is  yet  better  to  have  a  deep,  warm,  inward  sense  of  them ;  to  have 
them  burning  in  the  breast,  and  all  the  breast  aflame  with  the  holy  fire.    No  better 
effect  oould  come  to  us  of  our  "  talkings  "  together  by  the  way ;  and  of  our  en- 
deavours to  open  to  each  other  the  Scriptures.    2.  The  next  effect  is  what  we  may 
express  in  the  phrase :  ♦'  the  willing  feet. "     *'  They  rose  up  the  same  hour  and 
returned  to  Jerusalem."    The  feeling  was  instinctive  that  something  must  be  done, 
and  done  immediately.    All  this  good  news  which  has  turned  their  hearts  into 
fountains  of  joy,  must,  in  some  way,  be  told,  and  told  without  delay ;  in  what  way 
may  best  remain  to  be  seen  ;  but  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  return  to  Jerusalem. 
There  their  hopes  were  buried  three  days  ago,  and  they  go  now  to  tell  of  their 
resurrection.     There,  their  friends  are ;  and  probably  their  work,  and  possibly  their 
Bufferings.     No  matter.     They  must  go.    Is  it  not  always  thus  with  those  to  whom 
Christ  makes  Himself  known  ?    Arising  out  of  the  feeling  of  His  presence,  along 
with  the  burning  of  heart  that  makes  that  presence  known,  is  the  immediate  and 
ineffaceable  conviction  that  something  must  be  done  for  Him.    "  Here  am  I,  send 
me."     »•  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  f  "    At  least,  I  feel  that  whatever  my 
hand  findeth  to  do,  I  must  do  it  with  all  my  might,  and  without  delay.    I  must  go ; 
and  when  I  reach  the  end  of  the  little  journey,  I  must  speak.     3.  Thus  we  come  to 
another  effect  of  the  relation  of  Christ,  which  we  may  call  the  effect  of  the  ready- 
tongue.    When  they  came  to  Jerusalem,  they  told  "what  things  were  done  in  the 
way,"  and  how  *'  He  was  known  of  them  in  the  breaking  of  bread."    (A.  Raleigh, 
J[>J>.)        Hallowed  feelings  .'—Our  emotions  are  connected  with  our  intellectual 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  xxiv. 

Btates,  yet  distinct  from  them  and  beyond  them,  because  the  result  of  them.  The 
text  records  the  way  in  which  the  feelings  of  the  two  disciples  were  excited  by  the 
oonversation  of  the  unknown  stranger  who  joined  them  on  the  way  to  Emmaus. 
It  suggests  a  twofold  observation.  L  The  oospel  appeals  to  the  feelinqs  or 
MEN.  It  is  a  religion  intended  for  man  in  the  sense  that  it  meets  the  wants  of  his 
entire  nature.  And  the  emotional  is  as  really  a  part  of  man's  nature  as  any  other. 
It  would  not  be  a  sufficient  religion  for  man  if  it  merely  issued  its  commands  as  to 
what  should  be  done  in  the  shape  of  bodily  service,  or  even  in  the  exercise  of  a 
discipline  intended  for  the  subjugation  of  the  body ;  nor  if  it  only  furnished  the 
intellect  with  instruction  and  elevating  material.  It  must  address  itself  also  to  the 
moral  and  emotional  nature.  Accordingly,  Christianity  seizes  on  the  passions, 
sympathies,  and  susceptibilities  of  our  nature.  The  Old  and  New  Testaments  are 
alike  full  of  them,  as  the  experience  of  the  godly.  It  follows  that  those  whose 
feelings  are  not  touched  by  it  are  unacquainted  with  its  saving  power.    II.  Thb 

OOSFEIi   IS  ADAPTED  TO   EXCITE   THE   FEELINQS   OF   MEN.      1.   The  trUths  Of   the  gOSpel 

are  in  themselves  adapted  to  excite  feeling.  You  attempt  to  produce  emotion  by 
the  exhibition  of  objects  that  are  suitable  to  that  end.  Take,  as  illustrations,  the 
feelings  of  joy  and  of  love.  Could  anything  be  more  adapted  to  their  production 
than  the  truth  that  God  loves  the  world  of  sinners ;  that  He  gave  His  Son  to  death 
for  them ;  and  that  whosoever  believes  in  Him  receives  pardon  and  eternal  life  ? 
2.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  they  are  addressed  to  men  in  certain  states  of 
mind.  You  would  never  expect  to  interest  a  dying  man  by  placing  on  his  pillow 
the  crown  of  an  earthly  kingdom.  A  word  of  comfort  respecting  the  future  is 
incomparably  more  to  him  than  all  the  splendours  of  this  world.  Thus,  when  yoa 
laboured  under  deep  conviction  of  sin  and  consequent  distress,  perhaps  amounting 
to  hopelessness,  the  nature,  sufficiency,  and  freeness  of  salvation  iu  Christ  was 
expounded,  and  you  found  it  exactly  what  you  wanted.  Thus,  when  you  have 
come  to  the  sanctuary  with  some  trouble  on  your  heart  that  has  almost  shaken  your 
faith  to  its  centre,  the  theme  of  the  ministry  has  been  God's  faithfulness  and  love, 
or  the  mystery  along  with  the  benevolence  of  His  providence ;  and  your  fainting 
soul  has  felt  like  a  falling  child  whose  mother  has  tenderly  taken  it  up  and  saved  it 
from  hurt.  3.  Some  circumstances  are  specially  favourable  to  the  excitement  of 
the  feelings  by  the  gospel.  The  public  worship  of  the  sanctuary.  The  communion 
of  Christian  friends.  The  retirement  of  the  closet.  4.  Spiritual  feelings  must  b« 
sustained  by  the  means  which  first  produces  them.  Do  you  wish  to  keep  your 
heart  warm  in  this  sense  f  Often  walk  and  talk  with  Jesus.  Let  Him  be  much  in 
your  thoughts.  {John  Bawliiwon.)  A  suggestive  question : — I.  This  question  which 
these  disciples  asked  themselves,  illustrates  the  ditficcltt  we  hate  m  dndebstand* 

XNG  at  the  TniE  THE  BELATITE  IMPOBTANCE   OF  EVENTS   IN  OUB  LIVES,  AND  ESPECIALLT 

or  THE  BELioious  EVENTS  IN  THEM.  We  are  naturally  disposed  to  think  that  the 
important  events  must  be  striking ;  that  they  must  address  themselves  powerfully 
to  the  imagination ;  that  they  must  stand  out,  in  obvious  prominence,  from  among 
surrounding  occurrences.  Whereas  it  may  very  well  happen  that  what  is  most 
important  in  reality,  that  is  to  say,  in  its  bearing  on  our  prospects  in  the  future 
life,  is  in  appearance  commonplace  and  trivial.  Of  course  in  this  world  we  look  at 
the  plan  of  our  hves  from  below,  not  from  above.  We  deal  with  the  task  of  each 
day,  of  each  hour,  as  it  comes ;  we  have  no  time  or  capacity  to  make  a  map  or 
theory  of  the  whole  and  to  arrange  the  several  parts  in  their  true  proportion  and 
perspective.  It  is  with  oar  conceptions  of  life  as  with  a  landscape  painting ;  some 
tree  in  the  immediate  foreground  fills  up  a  third  of  the  canvas,  while  the  towers  of 
a  great  city,  or  the  outlines  of  a  mountain  range,  lie  far  away  in  the  distance.  In 
another  state  of  existence  the  relative  worth  of  everything  will  be  clear  to  us :  here 
we  constantly  make  the  wildest  mistakes,  partly  from  the  narrowness  of  our  out- 
look, and  partly  from  the  false  ideals  which  too  often  control  oar  judgment.  We 
look  out  for  the  sensational,  which  never  comes  to  as  quite  as  we  anticipate  it ;  we 
walk  near  Jesus  Christ,  who  veils  His  presence,  in  the  ordinary  paths  of  life; 
perhaps  we  never  get  beyond  a  certain  passing  glow  of  emotion,  which  dies  away 
and  leaves  us  where  we  were.  Our  hearts  burn  within  us.  But  what  this  has 
meant  we  only  find  out  when  it  is  too  late.  IL  Another  point  suggested  by  the 
words  is  the  use  op  RELiaions  feeling.  "  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  as  ?  *• 
The  disciples  ask  each  other  the  question  in  a  tone  of  self-reproach.  While  oar 
Lord  explained  to  them  the  true  sense  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  with  reference  to 
His  person  and  His  work,  His  sufferings  and  His  triumph,  their  whole  inward 
being,   thought,    affection,   fancy,   had   kindled    into   fiame.      They  were   oa 


«HAS.  XXIV,]  ST.  LUKE.  647 

fire,  and  jet  it  all  had  led  to  nothing.  Oaght  it  not  to  have  led  to  some- 
thing? Ought  it  not,  at  the  least,  to  have  convinced  them  that,  withia 
the  range  of  their  experience,  One  only  conld  have  spoken  as  He  did? 
Certainly,  my  brethren,  true  religion  cannot  afford  to  neglect  any  elements  of  man's 
complex  nature ;  and  so  it  finds  room  for  emotion.  That  glow  of  the  soul  with 
which  it  should  hail  the  presence  of  its  Maker  and  Redeemer  is  as  much  His  handi- 
work as  the  thinking  power  which  apprehends  His  message  or  the  resolve  which 
enterprises  to  do  His  will.  Yet  religious  emotion,  like  natural  fire,  is  a  good 
servant  but  a  bad  master.  It  is  the  ruin  of  real  religion  when  it  blazes  ap  into  a 
fanaticism  that,  in  its  exaltation  of  certain  states  of  feeling,  proscribes  thought, 
and  makes  light  of  duty,  and  dispenses  with  means  of  grace,  and  passes  through 
some  phase  of  frantic,  although  disguised,  self-assertion,  into  some  further  phase 
of  indifference  or  despair.  But,  when  kept  well  in  hand,  emotion  is  the  warmth 
and  lustre  of  the  scAil's  life.    III.  A  third  consideration  which  the  words  suggest, 

is  THB   DUTY  OF  MAKINO  AM  ACIIVB  BITOBT  TO   UNDEBSTAND  TBUTH  AS  IT  IB  PBESBNTKD 

TO  US.  I  say,  an  active  effort ;  because,  as  a  rule,  our  minds  are  apt  to  be  passive. 
We  let  truth  come  to  say  what  it  can ;  we  do  not  go  out  to  meet  it,  to  welcome  it, 
to  offer  it  a  lodging  in  the  soul,  and,  if  it  may  be,  to  take  its  measure  and  under- 
stand it.  If  we  have  serious  thoughts  now  and  then,  and  look  into  our  Bibles  in  a 
casual  way,  and  attend  some  of  the  Church  services,  we  think  we  have  good  reason 
to  be  satisfied  that  we  know  all  that  it  concerns  our  soul's  health  to  know ;  perhaps 
even  that  we  know  enough  to  discuss  religious  questions  of  the  day  with  confidence. 
We  drift  through  life  in  this  way,  some  of  us ;  making  our  feelings  and  preferences 
the  rule  of  truth ;  assuming  that  what  is  popular  for  the  passing  hour,  or  what 
comes  readily  to  us,  must  be  the  will  of  God.  He  indeed  is  near  from  whom  we 
might  learn  the  truth ;  walking  by  our  side,  ready  and  longing  to  be  inquired  of  if 
we  only  will ;  but  we  dispense  ourselves  from  the  necessity.  Religious  truth,  we 
say  to  ourselves,  is  very  simple  and  easy  of  acquirement ;  that  which  is  intended 
for  all  must  be  open  to  all,  and  cannot  be  the  monopoly  of  those  who  make  efforts 
to  know  it.  And  yet  nothing  in  the  Bible  is  clearer  than  that  it  makes  the  attain- 
ment of  truth  depend  upon  an  earnest  search  for  truth  (Matt,  vii,  7 ;  Prov.  viii.  17 ; 
Jer.  xxxiii.  3 ;  Prov.  ii.  3-5).  In  conclusion,  let  us  reflect  that  our  Lord's  presence 
with  His  disciples  during  the  forty  days  after  His  resurrection  was  in  many  ways  an 
anticipation  of  His  presence  in  His  Church  to  the  end  of  time.  His  religion  wears  a 
commonplace  appearance ;  its  sacred  books  seem  to  belong  to  the  same  category  as 
the  works  of  human  genius ;  its  Sacraments  are,  St.  Augustine  said,  rites_  chiefly 
remarkable  for  their  simplicity ;  its  ministers  are  ordinary,  and  often  erring  and 
sinful,  men.  But  for  all  that,  the  Incarnate  Son  is  here,  who  was  crucified  and 
rose  from  death,  and  ascended  and  reigns  in  heaven,  He  is  here ;  and  the  trial  and 
duty  of  faith  is  what  it  was  eighteen  centuries  ago,  namely,  to  detect,  under  the 
veil  of  the  familiar  and  the  commonplace,  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  and  the 
Divine.  We,  too,  walk  along  the  road  to  Emmaus ;  and  the  Divine  Teacher 
appears  to  us,  as  St.  Mark  puts  it,  "in  another  form";  and  our  hearts,  perhaps, 
glow  within  us,  yet  without  doing  anything  for  our  understandings  or  our  wills. 
{Canon  LiddoTi,)  Christ  warms  the  heart: — I.  Consideb  the  occabiok,  ob  the 
MEANS  EMPLOYED.  "He  talked  with  us  by  the  way."  "He  opened  to  us  the 
Scriptures."  II.  Consideb  the  effect  peoduced  by  that  occasion  and  those 
UBANS.  "  Did  not  our  heart  burn,"  &c.  There  is  in  real  communion  that  which 
warms  the  heart.  Away  from  Christ,  all  is  coldness  in  regard  to  God  and  spiritual 
things  ;  away  from  Christ,  men  even  pride  themselves  in  a  sort  of  stoical  apathy  in 
regard  to  the  claims  of  God ;  away  from  Christ,  the  most  constraining  motives  of 
the  gospel  are  heard  with  unconcern.  There  is  communion  to  be  had  with  Christ 
in  prayer.  Many  pray  in  a  formal  way,  but  have  never  yet  known  "  the  heart  to 
bum  within  them  "  in  prayer.  So  with  meditation  :  "  My  meditation  of  Him  shall 
be  sweet,"  said  the  psalmist.  "  Did  not  our  heart  bum  within  us?  "  And  whence 
this  effect?  They  were,  you  remember,  anxious  disciples,  perplexed  with  doubts 
and  seeking  the  truth.  Hence,  as  they  heard  Him  expound  the  Scriptures,  they 
found  their  doubts  gradually  cleared  away.  It  is  when  you  discover  your  personal 
interest  in  the  things  spoken  of—"  That  promise  speaks  to  me,"  "  That  Saviour  is 
my  Saviour,"  "  This  God  is  our  God  even  unto  death,"  "  He  is  mine,  and  I  am 
ms  " — that  you  will  again  feel  "  the  heart  to  bum  within  you."  {J.  H.  Hamhleton, 
M.A.)        The  means,  author,  and  effects  of  Christian  instruction : — I.  We  have 

XHa   IMSTBDMENTALITY   used    by    OUB    LoBD    in    the   instruction    01"   Hl8  DISCIPIiES. 

We  are  told  it  was  "  the  Scriptures."    God  honours  EUs  word  above  all  Hia  attri- 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xdt, 

butes '•Thon  hast  magnified  Thy  word,"  says  David,  "above  all  Thy  name  ;"  f.«., 

"all  Thy  perfections."  Why  does  He  do  so?  Because  it  is  by  His  Word  He 
leveals  the  mystery  of  His  essence,  and  His  moral  perfections.  Because  without 
His  Word  there  would  be  no  God  to  be  recognized  and  worshipped.  II.  We  have 
to  consider,  thb  agency  by  which  this  instbumentaiiIty  was  made  effective. 
We  read  that  Christ  "  opened  "  the  Scriptures.  But  where  was  the  necessity  for 
"  opening  "  the  Scriptures  ?  What  is  there  so  mystical  in  the  nature  of  this  book, 
that  it  should  have  been  as  written  in  unintelligible  characters  which  they  did  not 
understand?  Eemember  that  the  Bible  is  a  sealed  book  to  any  who  are  unen- 
lightened by  the  Spirit  of  God  1  It  is  true  of  the  Bible  as  of  every  department  of 
Divine  knowledge,  that  the  natural  man  cannot  receive  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 

God they  are  foolishness  to  him :    he  cannot  know  them,   because  they   are 

BpirituaUy  discerned.    III.  But,  again.  What  was  the  sensible  effect  produced 

IN   THE   MINDS   OF   THOSE   WHO   WEBE   THUS   INSTRUCTED   BY  OUR  LOED  ?      Their  heattS 

burned  within  them.  Observe,  they  got  light  and  heat  at  the  same  time,  "  Did  not 
our  heart  burn  within  us?  "  With  what  did  they  bumf — with  shame  for  their 
sins ;  their  hearts  were  melted  into  penitence,  inflamed  with  zeal,  and  filled  with 
the  fire  of  Divine  love  ;  the  Spirit  of  God  kindled  within  them  what  the  breath  oi 
God  breathed  in  them  1 — the  bright  light  of  hope  shone  within  their  minds,  and 
they  were  enabled  to  take  a  clear  view  of  Christ — Christ  was  manifested  to  them — 
"  their  heart  burned  within  them."  Here,  then,  we  see  the  sensible  effect  produced 
by  the  instruction  of  our  Lord  in  the  Scriptures.  Here  we  have  presented  to  ua 
the  instrumentality  employed  in  the  work  of  conversion  ;  the  agent  in  the  work  of 
conversion ;  and  the  effect  of  the  work  of  conversion — we  have  the  Bible  as  the 
instrumentality  ;  we  have  Christ  as  the  teacher ;  and  we  have  burning  hearts  as  the 
effect  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  (il.  H.  Beamish,  M.A.)  The  Bible  gives  light 
and  warmth: — A  gentleman  approached  the  fruit  stand  of  an  Italian  woman,  whom  he 
found  very  intently  engaged  reading  a  book.  "  What  are  you  reading  there,  my  good 
woman,  that  seems  to  interest  you  so  much  ?  "  he  inquired.  •*  The  Word  of  God,"  said 
the  woman.  "  The  Word  of  God  !  Who  told  you  that  ?  "  "  God  told  me  Himself," 
answered  the  woman.  ♦'  God  told  you  ?  How  did  He  do  that  ?  Have  yoa  ever 
talked  with  God  ?  How  did  He  tell  you  that  was  His  Word  ?  "  Not  accustomed  to 
discuss  questions  of  theology,  the  woman  was  a  little  confused.  Kecovering 
herself,  she  said :  "  Sir,  can  you  prove  to  me  that  there  is  a  sun  up  there  in 
heaven  ?  "  "  Prove  it,"  said  the  man, "  Why  do  you  ask  me  to  prove  it  T  It  proves 
itself.  It  warms  me  and  I  see  its  light;  what  better  proof  can  any  one  want? *• 
The  woman  smiled  and  said :  "  Just  so ;  you  are  right.  And  that  is  just  the  way 
God  tells  this  Book  is  His  Word.  I  read  it,  and  it  warms  me  and  gives  me  light. 
I  see  Him  in  it,  and  what  it  says  is  light  and  warmth  which  none  but  God  can 
give;  and  so  He  tells  me  it  is  His  Word.  What  more  proof  do  I  needf  *' 
Divine  influence  needed  to  understand  the  Scriptures: — Unsanctified  men  cannot 
read  tie  Bible  to  profit.  If  you  bring  me  a  basket  full  of  minerals  from  California, 
and  I  take  them  and  look  at  them,  I  shall  know  that  this  specimen  has  gold  in  it, 
because  I  see  there  little  points  of  yellow  gold,  but  I  shall  not  know  what  the  white 
and  the  dark  points  are  that  I  see.  But  let  a  metallurgist  look  at  it,  and  he  will 
see  that  it  contains  not  only  gold,  but  silver,  and  lead,  and  iron,  and  he  will  single 
them  out.  To  me  it  is  a  mere  stone,  vnth  only  here  and  there  a  hint  of  gold,  but 
to  him  it  is  a  combination  of  various  metals.  Now  take  the  Word  of  God,  that  il 
tilled  with  precious  stones  and  metals,  and  let  one  instructed  in  spiritual  insight  go 
through  it,  and  he  will  discover  all  these  treasures ;  while,  if  you  let  a  man 
nninstructed  in  spiritual  insight  go  through  it,  he  will  discover  those  things 
that  are  outside  and  apparent,  but  those  things  that  make  God  and  man 
friends,  and  that  have  to  do  with  the  immortality  of  the  soul  in  heaven, 
escape  his  notice.  No  man  can  know  these  things  unless  the  Spirit  of  God 
has  taught  him  to  discern  them.  (JT.  W.  Beeeher.)  While  He  opened  to 
US  the  Scriptures. — The  opening  of  the  Scriptures  : — I.  The  Scriptures  cw)sed. 
1.  The  mysterious  nature  of  the  Bible  itself.  2.  The  degenerate  faith  of  the 
disciples.  IL  The  Scriptures  opened.  1.  It  is  necessary  to  have  Christ  as  the 
interpreter.  2.  The  disciples  must  possess  a  sympathetic  heart.  3.  Given  these 
conditions,  the  Scriptures  are  opened  with  the  utmost  ease.  IIL  The  result  o» 
THE  OPENING  OF  THE  ScBiPTUBES.  1.  The  two  disciplcB  Understood  that  a  thorough 
unity  of  design  pervaded  the  whole  Bible.  2.  They  perceived  that  Christ  was  the 
great  theme  of  the  Scriptures.  3.  They  were  fiUed  with  wonder  at  the  aspect  in 
which    Christ   was    revealed.     4.  They    experienced  true   happiness.      (H.    Ot 


CHAP.  X3IV.]  ST.  LUKE.  649 

fFilUams.)  ChrUt  opening  the  Scriptures: — I.  Oob  Lord's  sermon  ok  this 
OCCASION.  IL  The  benefits  we  may  derive  therefrom.  1.  It  encourages  us  to 
search  the  Scriptures.  2.  It  encourages  us  to  preach  Scripture  sermons.  3.  It 
calls  on  the  people  to  listen  to  Scripture  sermons.  4.  It  strengthens  our  faith  in 
the  truth  of  the  Scriptures.  5.  It  strengthens  our  faith  in  the  predictions  con- 
cerning the  increase  of  Christ's  kingdom.  (Canon Fleming.)  Scripture  opened : — 
I.  The  Holt  Scriptures  are  the  only  source  of  Divine  wisdom  and  consola- 
tion.    II.  For    the    full    understanding    of   the   Scriptures,   we   need    thr 

SPIRITUAL  teaching  OF  OUB  LoRD  JeSUS  ChRIST.  III.  ThIS  SPIRITUAL  TEACHING  1» 
OFTEN  SPECIALLY  GRANTED  TO  TRUE  DISCIPLES,  WHEN  ENGAGED  IN  HOLY  CHRISTIAN 
COMMUNION.      IV.   When     YOUB    affections    are    warmed    by    discoveries  made   TO 

SOU  IN  THE  Word  of  God,  then  you  should  at  once  recognize  the  presence 
OF  Jesus,  and  earnestly  entreat  His  continuance  with  you.  {J.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Christ  opening  Scripture : — L  It  is  Christ's  work  to  open  and  apply  the 
Scriptures  where  they  reach  the  heart.  He  is  the  great  Prophet  of  His 
Church,  who  hath  already  revealed  the  will  of  God  for  our  salvation.  He  opens 
the  Scripture  that  it  may  not  remain  a  sealed  Book,  and  opens  the  understanding, 
and  unbars  the  heart,  that  the  light  may  enter  to  make  the  first  saving  change, 
and  to  be  our  strength  and  comfort  afterward.  II.  The  opening  and  applying  of 
THE  Scriptures  are  the  means  Christ  will  ordinarily  use,  to  reach  and 
CABBY  on  His  design  upon  the  heart.    IIL  'Tis  in  this   way  of  opening  and 

APPLYING   THE    SCRIPTUBES,  THAT   ChKIST   IS   TO   BE    CONCEIVED   OF,  AND   REGARDED  AS 

taleino  with  His  people.  He  did  so  personally  while  He  was  upon  earth,  and 
continues  to  do  so  by  His  ministers  and  Spirit  now  when  He  is  gone  to  heaven. 
IV.  In  what  eespects  theib  hearts  may  be  said  to  burn,  to  whom  Christ 
ETFEOTUALLY  SPEAKS.  To  keep  your  thoughts  distinct,  I  shall  consider  this,  either 
with  respect  to  sinners,  whom  He  is  drawing  to  him :  or  to  believers,  whom  He  is 
acquainting  with  their  interest  in  Him.  1.  As  to  sinners  whom  He  is  drawing  to 
Him.  When  Christ  opens  the  Scriptures,  and  talks  with  such,  their  hearts  may  be 
said  to  burn — (1)  With  a  sense  of  sin,  and  a  fearful  apprehension  of  deserved 
wrath.  (2)  Their  hearts  are  made  to  bum  with  ardent  desire  for  deliverance  from 
their  sinful  wretched  state,  and  for  an  interest  in  Christ  the  only,  all-sufficient 
Saviour.  2.  As  to  believers,  whom  Christ  is  acquainting  with  their  interest  in  Him, 
and  thereby  talking  with  them  to  their  comfort ;  whilst  He  does  so,  their  hearts 
may  be  made  to  bum.  (1)  With  love  to  Him;  and  (2)  With  longing  desires  to  be 
with  Him.  And  both  these  are  excited  by  what  He  makes  the  subject  of  His 
discourses  with  them,  namely.  His  sufferings,  and  His  glory.  The  followers  of 
Gbrist  may  have  their  hearts  made  to  bum,  with  desire  to  see,  and  be  for  ever  with 
Him.    V.  With  what  temper  they,  who  undbb  Christ's  speaking  to  them 

SAVE  FELT  THEIB  HEARTS  TO  BURN  WITHIN  THEMSELVES,  SHOULD  BE   LED  TO  OPEN  IT 

TO  OTHERS.  The  answer  to  this  is  obvious.  1.  With  deep  humility ;  as  having 
their  eye  upon  their  unworthiness,  that  the  Lord  of  glory  should  talk  with  such  as 
them,  and  in  so  plain  and  powerful  a  manner  lead  them  into  an  acquaintance  with 
the  Word  of  truth ;  and  thereby  with  the  things  concerning  Himself,  which  are  so 
necessary  to  their  safety  and  peace.  2.  With  raised  wonder ;  they  being  ready  to 
Bay,  How  strange  an  ardour  did  we  feel  within  us  kindling  into  an  heavenly  flame, 
while  H«  talked  with  as,  and  opened  to  us  the  Scriptures  ?  3.  With  thankfulness 
and  joy ;  from  a  just  sense  of  the  value  of  that  distinguishing  grace  of  Christ, 
which  made  the  remembrance  of  the  time  and  place  where  it  was  vouchsafed  so 
pleasant  to  them  afterwards.  4.  With  desire  and  endeavour  to  bring  others 
acquainted  with  Christ,  by  whom  their  hearts  were  made  to  bum  within  them. 
(D.  Wilcox.)  The  right  point  of  viev) : — I  go  into  a  gallery  where  there  are 
illustrious  persons  hung  in  portraiture.  I  see  one  that  I  am  attracted  to,  and  I 
look  upon  it,  and  I  know  this  much — ^that  it  is  a  man.  I  know  that  it  is  a  man  of 
beauty,  or,  lacking  beauty,  indicating  great  intellectual  development  and  power  of 
brain.  A  number  of  such  external  things  I  know  of  him,  but  nothing  more.  By 
and  by,  some  one  says  to  me,  "  His  name  is  Goethe."  Ah  1  instantly  a  vision 
springs  up  in  my  mind.  I  have  read  of  Goethe.  I  know  his  poems.  I  know  his 
dramas.  I  know  mnch  of  the  whole  German  literature  which  he  has  created. 
And  the  moment  I  hear  his  name,  and  associate  it  with  that  portrait,  it  assumes 
new  life.  It  is  a  hundred  times  more  to  me  than  it  was  before.  I  say  to  myself, 
"  Then  that  is  Goethe,  is  it  f  Well — well — well "  ;  and  all  these  wellt  merely  mean 
that  I  am  thinking,  and  gathering  together  aU  my  scattered  knowledge,  and 
concentrating  it  on  that  effigy.    I  do  not  know  him  personally,  though  I  know  him 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. 

ftB  well  ae  a  book  could  interpret  him  to  me.  But  suppose  I  had  been  in  Germany ; 
Buppose  I  had  been  invited  to  his  house ;  had  seen  him  in  the  morning,  at  noon, 
and  at  night ;  at  the  table,  familiarly ;  with  his  manuscripts,  in  his  study ;  sapposa 
I  had  seen  him  when  topics  came  before  him  for  discussion,  or  in  his  intercourse 
with  men ;  suppose  I  had  seen  him  surrounded  by  little  children,  and  seen  how 
they  affected  him  ;  suppose  I  had  seen  how  noble  personages  affected  him ;  suppose 
I  had  seen  him  in  moments  of  calmness  and  silence  and  reverie ;  or  at  funerals ;  or 
lit  great  public  rejoicings ;  in  all  those  moods  and  circumstances  which  go  to  show 
exactly  what  a  man  is ;  suppose  I  had  lived  with  him,  and  seen  the  coruscation, 
the  whole  play  of  his  soul,  would  I  not  then  have  a  knowledge  of  him  which  no 
portrait  could  give  me  ?  Having  gained  this  larger  knowledge  of  him,  I  say,  "  I 
never  knew  Goethe  before";  but  one  exclaims,  "You  never  knew  Goethe  before? 
Yes  you  did.  I  pointed  him  out  in  such  a  gallery  at  such  a  time ;  and  now  you  say 
you  never  knew  him  before!"  But  would  it  not  be  true?  {H.  W.  Beeeher.) 
Understanding  the  Scriptures : — The  biographer  of  Dr.  Arnold,  of  Rugby,  when 
describing  his  plan  of  studying  the  Bible,  makes  this  important  observation : 
•'  There  are  two  methods  of  reading  Scripture,  perfectly  distinct  in  their  object  and 
nature :  the  one  is  practical,  the  other  scientific ;  the  one  seeks  the  religious  truth 
of  Scripture  as  bearing  on  the  inquirer's  heart  and  personal  feelings ;  the  other, 
the  right  comprehension  of  the  literary  and  intellectual  portions  of  the  Bible.  .  .  . 
Only  those  who  feel  the  Bible  can  understand  it."  Christ's  method  of  imparting 
■instruction: — There  are  here  several  points  of  very  great  interest.  We  have  a 
striking  illustration  of  our  Lord's  method  of  teaching,  which  was  to  give  more  when 
that  already  given  had  been  duly  received.  We  have  also  a  most  emphatic  warning 
as  to  the  danger  of  losing  golden  opportunities,  or  of  letting  slip  through  ignorance 
or  procrastination  the  means  of  acquiring  great  accessions  of  knowledge  and  grace. 
These  truths  will  open  before  you  as  we  proceed :  at  present  we  need  only  announce, 
as  the  general  object  of  our  discourse,  the  showing  you  how  near  the  disciples  were 
to  the  losing  the  manifestation  of  their  Master,  forasmuch  as  though  •'  He  made  as 
though  He  would  have  gone  further,"  and  how  certainly  they  would  have  lost  that 
manifestation,  had  they  not  been  enabled  to  say  with  perfect  truth,  in  the  words  of 
our  text — "  Did  not  our  heart  bum  within  us,  while  He  talked  with  us  by  the  way, 
and  while  He  opened  to  us  the  Scriptures  ?  "  Now,  you  may  all  see,  if  you  study 
with  any  attention  the  record  of  our  blessed  Saviour's  ministrations,  that  He 
required  a  peculiar  state  of  mind  in  those  to  whom  He  taught  truth,  withholding  it 
where  likely  to  be  despised  or  made  an  instrument  of  injury,  but  imparting  it  where 
He  aaw  that  it  would  be  reverently  and  profitably  received.  It  was  evidently  a 
principle  with  Christ,  as  indeed  He  expressly  announced,  to  give  more  where  what 
had  been  given  had  been  duly  improved,  so  that  fresh  communications  were  made 
to  depend  upon  men's  use  of  past.  He  did  not  pretend  to  open  truth  after  truth, 
just  as  though  His  whole  business  had  been  to  furnish  to  the  world  a  certain 
amount  of  revelation,  whether  they  would  hear  or  whether  they  would  forbear ;  but 
He  watched  with  great  attentiveness  the  reception  of  truth,  and  He  added  or  with- 
held according  as  that  reception  did  or  did  not  indicate  love  for  truth  and  a  readi- 
ness  to  obey  its  demands.  And  the  importance  to  ourselves  of  observing  the  coarse 
which  Christ  pursued  upon  earth  lies  mainly  in  this.  We  have  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  such  course  was  followed  only  in  the  days  of  His  public  ministrations, 
but  rather,  that  it  was  universally  characteristic  of  God's  spiritual  dealings.  Yoa 
will  never  make  way  with  the  Bible  by  going  to  it  in  a  spirit  of  speculation,  canying 
to  it  the  same  feelings  as  to  a  treatise  on  some  branch  of  human  science.  It  is  not 
indeed  now,  as  it  was  when  our  Lord  personally  taught ;  when  the  letter,  so  to 
speak,  of  Scripture  might  be  variously  distributed,  according  to  men's  various 
dispositions  and  capacities,  but  it  still  is,  that  the  letter,  though  equally  accessible 
to  all,  is  not  equally  illuminated  to  all ;  and  by  keeping  altogether  to  Himself  the 
power  of  illuminating  the  page,  so  that  He  can  leave  that  a  parable  to  one  which  He 
clears  from  all  mystery  to  another,  God  can  cause  that  now,  as  much  as  in  the  days 
of  the  Eedeemer,  the  amount  of  knowledge  shall  be  proportioned  to  certain  moral 
qualities  and  acts.  You  may  be  sure  that  it  is  as  true  now  as  ever  it  was,  and  in 
as  large  a  sense,  that  "  whosoever  doeth  the  will  of  God,  he  shall  know  of  the 
doctrine" ;  for  there  are  innermost  meanings  in  Scripture  which  will  never  be  reached 
through  learning  and  ingenuity,  but  which  open  before  the  hunble  and  prayer< 
f  ol  inquiry ;  so  that  passages  on  which  criticism  is  vainly  tnming  all  its  strength, 
and  to  whidi  it  can  attach  none  hot  an  obscure  and  nnimportant  sense,  reveal  to 
many  an  uneducated  and  simple-minded  Christian  the  coonsels  of  God  and  the 


CBAP.  xrw.]  ST.  LUKE.  651 

glories  of  eternity ;  so  that  it  still  depends  on  your  love  for  truth,  and  on  your 
willingness  to  act  on  it  so  fast  as  discovered,  whether  you  shall  grow  in  the  know, 
ledge  of  heavenly  things ;  just  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  Redeemer,  when  a  parable 
was  employed  to  veil  truth  from  the  careless,  or  a  miracle  concealed,  to  withhold 
evidence  from  the  obstinate.  But  never  think  that  an  unaided  intellect  can  master 
scriptural  dilficulties,  or  that  unimproved  knowledge  can  be  a  good  thing.  There 
is  a  certain  point  up  to  which  Divine  teaching  will  advance,  but  there  will  pause, 
in  order  that  it  may  be  ascertained  whether  you  prize  what  you  have  learned,  and 
are  sincere  in  the  desire  to  learji  more.  And  all  this  was  imaged  by  the  conduct  of 
Christ  with  reference  to  His  disciples.  This  "  making  as  though  he  would  have 
gone  further,"  was  but  an  instance  of  that  cautiousness  of  which  we  have  spoken 
as  characteristic  of  His  ministry.  He  just  wanted  to  have  evidence  whether  truth 
were  duly  loved ;  for  on  His  finding  that  evidence  depended,  according  to  His 
universal  rule,  His  continuing  His  instruction.  There  are  many,  we  are  thoroughly 
persuaded,  who  often  miss  the  manifestation  of  Christ  through  the  indolently  letting 
slip  some  presented  opportunity  ;  nay,  we  doubt  whether  there  be  any  man  who  is 
brought  within  hearing  of  the  gospel  unto  whom  there  have  not  been  moments  in 
which  he  has  stood  upon  the  very  threshold  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  which 
it  has  depended  upon  his  immediately  obeying  some  impulse  or  hearkening  to  some 
suggestion  whether  the  door  should  fly  open  or  remain  closed  against  him.  The 
mind  of  the  unconverted  man,  stirred  through  some  secret  instrumentality,  has 
felt  it  proposed  to  it  that  it  should  take  into  its  chambers  a  Ouest  who  might 
discipline  the  passions  and  remodel  the  character ;  but  then  it  has  been  questioned 
whether  the  proposal  should  be  instantly  closed  with,  or  longer  time  given  for 
deUberation,  and  because  the  latter  course  has  been  adopted — because,  that  is,  the 
disciples  when  at  Emmans  have  parted  from  their  Teacher  in  the  street,  and  gone 
alone  into  the  house,  the  golden  opportunity  has  been  lost,  and  there  has  been  no 
manifestation  of  Christ  to  the  soul.  You  may  not  be  thoroughly  aware  of  it,  but 
we  should  wish  you  to  be  assured,  that  religion  is  of  such  a  nature  that  eternity  is 
very  frequently  dependent  on  a  moment.  You  can  never  be  certain  that  an  impulse 
will  be  repeated  or  a  suggestion  renewed ;  so  that  in  parting  from  the  Teacher 
who  has  awakened  some  serious  emotion,  in  place  of  taking  Him  with  you  into  your 
dwelling,  that  the  emotion  may  be  deepened,  you  are  perhaps  letting  go  your  last 
likelihood  of  salvation,  and  shutting  yourselves  up  to  indifference  and  impenitence. 
{H.  Melvill,  B.D.)         While  He  talked  with  ut : — "  I  have  lately  seen,"  wrote  Mr. 

Hervey,  "  that  most  excellent  minister  of  the  ever  blessed  Jesus,  Mr. .     I 

dined,  supped,  and  spent  the  evening  with  him  at  Northampton,  in  company  with 
Dr.  Doddridge,  and  two  pious  clergymen  of  the  Church  of  England,  both  of  them 
known  to  the  learned  world  by  their  valuable  writings ;  and  surely  I  never  spent  a 
more  dehghtful  evening,  or  saw  one  that  seemed  to  make  nearer  approaches  to  the 
felicity  of  heaven.  A  gentleman,  of  great  worth  and  rank  in  the  town,  invited  ns 
to  his  house,  and  gave  as  an  elegant  treat ;  but  how  mean  was  his  provision,  how 
coarse  his  delicacies,  compared  with  the  fruit  of  my  friend's  lips  1  They  dropped 
as  the  honeycomb,  and  were  a  well  of  life."  The  Lord  is  risen  Indeed. — Jesus 
risen : — The  evidence  for  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  of  two  kinds,  predictive  and 
historical.  From  the  Old  Testament  it  appears  that  Messiah  was  to  rise  ;  from  the 
New,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  did  rise,  and  therefore  is  the  Messiah.  Among  the 
predictive  witnesses,  the  first  place  is  due  to  that  ancient  and  venerable  order  of  men, 
styled  patriarchs,  or  heads  of  families,  whose  Uves  and  actions,  as  well  as  their 
words,  were  descriptive  of  the  person,  in  faith  of  whom  they  lived  and  acted, 
instructing,  interceding  for,  and  conducting  their  dependents,  as  representative 
prophets,  priests,  and  kings;  looking  forward  unto  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  their 
faith  and  ours,  who,  by  dying  and  rising  again,  was  to  exhibit  to  the  world  the 
Divine  fulness  of  all  these  characters.  In  the  class  of  the  predictive  witnesses  of 
our  Lord's  resurrection,  the  second  place  is  claimed  by  the  law.  When  we  see  the 
Levitical  high  priest  arrayed  in  the  garments  of  glory  and  beauty ;  when  we  behold 
him  purifying  all  the  parts  of  the  figurative  tabernacle  with  blood,  and  then  entering 
witibin  the  veil,  into  the  holiest  of  all,  to  present  that  propitiating  blood  before  the 
offended  Majesty  of  heaven ;  is  it  possible,  even  though  an  apostle  had  not  applied 
all  these  circumstances  for  us,  to  detain  the  imagination  a  moment  from  fixing 
itself  on  the  great  High  Priest  of  our  profession ;  the  plenary  satisfaction  made  on 
the  erosB ;  Hu  resurrection  in  an  immortal  body,  no  more  to  stand  charged  with 
aiBt  BO  more  to  see  corruption ;  the  purification  of  the  Church  by  His  precious 
Mood ;  His  ascension  into  heaven,  and  intereeHion  for  oa,  in  the  presence  of  God  t 


65S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohat.  xdt., 

Next  to  the  patriarchs  and  the  law,  the  prophets  press  for  admittance,  to  delivei 
their  testimony ;  for  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus,"  as  saith  the  angel  in  the  Revela- 
tion, ••  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  Some  of  these  give  their  evidence  in  the  ancient 
way  of  fignre  and  emblem ;  others,  with  less  reserve,  in  express  literal  declarations. 
A  fact  of  80  extraordinary  a  nature  as  the  resurrection  of  a  body  from  the  dead, 
predicted,  as  W3  have  seen,  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners,  by  the  patriarchs, 
the  law,  and  the  prophets,  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  happened  without  sufiQcient 
witnesses  of  its  accomplishment.  {Bishop  Home.)  The  Lord  it  risen  indeed : — 
I.  Let  TJ8  VEBiTJ  THE  STATEMENT  OF  THE  TEXT.  In  attempting  this,  let  me  first  of 
all  call  your  attention  to  Christianity  as  an  existing  fact.  And  the  centre  of  that 
belief  is  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  We  can  thus  trace  the  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection  to  its  source,  and  see  that  it  was  no  gradual  innovation  into  the 
Church's  belief ;  no  doctrine  gradually  taking  shape,  as  myths  do,  from  ideas  which 
have  been  floating  about  in  the  minds  of  men ;  but  an  alleged  fact,  attested  by  those 
who  professed  to  be  eye-witnesses  of  the  event ;  and  believed  in  by  the  Church  at 
a  time  when  these  witnesses  were  still  alive.  Now,  in  testing  the  value  of  their 
testimony,  two  questions  present  themselves,  and  give  rise  to  two  concurrent  traces 
of  thought,  both  of  which,  as  we  think,  lead  to  the  conclusion,  that  no  testimony 
could  be  more  trustworthy  than  that  borne  by  the  evangelists  and  others  to  the 
resurrection  of  our  Lord.  This  first  question,  Were  they  competent  witnesses, 
divides  itself  into  two.  Were  they  deceived  themselves?  Did  they  attempt  to 
deceive  others  ?  If  either  of  these  questions  can  be  answered  in  the  affirmative, 
their  testimony  is  invalid  ;  if  answered  negatively,  their  testimony  deserves  to  be 
received.  That  they  could  not  be  deceived  themselves,  is  evident  from  the  following 
considerations — 1.  The  question  to  which  they  bear  testimony  is  not  one  of  doctrine 
on  which  their  judgment  might  have  misled  them  ;  but  one  of  fact,  on  which  they 
were  guided  by  the  evidence  of  their  senses.  2.  The  witnesses  were  not  one  or 
two,  but  a  large  number — upwards  of  five  hundred  having  seen  the  risen  Redeemer 
at  the  same  time.  3.  The  men  were  not  fanatics,  whose  excited  imagination  might 
cause  them  to  mistake  some  uncommon  appearance  for,  or  to  invest  it  with,  the 
form  of  their  Lord.  Their  whole  demeanour  is  the  very  antipodes  to  anything  like 
fanaticism.  No  finer  specimen  of  sobriety  than  their  narrative  presents  can  be 
found  in  any  language.  4.  The  times  and  the  manner  of  the  Saviour's  appearing 
were  such  as  to  render  deception  impossible.  He  appeared  repeatedly — at  different 
times  and  in  various  circumstances,  and  was  not  only  visible  to  the  eye,  but  palpable 
to  the  touch.  Lastly,  their  familiarity  with  the  Saviour  previous  to  His  death 
qualified  them  for  recognizing  Him  after  His  resurrection.  They  had  been  with 
Him  in  all  circumstances.  These  considerations  amply  suffice  to  show  that  they 
could  not  be  deceived.  But  did  they  attempt  to  deceive  others  ?  One  would  think 
the  principles  they  propagated  should  be  sufficient  to  acquit  them  of  such  a  charge. 
Could  impostors  devise  and  propagate  principles  which  surpass  the  practice  of  the 
nations  almost  as  much  as  heaven  contrasts  with  hell — principles  which,  wherever 
they  obtain,  promote  the  highest  morality,  making  men  truthful,  honest,  upright, 
generous,  and  devout— could  impostors  devise  and  propagate  such  principles  as 
these  7  We  think  not.  Besides,  men  do  not  practise  imposition  without  an  object. 
If  they  attempt  to  deceive,  it  is  with  a  view  to  some  selfish  end — could  there  be 
any  such  end  contemplated  by  the  disciples  of  Christ  ?  They  could  not  hope  to 
improve  their  temporal  circumstances.  Then,  did  they  hope  to  gain  for  themselves 
a  reward  in  heaven  ?  A  reward  in  heaven,  for  publishing  a  falsehood,  and  imposing 
on  their  fellows !  We  pass  on  now  to  consider  the  second  question.  Would  their 
testimony  if  false  have  been  believed  in  Jerusalem  and  elsewhere?  and  the  concur- 
rent though  different  train  of  thought  to  which  it  gives  rise.  All  these  statements 
of  the  history  must  have  been  known  to  be  false  by  those  among  whom  they  were 
circulated ;  or  at  least  their  falsehood  might  easily  have  been  made  so  manifest  a? 
to  render  their  reception  impossible,  and  to  confine  them  to  the  parties  with  whom 
they  originated.  And  not  only  were  they  capable  of  effectual  contradiction ;  but 
those  who  had  the  power,  had  also  the  strongest  inducement  to  make  known  their 
falsehood.  II.  Let  va  account  fob  the  exultant  feelings  with  which  the 
DisciPiJis  published  this  statement.  In  attempting  this  it  is  necessary  to  place 
ourselves  to  some  extent  in  the  position  of  the  disciples,  in  order  that  we  may  judge 
of  the  manner  in  which  they  were  personally  affected  by  the  event.  It  is  evident 
from  the  Gospels  that  they  were  greatly  overwhelmed  by  His  death.  _  They  had 
■aorifioed  all  they  possessed,  and  were,  as  it  now  appeared  to  them,  to  gain  nothing. 
Vheir  temporal  proapeets  were  blasted.    Their  friends  were  alienated  from  them ; 


«HAP.  xxiv.J  ST.  LUKE.  658 

and  all  they  oould  look  for  in  return  was  the  derision  of  their  neighbours  for 
having  indulged  baseless  expectations.  In  this  state  of  mind,  when  it  became 
evident  to  them  that  the  Lord  was  risen,  when  they  saw  and  heard  Him,  and  knew 
from  the  old  manner  and  spirit  that  it  was  He  himself,  what  a  strange  revulsion  of 
feeling  they  must  have  experienced  I  What  new  light  must  suddenly  have  flashed 
upon  them  1  Then  He  t«  a  king  after  all,  though  in  another  sense  than  we  imagined. 
Then  our  expectations  are  not  disappointed ;  there  is  a  reward  for  as  still,  higher 
than  we  had  dreamed  of.  Then  we  have  still  our  friend  to  lean  upon,  to  care  for 
as,  and  comfort  us,  and  goide,  and  help  us.  Now  we  have  a  new  conception  of  our 
calling  and  of  our  Master's  reign.  Now  we  can  see  how  our  carnal-mindedness 
kept  us  from  perceiving  the  full  meaning  of  His  gracious  words ;  and  that  when 
we  attributed  to  Him  hard  sayings,  He  was  but  holding  out  to  us  greater  blessings 
than  our  hearts  were  prepared  to  receive.  No  wonder  that  when  such  thoughts 
dawned  upon  them,  their  hearts  were  filled  with  joy  I  There  were  reasons,  perhaps, 
for  their  joy,  which  even  they  did  not  yet  fully  apprehend — reasons  relating  to 
as  as  well  as  to  them.  They  did  not  yet  perceive  all  the  results  to  humanity  which 
were  to  flow  from  His  death,  though  ultimately  they  showed  that  they  knew  what 
importance  was  attached  to  it — Peter,  e.g.,  making  it  the  principal  subject  of  his 
sermons,  connecting  it  with  the  miracles  which  he  wrought,  and  in  his  Epistle 
attributing  to  it  the  new  birth  of  believers  ;  while  Paul,  in  1  Cor.  xv.,  to  which  we 
have  already  referred,  makes  it  lie  at  the  basis  of  the  entire  Christian  faith — "  If 
Ohrist  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain."  The 
meaning  of  these  words,  and  the  supreme  importance  of  the  event  to  which  they 
refer,  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following  considerations :  The  resurrection  was  the 
Divine  seal  to  the  Saviour's  mission.  During  His  life  He  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of 
God  in  a  sense  which  made  Him  equal  with  the  Father — to  have  come  from  the 
bosom  of  the  Father  that  He  might  reveal  His  character  to  mankind,  and  open  a 
way  by  which  sinners  might  approach  and  find  acceptance  with  Him — to  pat  away 
sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  and,  ere  His  death,  exclaimed  in  reference  to  this 
work,  "  It  is  finished  I  "  Now,  suppose  that  after  all  this.  He  had  not  risen.  In 
that  case  His  claims  would  have  been  falsified.  It  would  have  been  evident  that 
He  was  a  mere  impostor.  God  does  not  own  this  pretended  Son  of  His,  who  claimed 
to  be  one  in  nature  with  Himself.  His  revelation  of  the  Father  is  untrue.  Whereas 
the  resurrection  pat  the  Divine  seal  to  His  claims,  and  made  manifest  His  own 
Divine  attributes.  By  it  God  declared  before  all  the  worlds  that  He  was  all  that 
He  professed  to  be,  and  had  done  what  He  professed  to  do ;  that  His  life  and 
teaching  contained  a  true  revelation  of  the  Divine  character ;  that  He  had  opened 
a  way  of  access  to  God  through  the  atonement  which  He  had  offered  for  the  Bins 
of  the  world  ;  that  through  Him  the  love  of  God  was  free  to  our  fallen  race ;  that 
in  Him  there  was  pardon  and  life  for  mankind  sinners.  All  this,  if  His  miracles 
had  not  previously  made  it  manifest,  was  clearly  revealed  in  the  light  which  shone 
on  the  sepulchre  on  that  first  Easter  morning.  But  oh  the  joy  which  comes  to  us 
from  that  deserted  grave !  "  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed ! "  Then  woe  unto  those 
by  whom  His  overtures  of  mercy  are  rejected  and  His  authority  set  at  nought.  As 
the  conqueror  of  death  no  one  can  successfully  resist  His  will.  The  power  which 
rifled  the  grave  can  crush  the  proudest  rebel.  {W.  Landelt.)  Chrisfa  rauirrec- 
tion:—!.  The  besurbection  of  Chbist  is  a  prvoTAi.  faot.  The  key-stone  of 
Christ's  religion.  All  turns  upon  this.  Either  Jesus  rose,  or  else  He  is  an  impostor, 
ftnd  imposture  in  one  thing  makes  Him  false  in  all.  Take  away  the  resurrection, 
and  there  is  no  link  left  between  heaven  and  earth :  preaching  is  a  lie,  faith  is  idle, 
happy  dying  is  a  delusion,  and  happy  living  is  a  greater  fiction  still.  But,  with 
St.  Paul,  we  may  challenge  the  world  to  disprove  the  assertion  in  the  text.  II.  The 
BESUBBECTioM  OF  Ghbist  WAS  A  MiBACUE.  Otherwise  impossible.  Nature  possesses 
no  power  to  raise  a  dead  body.  But  once  admit  that  the  work  is  God's,  and  all 
difficulty  disappears.  III.  What  the  besdbbection  body  was.  The  saije  palpable 
and  substantial  frame  which  quivered  on  the  cross.  I  argue  this — 1.  From  the 
fact  that  He  prophesied  His  own  personal  resurrection,  in  His  own  proper  identity. 
2.  From  the  fact  that  the  disciples  recognized  that  identity,  though  reluctantly. 
8.  From  the  fact  that  He  recognized  His  own  identity.  (T.  Armitage,  DJ).)  The 
resurrection  of  Christ : — I.  His  besobbection  is  the  pledge  of  oitbs.  1.  First, 
because  He  promised  that  it  should  be — "  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  His 
human  nature  was  the  grain  of  seed  (John  xii.)  which,  sown  by  the  hand  of  God 
in  the  field  of  the  world,  was  to  fructify  in  death,  to  bear  a  thousandfold  in  resnr- 
Motion.    He  linked  oar  nature  with  Hia.    It  was  united  not  for  a  Mason*  bat  for 


(,U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ran 

ever.  2.  But  we  have,  secondly,  more  than  the  identity  of  our  nature  with  Hia,  to 
establish  the  fact  that  in  His  resurrection  we  have  the  pledge  of  our  own.  W* 
need  to  be  assured  that  His  triumph  will  avail  for  us ;  and  we  are.    In  Hia  handv 

SRev.  i.  18),  we  are  told,  are  placed  "the  keys  of  death  and  hell."  No  longer  ia- 
eath  in  Satan's  power;  he  was  compelled  to  surrender  his  dominion  to  the  Saviour. 
II.  We  proceed  to  view  our  Lord's  resurrection  as  the  pattern  op  oubs.  To  b» 
raised  in  the  lowest  character  in  which  it  were  possible,  would  be  an  exaltation 
too  glorious  to  be  understood  in  our  present  humiliation.  Let  us  examine  a  few 
of  the  particulars  of  resemblance  between  His  resurrection  and  ours.  1.  And,  first. 
He  retained  the  identity  of  His  person.  No  change  passed  upon  Him,  save  that 
round  His  humanity  glory  appeared,  like  that,  perhaps,  which  He  wore  for  a  season 
on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  And  we,  too,  shall  rise,  in  the  likeness  of  Hia 
resurrection,  our  very  selves.  2.  "We  shall  be  raised,  too,  by  the  same  instrumentality. 
We  are  told  by  the  Saviour  that  He  had  power  to  lay  down  His  life,  and  power  to- 
take  it  up  again.  We  are  nowhere  told  that  He  did  so ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  plainly 
declared  that  He  was  not  His  own  deliverer  from  the  prison-house  of  death.  He  is 
said,  in  the  first  of  Peter,  the  third  chapter,  at  the  eighteenth  verse,  to  have  beeH' 
"  quickened  by  the  Spirit "  ;  and  again,  in  the  eight  chapter  of  Romans,  the  second 
verse,  to  have  been  raised  by  the  Father.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  God  the  Father 
was  the  Author,  and  God  the  Spirit  the  Agent  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  If  it 
ehould  be  asked,  *'  Why  is  it  so  ?  "  the  answer  is,  that  Christ  came  to  fulfil  all  the 
conditions  of  oor  salvation;  He  must  be  "made  like  unto  His  brethren  in  all 
things,"  and  therefore  in  His  resurrection.  8.  Angels  were  employed  instrumentaUy 
in  the  resurrection  of  Christ ;  and  they  will  be  in  ours.  Wherefore  is  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  indebted  to  an  angel's  hand  for  His  deliverance  ?  Why  does  not  the  prison 
door  fly  open  as  the  God-Man  awakens  from  His  death-sleep?  Why?  Because  He 
must  "  fulfil  all  righteousness  " ;  He  must  travel  back  to  the  glory  He  had  left  in- 
the  character  of  those  He  ransomed ;  He  must  submit  to  every  condition  of  that 
covenant  by  which  the  ransomed  fallen  are  to  enter  into  life  ;  He  must,  in  short, 
return  to  glory  as  a  Man.  III.  We  come  to  speak  upon  some  of  the  EnrEoxs  op 
THE  Savxode's  resobrection.  These  we  regard  in  a  twofold  aspect.  1.  As  the* 
resurrection  affects  our  present  relation  to  God.  The  atonement  and  resurrection 
of  Christ  are  inseparably  connected.  We  take  but  a  defective  view  of  the  atone- 
ment when  we  limit  it  to  the  work  wrought  on  Calvary  ;  nay,  we  will  say,  that  if 
the  work  of  the  Saviour  ended  here,  there  could  have  been  no  atonement.  The- 
work  was  commenced  on  Calvary — it  is  completed  in  heaven.  Without  the  resur- 
rection there  could  be  no  triumph  over  death,  no  entrance  into  glory,  and  hence  no 
atonement  available  for  our  entering  where  Christ  had  not  gone  before.  2.  Bufc 
there  is  another  and  most  important  way  in  which  the  tidings  of  our  text  affect  us, 
W?  stand  in  the  same  position  as  Israel  of  old  occupied  on  the  day  of  atonement, 
as  regards  our  justification  our  privileges  in  other  respects  exceed.  We  have  lost 
more  than  God's  favour  in  the  fall ;  we  have  lost  our  right  of  access  to  Him.  A. 
rebel  may  be  pardoned,  and  fuUy  pardoned,  and  yet  never  find  access  to  the  royal 
presence.  It  was  so  with  Israel  |  they  approached  God  only  through  the  person  of 
their  high  priest.  Ours  is  the  high  and  holy  privilege  of  access  to  God.  3.  W» 
connect  the  resurrection  of  Christ  with  our  own ;  not  as  regards  its  reality  for  this 
we  have  done  before,  but  its  glory.  But  what  can  we  say  of  this  ?  To  tell  of  thfr 
glory  which  shall  burst  upon  a  waiting  Church  in  the  resurrection  morning,  would 
be  to  describe  that  sun  which  shall  no  more  go  down  ;  it  would  be  to  fathom  the 
perfections  of  that  God  whose  glory  fills  heaven  and  earth.  In  conclusion :  There  i» 
not  a  being  in  the  universe  which  will  not  be  affected  by  the  resurrection  of  JesuB. 
(A.  C.  Carr,  M.A.)  The  necetsity  of  Christ' i  resurrectiom : — The  resurrection  of 
Christ  was  necessary — 1.  In  order  to  the  atonement.  2.  In  order  to  the  holinei» 
of  the  believer.    8.  In  order  to  the  salvation  of  the  Church.    {M.  H.  Seymour, 

Vera.  86-49.  Jeaus  Himself  stood  In  the  midst  of  them.— T^^lrat  appearance  of 
the  rUen  Lord  to  the  eleven : — The  cebtaintt  of  our  Lord's  bebcrreotiom.  No 
^t  in  history  is  better  attested.  1.  Observe,  that  when  this  person  appeared  ia 
the  room,  the  first  token  that  it  was  Jesus  was  His  speech :  they  were  to  have  the 
evidence  of  hearing :  He  used  the  same  speech.  No  sooner  did  He  appear  than  He 
■poke.  His  first  accents  must  have  caUed  to  their  minds  those  cheering  notes  with 
vhich  He  had  closed  His  last  address.  They  must  have  recognized  that  charming; 
voice.    He  was  a  peace-maker,  and  a  peace-giver,  and  by  this  sign  they  were  gives 


CHAP,  mv.]  ST.  LUKE.  656 

to  discern  their  Leader.  I  want  you  to  notice  that  this  evidence  was  all  the  better, 
because  they  themselves  evidently  remained  the  same  men  as  they  had  been. 
*•  They  were  terrified  and  affrighted,  and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit  "  j 
and  thus  they  did  exactly  what  they  had  done  long  before  when  He  came  to  them 
walking  on  the  waters.  They  are  not  carried  away  by  enthusiasm,  nor  wafted  aloft 
by  fanaticism ;  they  are  not  even  as  yet  upborne  by  the  Holy  Spirit  into  an  unusual 
Btate  of  mind,  but  they  are  as  slow  of  heart  and  as  fearful  as  ever  they  were.  It 
they  are  convinced  that  Jesus  has  risen  from  the  dead,  depend  upon  it,  it  must  be 
BO,  2.  Thus  far  in  the  narrative  they  had  received  the  evidence  of  their  ears,  and 
that  is  by  no  means  weak  evidence ;  but  now  they  are  to  have  the  evidence  of  sight ; 
for  the  Saviour  says  to  them,  •'  Behold  My  hands  and  My  feet,  that  it  is  I  Myself  "  j 
"  and  when  He  had  thus  spoken,  He  showed  them  His  hands  and  His  feet."  John 
says  also  "His  side,"  which  he  specially  noted  because  he  had  seen  the  piercing  o£ 
that  side,  and  the  outflow  of  blood  and  water.  They  were  to  see  and  identify  that 
blessed  Body  which  had  suffered  death.  3.  Furthermore,  that  they  might  be  quite 
sore,  the  Lord  invited  them  to  receive  the  evidence  of  touch  or  feeling.  He  called 
them  to  a  form  of  examination,  from  which,  I  doubt  not,  many  of  them  shrank ; 
He  said,  "  Handle  Me,  and  see ;  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  Me 
have."  The  saints  are  not  at  the  coming  of  their  Lord  to  remain  disembodied 
spirits,  nor  to  wear  freshly  created  bodies,  but  their  entire  manhood  is  to  be  restored, 
and  to  enjoy  endless  bliss.  It  will  be  of  a  material  substance  also ;  for  our  Saviour'^ 
Body  was  material,  since  He  said,  "Handle  Me,  and  see  that  it  is  I  Myself ;  for  a 
spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  Me  have."  4.  Still  further  to  confirm 
the  faith  of  the  disciples,  and  to  show  them  that  their  Lord  had  a  real  Body,  and 
not  the  mere  form  of  one.  He  gave  them  evidence  which  appealed  to  their  common 
sense.  He  said,  "  Have  ye  any  meat ;  and  they  gave  Him  a  piece  of  a  broiled 
fish,  and  of  an  honeycomb.  And  he  took  it  and  did  eat  before  them."  This  waa 
an  exceedingly  convincing  proof  of  His  unquestionable  resurrection.  In  very  deed 
and  fact,  and  not  in  vision  and  phantom,  the  Man  who  had  died  upon  the  cross 
stood  among  them.  II.  Oub  Lobd's  chabacteb  when  bisen  fbom  the  dead. 
1.  Notice,  first,  that  in  this  appearance  of  Christ  we  are  taught  that  He  is  still 
anxious  to  create  peace  in  the  hearts  of  His  people.  No  sooner  did  He  make  Him- 
self visible  than  He  said,  "  Peace  be  unto  you."  He  has  not  lost  His  tender  car© 
over  the  least  of  the  flock ;  He  would  have  each  one  led  by  the  still  waters,  and 
made  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures.  2.  Note  again,  that  He  has  not  lost  His  habit 
of  chiding  unbelief,  and  encouraging  faith;  for  as  soon  as  He  has  risen,  and  speaks 
with  His  disciples,  He  asks  them,  "  Why  are  ye  troubled  ?  and  why  do  thoughts 
arise  in  your  hearts  ?  "  He  loves  you  to  believe  in  Him,  and  be  at  rest.  3.  Notice, 
next,  that  when  the  Saviour  had  risen  from  the  dead,  and  a  measure  of  His  glory 
was  upon  Him,  He  was  still  most  condescendingly  familiar  with  His  people.  H« 
showed  them  His  hands  and  His  feet,  and  He  said,  "  Handle  Me,  and  see."  4.  The 
next  thing  is  that  the  risen  Lord  was  still  wonderfully  patient,  even  as  He  had 
always  been.  He  bore  with  their  folly  and  infirmity  ;  for  "  while  they  yet  believed 
not  for  joy,  and  wondered,"  He  did  not  chide  them.  5.  Observe  that  our  Saviour, 
though  He  was  risen  from  the  dead,  and  therefore  in  a  measure  in  His  glory, 
entered  into  the  fullest  fellowship  with  His  own.  Peter  tells  ns  that  they  did  eat 
and  drink  with  Him.  I  do  not  notice  in  this  narrative  that  He  drank  with  them, 
but  He  certainly  ate  of  such  food  as  they  had,  and  this  was  a  clear  token  of  His 
fellowship  with  them.  6.  Let  me  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  when  Jesus 
bad  risen  from  the  dead.  He  was  just  as  tender  of  Scripture  as  He  was  before  His 
decease.  7.  Once  again,  our  Saviour,  after  He  had  risen  from  the  dead,  showed 
that  He  was  anxious  for  the  salvation  of  men  ;  for  it  was  at  this  interview  that  He 
breathed  upon  the  apostles,  and  bade  them  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  fit  them  to  go 
forth  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  III.  The  light  which  is  thrown  by  this 
incident  upon  the  natubs  or  oub  own  besdbbeotiok.  1.  First,  I  gather  from  this 
text  that  our  nature,  our  ^n-hole  humanity,  will  be  perfected  at  the  day  of  the 
appearing  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  when  the  dead  shall  be  raised 
incorruptible,  and  we  that  may  then  be  alive  shall  be  changed.  Jesus  has  redeemed 
not  only  our  souls,  but  our  bodies.  2.  I  gather  next  that  in  the  resurrection  our 
natute  will  be  full  of  peace.  Jesus  Christ  would  not  have  said,  "  Peace  be  unto 
yon,"  if  there  had  not  been  a  deep  peace  within  Himself.  He  was  calm  and  nndis* 
tnrbed.  There  was  much  peace  about  His  whole  life  ;  but  after  the  resurrection 
His  peace  becomes  very  conspicuous.  There  is  no  striving  with  scribes  and  Pharisees, 
there  is  no  battling  with  anybody  after  oor  Lord  is  risen.    Such  shall  be  oar  life,  we 


666  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tar, 

shall  be  flooded  with  eternal  peace,  and  shall  nevpr  again  be  tossed  abont  with  trouble, 
and  sorrow,  and  distress,  and  persecution.  3.  When  we  rise  again  our  nature  will 
find  its  home  amid  the  communion  of  saints.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had 
risen  again  His  first  resort  was  the  room  where  His  disciples  were  gathered.  His 
first  evening  was  spent  among  the  objects  of  His  love.  Even  so,  wherever  we  are 
we  shall  seek  and  find  communion  with  the  saints.  4.  Furthermore,  I  see  that  ia 
that  day  our  bodies  will  admirably  serve  our  spirits.  For  look  at  our  Lord's  Body. 
Now  that  He  has  risen  from  the  dead  He  desires  to  convince  His  disciples,  and  His 
Body  becomes  at  once  the  means  of  His  argument,  the  evidence  of  His  statement. 
His  flesh  and  bones  were  text  and  sermon  for  Him.  5.  In  that  day,  beloved,  when 
we  shall  rise  again  from  the  deac"!  we  shall  remember  the  past.  Do  yoa  not  notice 
how  the  risen  Saviour  says,  "  These  are  the  words  which  I  spake  unto  yon,  while  I 
was  yet  with  you."  He  had  not  forgotten  His  former  state.  It  is  rather  a  small 
subject,  and  probably  we  shall  far  more  delight  to  dwell  on  the  labours  of  car 
Eedeemer's  hands  and  feet ;  but  still  we  shall  remember  all  the  way  whereby  the 
Lord  our  God  led  us,  and  we  shall  talk  to  one  another  concerning  it.  6.  Observe 
that  our  Lord,  after  He  had  risen  from  the  dead,  was  still  full  of  the  spirit  of  ser- 
vice, and  therefore  He  called  others  out  to  go  and  preach  the  gospel,  and  He  gave 
them  the  Spirit  of  God  to  help  them.  When  you  and  I  are  risen  from  the  dead, 
we  shall  rise  full  of  the  spirit  of  service.  He  will  use  us  in  the  grand  economy  of 
future  manifestations  of  His  Divine  glory.  Possibly  we  may  be  to  other  dispensa- 
tions what  the  angels  have  been  to  this.  Be  that  as  it  may,  we  shall  find  a  part  of 
our  bliss  and  joy  in  constantly  serving  Him  who  has  raised  us  from  the  dead. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  Divine  visitation  : — I.  When  He  appeabed.  1.  When  they 
had  been  acting  unworthily  by  fleeing  from  Him  at  His  betrayal,  and  deserting 
Him  at  His  trial.  2.  When  they  were  unprepared,  and  unbelieving,  doubting  Hia 
express  promise,  and  refusing  the  testimony  of  His  messengers.  3.  When  they 
greatly  needed  His  presence,  for  they  were  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd.  4.  When 
they  were  exercising  the  little  life  they  had  by  coming  together  in  loving  assembly. 
So  far  they  were  doing  well,  and  acting  in  a  way  which  was  likely  to  bring  blessing. 

5.  When  they  were  lamenting  His  absence,  and  thus  proving  their  desire  after  Him. 
This  is  an  admirable  means  of  gaining  His  presence.  6.  When  certain  among 
them  were  testifying  concerning  Him.  Are  not  we  in  a  similar  condition  ?  May 
we  not  hopefully  look  for  our  Lord's  manifestation  of  Himself?  II.  What  Hk 
SAID.  "Peace  be  unto  you."  L  It  was  a  benediction:  He  wished  them  peace, 
2.  It  was  a  declaration :  they  were  at  peace  with  God.  3.  It  was  a  fiat ;  He 
inspired  them  with  peace.  4.  It  was  an  absolution :  He  blotted  out  all  offences  which 
might  have  spoiled  their  peace.  IH,  What  came  op  His  appeabing.  1.  He 
banished  their  doubts.  Even  Thomas  had  to  shake  off  his  obstinate  unbelief. 
2.  He  revealed  and  sealed  His  love  upon  their  hearts  by  showing  them  His  hands 
and  His  feet.  3.  He  refreshed  their  memories.  "These  are  the  words  which  I 
spoke  unto  you "   (verse  44).      4.  He  opened  their  understandings  (verse  45). 

6.  He  showed  them  their  position.  "  Ye  are  witnesses  of  these  things "  (verse 
48).  6.  He  filled  them  with  Joy  (John  xx.  20).  Peace  be  unto  you. — Peace 
bestowed  vpon  man : — I.  Notice  the  nature  of  the  blessing  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  proclaims.  It  is  the  blessing  of  "Peace."  II.  We  observe  the  pecu- 
liar connection  which  the  Bedeemer  implies  this  blessing  to  possess  with  Him- 
self. He  comes  to  them  as  the  author  of  peace :  and  the  peace  which  He 
wishes  for  them.  He  Himself  gives.  1.  Let  it  be  considered  that  reconciliation 
with  God  arises  wholly  and  exclusively  from  the  sacrificial  efficacy  of  the  Saviour's 
Bufferings.  2.  Not  only  is  reconcihation  secured  entirely  by  the  sacrificial  efficacy 
of  His  sufferings,  but  from  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ  proceeds  the  mission  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whose  office  it  is  to  apply  actually  to  men  the  various  blessings  of  redemption. 
III.  The  animating  influence  which  the  Lord  Jesus  designs  a  participation  of  this 
blessing  to  exercise  over  all  those  by  whom  it  is  enjoyed.  1.  The  possession  of  this 
spiritual  peace  is  designed  to  act  as  a  preservative  against  temptation.  2.  As  designed 
to  be  a  consolation  amidst  sorrow.  3.  As  designed  to  be  an  incentive  to  activity. 
4.  Ab  an  exciting  cause  of  gratitude.  {J.  Parsons.)  The  timely  presence  and 
•o/utatum  of  Jesus: — I.  With  reference  to  the  charactbb  op  the  visit  we  may 
remark,  that  the  visits  which  Christ  makes  to  His  Churches  are  of  two  kinds.  He 
Bometimea  comes  in  anger,  to  chastise  them.  In  this  manner  He  threatened  to 
visit  some  of  the  Asiatic  Churches.  At  other  times  He  visits  His  Churches  in  • 
gracious  manner,  to  comfort,  animate,  and  bless  them.  This  is  evident,  in  the  first 
place,  from  the  langnage  in  which  He  addressed  them ;  Peace  be  with  yoa.    Thif 


CMAP.  xxiT."  ST.  LUKE.  %B1 

M  BO  mere  formal  greeting  on  His  lips,  but  the  expression  of  a  genuine  desire  for 
leir  welfare.  Nay,  more ;  it  was  an  assurance  that  peace  existed  between  God  and 
lem.  Nor  was  this  all :  it  was  also  the  bestowmeut  of  His  peace  upon  them. 
L  Ths  timk  whbn  this  gracious  visit  was  madk.  1.  It  was  made  at  a  time 
?hen  the  disciples  were  exceedingly  unworthy  of  such  a  favour,  and  when  they 
rather  deserved  to  have  been  visited  in  anger.  They  had  treated  Him  in  a  very  unkind 
and  ungrateful  manner.  2.  It  was  made  at  a  time  when  the  Church  was  very  im- 
perfectly prepared  for  it,  and  when  very  few  among  them  expected  it,  or  had  any  hope 
of  such  a  favour.  3.  The  time  when  Christ  made  this  gracious  visit  to  His  Church 
was  a  time  in  which  it  was  very  much  needed.  The  faith,  and  hope,  and  courage 
of  its  members  were  reduced  to  the  lowest  point  of  depression,  and  unless  revived 
by  His  presence,  must  soon  have  expired.  4.  This  visit  was  made  at  a  time  when 
the  Church  was  employed  in  exerting  the  little  life  which  yet  remained  among  them, 
and  in  using  proper  means  to  increase  it.  Though  assembling  at  this  time  was 
dangerous,  so  that  they  did  not  dare  to  meet  openly,  yet  they  did  assemble,  and 
they  assembled  in  the  character  of  Christ's  disciples.  This  proved  the  existence  of 
B  bond  of  union  among  them,  which  drew  them  together.  This  bond  of  union 
consisted  in  sympathy  of  feeling.  They  all  felt  the  same  afiections,  the  same 
apprehensions  and  anxieties,  and  the  same  sorrows,  and  all  their  thoughts  centred 
in  one  object.  This  object  was  their  crucified  Master.  5.  The  gracious  visit  appears 
to  have  been  made  the  very  first  time  that  the  Church  met  after  Christ's  resurrec- 
tion. This  circumstance  is  highly  indicative  of  His  affection  for  them,  of  His 
unwillingness  to  leave  them  mourning  one  moment  longer  than  was  necessary,  and 
of  His  strong  desire  to  be  again  in  the  midst  of  them.  We  remark  lastly,  that 
this  gracious  visit  was  made  on  the  Lord's  day.  And  the  next  visit  which  He  made 
to  His  Church  was  made  on  the  next  Lord's  day.  My  brethren,  should  He  not 
favour  ns  with  His  presence  on  this  occasion,  let  us  consider  this  evil  as  the  cause 
of  His  absence,  and  set  ourselves  to  remove  it  without  delay.  {E.  Payson,  D.D,) 
The  mission  and  equipment  of  the  disciples  : — I.  The  salutation — "  Peace  be  unto 
you."  These  words  were,  no  doubt,  meant  to  allay  the  fears  which  were  then 
agitating  the  disciples'  minds.  In  themselves  they  were  fitted  to  have  this  effect, 
as  showing  the  spirit  and  purpose  with  which  He  had  come  among  them.  But  they 
were  also,  and  still  more,  fitted  to  have  this  effect,  because  of  what  they  brought  to 
their  remembrance.  They  were,  in  fact,  like  His  wounds,  signs  by  which  they 
might  identify  the  risen  Lord.  The  twofold  utterance  of  this  salutation  is  not  with- 
out significance.  As  Luke  tells  us,  "  The  disciples  had  beheld,  touched,  and  gladly 
received  their  rebuke  ;  but  there  is  again  a  wondering  among  them  before  the  final 
clear  and  tranquil  assurance  fills  their  hearts.  As  before  through  fear,  so  now 
through  astonished  joy,  they  cannot  altogether  and  fully  believe."  Their  joy, 
though  it  has  actual  faith  in  it,  "  does  not  reach  to  peace  and  joy  combined  in  their 
fulness."  ^  It  has  "  in  its  first  vehemence  and  disquietude  too  little  peace."  It  is  a 
"  violent  joy,  in  which,  notwithstanding  its  semblance  of  overpowering  feeling,  a 
deep  and  firm  faith  can  scarcely  fix  its  roots.  Therefore  the  wise  and  patient 
Master  gradually  brings  them  to  the  peace  of  faith."  But  we  unduly  limit  ths 
significance  and  scope  of  these  words,  if  we  view  them  only  as  designed  to  remove 
the  fears  of  the  disciples.  Bather  are  we  to  regard  them  as  the  salutation  which 
His  resurrection  brings  to  those  for  whom  He  died — the  message  borne  by  His 
wounds  to  all  who  look  to  Him  for  salvation.  This  resurrection  as  plainly  as  His 
advent  proclaims,  «•  peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  to  men."  II.  The  sending — "  Ap 
My  Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I  you,"  This  was  fitly  preceded  by  the 
salutation,  inasmuch  as  the  man  who  is  to  be  the  herald  of  peace  to  others  needs  to 
enjoy  peace  himself.  How  great  the  honour  which  He  puts  upon  His  servants  in 
thus  comparing  their  mission  with  His  own !  And  we  offer  the  following  remarks, 
not  as  exhaustive,  but  only  as  possible  helps  to  the  interpretation :  1.  That  they 
are,  in  some  measure,  to  represent  Him  before  men  even  as  He  represented  ths 
FaUier,  giving  men,  both  by  their  life  and  their  teaching,  a  representation  of  His 
character,  so  as  to  enable  them  to  form  a  conception  of  what  He  was.  Such  was 
unquestionably  their  calling.  They  were  to  be  living  epistles  of  Christ.  He  was 
to  Hve  in  them.  2.  That  they  receive  authority  from  Hun  in  some  measure,  as  He 
received  authority  from  His  Father.  They  speak  in  His  name,  as  He  spoke  in  His 
Father's  name.  They  do  His  works,  as  He  did  the  works  of  His  Father.  3.  That 
they  are  to  be  His  messengers  to  mankind,  as  He  was  the  Father's  messenger, 
taking  np  and  publishing  among  the  nations  the  gospel  which  He  first  proclaimed. 
4.  That  they  are  to  prosecute  their  work  in  the  same  spirit  as  He  did — a  spirit  of 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRAl  on.  [chap. 


Belf-denial  and  benevolence,  seeking  not  their  own  gratification,  but  the  glory  of 
<Jod  and  the  salvation  of  men.  5.  That  they  must  seek  to  do  their  work  by  the 
same  instrumentality — not  with  carnal  weapons,  but  by  the  spiritual  forces  which 
are  mighty  through  God  to  the  pulling  down  of  strongholds — not  depending  on 
human  might  or  power,  but  on  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  6.  That  they  are 
to  be  in  the  world  as  He  was — in  it,  though  not  of  it — seeking  no  portion  in  it,  nor 
making  it  their  rest — desirous  of  remaining  in  it  only  while  they  have  work  to  do 

glad  to  leave  it  when  their  work  is  done.     Such  are  some  of  the  things  which 

may  be  implied  in  their  being  sent  by  Him  as  He  was  sent  by  the  Father.    III. 
The  endowment — "  He  breathed  on  them,  and  saith  unto  them,  Eeceive  ye  the 
Holy  Ghost."    IV.  The  momentous  wokk  to  be  done — "  Whose  soever  sins  ye 
remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them  ;   and  whose  soever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are 
retained."     {W.  Landels,)        Behold  My  hands  and  My  feet — Jesus  on  the  evening 
of  Easter  Day  : — I.  Here  we  note  first  of  all  odb  Lord's  indulgent  teeatment  of 
MISTAKES  AND  IMPERFECTIONS  IN  BELIGI0U8  BELIEF.    We  may  vcuture  to  say  that 
the  disciples,  seeing  our  Lord  in  the  midst  of  them,  ought  to  have  recognized  Him 
at  once.     They  knew,  from  long  companionship  with  Him,  that  there  were  no  dis- 
coverable limits  to  His  power  over  life  and  nature.     That  our  Lord  held  His  dis- 
ciples responsible  for  such  knowledge  as  this  is  plain  from  the  words  which  He  had 
used,  earlier  in  the  afternoon,  when  addressing  the  two  on  the  Emmaus  road ; 
and  from  St.  Mark  we  learn  that  on  this  occasion,  too.  He  "  upbraided  them  with 
their  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart."    Yet,  looking  to  St.  Luke's  report,  what 
tender  censure  it  is  1    Here  certainly  is  no  expression  which  betrays  grief  or  anger. 
He  meets  their  excitement  with  the  mildest  rebuke — if  it  be  a  rebuke.     "  Why  are 
ye  disquieted  ?  and  why  do  critical  reasonings  arise  in  your  hearts  ?  "    He  traces 
their  trouble  of  heart  to  its  true  source — the  delusion  which  possessed  their  under- 
standings about  His  being  only  a  "  spirit."    In  His  tenderness  He  terms  their 
unworthy  dread  a  mere  disquietude  of  the  heart ;  they  are  on  a  false  track,  and 
He  will  set  them  right.     What  a  lesson  is  here  for  all  who,  whether  as  fathers  and 
mothers,  or  teachers,  or  clergymen,  have  upon  their  hands  the  immense  responsi- 
bility of  imparting  religious  truth  to  others  I    The  first  condition  of  successful 
teaching  is  patient  sympathy  with  the  difficulties  of  the  learner.     A  great  master 
was  once  asked,  "  What  is  the  first  condition  of  successful  teaching  ?  "  "  Patience," 
he  said-     "What  is  the  second?"     "Patience."     "What  is  the  third?"     He 
paused,  then  said,  "  Sympathy."    And  what  a  rebuke  is  here  on  the  want  of  con- 
siderateness,  of  courtesy,  of  generosity,  which  so  often  disfigures  our  modern  treat- 
ment of  real  or  supposed  religions  error  1    Who  can  wonder  at  our  failures  to  con- 
vince, when  our  methods  are  so  unlike  that  of  the  Great  Teacher  I    U.  Here,  too, 
we  see  oub  Lord's  sanction  of  the  principle  of  inquiby  into  the  foundations 
OF  OUR  BBLiGious  BELIEF.    Undoubtedly  the  understanding  has  great  and  exacting 
-duties  towards  Eevealed  Truth.  If  God  speaks,  the  least  that  His  rational  creatures 
-can  do  is  to  try  to  understand  Him.     And  therefore,  as  the  powers  of  the  mind 
gradually  unfold  themselves,  the  truths  of  religion  ought  to  engage  an  increasing 
share  of  each  of  them,  and  not  least  of  the  understanding.      What  too  often 
happens  is,  that  while  a  young  man's  intelligence  is  interesting  itself  more  and 
more  in  a  widening  circle  of  subjects,  it  takes  no  account  of  religion.    The  old 
childish  thoughts  about  religion  lie  shrivelled  op  in  some  out-of-the-way  comer  of 
a  powerful  and  accomplished  mind,  the  living  and  governing  powers  of  which  are 
-engaged  in  other  matters.     Then,  the  man  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  meets  with 
some  sceptical  book ;  and  he  brings  to  bear  on  it  the  habits  of  thought  and  judg- 
^nent  which  have  been  trained  in  the  study  of  widely  different  matters.    He  forms, 
Jie  can  form,  no  true  estimate  of  a  subject,  so  unlike  any  he  has  really  taken  in 
tiand  before:  he  is  at  the  mercy  of  his  new  instructor,  since  he  knows  nothing  that 
irill  enable  him  to  weigh  the  worth  or  the  worthlessness  of  startUng  assertions. 
He  makes  up  his  mind  that  science  has  at  length  spoken  on  the  subject  of  religion; 
«nd  he  turns  his  back,  with  a  mingled  feeling  of  irritation  and  contempt,  on  the 
truths  which  he  learned  at  his  mother's  knee.     This  is  no  imaginary  case ;  and 
among  the  reasons  which  go  to  explain  so  sad  a  catastrophe,  this,  I  say,  is  one  ; 
that  the  understanding  has  not  been  properly  developed  in  the  boy  and  the  young 
{man,  with  relation  to  religious  truth.    What  is  the  law  of  that  development  ?    It  is 
^his :  that  as  the  mind  grows,  it  learns  to  reinforce  the  teaching  of  authority  by 
ihe  inquiries  of  reverent  reason.    But  do  not  suppose  that,  because  it  condescends 
(o  be  thus  tested  by  your  understanding  as  regards  its  reality,  it  is  therefore  within 
the  oompass  of  your  onderstanding  as  regards  its  scope.    It  begins  with  that  which 


OHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  6S» 

yon  can  appraiae ;  it  ends  in  that  which  is  beyond  yon  :  because  while  you  are 
finite  and  bounded  in  your  range  of  vision,  it  is  an  unveiling  of  the  Infinite,  of  the 
Incomprehensible.     III.  Once  more,  note  heee  the  direction  which  oub  Lobo 

POBPOSELY  GAVE   TO   THE  THOUGHTS  OF   HiS   PERPLEXED  DISCIPLES.       He  doCS  not  tum 

them  in  upon  themselves ;  He  does  not  take  their  trouble,  so  to  speak,  sympatheti- 
cally to  pieces,  and  deal  with  its  separate  elements  ;  He  does  not  refute  one  by  one 
the  false  reasonings  which  arise  within  them.  He  does  not  say  to  them,  "  These 
disquietudes,  these  doubts,  are  mere  mental  disorders,  or  interesting  experiences, 
and  the  mind  itself  can  cure  diseases  which  the  mind  has  produced."  He  would, 
on  the  contrary,  have  them  escape  from  themselves  ;  from  the  thick  jungle  of  their 
doubts  and  fears  and  hopes  and  surmises  :  and  come  to  Him.  Whatever  they  may 
think,  or  feel ;  He  is  there,  seated  on  a  throne  which  enthusiasm  did  not  raise,  and 
which  doubt  cannot  undermine ;  in  His  own  calm,  assured,  unassailable  Life. 
"  Behold  My  hands  and  My  feet,  that  it  is  I  Myself  :  handle  Me,  and  see ;  for  a 
mere  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  Me  have."  Let  us  remind  ourselves 
that  whether  we  believe  them  or  not,  the  facts  of  the  Christian  creed  are  true ;  and 
that  faith  only  receives,  but  that  it  cannot  possibly  create  or  modify  Christ  and  His 
^fts.  Whether  men  believe  or  not  in  His  eternal  person,  in  the  atoning  virtue  of 
His  death,  in  the  sanctifying  influences  of  His  Spirit,  in  the  invigorating  grace  ol 
HiB  sacraments — these  are  certain  truths.  They  are  utterly  independent  of  the 
hesitaticiis  and  vacillations  of  our  understandings  about  them.  To  ourselves, 
indeed,  it  is  of  great  moment  whether  we  have  faith  or  not :  to  Him,  to  His  truth, 
to  His  gifts,  it  matters  not  at  all.  "  The  Lord  sitteth  above  this  waterflood  "  of 
our  changing  and  inconstant  mental  impressions  ;  "  the  Lord  remaineth  a  Xing  for 
«ver."  "  If  we  believe  not,  yet  He  abideth  faithful ;  He  cannot  deny  Himself." 
{Canon  Liddon,)  The  reality  of  the  resurrection : — I.  The  nature  of  oub  Lord's 
BiSEN  BODY.  It  was  the  Body  which  had  been  bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  had 
been  nailed  to  the  cross ;  the  Body  from  which  life  had  been  expelled  by  the  painful 
death  of  crucifixion,  ere  it  bad  been  buried  in  the  grave  of  Joseph  of  Arimathea. 
This  identity  is  insisted  on  by  our  Lord.  •*  I  Myself."  '•  Flesh  and  bones."  Our 
Lord's  risen  body,  then,  was  literally  the  very  body  which  had  been  crucified;  and 
vet  it  had  properties  attaching  to  it  which  distinguished  it.  It  was  sown  a  natural 
body,  that  is  a  body  governed  by  ordinary  natural  laws ;  and  raised  a  spiritual  body, 
that  is,  a  body  which,  while  retaining  physical  substance  and  unimpaired  identity, 
was  yet  endowed  and  Interpenetrated  with  some  of  the  properties  of  spirit.  II. 
Now,  corresponding  to  the  twofold  character  of  our  Lord's  risen  Body,  visible  and 
palpable  on  the  one  hand,  and  spiritual  on  the  other,  is  the  character  of  ths 
BELiGiON  which  REPRESENTS  HiH  AMONG  MEN.  Beligion  is  like  a  sacrament :  it  has 
its  outward  and  visible  signs  and  its  inward  fact,  or  thing  signified.  Of  these,  the 
latter  is,  beyond  dispute,  the  more  important.  Beligion,  the  bond  between  the  soul 
and  God,  lives  in  the  habits,  or  acts,  whereby  the  soul  adheres  to,  and  communes 
with,  the  Infinite  Source  of  life.  It  is  made  up  of  faith,  hope,  and  love,  pouring 
themselves  forth  at  the  feet  of  the  Invisible  King ;  it  is  by  turns  aspiration,  worship, 
resolve;  it  expends  itself  in  a  thousand  unheard,  unuttered  acts,  whereby  the 
human  spirit  holds  converse  with  its  Creator.  Beligion  is  thus  in  its  essence 
altogether  removed  from  the  province  of  sense ;  we  cannot  feel,  or  see,  or  hear, 
these  acts  of  the  soul,  which  assert  its  presence.  It  belongs  to  the  purely  immaterial 
world ;  it  is  hid  with  the  Father,  who  seeth  in  secret,  and  who  is  worshipped,  if  at 
all,  in  spirit  and  truth.  On  the  other  hand,  religion  has  another  aspect.  It  steps 
forth  from  the  sphere  of  the  supersensuous,  which  is  its  congenial  home  ;  it  takes 
bodily  form  and  mien,  and  challenges  the  senses  of  hearing,  and  sight,  and  touch. 
It  appeals  through  the  human  voice  to  the  ear  of  sense.  It  meets  and  fascinates 
the  eye ;  it  even  presents  itself,  as  in  the  outward  elements  of  a  sacrament,  to  the 
touch.  It  is  represented  by  a  visible  society — the  Church.  This  society  has  its 
ministers,  its  assemblies  for  worship,  its  characteristic  rites,  its  public  buildings — 
all  of  which  fall  within  the  province  of  sense.  The  visible  Church  is,  as  our  Lord 
said,  a  city  set  on  a  hill,  which  cannot  be  hid.  Again,  religion  is  represented  by  a 
book — the  Bible.  The  Bible,  too,  belongs  to  the  world  of  sense,  just  as  much  as 
<he  Church.  We  see  it,  handle  it,  read  it.  It  brings  religion  visibly  into  the  area 
of  history,  of  poetry,  of  philosophy,  as  embodied  in  a  large  ancient  literature.  In 
the  same  way,  religion  takes  an  outward  shape  in  the  good  works  and  characters 
of  individual  Christians.  They  arrest  observation ;  they  invite  comment,  examina- 
tion, discussion;  they  belong  just  as  much  to  the  public  life  of  mankind  as 
do  the  lives  of  worldly  or  wicked  men.    By  them,  too,  Jesus  Himself  stands 


660  THE  Bir.LICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

in  the  midst  of  human  society.  In  short,  religion  in  the  world  has  this. 
double  character — outward  and  inward.  III.  Odb  Lord's  pbecept,  "handle 
Me,  and  see,"  is  addressed  to  two  different  classes  op  men.  1.  It  iff 
fin  encouragement  for  the  timid.  2.  It  is  a  direction  for  the  perplexed.  {Ibid.y 
The  wounds  of  Jesm  : — I  wish  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  simple  fact  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  He  rose  again  from  the  dead,  had  in  His  body  the  marks 
of  His  passion.    If  He  had  pleased  He  could  readily  have  removed  them.    I.  Of 

WHAT   USE    WAS   THE    EXHIBITION   OF    THOSE   WOUNDS    TO    THE    DISCIPLES?      They  Were^ 

infallible  proofs  that  He  was  the  same  person.  Had  not  some  such  evidence  been 
visible  upon  our  Saviour,  it  is  probable  that  His  disciples  would  have  been  un- 
believing enough  to  doubt  the  identity  of  His  person.  But,  now,  think  1  If  Christ 
had  to  undergo  in  His  countenance  those  matchless  transformations,  that  must 
have  been,  first  of  all,  connected  with  His  bloody  sweat,  then,  with  His  agony,  and 
after  that,  with  the  transforming,  or,  if  I  may  use  such  a  word,  the  transmutation 
of  ffis  body  into  a  spiritual  body,  can  you  not  conceive  that  His  likeness  would  be 
changed,  that  the  disciples  would  scarcely  know  Him  if  there  had  not  been  some 
deeply  graven  marks  whereby  they  would  be  able  to  discover  Him  ?  The  disciples 
looked  upon  the  very  face,  but,  even  then  they  doubted.  There  was  a  majesty 
about  Him  which  most  of  them  had  not  seen.  Peter,  James,  and  John,  had  seen 
Him  transfigured,  when  His  garments  were  whiter  than  any  fuller  could  make 
them ;  but  the  rest  of  the  disciples  had  only  seen  Him  as  a  man  of  sorrows  ;  they 
had  not  seen  Him  as  the  glorious  Lord,  and,  therefore,  they  would  be  apt  to  doubt 
whether  He  was  the  same.  But  these  nail-prints,  this  pierced  side,  these  were  marks 
which  they  could  not  dispute,  which  unbelief  itself  could  not  doubt.  II.  Let  us  turn  to 
the  second  question :  Why  should  Christ  wear  these  wounds  in  heaven,  and  op  what 
AVAIL  ARE  THEY  ?  1.  I  Can  conceivc,  first,  that  the  wounds  of  Christ  in  heaven  will  be 
a  theme  of  eternal  wonder  to  the  angels.  2.  Again,  Christ  wears  these  scars  in  His 
Body  in  heaven  as  His  ornaments.  The  wounds  of  Christ  are  His  glories,  they  are 
His  jewels  and  His  precious  things.  3.  Nor  are  these  only  the  ornaments  of 
Christ :  they  are  His  trophies — the  trophies  of  His  love.  Have  yon  never  seen  a 
soldier  with  a  gash  across  his  forehead  or  in  his  cheek  ?  Why  every  soldier  will 
tell  you  the  wound  in  battle  is  no  disfigurement — it  is  his  honour.  4.  Another 
reason  why  Jesus  wears  His  wounds  is,  that  when  He  intercedes  He  may  employ 
them  as  powerful  advocates.  When  He  rises  up  to  pray  for  His  people.  He  needa 
not  speak  a  word ;  He  lifts  His  hands  before  His  Father's  face  ;  He  makes  bare  Hia 
side,  and  points  to  His  feet.  These  are  the  orators  with  which  He  pleads  with  God 
— these  wounds.  Oh,  He  must  prevail.  5.  Jesus  Christ  appears  in  heaven  as  the 
Wounded  One,  this  shows  again  that  He  has  not  laid  aside  His  priesthood.  If  the' 
wounds  had  been  removed  we  might  have  forgotten  that  there  was  a  Sacrifice;  and, 
mayhap,  next  we  might  have  forgotten  that  there  was  a  Priest.  But  the  wounds 
are  there:  then  there  is  a  Sacrifice,  and  there  is  a  Priest  also,  for  He  who  is  wounded 
is  both  Himself  the  Sacrifice  and  the  Priest.  6.  There  is  another  and  terrible 
reason  why  Christ  wears  His  wounds  still.  It  is  this.  Christ  is  coming  to  judge 
the  world.  Christ  has  with  Himself  to-day  the  accusers  of  His  enemies.  And 
when  Christ  shall  come  a  second  time  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  seated 
on  the  great  white  throne,  that  hand  of  His  shall  be  the  terror  of  the  universe. 
"  They  shall  look  on  Him  whom  they  have  pierced,"  and  they  shall  mourn  for  their 
sins.  They  would  not  mourn  with  hopeful  penitence  in  time  ;  they  shall  mourn 
with  sorrowful  remorse  throughout  eternity.  III.  What  does  Christ  mean  by  show- 
INS  to  us  His  hands  and  feet  ?  1.  He  means  this,  that  suffering  is  absolutely 
necessary.  Christ  is  the  head,  and  His  people  are  the  members.  If  suffering 
could  have  been  avoided,  surely  our  glorious  Head  ought  to  have  escaped ;  but  inas- 
much as  He  shows  us  His  wounds,  it  is  to  tell  us  that  we  shall  have  wounds  too. 
2.  But  next  He  teaches  us  His  sympathy  with  us  in  our  suffering.  "  There,"  saya 
He,  "  see  this  hand  1  I  am  not  an  high  priest  that  cannot  be  touched  with  the 
feeling  of  your  infirmities.  I  have  suffered,  too.  I  was  tempted  in  all  ways  like  aa 
you  are.  Look  here  1  there  are  the  marks — there  are  the  marks.  They  are  not 
only  tokens  of  My  love,  they  are  not  only  sweet  forget-me-nots  that  bind  Me  to  love 
you  for  ever.  But  besides  that  they  are  the  evidence  of  My  sympathy.  I  can  feel 
for  you.  Look — look — I  have  suffered.  Have  you  the  heart-ache  ?  Ah,  look  you 
here,  what  a  heart-ache  I  had  when  this  heart  was  pierced.  Do  yon  saffer,  eren 
onto  blood  wrestling  against  sin  ?  So  did  I.  I  have  sympathy  with  yon."  8. 
Christ  wears  these  wounds  to  show  that  soffering  is  an  bonoorable  thing.  To 
suffer  for  Christ  is  glory.     4.  Lastly,  there  is  one  sweet  thought  connected  with  the 


OHAT.  XHv.J  ST.  LUKE.  661 

•wounds  of  Christ  that  has  charmed  my  sonl,  and  made  my  heart  run  over  with 
delight.  It  is  this  :  I  have  sometimes  thought  that  if  I  am  a  part  of  Christ's  Body, 
I  am  a  poor  wounded  part ;  if  I  do  belong  to  that  all-glorious  whole,  the  Church, 
which  is  His  fulness,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all,  jet  have  I  iaid 
within  me,  '•  I  am  a  poor  maimed  part,  wounded,  full  of  putrifying  sores."  But 
Christ  did  not  leave  even  His  wounds  behind  Him  ;  even  those  He  took  to  heaven. 
"  Not  a  bone  of  Him  shall  be  broken,"  and  the  flesh  when  wounded  shall  not  be 
discarded — shall  not  be  left.  He  shall  carry  that  with  Him  to  heaven,  and  He 
shall  glorify  even  the  wounded  member.  Is  not  this  sweet,  is  not  this  precious  to 
the  troubled  child  of  God?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  crucial  test : — In  an  old 
legend  it  is  said  that  Satan  once  appeared  to  an  old  saint  and  said,  "  I  am  Christ," 
when  the  saint  confounded  him,  and  exposed  his  pretensions,  as  he  said,  "Then 
where  are  the  nail-prints?  "  (H.  0.  Mackey.)  They  yet  believed  not  for  Joy. — 
Primitive  doublings  and  their  cure : — I.  The  doubts  of  the  disciples.  II.  Thk 
Lobd's  way  op  meeting  the  doubts  of  the  disciples — '*  He  showed  them  His 
hands  and  His  feet."  Strange  as  this  kind  of  recognition,  this  way  of  fixing  the 
doubted  identity,  may  seem,  it  was  satisfactory.  The  mother  in  the  story  knew  her 
long-lost  child  by  the  scar  on  the  shoulder  received  in  infancy  ;  so  was  the  Son  of 
God  recognized  by  the  nail-prints  and  the  bruises  of  the  Cross.  But  did  the  dis- 
ciples need  this  ?  Were  the  loved  features  not  the  same  as  ever  ?  Were  the  eyes 
that  wept  over  Jerusalem  not  the  same  as  before ;  or  had  the  grave  robbed  them  of 
their  tenderness  and  lustre  f  Were  the  lips,  from  which  came  the  gracious  words 
of  parting  love,  not  the  same  as  in  the  upper  chamber  at  the  last  supper  ?  Was 
the  voice  so  altered,  that  they  did  not  know  its  tones  ?  No.  These  resemblances 
might  all  be  recognized  ;  but  so  many  things  threw  doubt  upon  these  recognitions. 
It  is,  then,  to  remove  all  doubt  that  He  exhibits  the  marks  of  His  Passion. 
And  in  doing  so,  He  shows  us  the  true  way  of  dispelling  doubt,  of  whatever  kind  it 
may  be,  viz.,  the  fuller  knowledge  of  Himself,  as  the  dead,  the  buried,  the  risen, 
and  living  Christ.  It  is  this  that  is  the  cure  of  all  unbelief,  the  death  of  doubting, 
the  cherisher  of  faith,  the  perpetual  source  of  stability  and  peace ;  for  the  real 
cause  of  all  doubting  is  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Too 
good  to  be  true : — In  the  case  before  ub,  the  disciples  saw  Christ  manifestly  before 
their  eyes.  To  a  certain  extent  they  believed  in  His  resurrection ;  that  belief  gave 
them  joy,  and  at  once  that  very  joy  made  them  unbelieving.  They  looked  again  ; 
they  believed  once  more ;  anon,  a  wave  of  joy  rolled  right  over  the  head  of  their 
faith,  and  then  afresh  their  doubts  returned.  If  God  had  been  half  as  merciful  or 
a  tithe  as  kind  as  He  was,  I  could  have  believed  it,  but  such  exceeding  riches  of  His 
grace  were  too  much ;  such  out-doings  of  Himself  in  goodness,  such  giving  exceed- 
ing abundantly  above  what  one  could  ask  or  even  think,  seemed  too  much  to 
beheve.  We  will  at  once  attempt  to  deal  with  this  temptation.  I.  To  begin,  det 
UB  ACCOUNT  FOB  IT.  1.  It  is  httle  marvel  that  the  spirit  is  amazed  even  to  astonish- 
ment and  doubt  when  you  think  of  the  greatness  of  the  things  themselves.  The 
black  sinner  says,  *•  My  iniquity  is  great ;  I  deserve  the  wrath  of  God  ;  the  gospel 
presents  me  with  a  pardon,  full  and  complete.  I  have  laboured  to  wash  out  these 
stains,  but  they  will  not  disappear ;  the  gospel  tells  me  that  the  precious  blood  of 
JesQS  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  2.  Another  reason  for  incredulity  may  be  fonnd  in 
our  sense  of  onworthiness.  Note  the  person  that  receives  these  mercies,  and  you 
will  not  wonder  that  he  believes  not  for  joy.  "  Ah,"  saith  he,  "  if  these  things  were 
given  to  the  righteous  I  could  believe  it,  but  to  me,  an  old  offender,  to  me,  a  hard- 
hearted despiser  of  the  overflowing  love  of  God  that  cannot  be  1 "  3.  Add  to  these  the 
strange  terms  upon  which  God  presents  these  things  to  poor  sinners.  The  miracle  of 
the  manner  equals  the  marvel  of  the  matter.  No  works ;  simply  trust  thy  soul  with 
Christ.  4.  And  add  to  this  one  more  thought — the  method  by  which  God  proposes 
to  work  all  this ;  that  is  to  say.  He  proposes  to  pardon,  and  to  justify  the  sinner 
instantaneously.  II.  Having  thus  tried  to  account  for  this  state  of  the  heart,  may 
I  have  the  help  of  God  while  I  try  to  no  battle  with  the  evil  that  is  in  it,  that  we 
KAT  BE  ABLE  TO  BELIEVE  IN  Chbist  1  1.  Ttonbled  heart,  let  me  remind  thee,  first  of 
all,  that  thou  hast  no  need  to  doubt  the  trnth  of  the  precious  revelation  because  of 
its  greatness,  for  He  is  a  great  God  who  makes  it  to  thee.  Let  no  low  thoughts  of 
God  come  in  to  make  you  doubt  His  power  to  save  you.  2.  Again,  let  me  remind 
yoo  that  the  greatness  of  God's  mercy  shoold  enooorage  yon  to  beheve  that  it  comes 
from  God.  3.  Let  me  remind  yon  again,  that  yon  may  get  another  argument  to 
put  an  end  to  your  fears  about  the  greatness  of  God's  mercy  from  the  greatness  of 
Hifl  pcoTidenoe.    IIL  I  close  by  using  tocb  vest  fbabb  as  an  enticeubnt  to  isluvs. 


ee»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSIRATOR.  [chap,  xxir. 

If  it  be  so  joyous  only  to  think  of  these  things,  what  must  it  be  to  possess  them  1 
If  it  gives  such  a  weight  to  thy  spirit  only  to  think  of  being  pardoned,  adopted, 
accepted,  and  saved,  what  must  it  be  really  to  be  washed?  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  final  recorded  meeting  in  Jerusalem: — I.  Consider   the   waitino   (see    A-cts 

1.  4).  II.  The  pbomised  baptism  (see  Acts  i.  5).  III.  Chbist's  exegesis,  o& 
EXPLANATION   OP  IHE   Old   TESTAMENT.     1.    Kemiuds  them   of  former  teaching. 

2.  Law,  prophets,  Psalms,  &c.,  must  be  understood  of  Him.     IV.  The  opbnin» 

OF  THBIE  UNDERSTANDING.  V.  ThE  COMPREHENSIVE  OHARACTEB  OF  GhBIST'S  COM- 
MISSION. 1.  Eepentance.  2.  Eemission  of  sins.  3.  In  His  name.  Christ  the 
sole  hope.  4.  Among  all  nations.  Missions  an  essential  part  of  the  Church. 
6.  Beginning  at  Jerusalem.  VI.  The  dispensation  of  the  gospel  committed 
TO  THEM.  VII.  Tabrting  AT  JERUSALEM.  "  Tarrying,"  when  done  because  of 
faith,  is  a  fine  proof  of  faith,  and  strengthens  prayer,  and  is  an  exercise  of  humility. 
{G.  VenaUes,  S.C.L.)  The  Saviour's  last  words: — I.  Essential  chabacteristics 
OF  THE  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  1.  Prophetic.  (1)  The  books  of  Divine 
origin.  (2)  Its  writers  holy  men.  2.  Messianic.  (1)  In  their  spirit. .  (2)  In  their 
letter.  (3)  In  their  symbols.  3.  Harmonic.  (1)  Moses,  the  prophets,  and  psalms 
distinct  chords  of  one  Christly  anthem.  (2)  This  wondrous  unity  of  the  Old 
Testament  Scriptures  an  irrefragable  proof  of  their  essential  divinity.  II. 
Essential  need  of  Divine  illumination  to  understand  the  Old  Testament 
ScBiPTUEES.  1.  Suggested  by  Christ's  exposition.  2.  Proved  in  the  disciples' 
experience.  3.  Corroborated  in  all  generations.  HI.  Essential  pre-bequisites 
fob   human   saltation.     1.  The  death  of  Christ.     2.  The  resurrection  of  Christ. 

3.  Repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  IV.  An  essential  chaeacteristic  or  a 
disciple  of  Christ.  1.  To  bear  witness  of  personal  salvation  through  Christ. 
2.  To  bear  witness  of  personal  interest  in  the  salvation  of  others.  V.  An  essential 
NEED  FOB  SUCCESSFUL  WITNESSING  FOB  Chbist.  1.  This  promise  of  the  Father  was  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  i.  8).  2.  This  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  to  endue  the 
disciples  of  Christ  with  power  for  testimony.  3.  This  enduement  with  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  essential  for  successsful  bearing  witness  for  Christ.  Practical  questions : 
1.  Are  we  all  disciples  of  Christ?  2.  Do  we  all  bear  witness  for  Jesus  Christ?  3.  Is 
our  witnessing  for  Christ  accompanied  with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  4.  If  not, 
why  not?  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  The  gospel  for  the  world  : — I.  The  basis  of  thk 
GOSPEL  FOB  THE  WORLD.  1.  This  threefold  division  of  the  Scriptures  suggestive  in  this 
connection.  (1)  As  showing  that  Christ  is  the  central  glory  of  each  and  every  part. 
(2)  As  showing  in  tbis  the  essential  unity  of  all  the  parts.  2.  The  fulfilment  of 
the  Messianic  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  most  important  in  the 
evangehzation  of  the  world.  (1)  Because  it  proves  the  Divine  origin  of  the 
Scriptures.  (2)  Because  it  shows  the  Divine  authority  with  which  the  Christ  of 
the  Scriptures  is  invested  as  the  world's  Saviour.  II.  The  qualifications  fob 
THE  PROMULGATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL  TO  THE  WORLD.  1.  A  Spiritual  Understanding 
of  the  Scriptures.  (1)  Concerning  the  fitness  of  a  sufifering  and  a  triumphant 
Christ.  (2)  Concerning  the  essentials  of  gospel  preaching.  2.  Another  quali- 
fication is  Christian  discipleship.  3.  A  third  qualification  is  the  special  endue- 
ment of  power.  (1)  This  enduement  of  power  by  the  Holy  Spirit  should  be 
distinguished  from  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  not  a  special,  but 
general  privilege  of  every  Christian.  (2)  The  condition  for  this  enduement  may 
be  seen  in  the  account  given  of  the  prayerful  waiting  therefor,  before  the  day 
of  Pentecost    (Acts  i.   12-14 ;   ii.  1-4).     HI.  The  return  of  Christ  to  heaven 

NECESSARy   FOB   THE   SUCCESS   OF  THE   GOSPEL  IN   THE   WORLD.       1.    The   retum  of   OUf 

Lord  to  heaven  was  necessary  in  order  that  the  Holy  Spirit  might  be  sent. 
(John  xvi.  7).  2.  On  the  work  of  the  Spirit  depend  the  conviction  and  conversion 
of  men,  and  the  completion  of  the  truth  (John  xvi.  8-14).  IV.  Peactical  con- 
clusions. 1.  The  world's  great  need — the  gospel  of  Christ.  2.  The  Church's 
great  responsibility  to  supply  this  need.  3.  The  importance  of  being  equipped. 
(Ibid.)  Then  opened  He  their  understanding. — Christ  illuminates  the  under- 
standing : — I.  What  is  included  in  this  act  of  Christ  ?  1.  It  Implies  the 
transcendent  nature  of  spiritual  things,  far  excieding  the  highest  flight  and 
reach  of  natural  reason.  2.  Christ's  opening  the  understanding  implies  the 
insafficiency  of  all  external  means,  how  excellent  soever  they  are  in  themselves 
to  operate  savingly  upon  men,  till  Christ  by  His  power  opens  the  soul,  and  ^  so 
makes  them  effectnaL  3.  Christ's  opening  the  understanding  imports  His  Divine 
power,  whereby  He  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  to  Himself.  Who  but  G  vd  knows 
the  heart  r    Who  but  God  can  unlock  and  open  it  at  pleasure  7    II   Bx  yruAT 


«HAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  6S3 

ACTS  Chbist  performs  this  work.  1.  By  His  Word.  2.  By  His  Spirit.  He  breaks  in 
tipon  the  understanding  and  conscience  by  powerful  convictions  and  compunctions 
^John  xvi.  8).  When  this  is  done,  the  heart  is  opened  :  saving  Ught  now  shines  in 
it ;  and  this  light  set  up,  the  spirit  in  the  soul  is — 1.  A  new  light,  in  which  all  things 
appear  far  otherwise  than  they  did  before.  The  names  "Christ"  and  "  sin,"  the 
words  "heaven  "  and  "hell"  have  another  sound  in  that  man's  ears,  than  formerly 
they  had.  2.  It  is  a  very  affecting  light ;  a  light  that  hath  heat  and  powerful 
influences  with  it,  which  makes  deep  impressions  on  the  heart.  3.  And  it  is 
a  growing  light,  like  the  light  of  the  morning,  which  "  shines  more  and  more  unto 
the  perfect  day"  (Prov.  iv.  18).  Inferences:  1.  If  this  be  the  work  and  office  of 
Jesus  Christ,  to  open  the  understandings  of  men ;  hence  we  infer  the  miseries 
that  lie  upon  those  men,  whose  understandings,  to  this  day,  Jesus  Christ  hath  not 
opened ;  of  whom  we  may  say,  as  it  is  Deut.  xxix.  4.  2.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  the  great 
Prophet  of  the  Church,  then  surely  He  will  take  special  care  both  of  the  Church 
and  the  under-shepherds  appointed  by  Him  to  feed  them.  3.  Hence  you  that 
are  yet  in  darkness,  may  be  directed  to  whom  to  apply  yourselves  for  saving 
knowledge.  It  is  Christ  that  hath  the  sovereign  eye-salve  that  can  cure  your 
blindness.  4.  Since  then  there  is  a  common  light,  and  special  saving  light, 
which  none  but  Christ  can  give,  it  is  therefore  the  concernment  of  every  one 
of  you  to  try  what  your  light  is.  "  We  know  that  we  all  have  knowledge  "  (1  Cor. 
viii.  1).  These  lights  differ — 1.  In  their  very  kind  and  natures.  The  one  is 
heavenly,  supernatural,  and  spiritual  ;  the  other  earthly  and  natural,  the  effect  of  a 
better  constitution  or  education  (James  iii.  15, 17).  2.  They  differ  most  apparently 
in  their  effects  and  operations.  The  light  that  comes  in  a  special  way  from  Christ, 
is  humbling,  abasing,  and  soul -emptying  light ;  by  it  a  man  feels  the  vileness  of  his 
own  nature  and  practice,  which  begets  self-loathing  in  him  ;  but  natural  light,  on 
the  contrary,  puffs  up  and  exalts,  makes  the  heart  swell  with  self-conceitedness 
(1  Cor.  viii.  1).  The  light  of  God  is  practical  and  operative,  still  urging  the  soul — 
yea,  lovingly  constraining  it  to  obedience.  3.  They  differ  in  their  issues.  Natural 
eommon  knowledge  vanisheth,  as  the  apostle  speaks  (1  Cor.  xiii.  8).  'Tis  but. 
Mayflower,  and  dies  in  its  month.  "  Doth  not  their  excellency  that  is  in  theiik 
go  away?"  (Job  iv.  21).  Bat  this  that  springs  from  Christ  is  perfected,  not 
destroyed  by  death ;  it  springs  up  into  everlasting  life.  The  soul  in  which  it 
is  subjected  carries  it  away  with  it  into  glory.  5.  How  are  they  obhged  to  love, 
Berre,  and  honour  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he  hath  enhghtened  with  the  saving 
knowledge  of  Himself  ?  0  that  with  hands  and  hearts  lifted  up  to  heaven, 
ye  would  adore  the  free  grace  of  Jesus  Christ  to  your  souls !  {J.  Flavel.)  On 
the  understanding  of  Scripture: — I.  Odb  Lord  dxsiqned  to  put  an  especial 
BONOUB  ON  THE  ScBiPTUBES.  He  might  have  taught  His  disciples  without  them. 
Be  might  have  enabled  them,  by  immediate  inspiration,  to  understand  all  things 
which  related  to  His  person.  His  office,  and  Divine  commission  ;  to  His  death  and 
Bufferings,  His  resurrection,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow.  But  He  ohose 
rather  to  refer  them  to  the  hving  oracles,  given  by  God  unto  their  fathers.  Let 
me  solemnly  ask  you,  beloved  brethren,  what  value  do  you  set  upon  the  Scriptures  ? 
11.  Bat,  while  vast  numbers  read  not  the  Scriptures  at  all,  mant  bead  them,  but 
CNDEBSTAND  TEEU  NOT.  Their  meaning  is  sealed  up.  If  we  would  profit  by  the 
Scriptures,  we  must  not  read  them  like  another  book.  III.  That  these  remarks 
may  be  brought    to    some  practical  end,  let  us,  finally,  ask — Do  we  bead  thb 

SCBIPTUBES    CONTnOJALLY    WITH   THIS   CONVICTION,   THAT,   WITHOUT  THE   TEACHINO    OF 

THB  Spibit  or  Chbist,  WE  CANNOT  UNDEBSTAND  THEM  ?  It  is  our  duty  to  searcb 
the  Scriptures;  it  is  the  Lord  alone  who  can  enable  us  to  understand  them. 
1.  If  this  conviction  be  strong  on  our  minds,  it  will  lead  us  to  read  the  Scriptures 
with  earnest  prayer.  2.  Again,  if  we  be  under  an  abiding  conviction  that, 
without  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  we  cannot  nnderstand  the  Scriptures,  we  shall 
read  them  with  diligence  and  perseverance.  3.  Once  more,  if  we  be  deeply  con- 
vinced of  our  need  of  the  grace  of  God,  we  shall  read  the  Scriptures  with  an 
obedient,  humble,  teachable  spirit.  {E.  Blencowe,  M.A.)  The  understanding 
opened : — I.  The  change  fboduced.  The  unlocking  of  the  whole  sonl ;  the 
breaking  down  of  all  the  barriers  of  pride,  prejudice,  and  sin,  which  preclude  the 
gospel,  and  prevent  the  cordial  reception  of  its  salutary  truths.  U.  The  authob 
or  this  change.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  His  Spirit.  Inward  illumination  is 
necessary,  because  of — 1.  The  insufficiency  of  human  powers.  2.  The  inefficiency 
of  ontward  means.  IIL  The  end  of  this  change ;  the  object  which  its  Divine 
Author  particularly  regards ;  and  this  is,  a  right  acquaintance  with  the  holy 


064  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xwt. 

ScriptareB,     "Then  opened  He  their  nnderetanding " ;   why?  to  what  end  and 
purpose?    "  That  they  might  understand  the  Scriptures."    Here  let  it  be  carefully 

noted the  holy  Scriptures  are  a  complete  revelation  of  the  mind  and  will  of  Goi 

But  what  is  this  understanding  of  the  Scriptures,  this  right  acquaintance  with  the 
"Word  of  God,  which  evinces  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ?  1.  It  is  impressive. 
It  is  knowledge  which  touches  and  interests  the  heart.  2.  It  is  progressive.  The 
Spirit  of  Christ  teaches  gradually.  "  More  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  3.  It 
is  practical.  This  knowledge  has  influence  on  the  spirit  and  conduct  of  men,  an 
influence  most  salutary  and  important.  (1)  It  humbles  for  sin.  (2)  It  endears  the 
Saviour.  (3)  It  promotes  holiness.  From  the  whole  we  remark — 1.  The  unhappy 
condition  of  those  whose  minds  are  yet  closed  against  the  light  of  the  word  and 
Spirit  of  Christ.  Natural  blindness  is  a  melancholy  affliction,  but  unspeakably 
more  so  this  darkness  of  the  soul  1  2.  The  duty  of  such  as  desire  Divine  teaching. 
Think  not  highly  of  yourselves,  but  soberly  as  you  ought  to  think.  3.  The 
encouragement  which  the  gospel  gives  to  apply  to  Jesus  Christ.  This  encourage- 
ment is  large  and  free.  (T.  Kidd.)  Understanding  the  Scriptures: — Whilst 
at  prayer-meeting  to-night,  I  learned  more  of  the  meaning  of  Scripture  than  ever 
before.  Suitable  frames  of  soul  are  like  good  lights,  in  which  a  painting  appears 
to  its  full  advantage.  (S.  Pearse.)  The  opened  understanding : — This  is  in 
all  probabihty  as  stupendous  a  miracle  as  any  in  the  Lord's  history.  That  men 
should  in  a  moment  receive  a  power  of  mental  comprehension  which  they  had  not 
before,  and  that  this  power  should  enable  them  to  see  the  true  import  and  meaning 
of  a  book  which  had  hitherto  been  closed  to  them,  seems  greater  than  any  acts 
of  healing,  or  feeding  of  multitudes,  or  stilling  of  tempests.  It  implies  Divine 
power  over  our  spiritual  and  intellectual  nature  such  as  God  only  can  exercise. 
And  yet  it  is  the  commonest  of  all  miracles,  and  the  one  which  survives  amongst 
us.  Th«  opening  of  the  mind  and  heart  to  the  things  of  God  is  constantly  now  going 
on.  To  many — we  may  say  to  all — who  submit  their  wills  and  understandings 
to  God,  the  Scriptures  are  unlocked,  a  new  light  is  shed  upon  every  part  of  them, 
especiaDy  upon  the  works  and  words  of  the  Lord.  This  power  of  a  risen  Christ 
we  claim  every  time  we  put  up  to  God  one  of  the  most  familiar  of  all  our  prayers, 
that  "  by  patience  and  comfort  of  His  holy  "Word  we  may  embrace  and  ever  hold 
fast  the  blessed  hope  of  everlasting  life"  in  Jesus  Christ.  (M.  F.  Sadler.) 
ThUB  it  Is  written,  and  thus  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer. — ChrisVs  epitome  of  the 
gospel: — I.  Thb  gospel  is  heeb  eepkesented  as  the  outcome  of  the  long- 
CHEBiSHBD  PDEP0SE8  OF  GoD.  It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer  and  to  rise  again,  because 
it  was  included  in  God's  redemptive  purposes  as  revealed  by  His  servants  the 
prophets.     Redemption    was  not  an  afterthought  in  the  Divine  mind.    II.  Thb 

GOSPEL  IS  herb  BEPEESENTED  AS  GBODNDINO  ITSELF  IN  TWO  HISTOBICAIi  FACTS:  VIZ., 
ON  THB  BUFFEBING6  AND  TEE  EE8UERECTI0N  OF  ChEIST.  ILL  ThB  GOSPEL,  AB 
EXPBEBSED   IN   THESE   TWO   FACTS,  IS   EEBB   BEPEESENTED   AS   THB   SUBJECT  MATTBB  OF 

AFOSTOUO  PEEACHiNG.  Why?  Unquestionably,  because  they  are  the  most  vital 
and  essential  doctrines  of  Christianity.  They  lie  at  the  root  of  all  experimental 
rehgion.    IV.  The  gospel  is  heeb  bepbesented  as   embbacing  in  its  mebciful 

DESIGNS  thb   ENTIEB   HUMAN   EACE.       It   IS  TO   BE   PBEACHED    "  AMONG  ALL  RATIONS." 

■y.  Thb  gospel  is  hebe  bepeesentbd  as  ofpeeing  Divine  mebcy  to  the  chief  op 
8INHEBS.  ••  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."  {W.  H.  C.  Harris.)  The  principles  and 
proclamation  of  the  gospel: — It  would  be  difficult  to  find  in  the  Word  of  God  another 
paragraph  which  contains  within  itself  more  of  the  essential  principles  of  the 
gospel  than  that  to  which  this  text  belongs.  I.  The  gbound  on  which  thb 
GOSPEL  pboclamation  BESTS :  "  It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  rise  from  the 
dead  the  third  day."  There  could  have  been  no  gospel  if  there  had  been  no  Cross; 
but  the  death,  even  of  Jesus,  would  have  had  no  efficacy  for  the  removal  of  human 
guilt,  if  He  had  not  risen  from  the  grave.  The  one  fact  is  invariably  connected 
with  the  other  in  the  Epistles.  The  honour  of  the  law  required  a  victim.  Three 
doctrines  unite  to  form  a  trinity  of  gospel  truth :  1.  The  person  of  Christ  as  God 
incarnate.  2.  The  death  of  Christ  as  the  sacrifice.  .S.  The  resurrection  of  Christ 
as  the  witness  to  the  other  two  doctrines.  II.  Thb  bobstancb  of  the  oospbl 
MESSAGE  HBBE  DBSCBiBBD :  "  That  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should  be 
preached  in  His  name."  It  is  a  proclamation  of  the  remission  of  sins.  This 
pardon  is— 1.  Full ;  2.  Free  ;  3.  Immediate ;  4.  Irreversible.  But  it  is  not  a  pro- 
clamation of  forgiveness  alone.  Two  things,  repentance  and  remiBsion,  are_  to  go 
together.  A  man  cannot  have  forgiveness  and  continue  «t  the  same  time  to 
indulge  in  sin.    This  mention  of  repentance  is  yirtoallj  the  same  thing  M  that 


SBAV.  xxpr.]  ST.  LUKE.  661 

Insistance  on  faith  bo  constantly  found  in  the  New  Testament.  Faith  is  the  Christ- 
ward  side  of  repentance.  Repentance  is  the  sinward  side  of  faith.  III.  Thb  ordeb 
IN  WHICH  THIS  PEocLAMATioN  18  TO  BE  MADK :  "  To  all  natioDS,  beginning  at 
Jerusalem."  The  reasons  of  ••  beginning  at  Jerusalem  "  were— 1.  To  magnify  tha 
Divine  mercy.  2.  To  secure  a  convincing  illustration  of  the  gospel's  elficacy.  3. 
To  establish  a  principle  for  the  guidance  of  God's  people  in  all  ages.  So  the  law 
is  that  our  first  efforts  should  begin  in  our  own  homes — "  beginning  at  Jerusalem  " 
—but  we  are  not  to  be  content  with  working  there.  We  must  look  abroad  also  "  to 
all  nations.'  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Christ's  sufferings,  resurrection,  d-c. : — I. 
The  expediency  of  Christ's  suffering  and  resurrection.  1.  That  prophecy 
might  be  fulfilled  (Zech.  xiii.  1).  2.  That  justice  might  be  satisfied,  and  peace 
made  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26).  3.  To  convince  and  confound  His  adversaries.  4.  To 
confirm  the  faith  of  His  disciples.  5.  To  conquer  sin,  death,  and  grave.  6.  That 
He  might  be  the  firstfruits.  7.  That  after  abasement  He  might  be  exalted.  II. 
Thb  blessed  effects  resulting.  "  That  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should 
be  preached  in  His  name  among  all  nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem."  1.  The 
nature  and  necessity  of  repentance  (Acts  v.  31).  2.  Full  and  free  remission  (Acta 
xiii.  39).  3.  "  In  His  name,"  or  by  His  authority  (Mark  xvi.  15,  16).  4.  Begin- 
ning at  Jerusalem  in  the  first  place  (Luke  i.  72).  5.  And  carrying  it  to  all  nations. 
in.  The  improvement.  1.  The  grace  of  Christ  always  prevents  us  (Luke  xix.  10). 
2.  Repentance  and  remission  of  sins  are  the  fruits  of  Christ's  death  and  resurrec- 
tion (Bom.  viii.  33,  34).  3.  Remission  of  sins  also  accompanied  with  the  saving 
knowledge  of  salvation.  4.  The  gospel  commission  is  without  exception  of  nations, 
as  God's  people  are  in  all  nations.  5.  Salvation  is  alone  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
(T.  B.  Baker.)  Two  supreme  necessities : — I.  It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer.  1. 
Because  He  must  show  the  evil  of  sin ;  and  this  is  only  seen  in  its  results.  2.  Be- 
oause  He  must  vindicate  the  Divine  honour ;  and  this  He  could  only  do  by  bearing 
the  penalty  of  sin.  3.  Because  His  truth  would  oppose  the  natural  inclinations  of 
men,  and  they  would  be  sure  to  make  Him  suffer.  4.  Because  He  must  render  a 
perfect  obedience  to  the  Father;  and  this  could  only  be  tested  and  proved  ba 
Buffering.  II.  It  behoved  Christ  to  rise.  1.  Because  His  work  was  a  oo^. 
mission,  and  some  sign  of  its  acceptance  was  needed.  2.  Because  His  work  was 
incomplete  at  death ;  part  must  be  accomplished  in  renewed  life.  {The  Weekly 
Pulpit.)  Christ's  death  and  resurrection  foretold  in  Scripture: — I.  That  Messiah 
8H0ULD  BUFTEB  DEATH.  1.  Forotold  in  the  Pentateuch.  (1)  Gen.  xxii.  18.  (2) 
Sacrificial  slaying  of  beasts.  2.  Foretold  in  the  Prophets  (Isa.  liii. ;  Dan.  ix.  25,  26 ; 
Zech.  xii.  10).  3.  Foretold  in  the  Psalms  (Psa.  xvi.  9, 10).  II.  That  it  behoved 
Him  also  to  bise  again.  1.  This  was  first  foreshown  in  the  same  story  of  Isaac, 
wherein  his  sacrifice  or  suffering  was  acted.  For  from  the  time  that  God  com- 
manded Isaac  to  be  offered  for  a  burnt-offering,  Isaac  was  a  dead  m^^n ;  but  the 
third  day  he  was  released  from  death.  This  the  text  tells  ns  expressly,  that  it  was 
the  third  day  when  Abraham  came  to  Mount  Moriah,  and  had  his  son,  as  it  were, 
restored  to  him  again :  which  circumstance  there  was  no  need  nor  use  at  all  to 
have  noted,  had  it  not  been  for  some  mystery.  For  had  there  been  nothing  in- 
tended but  the  naked  story,  what  did  it  concern  ns  to  know  whether  it  were  tha 
third  or  the  fifth  day  that  Abraham  came  to  Moriah,  where  he  received  his  son  from 
death  ?  (see  Heb.  xi.  17-19).  The  same  was  foreshowed  by  the  law  of  sacrifices, 
which  were  to  be  eaten  before  the  third  day.  Some  sacrifices  were  to  be  eaten  tha 
same  day  they  were  offered;  but  those  which  were  deferred  longest,  as  the  peace- 
offerings,  were  to  be  eaten  before  the  third  day.  The  third  day  no  sacrifice  might 
be  eaten,  but  was  to  be  burnt :  if  it  were  eaten,  it  was  not  accepted  for  an  atone- 
ment, but  counted  an  abomination.  Namely,  to  show  that  the  sacrifice  of  Messiah, 
which  these  sacrifices  represented,  was  to  be  finished  the  third  day  by  His  rising 
from  the  dead  :  and  therefore  the  type  thereof  determined  within  that  time,  beyond 
which  time  it  was  not  accepted  for  atonement  of  sin,  because  then  it  was  no  longer 
a  type  of  Him.  2.  As  for  the  prophets,  I  find  no  express  prediction  in  them  for  the 
time  of  Christ's  rising  (for  that  of  the  case  of  the  Prophet  Jonah,  I  take  to  be  rather 
an  allusion  then  a  prophecy)  only  in  general,  "  That  Christ  should  rise  again,"  is 
implied  both  in  that  famous  prophecy  of  Isa.  hii.,  and  that  of  Zech.  xii.  3. 1  come 
to  the  Psalms,  where  not  only  His  rising  again  is  prophesied  of,  but  the  time 
thereof  determined ;  though  at  first  sight  it  appears  not  so :  namely,  in  Uiat  fore- 
alledged  passage  of  the  Sixteenth  Psalm,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  in  hell,  nor 
Buffer  Thine  Holy  One  to  see  eorraption."  All  men  shall  rise  again,  but  their  bodies 
mist  flrit  ntom  to  dust,  and  see  ootruptioa.  But  Messiah  was  to  rise  again  befon 


66«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [CHAJ  xxif. 

He  saw  corrnption.  If  before,  then,  the  third  day  at  farthest ;  for  then  tho  body 
naturally  begins  to  see  corruption.  (J.  Mede.)  Necessity  for  Christ's  sufferings  :— 
Christ's  sacrifice  upon  Calvary  came  along  by  a  process  of  natural  simplicity.  His 
death  is  readily  explicable,  and  yet  after  He  died  He  said  that  that  death  was  one 
of  the  foregone  conclusions  of  history :  "  Thus  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer."  Paul 
said  "  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered."  '•  Must."  It  is  well  to  think  down  deep 
thoughts  into  the  "  musts  "  of  history.  The  ages  were  surveyed — using  the  word 
of  the  civil  engineer — before  they  were  peopled  and  built  upon,  and  the  points  were 
fixed  which  now  century  by  century  God  is  covering  with  facts  and  events.  (C  H. 
Parkhurst.)  Why  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer  and  to  rise  : — I.  To  sutfeb.  1.  It 
did  not  primarily  behove  Christ  to  suffer  merely  because  the  prophets  had  foretold 
that  He  should  suffer  and  die ;  the  necessity  of  His  sufferings  was  rather  the  reason 
why  prophets  were  directed  to  foretel  a  suffering  Messiah.  It  behoved  TTim  to 
suffer,  that  He  might  make  a  full  and  sufficient  atonement  for  the  sins  of  guilty 
man.  It  was  the  will  of  the  Divine  Father,  and  that  will  was  sovereign  and 
absolute,  that  Jehovah  Jesus,  the  everlasting  Son  of  the  Father,  should  assume  our 
nature,  live  in  our  world,  and  suffer  in  our  stead.  It  was  the  voluntary  engage- 
ment of  the  Son  of  God  to  accomplish  His  Father's  will — "  Lo  1  I  come ;  in  the 
volume  of  the  Book  it  is  written  of  Me,  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  My  God."  2.  I 
grant  you  there  are  collateral  reasons  why  it  thus  "  behoved  Christ  to  suffer." 
"  Thus  it  behoved  Him  to  suffer,"  that  He  might  exhibit  a  perfect  pattern  of  all 
excellence,  and  of  patience  in  the  midst  of  suffering.  In  all  His  condescension,  in 
all  His  meekness,  in  all  His  forgiveness,  in  all  His  charity.  He  has  taught  us  how 
to  live  and  how  to  suffer ;  and  "if  we  say  we  abide  in  Him,  we  ought  to  walk  as 
He  also  walked."  3.  •'  It  behoved  Him  to  suffer  "  in  our  nature,  and  in  our  world, 
that  He  might,  in  some  sense,  ennoble  and  dignify  the  path  of  poverty  and  of  suffer- 
ing. 4.  "  It  behoved  Him  to  suffer,"  that  from  personal  experience  in  our  nature 
and  in  our  world,  He  might  know  how  to  sympathise  with  His  suffering  people. 
6.  "  It  behoved  Him  to  suffer,'"  preparatory  to  that  glory  to  which,  as  Mediator,  He 
was  to  be  exalted.  "  Ought  not  Christ  to  suffer  these  things,  and  to  enter  into  His 
glory  ?  "  Not  nnfrequently  does  it  happen,  that  the  path  of  suffering  is  the  high 
road  to  honour  and  glory ;  and  never  does  true  greatness  appear  in  a  light  so  im- 
pressive and  interesting,  as  when  seen  grappling  with  difficulties,  struggling  with 
opposition,  and  ultimately  rising  superior  to  all.  Through  what  a  scene  of  suffer- 
ing and  agony  and  blood  did  our  Divine  Saviour  pass,  preparatory  to  entering  into 
His  glory !  And  when  He  arrived  at  the  heavenly  world,  what  an  outburst  of 
triumph  and  joy  do  we  hear  1  •»  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain."  And  let 
His  suffering  followers  know,  that  if  so  be  they  suffer  with  Him,  in  His  cause  and 
in  Hie  state  and  temper,  they  shall  also  be  glorified  together.  U.  To  bibb  again. 
1.  It  behoved  Him  to  rise,  that  in  rising  He  might  show  that  the  redemption-price 
paid  by  the  shedding  of  His  blood  was  sufficient,  and  that  it  was  accepted.  2.  It 
behoved  Him  to  rise  from  the  dead,  that  in  rising  He  might  show  that  He  had 
triumphed  over  death.  8.  It  behoved  Him  to  rise,  that  in  rising  He  might  be  "  the 
firstfrnits  of  them  that  slept."  4.  It  behoved  Him  to  rise  from  the  dead,  that  in 
rising  He  might  assert  and  exercise  His  regal  character  and  office  as  King 
of  saints,  as  Lord  of    the    earth.      (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  That   repentance 

and  remission  of  sins  should  be  preached.  —  Christ's  first  and  last  subject : — 
From  Matt.  iv.  17,  coupled  with  this  verse,  we  learn  that  repentance  was 
the  first  subject  upon  which  the  Bedeemer  dwelt,  and  that  it  was  the  last 
which,  with  His  departing  breath,  He  commended  to  the  earnestness  of  His  dis- 
ciples. He  begins  His  mission  crying,  "  Bepent "  ;  He  ends  it  by  saying  to  His 
enccessors  the  apostles,  "  Preach  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  among  all 
nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem."  I.  Bepentance — rrs  obioin.  When  we  cry, 
"  Bepent  and  be  converted,"  there  are  some  foolish  men  who  call  us  legal.  Now, 
we  beg  to  state,  at  the  opening  of  this  first  point,  that  repentance  is  of  gospel 
parentage.  It  was  not  bom  near  Mount  Sinai.  If  repentance  is  ever  obtained  by 
the  poor  sinner,  it  must  be  found  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  and  not  where  the  ten 
conomandments  lie  shivered  at  Sinai's  base.  And  as  repentance  is  of  gospel 
parentage,  I  make  a  second  remark,  it  is  also  of  gracious  origin.  Bepentance  was 
never  yet  produced  in  any  man's  heart  apart  from  the  grace  of  God.  IL  But  to 
pass  forward  from  this  first  point  to  our  second  head,  let  us  notice  the  EssENTUiiS 
of  true  repentance.  I  have  thus,  as  best  I  coold,  feeling  many  and  very  sad  dis- 
tractions in  my  own  mind,  endeavoured  to  explain  the  essentials  of  true  repen- 
tance— ^illmnination,  hunuliation,  detestation,  transformation.    IC.  And  now,  with 


CHAP.  xxiT.]  ST.  LUKE.  ee? 

all  brevity,  let  me  notice,  in  the  third  place,  the  coMPAiaoNO  of  true  repentance. 
Her  first  companion  is  faith.  There  was  a  question  once  asked  by  the  old  Puritan 
divines,  "Which  was  first  in  the  soul,  faith  or  repentance?  "  Some  said  that  a 
man  oould  not  truly  repent  of  sin  until  he  believed  in  God,  and  had  some  sentje  of 
a  Saviour's  love.  Others  said  a  man  could  not  have  faith  till  he  had  repented 
of  sin ;  for  he  must  hate  sin  before  be  could  trust  Christ.  So  a  good  old  minister 
-who  was  present  made  the  following  remark  :  "  Brethren,"  said  he,  "  I  don't  think 
you  can  ever  settle  this  question.  It  would  be  something  like  asking  whether, 
when  an  infant  is  bom,  the  circulation  of  the  blood  or  the  beating  of  the  pulse  can 
be  first  observed."  Said  he,  "  It  seems  to  me  that  faith  and  repentance  are  simul* 
taneous.  They  come  at  the  same  moment.  There  could  be  no  true  repentance 
without  faith.  There  never  was  yet  true  faith  without  sincere  repentance."  We 
endorse  that  opinion.  I  believe  they  are  like  the  Siamese  twins — they  are  bom 
together,  and  they  oould  not  live  asunder,  but  must  die  if  you  attempt  to  separate 
them.  Faith  always  walks  side  by  side  with  his  weeping  sister,  true  repentance. 
There  is  another  sweet  thing  which  always  goes  with  repentance,  just  as  Aaron 
went  with  Moses,  to  be  spokesman  for  him ;  for  yon  must  know  that  Moses  was 
slow  of  speech,  and  so  is  repentance.  Repentance  has  fine  eyes,  but  stanmiering 
lips.  In  fact,  it  usually  happens  that  repentance  speaks  through  her  eyes,  and 
cannot  speak  with  her  Ups  at  all,  except  her  friend — who  is  a  good  spokesman — is 
near.  He  is  called  "  Mr.  Confession."  This  man  is  noted  for  his  open-breastedness. 
Bepentance  sighs  over  the  sin — confession  tells  it  out.  Holiness  is  evermore  the 
bosom  friend  of  penitence.  Fair  angel,  clad  in  pure  white  linen,  she  loves  good 
company,  and  will  never  stay  in  a  heart  where  repentance  is  a  stranger.  Bepen- 
tance must  dig  the  foundations,  but  holiness  shall  erect  the  structure,  and  bring 
forth  the  top- stone.  Bepentance  is  the  clearing  away  of  the  rubbish  of  the  past 
temple  of  sin;  holiness  builds  the  new  temple  which  the  Lord  our  God  shall 
inherit.  Bepentance  and  desires  after  holiness  never  can  be  separated.  Tet  once 
more — wherever  repentance  is,  there  cometh  also  with  it  peace.  IV.  And  now  I 
come  to  my  fourth  and  last  point,  namely,  the  excellencibs  of  repentance.  I  shall 
somewhat  surprise  you,  perhaps,  if  I  say  that  one  of  the  excellencies  of  repentance 
lies  in  its  pleasantness.  "  Oh !  "  you  say,  *'  but  it  is  bitter  1 "  Nay,  say  I ;  it  ia 
sweet.  At  least,  it  is  bitter  when  it  is  alone,  like  the  waters  of  Marah ;  but  there  is 
a  tree  called  the  cross,  which  if  thou  canst  put  into  it,  it  will  be  sweet,  and  thou 
wilt  love  to  drink  of  it.  At  a  school  of  mutes  who  were  both  deaf  and  dumb,  the 
teacher  put  the  following  question  to  her  pupils :  "  What  is  the  sweetest  emotion  ?  " 
As  soon  as  the  children  comprehended  the  question,  they  took  their  slates  and 
wrote  their  answers.  One  girl  in  a  moment  wrote  down  "Joy."  As  soon  as  the- 
teacher  saw  it,  she  expected  that  all  would  write  the  same,  but  another  girl,  more 
thoughtful,  put  her  hand  to  her  brow,  and  she  wrote  "Hope."  Verily,  the  girl 
was  not  far  from  the  mark.  But  the  next  one,  when  she  brought  up  her  slate,  had 
written  "  Gratitude,"  and  this  child  was  not  wrong.  Another  one,  when  she 
brought  up  her  slate,  had  written  "Love,"  and  I  am  sure  she  was  right.  But 
there  was  one  other  who  had  written  in  large  characters — and  as  she  bronght 
up  her  slate  the  tear  was  in  her  eye,  showing  she  had  written  what  she 
felt  — "  Bepentance  is  the  sweetest  emotion."  And  I  think  «/i«  was  right. 
Besides  this  excellency,  it  is  specially  sweet  to  God  as  well  as  to  men.  '|  A 
broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  Thou  wilt  not  despise."  When  St.  Angustine 
lay  a-dying,  he  had  this  verse  always  fixed  upon  the  curtains,  so  that  as  often  as  he 
awoke  he  might  read  it — "  A  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  Thou  wilt  not 
despise."  When  you  despise  yourselves,  God  honours  you ;  but  as  long  as  yoa 
honour  yourselves,  God  despises  you.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  gospel  com- 
mission : — L  The  foundation  of  this  commission  (see  ver.  46).  IL  The  fecdliab 
woBE  of  this  commission.  The  preaching  of  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  in 
the  name  of  Christ.    III.  Its  beginnino  as  to  locality.     Jerusalem.    IV.  The 

EXTENT    OF     THE    COMMISSION.      All    natioUB.      V.    ThE    OBANS    USB    TO    WHICH    THE 

COMMISSION  MUST  NOW  BE  PUT  BT  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.  (A.  SomervUle.)  The 
apostolic  commission: — I.  The  wobe  presceibed  by  the  Savioub.  The  end  of 
this  work  is,  that  sinners  should  be  saved.  This  practical  end  we  must  ever  keep 
in  view.  1.  The  means  here  prescribed  is  preaching — preaching  repentance  and 
remission  of  sins.  This  ordinance  of  preaching,  even  in  the  general  sense  of 
public  religions  teaching,  is  all  hot  peculiar  to  the  religion  of  Christ.    3.  The 

Eowei  indicated  in  our  text  is  the  power  of  troth,  of  the  true  Word  of  God.    And 
ere  we  see  the  ultimate  source  of  our  strength,  in  the  revealed  will  of  Ood.    The 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxm 

BO-called  orusaders,  in  their  wild  enterprise  for  the  recovery  of  God-forsaken  Pales* 
tine  from  the  infidels,  were  animated  and  sustained  by  the  battle-cry,  "  God  willa 
it."  In  seeking  to  win  the  lost  world  to  its  life  in  God,  from  the  bondage  of  sin 
and  death  and  hell,  we  have  to  cheer  us  and  sustain  us  the  Bible  truth,  "  God  willa 
it."  For  the  work  which  He  has  ordained  shall  certainly  be  done  (Isa.  Iv.  10-13). 
This  glorious  work  the  gospel  is  fitted  instrumentally  to  achieve  by  its  nature  aa 
true  and  Divine,  "  the  Word  of  God."  3.  Not  only  the  gospel  is  true  and  Divine ; 
its  Teacher  is  true  and  Divine.  It  is  ordained  in  this  Will  that  the  preaching  shall 
be  "in  the  name"  of  Jesus  the  Christ.  II.  The  ordeb  in  which  this  wobk  la 
TO  BK  undertaken:  " beoinnino  AT  Jebusalem."  Not  passing  by  Jerusalem,  nor 
coming  to  her  in  the  last  place,  but  "  beginning  at  Jerusalem  " :  so  runs  the  WilL 

I.  They  are  the  nearest,  most  easily  reached.  (1)  In  place.  To  the  apostles  elect 
Jerusalem  was  literally  the  nearest  point  of  Judiea,  and  Jndffia  of  Palestine,  and 
Palestine  of  the  world.  And  even  beyond  Judaea  and  Palestine,  in  every  important 
city  of  the  Gentile  world,  there  was  a  Judsea  and  Jerusalem,  a  Jewish  quarter  and 
synagogue,  more  accessible  and  convenient  for  public  religious  teaching  and  discus- 
Bion  than  any  other  quarter  and  temple.  This  is  one  of  his  points  of  resemblance 
to  the  Scot — his  nation,  far  more  than  ours,  is  the  ubiquitous  nation.  All  the 
world  over,  the  Jew  is  nearest  in  place.  (2)  They  are  nearest  in  mind.  The  wood 
has  first  to  be  hewn  in  the  savage  forest,  and  the  stones  to  be  quarried  from  the 
bowels  of  the  earth,  before  the  heathen  mind  can  furnish  as  much  as  an  altar  for 
our  faith  to  be  laid  on.  But  in  the  mind  of  the  Jew  the  altar  is  built  to  our 
hands ;  the  wood  is  there  upon  it,  ready  to  be  kindled  to  a  blaze.  2.  They  are, 
when  found  and  saved,  fitted  to  be  the  most  precious,  as  instruments  of  diffusing 
the  gospel  to  others.  I  have  already  referred  to  their  lot  of  ubiquity,  showing  that 
they  are  by  position  an  army  in  actual  occupation  of  the  world.  I  might  add  that 
they  have  a  natural  gift  of  tongues,  being  familiar  with  the  languages  of  all  the 
nations  among  which  they  are  dispersed.  And  we  have  seen  that  they  have  a 
theological  knowledge,  derived  from  Old  Testament  revelation,  such  that  they  need 
only  to  know  Jesus  as  the  incarnate  Word  in  order  to  be  ready-made  preachers  of 
Him  in  the  gospel.  3.  They  are  the  worst.  They  are  the  chief  of  sinners,  pecu- 
liarly the  children  of  the  devil  (John  viii.  44).  No  other  nation  has  sinned  as  they 
have  sinned,  so  long  and  deeply  and  desperately,  against  the  light  of  God's  offered 
mercy,  first  in  '•  Moses  and  aU  the  prophets,"  then  in  the  person  of  Jesus  the 
Christ,  and  finally  in  the  apostles  and  evangelists  throughout  the  new  dispensation 
of  the  Spirit.  Therefore  we  ought  to  preach  the  gospel  of  salvation  "to  the  Jews 
first."  For,  first,  in  so  doing  we  act  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  as  a  dispensation  of 
healing  mercy  :  we  illustrate  the  abounding  grace  of  the  great  Physician,  who 
hastens  to  go  first  with  His  remedy  where  the  malady  is  deadliest.  And  second : 
when  Jerusalem  has  yielded  at  last,  and  believed  and  repented  for  salvation,  what 
shall  her  actual  salvation  be  but  spiritual  resurrection  to  the  world  ?  For  she  will 
love  much  because  she  has  been  forgiven  much.  {J.  Macgregor,  D.D.)  The 
work  of  the  Chri$tian  ministry:  —  I.  Tek  oband  bubjects  of  the  Chbistian 
minibtbt:  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  U.  How  these  subjects  abe  to 
be  delivered  :  preached.  (1)  Simply ;  (2)  earnestly ;  (3)  faithfully ;  (4)  affec- 
tionately, in.  In  whose  name  these  two  great  subjects  abe  to  bb  pbeached: 
in  the  name  of  Christ.  lY.  To  whom:  all  nations.  V.  Where  itbst:  at  Jeru- 
salem. (TT.  J.  Grundy.)  Repentance  and  pardon: — Repentance  and  pardon  are 
like  to  the  tiiree  spring  months  of  the  year — March,  April,  and  May.  Sin  comes 
in  like  March — blustering,  stormy,  and  full  of  bold  violence.  Eepentance  succeeds 
like  April — showery,  weeping,  and  full  of  tears.  Pardon  follows  like  May — springing, 
singing,  full  of  joys  and  fiowers.  If  our  hands  have  been  full  of  March,  with  the 
tempest  of  unrighteousness,  our  eyes  must  be  full  of  April,  with  the  sorrow  of 
repentance ;  and  then  our  hearts  shall  be  full  of  May,  in  the  true  joy  of  forgiveness. 
The  duty  and  importance  of  special  e forts  for  the  conversion  of  cities : — I.  Oub 
Sa\iour  devoted  His  personal  ministrt  vert  uuch  to  cities  and  laboe  towns. 

II.  Christ,  in  His  instbuctions  to  His  disciples,  farticulably  dibectb  theib 
attention  to  cities  and  laboe  towns.  IIL  Cities  were  the  theatres  of  the 
Holt  Spibit's  first  and  most  illustrious  achievements.  Instance — Jerusalem, 
Antiooh,  Ephesus,  Corinth,  <fec  IV.  Wb  should  seek  the  conversion  of  cities. 
because  in  tbeu  tee  adverbabt  beions  with  peculiab  power.  Would  yoo  see 
the  power  of  Satan  in  cities  7  Cast  your  eye  back  npon  the  past.  What  were 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  ?  What  were  Tyre,  and  Sidon,  and  Nineveh  T  What  was 
Babylon?  What  was  Jerusalem  in  its  latter  days,  when  given  up,  aconrsed  of  Ood 7 


«HAP.  33IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  «ef ' 

What  were  they  but  sinks  of  poUation  and  fountains  of  ruin  f  And,  could  we  draw 
aside  the  curtains  of  darkness,  what  might  we  see  in  modetn  cities  ?    V.  Thebs 

ABB   PBCnUAB    ADTANTAQBS   FOB  THE   PBOMOTION    07    BEUOION   IN   CITIES.        In   CitieS, 

ministers  and  good  men  can  readily  and  effectually  co-operate  in  plans  of  useful- 
ness. Cities  also  furnish  peculiar  advantages  for  individual  exertion.  If  Christiana 
in  onr  cities  would  conduct  themselves  agreeably  to  the  Bible,  how  awfnl  to  the 
wicked  would  be  their  example  I  What  reformations  would  be  wrought  among  the 
worldly  and  profane  1  How  many  haunts  of  poverty  and  wretchedness  would  be 
searched  out !  How  many  souls,  once  in  communion  with  the  saints,  would  be 
brought  back  from  their  wanderings  1    YL  Anotheb  bgason  tob  special  eftobts 

IN   BBHAIiir   OF  CITIES  IS,   THB    INFLUBNCE    WHICH    THEY  BXEBT   ON   THE   OO0NTBY  AND 

ON  THB  woBLD.  {W.  Pattou,  M.A.)  The  charge  to  the  apostles : — I.  What  thet 
WEBB  TO  PBEACH.  1.  Bepeutance.  This  consists  in  conviction  of  sin,  contrition 
of  heart,  and  godly  sorrow  for  transgressions;  and  it  ends  in  real  conversion  to 
God.  2.  Bemission  of  sins.  Free,  fall,  finaL  The  Forgiver  retains  no  anger.  3. 
They  were  to  preach  both  repentance  and  the  remission  of  sins.  We  are  not  to 
separate  what  God  hath  joined  together.  To  encourage  the  hope  of  pardon,  with- 
out repentance,  is  rebellion  against  common  sense,  and  treason  against  the  whole 
spirit  and  letter  of  the  Word  of  God.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  true 
repentance  without  proper  views  of,  and  faith  in,  God's  pardoning  mercy  and  grace. 
Witliout  these  the  heart  may  be  terrified,  but  it  never  can  be  softened.  IL  How 
TBET  WEBB  TO  PBEACH  THIS.  "In  His  name."  1.  In  His  stead.  2.  By  His 
authority.  8.  Through  His  mediatorial  influence.  HI.  Among  whom  webb  thet 
TO  pbbaoh  ?  "  Among  all  nations."  1.  Christianity  was  designed  to  be  universal ; 
to  enter  and  to  pervade  all  nations  of  the  earth.  2.  Christianity  is  adapted  to 
aniversality.  3.  Enough  has  already  been  done  to  encourage  our  hope  of  its  actual 
oniversality  in  due  time.  TV.  Where  mtebe  they  to  begin  theib  wobk  f  "In 
Jerusalem."  1.  To  fulfil  Scripture  (Zech.  xiv.  8).  2.  To  attest  more  strongly  the 
truth  of  Christianity.  They  were  to  begin  to  preach  the  facts  of  the  gospel  in  the 
very  place  where  it  is  reported  they  occurred;  and  so  recently  as  to  be  in  the 
memory  of  those  they  addressed.  Would  impostors  have  done  this  ?  3.  To  afford 
proofs  of  the  Saviour's  compassion.  He  sends  His  ambassadors  with  offers  of 
meroy  and  pardon  to  a  city  whose  inhabitants  were  reeking  with  His  blood.  4.  It 
was  tiiat  His  ministers  should  afford  encouragement  to  all ;  so  that  none  should 
have  a  just  pretence  "to  perish  in  despair."  "Though  your  sins  are  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  5. 
It  was  to  encourage  His  servants  in  their  endeavours  to  evangelize.  The  apostlea 
were  not  to  begin  at  a  distance,  but  as  near  as  possible.  Suppose,  now,  yoa  had  a 
wilderness  covered  with  briers  and  thorns,  and  you  wished  to  make  a  smooth  passage 
through  it ;  would  it  be  wiser  to  begin  at  the  farther  end,  and  work  homewards,  or  at 
home  first,  pursuing  your  course  to  the  farther  end  ?  Would  not  the  latter  way 
save  you  some  time  and  trouble  ?  And,  as  yon  went  on,  would  not  the  little  parts 
you  cultivated  afford  supplies  to  aid  you  to  proceed  with  your  cultivation  7  ( W.  Jay.) 
Repentance: — ^He  that  repents  leaves  the  wrong  way  to  take  the  right.  Bepentance 
is  a  change  of  mind  leading  to  a  change  of  conduct.  He  that  repents  turns  quite 
round  to  God ;  his  back  was  to  heaven's  gate,  his  face  is  now  toward  it.  A  single 
action  may  show  the  change,  as  the  weather-vane,  pointing  to  a  new  quarter,  teUs 
us  that  the  wind  has  changed.  And  what  a  change  that  may  be !  *'  The  wind  is 
west,"  we  cry ;  "the  drought  is  over  1 "  How  simple  is  repentance,  how  mighty  the 
effects  I  "  Effects ! "  **  Simple  I  "  Is  the  rain  that  blesses  the  thirsty  land  caused 
by  the  taming  weather-cock  ?  Is  the  great  change  of  wind,  of  which  even  smoke 
or  a  straw  may  give  as  notice,  only  to  be  had  for  the  wishing,  or  so  very  simple  in 
its  oaoses  ?  We  cannot  state  too  simply  to  ourselves  what  repentance  is ;  but  this 
rcpentanoe,  of  which  we  so  speak,  is  a  very  great  thing.  This  change  in  the  sonl's 
weather  may  come  in  with  stormy  darkness ;  thunder  and  rain  and  tempest  may  be 
the  servants  of  God  that  bring  the  blessing.  To  preach  repentance  then  is  not 
merely  to  cry :  **  Consider  your  ways,  amend  them."  It  is  to  present  such  induce- 
ments, and  to  provide  such  "  assistances  "  that  the  soul  may  feel  itself  very  power- 
fully dealt  with  for  amendment ;  and  these  are  provided  and  presented  in  Jesus 
Christ.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Remission  of  sins: — "  Bemission  of  sins  "  is  the  assor- 
anoe  that  God  will  not  charge  them  against  the  repentmg  soul ;  and  that  He  will 
break  the  strength  they  still  have  in  it,  and  wholly  disperse  and  destroy  them. 
Pardon  and  complete  deliverance  are  assured ;  and  at  once  the  effeet  of  former  ma, 
begins  to  be  put  away.    But  the  process  of  salvation  is  a  gradual  one.    To  pot  oa 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  xxiv. 

Christ  is  not  the  work  of  an  hour.  The  Physician  once  welcomed,  many  a  visit 
must  He  pay.  Even  were  the  soul  at  the  hour  of  its  repentance  absolutely  assured 
that  no  more  harm  could  ever  come  to  it  from  what  it  had  done  amiss,  it  has  all  its 
good  yet  to  win  and  to  appropriate :  as  yet  it  occupies  a  low  place ;  it  is  untaught, 
unclad  ;  it  must  be  educated ;  it  can  rise  only  by  degrees.  Christ  has  said  for  it, 
and  for  all  souls,  "  I  have  overcome  evil ;  I  have  perfected  good."  By  faith  in  Him, 
i.e.,  by  our  bo  personal  union  with  Him,  through  trust,  that  He  is  ours  and  we  His, 
we  gain  all  the  benefits  of  His  protection  from  evil,  and  His  promised  imparta- 
tion  of  God.  But  we  enter  into  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  gradually.  And,  strong 
as  our  confidence  in  the  Divine  pardon  may  be,  sin  in  us  does  not  at  once  die  ;  and 
earnest  as  our  repentance  toward  God  may  be,  the  good  new  hfe  in  us  is  not  at  once 
adult  and  all-accomplished.  But,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  there  has  been  preached 
to  us,  and  still  is,  "  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  " :  "  repentance,"  with  all 
inducements  and  all  assistances ;  "  remission,"  with  all  assurance  :  the  comfort  of 
the  blessing,  the  earnest  of  its  full  realization — these  may  at  once  be  ours.  In  the 
name  of  Christ :  shall  we  say,  by  His  power  the  one  is  preached ;  for  His  sake,  the 
other  ?  Yes ;  bo  we  may  say.  But  the  two  blessings  are  one  in  Him  who  has 
subdued  the  past  for  us  and  won  for  us  the  future.  Vain,  and  wrong,  were  any 
declaration  of  pardon  without  a  call  to  repentance.  Vain,  and  even  mocking,  were 
any  call  to  repentance  without  the  promise  of  pardon.  Hope  there  can  be  none  for 
man  unless  he  be  made  divinely  good.  Good,  and  happy  in  his  goodness  can  no 
man  be  made,  unless  the  forces  of  evil  with  which  he  was  leagued,  by  which  he 
was  thralled,  to  which  he  contributed,  are  overcome.  {Ibid.)  Beginning  at 
JemBalem. — Reasons  for  "  beginning  at  Jerusalem"  : — I,  That  the  pbomibe  op  thb 
Fatheb  mioht  bb  fulfilijED.  II.  That  the  tbuth  of  Chbistianitt  might  bb 
coMFniMXD.  m.  That  the  ftoness  of  Christ's  mebct  might  be  proclaimed. 
IV.  That  the  effioaot  of  His  grace  might  be  manifested.  In  conclusion,  w* 
learn  from  the  subjeot^l.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  professing  Christians  to  manifest 
the  spirit  of  Christ.  If  Christ  is  dwelling  in  you,  you  cannot  but  manifest  His 
spirit,  for  His  life  is  your  life.  2.  We  learn  from  this  subject,  that  it  is  our  duty 
to  spread  the  gospel  of  Christ.  8.  From  this  subject  we  learn  how  sincere  and 
earnest  is  God's  desire  for  the  salvation  of  sinners — "  He  is  not  willing  that  any 
should  perish."  {J.  Dobie,  D.D.)  Beginning  at  Jerusalem; — I.  What  they  were 
TO  preach.  1.  Repentance.  (1)  Repentance  as  a  duty.  (2)  The  acceptableness  of 
repentance.  (3)  The  motives  of  repentance.  Not  mere  fear  of  hell ;  but  sorrow 
for  sin.  (4)  Repentance  in  its  perpetuity.  (5)  The  source  of  repentance.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  exalted  to  give  repentance.  2.  Remission  of  sins.  Free,  fulU 
irreversible  pardon  for  all  who  repent  of  sin,  and  lay  hold  on  Christ  by  faith.  H. 
Where  it  is  to  be  pbbached.     Among  all  nations.    Divine  warrant  for  missions. 

III.  But  this  is  not  all.  We  are  actually  told  how  to  preach  it.  Repentance  and 
remission  are  to  be  preached  in  Christ's  name.  What  does  this  mean  ?  1.  Ought 
we  not  to  learn  from  this  that  we  are  to  tell  the  gospel  to  others,  because  Christ 
orders  us  to  do  so  ?  In  Christ's  name  we  must  do  it.  Silence  is  sin  when  salvation 
is  the  theme.  But  it  means  more  than  that.  2.  Not  only  preach  it  under  His 
orders,  but  preach  it  on  His  authority.  The  true  servant  of  Christ  has  his  Master 
to  back  him  np.  8.  But  does  it  not  mean,  also,  that  the  repentance  and  the  remission 
which  are  so  bound  together  come  to  men  by  virtue  of  ,Hi8  name  ?  Oh,  sinner,, 
there  would  be  no  acceptance  of  your  repentance  if  it  were  not  for  that  dear  name  I 

IV.  Now,  I  ehal'.  ask  your  attention  to  the  principal  topic  of  the  present  discourse, 
and  that  is,  that  He  told  His  disciples  where  to  begin.  The  apostles  were  not  to- 
pick  and  choose  where  they  should  start,  but  they  were  to  begin  at  Jerusalem. 
Why  ?  1.  Because  it  was  written  in  the  Scriptures  that  they  were  to  begin  at 
JeroBalem  (l8a.iL3;  Joel  ii.  32,  iii.  16;  Zech.xiv.8).  2. 1  suppose  that  our  Lord  bade 
His  disciples  begin  to  preach  the  gospel  at  Jerusalem,  because  it  was  at  Jerusalem 
that  the  facts  which  make  up  tiie  gospel  had  oocnrred.  8.  The  third  reason  why  the 
Lord  Jesus  told  them  to  begin  at  Jerusalem  may  have  been  that  He  knew  that  there 
would  come  s  time  when  some  of  His  disciples  would  despise  the  Jews,  and  there- 
fore He  said — When  yon  preach  My  gospel,  begin  with  them.  This  is  a  standing 
commandment,  and  everywhere  we  ought  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  Jew  as  well  as 
to  the  Gentile;  Paal  even  says,  "  to  the  Jew  first."  4.  The  fourth  reason  for 
beginning  at  Jerusalem  is  a  practical  lesson  for  yon.  Begin  where  yon  are  tempted 
not  to  begin.  Naturally  these  disciples  would  have  said  one  to  another  when  they 
mat,  **  We  eannot  do  much  here  in  Jerusalem.  The  first  night  that  we  met  together 
tb»  doors  were  shut  for  fear  of  the  Jews.    It  is  of  no  nse  for  ns  to  go  oat  into  th* 


OHAP.  xxiv.)  ST.  LUKE.  67 J 

street ;  these  people  are  all  in  such  an  excited  frame  of  mind  that  they  will  not 
receive  us ;  we  had  better  go  up  to  Damascus,  or  take  a  long  journey,  and  then 
commence  preaching ;  and  when  this  excitement  is  cooled  down,  and  they  have 
forgotten  about  the  crucifixion,  we  will  come  and  introduce  Christ  gradually,  and 
Bay  as  little  as  we  can  about  putting  Him  to  death."  That  would  have  been  the 
rule  of  policy — that  rule  which  often  governs  men  who  ought  to  be  led  by  faith.  But 
our  Lord  had  said,  "Beginning  at  Jerusalem,"  and  so  Peter  must  stand  up  in  the 
midst  of  that  motley  throng,  and  he  must  tell  them,  "  This  Jesus  whom  ye  have 
with  wicked  hands  crucified  and  slain  is  now  risen  from  the  dead."  Instead  of 
tearing  Peter  to  pieces  they  come  crowding  up,  crying,  '•  We  believe  in  Jesus  :  let 
us  be  baptized  into  His  sacred  name."  The  same  day  there  were  added  to  the 
church  three  thousand  souls,  and  a  day  or  two  afterwards  five  thousand  were  con- 
verted by  the  same  kind  of  preaching.  We  ought  always  to  try  to  do  good  where 
we  think  that  it  will  not  succeed.  6.  Begin  at  home.  Look  well  to  your  own 
children,  servants,  brothers,  sisters,  neighbours.  6.  Begin  where  much  has  been 
already  done.  The  Jerusalem  people  had  been  taught  for  centuries  in  vain ;  and 
yet  Christ's  disciples  were  to  speak  to  them  first.  We  must  not  pass  the  gospel- 
hardened  ;  we  must  labour  for  the  conversion  of  those  who  have  enjoyed  privileges 
bat  have  neglected  them.  7.  Begin  where  the  gospel  day  is  short.  It  was  about 
to  end  at  Jerusalem.  Now,  then,  if  you  have  any  choice  as  to  the  person  you  shall 
Epeak  to,  select  an  old  man.  He  is  near  his  journey's  end,  and  if  he  is  unsaved 
there  is  but  a  little  bit  of  candle  left  by  the  light  of  which  he  may  come  to  Christ. 
Or  when  any  of  you  notice  a  girl  upon  whose  cheek  you  see  that  hectic  flush  which 
marks  consumption — if  you  notice  during  service  the  deep  "  churchyard  "  cough — 
say  to  yourself,  "  I  will  not  let  you  go  without  speaking  to  you,  for  you  may  soon  be 
dead."  We  ought  speedily  to  look  up  those  whose  day  of  grace  is  short.  8.  Begin, 
dear  friend,  where  you  may  expect  opposition.  That  is  a  singular  thing  to  advise, 
bat  I  recommend  it  because  the  Saviour  advised  it.  If  they  began  at  Jerusalem, 
they  would  arouse  a  ferocious  opposition.  But  nothing  is  much  better  for 
the  gospel  than  opposition.  9.  The  Saviour  bade  them  begin  at  Jerusa- 
lem, because  the  biggest  sinners  lived  there.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Beginning 
at  Jerusalem: — I.  The  charge  to  begin  at  Jerusalem  shows  how  the  gospel 
challenges  investigation  of  the  facts  which  it  proclaims  in  the  locality  in  which  they 
transpired,  and  where,  in  consequence,  they  are  capable  of  being  most  thoroughly 
sifted.  II.  The  charge  to  begin  at  Jerusalem  shows  that  even  Jerusalem  sinners — 
the  men  who  had  thirsted  for  the  Saviour's  blood — the  men  who  had  cried,  "  Away 
with  Him,  crucify  Himl  " — the  men  who  mocked  Him  in  His  last  agonies — the 
men  who  reviled  and  tortured  and  murdered  Him — were  not  excluded  from  His 
compassion.  1.  Taking  at  the  outset  the  lowest  ground,  we  learn  from  His  words 
that  there  is  mercy  for  the  greatest  sinners.  2.  But  this  is  not  alL  The  text 
requires  as  to  advance  a  step  further.  It  not  only  teaches  that  there  is  mercy  for 
the  worst  sinners,  but  that  the  worst  and  most  wretched  sinners  are  especially  the 
objects  of  mercy.  Should  you  begin  to  ask  how  this  is,  and  on  what  principle  it  ia 
to  be  accounted  for,  our  own  feelings  under  certain  circumstances  may  help  us  to  an. 
answer.  The  mother,  if  she  loves  as  a  mother  should,  has  no  arbitrary  or  ground- 
less preference  for  any  of  her  children.  While  they  are  all  about  her,  behaving  as 
children  should,  she  cannot  tell  you  which  is  dearest.  Most  sincerely  she  will  tell 
you  that  she  loves  them  all  alike.  But  in  after  years,  when  their  character  is  deve- 
loped, and  each  pursues  his  own  course,  it  is  the  poor  prodigal  whose  suffering  most 
awakens  her  solicitude,  and  not  so  much  his  snSering  as  his  sin.  It  is  his  image' 
that  is  most  frequently  present  to  her  mind.  Let  me  add  here,  that  the  salvatioa 
of  the  worst  sinners  will  serve  most  to  magnify  the  Divine  mercy.  As  the  rough 
sea  makes  manifest  the  good  quahties  of  the  lifeboat  which  has  weathered  the 
storm ;  as  the  physician's  skill  is  most  illustriously  displayed,  and  the  efficacy  of 
his  medicines  most  strikingly  evinced,  by  the  cure  of  the  most  aggravated  disease  ;. 
as  the  builder's  reputation  is  advanced,  not  only  by  the  beauty  and  symmetry  of 
the  structure  which  he  has  erected,  but  also  by  the  worthlessness  of  the  materials 
oat  of  which  it  has  been  formed ;  so  is  mercy  most  illustriously  displayed  and  most 
gloriously  magnified  in  the  salvation  of  the  greatest  sinners.  Moreover,  the  for- 
giveness of  the  greater  guilt  is  fitted  to  awaken  greater  gratitude  in  the  forgiven, 
sinner.  III.  The  Saviour's  charge  shows  the  order  in  which  we  shoold  prooe»d  in 
oar  efforts  for  the  conversion  of  the  world.  The  principle  which  He  commends  to 
ns  is  the  sound  principle  of  begiiming  at  home.  But  while  our  efforts  should  begin 
»t  home,  they  should  only  begin  tbez«.     (TT.  LandeU.)       The  Divine  order  of 


«57»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xat, 

preaching : — Mark  the  order  to  be  observed,  for  it  is  here  prescribed,  in  promnl- 
gating  the  system  of  troth  and  mercy  throughout  the  world.  They  were  to  '*  begin 
at  Jerusalem" ;  and  therefore  we  must  begin  there.  For  thus  it  is  written — "  A  law 
shall  go  forth  from  Zion,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  This  part  of 
4h«  Divine  order  gives  to  our  common  Christianity  a  character  of  the  most  resplen- 
dent truth.  "  Beginning  at  Jerusalem."  Suppose  they  had  begun  anywhere  else 
but  at  Jerusalem.  Suppose  they  had  passed  Jerusalem  by.  Suppose  they  had 
sone  to  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Suppose  they  had  gone  to  countries  still 
more  remote,  and  there  commenced  operations,  and  there  proclaimed  repentance 
and  remission  of  sins  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  Infidelity  with  both  its  eyes 
©pen  and  both  its  ears,  to  look  at  anything  that  can  be  seen,  and  listen  to  anything 
that  can  be  heard,  which  can  be  lifted  up  to  the  discredit  of  Christianity — infidelity 
would  very  soon  have  raised  its  crest,  and  lifted  its  voice  on  high.  It  would  have 
said,  •*  You  see  how  these  apostles,  as  they  are  called,  managed  this  matter.  Not 
a  man  of  them  dared  say  a  word  in  Jerusalem.  They  knew,  if  they  had  gone  there 
with  their  tales  about  the  darkened  sun,  the  rending  rocks  and  rising  dead,  the 
people  of  Jerusalem  would  have  risen  up  to  confront  them ;  a  child  of  seven  years 
old  would  have  been  enough  to  confront  them  all.  Away  they  went  to  another  part 
of  the  world,  and  there  began  with  their  tales  of  one  Jesus  that  lived  and  died  and 
irose  again,  and  that  all  who  believe  in  Him  will  be  saved  by  Him ;  and  these  un- 
tutored people,  who  had  no  means  of  ascertaining  whether  the  statements  were  true 
or  false,  seeing  the  confidence  with  which  they  were  asserted,  were  credulous  enough 
to  receive  them,  and  thus  your  Christianity  made  a  beginning  in  the  world."  Did 
it  so  ?  Let  infidelity  blush,  if  of  a  blush  it  is  capable — which  I  very  much  doubt — 
for  where  shame  is,  virtue  may  be  some  day  or  other.  Let  infidelity  blush  1 — at 
Jerusalem  they  did  begin.  On  the  very  spot  where  the  facts  happened,  there  were 
those  facts  fearlessly  and  triumphantly  proclaimed.  They  did  not  wait  half  a 
century,  till  almost  all  that  lived  when  the  facts  occurred  were  numbered  with  the 
■dead.  They  went  immediately ;  they  "  began  "  there  on  the  very  spot ;  there  they 
preached  a  risen  Saviour,  and  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  in  His  name. 
Tmth  loves  daylight,  truth  glories  in  the  sunshine — invites  attention,  challenges 
•examination,  commands  conviction  and  assent.  **  Begin  at  Jerusalem  ! "  and  does 
mot  this  give  to  our  Divine  Christianity  a  character  of  the  tenderest  compassion  ? 
<«  Begin  at  Jerusalem?"  lean  almost  imagine  I  hear  Simon  Peter,  who  had  a 
warm  heart  and  therefore  a  ready  tongue,  say  to  his  Master — ♦'  Oh  1  let  it  be  rather 
anywhere  but  Jerusalem.  Hast  Thou  forgotten  how  they  treated  Thy  prophets 
before  Thee?  Hast  Thou  so  soon  forgotten  how  they  treated  Thyself? — how  they 
despised  Thy  teaching  and  Thy  prayers,  and  Thy  entreaties  and  tears  ?  Hast  Thoa 
-BO  soon  forgotten  how  they  thirsted  for  Thy  blood,  and  how  they  rested  not  till  they 
Jiad  imbrued  their  hands  in  it?  Look  at  Thy  hands  and  side,  do  not  they  bear  the 
marks  of  their  cruelty  ? — Anywhere  but  Jerusalem."  Such  might  be  the  language 
of  man,  but  such  was  not  the  determination  of  our  merciful  Bedeemer — *•  As  the 
fheavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  My  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  My 
thoughts  than  your  thoughts."  "  Begin  at  Jerusalem."  "  Though  I  bear  the  marks 
of  their  cruelty,  they  shall  have  the  first  offer  of  My  clemency.  Begin  there.  Go 
and  try  to  find  ont  those  that  falsely  accused  Me,  and  tell  them  I  am  ready  to  be- 
come their  advocate,  to  plead  their  cause  before  the  throne  on  high.    •  Begin  at 

Jerusalem ' try  to  find  out  those  that  scourged  Me,  and  teU  them  from  Me,  that  by 

Hy  stripes  they  may  be  healed.  'Begin  at  Jerusalem' — find  out  those  cruel 
wretches  that  mingled  for  Me  in  My  extremity  the  cup  of  vinegar  and  gall,  and  tell 
■4hem  from  Me,  that  at  My  hand  they  may  receive  the  cup  of  salvation.  •  Begin  at 
Jerusalem ' — find  ont  those  that  plaited  the  crown  of  thorns — that  put  it  on — that 
ismote  Me  with  a  reed,  and  mocked  Me — and  tell  them  from  Me,  that  from  Me  they 
may  receive  •  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away.'  "  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  _  The 
€hxircK$  duty  to  those  outside : — Suppose^  you  gentlemen  who  are  in  business 
leoeived  no  business  letters  to-morrow  morning  when  you  reached  your  office,  and 
-you  were  expecting  large  remittances  from  abroad,  you  would  be  Tery  much 
-astonished.  You  would  wait  for  the  next  post,  and  for  tiie  next,  but  I  expect  that, 
'before  noon,  your  excitement  would  be  so  great  that  you  would  hurry  off,  probably, 
i4o  the  General  Post  Office,  and,  if  there  was  a  imiversal  non-delivery  of  letters  in 
<the  city  of  London,  you  would  really  wish  to  see  the  Postmaster-General  if  he  were 
within  reach,  or,  at  any  rate,  the  postmaster  of  the  main  office.  And  what  would 
be  your  criticism  if,  when  you  explained  your  troubles  and  the  non-delivery  of  the 
d^tera,  that  official  shnigged  his  Bhonlders,  andealmly  replied  that  the  letters 


CHAP,  xnv.]  .  8T.  LUKE.  «7» 

all  there,  and  that  yon  were  quite  aware  that  the  post-office  was  open  from  seven  to 
ten,  and  that  you  had  only  to  call  and  you  could  have  your  letters.  You  would  turn 
round  and  say,  '•  The  Government  pays  you  to  deliver  the  letters  at  our  address." 
And  in  the  same  way  God  has  given  you  and  me  certain  messages  of  mercy  to  th© 
einners  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  it  is  our  business  to  take  those  messages  to 
them.  {H.  P.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Tarry  ye  In  the  city  of  Jerusalem. — Tarrying  for 
fitneti: — I.  The  fitness  op  the  Chbisxian.  1.  Its  essential  feature.  "Power." 
This  comprehends  all  the  "fruits  of  the  Spirit."  2.  It  is  properly  and  distinctly  & 
gift  imparted  from  without  and  above.  "Endued  with  power  from  on  high." 
S.  Its  purpose.  Not  an  ornament  or  accomplishment  merely.  It  qualified  mea 
for  various  offices  in  the  Church  (Eph.  iv.  7,  11).  II.  Tabbying  foe  fitness. 
Great  benefits  require  time  for  their  realization :  and  spiritual  exercise  pre> 
pares  for  spiritual  endowment.  1.  By  their  enforced  tarrying  the  disciple* 
were  taught  that  no  man  must  thrust  himself  into  the  ministry  of  Christ. 
2.  The  delay  was  an  important  element  of  their  preparation.  3.  The  place 
for  power  is  the  place  of  Divine  appointment.  Why  "  Jerusalem "  7  It 
was  full  of  associations  of  His  ignominy  and  death.  It  contained  the  worst 
enemies  of  His  cause.  But  "  Christ  is  God's  forgiveness."  (A.  F.  Muir,  M.A.\ 
Times  of  waiting : — The  time  during  which  they  were  to  "  tarry  "  proved  to  be  ten 
days — from  the  Thursday  to  the  Sunday  week  following.  It  was  just  long  enough 
to  be  a  real  test  and  tri&l.  You  may  say,  perhaps,  considering  the  circumstances, 
it  was  a  tremendous  trial.  And  yet,  mercifully,  just  shortened  enough  to  be  not 
intolerable — a  discipline,  but  like  every  other  from  the  Father's  hand,  a  discipline 
beautifully  tempered.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  this  interruption — I  speak,  of 
coarse,  according  to  man — this  interruption  by  ten  days  had  a  great  design,  and 
that  it  was  to  iUustrate  one  very  important  part  of  God's  methods  with  all  His 
children,  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances.  I  see  traces  of  the  same  method 
of  dealing  throughout  the  Bible.  There  is  a  pause,  there  is  a  breathing  time, 
before  anything  falls.  In  judgments,  the  flood  did  not  begin  till  not  only  a 
hundred  and  twenty  years  had  passed,  but  not  until  seven  days  after  the  date  foi 
which  it  had  been  positively  announced.  And  at  Sodom,  at  Gomorrah,  at  Jericho, 
at  Nineveh,  at  Jerusalem,  there  were  intervals,  distinct,  between  sentence  and 
execution.  While  equally,  many,  I  might  say  most,  of  the  best  blessings  of  which 
we  read  did  not  come  till  there  had  first  been  what  you  may  call  their  period — a 
waiting-time.  Sometimes  it  is  very  short,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Syrophoenician 
woman,  or  Mary  and  Martha  at  Bethany,  three  or  four  days ;  sometimes  longer,  as 
with  Abraham  looking  for  a  son,  or  David's  succession  to  his  predicted  throne ; 
sometimes  exceedingly  protracted,  as  when  good  king  Hezekiah  never  lived  to  see 
the  answer  to  a  father's  prayers  in  the  conversion  of  his  son,  and  yet,  nevertheless, 
when  the  appointed  moment  came,  his  son  was  brought  to  God,  though  the  lips 
that  prayed  it  were  silent.  And  what,  what  is  the  whole  of  this  dispensation 
through  which  we  are  now  passing  ?  A  space  between  two  advents — a  waiting  time 
for  that  which  seemed  to  be,  and  which  apostles  thought  to  be,  quite  close  at  the 
door  two  thousand  years  ago.  Do  you  say  that  is  too  long  to  be  a  parallel,  that  is 
not  an  interval  T  Nay,  "  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  Me ;  and  again  a  little 
while  and  ye  shall  see  Me,  because  I  go  to  the  Father."  And  we  are  dealing  with 
One  to  whom  "  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day.'* 
The  thought,  then,  which  I  wish  to  impress  upon  yon,  and  which  seems  to  me  to 
be  the  lesson  of  this  season  is,  that  God  is  a  God  who  delights  in  intervals — 
intervals  as  they  relate  to  our  little  minds,  but  all  an  equal  part  in  one  grand 
design — and  that  the  right  viewing  and  the  proper  use  of  these  intervals  is  an 
essential  part  of  the  Christian's  education.  We  ought  to  know  how  these  intervale 
should  be  passed.  First,  you  must  have  in  your  mind  a  remembrance  that  it  is  anr 
interval,  only  an  interval,  an  ordained  interval,  an  interval  with  a  defined  boundary 
line — though  you  cannot  see  it — that  it  is  in  the  map,  that  it  is  as  much  a  part  oi 
the  map  of  God's  covenant  as  the  issue  which  is  to  come,  or  as  the  means  which 
yon  are  now  using  to  obtain  it.  Then,  acknowledging  it  as  God's  own  waiting 
time,  yon  must  honour  Him.  Shall  the  great  God,  all  wise  and  true,  be  hurried  by 
one  of  His  creatures  ?  "  Tarry  thou  the  Lord's  leisure  "  is  written  on  the  fore- 
front of  all  God's  government.  Is  not  it  enough  for  yon  that  He  has  told  yon 
♦•  what "  ? — are  you  to  dictate  the  "  when,"  and  determine  the  "  where  "  ?  Still, 
while  yon  keep  the  eye  of  expectation  upon  the  horizon  where  the  promise  is  to 
arise,  keep  your  hand  on  the  door.  The  hour  is  a  fixed  hour — it  is  in  the  "  deter> 
minate  counsel  and  fore-knowledge  of  God."  Then,  in  the  interval,  you  will  do 
Toi..  m.  43 


«74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxf. 

well  to  do  just  what  Christ  told  His  little  Church  to  do  in  this  great  model  of  all 
waiting — go  on  with  present  duties,  be  content  for  a  little  time  to  have  a  very  small 
sphere,  keep  in  the  appointed  path,  and  be  sure  that  you  use  ordinances,  be  whera 
all  blessing  comes,  stay  in  Jerusalem.     Then,  in  your  Jerusalem,  look  to  it  that  it 
is  all  love,  else  your  prayers  will  be  hindered.     And,  like  the  twelve — and  this  is  a 
wonderful  record,  and  shows  how  God  blesses  and  honours  His  waiting  ones,  even 
when  all  outward  circumstances  are  quite  dark — spend  the  time  in  great  joy.    And 
be  much  in  prayer,  especially  united  prayer.     {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)        Endued  witli 
power  from  on  high. — Spiritual  power  : — Our  need  to-day  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  apostles.     Our  work  is  prosecuted  under  different  circumstances,  but  its  diffi- 
culties are  essentially  the  same.    The  weak  things  of  the  world  have  still  to  contend 
against  the  mighty,  and  can  be  equal  to  the  struggle  only  in  so  far  as  they  are 
made  mighty  by  power  from  on  high.     And  the  promise  to  us  is  unchanged.     I. 
What  this  bpibituaij  power  is.    In  a  word,  it  is  intensity  in  every  part  of  the 
Christian  life.    There  is  power  in  faith — the  strong,  simple,  unwavering  faith 
which  BO  lays  hold  of  a  truth  that  it  possesses  and  controls  the  soul,  stiriing  its 
deepest  sympathies,  and  awakening  its  mightiest  faculties.      There  is  power  in 
the  devoted  loyalty  to  truth  which  leads  a  man  to  obey  her  caU  at  whatever  cost,  to 
Burrender  wealth,   ease,  honour,  and,  what  is  as  hard  as  all  besides,  personal 
prejudice,  as  well  as  interest  for  her  sake.     There  is  power  in  the  courage  which 
leads  a  man  to  work  out  his  own  ideal  of  duty ;  to  speak  what  is  true,  and  do  what 
is  right,  without  taking  counsel  with  flesh  and  blood ;  to  stand  alone  and  defy  a 
Ecoffing  world,  rather  than  compromise  his  integrity  or  betray  his  trust.    There  is 
power  in  sympathy — the  gentle,  loving,  active  compassion,  which  finds  its  chief 
delight  in  doing  good ;  which  unlocks  the  hearts  of  men  as  by  a  magic  key,  and 
establishes  a  rule  within  them  by  the  force  of  its  own  unselfishness.     There  ia 
power  in  the  grandeur  and  sublimity  imparted  to  life  by  its  conscious  association 
with  another  and  eternal  state  of  being,  and  the  desire  so  to  shape  all  its  thoughts 
and  words  and  deeds  that  it  shall  be  but  the  fitting  prelude  to  that  better  and  purer 
life.     There  is  power  in  devoted  love  to  a  high  and  noble  Person :  a  love  which  not 
only  inspires  in  the  soul  the  earnest  desire  to  partake  of  His  goodness  and  beauty, 
hut  to  forget  itself  in  the  daily  effort  to  exalt  and  honour  Him.    All  these  elements 
are  united  in  that  **  spiritual  power  "  of  which  I  speak.    II.  The  need  which  ths 
Church  has  of  this  power.     It  is  the  one  great  want  of  this  age.    With  it,  we 
need  not  be  afraid  of  the  utmost  liberty ;  without  it,  there  is  no  safety,  even  in  the 
most  watchful  and  zealous  conservatism.    With  it,  we  shall  be  able  to  silence  the 
gainsaying  even  of  this  sceptical  generation  ;  without  it,  we  may  employ  the  most 
cogent  arguments,  and  put  them  in  the  most  convincing  form,  and  our  labour  will 
be  utterly  fruitless ;  for  it  is  the  hearts  of  men  we  have  to  move  rather  than  their 
intellects,  and  hearts  are  only  reached  by  the  power  of  soul.    With  it,  we  may 
stiU  have  controversy,  but  there  will  be  a  counteractive  force  that  will  repress  all 
its  evil  and  violence ;  without  it,  we  may  have  uniformity  and  quiet,  but  in  them 
Hiete  will  be  the  seeds  of  corruption,  decay,  and  death.     With  it,  we  may  have  a 
feeble  agency  and  imperfect  organization  and  defective  plans,  and  yet  out  of  their 
-very  weakness  will  be  perfected  strength  ;  without  it,  we  may  have  improvement  in 
our  machinery,  but  for  lack  of  the  motive  power  there  will  be  no  result.     Give  this, 
and  everything  will  follow.     The  whole  aspect  of  our  religious  condition  will  be 
altered,  a  new  and  more  vigorous  love  will  characterize  the  action  of  the  Church, 
problems  that  seem  insoluble  will  be  settled,  and  difficulties  that   have  been 
regarded  as  insuperable  will  be  overcome.    III.  How  this  power  is  to  be  obtained. 
It  is  ♦•  power  from  on  high."     God  gives  it — gives  it  to  every  humble  and  trusting 
fioul,  gives  it  in  answer  to  prayer,  gives  it  liberally  to  all  who  earnestly  seek.    The 
first  and  great  condition  of  it  is  absolute  trust  in  Him.    Nothing  else  can  impart 
earnestness  and  sincerity  to  our  supplications.     (J.  O.  Rogers,  B.A.y  ^     Power 
from  on  high : — I  propose  to  illustrate  this  description  of  the  blessed  Spirit — I.  Bt 
the  bztbaobdinaby  effects  produced  upon  the  apostles.     II.  By  the  ordinabt 

SNFLUBNCB   EXERTED   ON   THEM  AND   ON  ALL  TBUE   CHRISTIANS.      I.   Consider,  then,  itt 

these  extraordinary  gifts,  which  were  only  intended  for  the  time,  how  mightily  God 
wrought  in  man.  1.  Take  the  gift  of  tongues.  2.  Mark  the  illumination  of  th« 
mind  with  tiie  full  truth.  3.  Mark  the  power  with  which  they  spake.  All  was  light, 
all  feeling.  4.  Mark  their  miracles  of  healing.  6.  Note  their  discernment  of  spirits, 
as  in  the  oases  of  Ananias  and  Simon  Magus.  6.  Finally,  take  their  courage.  II.  Bt 

THS  ORDINABT  INFLUENCES   EXERTED  ON   THE  APOSTLES  AND   ON  ALL   TRUE   CHRISTIANS. 

Ltt  OS,  then,  oonsider  how  this  power  manifests  itself.    And  here,  too,  we  shall  sea 


■tmiT.  rxxr. 


ST.  LUKE.  675 


a  mighty  working  of  God  in  man,  not  inferior  in  real  glory,  and  superior  ia  grace, 
tc  ihose  extraordinary  illapsea.  This  is  displayed — 1.  In  the  awakening  of  the 
soul  of  man  from  its  deep  and  deadly  sleep  of  sin.  2.  Our  subject  is  illustrated 
bv  the  office  of  the  Spirit  as  the  Comforter.  3.  "We  have  another  instance  in  the 
office  of  the  Spirit  as  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Sanctifier.  4.  Take  a  final  instance 
from  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  I  apply  this  subject  to  your  edification  by  observing 
— 1.  That  there  is  a  power  promised  to  you  more  glorious  than  all  the  endowments 
-of  apostolic  gifts.  2.  Fix  the  greatness  of  the  blessing  before  you.  3.  Do  you  ask 
how  you  are  to  attain  it  ?  See  your  example  in  the  apostles.  Believe  your  Lord : 
"  I  send  the  promise  of  My  Father  upon  you."  4.  Know  that  "  if  any  man  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His. "  Aspire,  then,  to  this.  5.  Ask  the  effusion 
of  the  Spirit  upon  your  friends,  the  whole  Church,  and  the  world.  {R.  Watson.) 
Power: — The  chief  aim  and  labour  of  Boulton  was  the  practical  introduction  of 
Watt's  steam  engine  as  the  great  working  power  of  England.  With  pride  he  said 
•to  BosweU,  when  visiting  Soho,  "  I  sell  here,  sir,  what  all  the  world  desires  to 
have — power."  (Smiles.)  Power  from  on  high : — Some  men  are  richly  endowed 
with  this  priceless  gift.  When  they  speak  their  hearers  feel  that  a  supernatural 
power  is  grappling  with  them,  and  forcing  them  to  yield  or  to  set  up  a  conscious 
resistance.  People  are  often  at  a  loss  to  account  for  the  infiuence  which  such  men 
possess.  As  men  they  see  nothing  in  them  to  account  for  it ;  but  they  are  compelled 
to  feel  and  confess  that  mysterious  something  with  which  their  entire  being  is 
surcharged.  Mr.  Carpenter,  of  New  Jersey,  a  Presbyterian  layman,  who  lived  many 
years  ago,  presents  a  most  striking  instance  of  this  wonderful  power.  His  education 
was  very  limited,  and  his  mental  endowments  were  of  the  most  ordinary  kind.  Till 
anointed  of  the  Holy  Ghost  he  was  a  mere  cipher  in  the  Church.  As  soon, 
however,  as  he  received  that  anointing,  he  became  a  man  of  marvellous  spiritual 
power.  The  hardest  sinners  melted  under  his  appeals,  and  yielded  to  Christ.  At 
his  death  it  was  stated  that  by  a  very  careful  inquiry  it  had  been  ascertained  that 
more  than  ten  thousand  souls  had  been  converted  through  his  direct  instrumen- 
tality. Finney  is  another  instance.  '*  Soon  after  his  conversion,"  we  are  told, 
*•  he  received  a  wonderful  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  which  was  followed  by  marvellous 
effects.  His  words  uttered  in  private  conversation,  and  forgotten  by  himself,  fell 
like  live  coals  on  the  hearts  of  men,  and  awakened  a  sense  of  guilt,  which  would 
not  let  them  rest  till  the  blood  of  sprinkling  was  applied.  At  his  presence,  before 
he  opened  his  lips,  the  operatives  in  a  mill  began  to  fall  on  their  knees,  and  cry  for 
mercy.  When  traversing  Western  and  Central  New  York,  he  came  to  the  village  of 
Bome  in  a  time  of  spiritual  slumber.  He  had  not  been  in  the  house  of  the  pastor 
an  hour  before  he  had  conversed  with  all  the  family,  and  brought  them  all  to  their 
knees  seeking  pardon  or  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit.  In  a  few  days  every  man. 
woman,  and  child  in  the  village  and  vicinity  was  converted,  and  the  work  ceased 
from  lack  of  material  to  transform ;  and  the  evangelist  passed  on  to  other  fields  to 
behold  new  triumphs  of  the  gospel  through  his  instrumentality."  {John  Qriffith.) 
Nev  power : — When  I  was  preaching  in  Farwell  Hall,  in  Chicago,  I  never  worked 
harder  to  prepare  my  sermons  than  I  did  then.  I  preached  and  preached ;  bat  it 
was  beating  against  the  air.  A  good  woman  used  to  say,  "  Mr.  Moody,  you  don't 
Beem  to  have  power  in  your  preaching."  Oh,  my  desire  was  that  I  might  have  a 
fresh  anointing.  I  requested  this  woman  and  a  few  others  to  come  and  pray  with 
me  every  Friday  at  four  o'clock.  Oh,  how  piteously  I  prayed  that  God  might  fill 
the  empty  vessel.  After  the  fire  in  Chicago,  I  was  in  New  York  city,  and  going 
into  the  bank  on  Wall  Street,  it  seemed  as  ii  I  felt  a  strange  and  mighty  power 
coming  over  me.  I  went  up  to  the  hotel,  and  there  in  my  room  I  wept  before  God. 
and  cried,  "  Oh,  my  God,  stay  Thy  hand  1 "  He  gave  me  such  fulness  that  it 
seemed  more  than  I  could  contain.  May  God  forgive  me  if  I  should  speak  in  a 
boastful  way,  but  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  preached  a  sermon  since,  but  God  has 
given  me  some  soul.  Oh,  I  would  not  be  back  where  I  was  four  years  ago  for  all 
the  wealth  of  this  world.  If  you  would  roll  it  at  my  feet,  I  would  kick  it  away 
like  a  football.  I  seem  a  wonder  to  some  of  you,  but  I  am  a  greater  wonder  to 
myself  than  to  any  one  else.  These  are  the  very  same  sermons  I  preached  in 
Chicago,  word  for  word.  It  is  not  new  sermons,  but  the  power  of  God.  It  is  not  a 
new  gospel,  but  the  old  gospel,  with  the  Holy  Ghost  of  power.  (D.  L.  Moody.) 
Need  of  the  Spirit  of  God— the  fire  from  heaven : — Suppose  we  saw  an  army  sitting 
down  before  a  granite  fort,  and  they  told  us  that  they  intended  to  batter  it  down, 
tra  might  ask  them,  "  How  1 "  They  point  to  a  cannon  ball.  Well,  but  there  is 
•0  power  ia  that ;  it  is  heavy,  hat  not  more  than  half -a-handred  or  perhaps  • 


•76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOS.  [CHi».  xxw, 

hundred- weight ;  if  all  the  men  in  the  army  hurled  it  against  the  fort  they  would 
make  no  impression.  They  say,  "  No,  but  look  at  the  cannon  !  "  "Well,  but  there 
it  no  power  in  that.  A  child  may  ride  upon  it ;  a  bird  may  perch  in  its  mouth.  It 
is  a  machine,  and  nothing  more.  "But  look  at  the  powder."  Well,  there  is  no 
power  in  that ;  a  child  may  epill  it ;  a  sparrow  may  peck  it.  Yet  this  powerless 
powder  and  powerless  ball  are  put  into  the  powerless  cannon :  one  spark  ct  fira 
enters  it,  and  then,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  that  powder  is  a  flash  of  lightning, 
and  that  cannon  ball  is  a  thunderbolt  which  smites  as  if  it  had  been  sent  from 
beaven.  So  is  it  with  our  church  or  school  machinery  of  this  day ;  we  have  the 
instruments  necessary  for  pulling  down  strongholds,  bat  O  for  the  fire  from, 
heaven  1     (W.Arthur.) 

Vers.  50-58.  While  He  blessed  them   He    was  parted  from   them. — The  at' 

cension : — I.  Consideb  the  ascension  as  the  ckowninq  fact  of  Cheist's  life.  It 
was  the  consummation  of  aU  His  glorious  work  for  man,  and  henceforth  man 
through  Him  becomes  a  conqueror  too.  "  He  led  captivity  captive.  He  received 
gifts  for  men."  And  with  the  baptism  of  these  we  are  conquerors,  in  onr  temptations 
over  the  devil,  in  our  gardens  of  agony  over  sorrow,  and  in  the  end  over  death  and 
the  grave,  when  we  shall  ascend  to  be  with  Him  in  glory.  II.  Consitbe  Hia 
ASCENSION  AS  His  ENTEBONEMENT  AS  KiNO  ovEB  ALL.  Unsesn  but  ever  present. 
Buling  from  His  throne  in  heaven  over  all  the  affairs  of  the  world  till  His  enemies 
become  His  footstool.  III.  Consideb  His  ascension  in  belation  to  His  comimo 
AQAiN  (Acts  i.  11).  {R.  Davey.)  Our  Lord's  ascension: — I.  Notice  the  flack 
FBou  WHICH  ocB  LoBD  ASCENDED.  Near  Gethscmanc.  Near  Bethany.  A  familiar 
haunt.  II.  Notice  the  witnesses  of  oub  Lobd's  ascension.  His  faithful 
apostles.  III.  Notice  the  last  act  of  oub  Lobd  befobe  His  ascension. 
Blessing.  IV.  The  ascension  of  Chbist  helps  oub  thoughts,  and  gives 
definiteness  to  oub  conceptions  of  the  futube  life  of  the  bedeemed.  v. 
Chbist's  ascension  is  the  pledge  of  the  heavenly  lite  of  the  bedeemed. 
yi.    When  oub  Lobd  ascended  into  heaven  He  gained  fob  us  a  obeat  and 

UNSPEAKABLE      BLESSING,     THE     GIFT     OF      THE     HoLT      SpIEIT.        (TF.      Bull,     B.A.} 

The  ascension  : — In  this  quiet  and  unostentatious  manner  did  our  Saviour  take  His 
departure  from  this  world.  His  exit  was  as  noiseless — as  Uttle  attended  with  pomp 
— as  His  entrance.  He  has  finished  the  redemption  of  a  world — He  has  vanquished 
the  powers  of  hell— He  has  triumphed  over  death  and  the  grave.  1.  From  His 
ascension,  therefore,  we  may  learn  that  heaven  has  been  opened  for  us.  He 
became  our  brother.  He  stood  as  our  representative.  There  is  not  only  comfort 
for  OS  in  the  assurance  of  admission,  but  in  the  thought,  that  when  admitted  we 
shall  find  One  so  closely  related  to  us  occupying  such  an  exalted  place.  2.  Out 
Saviour's  ascension  in  the  nature  He  wore  while  on  earth  may  teach  us  that, 
though  He  be  so  highly  exalted.  He  has  sympathy  with  us  still ;  though  far 
removed  from  us  as  regards  His  bodily  presence,  the  brotherly  tie  which  united  ua 
has  not  been  severed.  3.  The  presence  in  heaven — the  exaltation  to  the  throne  of 
universal  dominion  of  One  so  closely  related  to  us,  and  having  such  sympathy  with 
lis,  should  give  confidence  to  our  prayers,  leading  us  to  desire  and  expect  great 
blessings  at  His  hands.  4.  Finally.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the  privilege  we  enjoy 
in  the  exaltation  of  One  who  bears  our  nature.  (W.  Landels.)  On  the  ascension 
of  Christ : — First,  let  us  consider  the  time  of  the  occurrence  of  this  event.  This 
interval,  also,  was  sufficient  in  order  to  afford  Him  an  opportunity  of  detailing 
much  that  to  them  would  be  highly  interesting,  in  relation  to  His  kingdom,  to  the 
preaching  of  His  gospel,  and  to  the  establishment  of  His  empire  through  the  world. 
Once  more.  He  continued  a  sufficient  period  of  time  on  earth  in  order  to  afford  the 
strongest  evidence  of  the  love  He  bore  to  His  Church  and  people ;  that  He  would 
not  even  take  possession  of  the  promised  crown,  nor  enter  upon  "  the  joy  set  before 
Him,"  till  He  had  ordered  all  things  relating  to  His  kingdom.  We  notice,  in  the 
second  place,  the  site  ob  spot  at  which  this  occurrence  took  place.  "  He  led  themt 
out  as  far  as  to  Bethany."  I  pass  on,  in  the  third  place,  to  consider  the  uankeb  in 
which  the  ascent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  took  place.  You  will  observe,  first,  that 
it  was  while  He  prayed — "  as  He  blessed  them,"  Observe,  again,  that  it  was  while 
they  were  listening  to  the  interesting  communications  which  our  Lord  had  to  impart. 
It  belongs  to  this  part  of  the  subject  to  observe  their  solemn  adoration  of  Hii& 
after  that  they  saw  Him  no  more.  "  He  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up 
into  heaven :  and  they  worshipped  Him."  I  hasten  to  the  last  point  of  our 
discourse — to  consider  the  gbbat  ends  akd  objects  of  this  most  xhfobtant  tbans* 


CBAP.  xht.]  ST.  LUKE.  <77 

ACTION.  Christ  has.  left  onr  world — He  is  gone — He  has  gone  to  the  mansions  of 
heavenly  glory ;  and  for  what  purposes  has  He  taken  His  departure.  First,  in 
order  that  He  might  celebrate  a  signal  tritmiph  over  all  His  enemies.  He  has 
gone,  secondly,  to  take  possession  of  the  well-earned  reward,  the  stipulated  recom- 
pense,  to  which  His  obedience  and  His  suffering  have  so  well  entitled  Him.  Thirdly, 
He  has  gone  to  receive  and  to  communicate  that  fulness  which  the  Father  had 
entrusted  into  His  hands;  and  especially  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  he 
bestows  upon  "the  rebellions  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them." 
Fourthly,  He  has  gone  to  ensure  and  prepare  a  place  for  all  His  believing  fol- 
lowers. I  only  add  that  He  has  gone  thus  to  heaven  in  order  to  give  an  example 
and  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which  He  will  come  again  in  the  clouds  of 
Heaven.  And  is  He  gone  ?  and  have  the  heavens  received  Him  ?  Then,  first, 
let  ns  send  our  hearts  after  Him.  Secondly,  in  the  absence  of  our  Lord,  let  us 
abide  closely  in  the  fellowship  of  His  Church.  Like  the  disciples,  let  ns  resort 
to  the  temple ;  like  the  disciples,  let  us  keep  together.  Let  us  not  be  scattered 
and  disunited.  Thirdly,  this  subject  should  lead  us  to  cherish  a  cheerful  con- 
fidence with  respect  to  our  entrance  into  eternity.  And  let  this  soothe  our  spirits 
when  we  are  mourning  over  onr  dead.  {0.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  Lord's  fare- 
well:— I.  The  last  acts  of  thb  Bsdbkhsb  on  eabth.  1.  He  selects  a  suitable 
place  fiom  which  to  take  His  departure.    2.  He  solemnly  blesses  His  disciples. 

3.  He  ascends  up  to  heaven.  4.  "It  came  to  pass,  while  He  blessed  them.  He 
was  taken  up."  Did  His  ascension,  then,  interrupt  and  cut  short  the  blessing? 
No ;  He  still  continued  to  bless  as  He  went  up.  No — nor  is  the  blessing  yet  at  an 
end :  for  this  is  that  Christ  who,  as  St.  Paul  says,  "  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  ns."  U.  The  fibst  acts  of  the  bedebued 
AFTBB  His  depabtube.  1.  They  worshipped  Him.  Bemember  that  I  The  appointed 
teachers  of  the  Christian  religion  "  worshipped "  Christ ;  it  was  their  very  first 
act  after  they  had  ceased  to  behold  Him.  2.  They  were  filled  with  joy — great 
joy.  Now  therefore  they  rejoiced — 1.  On  their  Lord's  account.  "If  ye  love 
Me,"  He  had  said,  "  ye  would  rejoice,  because  I  said,  I  go  to  the  Father."  And 
this  their  joy  is  now  fulfilled.  2.  On  their  own  account.  All  was  now  plain 
in  the  system  of  that  redemption,  concerning  which  they  had  long  formed  such 
erroneous  expectations.  3.  In  the  use  of  appointed  means  they  sought  and 
expected  His  gifts  of  grace.  In  Jerusalem  were  they  to  receive  the  "  promise  of 
the  Father";  therefore  they  at  once  returned  thither.  On  their  arrival,  behold 
them  "  continually  in  the  temple,  praising  and  blessing  God!  "  continually — that 
is,  at  every  appointed  service.  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.)  Our  Lord's  attitude  in  ascend- 
ing : — I.  His  hands  webe  ttplifted  to  bless.  1.  This  blessing  was  no  nnusual 
thing.  To  stretch  out  His  hands  in  benediction  was  His  customary  attitude.  In 
.that  attitude  He  departed,  with  a  benediction  still  proceeding  from  His  lips.  2. 
This  blessing  was  with  authority.  He  blessed  them  while  His  Father  acknowledged 
Pi'tt)  by  receiving  Him  to  heaven.  3.  This  blessing  was  so  full  that,  as  it  were,  He 
emptied  His  hands.    They  saw  those  dear  bands  thus  unladen  of  their  benedictions. 

4.  The  blessing  was  for  those  beneath  Him,  and  beyond  the  sound  of  His  voice ; 
He  scattered  benedictions  upon  them  all.  5.  The  blessing  was  the  fit  Jlnis  of  His 
sojourn  here ;  nothing  fitter,  nothing  better,  could  have  been  thought  of.  IL  Those 
HANDS  WEBE  piEBCED.  This  could  be  seen  by  them  aU  as  they  gazed  upward.  1. 
Thus  they  knew  that  they  were  Christ's  hands.  2.  Thus  they  saw  the  price  of  the 
blessing.  His  crucifixion  has  purchased  continual  blessing  for  all  His  redeemed. 
8.  Thus  they  saw  the  way  of  the  blessing;  it  comes  from  those  human  hands, 
through  those  sacrificial  wounds.  4.  A  sight  of  those  hands  is  in  itself  a  blessing. 
By  that  sight  we  see  pardon  and  eternal  life.  5.  The  entire  action  is  an  epitome 
of  tile  gospel.  This  is  the  substance  of  the  matter — "  hands  pierced  distribute 
benedictions."  Jesus,  through  suffering  and  death,  has  power  to  bless  us  out  of 
the  highest  heaven.  This  is  the  last  that  was  seen  of  our  Lord.  He  has  not 
changed  His  attitude  of  benediction.  He  will  not  change  it  till  He  shall  descend 
in  His  glory.  IIL  Those  hands  swat  the  sceptre.  His  hands  are  omnipotent. 
Those  very  hands,  which  blessed  His  disciples,  now  hold,  on  their  behalf,  the  sceptre 
— 1.  Of  providence:  both  in  small  affairs  and  greater  matters.  2.  Of  the  spiritual 
kingdom :  the  Church  and  all  its  work.  8.  Of  the  future  judgment  and  the  eternal 
teign.  IC.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Saviour's  hand  : — That  wonderful  hand  of  Christ  I 
It  was  tiie  same  hand  which  had  been  so  quickly  stretched  out  to  rescue  Peter  when 
sinking  in  Galilee's  waves.  It  was  that  same  hand  which  had  been  held  in  the 
•ight  of  the  questioning  disciples  on  the  third  evening  after  they  had  seen  it  laid 


878  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  zztr. 

lifeless  in  the  tomb.  It  was  that  same  hand  which  incredulons  Thomas  mast  see 
before  he  would  believe  its  risen  power ;  it  was  that  same  hand  which  was  extended 
to  him  not  only  to  see,  bat  to  touch  the  nail-prints  in  its  palm.  It  was  that  same 
hand  which  the  disciples  last  saw  uplifted  in  a  parting  blessing  when  the  oload 
parted  Him  from  them.  It  was  only  after  ten  days  that  they  realized  the  fulness 
of  blessing  which  came  from  that  extended,  pierced  hand  of  Christ.  Peter  at  Pente- 
cost must  have  preached  with  that  last  eight  of  it  fresh  in  his  memory,  when  h« 
said,  "  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and 
Christ."  That  hand,  with  its  nail-prints,  knocks  at  the  heart's  door  for  entrance. 
That  hand,  with  its  deep  marks  of  love,  beokons  on  the  weary  runner  in  the 
heavenly  way.  {F.  B.  Fullan.)  Lessons  from  the  ascension: — The  ascension 
was  the  appropriate  bloom  and  culmination  of  the  resurrection.  I.  Since  ona 
Lord  has  ascended,  we  abe  meveb  to  thine  of  Him  as  dead.  He  has  rounded  the 
black  and  inscrutable  Cape  of  Storms,  and  changed  it  for  us  henceforth  into  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  It  follows  that  all  the  great  offices  pertaining  to  His  exalta- 
tion are  in  active  exercise.  1.  He  stands  in  heaven  to-day  the  Living  Head  of  H'3 
redeemed  Church.  2.  He  stands  in  heaven  to-day  our  Priestly  Advocate.  3.  He 
stands  in  heaven  to-day  as  the  Controller  of  all  things  in  God's  providential 
government.  H.  Since  our  Lord  has  ascended,  we  are  never  to  think  op  Him 
AS  DISTANT.  Coutact  of  Spirit  with  spirit — nothing  can  be  nearer,  more  intimate. 
Christ's  inner  presence  by  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  special  boon  and  issue  of  Hia 
ascension.  III.  Since  cub  Lord  has  ascended,  wb  are  neveb  to  think  of  Hni 
AS  DIFFERENT.  He  has  not  laid  aside  His  brotherhood  with  as.  To  our  Srother'a 
heart  prayer  must  find  its  way;  from  Him  to  us  a  perfect  sympathy  must  ever  flow. 
(W.  Hoyt,  D.D.)        On  the  ascension  of  Christ: — I.  In  the  first  place,  Bt  oub 

SaVIOUB'S  ascension  into  heaven  IT  WAS  MADE  TO  APPEAR  THAT  THE  GREAT  DESION  VOB 

WHICH  He  descended  to  the  EARTH  WAS  COMPLETELY  FULFILLED.  A  Solemn  attesta- 
tion was  thus  given  by  God  to  the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  that  great  sacrifice  which 
He  offered  by  His  death  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  The  ascension  of  Christ  was  the 
signal  of  His  triumph  over  all  the  powers  of  darkness.  II.  It  is,  in  the  next  place, 
to  be  viewed  by  us  with  respect  to  Christ  Himself,  ab  a  merited  restoration  to 
His  obioinaii  felicity.  As  the  Son  of  God,  all  glory  belonged  to  Him  for  ever. 
III.  In  the  third  place,  Christ  ascended  into  heaven  that  He  might  act  thebe,  in 
the  pbesence  of  God,  as  oub  Hioh  Priest  and  Intercessor.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.) 
The  ascension  of  Christ : — 1.  This  event  had  been  foretold  and  typified  in  the  Old 
Testament.  See  especially  Psalms  Ixviii.  and  ex.  Moses,  ascending  the  moant  to 
receive  the  law,  may  be  a  type  of  Christ  ascending  to  receive  spiritual  blessings  for 
men.  Elijah,  taken  ap  into  heaven,  and  imparting  a  double  portion  of  his  spirit 
to  his  successor,  was  probably  typical  of  Christ  ascending  and  imparting  the 
Pentecostal  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  the  Jewish  high  priest,  in  passing  from 
the  holy  place,  which  represented  earth,  to  the  most  holy,  whicn  figured  heaven, 
also  foreshadowed  the  ascension  of  our  Lord.  2.  These  predictions  and  types  were 
now  to  be  fulfilled.  3.  To  the  top  of  this  mountain  our  Saviour  led  His  disciples, 
purposing  to  ascend  visibly  from  thence.  He  might  have  taken  His  departure 
unseen  by  them,  but  He  ascended  openly,  to  confirm  their  faith  in  Him  as  the 
promised  Messiah,  to  assure  them  of  the  certainty  of  the  life  in  the  world  to  oome, 
and  of  their  own  exaltation  to  the  place  whither  He  had  gone  before.  4.  The 
manner  in  which  Christ  was  taken  up  from  the  midst  of  His  disciples,  as  described 
in  our  text,  was  most  interesting,  and  is  worthy  of  our  attention.  In  the  very  act 
of  blessing  them  He  was  taken  away.  Oh,  what  a  delightful  consistency  and  love- 
liness of  character  we  have  in  Jesus  from  the  beginning  of  His  mission  to  its  close  I 
The  first  assurance  of  His  birth  was  accompanied  by  the  cry  of  peace  on  earth  and 
good-will  to  men ;  and  here.  He  goes  from  the  world  with  hands  outstretched  in 
benedictions  upon  those  He  left  below.  Surely  if  any  man  love  not  such  a  Saviour 
he  deserves  to  be  "  Anathema,  Maranatha."  5.  But  what  feelings  must  have  pos- 
sessed the  hearts  of  the  disciples  when  they  witnessed  these  things.  6.  And  where 
was  He  from  whom  they  had  been  separated  t  His  place  on  the  eternal  throne  of 
glory  had  been  resumed,  and  He  sat  there  now  not  as  God  merely,  but  God-man, 
the  great  mediatorial  king.  7.  Such  were  the  leading  circumstances  attending  the 
ascension  of  our  Lord.  (W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  The  ascension  of  Jesris  : — I.  Thh 
witnesses  of  the  ascension.  Only  friends.  Only  the  small  band  of  the  eleven 
apostles.  II.  The  place.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerustdem,  which  had  been 
the  scene  of  many  of  oor  Lord's  great  miracles,  where  Hia  most  violent  enemies 
■eaided,  and  where  He  had  suffered  d^ath  in  the  moat  publio  nuumer.    Also  meat 


CHii    zziT.]  ST.  LUKE.  Vn 

Bethany,  a  spot  safficiently  retired  to  permit  the  assemblage  of  the  eleven  without 
exciting  the  vigilance  of  enemies.  III.  The  manneb  of  Christ's  ascension.  The 
ascension  seems  to  have  been  slovr  and  gentle.  The  apostles  could  therefore  view 
it  distinctly  and  deUberately,  so  that  they  might  be  assured  of  its  reality,  and  be 
able  to  describe  it  to  others.  No  chariot  nor  horses  of  fire  were  seen  Uke  those 
which  wafted  the  prophet  Elijah  to  heaven ;  no  violent  whirlwind  agitated  the  air, 
no  blaze  of  glory  dazzled  the  eyes,  or  overpowered  the  feelings  of  the  anxious  spec- 
tators. Every  part  of  the  scene  accorded  with  the  character  of  the  mild  and  bene- 
volent  Jesus.  Though  a  parting  scene,  there  was  nothing  in  it  to  terrify  or  depress 
the  minds  of  the  apostles.  They  were  indeed  surprised  and  filled  with  astonish- 
ment, but  it  was  an  astonishment  which  expanded,  elevated,  and  delighted  them ;  for 
we  are  told  they  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy.     lY.  Let  us  next  inquire 

WHAT  BEA80N3  OAK   BS   ASHGNED  rOB  THE  ASOENSIOK  OF  JeSUS.       1.   Elrst,  then,  it   waS 

necessary  to  complete  the  proof  of  His  exalted  rank  and  Divine  mission.  2.  The 
ascension  was  necessary  in  order  that  the  Lord  Jesus  should  complete  His  media- 
torial functions.  3.  It  was  necessary  that  Jesus  should  ascend  to  heaven,  to 
receive  the  approbation  and  honour  from  His  heavenly  Father,  which  were  to  be 
given  to  Him  as  the  Mediator  and  Redeemer  of  man.  Y.  The  benefits  which  ws 
MAT  DERIVE  FBou  THE  ASCENSION  OF  Jbsus.  1.  It  tcuds  to  Complete  our  faith  in 
EUm.  His  miracles  proved  His  Divine  power;  and  His  prophecies,  His  Divine 
knowledge.  His  death  proved  His  own  declaration,  "  that  He  had  power  to  lay 
down  His  life";  His  resurrection,  "that  He  had  power  to  take  it  again."  In 
addition,  His  ascension  showed  that  all  the  purposes  of  His  coming  to  this  world 
were  finished,  that  He  was  going  to  return  to  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  was ;  nay,  that  the  glory  of  His  human  nature  was  to  be  in- 
creased in  a  high  degree.  Hereby,  then,  is  our  faith  in  Him  enlarged,  strengthened, 
and  completed,  for  we  have  fuU  assurance  of  the  dignity  and  perfection  of  Jesus, 
and  that  the  great  and  benevolent  purposes  for  which  He  visited  this  world 
were  fully  accomplished.  2.  We  are  assured,  also,  as  connected  with  the  ascension 
of  Jesus,  of  another  event  resembling  it  in  maimer,  namely,  the  second  coming  of 
the  Lord  Jesas.  3.  By  the  ascension  of  Jesus  His  promises  to  the  righteous  are 
fully  ratified.  {J.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  Lord's  ascemion: — I.  The  circum- 
stances OF  O0B  Lord's  ascension.  1.  The  time.  Not  until  after  He  had  appeared 
to  Eis  disciples  frequently,  and  conversed  with  them  freely.  He  tarried  with  them 
forty  days,  to  convince  them  of  His  resurrection,  to  instruct  them  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  and  to  encourage  them  to  stedfastness  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel  2. 
The  place  of  His  ascension.  Mount  Olivet.  This  was  a  place  to  which  He  fre- 
quently resorted  for  secret  prayer.  So,  also,  the  bed  of  sickness,  though  the 
believer  may  endure  much  agony  there,  is  generally  the  spot  whence  his  soul, 
released  from  trouble,  ascends  to  the  joys  of  heaven.  3.  The  ascension  of  Christ 
took  place  in  the  presence  of  numerous  witnesses.  There  was  no  necessity  for  any 
persons  being  present  when  our  Lord  rose  from  the  dead,  because  Hia  appearing 
after  His  resurrection  to  those  who  knew  Him  before  His  crucifixion  was  a  sufficient 
proof  of  His  resurrection.  4.  Another  circumstance  of  which  we  are  informed  is, 
that  this  event  took  place  while  our  Lord  was  employed  in  blessing  the  disciples. 
By  this  action  He  showed  the  strength  and  the  duration  of  His  aSection  for  Hla 
disciples.  5.  We  are  told,  in  Acts  I.  9,  that  "  a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their 
sight."  Clouds  are  frequently  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  a  medium  through  which 
the  Lord  in  some  degree  manifested  Himself  to  men.  6.  The  last  circumstance  we 
have  to  notice  is,  that  our  Lord's  ascension  was  attended  by  angels.  H.  Its  ends, 
or  the  chief  purposes  for  which  He  ascended.  1.  Christ  ascended  in  order  to  send 
down  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  Jesus  Christ  ascended  into  heaven  in  order 
to  make  intercession  for  His  people.  3.  Jesus  Christ  ascended  in  order  that  He 
might  receive  infinite  power,  happiness,  and  glory,  as  the  reward  of  His  humiliation. 
He  is  set  down  on  His  throne  of  glory  to  exercise  dominion  over  the  universe,  but 
especially  over  His  Church.  4.  Our  Lord  ascended  into  heaven  that  He  might 
prepare  a  place  for  His  followers,  and  bring  them  home  to  Himself.  III.  Having 
considered  the  chief  circumstances  and  ends  of  our  Lord's  ascension,  we  now  come 
to  consider,  in  the  last  place,  tbb  fbacticai.  effects  which  the  consideration  op 
^HE  btbnt  SHont.D  PRODTJCK  ON  cs.  1.  It  should  lead  us  to  pay  the  Redeemer  that 
Divine  homage  which  is  so  justly  due  to  His  name.  2.  It  becomes  us  to  rejoice  on 
aooonnt  of  our  Lord's  ascension.  3.  Our  Lord's  ascension  should  lead  us  unhesi< 
tatingly  to  trust  in  Him  for  salvation.  4.  Christ's  ascension  should  encourage  us 
to  engage  with  liveliness  in  religious  exercises.    6.  The  consideration  of  ooi  Lord's 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxIT. 

ascension  ehonld  raise  our  thoughts  and  affections  to  heaven.  6.  Our  Lord'i 
ascension  should  carry  forward  our  thoughts  to  His  second  coming.     (Jos.  Foote, 

M.A.)        From  home  to  heaven  : — It  seems  natural  to  wish  to  pass  away  from  this 

world  from  the  place  which  we  call  our  home.  How  many  persons — when  they  are 
in  search  of  health  in  the  mountains  of  Switzerland  or  by  the  lake  side,  in  the 
■watering  places,  or  bright  sunny  spots,  where  they  seek  to  fan  the  dying  embers 
of  life — ^when  they  find  that  their  end  is  approaching,  desire  to  go  home  to  die. 
Those  who  go  out  to  India  in  the  Civil  Service  have  this  hope  before  them, 

'  that  they  shall  spend  their  last  days  in  England  and  die  at  home.     So  it  was 
natural  that  our  Saviour  should  choose  to  pass  away  from  the  familiar  slope  of 
Olivet,  within  sight  of  Bethany,  the  nearest  place  to  a  home  that  the  Son  of  Man 
knew  during  His  public  ministry,  that  from  this  oft-frequented  haunt  He  should 
ascend  to  His  Father  and  our  Father,  to  His  God  and  our  God.     [W.  Bull,  B.A.) 
The  parting  blessing  : — He  departed  from  them  in  the  act  of  blessing  ;  He  was  still 
blessing  when  the  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight.     And  what  was  this  bat 
the  natural  climax  of  all  our  Lord's  precedent  life  ?     That  life  had  been  one  of 
continual  blessing.     And  before  we  turn  from  this  subject  of  "  connection,"  does  it 
not  seem  as  though  heaven  and  earth  are  here  represented  as  coimected  with  blessing? 
The  lark,  soaring  up  on  high,  seems  nevertheless  to  connect  the  skies  and  earth 
by  her  train  of  song ;  thus  binds  Christ  the  heaven  and  the  earth  now.  There  is 
no  sight ;  but  from  the  height  above  drops  blessing — blessing  for  all  who  will  take 
it ;  no  less  blessing  on  His  part  because  it  may  be  refused  by  us ;  blessing  which 
shall  fall  upon  all  believers  now ;  and  which  shall  soak  into  the  thirsty  bosom  of 
the  millenial  earth  when  He  is  owned  as  King  of  all  its  kings  and  Lord  of  all  its 
lords.     And  with  this  thought  of  connection  comes  that  of  activity  also.     We  have 
not  presented  before  us  any  careful  thoughts  of  Christ  about  His  own  glory  ;  the 
activity  of  His  mind — yea,  even  of  His  body — was  all  being  pat  forth  on  behalf  of 
others.    We  can  easily  imagine  how  comforting  thoughts  flowed  in  npon  the  dis> 
ciples  when  they  remembered  this.    He  ascended  into  the  heavens  while  blessing 
them ;  and,  if  so,  what  bat  blessing  could  they  look  for  from  that  other  world? 
Those  who  knew  Him  not  might  look  up  with  fear  and  trembUng,  and  see  ths 
Judge  upon  His  throne.     The  heavens  contained  nothing  but  woe  for  them ;  but 
Jesus,  by  entering  heaven  in  the  very  act  of  blessing,  taught  His  people  how  tc 
look  up,  what  there  to  see,  and  what  thence  to  expect.    There  is  yet  one  more 
thought  which  presses  npon  oar  minds  in  connection  with  this  parting  aspect  of 
Christ.  What  He  dropped  on  them  they  in  turn  were  to  drop  upon  the  world.   The 
last  impression  of  their  Lord  was  to  exercise  its  peculiar  power  upon  their  after 
lives ;  and  we  may  be  well  assured  that  so  it  did.    Activity  in  blessing  marked 
Jesus'  career  to  the  very  last ;  He  was  unwearied  in  well-doing.    He  has  carried 
His  energy  with  Him  into  heaven.     Remembering,  then,  that  all  good  things  are 
given  to  as  for  others  as  well  as  for  ourselves,  let  ns  use  for  others  this  word 
"  while,"  in  whatever  teaching  it  conveys  to  our  souls.     Good  things  most  tmly 
perform  their  mission  to  us  when  they  pass  on  through  as  to  perform  a  ministry 
to  others  also.    We  never  know  the  power  of  a  good  thing — how  really  good  it  is — 
antil  we  begin  to  use  it,  to  pat  it  in  the  way  of  evolving  its  fragrance.     (P.  B, 
Power,  M.A.)        Christ  departs  while  blessing  : — Oh,  what  a  fitting  close  to  such  a 
life  as  that  of  the  Bedeemer  1    He  had  come  to  bless  the  world,  and  He  spent  Hia 
every  moment  on  earth  in  commanioating  blessings ;  and  now,  as  though  He  were 
going  within  the  veil  to  carry  on  the  same  gracious  purpose.  He  quits  the  earth 
with  extended  hands,  and  the  last  words  that  He  utters  in  mortal  hearing  are 
words  of  Divine  benediction.    What  could  be  more  worthy  of  His  character  ?  what 
more  likely  to  assure  and  comfort  His  followers  ?    It  was  not,  you  observe,  when 
He  had  finished  His  benediction,  but  while  He  was  pronouncing  it,  that  Christ 
commenced  His  ascent ;  so  that  His  departure  may  be  said  to  have  interrupted  the 
blessing.    And  we  are  disposed  to  think  that  there  was  something  in  this  wliich 
was  designed  to  be  pre-eminently  significant.   At  all  events,  we  are  certain  that  the 
fact  may  be  interpreted  into  lessons  of  general  application  and  of  no  common 
merit.    It  was  no  proof,  yon  see,  that  Christ  did  not  love  His  disciples,  and  that  He 
was  not  consulting  their  good,  that  He  withdrew  Himself  from  them._    On  the 
contrary,  He  was  blessing  them  in  leaving  them.     If  there  had  been  nothing  in  the 
departure  itself  from  which  to  argue  a  blessing,  there  might  have  been  place  fox 
suspicion ;  but  the  mode  of  departure  irresistibly  proves  that  Christ  went  away 
not  in  anger,  bat  in  tenderness.     And  though  when  anything  analogous  to  Hu 
departure  occors  it  may  not  be  possible  to  assure  oarselves  that  the  departing  One 


flKAP.  xxiv.J  ST.  LUKh.  «81 

has  left  us  in  the  act  of  blessing  ns,  it  cannot  be  unreasonable  to  regard  the  history 
before  us  as  in  some  measure  a  parable,  and  argue  from  it  something  general. 
"When,  for  example,  the  spiritually-minded  have  enjoyed  seasons  of  communion 
■with  the  Saviour — seasons  most  blessed,  which  assuredly  there  are,  though  the 
cold  and  the  worldly  may  think  it  merely  enthusiasm  to  speak  of  the  manifestations 
to  the  soul  of  the  invisible  Mediator — and  when  these  seasons  have  been  followed 
by  others  of  less  intimate  fellowship,  how  apt  are  Christians  to  be  troubled  and 
cast  down,  as  though  it  must  have  been  in  wrath  that  the  Redeemer  withdrew  the 
tokens  of  His  presence  I  But  they  should  rather  go  in  thought  to  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  and  behold  how  Christ  parts  from  His  disciples.  Oh,  it  is  not  necessarily 
in  displeasure  that  the  Saviour  withdraws  Himself.  If  you  oould  see  Him  depart, 
it  may  be  that  you  would  behold  those  extended  arms,  and  hear  the  lingering 
benediction,  and  thus  learn  that  He  went  away  only  because  it  was  expedient  for 
you — because  He  could  bless  yoa  better  and  more  eSeotually  by  temporal  removal 
than  through  unbroken  continuance  amongst  you.  (fl.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The 
ascension  and  exaltation  of  Christ : — I.  Thb  pkepabation  fob  the  ascbnsiont.  The 
small  procession  of  Christ  and  the  eleven  apostles  gradually  increases  till  it  con- 
sists  of  five  hundred  persons.  They  reach  and  climb  the  Mount  of  Olives.  Then 
the  arms  which  not  long  before  had  been  stretched  out  upon  the  accursed  tree  are 
uplifted  in  prayer.  A  last  smile  He  leaves  for  a  legacy  behind  Him  ere  He  quits 
the  world — a  smile  involving  whole  oceans  of  meaning ;  and  who  can  venture  to 
fill  up  the  outline,  or  clothe  in  words  that  blessing  which  He  gives  to  His  little  flock 
whom  He  is  leaving  alone  in  the  world  ?  All  He  has  to  leave  them  is  a  blessing, 
and  yet  a  blessing  whieh  is  felt  to  be  a  shield  of  defence  and  a  security  in  trial  to 
them  all.  And,  lo  1  while  He  is  thus  employed  in  blessing,  the  cloud  that  has  been 
approaching  on  the  breath  of  the  gentle  breeze  rests  on  Christ's  head  and  conceals 
His  face,  and  obliterates  His  smile,  and  gathers  around  His  uplifted  arms,  and 
snrrounds  His  whole  form  and  hides  it  from  view.  II.  Let  us  follow  Ghbist 
DPWABDB  WITH  THB  wiNO  OF  FAITH.  As  through  a  Veil,  though  the  disciples  may 
not  see  Him,  He  sees  them,  and  counts  their  tears.  He  sees,  too,  Jerusalem 
itself,  and  perhaps  weeps  over  it  again.  But  night  has  come  over  the  landscape. 
The  land  below  fades  away  from  His  view.  Olivet,  the  Moabite  mountains,  the 
loftiest  x>eak  of  all  the  Sinaitio  range,  have  disappeared,  and  the  cloud  chariot 
plunges  amidst  the  stars.  Orion  on  the  south,  and  the  Great  Bear  on  the  north, 
are  left  behind.  The  moon  becomes  Chiist's  footstool,  and  is  then  spumed  away 
as  He  mounts  higher  still.  Through  the  milky  way,  as  through  the  multitudinous 
laughter  of  an  ocean's  billows,  He  pursues  His  course.  The  last  star  which,  like  a 
giant  sentinel,  keeps  its  solitary  watch,  and  treads  its  enormous  round  on  the  verge 
of  the  universe,  ceases  to  be  seen,  and  the  hoUow  and  blank  space  which  lies  beyond 
is  found  to  be  peopled  with  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  who  have  come  oat 
to  meet  and  to  welcome  their  Eing  and  their  Lord.  And  then  the  gates  of  the 
heavenly  city  appear,  flaming  with  diamond  and  gold  as  with  the  lustre  of  ten 
thousand  suns.  From  the  angelic  cavalcade  the  cry  arises,  "  Open,  ye  everlasting 
gates,  that  the  King  of  glory  may  enter  in  "  ;  and  it  is  met  by  the  challenge  from 
the  walls,  ••  Who  is  this  King  of  glory  ?"  and  the  reply  comes, "  The  Lord  of  hosts, 
that  is  also  the  Man  of  Nazareth,  the  mighty  in  battle.  He  is  the  King  of  glory." 
And,  lo !  the  gates  fly  open,  and  the  everlasting  doors  are  anbarred,  and  thus  the 
King  of  glory  enters  in,  and  the  Man  of  Nazareth,  amidst  the  acclamation  of  ten 
thousand  timet  ten  thousand  and  thousands  of  thousands,  takes  His  seat  upon  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.    IIL  Consideb  the  sfibiiual  sense  in  which 

ChBIST     lUT    BE    SAID    TO    HAVE    ASCENDED    TO     BE     EXALTED.      1.    Christ    iS    in    the 

ascendant  as  the  highest  example  of  moral  excellence.  (1)  No  character,  con- 
fessedly, can  be  named  beside  His  in  richness  and  depth,  in  pureness  and 
simplicity,  in  dignity  and  truthfulness  and  affection.  (2)  No  death,  in  grand 
QnconsciousnesB,  in  profound  submission,  in  ateolute  rennnciation  of  self,  in  the 
spirit  of  forgiveness  which  pervades  it,  in  its  meekness,  gentleness,  and  patience, 
can  be  named  with  that  of  Calvary.  Truly  said  Bousseau,  "  If  the  life  and  death 
of  Socrates  were  those  of  a  sage,  the  Hfe  and  death  of  Jesus  were  those  of  a  Ood." 
S.  Jesus  is  the  best  specimen  of  the  risen  man.  No  other  risen  man  has  got  beyond 
the  lowest  step  in  the  stage  leading  up  to  the  footstool  of  the  throne  on  which  the 
Man  of  Galilee  is  thus  exalted.  8.  Christ  is  one  the  history  of  whose  faith  is  the 
most  wonderfol  of  all  histories.  4.  The  moral  and  spiritual  principles  which  were 
the  teaching  and  the  glory  of  Christ  are  those  on  which  the  happiness  of  the  world 
present  and  the  prospects  of  the  world  future  are  felt  to  be  dependent.    In  eooo 


682  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  rar^ 

elusion :  1.  What  a  cheering  doctrine  is  that  of  Christ's  exaltation.  God  haa 
recognized  His  principles  as  the  laws  of  universal  government.  2.  Let  us  seek  to 
ascend.  "  Excelsior."  (G.  GilfiUan.)  Great  joy. — A  ttrange  joy,  yet  explic- 
able : — They  had  parted  from  their  beloved  Master  ;  they  had  to  face  a  trying  life 
now,  without  having  Him  near  to  counsel  or  to  help ;  they  would  never  see  Him 
Again,  till  they  died.  And  yet  they  were  glad.  From  the  place  of  that  last  earthly 
parting  they  went  away,  not  stricken  to  the  earth,  not  stunned  and  stupefied,  as  we 
are  after  the  like  heart-breaking  wrench,  bat  in  high  spirits,  cheerful  and  elate. 
*'  They  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy  1 "  WeU,  it  is  very  strange.  Perhaps 
the  disciples,  coming  back  to  Jerusalem,  could  not  easily  have  sorted  out  and 
explained  to  other  people  the  reasons  of  their  great  joy.  First,  there  was  some- 
thing very  cheering  about  all  the  surroundings  of  Christ's  departure.  It  was  to  be, 
the  disciples  knew ;  and  the  whole  event  was  so  different  from  what  such  a  parting 
might  have  beeiL  For  one  thing,  it  was  so  triumphant,  so  glorious,  so  miraculous, 
that  it  was  proof  irresistible  that  the  work  which  brought  the  Bedeemer  to  this 
world  was  finished  successfully.  And  it  was  blessing  His  servants  that  the 
^Redeemer  left  them.  Sometimes,  while  here.  He  had  spoken  severely,  and  that 
not  to  His  enemies  only,  but  to  His  friends — to  the  great  apostle  Peter,  "  Get  thee 
behind  Me,  Satan  "  ;  but  all  that  was  gone,  and  there  was  only  kindness  in  the 
departing  heart  and  voice.  Now,  as  a  second  reason  for  this  strange  joy,  let  us 
remember  that  there  was  one  great  definite  gain  which  was  to  come  of  Christ's 
going ;  and  upon  the  enjoyment  of  that  gain  His  Church  was  soon  to  enter 
now.  The  blessed  Spirit,  the  Holy  Ghost,  could  not  come  till  the  Saviour 
went ;  and  He  Himself  had  declared  strongly  that  it  would  be  gain  for  His 
disciples  to  lose  Him  if  thus  they  received  the  blessed  Spirit  in  His  stead. 
They  hardly  understood,  perhaps,  the  disciples,  on  the  day  Christ  went — they  did 
not  understand,  as  we  do  now,  all  that  the  Holy  Ghost  would  be,  of  light,  strength, 
wisdom,  joy,  peace,  strong  consolation.  It  needed  experience  of  His  sympathy. 
His  faithfulness.  His  patience.  His  almighty  power,  to  make  Christian  people  know 
what  He  is.  But  the  disciples  knew  enough  to  make  them  anticipate  His  coming 
with  joyful  expectation ;  and  for  this  reason,  doubtless,  among  others,  even  from 
the  spot  where  they  had  seen  their  Saviour  for  the  last  time  in  this  life,  they 
"  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy."  We  can  think  of  a  third  reason  for  this 
joy  on  that  parting  day.  It  was  a  parting  quite  by  itself.  He  went  away,  in  visible 
form.  It  was  better  for  His  Church  that  He  should ;  but,  after  all.  He  never  left 
it.  He  went  away,  as  concerns  the  material  presence,  which  must  be  here  or  there. 
He  abode  yet  in  that  Divine,  real  though  unseen  presence,  which  can  be  everywhere. 
Even  as  He  departed  from  sight  and  sense.  He  uttered  the  sure  and  hopeful  promise, 
"  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world."  He  could  be  with  the 
disciples  He  left,  He  can  be  with  us  day  by  day,  as  God  is  with  us ;  present  that 
is,  to  faith,  not  to  sense,  but  as  really,  substantially,  influentially  present,  as  any 
thing  or  person  we  can  touch  or  see.  Beyond  these  spiritual  consolations  which 
might  cheer  under  the  departure  of  their  Saviour,  the  disciples  had  yet  another 
hope,  which  some  might  esteem  as  having  something  more  substantial  in  it.  Master 
and  servants  were  to  meet  again.  This  same  Jesus,  now  gone,  is  to  come  again  in 
glory ;  and  since  that  day,  the  Church  is  "  waiting  for  the  coming  of  onr  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  That  wUl  be  the  consummation  of  all  things.  Then,  all  will  be 
well  at  last.  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D,)  Joy  in  working  for  Christ: — In  a  recent 
great  European  war,  the  soldiers  of  both  countries,  whan  they  were  ordered  to  the 
seat  of  war,  received  the  order  enthusiastically,  and  marched  to  the  front  with 
waving  of  banners  and  singing.  The  joy  of  the  disciples  when  called  to  win  the 
world  for  Christ,  seem  to  have  been  similar  (vers.  52,  63).  If  a  father  entmsts  his 
eon  with  a  difficult  piece  of  work,  the  boy  does  it  joyfully  and  proudly.  Shoold  we 
have  less  joy  in  performing  a  great  work  entrusted  to  us  by  Christ  ?  The  counter- 
balance : — This  statement  is  of  more  interest  and  importance  to  as  than  appears 
at  first  sight.  It  embodies  a  great  principle ;  and  that,  one  which  enters  continually 
into  the  Christian's  life.  The  inward  counterbalancing  the  outward — this  is  the 
great  idea  brought  before  ns ;  and  it  will  unfold  itself,  as  we  proceed  to  examine 
the  circumstances  under  which  the  apostles  were  placed,  when  they  thus  "  returned 
to  Jerusalem  vritix  great  joy."  At  the  first  glance,  we  should  have  supposed  "joy  "  to 
have  been  the  very  last  emotion,  which,  at  this  particular  time,  would  have  swayed 
the  apostles'  minds.  We  shall  find  no  cause  for  it  in  anything  outward.^  Nature 
seemed  to  indicate  everything  but  joy.  We  should  not  have  been  surprised,  had 
w«  been  reading  merely  an  ordinary  narratiTe,  to  have  hetrd  that  terror  instead  of 


OHAP.  XXIV.]  ST.  LUKE.  888 

joy  was  the  leading  feeling  in  the  apostles'  minds.  Another  class  of  feelings,  also, 
was  calculated  to  arise  within  their  breasts ;  and  whatever  emotions  these  were 
likely  to  be  productive  of,  they  were  certainly  not  those  of  joy.  The  feelings  which 
nature  would  have  engendered  under  these  circumstances  were  those  of  indignation 
and  revenge.  Then,  there  was  the  natural  shrinking  from  sad  associations.  Were 
they  to  be  affected  by  the  outward  only,  almost  every  stone  in  Jerusalem  would 
have  a  mournful  voice  for  them,  saying,  "  Here  He  once  was,  but  He  is  gone ;  and  His 
place  knoweth  Him  now  no  more."  But  there  were  other  and  higher  influences  at 
work;  there  must  have  been,  for  we  read,  not  of  resignation,  but  of  joy ;  and  not 
only  of  joy,  but  of  "great  joy";  and  to  produce  this,  there  must  have  been  a  great 
counterbalancing  principle  within  the  heart.  The  actual  feeling  of  the  apostles 
was  that  of  *'  great  joy"  ;  and  whence  this  great  joy  came  we  can  easily  see.  All 
doubts  were  now  removed.  Coldly  and  damply,  unbelief,  from  time  to  time,  had 
struck  in  upon  tkem ;  but  it  was  now  dispelled  for  ever.  The  veil's  last  fold  was 
removed  from  their  eyes ;  and  they  now  stood  forth  upon  firm  ground,  prepared  to 
meet  the  world  in  the  power  of  clear,  inward  light.  Wherever  there  is  full,  clear, 
molouded  faith,  and  that  in  unhindered  exercise — there,  there  is  joy,  and  all  the 
power  that  flows  forth  from  a  hghtand  joyous  heart.  The  disciples  had  seen  also  the 
exaltation  of  the  One  they  loved.  Moreover,  they  had  now  a  union  with  the  unseen. 
We  can  understand  how  a  new  hght  was  now  thrown  on  all  old  scenes ;  how  a  new 
destiny  lay  outstretched  before  the  disciples'  eyes ;  how  they  felt  that  th«y  had  that 
which  the  world  had  not  given,  and  which  the  world,  therefore,  could  not  take  away ; 
and,  rich  in  all  this,  they  turned  from  the  place  whence  their  Lord  had  ascended  up 
on  high,  "  leading  captivity  captive,"  and  re-sought  the  place  where  He  had  been 
bound,  and  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter ;  all  tears  now  wiped  from  their  eyes, 
and  their  hearts  fiUed  with  "  great  joy."  Here,  then,  was  the  power  of  the  inward  to 
counterbalance  the  outward;  and  what  says  it  to  us  as  regards  our  own  experiences? 
First  of  all  it  says :  As  with  the  disciples,  so  also  with  you ;  look  not  always  for 
a  eliange  in  the  outward  aspect  of  things,  but  look  for  the  introduction  of  a  new 
element  therein,  modifying,  compensating,  supporting,  as  the  case  may  be.  The 
outward  remains  unmoved ;  but  it  is  met  by  the  inward  which  pervades  it,  and 
puts  forth  its  more  than  compensating  power;  there  is,  as  the  apostle  says  in 
1  Thess.  i.,  "much  affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  now,  with  regard 
to  ourselves.  What  is  the  power  of  the  inward  with  us  ?  In  the  first  place,  have 
we  an  inward  living  power  within  us  which  exercises  an  unmistakeable  influence  ; 
and  can  compensate,  energize,  or  support,  as  circumstances  may  require  ?  It  is 
surely  impossible  to  have  this  without  knowing  it,  there  are  so  many  circumstances 
which  are  calculated  to  call  it  into  exercise,  and  in  which,  if  it  existed,  it  must 
have  acted.  Have  we  a  felt  and  realized  union  with  God,  which  influences  us,  so 
ttist  we  feel  we  have  something  which  the  world  cannot  see ;  and  which,  indeed, 
is  not  of  the  world  at  all  ?  Our  perceptions  may  be  more  or  less  vivid  on  these 
points,  but  have  we  a  perception,  so  that  there  is  as  distinct  an  inward  life  as  there 
is  an  ontward?  Moreover,  are  we  conscious  of  how  this  "inward"  has  acted? 
Have  we  felt  when  disappointed  of  earthly  things,  or  in  them,  that,  after  all,  there 
was  nothing  unduly  to  depress  us :  for  that  we  had  something  else  of  infinitely 
Ibore  importance,  in  which  we  could  not  be  disappointed  ?  When  darkness  closed 
in  upon  us  in  the  outward  world,  have  we  had  distinct  inward  light,  in  which  we 
could  move,  and  see,  and  rejoice  ?  When  called  upon  to  sacrifice  any  of  the  "  out- 
ward," have  we  been  enabled  to  do  so  because  it  was  as  nothing  compared  with  the 
**  inward  " — the  possession  of  which  soothed  and  comforted  us,  and  kept  us  from 
Deing  down-trodden  by  poverty,  and  being  made  to  feel  ourselves  miserably  poor  ? 
Let  the  believer  also  never  be  a  gloomy  man.  If  ever  any  men  on  earth  had  cause 
for  gloom  the  apostles  had,  when  they  returned  to  Jerusalem ;  but  they  returned 
with  "  great  joy."  Let  us  not  be  gloomy  in  the  world  or  to  the  world  ;  let  us  show 
it  that  we  have  something  more  than  it  has.  Perhaps  men  will  believe  that  faith 
is  a  real  power  when  they  see  it  able  to  do  something ;  when,  acting  from  within, 
it  can  make  as  cheerful  in  times  of  sadness,  and  contented  in  times  of  reverse  and 
poverty,  and  patient  in  times  of  weariness  and  pain,  and  ever  hopeful  for  the 
fatoxe — our  horizon  being,  not  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  but  the  glorious 
land  which  lies  beyond.  And  who  knows  whether,  thus  looking  beyond  this  earth, 
we  may  not  lead  others  to  ask  whereon  our  eyes  are  fixed,  and,  it  may  be,  that  they 
also  wUl  look  onward  and  upward  and  join  us  on  oar  way.  One  Adrianus,  in  ancient 
times,  seeing  the  martyrs  suSer  each  grievouB  things  in  the  oaoae  of  Chriat,  asked, 
**  What  if  that  which  enables  them  to  bear  soch  saflerings  ?  "    Then  he  was  toU 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  mr. 

of  the  •*  inward  "  oounterbalaucing  the  •'  outward";  for  one  of  them  replied,  "  Eye 
hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things 
which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Kim."  And  thas  was  Adrianus  won 
not  only  to  conversion,  but  to  martyrdom  also,  for  he  laid  down  his  life  manfully 
for  Christ.  (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.)  Continually  in  the  temple,  praising  and  blessing: 
God. — Christian  worship  : — L  The  objbct  of  Chbistiam  wobshif.  1.  A  human 
Christ.  2.  A  living  Christ.  3.  A  glorified  Christ.  4.  A  oruoified  Christ.  11.  Thb 
PLACE  OF  Cbbistian  wobship.  "  The  temple."  Where  two  or  three  are  met  together 
in  Christ's  name.  III.  The  time  of  Chbistian  wobship.  ••  Continually."  Every 
day.  No  opportunity  of  doing  homage  to  the  Saviour  should  be  missed.  lY.  The 
FOBU  OF  Chbistiam  wobship.  "  Praising  and  blessing  God."  Magnifying  His 
mercy,  and  speaking  good  of  His  name.  Y.  The  sriBrr  of  Chbistian  wobship. 
"  With  great  joy."  The  Christian  rejoices  in  the  Saviour's  exaltation — 1.  For 
Christ's  sake.  Beward  of  redeeming  work.  2.  For  his  own  sake.  A  pledge  and 
guarantee  of  his  acceptance  and  salvation.  8.  For  the  world's  sake.  {T.  Whitelaw, 
M.A.)  Earnestness  in  using  means  of  grace : — "Continually  in  the  temple  1" 
Observe  that  I  The  disciples  wer^  now  thoroughly  assured  that  they  had  an  Advocate 
in  the  heavenly  temple,  but  this  did  not  withdraw  them  from  the  earthly.  On  the 
contraiy,  they  seem  to  have  resorted  with  greater  frequency  to  the  courts  of  the 
Lord's  house,  well  convinced,  by  the  circumstance  of  their  Master's  departore,  that 
they  had  an  Advocate  with  God,  and  we  may  be  sore  that  there  is  something 
radically  wrong  when  a  sense  of  the  privileges  of  Christianity  produces  listlessnesa, 
and  does  not  produce  earnestness  in  the  use  of  Christian  ordinances.  He  is  not  a 
strong  Christian  who  feels  that  he  can  do  without  sermons  and  sacraments,  any 
more  than  it  is  the  appetite  of  an  energetic  man,  when  there  is  no  rehsh  for  food. 
It  is  no  aign  of  good  faith  or  well-grounded  hope  that  the  Christian  seems  beyond 
needing  the  means  of  grace ;  as  well  might  you  think  it  a  sign  of  knowledge  and 
seourity  against  shipwreck  that  the  mariner  was  above  eonaulting  his  ohart  or 
making  observations.  "Those  that  be  planted  in  the  hoaie  of  ute  Lord  ahall 
floarifih  in  the  ooorts  of  oar  God."    {H.  Meivill,  BJ>.) 


,  Theological  Seminary-SP«r  L'bra'Y 


T  1012  01127  8225 


Date  Due 


*)f  ••    n 


