1m;'


iPlill

III!


mi


iiiiii


M;.;.  !t:.Ji:  ■


I


!S


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 9241 01 1 04754


THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED    BY   THE

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ;

AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY  THE


VEN.  AKCHDEACON  F.  W.  FAREAR,  D.D.,  F.H.S.-EIGUl  REV.  n.  COTTEEILL,  D.D.,  F.E.S.B.

—VERY  EEV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EEV.  CANON  G.  EAWLINSON,  M.A.

— EEV.  A.  PLUMMEE,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto.


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY


EDITED   BY  THE


VERY  REV.  II.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,


DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER;


AND   BY  THE

KEY.   JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A.


II.    SAMUEL.

By   vert   rev.   R.  PAYNE   SMITH,   D.D.,

DEAN  OP   CANTERBURY.

f  omiletics :
By   REV.    PROF.    C.    CHAPMAN,   M.A.,  LL.I),

WESTERN  COLLEGE,    PLYMOUTH.

fomilies  bg  Nations  <^utl)ors:

REV.  B.  DALE,  M.A.  REV.  G.  WOOD,  B.A.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto.


'h'..


3(c>0  i^9^  ^


THE    SECOND

BOOK    OF    SAMUEL.


INTRODUCTION.


The  Second  Book  of  Samnel  is  virtually  the  history  of  David's  reign,  while
the  First  had  comprised  a  twofold  narrative,  that,  namely,  of  Samuel's  refor-
mation of  Israel,  followed  by  the  aoconnt  of  the  uprise  and  fall  of  Saul.
And  never  had  king  a  more  pathetic  history  than  Israel's  first  monarch.
Full  of  hope  and  vigour,  yet  modest,  brave,  and  generous,  he  had  entered
in  a  most  praiseworthy  spirit  upon  the  duties  of  his  high  but  difScuIt  office.
Unhappily^  there  was  a  flaw  in  a  character  otherwise  so  noble.  Throughout
the  history  of  Israel  one  great  principle  is  never  forgotten,  and  that  is  the
presence  of  a  higher  than  anj  human  power,  ever  ruling  in  the  affairs  of
men,  and  making  right  and  justice  prevail.  And  Saul  could  not  bring
himself  into  accord  with  this  power,  and  again  and  again  crossed  the
boundary  which  lay  between  the  king's  authority  and  that  of  God.  It
might  seem  a  small  matter,  that  at  a  time  of  great  urgency  Saul  could  not
wait  till  the  expiry  of  the  seven  days  appointed  for  Samuel's  coming  to
Qilgal  (1  Sam.  xiii.  13)  ;  and  to  lose  a  kingdom  for  such  hastiness  seems  to
many  modern  commentators  a  hard  measure.  Nor  are  excuses  wanting  for
his  leniency  towards  the  Amalekites,  and  Saul  himself  could  see  in  it  at
first  no  violation  of  God's  command  (1  Sam.  xv.  20).  But  in  both  cases
there  was  present  the  same  spirit  which  made  him  murder  in  cruel  haste
the  high  priests  at  Nob,  and  put  even  their  women  and  babes  at  the  breast
to  death  for  the  supposed  violation  of  his  royal  authority.  Saul  could  not
submit  to  the  Power  that  is  higher  than  man,  nor  consent  to  make  his  own
will  bend  to  that  of  God ;  and  this  wilfulness  was  rebellion  as  hateful  and
contrary  to  right  as  open  dealings  with  unclean  spirits,  or  the  actual
abandonment  of  Jehovah  for  idols  (1  Sam.  xv.  23).  It  is  easy  to  see  its
batefnlness  in  Such  deeds  as  the  murder  of  the  priests  and  the  repeated


INTBODUOTION  TO


attempts  to  slay  David.  The  unerring  jndgment  of  God  condemned  it  at
its  first  outbreak,  and  before  it  had  ended  in  crime;  and  this  condemnation
was  in  mercy.  Had  Saul  repented  and  humbled  himself  in  heart,  his  course
would  have  been  one  ever  brightening  into  light.  But  he  was  stubboru
and  rebellious,  and  the  gloom  deepened  round  him  till  all  was  dark.

Saul  was  not  prepared  to  do  right  because  it  was  right;  and  when
Samuel  and  those  who  loved  the  right  for  its  own  sake  drew  away  from
him,  his  vanity  was  wounded,  and  jealousy  took  possession  of  his  heart.
Undoubtedly  he  was  a  man  possessed  of  great  mental  and  bodily  gifts,  and
his  achievement  in  so  rapidly  raising  the  militia  of  Israel  and  crushing
Nahash  the  Ammonite  gave  him  just  reason  for  exultation.  It  v^b  a  deed
in  which  he  gave  proof  of  high  courage,  strong  will,  and  great  militarj
capacity.  He  must  have  been  himself  surprised  at  the  rapidity  and  com-
pleteness of  his  success.  And  in  that  hour  of  gratified  self-love  he  could
be  generous  and  noble-minded  (1  Sam.  xi.  13).  But  it  was  largely  vanity
as  well  as  fanaticism  which  led  to  the  rash  vow  which  nearly  cost  Jonathan
his  life ;  and  when  he  heard  the  women  sing  of  David  having  slain  his  ten
thousands,  this  wrong  done  to  his  self-love  filled  him  with  a  mean  spite
against  one  who  would  have  been  the  truest  of  his  friends,  and  his  strong
bulwark  against  the  evils  which  filled  his  latter  years  with  distress.  And  it
was  this  brooding  jealousy  which  disturbed  the  balance  of  Saul's  mind,  aud
made  him  subject  to  6ts  of  mania,  marked  generally  by  intense  depression,
but  breaking  out  occasionally  into  deeds  of  fierce  violence.

Saul,  in  the  midst  of  his  violent  acts,  had  never  ceased  to  be  a  religions
man,  though  there  was  none  of  that  personal  love  and  loyalty  to  Jehovah
which  so  distinguished  David.  It  was  the  national  religion  to  which  he
gave  his  allegiance  ;  and  it  was  as  a  statesman  and  patriot  that  he  respected
it,  though  doubtless  he  never  shook  off  the  influence  of  Samuel.  But  there
was  little  genuine  piety  in  his  heart,  and  no  trust  in  God,  nor  any  feeling  of
union  with  him.  In  domestic  life  he  retained  his  oimple  manners,  and  did
not  give  way  to  that  voluptuousness  which  disgraced  David,  and  filled  the
last  twenty  years  of  his  life  with  shame  and  sorrow.  But  as  a  ruler  he  had
failed.  It  had  seemed  at  first  as  if  the  hope  of  Israel,  that  under  a  king
the  nation  might  dwell  safely,  wonld  be  fulfilled  in  him.  For  many  years
he  was  a  vigorous  and  successful  chieftain,  and  a  hero  in  war.  And
Israel  under  him  was  rapidly  advancing  in  the  arts  also  of  peace.  Pro-
tected by  the  military  successes  of  the  king,  Samuel  was  able  in  tranquillity
to  carry  on  his  schools,  and  through  the  sons  of  the  prophets  to  promote  the
great  work  of  internal  reform.  Justice  was  administered  (1  Sam.  vii.  15),
and  the  rudiments  of  learning  were  being  generally  acquired.  When  the
younger  son  of  a  farmer,  evidently  little  thought  of  at  home,  and  in  his
brother's  estimation  fit  only  to  look  after  a  few  sheep,  could  read  and  write,
education  must  have  been  a  thing  not  uncommon.  For  David  thus  taught
was  but  a  mere  drudge  at  home.  His  elegy  over  Saul  and  Jonathan  tells  us
of  domestic  refinement;  of  women  olad  in  scarlet,  and  with  jewels  of  gold


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  iU

Saul  had  done  much  ;  but  in  his  Itist  years  he  brought  all  to  ruin,  and  at
his  death  he  left  his  country  in  abject  thraldom,  and  with  all  its  national
liberties  trampled  underfoot.

In  his  fall  Saul  involved  in  equal  ruin  his  son  Jonathan,  one  of  the  most
generous  and  beautiful  characters  that  ever  the  world  saw.  And  his  death
at  Gilboa  was  but  the  ending  of  a  path  wrapped  in  deepening  shadow  and
leading  inevitably  to  misery  and  disaster.  In  1  Sam.  xiv.  we  see  Saul  in
almost  as  bad  a  light  as  when  he  murdered  Ahimelech  and  his  brethren.  The
youthful  Jonathan  and  his  armodr-bearer  had  wrought  one  of  those  feats  of
desperate  valour  which  are  not  uncommon  in  the  history  of  the  Israelites.
And  their  bravery  had  stricken  the  raw  levies  of  the  Philistines  with  panic,
increased  by  the  action  of  a  body  of  Hebrews  drawn  from  the  districts
conquered  by  the  Philistines,  and  forced  to  serve  in  their  army.  They  were
posted  in  the  rear  to  guard  the  camp,  and  their  defection  placed  revengeful
enemies  in  the  very  pathway  of  flight.  Saul  meanwhile  concludes  from  the
absence  of  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer  that  it  was  some  brave  exploit
of  theirs  which  was  causing  this  confusion  in  the  Philistine  host ;  but  when
the  priest  asks  counsel  of  God,  with  just  the  same  absence  of  self-control  as
had  made  him  refuse  to  wait  for  Samuel  at  Gilgal,  Saul  bids  him  withdraw
his  hand  from  the  ephod  and  desist.  He  needs  no  counsel  from  above.  He
will  act  for  himself,  and  with  extraordinary  rashness  and  absence  of  good
sense  he  commands  the  people  under  a  solemn  curse  to  abstain  from  food
until  all  is  over.  They  must  fight  the  battle  and  pursue  fasting.  Had  he
given  himself  time  for  reflection,  he  would  have  felt  that  the  slight  loss  of
time  spent  in  taking  refreshment  would  be  more  than  compensated  by
increased  vigour  of  body  and  power  of  endurance.  The  pursuit,  too,  had
come  suddenly,  and  his  men  were  not  prepared ;  and  to  have  partaken  of
the  provisions  cast  aside  by  the  runaways  would  have  kept  up  their
strength.  They  must  at  last  stop  from  sheer  exhaustion,  and  then  the
whole  army  would  be  in  a  state  of  ravenous  hunger.  Worst  of  all,  he  was
laying  a  trap  for  those  who  had  gained  the  victory.  Saul's  body-guard
would  hear  his  orders,  and  obey  with  grumbling.  Jonathan  and  all  who
joined  in  the  pursuit  from  a  distance,  rushing  from  caves  and  from  the
hills  of  Ephraim,  would  be  in  danger  unwittingly  of  bringing  upon  them-
selves a  curse.

The  results  were  most  disastrous.  When  they  reached  Aijalon  the
people  were  so  faint  with  hunger  that  they  began  slaying  sheep  and  oxen,
and  eating  them  without  observing  the  command  of  the  Law,  that  they  must
carefully  free  the  flesh  from  the  blood.  And  Saul,  aghast  at  this  violation
of  a  solemn  ceremonial  ordinance,  bids  his  body-guard  disperse  themselves
among  the  people,  and  compel  them  to  bring  their  oxen  to  a  large  stone,
and  there  slay  them  in  the  manner  prescribed.  There  was  thus  long  delay
before  the  wants  of  the  troops  could  be  supplied,  and  when  at  last  they  had
taken  a  hurried  meal,  and  Saul  was  eager  to  resume  the  pursuit,  they  gave
him  so  Bulky  an  answer  as  to  bo  virtually  a  refusal.     And  now  the  priest,


INTRODUCTION   TO


mediating  between  king  and  people,  purposes  to  ask  counsel  of  God,  and
Saul  consents.  But  no  answer  comes.  Saul  liad  refused  God's  counsel  in
the  morning,  and  now  the  oracle  is  silent.

But  Saul  sees  no  fault  in  himself.  Fault  he  assumes  there  is,  and  he  will
find  it  out  by  drawing  lots.  He  bids  the  people  stand  on  one  side,  and
himself  and  Jonathan  on  the  other;  and.  again,  with  a  sulky  answer,  the
people  assent.  Again  and  again  the  lot  falls,  till  Jonathan  is  left,  and
Saul,  nothing  doubting  that  he  is  guilty,  asks  for  confession;  whereupon
Jonathan  tells  him  how,  unwitting  of  his  command,  he  had  tasted  almost  by
chance  a  little  honey.  Never  was  man  more  innocent  than  Jonathan,  and
God  by  him  that  day  had  wrought  a  great  deliverance  for  Israel.  Yet  his
guilty  father,  with  dark  fanaticism,  condemns  him  to  death.  The  people
indeed  rescue  him,  but  all  his  legal  rights  were  gone.  In  the  eye  of  the  Law
he  was  a  dead  man,  and  henceforward  Jonathan  ever  acts  as  if  there  was  a
bar  between  him  and  the  kingdom.  He  never  once  speaks  as  if  it  were
possible  for  him  to  inherit  Saul's  throne,  or  as  if  he  were  ceding  to  David
anything  to  which  he  had  a  claim.  His  father's  curse,  his  father's  con-
demnation, still  rested  upon  him.  The  people  had  saved  him  by  force,  but
the  legal  act  remained,  and  the  father  had  destroyed  the  son.

From  first  to  last  Saul  was  the  destroyer  of  himself,  his  family,  and  his
kingdom.  Samuel  foretold  his  fall,  but  the  warning  was  given  personally
to  the  king  to  move  him  to  repentance.  Repentance  would  have  saved
him,  and  Samuel  allowed  him  ample  time ;  for,  during  four  or  five  years,
he  did  absolutely  nothing  to  help  on  his  words  to  their  accomplishment.
Only  after  this  long  delay,  spent  by  Samuel  in  mourning  (1  Sam.  xv.  35),  at
God's  express  command  he  arose  and  anointed  David;  but  neither  of
them,  either  openly  or  by  secret  conspiracy,  took  any  steps  to  compass
Saul's  ruin.  All  that  David  did  he  was  driven  to  do.  To  the  last  he  was
loyal  to  his  king.  And  when  in  an  evil  hour  be  deserted  his  country,  and
entered  the  service  of  the  Philistine  king  of  Gath,  it  was  almost  a  renuncia-
tion of  his  anointing.  He  seems  himself  to  have  given  up  all  idea  of  ever
becoming  king,  and,  in  a  fit  of  desperation,  to  have  thought  only  of  saving
his  life.  To  his  countrymen  this  open  alliance  with  their  enemies  put  him
entirely  in  the  wrong,  and  sorely  he  was  punished  for  it  by  a  seven  years*
delay.  Yet  slowly  both  predictions  were  moving  on  to  their  fulfilment,  and
if  the  purpose  was  Divine,  the  human  agency  was  that  of  the  self-willed
Saul.

There  is  thus  a  tragic  interest  in  the  First  Book  of  Samuel.  Unre-
pentant, stubborn,  wilful  even  in  his  deepest  depression,  the  king  struggles
against  his  fate,  but  each  effort  only  entangles  him  in  fresh  difficulties,  and
burdens  his  conscience  with  darker  crimes.  The  one  pathway  of  safety
which  David  tried,  and  not  in  vain,  in  his  season  of  terrible  sin,  Saul  will
not  try.  He  sees  his  doom  ;  is  driven  by  it  to  melancholy,  is  unhinged  in
mind;  but  the  prophet's  words,  "rebellion,"  "stubbornness,"  indicate  the
unyielding  elements  of  his  nature,  and  stubbornly  he  died  in  the  lost  battle-


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


field.  Like  Prometlieas,  he  defied  the  Almighty,  in  deeds  if  not  in  words,
but  the  heroism  was  gone,  and  in  that  last  sad  scene,  when,  in  mental
and  moral  degradation,  the  despairing  monarch  songht  the  witch's  cave,
Btnbbomness  alone  remained.  And,  meanwhile,  the  other  purpose  of  God  was
growing  in  strength,  and,  throagh  strange  scenes  of  heroism  and  feebleness,
the  shepherd-boy  becomes  the  nation's  champion,  the  king's  son-in-law,  an
outlaw  and  a  deserter,  before  finally  he  becomes  a  king.

In  the  two  Books  of  Samuel,  David's  uprising  and  reign,  his  sins  and  his
terrible  punishment,  are  given  us  in  great  detail,  not  merely  because  of
their  intrinsic  interest  and  the  clearness  with  which  they  teach  the  g^eat
lesson  that  sin  is  ever  punished — not  merely  this,  but  even  more  because
he  was  a  most  important  factor  in  the  development  of  Israel  as  the  Mes-
sianic nation.  There  is  in  this  respect  a  parallel  between  the  Book  of
Genesis  and  the  Books  of  Samuel.  The  great  business  of  the  one  is  the
selection  of  the  man  from  whom  was  to  spring  the  nation  predestinated  to
be  the  depository  of  God's  revealed  truth.  In  the  Books  of  Samuel  we
have  the  choice  of  the  man  who,  next  to  Moses,  was  to  form  that  nation
for  its  high  ofiSce,  and  to  be  the  ancestor  of  Christ.  In  David  the  great
purpose  of  Israel's  existence  was  to  advance  a  great  step  onwards.  Eight
hundred  years  had  passed  since  the  choice  of  Abraham,  and  four  hundred
since  Moses  gave  laws  and  political  unity  to  those  sprung  from  him ;  and
•it  had  often  seemed  as  if  the  folk  were  too  tiny  to  be  of  any  real  service
to  mankind,  and  as  if  it  must  be  crushed  out  of  existence  by  the  more
powerful  kingdoms  that  surrounded  it.  It  was  a  territory  so  small,  was
placed  in  so  dangerous  a  position  on  the  very  battle-ground  of  Egypt  and
Assyria,  and  the  constitution  of  the  realm  was  so  little  adapted  to  purposes
of  war,  that  it  seemed  impossible  for  it  to  have  more  than  a  short-lived
endurance.  But  small  as  was  Israel,  God  had  chosen  it  to  light  a  torch
that  should  illuminate  the  whole  world,  and  God's  Word,  which  is  the  light
of  men,  received-  through  David  a  most  precious  addition  to  its  contents.

Ah  a  preparation  for  the  selection  of  David,  the  work  of  both  Saul  and
Samuel  was  necessary.  Saul  had  given  Israel  a  sense  of  unity  and,  at
least,  a  taste  of  the  blessings  of  independence.  The  wish  for  a  united
Israel  was  as  strong  an  influence  in  the  uprise  of  David's  empire  as  it  has
proved  in  modem  times  in  the  endowment  of  Europe  with  a  united  Italy.
This  right  feeling  had  begun  in  Samuel's  time,  brought  about  probably  by
the  tyranny  of  the  Philistines  ;  and  Samuel,  who  saw  in  it  a  tacit  reproach
to  himself,  who  had  done  so  much,  for  not  having  done  more,  withstood  it
in  vain.  Saul's  victory  over  the  Ammonite  Nahash,  won  by  united  Israel,
made  this  feeling  so  strong,  that  David's  election  to  the  crown  came  as  an
inevitable  necessity,  though  long  delayed  by  his  relations  with  the  Philis-
tines ;  and,  when  elected,  he  had  not  to  build  up  the  kingdom  from  the
foundations— Saul  had  done  that,  but  to  retrieve  the  evil  resnlts  of  one
terrible  disaster.  But  the  moral  and  mental  development  wrought  by
Samuel  was  a  condition  even  more  indispensable  to  David's  kingdom  than


INTBODUOTION  TO


Saul's  restoration  of   the  nation  to   political  life.     Davids  empire  was  a
matter  of  vast  importance  to  Israel  as  the  Messian.c  nation,  and  Saul  pre-
pai'ed  the  way  for  it.     But  it  was  a  matter,  after  all,  of  only  secondary
importance,  and  Samnel's  reforms  had  kindled  again  into  brightness  the
nation's  inner  life.     He  purified  Israel's  morals,  fanned  its  decaying  faith
into  heroic  confidence  in  Jehovah,  and  enriched  it  with  a  high  civilization.
The  learning  which  had  always  had  a  home  in  the  sanctuary,  and  which
was  for  a  time  trampled  out  when    Shiloh  was  destroyed,  found  a  new
dwelling  in  the  Naioth  at  Ramah.     Reading,  writing,  music,  history,  not
merely  existed  there,  bnt  were  taught  to  an  ever-increasing  number  of  the
choicest  spirits  of  Israel.     Ramah  was  the  centre  of  an  active  propaganda,
and  the  sons  of  the  prophets  went  back  to  their  homes  as  missionaries,
bound  to  teach  and  to  elevate  and  to  indoctrinate  with  Samuel's  views  all
the  inhabitants  of  their  villages  or  towns.     And  these  views  had  a  strong
practical  bearing  both  upon  the  political  and  the  spiritual  life  of  the  nation
The  eighth  psalm,  composed  by  David  to  be  sung  to  a  melody  learnt  by
him  when  in  the  service  of  Achish,  King  of  Gath,  is  testimony  enough  to
the  refinement  both  of  thought  and  of  language  that  followed  upon  Samuel's
reforms.     For  David,  the  youngest  of  a  large  family  of  sons  of  a  yeoman
at  Bethlehem,  could  have  gained  only  in  Samuel's  schools  that  acquaintance
with  literary  arts,  and  that  knowledge  of  the  history  of  his  country,  which  *
undoubtedly  he  had  acquired  somewhere.     To  suppose  that  he  could  have
obtained  them  elsewhere  is  to  suppose,  what  probably  became  true  in  course
of  time,  that  Samuel's  scholars  had  already  set  themselves  to  teach  in  all
parts  of  the  country.     Among  a  race  of  farmers  learning  would  not  advance
with  such  extreme  rapidity;   but  the  Israelites  were  no  common  people,
and  their  progress  was  sure  and  steady.     It  is  probable  that  Gad,  David's
friend  throughout  his  life,  joined  him  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  wander-
ings as  an  outcast,  from  a  personal  affection  which  began  when  they  were
school-friends  together  at  Ramah.     For  Gad,  who  is  expressly  said  to  have
been  a  prophet  (1  Sam.  xxii.  6),  is  by  the  name  certified  to  have  been  one
of  Samuel's  scholars.      He  chose  a  very  hard  life  when   he  went  to  be
chaplain  to  a  band  of  men  composed  of  such  dangerous  elements  as  David's
freebooters ;  but  he  loved  David,  was  confident  in  his  power  of  governing
them,  and  deep  in  his  heart  was  the  conviction  that  Samuel's  prophecy
would  surely  be  fulfilled.

And  this  captain  of  a  band  of  wild  outlaws  was  destined  in  course  of
time  to  remodel  the  temple  service,  to  teach  men  to  "  prophesy,"  i.e.  to
testify  to  Divine  truth,  on  harp  and  cymbal  and  psaltery  (1  Chron.  xxv.  1),
and  to  give  to  the  national  worship  its  most  spiritual  element.  Not  only  did
David  write  psalms  himself,  but  his  temple  service  gave  them  a  use,  made
them  the  common  property  of  all,  and  caused  others  also  to  give  expression
to  their  devotion  in  the  same  way,  as  occasion  called  their  feelings  forth.
The  psalms  were  not  mere  lyric  compositions,  the  result  of  poetic  genius
and  fervour ;  no  doubt  many  psalms  at  first  were  simply  so ;  but  they  soon


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  vii

became  the  voice  of  the  nation's  worship,  the  expression  of  its  faith  and
love  and  trust  in  its  God.  In  this  there  was  a  distinct  advance,  and  a
nnost  pure  and  ennobling  and  spiritual  element  was  added,  not  merely  to
the  ritual  of  the  temple,  but  to  the  worship  of  God  in  the  homes  of  the
people.  The  sacrifice  was  full  of  teaching,  but  its  details  were  coarse,  and
to  us  would  be  revolting.  In  the  psalms  sung  to  bright  melodies  in  the
temple,  we  have  a  form  of  worship  so  perfect,  that  it  has  lasted  from  David's
day  unto  our  own  time  ;  and  the  similar  use  of  hymns  in  our  services  has
enriched  our  Church  with  a  body  of  spiritual  poetry  almost  as  precious  as
David's  psalms.  And  like  hjrmns  in  our  own  days,  the  psalms  would  be
learnt  by  the  people,  and  sung  in  their  homes ;  and  the  worship  of  Israel
would  consist  not  merely  of  stately  services  in  the  temple,  but  of  the  voice
of  prayer  and  praise  chanted  throughout  the  land  to  the  tunes  of  Asaph
and  his  brethren,  and  in  David's  words.

In  this  respect  we  reap  the  benefit  of  David's  varied  experiences.  Had
he  been  a  man  of  unblemished  morality,  his  psalms  would  have  struck  no
deeper  note  than  those  of  Korah,  or  Asaph,  or  Jeduthun.  In  Jeremiah
alone  we  should  have  had  a  psalmist  whose  words  were  the  outpouring  of
a  troubled  heart.  As  it  is,  the  passion-fraught  nature  of  David  hurried
him  into  sins  so  terrible  as  to  cover  his  character  with  disgrace,  and  bring
upon  him  twenty  years  of  severe  punishment,  ever  following  blow  upon
blow,  and  darkening  even  his  death-bed  with  the  fate  of  his  eldest  son,  of
the  nephew  who  had  been  the  pillar  of  his  safety  in  every  danger,  and  of
the  priest  who,  having  alone  escaped  from  the  slaughter  of  his  family  at
Nob,  had  been  David's  faithful  companion  all  the  days  of  his  life.  No  regal
splendour,  no  greatness  of  glory,  could  compensate  for  the  lurid  gloom  of
that  death-bed.  But  God  overruled  all  this  misery  for  lasting  good  ;  for
David  has  been  for  all  ages  the  psalmist  of  sorrow  and  of  repentance.
Myriads  of  sinners  have  found  in  the  fifty-first  psalm  the  best  expression
of  feelings  that  were  rending  their  hearts.  Nor  does  this  psalm  stand
alone.  When  we  read  utterances  such  as  those  in  Ps.  xxxi.  9,  10 ;  xxxviii.
4 ;  xl.  12,  etc.,  the  words  would  seem  overstrained  did  we  not  know  the
greatness  of  David's  sin,  the  depth  of  his  penitence,  and  the  stern  righteous-
ness which  punished  him  not  once  only,  but  with  ever-recurring  severity.

The  words  quoted  by  St.  Paul  from  1  Sam.  xiii.  14,  that  David  was  a
man  after  God's  heart,  often  trouble  the  minds  of  believers,  because  they
take  them  as  the  Divine  verdict  upon  his  whole  character.  Really  they  are
spoken  of  him  such  as  he  was  when  Samuel  anointed  him,  and  when  his
youthful  piety  was  still  unstained.  Yet  to  the  very  last  he  manifests  such
tenderness,  such  spirituality,  and  so  devout  and  personal  a  trust  in  God  as
still  to  justify,  though  with  large  exceptions,  this  high  estimate  of  him.
And  almost  all  his  psalms  belong  to  the  days  when  trouble  and  anguish  had
stirred  depths  in  his  soul  which  otherwise  would  have  remained  stagnant.
There  are  but  few  which  belong  to  the  days  of  his  pure  innocence.  Hia
poems  then  would  have  celebrated  the  beauties  of  nature,  the  Creator's


rm  INTKODUOTION  TO


goodness,  the  brave  exploits  of  his  countrymen,  and  the  like.  It  was  after
his  terrible  fall  that  the  contrite  and  hambled  David  poured  forth  from  the
inmost  recesses  of  a  struggling  breast  the  words  of  earnest  penitence,  of
deep  humiliation,  and  withal  of  intense  trust  in  the  God  who  was  punishing
him  so  sternly,  and  of  unwavering  faith  in  the  Divine  goodness,  which  was
manifesting  itself  to  him  as  justice  that  could  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.

The  Second  Book  of  Samuel  is  thus  the  basis  and  the  justification  of  the
Book  of  Psalms.  The  intensity  of  feeling  manifested  there  is  proved  to
be  no  mere  poetry,  but  the  cry  of  real  distress.  And  because  of  the  reality
of  his  repentance  David  was  forgiven;  but  his  forgiveness  did  not  save
him  from  punishment.  Never  was  history  more  sad  than  David's  from  thp
day  when  Nathan  said,  "  Thou  art  the  man  !  "  unto  that  last  death-bed  scene,
when,  troubled  by  the  cry  of  rebellion,  he  was  forced  to  condemn  old  friends
in  order  to  prevent  civil  war  and  save  the  throne  of  his  chosen  son.  And
as  David's  sin  was  the  violation  of  domestic  chastity,  so  all  his  sorrows
sprang  from  the  same  source,  and  not  only  were  his  own  sons  the  workers
of  his  misery,  bnt.it  was  in  and  by  his  children  that  he  was  punished.

Tet  amidst  it  all,  David  was  a  man  after  God's  heart  in  this  respect  at
least,  that  there  was  neither  rebellion  nor  stubbornness  in  his  character.
His  sins  were  greater  than  those  of  Saul,  but  they  were  not  persisted  in.
David  humbled  himseK  before  God,  and  bore  his  chastisement  not  only
meekly,  but  with  a  clinging  love  to  the  hand  that  was  scourging  him.  Let
but  God  deliver  him  from  blood-guiltiness,  and  amid  the  ruin  of  his  earthly
happiness  he  would  sing  aloud  of  Jehovah's  righteousness  (Ps.  li.  14).

But  besides  the  interest  inseparable  from  the  study  of  a  character  snch
as  David's,  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel  gives  us  the  history  of  the  foundino'
of  Israel's  empire.  War  is  a  dreadful  thing,  and  involves  a  terrible  amount
of  material  loss  and  injury;  but  it  is  at  once  God's  penalty  upon  national
debasement,  and  his  remedy  against  national  meanness  and  selfishness.
Nations  rise  to  moral  greatness  through  war,  and  when  they  have  been
sinking  through  social  corruption  and  private  immorality,  it  is  generally
war  which  reveals  to  them  the  gangrene  in  their  midst,  and  either  forces
them  by  repeated  disaster  to  humble  themselves  for  it,  or  displaces  them
in  order  that  a  worthier  people  may  fill  their  room.

So  Israel  had  displaced  the  Canaanite  tribes  in  Palestine.  And  with  all
their  faults,  the  repeated  acts  of  heroism  of  which  we  have  the  record  in
the  Book  of  Judges  prove  them  to  have  been  a  race  of  sterling  worth.  No
commonplace  people  could  have  produced  such  men  as  Saul  and  Jonathan,
to  say  nothing  of  Samuel,  whose  wisdom  and  goodness  and  ability  as  the
restorer  of  a  crushed  nation,  and  the  founder  of  institutions  which  enriched
it  with  intellectual  and  moral  and  religious  life,  raise  him  to  an  extra-
ordinary pre-eminence.  Yet  the  extraordinary  meu  of  a  nation  always
hold  some  relation  to  its  ordinary  level,  and  Samuel  did  not  stand  alone.
He  was  followed  by  David  and  the  numerous  worthies  of  his  court.  But
Israel  could  not  have  maintained  its  heroism  and  nobleness  by  the


mere


THE   BEOOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


memory  of  the  feats  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Judges.  Even  then  the
nation  was  sinking  downwards.  Jephthah  and  Samson  were  men  of  loWer
worth  than  Barak  and  Gideon.  The  ruinous  defeat  at  Aphek,  followed  by
the  capture  of  the  ark  and  the  destruction  of  the  national  sanctuary  at
Shiloh,  convinced  Israel  of  its  degradation,  and  made  it  ready  to  yield  to
Samuel's  exhortations.  Then  followed  a  period  of  struggle,  and  then  came
the  empire  of  David  and  the  splendour  of  Solomon's  court.  It  was  a  short-
lived glory.  Christ's  kingdom  was  not  to  have'  much  of  earthly  magnificence
about  it.  But  the  Messianic  people  before  his  advent  had  a  tremendous
work  to  do,  and  needed  some  noble  memories  to  strengthen  them  as  well
as  grand  hopes  bidding  them  ever  move  onwards.  And  David's  grandeur
and  the  splendour  of  Solomon,  who  to  this  day  holds  a  unique  position  in
the  imagination  of  Oriental  nations,  gave  them  what  they  needed.  Through-
out a  checkered  history  they  continued  to  be  a  firm,  strong,  and  heroic
people,  and  with  powers  of  endurance  which  have  enabled  them  to  remain
a  miracle  and  a  wonder  to  the  present  day.

David's  wars  and  conquests  had  thus  a  great  importance  for  Israel,  and
therefore  for  mankind.  But  his  empire  was  also  a  symbol  of  the  Christian
Church,  and  David  is  the  representative  of  sin-stained  fallen  man  finding
forgiveness  through  repentance.  And  there  is  thus  a  reason  for  the
restriction  to  him  of  the  promise  that  the  Messiah  should  be  his  Son.  It  is
never  renewed  to  any  of  his  successors.  Solomon  was  the  glory  of  the
East  for  his  wisdom;  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  emulated  David's  piety,  and
were  unstained  by  his  sins ;  but  no  prophet  hails  them  as  the  inheritors  of
David's  promise.  The  seed  of  Judah's  kings  were  to  serve  as  "  eunuchs  in
the  palace  of  the  king  of  Babylon  "  (Isa.  xxxix.  7).  It  was  from  Nathan,
a  son  uncrowned,  and  scarcely  mentioned  in  the  history,  lost  quickly  to
view  among  the  crowd  of  ordinary  citizens,  that  he  was  to  spring  who  is
the  Church's  King,  but  who  nationally  was  but  a  sucker  from  the  cut-down
stem  of  Jesse  (Isa.  xi.  1).  We  have  given  the  reason  above.  David  is  the
type  of  fallen  man,  sternly  chastised  for  his  iniquity,  but  finding  forgive-
ness, rest,  peace,  strength,  in  "the  God  of  his  salvation"  (Ps.  li.  14).

We  have  thus  in  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel  a  history  essential  to  Holy
Scripture,  and  of  profound  and  even  painful  interest.  For  never  had
human  soul  %  more  checkered  record  of  sin  and  sorrow,  of  discord  in  its
relations  with  itself,  of  intense  contrition  and  earnest  pleading  for  forgive-
ness, and  of  genuine  faith,  than  that  which  is  set  before  us  here.  But
without  the  Psalms,  which  disclose  to  us  the  inner  working  of  David's
heart,  we  should  lose  much  of  its  significance.  For  here,  chiefly,  we  have
David's  sin  and  his  lifelong  punishment ;  while  there  we  have  the  struggle
of  his  soul  wending  its  way  through  darkness  and  sorrow  upwards  to
forgiveness,  to  light,  and  to  joyful  communion  with  God.

The  book  is  composed  of  three  separate  parts,  of  which  the  first  ends
with  the  list  of  David's  chief  officers  (ch.  i. — ^riii.).  This  narrative  prob-
ably included  a  good  deal  of  the  latter  part  of  the  First  Book  of  Samuel,


INTRODUCTION  TO


the  division  of  the  history  into  two  portions  being  unanthoritative.  It
gives  the  history  of  David  in  its  noblest  aspect,  and  if  we  include  in  it
the  victory  over  the  giant,  it  might  be  called  in  Homeric  phrase  the
'ApuTTcia  ToS  AaviS,  the  prowess  and  brave  achievements  of  a  hero.  It  traces
him  step  by  step  till  from  the  sheepcote  he  becomes  the  sovereign  of  all
Israel,  wherenpon  immediately  he  brings  the  ark  to  Jerusalem,  and  is
appointed  (ch.  viii.)  the  Messianic  king,  whose  office  it  is  to  build  the
temple,  to  ordain  a  spiritual  worship  for  Jehovah,  and,  as  Messiah's  repre-
sentative, to  take  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance.  It  was  probably  a
contemporary  document,  as  was  also  the  next,  which  forms  oh.  ix. — xx.
In  it  we  have  the  record  of  David's  sin  and  its  terrible  consequences.
Beginning  abruptly  with  his  kindness  to  Mephibosheth,  but  of  which  we
see  the  reason  when  we  come  to  the  details  of  the  flight  from  Jerusalem
and  sorrowful  return,  it  next  gives  ns  fuller  details  of  David's  conquests,
but  only  to  lead  up  to  the  history  of  David's  sin,  committed  when  his  heart
was  turned  away  from  God  by  the  glory  of  earthly  victories.  All  that
follows  is  the  painful  record  of  God's  just  severity.  This  narrative  also
ends  with  a  catalogue  of  David's  chief  officers,  but  there  is  now  a  touching
difference.  At  the  end  of  ch.  viii.  we  read  that  David's  sons  were  his
eohanim,  his  confidential  ministers.  His  family  was  then  happy  and  united,
and  his  children  were  the  chief  stay  of  his  throne.  At  the  end  of  ch.  xx.
it  is  a  stranger,  Ira  the  Jairite,  who  is  cohen,  David's  private  counsellor.
His  sons  have  all  lost  their  father's  respect,  and  the  numerous  children
who  had  once  been  his  pride  are  now  a  terror  to  him  and  a  cause  of
nnhappiness.  Perhaps  in  this  mention  of  Ira  as  David's  cohen  we  may  find
an  explanation  of  the  fact  that  all  David's  elder  children  were  passed  by,
and  the  succession  to  the  throne  given  to  Solomon,  who  at  this  time  was
but  eleven  or  twelve  years  old.  For  if  no  one  was  any  longer  fit  to  be
entrusted  with  the  office  of  cohen,  still  less  was  he  fit  to  be  king.  But  we
also  see  the  fitting  punishment  of  the  king's  polygamy.  David  had  set  a
bad  example  in  multiplying  unto  himself  wives,  and  he  reaped  from  it  an
«vil  harvest.  His  son  and  successor  was  even  more  sensual,  and  his  many
wives  wrought  also  his  ruin.

The  remaitting  four  chapters  have  no  internal  connection  with  one
another,  nor  are  they  placed  in  chronological  order.  For  ch.  xxii.,  which  is
virtually  identical  with  Ps.  xviii.,  was  written  shortly  after  Toi's  embassy
(ch.  viii.  10)  ;  the  "  last  words  "  in  oh.  xxiii.  belong  to  the  very  close  of
David's  reign ;  while  the  execution  of  Saul's  descendants,  the  battles  with
the  Philistines,  and  the  numbering  of  the  people  record  events  which
happened  in  the  earlier  years  of  the  kingdom.  The  "  last  words  "  give  ns
the  assurance  that  David's  closing  years  were  tranquil,  and  spent  in  an
anbrokoa  walk  with  God.  The  storms  of  his  life  were  over,  and  so  also
was  his  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  of  victorious  war  and  of  royal  state  and
magnificence.  But  his  sin  had  been  forgiven  him.  There  was  peace  in  his
own  heart  and  undiminished  trust  in  God.     Time  would  never  quito  heal


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  ii

his  sorrow  at  the  death  of  son  after  son,  caased  alike  by  his  own  sin  and
theirs.  If  Saol  had  wrought  the  ruin  of  his  kingdom,  David  had  wrought
the  rain  of  his  family  and  home.  Bat  the  one  was  stubborn  in  his
perverseness,  the  other  was  humbled  and  penitent,  and  his  sin  was  taken
away.  And  now,  calm  and  thankful,  he  was  approaching  the  haven  of
eternal  rest  in  Jehovah,  and  the  enjoyment  of  that  "  everlasting  covenant,
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  which  was  all  his  salvation  and  all  his
desire"  (ch.  xxiii.  5).  It  was  the  peaceful  end  of  a  troubled  life;  and  it
makes  us  confident  that  he  had  been  accepted,  and  that  the  words  of  his
penitential  psalms  came  from  his  heart.  And  we,  when  we  recite  them,
may  feel  sure  that  we  are  using  the  words  of  one  who,  if  he  had  sinned
much,  had  also  been  forgiven  much,  because  he  had  a  large  love  for  God,
wbrm  genuine  piety,  and  deep  and  earnest  penitenos.


THE    SECOND

BOOK    OF    SAMUEL.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  t


Ver.  1. — How  it  came  to  pass.  During
the  last  few  daya  events  had  been  crowding
fast  upon  one  another.  Living  as  fugitives
at  Ziklag,  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines,
David  and  his  men,  unfit  for  the  peaceful
occupations  of  agriculture,  had  been  driven
to  seek  their  maintenance  by  raids  upon  the
wild  tribes  in  the  desert.  Of  these  the  chief
were  the  Amalekites,  whose  home  was  the
bare  region  lying  between  the  south  of
Judah  and  Egypt.  We  have  ample  proof
that  this  race  was  atterly  hostile  to  all
order  and  quietness ;  it  lived  by  the  plunder
of  others,  and,  sheltering  itself  in  the  recesses
of  the  wilderness,  broke  out  thence  on  every
opportunity  to  carry  ravage  and  ruin  into
all  the  neighbouring  districts.  The  Amale-
kite  was  thus  every  man's  enemy,  and  the
object  of  universal  dislike ;  and  the  cruelty
which  he  habitually  practised  would  justify
to  David's  mind  the  barbarity  with  which
he  put  to  death  all  whom  he  found,  man
and  woman  alike.  But  his  object  was  not
justice.  His  cruelty  was  the  result  of  selfish
motives.  For  it  was  necessary  for  him  to
keep  tidings  of  his  real  doings  from  the  ears
of  Achisb,  who  naturally  would  not  approve
of  David's  military  activity.  He  very  pro-
bably had  put  him  there  upon  the  borders
to  protect  liis  realm  from  incursions;  but
David  in  the  Amalekite  war  was  the  as-
sailant, and  was,  moreover,  practising  his
men  for  ulterior  objects.  Aohish  most  pro-
bably received  a  share  of  the  captured  cattle ;
but  his  inquiries  were  met  with  an  equivoca-
tion (1  Sam.  zxvii.  10 — 12),  which  made  him
suppose  that  David,  with  the  usual  bitterness
of  a  renegade,  had  been  harrying  his  own
tribesmen.  And  the  falsehood  soon  en-
tangled David  in  most  painful  consequences ;
for  Aohish,  nothing  doubting  of  liis  fidelity,
and  of  his  bitter  hatred  of  Saul,  determined

n.  SAMUEL.


to  take  him  with  him  in  the  grand  army  of
the  Philistines,  whicli  was  slowly  moving
northward  for  the  conquest  of  the  land  of
Israel.  David  had  God's  promise  of  ulti-
mate safety,  and  he  ought  not  to  have
deserted  his  country.  As  a  deserter  to  the
PhUistines,  he  had  to  descend  to  falsehood,
and  now  treason  seemed  inevitable.  His  only
choice  lay  between  betraying  his  country  or
the  king  who  had  given  him  so  hospitable
a  refuge.  The  jealousy,  or  rather  the  good
sense,  of  the  Philistine  lords  (1  Sam.  xxix.  4)
saved  him  from  this  dreadful  alternative,  and
he  was  sent  back,  to  his  great  joy,  to  Ziklag.
But  it  was  a  dreadful  sight  which  there  met
his  view.  ;'With  strange  mismanagement,  he
had  left  no  portion  of  his  men  to  guard  his
little  city,  and  the  Amalekites  had  made
reprisals.  The  news  of  the  Philistine  army
upon  its  march  upwards  would  be  quickly
carried  through  the  desert,  and  the  wild
tribes  would  be  sure  to  take  the  opportunity
for  gathering  plunder  far  and  wide.  So  un-
defended was  the  whole  country,  that  they
met  nowhere  with  resistance.  And  David
saw,  on  his  return,  only  the  smoking  ruins  of
the  little  city  where  for  many  months  he
had  dwelt.  His  wives,  Ahinoam  and  Abigail,
the  wives  and  children  of  his  men,  had  all
been  carried  away  for  the  Egyptian  slave-
market.  So  secure  were  the  Amalekites,
that  they  had  no  fear  about  encumbering
their  march  with  a  vast  multitude  of  children
and  cattle.  And  to  add  to  his  distress,  his
men,  indignant,  and  not  without  reason,  at
David's  want  of  precaution,  were  threatening
to  stone  him  as  an  alleviation  for  their  dis-
tress. Never  had  David's  fortunes  fallen  so
low  as  at  that  moment;  but  quickly  they
were  to  rise  again.  By  energetio  action  he
not  only  recovered  the  spoil  and  the  captives
taken  from  Ziklag,  but  also  won  the  immense
wealth  gathered  by  the  Amalekites  in  a.
wide  raid  made  at  a  time  when  there  was


THE   SECOND   BOOK   OF   SAMOEL.


[oh.  1. 1—27.


no  one  to  resist  them  His  own  sliare  of  the
sirail  was  so  large  that  he  was  able  to  scud
valuable  presents  of  sheep,  oxeu,  and  camels
to  his  friends  in  Judsea,  probably  not  without
bome  prescience  that  the  way  to  his  return
might  be  opened  by  the  events  of  the  war
between  the  Philistines  and  Saul.  Tlie
duugerous  issues  of  that  war  could  not  be
hidden  from  him;  but  lie  would  find  solace
for  his  anxieties  in  the  active  work  of
restoring  order  at  Ziklag,  and  in  providing
hasty  shelter  for  the  women  and  children
whom  he  had  brought  back  to  their  desolated
homes.  But  his  suspense  did  not  last  lung.
For  when  David  had  abode  two  days  in
Ziklag,  news  came  -which  confirmed  his
worst  fears.  The  battle  had  been  fought;
Israel  had  been  routed;  and  Saul  and
Jonathan,  the  friend  who  had  been  to  him
more  than  a  brother,  lay  among  the  slain.

Ver.  2. — On  the  third  day.  This  means
the  third  day  after  David's  return  with  the
spoil  and  captives  recovered  from  the  Amale-
kites.  If  we  study  the  data,  we  find  that
David  had  marched  with  Aehish  as  far  as
Aphek  in  the  plain  of  Jezreel  (1  Sam.  xxix.
1),  opposite  to  which,  on  the  rising  ground
near  Gilboa,  Saul  had  posted  his  army.
A  march  of  three  days  had  brought  him
back  to  Ziklag  (1  Sam.  xxx.  1),  and  after
the  shortest  possible  delay  he  had  started
in  pursuit  of  the  Amalekites.  Tlie  rapidity
of  his  movements  is  proved  by  so  large  a
proportion  of  liis  hardy  men  falling  out  of
the  ranks  at  the  brook  Boaor;  but  neverthe-
less some  time  must  have  been  lost  at
Ziklag  in  discovering  the  greatness  of  their
disaster,  in  searching  for  any  who  might
possibly  have  escaped,  in  getting  food,  and
in  mustering  again  together  for  the  pursuit.
Near  the  brook  they  seem  to  have  found  the
Egyptian  slave  who  became  their  guide,  and
who  had  been  abandoned  three  days  before
David  found  him.  It  foUowa,  therefore,  that
the  Amalekites  were  then  three  days'  march
in  advance,  and  however  rapidly  the  pur-
suit was  urged  on,  we  cannot  allow  less
than  five  days  for  it,  and  one  for  the  battle
(vers.  12,  13,  17).  The  march  homeward
would  take  a  longer  time,  as  David  was  now
encumbered  with  flocks  and  herds,  women
and  children.  If  it  took  eight  days,  the
time  occupied  in  it  by  the  Amalekites,  the
whole  period  that  had  elapsed  since  David
was  sent  away  from  Aphek  by  the  Philistine
lords  would  be  eighteen  or  nineteen  days ;
and  it  is  thus  evident  that  the  Amalekites
were  plundering  Ziklag  at  the  very  time
when  he  was  being  dismissed,  half  angry,
half  rejoicing,  at  the  slight  put  upon  him,
but  little  thinking  of  the  sad  need  there
was  for  his  presence  elsewhere.  Now,  the
messenger  from  Gilboa,  If  an  active  runner,
would  easily  traverse  in  two  days  the  dis-


tance which  David  and  his  men  had  travelled
in  three.  And  thus  it  follows  that  the
battle  at  Gilboa  was  fought  on  the  very  day
of  David's  happy  return  from  the  pursuit,
and  about  nineteen  days  after  the  review  at
Aphek.  If  the  word  "  to-morrow  "  in  1  Sam.
xxviii.  19  seems  to  imply  a  more  rapid
march  of  events,  we  must  remember  that
the  meaning  of  the  word  in  Hebrew  is  more
indefinite  than  with  us  (oomp.  Gen.  xxx.
33 ;  Exod.  xiii.  14).  With  his  clothes  rent,
and  earth  upon  his  head.  Though  the
Amalekite  came  out  of  the  camp,  yet  we  are
not  to  suppose  that  he  had  been  one  of  the
combatants.  Every  army  is  followed  by
a  vast  number  of  vagabonds,  intent  upon
gain,  purchasing  of  the  troops  their  booty,
plundering  wherever  they  have  the  chance,
and  carrying  on  a  lucrative  but  illicit  trade.
He  was  more  probably  a  sort  of  gipsy
sutler  than,  as  many  suppose,  the  slave
of  some  Israelite.  He  professes,  however,  to
be  upon  Israel's  side,  and  appears  with  the
usual  marKS  of  sorrow.  By  so  doing  he
hoped  to  commend  himself  to  David,  whom
he  knew  to  be  too  patriotic  to  rejoice  at  the
defeat  of  his  countrymen,  though  he  doubted
not  that  he  would  hear  with  joy  of  the
death  of  so  inveterate  a  personal  enemy  as
Saul.  On  this  account,  and  because  the
way  would  now  stand  open  to  David's
ambition,  he  evidently  felt  sure  of  receiving
a,  large  guerdon  for  his  news.  There  is,
moreover,  a  further  interest  in  his  conduct ;
for  it  demonstrates  the  existence  of  a  wide-
spread popular  feeling  that  David  was
destined  to  be  Israel's  king.  It  was  this
conviction  which  made  him  give  David
kingly  honour  ;  for  he  fell  to  the  earth,  and
did  obeisance.  And  all  Israel,  on  the  morrow
after  the  defeat,  would  probably  have  done
the  same,  but  for  David's  own  couduct
Israel  was  too  high-spirited  a  nation  to
take  at  once  for  a  king  a  man  who  had
marched  with  their  enemies  to  fight  against
them,  even  though  they  knew  that  the'voice
of  prophecy  had  appointed  him  to  inherit
Saul's  throne.

Ver.  3. — Out  of  the  camp  of  Israel  am  I
escaped.  Non-combatants  would  hang  about
the  army,  watching,  as  soon  as  the  battle
had  begun,  the  fortunes  of  the  day,  and  im-
mediately that  they  saw  the  impending
defeat  of  their  own  side,  would  think  chiefly
of  their  personal  safety.  But  for  an  active
young  man  the  opportunity  would  then  have
come  for  booty.  The  Philistines,  in  pursuit
of  the  enemy,  would  soon  leave  the  battle-
field in  their  rear,  and  multitudes  would
quickly  prowl  about  it  to  plunder  the  dead.
WhUe  so  busied,  the  Amalekite  falsely  re-
presents himself  as  having  come  by  chance
upon  the  wounded,  but  still  living,  Saul.

Ver.  6. — ^As  I  happened  by  chance  upon


OH.  I.  1—27.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


Monnt  Gilboa,  The  story  of  the  Amalekite
is  at  variance  with  the  account  of  Saul's
death  given  in  the  last  chapter  of  the
preceding  book.  There,-  sore  pressed  and
wounded  by  archers,  hopeless  of  escape,  and
unable  to  make  any  further  resistance,  in
sore  distress  at  the  death  of  his  sons  and  the
loss  of  the  battle,  Saul  and  his  armour-bearer
fall  upon  their  own  swords.  Here,  closely
pursued  by  chariots  and  horsemen,  the  king
is  so  utterly  deserted  by  all  his  body-guard
that  he  calls  to  a  vagabond  prowling  about
for  booty  to  slay  him.  Naturally,  Ewald
and  his  followers,  who  regard  the  books  of
the  Bible  as  mere  patchwork,  find  here  the
marks  of  different  narrators,  whose  stories
the  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Samuel  pieced
together  without  having  the  shrewdness  to
observe  that  they  were  utterly  irreconcilable.
Some  modern  commentators  have,  however,
attempted  to  harmonize  them  with  little
success.  Keally,  the  story  of  the  Amalekite
is  a  most  improbable  Action,  and  utterly
untrue.  He  knew  nothing  as  to  the  manner
of  Saul's  death,  but  found  the  body,  probably
some  time  after  the  king  had  fallen;  and
he  was  able  to  strip  it  because  the  pursuing
Philistines  were  harrying  forward  to  make
their  victory  complete,  without  being  aware
of  what  was  the  crowning  glory  of  their  suc-
cess. As  the  pursuit  advanced  it  would  soon
become  safe  for  the  Amalekite  and  others  like,
him  to  try  and  secure  some  of  the  booty  before
the  Philistines  returned.  Archers  shooting
from  a  distance  might  easily  so  distress
Saul  as  to  make  him  despair  of  escape — and
it  appears  from  the  first  narrative  that  they
had  not  recognized  him ;  for  Saul  is  afraid
lest  they  should  do  so,  and,  having  taken
him  alive,  should  "  abuse,"  or  make  a  mock
of  him.  Here  chariots  and  horsemen  are  in
close  pur^!uit,  and  the  king  faces  them
grimly ;  nevertheless,  they  allow  a  stranger,
who  would  not  have  dared  to  mix  himself
up  with  the  battle,  to  rob  them  of  their
prize.  We  may  feel  sure  that  it  was  not
until  the  tide  of  battle  had  moved  onward
in  pursuit  that  the  Amalekite  ventured  upon
the  field  to  rob  the  dead.  When  so  occu-
pied he  came  upon  a  corpse,  now  for  some
brief  space  dead,  and  at  once  recognized  the
tall  form  of  the  king,  whose  identity  was
made  more  plain  by  the  golden  circlet  upon
his  helmet.  At  once  he  saw  the  chance  of
larger  gains,  and  hastily  tearing  off  the
royal  crown  and  the  bracelet  from  the  fallen
monarch,  without  a  thought  of  rescuing  the
remains  from  the  indignities  which  the
Philistines  were  sure  to  inflict  upon  them,
he  hurried  away  with  his  tidings.  Of  course,
he  knew  nothing  of  David's  recent  conduct,
nor  that  for  some  time  he  had  accompanied
the  invading  army,  nor  that  Ziklag  had
just  experienced  rough  treatment  from  his  I


own  countrymen.  Still,  if  he  had  told  the
truth,  he  would  have  fared  well;  for  he
brought  news  of  great  importance.  But
truth  was  not  a  virtue  much  practised  in
those  days,  and,  fancying  that  the  treatment
he  had  met  with  from  Saul  would  fill
David's  heart  with  bitter  rancour  against
him;  the  Amalekite  invented  this  story  of
his  having  slain  the  king  with  his  own
hands,  in  the  expectation  that  it  would  win
for  him  a  double  reward.

Ver.  9.— -Anguish.  This  word,  which
occurs  only  in  this  place,  comes  from  a  root
signifying  to  entwine  or  knot  together.  On
this  account  Jewish  commentators  explain
it  of  cramp,  which  often  follows  upon  loss
of  blood ;  but  it  is  equally  possible  that  it
means  vertigo,  or  giddiness,  when  things
seem  to  dance  or  interweave  themselves
together  before  the  eyes.  The  next  words
signify.  For  yet  is  my  life  whole  within  me,
and  give  the  reason  why  Saul  asked  the
Amalekite  to  slay  him.  The  story  is  at
least  plausible.  It  represents  the  king  as
deserted  by  his  army,  even  to  the  last  man,
and  with  the  Philistine  cavaby  and  chariots
in  close  pursuit.  He  is  not  mortally
wounded,  but,  as  giddiness  prevents  liis
escape,  there  is  danger  of  his  falling  alive
into  the  enemy's  hand ;  and  as  they  would
probably  not  have  killed  him,  but  carried
him  in  triumph  through  their  cities,  the
way  would  still  have  been  blocked  against
David's  succession.  The  fear  of  this  indig-
nity would  account  for  Saul's  earnest  appeal
to  the  Amalekite  to  slay  him,  and,  so  re-
quested, it  seemed  right  to  put  him  to  death,
instead  of  trying  to  carry  him  off  to  a  placo
of  safety.  But  all  this  was  merely  to  keep  up
appearances,  and  in  his  heart  he  doubted
not  that  David  would  regard  it  as  a  signal
service  that  his  enemy  was  put  out  of  the
way.

Ver.  10.— After  that  he  was  fallen  ;  He-
brew, after  his  fall ;  that  is,  his  defeat ;  for
Saul  was  standing  and  supporting  himself
with  his  spear.  The  crown,  probably,  was
a  narrow  band  of  gold  encircling  the  royal
helmet.  Bracelet.  We  read  of  "  bracelets  "
in  Numb.  xxxi.  50,  in  the  enumeration  of
the  spoil  taken  from  the  Midianites,  and
there  too  apparently  they  were  the  orna-
ments of  warriors.  In  the  Assyrian  monu-
ments chiefs  are  generally  represented  with
ornaments  upon  their  wrists  and  arms  (see
Layard, '  Nineveh,'  etc.,  pi.  18).

Ver.  12. — They  mourned,  and  wept,  and
fasted.  The  sight  of  Saul's  royal  insignia
was  clear  proof  of  Israel's  disaster ;  and  this
sorrow  of  David  and  his  men  shows  how
true  their  hearts  were  to  their  country,  and
how  unbearable  would  have  been  their
position  had  not  the  prudence  of  the  Philis-
tine lords  extricated  them  from  the  difficulty


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


t«H.  1. 1—27,


in  which  they  had  been  placed  by  David's
want  of  faith.  But  David  had  other  reaeons
besides  patriotism  for  sorrow.  Personally
he  had  lost  the  truest  of  friends,  and  even
Saul  had  a  place  in  his  heart  For  he
would  contrast  with  liis  terrible  deatli  the
early  glories  of  liis  reio;n,  when  all  Israel
honoured  him  aa  its  deliverer  from  the
crushing  yolre  of  foreign  bondage,  and  when
David  was  himself  one  vi  the  most  trusty
of  his  ciiptains.  Otto  von  Gerlach  compares
David  thus  weeping  over  tl.c  fall  of  his  im-
placable enemy  with  David's  Son  weeping
over  Jerusalem,  the  city  whose  inhabitants
were  his  bitter  foes,  and  who  not  only  sought
his  death,  but  delivered  him  up  to  the
Eomans,  to  be  scourged  and  spitefully  in-
treated,  and  slid II  upon  the  cross.

Ver.  15. — Go  near,  and  fall  upon  him.
This  was  no  hasty  sentence,  for  they  had
"fa»ted  uijtil  even.'  And  before  pronounc-
ing it  David  asks,  "  Wiience  art  thou  ? "
that  is,  he  makes  more  full  inquiry  into  his
condition  and  previous  doings.  He  knew
that  ho  was  an  Amalekitc,  and  most  pro-
bably had  seen  clearly  enough  that  his
whole  story  was  false ;  but  before  deciding
upon  his  fate,  he  desired  fuller  information
as  to  the  man's  previous  life.  Hi-i  question
elicits  from  him  tiiat  lie  was  a  subject  of  Saul.
For  the  word  "stranger"  means  a  settler,
wlio  had  withdrawn  from  his  own  country
and  joined  himself  to  Israel.  Moreover,  it
was  the  AmaLkitc's  father  who  had  done
tliis,  and  probably  he  was  one  of  many,  who,
finding  their  old  nomad  life  too  dangerous,
had  sougljt  a  home  in  the  southern  districts
of  Judah  ;  but  when  tlie  war  brok(\  out,  the
old  instinct  of  these  Bedaween  made  tliem
follow  the  army  for  pilfer  and  trade  in  spoil.
But  as  the  son  of  a  settler,  the  Araalekite
owed  by  birti  i  al  legianco  to  Saul,  and,  should
the  occasion  arise,  was  bound  to  render  him
loyal  aid.  Now,  according  to  his  own  ac-
count, lie  had  found  Saul  in  no  immediate
danger  of  death,  "  for  his  life  was  still  whole
within  him."  Escape  was  at  least  possible
with  the  Amalekite's  aid,  but  he  is  eager  to
kill  him.  And  David's  question,-  "How
wast  thou  not  afraid  .  .  to  destroy  the
Lord's  anointed?"  virtually  means,  "How
WMst  thou  not  afraid  to  kill  thy  own  king?"
The  Lord,  that  is,  Jehoviih,  was  no  name  of
I  ower  to  any  outside  the  covenant  peopb,
no)-  in  settling  in  Judsca  did  the  Amalekites
accept  the  national  religion.  But  the  words
would  show  even  to  a  stranger  that  Saul
was  Israel's  lawful  and  consecrated  king.
Commentators,  with  slraugo  perverseness,
have  found  in  these  words  an  outbreak  of
selfishness  on  David's  pait,  and  have  sup-
posed that  he  wished  to  guard  his  own
person  against  fiiluro  treason  by  makiii"'
a  wholesome  example.     But  this  is  both  to


misunderstand  the  examination  of  the  cul-
prit summed  up  in  vers.  13,  14,  and  also  to
put  aside  all  account  of  the  deep  and
agonizing  sorrow  which  was  rending  David's
heart.  What  would  have  been  an  English-
man's feelinss  if  news  had  come  that  we
hiid  lost,  for  instance,  the  battle  of  Waterloo,
and  if  the  fugitive  who  brought  the  infor-
mation had  said  that  he  had  killed  the
wounded  commander-in-chief?  In  David  s
case,  besides  deep  distress  at  the  disaster
which  had  befallen  his  country,  there  was
personal  grief  for  the  death  of  Jonnthan  and
of  Saul's  other  sons,  who-  were  David's
.brothi  rs-in-law ;  and  the  words  really  prove
his  loyalty  to  Saul  himself.  He  was  still
Jehovah's  anointed,  whatever  his  conduct
might  have  been;  and  we  have  found  David
on  previous  occasions  actuated  by  the  same
generous  respect  for  duty  when  clearly  it
was  contrary  to  his  own  interests  (see,  for
instance,  1  Sam.  xxvi.  9).  David  put  the
wretch  justly  to  death  fur  meanly  murderii;g
one  whom  he  might  possibly  have  savid:
And  the  man's  very  purpose  was  to  suggest
to  David,  in  a  covert  way,  that  escape  really
was  possible,  but  that  hejiad  madn  all  things
sure,  and  so  deseiwed  a  lirge  reward.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  he  had  not  killed  Saul,  but
hnd  invented  the  story  because,  judging
David  by  his  own  immoral  standard,  he  had
supposeil  that  he  would  regard  the  crime  as
a  valuable  service.

Ver.  17. — ^David  lamented  with  this  lamen-
tation. The  Hebrew  w  ord  for  "  lamentation  "
is  luiiali,  a  technicd  t(  rm  for  an  eldgy  or  poem
commemorative  of  the  dead.  Thus  Jere-
miah wrote  a  Jcinah  in  memory  of  K  ng
Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  25) ;  and  there  is
little  doubt  that  the  "  lamentations  "  there
spoken  of  were  a  collection  of  dirges,  in
which  probably  this  ode  written  by  David
held  an  honoured  place.  In  ch.  iii.  33,  34
we  have  a  short  Icinah  in  Abnor's  honour,
which  possibly  formed  part  of  a  longer  poem,
of  which  those  two  virses  only  are  quoted
as  sufficing  to  prove,  not  only  David's  inno-
cence, but  also  his  indignation  at  Joab's
foul  deed.  In  both  these  places  we  have
remains  of  David's  secular  poetry,  and  find
it  marked  by  the  same  strong  emotion  and
the  same  sublimity  of  thought  as  distinguish
his  psalms.  We  observe  also  the  nobleness
of  David's  nature  in  his  total  silence  con-
cernin,<<  himself,  and  his  generous  eidogy,
not  of  Jonathan  only,  but  also  of  Saul.  The
mean  envy  and  the  implacable  jealousy  o(
the  latter  are  no  more  reniembcrid,  and  he
sees  iu  him,  not  the  personal  foe,  but  the  bravo
king  who  has  fallen  in  his  country's  cause.

Ver.  18.— Also  he  lade  them  teach  tho
children  of  Judah  [the  use  of]  the  bow.  The
old  view  is  that  given  by  the  inserted  words,
and  is  well  put  by  Ephrem  Syrus  in  his


ca.  1. 1—2'?.]


TflE  SECOKD  BOOK  OP  SAMtlEL.


commentary  upon  the  passage.  He  says
that,  as  Israel's  defeat  at  Gilboa  was  the
presage  of  a  long  struggle,  and  as  the  Philis-
tines had  gained  the  Tiotnry  there  by  their
skill  in  archery,  David  used  his  utmost
authority  with  his  own  tribe  to  get  them  to
practise  this  art  for  their  protection  in  future
wars,  This  explanation  would  be  plausible
were  it  not  that  we  have  reason  for  believing
that  the  Israelites  were  already  skilful  in
tlie  use  both  of  the  sling  and  the  bow,  in
both  of  which  the  Benjamites  especially  ex-
celled (1  Ohron  xii.  2).  The  modr;rn  view
is  that  given  in  the  Revised  Version,  where
the  inserted  words  are  "the  song  of"  the
bow.  "  The  Bow  "  is  thus  the  name  of  the
elegy,  taken  from  the  allusion  to  Jonathnn's
skill  in  the  use  of  that  weapon  (ver.  22 ;
oomp.  i  Sam.  xviii.  4;  xx.  36);  and  the
meaning  is  that  David  made  his  own  tribes-
men, wlio  were  probably  ill  disposed  to  Saul
and  hia  family,  leam  this  dirge,  not  so  much
for  its  preservation,  as  to  make  them  give
the  fallen  king  due  honour.  Similarly  Exud.
iii.  is  called  "  The  Bush  "  in  Mark  xii  26.
The  book  of  Jasher,  See  on  this  book  Josh.
X.  13,  where  the  Syriao  Version  calls  it
"  The  Book  of  Canticles,"  and  understands
by  it  a  collection  of  national  ballads  com-
memorative of  the  brave  deeds  of  Israelite
heroes.  Jasl.er  literally  means  "  upright,"
and  the  Book  of  Jasher  would  be  equivalent
to  "  Ilero-book,"  the  Hebrews  always  look-
ing to  Uie  moral  ratlior  than  the  physical
prowess  of  their  great  men.

Ver.  19. — The  beauty  of  Israel.  The  word
zeM  means  both  "beauty"  and  also  "the
gazelle."  EwaW  takes  it  in  the  second
sense,  and  explains  it  of  Jonathan,  "  eveiy-
where  the  first  in  oouriige,  in  activity,  and
speed ;  slender  also  arid  of  well-made  figure,
and  whose  personal  beauty  and  swiftness  of
foot  in  attack  or  retioat  gained  for  him
among  the  troops  the  name  of  '  the  gazelle.'
Tlie  Syriao  Version  also  translates 'gazelle,'"
but  Eplirom  says  that  the  whole  Israelite
■  nation  is  meant,  the  flower  of  whose  man-
hood lay  slaughtered  on  Moimt  Gilbna.
Which  signification  we  take  must  really
depend  upon  the  meaning  we  attach  to  tlie
words,  "  thy  high  place  ; "  and  these  in  the
Authorized  Version  have  nothing  to  refer  to,
and  so  become  unmeaning.  The  Revised
Version  follows  the  Vulgate  in  taking  Israel
as  a  vocative,  and  renders,  "  Thy  glory,  O
I.-.rael,  is  slain  upon  thy  high  places."  The
sense  would  thus  be  that  given  by  Ephrem,
Israel's  glory  being  its  "migl.ty"  men  or
heroes,  its  warriors  slain  upon  Mount  Gilboa
with  their  king.  But  ver.  25  makes  it  plain
that  the  "high  places"  are  Jnnathan's,  and
not  those  of  the  nation ;  and  the  more  cor-
rect rendering  is  "O  beauty  [(ir,  'gazelle']
gf  Israel,  slain  upon  thy  high  places  I  how


are  the  heroi  s  fallen  t "  Thus  Jonathan  is
certainly  meant,  and  tlie  heroes  are  the
young  prince  and  his  father;  and  as  the
hunted  antelope  Is  said  to  return  to  its  lair
in  tho  mountains,  and  there  await  its  death,
"  gazelle"  is  probablytlje  right  rendering.  In
a  dnge  in  honour  of  Saul  ami  Jonathan  w^a
may  be  pretty  sure  that  Jonathan  would  be
referred  to  in  its  opening  words,  and  the
camp-name  of  his  friend  would  bring  back
to  David's  mind  many  a  brave  feat  wrought
together,  and  many  a  pleasant  hour  of  com-
panionship in  past  years.

Ver,  20, — Gath  .  .  .  Aakelon.  By  thus
localizing  the  triumph,  and  bringing  before
the  mind  the  thought  of  multitudes  in  these
well-known  places  rejoicing  with  dance  and
song  over  the  news  of  their  victory,  a  more
affecting  picture  is  produced  by  the  con-
trast with  Israel's  distress  than  could  have
been  effected  by  mere  generalizations.  Pro-
bably, too,  there  was  present  in  David's  mind
the  remembrance  of  scenes  which  he  had
witnessed  in  those  towns.  In  course  of  time,
"  Tell  it  not  in  Gath "  became  a  proverb
(Micah  i. 'lO).  The  daughters.  It  is  the
custom  in  the  Bast  for  the  women  to  cele-
brate the  prowess  of  the  nation's  warriors
(Exod.  XV.  20;  1  Sam.  xviii.  6;  Ps.  Ixviii.
11  Revised  Version).  tTnoiroumoised.  For
some  unknown  reason,  this  word  is  used  as
a  term  of  reproach,  especially  of  the  Philis-
tines (1  Sam.  xiv.  6;  xvii.  26),

Ver.  21.— Fields  of  offerings ;  Hebrew,
fields  of  terumnth.  The  terumoth  were
lieave  offerings  (Lev.  vii.  14,  82),  and  the
Vulgate,  regarding  these  as  thank  offerings,
translates, "  Fields  of  firstfruits."  Tlie  sense
would  thus  be,  "  Fields  of  corn  such  as  was
used  for  heave  offerings."  Still,  this  sives  us
no  suitable  meaning ;  for  Gilboa  was  not  a
place  fit  lor  the  growth  of  corn ;  and  Theo-
doret,  in  his  version,  has  preserved  a  different
reading,  which  is  probably  right,  namely,
"  Ye  fields  and  mountains  cif  death. '  The
shield.,  ,  is  vilely  cast  away.  This  render-
ing contains  a  classical  idea  derived  from
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  among  whom  it  was
a  disgrace  for  a  soldier  to  return  without
his  shield.  But  this  imputes  personal
cowardice  to  Saul — a  reproach  which  is  en-
tirely undeserved ;  for  he  did  not  oast  away
his  shield,  but  remained  steadfast  unto  death.
The  right  translation  is,  "For  there  the
shield  of  heroes,  yea,  the  shield  of  Saul,  was
defiled,"  stained,  that  is,  with  blood.  We
have  no  proof  whatsoever  that  the  Israelites
had  the  same  notion  as  the  Greeks,  and  if
they  had,  David  would  certainly  not  have
put  such  a  stigma  upon  the  fallen  king.
[As  though  he  iiad]  not  [been]  anointed  with
oil.  By  rejecting  the  inserted  words,  we
get  the  original,  with  all  its  simplicity,  but
with  all  its  difficulty.


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  1. 1—27.


"  There  the  shield  of  the  heroes  was  defiled :
The  shield  of  Saul  not  anointed  with  oil."

The  interpretation  put  upon  these  words
in  the  Authorized  Version  is  taken  from  the
Vulgate,  no  mean  authority,  but  it  is  one
which  caunot  be  reconciled  with  the  Hebrew,
where  it  is  not  Saul,  but  his  shield,  which  is
referred  to.  It  was  a  Jewish  custom  to
anoint  the  shield  with  oil  before  a  baitle
(Isa.  xxi.  5),  in  order  probably  to  make  the
missiles  of  the  enemy  glance  off  from  it  with-
out injury.  And  bearing  this  in  mind,  David
now  contrasts  the  sad  issue  of  the  battle
with  the  hopes  with  which  the  warrior  had
in  old  times  gone  forth  to  war.  Then  his
shield  glistened  brightly ;  now  it  was  defiled
with  blood.  In  the  Revised  Version  the
rendering,  "vilely  oast  away,"  is  retained,
the  Revisers  not  having  perceived  that
"defiled,"  which  they  have  placed  in  the
margin,  is  absolutely  required  for  the  text
by  the  contrast  with  "the  shield  not
anointed  with  oil."

Ver.  22. — From  the  blood  of  the  slain.  In
old  time,  Saul  and  Jonathan  had  been  vic-
torious warriors,  who  had  returned  from  the
battle-field  stained  with  the  blood  of  their
enemies :  from  this  battle  they  return  no
more,  and  their  weapons  have  lost  their  old
renown.

Ver.  23.— Lovfely  and  pleasant.  The  words
of  the  Authorized  Version  contain  a  beauti-
ful antithesis,  which,  however,  does  not  exist
in  the  Hebrnw,  which  celebrates  the  close
union  of  father  and  son  in  life  as  well  as  in
death.

"  Saul  and  Jonathan,  the  lovely  and  pleasant.
Neither  in  their  lives  nor  in  their  death
were  they  divided."

Notwithstanding  Saul's  rash  vow,  Jonathan
had  ever  been  his  father's  faithful  friend
and  companion,  nor  had  his  affection  for
David  made  him  untrue  to  the  ties  of  natural
affection.  And  David  generously  commends
his  friend  for  thus  acting.

Ver.  24. — ^Ye  daughters  of  Israel.  In  old
time,  the  women  of  Israel  had  celebrated
Saul's  triumphs  (ver.  20),  but  now  it  is
their  sad  office  to  bewail  his  death.  And  a
touching  reason  is  given  for  their  sorrow.
During  Baul's  reign  the  condition  of  the


women  had  greatly  improved.  When  a
nation  is  in  the  miserable  plight  described
in  1  Sam.  xiii.  19—22,  there  is  neither
safety  nor  comfort  for  the  weak ;  but  when
the  strong  arm  of  Saul  had  won  freedom  for
Israel,  the  women  were  the  first  to  reap  the
benefit,  and  "their  scarlet  clothing  with
delights,"  that  is,  their  delightful  or  delicate
clothing  of  bright  colours  and  their  golden
ornaments,  prove  that  the  nation  had  made
a  great  advance  in  prosperity  and  culture
during  the  happier  years  of  Saul's  reign.

Ver.  26.— Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful.
Never  was  there  a  purer  friendship  than  that
of  Jonathan  for  David.  It  began  just  after
the  combat  with  Guliath,  when  the  young
prince,  instead  of  seeing  in  David  a  rival,
who  had  equalled  his  own  teat  of  valour,
took  him  to  his  heart,  put  upon  him  his
own  robe  and  armour,  and  thus  presented
him  to  the  army  as  his  friend  and  brother.
Nor  did  his  father's  hatred  of  David,  nor
the  knowledge  that  David  was  to  inherit
the  kingdom,  interfere  with  his  love.  He
remained  a  dutiful  son  to  his  father,  and
accepted  his  inferior  position  with, magna-
nimity, without  once  seeing  in  David  cause
for  blame;  and  it  surpassed  the  love  ot
women,  because,  to  requite  their  devotion,
they  look  for  protection  and  homage,  the
more  delightful  because  it  is  paid  by  the
strong  to  the  weak.  But  here  the  lives  of
the  two  friends  could  not  combine  in  one
happy  fusion  of  mutual  union.  Their  hearts
were  bound  together,  but  a  hard  fate,  of
which  tliey  were  fully  aware,  made  the  ruin
of  the  one  the  certain  result  of  the  happiness
ot  the  otlier.  Nevertheless,  Jonathan,  with
everything  to  lose,  and  David  with  every-
thing to  gain,  remained  true  and  loyal
friends.

Ver.  27.— How  are  the  mighty  fallen!
This  lament,  which  occurs  three  times,  is
the  central  thought  of  the  elegy.  Glorious
and  noble  in  their  past  lives,  the  heroes  had
now  fallen,  not  as  Wolfe  fell  at  Quebec,  with
the  shout  of  victory  in  his  ears,  but  .in  the
lost  battle.  And  David  sueks  relief  for  his
distress  in  dwelling  upon  the  sad  contrast
between  the  splendid  victories  which  Saul
had  won  for  Israel  when  first  chosen  to  be
king,  and  the  terrible  defeat  by  which  life
and  kingdom  had  now  been  lost.


HOMILBTICS.

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  facts  of  this  section  may  be  stated  thus  :  1.  David  having  retired
to  Ziklag  during  the  conflict  between  Israel  and  the  Philistines,  a  messenger  from  the
seat  of  war  comes  to  pay  him  homage.  2.  David,  being  as  yet  in  ignorance  of  the  event
on  GUboa,  and  being  impressed  by  the  signs  of  mourning  on  the  stranger,  is  prompted
to  ask  whence  he  came.  3.  Eager  to  ascertain  turther  information,  he  learns  from  the
Amalekite,  not  only  that  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  dead,  but  that,  according  to  the


CH.  1. 1— 27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


stranger's  story,  the  former  had  been  killed  by  the  hand  of  the  narrator,     i^  In
evidence  of  the  truth  of  his  story,  the  man  produces  Saul's  crown  and  bracelet.

Waiting  on  Providence.  David's  retirement  at  Ziklag  is  to  be  regarded  in  connection
with  his  well-established  conviction  that  he  was  the  chosen  servant  destined  to  occupy
a  foremost  place  in  establishing  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  persistent  resolve  not  to
take  a  single  step  of  his  own  devising  that  would  seem  to  force  on  the  removal  of  Saul
from  the  throne,  in  order  to  secure  thereby  his  own  elevation.  Events  had  forced  him
into  a  quasi-public  position  as  the  rival  of  Saul,  much  as  he  disclaimed  all  rivalry ;
and  now,  in  a  foreign  land,  with  a  following  not  of  his  own  seeking,  and  sensible  that  a
crisis  was  at  hand,  he  felt  that  he  could  do  nothing  but  maintain  a  resolute  inactivity,
leaving  the  issue  of  impending  events  to  Providence.  A  belief  in  Providence  is  very
common ;  in  word  men  express  their  dependence  on  it,  and  there  are  seasons  in  human
life  when,  perhaps,  all  we  can  do  is  to  wait  on  Providence.  There  is,  however,  a  false,
even  wicked,  waiting,  which  is  but  another  name  for  idleness  or  fatalism,  or  vague
looking  for  some  lucky  chance.  Considering  the  case  of  David,  we  can  trace  some  of
the  features  of  a  true  waiting  on  Providence.    There  is —

I.  Deep  conviction  of  being  devoted  to  a  holy  cause.  Life  is  devoted  to  a
Divine,  not  a  merely  human,  purpose.  This  was  pre-eminently  characteristic  of  David
at  this  time.  He  was  conscious  of  being  personally  identified  with  the  working  out  of
God's  holy  purpose  towards  mankind.  He  had  passed  out  of  the  realm  of  self-seeking  into
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  in  pviblio  and  priv.ite  lived  for  God.  Here  lies  the  beginning
of  our  right  and  privilege  to  wait  on  Providence.  As  our  Lord's  life  was  a  nobler
instance  of  consecration  to  a  holy  cause  than  was  David's,  so  now  ours  may  be  an
instance  less  conspicuous  than  his,  though  in  our  measure  as  real.  It  is  possible  for
us  to  be  one  with  Christ  and  his  kingdom — absorbed,  amidst  even  private  and  domestic
life,  with  the  purpose  dear  to  his  heart.  Our  life  gains  power  and  glory  only  in  propor-
tion as  we  are  enabled  to  cherish  a  well-founded  conviction  that  we  are  not  living  for
merely  temporal  and  material  considerations,  but  for  God,  and  in  that  sense  are  his
chosen  servants  for  specitic  purposes,  as  truly  as  was  David  when,  in  retirement  at
Ziklag,  he  knew  he  was  the  chosen  King  of  Israel.

II.  Freedom  from  selfish  and  malevolent  desires.  David  desired  not  elevation
for  the  sake  of  personal  gratification;  nor  did  he  desire  disaster  for  Saul  that  a  great
obstacle  to  his  own  advance  might  be  put  aside.  Men  consecrated  to  God  are  open  to
the  subtle  temptation  of  desiring  events  to  move  on  so  as  to  promote  their  own  personal
ease  at  the  cost  of  much  that  is  sacred.  Under  plea  of  greater  usefulness,  we  may  long
for  Providence  to  open  a  pathway  for  us,  when,  if  motives  are  severely  scrutinized,
there  is  discovered  a  secret  longing  for  personal  gratification.  The  interlacings  of
human  life  are  such  that  the  displacement  of  one  may  be  a  pre-reqnisite  to  the  freer
action  and  wider  usefulness  of  another;  and  one  whose  course  is  hampered  by  obstsoles
may  almost  unconsciously  cherish  the  wish  that  some  event  may  happen  which,  by  the
trouble  and  loss  it  brings  to  another,  will  promote  his  own  interests.  No  one  truly
waits  on  Providence  who  cherishes  this  spirit.  The  man  of  business  who,  amidst  diffi-
culties,, looks  out  eagerly  for  the  downfall  of  others  as  a  means  of  his  own  improved
chance  in  competition,  must  not  flatter  himself  that  all  along  he  has  been  quietly
waitiuR  on  Providence.  It  often  requires  very  high  religious  principle  to  labour  on  in
obscurity,  blessed  by  apparently  few  results,  with  a  calin  trust  in  God  untainted  by  the
desire  that  others,  possibly  less  worthy  in  character,  may  be  swept  away  by  resistless
events  to  make  more  room  for  ourselves.  David's  sentiments  towards  Saul,  who  stood
in  his  pathway,  are  full  of  instruction  to  all.

III.  Recognition  op  God's  ceaseless  control  over  obstacles,  and  of  his
steadily  dnfoldino  purposes.  Most  probably  David's  followers,  knowing  as  they
did  that  Saul  stood  between  him  and  the  throne,  often  marvelled  at  his  patient
inactivity.  But  by  a  keener  spiritual  vision  than  they  possessed,  he  recognized  the
perfect  control  of  the  God  he  served,  and  had  amazing  faith  in  the  sure  though  slow
unfolding  of  his  purposes.  Hence  he  could  wait  and  be  still.  This  quality  has  always
entered  largely  into  the  character  of  those  who  have  done  great  service  in  the  interests
of  truth  and  righteousness.  Our  Saviour,  during  his  earthly  life,  was  a  conspicuous
instance.     He  was  despised,  rejected,  of  the  people  tht-re  were  none  with  him,  and  events


THE  SECOKD  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  1. 1—27,


seemed  to  the  minds  of  his  disciples  (John  xiv.  1  i  xvi.  19—22 ;  Luke  xxiv.  21)  to  he
disastrous  to  his  cause;  and  yet  all  through  he  never  distrusted  the  Jfftther,  and  in
fulness  of  confidence  could  anticipate  the  results  of  a  steady  unfoldmg  of  the  JJivme
purpose  (John  x.  16).  So  likewise  we  In  secular  and  spiritual  affairs  may  he  said  to
wait  on  Providence  when,  in  spite  of  difiSculties  that  almost  crush  out  our  life,  we,
being  conscious  of  onenesB  with  Christ,  stagger  not  in  our  belief  in  the  all-controlling
wisdom  and  power,  and  rest  in  the  certainty  of  an  order  of  things  which  is  being
directed  towards  the  realization  of  the  Divine  purposes  with  which  our  entire  life  is
identified.  "  Have  faith  in  God."  He  slumbers  not ;  he  sleeps  not ;  he  works,  and
who  shall  let  ?

IV.  Readiness  fob  action,  beoulatbd  bt  resolve  onlt  to  act  in  habuont
WITH  HIGHEST  LAW.  David  was  ready  to  act  whenever  occasion  offered ;  but  he  would
not  create  occasion,  and  that  because  he  saw  that,  in  the  continuance  of  Saul's  life
and  reign,  there  was  involved  a  great  principle.  For  had  he  not  been  chosen  by  God  ?
and  was  not  God  now  allowing  him  to  work  out  his  own  chastisement  in  harmony  with
jfar-reaching  moral  laws  ?  David  could  only  act  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  law  which
seemed  to  be  expressed  in  Saul's  sad  life — namely,  the  removal  of  the  unworthy  by  a
natural  process.  There  was  a  reserve  of  power  in  Christ  during  his  life  among  men
which  could  have  accomplished  startling  results  had  he  put  it  forth- just  as  David
could  have  precipitated  events  by  putting  forth  his  strength  against  Saul — but  he
restrained  himself.  He  was  patient,  and  abstained  from  any  action  that  would  run
counter  to  the  moral  and  physical  laws  by  which  God  was  then  governing  mankind.
On  the  same  principle  he  now  carries  on  his  work  in  the  world.  Men  do  not  under-
stand him  when  they  look  for  an  extension  of  Christianity  in  violation  of  the  laws  of
moral  and  social  life  which  God  has  ordained.  We  are  entrusted  with  more  power  than
it  is  fit  to  put  forth.  Its  exercise  is  to  be  regulated  by  regard  to  law.  Especially  in
esibarrassed  circumstances,  when  it  seems  as  though,  in  our  business,  our  domestic
affairs,  or  Church  action,  we  could  make  marked  advance  by  a  vigorous  effort  in  a  given
direction,  does  it  become  us  to  ask  whether  such  Hction  would  be  in  harmony  with  the
law  of  righteousness.  During  the  sorrows  of  the  Church  (Luke  xxi,  9 — 21),  when  it
seemed  as  though  active  resistance  by  the  sword  was  essential  to  self  preservation,  the
disciples  were  to  be  patient,  and  not  run  counter  to  the  law  of  the  gospel  by  endeavour-
ing to  maintain  a  kingdom  of  peace  by  carnal  weapons.  We  must  wait  for  God,  be
ready  to  act  when  action  will  harmonize  with  the  holy  laws  of  God's  government.

V.  JiTDIOIOtrS   USE  OF   TIME,  AS  JUSTIFIED   BT  THE   OIROUMSTANCES  OP  OtTB  POSITION.

David  could  not  act  against  Saul ;  he  could  not  benefit  Israel  by  seeking  to  rid  them  of
an  unworthy  ruler ;  but  he  could  seek  to  remedy  the  evils  caused  by  the  Amalekites
at  Ziklag  (1  Sam.  xxx.  1,  26),  and  also  discipline  and  organize  his  adherents
( 1  Chron.  xii.),  and  so  put  himself  and  his  men  in  a  position  to  move  towards  Palestine
when  God  opened  the  way.  The  disciples  of  Christ  were  powerless  to  act  on  the  world
for  some  weeks  after  his  death,  but  they  cherished  faith  in  their  Lord,  and,  till  the  time
apiointed  by  Providence  came,  they  wisely  kept  together  for  prayer  and  mutual
encouragement  (Acts  i.  14 ;  cf.  ii.  1—13).  The  Christian  Church  may  believe  itself
called  to  enter  on  a  great  missionary  enterprise  in  an  at-present  inaccessible  country.
It  must  not  violate  the  laws  of  God  by  rushing  into  disaster  under  plea  of  promoting  a
good  cause,  but  must  gather  up  materials  and  become  ready  to  enter  in  when  a  higher
power  opens  the  way.  The  same  principle  applies  to  our  extension  of  business, "our
entering  on  new  or  wider  professions,  and  especially  if  we  are  ambitious  to  consecrate
ourselves  to  the  work  of  the  Christian  ministry.  Those  who,  after  the  example  of
David,  wait  on  Providence,  will  find  in  the  end  that  thei  ways  of  God,  though  apparently
slow  and  often  trying  to  patience,  are  indicated  by  the  issue.

A  subtle  temptation.  The  Amalekite  who  came  to  David  may  bo  regarded  as  an
Instance  of  a  quick-witted  cunning  man,  observant  of  facts  affecting  the  interests  of
others,  and  swiftly  ingenious  to  work  them  up  into  a  plausible  form,  ostensibly  for  the
advantage  of  strangers,  but  really  for  his  own  advancement  and  material  gain  He
knew  just  cuough  of  the  outward  development  of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  see  in  events
an  opportunity  for  making  them  subservient  to  his  own  purposes  Like  some  of  the
present  day,  who  are  aliens  to  the^  spiritual  Christian  commonwealth,  but  who  scruple


OB.  1. 1—2?.]  THE  BECOKD  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


not  to  make  a  profession  of  some  interest  in  it  a  means  of  attaining  to  social  position
and  material  prosperity,  so  did  lie  pay  honour  to  tlie  cliosen  servant  of  Qod  lor  wliat  lie
colild  gain  tliereby.  But  the  main  point  in  Iiis  conduct  centres  on  David.  He  came
practically  in  the  form  of  a  tempter  to  one  who  had  long  been  under  the  force  of  strong
temptation  to  desire  and  seek  the  removal  from  position,  if  not  from  life,  of  one  who
had  been  both  an  ungrateful  enemy  and  an  obstacle  to  the  carrying  out  of  his  life's
mission.  We  have  seen  in  our  comments  on  the  First  Book  of  Samuel  how  bravely
David  had  withstood  all  the  influences  which  urged  to  action  against  Saul.  He  had
triumphed,  and  was  now  calmly  waiting  on  Providence  at  Ziklag.  But  now  the  hand
of  Providence  was  being  manifested  without  any  action  of  his  own.  For  does  cot  this
stranger  declare  the  great  news  that  the  miserable  king  was  fallen ;  that  by  an  act  of
his  own  he  had  saved  Israel  from  the  shame  of  his  dying  directly  under  Philistine
hands ;  and  that  the  crown — the  symbol  of  authority— was  now  within  David's  own
camp?  Is  there  not  here,  then,  release  from  the  severe  tension  of  self-restraint  which
for  years  had  been  put  on  thought  and  deed?  Now  surely  David  may  breathe  freely,
and  even  bless  God  and  take  courage  1  Gratitude  to  such  a  newsbearer  was  surely
due,  and  a  sobered  gladness  may  legitimately  be  cherished  1  Let  us,  then,  consider  the
nature  of  subtle  temptations.

I.  Thet  may  spring  from  cnlookkd-fob  souboes,  and  bo  take  va  off  oub
60ABD.  Who  would  have  supposed  that  an  Amalekite — a  man  whose  tribe  had  been
in  conflict  with  David — would  have  appeared  before  him  as  bearer  of  news  most
momentous  as  affecting  his  future  career?  The  apparent  disinterestedness  of  one
who  could  not  be  a  partisan  would  render  David  open  to  the  natural  effect  of  the
tidings  on  an  ordinary  heart.  So  in  our  life  subtle  temptations,  calling  us  to  no
ostensible  act  of  wrong,  spring  up  we  know  not  how,  and  take  us  by  surprise.  It  may
be  an  evU  thought  is  suddenly  obtruded  in  a  line  of  ordinary  thought ;  or  a  friend
hints  at  a  possibility  without  suggesting  a  deed  or  a  feeling ;  or  a  set  of  facts  start
before  the  observing  faculty,  conveying,  by  their  convergence  on  a  matter  of  special
interest  to  us,  an  impulse  to  cherish  a  definite  class  of  feelings  which,  when  examined
in  cool  moments,  is  found  to  be  essentially  unholy.  "  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter
into  temptation,"  was  an  exhortation  based  on  a  profound  knowledge  of  the  manifold
avenues  along  which  subtle  promptings  to  evil  may  enter  into  and  possess  the  soul.

II.  They  mat  not  call  to  ant  definite  action.  In  this  case  David  was  even
relieved,  by  the  fact  of  the  tidings,  from  the  pressure  that  had  so  long  been  on  him  to
take  action  for  his  own  advancement.  Whatever  appeal  there  was  in  the  temptation
was  simply  to  the  seat  of  feeling.  The  constitutional  weakness  of  man  is  to  feel  satis-
faction when  an  enemy  is  removed,  and,  though  conventional  custom  may  lead  us  to
say  that  that  satisfaction  is  tempered  by  sadness,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  in  this  there  is
more  of  form  than  reality.  Many  men  would  not  see  any  temptation  in  this  narrative.
They  cannot  see  that  character  Ues  in  feeling  cherished,  more  than  in  acts  that  mani-
festly violate  some  law  of  God  or  man. '  Incitements  to  deeds  of  open  vice  do  not  form
the  most  dangerous  evils  of  our  lot.  Satan  ruins  more  by  undermining  than  by  direct
assault.  The  weakening  of  the  inner  seat  of  purity  and  kindliness  alone  need  not
involve  any  deed  or  word  known  to  our  fellow-creatures.

III.  Thet  mat  pbesent  themselves  undeb  cover  of  conbidebations  of  expe-
diency. Judging  from  the  standard  that  governs  the  lives  of  most  men,  the  Amale-
kite imagined  that  his  story  would  gratify  David  for  two  reasons — one,  that  hopes  long
cherished  of  being  of  service  to  Israel  were  soon  to  be  realized ;  the  other,  that  Saul  was
set  aside  by  other  hands  than  his  own.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that,  in  proportion
to  the  strength  of  bis  hope  of  some. day  being  the  means  of  raising  Israel  from  the
sorrows  which  had  come  by  the  misrule  of  Saul,  so  would  be  the  tendency  to  rejoice  in
its  speedy  realization  ;  and  this  he  knew  would  be  legitimate.  Hence,  although,  as  a
kindly  good  man,  he  might  well  abstain  from  cherishing  any  secret  satisfaction  at  the
disaster  which  had  befallen  Saul,  yet,  in  view  of  the  beneficial  issues  about  to  flow  from
the  event,  would  there  not  be  valid  ground  for  so  doing  ?  Was  not  the  welfare  of  the
nation  of  more  importance  than  sentiment  for  an  individual?  And  could  he  not  dis-
tinguish between  malicious  joy,  and  satisfaction  in  the  rising  of  public  good  out  of
personal  disaster  ?  It  is  thus  easy  for  one  nation  to  find,  by  a  swift  process  of  thought,
plausible  pretext  for  satisfaction  in  the  calamities  of  another  nation.    Possibly  our


10  THE   SECOND   BOOK   OP   SAMUEL.  [oh.  I.  1—27.


Church  life  is  not  free  from  the  subtle  temptation,  when  we  observe,  m  the  decay  of
rival  parties  or  denominations,  a  probable  increase  to  the  strength  of  our  own.  ^usiness
men  may  argue  that  benefits  to  society  arise  from  the  downfall  of  houses  trading  on
an  insecure  basis,  and  so  cover  the  real  character  of  the  personal  satisfaction  entertained.
"We  need  to  be  much  on  our  guard  when  the  reasoning  powers  are  stimulated  to  justify
sentiments  which  in  their  simple  nakedness  would  be  instinctively  abhorred  by  a  very
holy  and  loving  nature.     In  moral  matters  the  first  judgments  are  safest.

IV.  Thet  do  not  bevbal  ob  buqgest  the  immediate  and  remote  consequences
OP  YIELDING.  The  point  of  the  temptation,  as  it  fell  on  David's  nature,  was  simply
to  develop  a  certain  feeling  of  satisfaction  that,  as  he  could  not  and  would  not  raise  a
hand  against  Saul,  some  one  else,  in  a  natural  course  of  events,  had  been  permitted  by
Providence  to  do  so,  and  thus  had  secured  the  opening  of  the  door  for  which  he  had
been  waiting.  Now,  this  feeling,  so  natural  to  many  men,  so  commonly  cherished
under  kindred  circumstances,  even  though  a  human  weakness,  was  simply  a  private
transitory  sentiment  passing  over  the  inner  life,  and  forming  no  feature  in  conduct.  It
seemed  to  begin  and  end  there  and  then.  Its  presence,  if  permitted,  was  a  trifle,  and
inflicted  no  injury  on  society.  Thus,  while  other  temptations  on  presentation  startle
the  ordinary  mind  by  beii^  associated  at  once  with  damage  to  social  position,  or  to
family  or  nation,  temptations  of  this  class  do  not  reveal  or  suggest  at  the  time  their
consequences.  Of  course,  evil  is  to  be  resisted  as  evil  apart  from  effects ;  and  a  pure
mind  will  immediately  detect  the  essentially  immoral  nature  of  any  internal  incitement
to  transitory  impurity  of  sentiment.  But  it  is  easier  to  many  to  detect  and  resist
temptations  of  the  other  class.  No  doubt  every  deterioration  of  feeling  does  issue  in
disastrous  consequences,  as  surely  as  do  open  acts  of  vice,  only  the  subtle  process
escapes  notice.  Consequently  many  good  men,  forgetting  this,  often  entertain  sug-
gested transitory  feelings  of  evil,  which,  did  they  but  duly  consider  the  necessary
deterioration  of  their  entire  life  which  thereupon  sets  in,  they  would  carefully  watch
against  and  resist.

Pbactical  lessons.  1.  We  ought  to  act  at  all  times  under  the  influence  of  the
fact  that  at  no  hour  are  we  free  from  the  possibility  of  being  subjected  to  very  subtle
temptations.  2.  The  more  cultivated  and  tried  our  piety,  the  more  likely  is  it  that
the  trials  of  our  religious  purity  will  come  in  forms  not  suggestive  of  open  acts  of
transgression.  3.  Whenever  the  reasonings  of  expediency  come  in  to  justify  the
indulgence  of  sentiments  of  which  doubt  may  have  arisen  as  to  their  moral  quality,
we  may  safely  be  suspicious  of  fallacy,  and  so  should  close  the  debate  at  once.  4.  It
is  very  possible  that  a  long  season  of  persistent  temptation  to  actual  wrong,  as  in  the
case  of  David  for  years  past,  may  culminate  in  a  temptation  more  severe,  because  more
difficult  of  detection,  and  which,  if  yielded  to,  would  virtually  undo  the  work  of  years  of
resistance.  Therefore  we  need  to  be  specially  watchful  when  the  end  of  our  trials  is
near.

Vers.  11 — 27. — The  facts  of  the  section  are :  1,  Having  become  assured,  through  the
testimony  of  the  Amalekite,  of  the  defeat  of  Israel  in  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan,
David  and  his  men  spent  the  rest  of  the  day  in  mourning.  2.  On  the  morrow
David  examines  the  Amalekite  as  to  the  particulars  of  Saul's  death,  and  being  shocked
at  the  sin  and  shame  of  slaying  the  Lord's  anointed,  he  condemns  the  man  to  death.
3.  Being  left  to  his  own  reflections  on  the  sad  event  which  had  happened  to  Israel,  he
composes  an  elegy,  as  an  expression  of  his  own  feelings  and  for  the  use  of  Israel,  in
which  he  refers  in  impassioned  language  to  (1)  the  greatness  of  the  calamity  ;  (2)
its  possible  humiliation  and  shame  to  Israel  should  it  become  freely  known  in  Philis-
tine cities,  and  its  future  mournful  associations  with  the  locality  in  which  it  occurred ;
(3)  the  better  qualities  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  in  their  relation  to  their  country  and  to  each
other;  (4)  the  reason  for  sorrow  even  among  the  nora-fighting  members  of  the  com-
munity, as  they  reflect  on  the  improved  personal  comforts  incident  to  Saul's  reign  ;
and  (5)  his  special  friendship  with  Jonathan,  as  the  joy  and  solace  of  byi^one  years.
The  teaching  of  these  facts  and  expressions  of  feeling  may  be  summarized  by
embracing  the  public  act  of  mourning  for  Saul  and  the  poetic  lament  under  one  con-
ception, and  unfolding  the  various  truths  thus  contained.  But,  in  order  to  secure  more
consecution  in  dealing  with  those  two  items,  we  may  consider  first  the  teaching


CH.  1. 1— 27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  11

emliodied  in  the  conduct  of  the  Amalekite  in  its  contrast  with  that  of  David ;  and  this
can  perhaps  be  best  expressed  by  setting  forth  a  contrast  of  states  of  mind.  Hence
notice —

Secularitff  and  spirititaMty  of  mind  in  contrast.  The  conduct  of  the  Amalekite  was
very  natural,  as  we  find  men  in  general.  So  far  as  he  had  a  policy,  it  would  have  com-
mended itself  to  multitudes.  Observant,  shrewd,  and  on  the  alert  for  an  advantage,  he
evidently  was  well  aware  of  the  feud  between  Saul  and  David ;  and  knowing  how  of
late  David  had  smitten  his  own  countrymen,  he  judged  it  more  prudent  to  conciliate
him  by  performing  an  act  conducive  to  his  elevation  to  a  throne,  than  by  simply
purloining  jewels  on  a  battle-field.  The  story  concocted  about  his  actually  slaying
Saul  was  told  with  the  utmost  self-complacence,  as  though  no  one  could  doubt  the
mercifulness  and  the  utility  of  the  act ;  and  no  one  could  have  been  more  amazed  than
himself  when  David  represented  the  act  as  most  shocking,  and  condemned  him  to  die
for  such  wicked  temerity.  On  the  other  hand,  David's  conduct  is  the  reverse  of  what
would  have  been  generally  pursued.  For  Saul  had  been  a  most  bitter  and  unrelenting
enemy ;  had  charged  him  with  crimes  most  heinous ;  had  driven  him  into  a  painful
exile ;  had  returned  generosity  by  increased  hatred ;  and  was,  as  David  knew,  the  only
living  obstacle  to  his  return  to  Israel  and  elevation  to  the  throne.  And  yet,  not  only
had  David  been  unwilling  to  do  a  single  deed  that  might  be  construed  as  tending  to
weaken  Saul's  legitimate  authority,  but  he  now  even  deplores  the  reported  action  of
this  his  would-be  foreign  helper,  and  charges  him  with  having  committed,  on  his  own
showing,  a  most  shocking  crime.  Now,  the  contrast  of  the  conduct  and  views  of  the
two  men  is  to  be  found  in  the  utter  dissimilarity  of  their  respective  habitual  states  of
mind.    The  one  was  intensely  secular,  and  the  other  intensely  spiritual.    Consider —

I.  In  what  seculaeitt  and  bpibitualitt  or  mind  eespectively  consist,  and
Fow  THEY  BXPEES8  THEMSELVES.  1.  The  One  consists  mainly  in  the  tendency  to  looJe
at  things  out  of  their  spiritual  relations,  and  the  other  to  look  at  them  in  those  relations.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  know  that,  consequent  on  the  existence  of  a  supreme  Being  and
a  moral  government  which  he  exercises  over  spiritual  beings,  the  whole  universe  is
comprised  of  two  distinct  yet  inter-related  spheres— the  material  and  perishable  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  spiritual  and  imperishable  on  the  other.  As  men  necessitated  to
work  out  the  first  lines  of  our  destiny  under  material  conditions,  and  therefore  in
incessant  contact  with  the  perishable,  we  are,  through  the  bluntness  of  our  superior
perceptions,  superinduced  by  sin,  prone  to  regard  all  events  as  pertaining  to  our  fleet-
ing eaithly  experience.  This  is  secularity  of  mind — the  mind  that  sees  only  the  lower
side  of  man's  life,  and  takes  no  note  of  the  higher  destiny  of  which  he  is  capable.  On
the  other  hand,  spirituality  of  mind,  while  recognizing  the  value  and  Divine  source  of
our  common  lot  as  creatures  of  struggle  under  material  conditions,  perceives  the  reality
of  the  higher  invisible  sphere,  and  estimates  all  things  in  the  lower  according  to  its
relation  to  the  great  facts  and  dominating  laws  of  the  higher.  The  Amalekite  looked
on  Saul  as  simply  a  man  belonging  to  a  mundane  order  of  things,  in  which  other  men
were  striving  for  the  mastery  with  him.  David  saw  the  existence,  alongside  the  mun-
dane order,  of  an  invisible  kingdom,  and  he  recognized  in  Saul  an  embodiment  of  a
Divine  principle — an  institution  of  Divine  authorization.  For  was  he  not  the  Lord's
anointed?  Was  there  not  more  in  his  existence  than  was  comprised  in  range  of
Amalekite  vision  ?  Here  lies  the  dividing  line  between  the  two  great  classes  of  men.
The  one  sees  a  passing  age,  with  its  wants  and  struggles  appropriate  to  that  age ;  the
other  sees  an  invisible  and  enduring  spiritual  order,  and  that  man  is  to  be  viewed  in
relation  to  that  order.  The  one,  therefore,  is  carnal,  restricted  in  range,  utilitarian,  and
in  league  with  practices  that  "pay;"  the  other  is  religious,  wide  as  infinity  in  range,
pervaded  by  conscious  supremacy  of  holy  principles,  and  in  alliance  with  only  what  is
pure  and  pleasing  before  God.  2.  In  accordance  with  their  essential  nature,  they  will
respectively  manifest  themselves  at  times,  the  one  in  a  use  of  sacred  things  for  personal
gain,  and  the  other  in  self-ahnegation  out  of  reverence  for  what  is  Divine.  It  was  the
purely  secular  mind  of  the  Amalekite  that  led  to  his  endeavour  to  make  gain  out  of
the  death  of  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  that,  too,  without  supposing  that  he  was  doing
anything  remarkable.  It  was  David's  high-toned  spirituality  that  led  him  to  ignore
all  the  wrongs  he  had  experienced  at  the  hand  of  Saul,  and  to  pass  by  the  faults  and


12  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtJBt.  Ids.  i.  i—2/t.


follies  of  tlie  ui  happy  monarch,  and,  instead  of  finding  pleasure  in  prospect  of  his  own
coming  promotion,  to  feel  as  though  in  the  act  done  by  tbo  Amalekite  A  violence  had
been  perpetrated  against  the  most  holy  of  institutions.  So  has  it  been  in  all  ages,  and
is  still.  Men  can  barter  religious  professions  for  gain;  or  calmly  and  irreverently
handle  sacred  subjects  as  though  of  common  import ;  or  behave  in  the  presence  of
sacred  realities  as  though  treading  on  unhallowed  groimd.  Judas,  Simon  Magus,  the
revilors  at  the  ^'068,  have  their  counterparts  in  those  who  seek  gain  by  complying
with  the  will  of  godless  authorities,  professional  zealots  for  Christianity,  and  cynics  who
make  sport  of  sacred  things.  3.  But,  also,  it  is  a  tendency  which  in  each  ease  givet
colour'  to  the  entire  life.  It  was  not  a  new  thing  for  the  Amalekite  thus  to  think  and
feel  concerning  Saul  and  his  relation  to  Israel  and  David ;  for  all  along  Saul  had  been
to  him  simply  one  of  many  rulers  among  men,  and  the  conflict  of  the  past  years  had
been  only  a  trial  of  human  strength  and  skill.  And,  also,  David's  profound  reverence
for  the  Divine  idea  in  Saul's  kingship,  and  his  faith  in  the  reality  of  a  Divine  purpose
for  men  being  incorporated  with  it,  had  permeated  his  life  during  the  weary  days  ol
exile.  The  two  men  were  always  governed  by  their  respective  tendencies.  The  one
life  was  narrowed,  rendered  gross  and  liard  by  persistent  secularity ;  the  other  was
broadened,  refined,  and  beautified  by  constant  communion  with  the  unseen  and  eternal.
The  whole  domestic  and  private  as  well  as  public  life  of  men  is  affected  for  the  worse
or  better  as  they  are  secular  or  spiritual  in  tone.  Spirituality  is  favourable  to  every
phase  of  human  experience.  Secularity  means  debasement.  Were  society  pervaded
by  so  pure,  unselfish,  and  spiritually  perceptive  a  temper  as  was  David's,  and  more  so,
David's  greater  Son,  how  .smoothly  would  the  machinery  of  life  move  on,  and  what
music  would  there  be  in  its  roll !

IL  The   PINAL  KESULT  OF  DTDnLGIKO  TS  THESE  OPPOSITE  STATES  (St  UINO.      As  a

fact,  the  Amalekite's  zt'al  brought  him  disappointment — death.  David's  fine  percep-
tion of  the  sanctities  of  lile,  his  habitual  reverence  for  Divine  institutions  as  seen  in  sul
his  relations  to  Saul,  his  consciousness  that  God  was  establishing  his  ovm  kingdom
in  his  own  way, — all  this  issued  in  elevation  to  a  position  where  spirituality  of  mind
cotild  be  exercised  for  the  greater  good  of  Israel.  Prophetic  is  this  of  the  end  of  all
secularity  and  spirituality.  The  one  must  end  in  disappointment — iu  loss  of  those
things  which  it  was  thought  would  be  gained,  and  even  m  judicial  separation  from  the
pure  in  heart  (Matt.  xvi.  26;  vii.  21—23).  The  other  is  an  educatiou  by  which  we
become  qualified  to  rise  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  to  exercise  over  others  a  higher  and
wider  influence  than  otherwise  could  be  obtained  (1  John  iii.  2,  3 :  Matt.  xxv.  23 ;  1
Tim.  vi.  11, 12  ;  Eom.  iii.  21).

GBNERAt  LESSONS.  1.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  form  our  estimate  of  what  others
may  do  from  the  ideas  and  feelings  that  govern  our  own  actions.  The  Amalekite  could
not  conceive  of  any  one  not  rejoicing  in  the  death  of  a  foe.  2.  Dull  perception  of
spirituiJ  realities  is  a  real  impoverishment  of  life,  as  truly  as  is  an  afliiction  of  blindness
or  deafness.  3.  Eegard  for  Divine  institutions  is  to  be  cultivated  irrespective  of  the
imperfect  character  of  men  who  act  in  connection  with  them.  4.  The  expo.sure  of  a
base  spirit  is  sure  to  be  the  result  of  a  direct  judgment  of  the  Son  of  Diivid  when  we
are  called  to  stand  before  him.  5.  Any  attempt  to  court  the  favour  of  the  chosen
Kmg  in  Zion  by  deeds  and  spirit  not  in  harmony  with  the  holy  laws  of  his  kingdom,
will  inevitably  end  in  banishment  from  his  presence  (Luke  vi.  46 ;  xiii.  25—27).

Sorrow  for  the  miscarriage  of  Ufis  great  p;rpose.  Contrary  to  what  ordinary  men
would  have  miagined,  the  news  of  the  death  of  Saul  at  once  diverted  David's  thoughts
from  his  own  personal  advantage  accruing  therefrom,  and  at  once  developed  an  extra-
ordmary  sorrow.  It  must  not  be  concluded  that  the  setting  apart  of  the  rest  of  the
day  fur  purposes  of  mourning  (vers.  11,  12)  was  simply  compliance  with  custom  in
paying  outward  respect  for  the  memory  of  a  deceased  monarch  and  his  son.  No  doubt
snch  an  act  could  be  decently  performed  by  one  who  saw  in  the  disaster  an  occasion  of
personal  joy;  indeed,  a  heartless  rival,  who  cared  alone  for  his  own  elevation  to  the
throne,  would,  as  a  matter  of  mere  policy,  encourage  the  observance  of  tokens  of  public
sorrow;  for  history  testifies  to  the  presence  of  a  large  element  of  hypocrisy  in  the
elaborate  manifestations  of  grief  that  have  characterized  the  obsequies  of  rival  rulers
Bat  David  vaa  not  a  man  of  ceremony ;  and  the  elegy  penned  for  the  expression  of  his


CH.  1.1— 27.]  THE  SECOXD  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  13

own  anguish  of  spirit— so  tender  and  pathetic  as  it  is — must  be  accepted  as  tlie  inter-
preter of  the  act  of  public  mourning  in  David's  camp.  None  but  a  deeply  earnest  and
sincere  man  could  thus  write  of  the  woe  which  came  to  men  on  the  heiglits  of  Uilboa.
Tested  by  the  principles  that  govein  the  secular  mind,  the  elegy  is  perfectly  unacco  int-
able,  especially  considering  Saul's  lonu;-continued  persecution  of  David  and  the  cpen
pathway  to  the  throne  which  the  dufeat  at  ttilboa  laid  open  to  him.  But  there  was  a
wonderful  spiritual  unity  in  David's  life ;  and  to  those  who  have  followed  our  inter-
pretation of  his  conduct  and  motives  as  set  forth  elsewhere  (see  '  Pulpit  Commentary,'
i  Samuel,  Homiletics,  pp.  365,  415,  482,  513),  there  can  be  no  difliculty  in  perceiving
in  this  public  act,  and  in  the  elegy,  a  culmination  of  the  intense  and  painfully  loving
interest  with  which  he  all  along  had  watched  the  downward  course  of  the  unhappy
monarch.  There  were,  indeed,  several  items  entering  into  his  sorrow.  He  thought  of
the  kiugless  nation,  and  mourned  for  the  bereaved  "  house  of  Israel "  (ver.  12).  He
thought  of  the  chosen  people,  distinguished  above  all  uations  as  the  channels  of  a  great
and  merciful  Divine  purpose  to  the  world,  and  he  mourned  for  "  the  people  of  the  Lord."
He  could  not  forget  the  man  whose  love  to  him  had  been  "  wondeiful,  passing  the  love
of  women,"  and  he  wept  for  Jonathan  (vers.  12,  26).  But,  most  of  all,  he  thought  of
one  great  in  position,  great  in  responsibilities,  who  once  had  set  before  him  the  possi-
bilities of  a  grand  destiny  in  connection  with  the  unfolding  of  God's  merciful  purpose
to  mankind ;  and  he  mourned  with  an  overwhelming  sorrow  th:it  he  had  fallen  on  the
field  a  defeated,  mined  man,  covered  with  the  shame  and  misfortunes  of  a  woeful  mis-
carriage of  his  life's  mission.

I.  Failure  in  life's  mission  is  the  great  disaster  of  life.  David  knew  that
death  came  to  all  men,  and  ihat  the  removal  from  earth  of  one  who  has  figured  before
our  vision  disturbs  the  whole  current  of  feeling.  Had  Saul  died  under  some  circum-
stances DaTid  would  have  8t)rrowed,  but  the  pang  of  this  his  sorrow  would  not  have
been  experienced.  He  had  known  Saul  as  the  chosen  of  God,  equipped  for  high
enterprise  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  in  a  position  to  prepare  the  pathway  for  the
coming  of  a  mightier  king.  Splendid  opportunities  arose;  strong  influences  were
brought  to  bear ;  but  all  in  vain.  Life's  mission  failed.  The  noble  work  was  not  done.
Fine  abilities  were  wasted.  Dishonoured,  abandoned  by  God,  covered  with  shame —
the  shame  of  an  abortive  life — he  passed  away.  Simple  death  would  have  been  glorj'
and  blessing  as  compared  with  this.  What  was  true  of  Saul  may  be  true  of  others
and,  unhappily,  is  too  often  the  fact.  God  has  a  purpose  in  the  life  of  every  human
being,  and  our  business  in  this  world  is  to  comprehend  the  nature  of  that  purpose  and
realize  it  in  our  experience.  It  is  an  unutterable  disaster  if,  knowing  why  we  are  here,
and  possessing  all  the  appliances  and  means  of  carrying  out  God's  will,  we  neverthe-
less pass  away  as  unprofitable  servants  (Matt.  xxv.  26 — 30).  There  are  instances  of
frequent  occurrence  in  which  splendid  abilities,  robust  health,  excell-nt  social  position,
fine  openings  for  usefulness,  are  all  wasted  by  the  dominance  of  unholy  passions,  and
men  have  to  witness  the  sad  speotncle  of  early  promise  issuing  in  a  dishonoured  name
and  premature  grave.  Those  who  believe  that  all  vifho  are  born  amidst  Christian
influences  are  sent  into  the  world  to  work  out  for  themselves  and  others  a  pure  and
blessed  destiny,  and  that  this  can  only  be  secured  by  our  personally  falling  in  the  line
of  Christ's  purpose  and  becoming  one  with  him  in  the  deepest  spiritual  sense,  as  Saul
was  expected  to  fall  in  the  line  of  God's  great  purpose  to  man  through  Igrael,  and  live
in  its  spirit, — such  persons  recognize  a  terrible  miscarriage  of  life  when  men  live,  it
may  be,  in  ease  and  wealth  and  respectability,  but  alien  in  heart  to  Christ,  and  then
die  in  the  same  condition.  They  have  not  laid  up  treasure  for  the  future.  Nations
and  communities  are  also  charged  with  their  respective  life-work,  and  it  is  a  tearful
thing  when,  through  unfaithfulness,  their  mission  is  abortive.  Jireraiah's  wail  over
Judah  (Jer.  ix.),  our  Saviour's  lamentation  over  Jerusalem,  and  his  prospective  sorrow
over  the  Church  at  Laodioea  (Eev.  iii.  14—20),  were  based  on  the  same  view  of
miscarriage  of  life's  purpose  as  was  David's  lament  over  Saul.

II.  The  sorrow  felt  for  a  miscarriage  of  life's  purpose  is  deepened  by  the  appre-
hension OF  ITS  effect  on  the  REPUTATION  AND  PROOBBSS  OF  THE   KINGDOM  OF  GOD.

Saul  was  not  simply  a  monarch  maintaining  his  own  special  interests  as  one  among
the  many  kings  of  the  earth ;  he  was  regarded  by  David  as,  and  in  fact  was,  the  oSicial
representative  of  the  theocracy — ihe  kingdom  of  God  in  its  early  stage  of  development.


14  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  i.  1—27.


It  was  the  pride  and  joy  of  devout  men  that  Israel's  king  governed  a  people  chosen  of
God  for  the  assertion  and  exposition  of  principles  superior  to  those  which  ohtained  in
the  heathen  nations.  The  pledge  of  prosperity  had  heen  given  to  the  chosen  people,
and  their  history  had  demonstrated  to  the  heathen  again  and  again  that  the  God  of
Israel  was  indeed  supreme.  The  uncircumcised  Philistines  could  not  know,  or  if  they
knew  could  not  appreciate,  the  spiritual  conditions  on  which  national  prosperity  was
guaranteed;  hut  they  would  he  quick  to  boast  over  Israel's  adversity,  and  to  magnify
their  idols  to  the  detriment  of  Jehovah's  fame.  "Tell  it  not  in  Gath"  was  David's
spontaneous  expression  of  the  increased  anguish  of  iis  spirit  on  account  of  the  failure
of  Saul's  life  and  work.  The  possibility  of  the  holy  kingdom  of  God  among  men  being
a  subject  of  ridicule  and  blasphemy — the  thought  of  God's  honour  being  for  a  moment
treated  with  scorn  by  the  ignorant  heathen — ^this  was  trouble  upon  trouble.  A  kindred
sorrow  falls  on  all  true  hearts  when,  by  the  wrecked  character  and  abortive  lives  of
professors  of  religion,  or  workers  in  connection  with  God's  holy  kingdom,  there  arises
the  possibility  of  the  scoffing  world  bringing  the  name  and  interests  of  Christianity
into  reproach;  for  every  blasphemous  word  and  triumph  of  joy  against  Christ  is
regarded  by  the  loving  soul  as  another  thrust  into  his  side.  Irreligious  men  can  little
know  the  anguish  of  true  Christiana  whenever  occasion  is  given,  by  the  incoasisttnoies
and  apostasies  of  life,  to  dishonour  the  sacred  Kame.

III.    The    DDE   EECOGNITION   OF   THE    MAGKITUDE    OF    THIS    DISASTER    DEPENDS  ON   A
SPIBITUAL   PEBOEPTIOK    OF    THE    GRAVITY   OF    OUE    BABTHLT    LIFE.       No    doubt    many

astute  men  regarded  David's  great  sorrow  as  a  sheer  extravagance.  Nothing  in  the
event,  from  their  point  of  view,  could  justify  such  a  wail  over  a  bitter  foe  and  ostensible
rival.  The  answer  to  that  reflection  on  the  reasonableness  of  David's  sorrow  lies  in
this— that  he  looked  on  Saul's  life  upon  its  Godward  side,  and  saw  beneath  the  pohtioal
and  merely  terrene  aspect  a  spiritual  issue,  which  issue,  affecting  as  it  did  all  that  is
most  great  and  momentous  in  man,  threw  all  else  into  the  background.  It  is  only
a  spiritual  perception — a  penetration  beneath  the  temporal  and  material  interests  to
the  invisible  and  eternal  relations  and  possibilities  of  human  existence — that  can  enable
one  thus  to  judge,  feel,  and  act  (1  Cor.  ii.  16).  Habitual  contact  with  the  visible  and
perishable  unfits  men  for  recognizing  the  true  solemnity  of  life,  and  the  subtle  elements
that  enter  into  the  determination  of  human  destiny.  Nominally  many  may  adopt  our
Lord's  view  of  the  bearing  of  man's  present  spiritual  state  upon  his  future  condition
(Matt.  XX,  1 — 16 ;  xxv.  1 — 13,  31 — 46),  and  yet  practically  place  a  successful  issue  of
life  in  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  and  wealth,  and  the  development  of  humanly
related  viitues.  Such  persons  are  disposed  to  think  Christ  rather  hard  and  unreasonable
in  pronouncing  the  man  to  be  a  "  fool "  (Luke  xii.  20)  who  congratulated  himself  on
the  fact  of  his  social  and  material  prosperity.  For  the  same  reason  they  deem
Christians  narrow  and  uncharitable  when  they  indicate  great  anxiety  for  the  future
condition  of  those  who,  while  outwardly  prosperous  and,  on  the  man-ward  side,  virtuous,
pass  away  without  affording  evidence  of  that  renewal  of  nature  by  which  alone  they
can  come  into  absorbing  sympathy  with  Christ,  and  cause  the  whole  tenor  of  their
life  to  flow  in  the  line  of  Christ's  mission  to  the  world.  Saul's  failure  on  the  spiritual
side  was  seen  by  David  to  lie  at  the  root  of  his  general  failure ;  and  those  only  who  estimate
modern  issues  of  life  by  the  supreme  test  of  the  spiritual,  can  see  in  many  lives,  other-
wise excellenj;,  a  woeful  miscarriage  of  life's  main  purpose  and  consequent  irretrievable
disaster  (1  Cor.  i.  18, 19 ;  ii.  6—10 ;  2  Cor,  v.  17,  20,  21 ;  Phil.  iii.  8,  9, 18, 19).

Tlie  incidental  teachings  of  a  great  disaster.  All  events  have  a  teaching  function  in
the  Divine  economy,  and  we  are  exhorted  to  extract  good  out  of  evil.  It  is  possible
that  in  the  general  evolution  of  human  interests  the  immediate,  if  not  remote,  effects  of
disastrous  events  are  counterbalanced  by  the  contribution  they  make  to  the  sum  total
of  instruction,  by  means  of  which  God  ultimately  elevates  the  world  in  purity  and
peace.  The  sad  issue  of  Saul's  life  was  doubtless  a  blessing  to  David,  in  that  its
solemn  lessons  gave  a  tone  to  his  subsequent  course,  which  enabled  him  to  withstand
many  of  the  perils  of  position ;  and  we,  studying  the  words  of  David  when  the  sorrow
was  fresh  upon  him,  may,  in  addition  to  what  has  already  been  noticed,  gain  instruction
on  several  matters  which,  in  its  helpfulness  to  our  life,  shall  illustrate  the  truth  that
under  the  all-controlling  hand  of  God  "  all  things  work  together  for  good."


OH.i,  1— 27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  15

I.  As  there  is  a  disposition  on  the  part  of  irreligious  men  to  find  delight  in  the  sins
and  frailties  of  Christians,  and  also  to  find  therein  excuse  for  their  own  impiety,  it

BEHOVES  ALL  WHO  HAVE  THE  NaME  AND  CAUSE  OF  ChKIST  AT  HEART  TO  BE  VERT
GUARDED  IN   THEIR  REFERENCES  TO  THE  SINS   AND   MISERIES   OF   BACKSLIDERS   AND   THE

ERRING.  The  sins  of  professors  are  to  be  the  suhject  of  silent  sorrow,  and,  when
possible,  of  Church  discipline ;  not  to  be  paraded  before  the  world,  as  though  such  free
publicity  were  a  due  chastisement  for  their  unfaithfulness.  The  spirit  that  can  readily
go  and  "  tell  it  in  Gath  "  is  not  the  spirit  of  Christ.  The  evident  pleasure  which  some
feel  in  making  known  the  shortcomings  of  professedly  religious  men,  can  only  spring
from  a  desire  to  excuse  their  own  indifference,  or  from  a  wicked  Pharisceism,  or  from
a  defective  sense  of  the  sacredness  of  the  Name  of  Christ.  Wliere  there  is  sincere
sorrow  there  will  be  tenderness,  and  the  family  instinct  will  avoid  the  publicity  of
family  misfortunes.  Christians !  weep  and  pray,  but  "  tell  it  not  in  Gath  "  (Jer.  ix.
1—3, 17—19).
IL  The  history  of  the  Church  reveals  what  serious  injiTry  has  been  caused

TO  RELIGION   BY   THE   IMPEBFECT   LIVES   OF   ITS   PROFESSED   FRIENDS.      The  "  UnoirCUm-

cised  "  did  know  of  Saul's  disaster,  and  it  made  them  strong  in  hotitility  to  the  chosen
race,  and  at  the  same  time  weakened  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel.  Saul  damaged
the  cause  of  righteousness  and  mercy  as  well  as  his  own  personal  reputation.  Too
often  has  Christ  been  wounded  in  the  house  of  his  friends  (Zech.  xiii.  6).  Considering
the  many  miscarriages  of  those  who  were  professedly  engaged  in  the  furtherance  of
the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  it  is  a  marvel  that  the  progress  of  Christianity  has  been
what  it  has.  They  little  think'  how  much  they  retard  the  final  supremacy  of  Christ
who,  by  a  Saul-like  unfaithfulness  and  degeneracy,  encourage  antagonism  among  his
foes,  and  produce  paralysis  among  his  friends.

III.  Momentous  events  bring  out  the  fact  that  culture  is  of  secondary
IMPORTANCE  TO  RELIGION.  David,  as  iS  Seen  from  his  varied  compositions  in  the
Psalms,  and  also  from  this  elegy,  was  a  man  of  fine  sesthetic  taste.  He  rejoiced  in  the
exquisite  beauties  of  nature.  The  dewy  slopes  of  Gilboa,  and  the  fat  pastures  of  its
valleys,  teemed  with  objects  of  delight  to  his  cultured  taste ;  but  now  that  his  spiritual
yearnings  were  unsatisfied,  now  that  the  holy  Name  of  God  was  being  dishonoured,  all
considerations  of  beauty  in  nature,  and  joy  in  the  higher  culture  of  life,  must  be  utterly
set  aside.  Let  Gilboa  become  a  waste,  let  the  joy  of  local  associations  perish,  since  the
religious  side  of  life  is  languishing !  The  scenes  amidst  which  our  loved  ones  die  are
often  cherished  in  the  memory  with  mournful  pleasure,  and  wo  seem  to  invest  them
with  a  more  tender  loneliness  because  there  the  joy  of  our  life  full  asleep.  But  when
the  smitten  heart  bleeds  over  a  shipwrecked  character — a  life  failing  in  its  noblest
purpose — then  the  local  associations  have  no  charm ;  blight  and  desolation  are  felt  to
be  the  most  appropriate  accompaniments  of  an  unrelieved  sorrow.  So  truly  do  great
tragic  events  in  life  bring  out  the  fact  that  our  religious  nature  will  assert  itself  as
above  all  mere  culture  and  (esthetic  refinement.

IV.  A  WISE  AND  tender  HEART  CAN,  while  Overwhelmed  with  sorrow  because  of
spiritual  disaster,  appreciate  the  value  op  humanly  related  virtues.  We  have
made  a  distinction  between  virtues  that  have  simply  a  human  aspect,  and  those
qualities  which  enter  into  the  essence  of  religion  and  are  Godward  in  aspect.  David's
great  grief  was  that,  so  far  as  his  religious  life  and  work  were  concerned,  Saul  w.as
degenerate  and  practically  ruined.  But,  as  a  relief  to  his  anguish  on  this  account,  he
turns  toward  the  manly  virtues  of  the  deceased  king,  and  with  exquisite  tenderness
dwells  on  them.  His  courage,  his  love  for  Jonathan,  and  his  benefactions  to  his
subjects  (vers.  22 — 24),  afford  some  solace  for  a  heart  that  can  find  none  in  contem-
plating the  spiritual  mission  of  the  king.  Nil  mortuis  nisi  bonum.  He  could  not,  from
very  sorrow  and  reverence  for  the  most  sacred  things,  speak  of  the  sad  miscarriage  of
his  life's  work ;  and  this  reference  to  the  good  of  his  life  was  really  an  expression  of
deep  affection,  and  at  the  same  time  an  indication  of  a  sorrow  secret  and  unutterable.
Christians  who,  with  the  light  that  Christ  gives,  see  spiritual  ruin  where  others  see
only,  and  rejoice  in,  humanly  related  virtues,  are  not  blind  to  the  manifest  virtues  of
men;  and  often,  in  theii'  silent  sorrow  for  the  absence  of  spiritual  saving  qualities,  they
can  speak  with  subdued  emotion  of  the  charms  and  attractions  of  personal  character.

V.  There  is  a  wonderful  charm  in  filial  piety  Maintained  under  most  adverse


16  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  1. 1— 27.

ciKonMBTANOM.  "  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  and  in
their  death  they  were  not  divided"  (ver.  23).  Yes ;  every  heart  says  " yes.  We  feel
the  charm  of  Jonathan's  fidelity  to  his  poor  erring  father  even  to  the  bitter  end.
David's  appreciation  of  this  is,  under  the  circumstances  (1  Sam.  xx.  I — 4),  most
beautifuL  Jonathan  knew  that  David  was  a  holy  man,  vilely  treated  by  his  own
father,  and  destined  to  ascend  the  throne ;  he  loved  him  with  a  tenderness  passing  the
love  of  women,  and  was  \inder  provocation  again  and  again  to  revolt  from  his  father's
rule;  but  with  patience,  tenderness,  and  faithfulness,  he  stood  by  hiin  to  the  end,
lamenting  his  sins,  restraining  his  evil  propensities,  and  variously  striving  to  lessen
the  evils  of  his  government.  The  filial  instinct  prevailed.  Piety  purified  and
Bbrsngtbened  it.  A  lesson  here  for  sons — the  more  valuable  in  proportion  as  parents
may  be  irreligious  or  imperfect.  It  is  a  noble  thing  for  a  son  to  watch  over,  care  for,
and  tenderly  restrain  the  tendencies  of  an  erring  father.  To  some  it  is  given  to  have
that  for  their  special  work.     Bemember  Jonathan.

VI.  It  is  possible  to  ohebish  veby  tendbb  and  helpful  fbibndbhips  even
AMIDST  THE  PBEBSUBE  OF  LIFE.  The  friendship  of  David  and  Jonathan,  begun  in  days
of  peace,  ceased  not  during  all  the  subsequent  seasons  of  toil  and  separation.  Doubt-
less David  had  often  been  comforted  in  his  solitude  and  wanderings  by  the  remembranco
of  that  true  heart  which  beat  in  sympathy  with  his  own,  and  Jonathan  would  1  a
upheld  in  his  delicate  and  painful  task  of  helping  and  restraining  an  errant  parent  by
the  assurance  that  David  was  not  unmindful  of  him  before  the  mercy-seat.  The
tendency  of  the  hurry  and  pressure  of  daily  business  is  to  crush  out  the  finer  and  more
tender  susceptibilities  of  the  heart,  and  rob  men  of  the  consolations  and  elevating
influence  of  wise  and  holy  personal  friendships.  For  self-culture,  for  solace,  for
spiritual  fellowship,  and  for  the  acquisition  of  moral  strength,  it  is  well  for  all  men  to
cherish  a  few  well-selected  friendships.

VII.  ThEBE   IB   A   BLESSED  INFLUENCE   ATTENBINO   THE    OHBBISHING    OP    HALLOWED

UEUORIRS.  David's  hallowed  memories  of  Jonathan  were  to  him  for  years  to  come
a  means  of  blessing.  His  life  was  more  sober  and  tender  and  spiritual  for  the  sweet
memory  of  one  so  lovable  and  dear.  The  language  of  vers.  25,  26  was  the  indication
of  a  permanent  element  in  David's  subsequent  life.  We  suffer  loss  when  beautiful
characters  are  taken  away,  and  we  find  a  gain.  For  though  visible  communion  is  no  more,
the  tender  memories  are  more  constant,  and  touch  more  closely  the  deeper  springs
of  Ufa.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

The  Hebrew  monarchy.  (Introductory.)  The  Hebrew  monarchy  holds  a  prominent
place  in  the  development  of  the  purpose  of  God  to  establish  his  kingdom  upon  eartL
In  accordance  with  this  purpose  Abraham  became  the  father  of  &  family,  distinguished
beyond  others  by  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  and  the  hope  of  his  promised  salva-
tion ;  the  family  grew  into  a  nation,  and  its  government  was  constituted,  by  the  agency
of  Moses,  a  theocracy  (a  word  first  used  by  Josephus,  '  Contra  Apion,'  ii.  17);  and  the
theocracy  (impaired  in  its  practical  influence  during  the  period  of  the  judges)  was
united  with  a  monarchy,  which  commenced  with  Saul,  acquired  strength  and  si>lendour
under  David,  culminated  in  the  glory  of  Solomon,  and  soon  afterwards  declined  to  its
fall;  leavmg  behind  it,  when  it  fell,  the  undying  hope  of  its  restoration  under  "the
King  MM&iah"  (1  Sam.  ii.  10).     Consider—

I.  Its  theooratio  foundation.  Although  a  king  was  sought  in  a  wrong  spirit,
his  appointment  was  not  incompatible  with  the  principles  of  the  theocracy.  What  were
these  principles?  1.  Its  supreme  Bead,  Lawgiver,  and  Judge  was  Jehovah  ;  its
subjects  were  hu  chosen  people  Israel  Having  revealed  himself  to  them  as  the  one
living  and  true  God,  and  redeemed  them  out  of  bondage,  he  made  a  covenant  with  them,
and  became  to  them  all,  and  more  than  all,  that  a  human  king  was  to  other  nations
(lixod.  XV.  18;  1  Sam.  xii.  12;  Zeph.  iii.  15).  "He  raised  and  consolidated  his
Vni?"^'"^^  '°'°  ,°''^°^.  *  *P^'='^^  nature"  (Kurtz,  •  Hist,  of  the  Old  Covenant,'  iiL
107).  The  perianal  relation  thus  formed  between  him  and  his  people  was  designed  to
maintain  amoni|  them  his  exclusive  worship,  to  keep  them  separate  from  the  idolatrous
and  corrupt  nations  around  them,  and  to  make  them  "a  kingdon)  of  priests  and  a  holy


OH.  1. 1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  17

nation."  2.  Its  laws  were  his  revealed  will,  pertaining  to  the  entire  circle  of  civil  and
religious  life.  "The  commonwealth  of  the  Jews,  different  in  that  from  all  others,  was
an  absolute  theocracy ;  nor  was  there,  nor  could  there  be,  any  difference  between  the
comiuonwealth  and  the  Church "  (Locke).  3.  Its  sanctions  were  his  favour  and  diu-
pleasure,  blessing  and  curse;  reward  or  punishment  of  a  temporal  nature  following
obedience  or  disobedience,  and  administered  by  properly  constituted  authorities  or
a  special  and  extraordinary  providence.  4.  Its  officers  were  his  appointed  servants,
whose  part  it  was  to  declare  his  will  and  administer  his  laws,  and  who  (whether
priests,  prophets,  judges,  elders,  or  princes)  were  themselves  subject  to  them  (Michaelis,
'Laws  of  Moses,'  i.  190;  Warburton,  'Div.  Leg.,'  v.  3;  Pairbairn,  •  Typology,'  ii.  443).
In  harmony  with  these  principles  a  humau  king  was  appointed  (as  already  provided
for,  Deut.  xvii.  15 — 20) ;  not,  indeed,  to  reign  independently  of  the  Divine  King,  or
according  to  his  own  will  and  pleasure,  but  as  his  viceroy  and  minister.  "  To  the
theocracy  was  added  the  monarchy,  not  to  subvert  or  gradually  supersede  it,  but
V)  fulfil  the  wants  of  the  age  by  its  side.  The  pure  theocracy  became  a  Basileo-
theooracy  "  (Ewald).  "  The  Hebrews  tinder  the  reign  of  David  clearly  recognized  the
theocratic  nature  of  their  constitution  "  (Jahn).

II.  Its  pbactical  efficiency.  The  condition  of  the  people  rendered  the  regal
office  necessary;  and  it  served  (especially  during  the  reign  of  David)  to :  1.  Gather  them
into  closer  umon,  and  so  consolidate  and  increase  their  strength.  Nothing  was  more
urgently  nee\it)d.  Their  common  faith  (or  rather  unbelief)  and  the  previously  existing
oincers  of  the  theocracy  were  insufficient  to  maintain  the  practical  union  and  co-opera-
tion of  the  tribes.  2.  Defend  them  against  their  adversaries,  by  whose  attacks  their
very  existence  was  imperilled.  It  secured  their  safety  and  independence,  and  it
extended  their  dominion  "from  the  river  of  Egypt  unto  the  great  river,  the  river
Euphrates,"  as  it  had  been  promised  of  old  (Gen.  xv.  18).  3.  Establish  order  and  the
more  regular  and  impartial  administration  of  justice.  In  the  days  of  the  judges  "  every
man  did  that  which  wa^  right  in  his  own  eyes,"  being  subject  to  no  proper  restraint  by
a  king,  as  responsible  "  minister  of  God  and  avenger  to  execute  wrath  upon  him  that
doeth  evil "  (Bom.  xiii.  4).  4.  Promote  the  main  purpose  of  their  national  caUing,
viz.  to  receive  and  conserve  "the  oracles  of  God"  (Bom.  iii.  2)  for  the  ultimate  benefit
of  mankind.  "  By  the  constitution  of  the  Hebrew  government  the  civil  and  municipal
statutes  of  the  nation  were  not  only  founded  upon  their  nUgiuus  belief,  but  they  were
also  so  framed  as  to  have  the  support  of  that  belief  for  their  main  object"  (Eussell,
•  Counection,'  bk.  xviii.).  And  this  object  was  more  effectually  accomplished  under  the
circumstances  by  means  of  the  monarchy  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.

■  III.  Its  manifest  impbbfbction.  Like  other  institutions  dependent  for  their
worth  upon  the  conduct  of  weak  and  sinful  men,  it  was  m^irked,  in  its  actual  working,
by  numerous  defects ;  being :  1.  Administered  in  a  manner  that  did  not  fully  accord
with  its  nature  and  design.  "  Whate'er  is  best  administered  is  best."  The  authority
and  power  entrusted  to  the  king  were  frequently  used  in  self-will  and  for  self-exaltation.
Hence  the  misery  in  which  the  reign  of  Saul  (really  an  autocracy)  terminated.  And
even  the  administration  of  David,  although  distinguished  by  surpassing  ability  and
fidelity,  w»S  by  no  means  faultless.  2.  Weakened  and  marred  by  the  personal  crimes
of  the  mosiarch.  David's  transgressions  exerted  an  injurious  influence,  not  only  upon
himself  and  his  familjf,  but  also  upon  his  government.  They  sowed  the  seeds  of
insubordination  and  rebellion.  3.  Often  employed  for  the  oppression  and  corruption  of
the  peopU.  "  Its  tendency  was  to  absolutism."  The  magnificence  of  Solomon  was  largely
based  upon  oppressive  taxation  and  forced  labour;  and,  instead  of  opposing  and
excluding,  he  suffered  and  indulged  idolatrous  practices — most  fatal  of  all  things  to  the
throne  and  nation.  4.  Liable  to  frequent  changes  and  gradual  deterioration.  Even
a  good  monarch  could  not  hold  his  ofifioe  long  "  by  reason  of  death ; "  and  the  hereditary
principle  did  not  insure  a  successor  of  like  character.  With  the  secession  of  the  ten
tribes  the  early  splendour  of  the  monarchy  became  dim ;  and  its  course,  with  intervals
of  glorious  revival,  was  downward.  It  virtually  terminated  with  the  Captivity  (Hos.
iii.  4,  6) ;  after  which  the  civil  government  was  subject  to  a  foreign  heathen  power,
and  the  theocracy  survived  chiefly  as  a  political  hierarchy ;  at  length  "  the  Bomang
came  and  took  away  their  place  and  nation."

IV.  It8  typical  sioNinoAKCE.    It  was  not  only  a  stage  of  preparation  for  the

IL  8AHUSU  O


18  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [o&.  1. 1— 27

kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  but  also  a  type  or  divinely  ordained  foreshadowing  of  it.  1.  It
rendered  the  conception  thereof  more  definite  and  vivid.  "  With  tlie  establishment  of
the  kingly  power,  a  new  class  of  ideas  was  brought  into  view  and  developed,  which  for
want  of  the  requisite  material  groundwork  could  not  be  previously  illustrated;  and
it  now  became  possible  to  descry  from  a  distance  and  to  announce  in  appropriate  and
intelligible  terms  the  coming  kingdom  of  the  Messiah."  2.  It  was  associated  with
express  promises  and  predictions  (oh.  vii.  12 — 16;  xxiii.  3 — 5).  "When  mankind
was  limited  to  a  single  family,  the  Hope  of  the  future  had  lain  in  the  seed  of  the  woman ;
the  patriarchal  age  had  looked  forward  to  a  descendant  of  Abraham ;  the  Mosaic  to
a  Prophet  and  a  Legislator.  In  like  manner  the  age  of  the  Jewish  monarchy  in  its
bloom  of  youth  and  prowess  was  bidden  to  fix  its  eye  upon  an  ideal  David,  who  was  to
be  the  King  of  the  future  of  the  world  "  (Liddon,  'Bampton  Lectures,'  p.  79).  "  The
establishment  of  the  kingdom  was  in  the  truest  sense  a  defection  from  God,  and  yet,
humanly  speaking,  it  was  a  necessary  defection.  An  earthly  king  fell  infinitely  short
of  the  type  of  Divine  government  represented  by  Moses,  or  Joshua,  or  Samuel;  but
he  was  at  once  a  definite  centre,  and  a  clear  sign  of  something  greater  than  himself.
If  he  presented  the  spiritual  idea  in  a  fixed  and  limited  form,  he  also  gave  distinctness
to  the  conception  of  the  present  moral  sovereignty  of  God,  and  furnished  imagery  under
which  the  prophets  could  construct  a  more  glorious  picture  of  the  future"  (Westcott,
'  The  Gospel  of  the  Resurrection,'  p.  68).  3.  Even  its  defects  and  failure  intensified
and  exalted  the  expectation.  With  every  disappointment  hope  sprang  up  afresh,  and  ^
found  its  purest  expression  in  the  utterances  of  the  prophets  (Isa.  ix.  6,  7 ;  liii. ;  Micah
V.  2).  "  What  was  earthly  and  carnal  in  the  theocracy  was  made  to  fall  into  com-
parative abeyance,  that  the  glory  of  its  spiritual  excellence  might  be  brought  more
prominently  into  view"  (Paiibaim).  Whilst  the  general  expectation  immediately
before  the  advent  of  Christ  was  of  a  temporal  kingdom,  many  "  waited "  with  lofty,
spiritual  hope  "  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel."  4.  It  was  (as  a  type)  fulfilled  in
a  higher  and  more  spiritval  manner  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  In  this  kingdom  the
principles  of  the  theocracy  are  preserved  and  exhibited  in  perfection.  It  is  the  real
theocracy.  Its  supreme  Head  (Bph.  i.  22)  is  at  once  Divme  and  human.  Its  subjects
consist  of  those  who  are  inwardly  renewed,  and  serve  him  from  the  heart.  It  is
spiritual,  righteous-,  peaceful,  and  blessed.  Although  in  the  world,  it  is  not  of  the
world.  It  can  coexist  in  time  and  place  (as  the  ancient  theocracy  could  not)  with
every  form  of  civil  government ;  and,  without  any  formal  connection  or  concordat
therewith,  it  can  exert  a  sovereign  influence  over  it.  It  claims  the  submission  of
every  individual  and  every  nation,  and  it  is  destined  to  fill  the  earth  and  endure
for  ever.

Bemaekb.  1.  The  purpose  of  God  to  set  up  on  earth  a  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the
key  of  history.  "The  grand  idea  of  a  kingdom  of  God  is  the  connecting  thread  that
runs  through  the  entire  course  of  Divine  revelation."  2.  The  methods  which  God
adopts  in  his  dealings  with  men  are  adapted  to  their  actual  condition,  and  the  accom-
plishment of  immediate  and  beneficent  ends;  his  revelations  of  himself  are  accom-
modated to  their  capacity  for  apprehending  and  profiting  by  them.  3.  He  allows  men
a  large  liberty  of  choice ;  and,  when  they  use  it  wrongly,  patiently  bears  with  their
imperfections  and  sins,  and  overrules  them  for  their  correction  and  improvement.  4.
His  procedure  is  marked  by  a  progressive  development;  and  the  facts  and  truths
involved  therein  contain  the  promise  and  prefigurement  of  later  and  greater  realities.
"  The  Old  Testament,  when  rightly  understood,  is  one  great  prophecy  of  the  New "
(Augustine).  "Christianity  lay  in  Judaism,  as  leaves  and  fruit  do  in  the  seed;
although  it  certainly  required  the  Divine  sun  to  bring  them  forth "  (De  Wette).
5.  What  is  expedient  in  one  age  may  not  be  so  in  another,  which  has  received  a  higher
revelation  of  the  Divine  will.  The  relative  worth  of  institutions  and  men  must  be
judged  of  according  to  their  circumstances  and  the  measure  of  light  possessed,  their
absolute  worth  according  to  the  highest  conceptions  of  truth  and  righteousness.  6.
God  selects  and  exalts  one  nation,  not  for  its  own  good  merely,  but  for  the  good
of  others  and  the  fulfilment  of  his  benevolent  purposes  toward  mankind.  7.  As  the
people  of  God  in  ancient  time  were  taught  to  look  forward  to  the  coming  of  the
Messiah,  so  we  are  now  taught  to  look  forward  to  Ms  coming  again,  and  the  complete
establishment  of  Ms  kingdom. — P.  »   =>     .  a


OH.  1. 1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  19

David's  reign :  B.o.  1051 — 1011.  (References :  1  Chron.  x. — ^xxix. ;  1  Kings  i.,  ii. ;
Psalms.  For  his  earlier  life,  as  shepherd  at  Bethlehem,  servant  of  Saul  at  Gribeah,
outlaw  in  the  wilderness  of  Judah  and  elsewhere,  see  1  Sam.  xvi. — xxxiv.)  When
Saul  fell  on  Gilboa,  David  was  about  thirty  years  old ;  the  age  at  which  Joseph  stood
before  Pharaoh,  the  Levites  entered  on  their  official  duties,  and  Jesus  began  his  public
ministry.  The  Second  Book  of  Samuel  describes  the  steps  by  which  he  became  king
over  Judah,  and  (after  seven  years  and  a  half)  king  over  all  Israel,  the  consolidation  and
victorious  expansion  of  his  kingdom  (ch.  i. — x.) ;  his  deplorable  fall  (when  about  fifty
years  of  age),  his  repentance,  the  consequences  of  his  transgression,  and  the  restoration
of  his  impaired  authority  (ch.  xi. — xx.);  and  (in  an  appendix,  oh.  xxi. — xxiv.)  among
other  things  some  events  and  utterances  of  his  last  days  (his  life  ending  at  three  score
years  and  ten).  "  He  most  happily  combined  all  the  qualifications  for  becoming  the
true  support  of  the  extraordinary  efforts  of  this  peiiod;  and  he  thus  succeeded  in
winning,  not  only  a  name  unequalled  in  glory  by  any  other  king  of  Israel,  but  also
a  halo  of  kingly  fame  as  ruler  of  the  community  of  the  true  God,  unattainable  by  a
king  of  any  other  nation  of  antiquity  "  (Ewald).  "  The  reign  of  David  is  the  great
critical  era  in  the  history  of  the  Hebrews."    In  it  we  see —

L  The  pueposb  op  the  Divine  King  of  Isbabl  fulfilled.  That  purpose  (sub-
ordinate to  the  larger  purpose  mentioned  in  the  preceding  homily),  to  make  David
ruler  instead  of  Saul,  was :  1.  Previously  indicated.  It  was  first  announced  by  Samuel,
in  indefinite  terms  (1  Sam.  xiii.  14 ;  xv.  28),  symbolized  in  the  anointing  of  David
(when  about  sixteen  years  old),  afterwards  doubtless  plainly  declared  to  him  by  the
prophet,  and  clearly  manifested  by  the  course  of  events.  It  was  also  more  and  mora
generally  recognized  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  20;  xxv.  30;  ch.  iii.  17,  18).  2.  Vainly  opposed,
at  first  by  Saul,  and,  after  he  had  been  made  King  of  Judah,  by  Abner  and  "  the  hoiis*
of  Saul."  It  was  impossible  for  them  to  succeed.  "  There  is  no  wisdom  nor  under-
standing nor  counsel  against  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xxi.  30).  3.  Gradually,  surely,  and  fuUy
tvrought  out.  There  were  times  in  which  it  seemed  to  fail,  but  only  to  become  more
apparent  and  effectual ;  like  a  stream  disappearing  beneath  the  surface  of  the  earth,
and  after  a  short  distance  bursting  forth  with  renewed  strength.  4.  Its  fulfilment
shows  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God,  and  should  confirm  our  faith  in  the  fulfilment
of  all  his  promises.  "  Wait  on  the  Lord."  "  There  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  all  liis
good  promise,"  etc.  (1  Kings  viii.  56).  "  The  Davidic  age,  with  those  that  lie  imme-
diately around  it,  towers  by  its  special  glory  like  a  giant  mountain  above  a  wide  tract  of
more  level  periods.  It  was,  moreover,  soon  afterwards  recognized  by  the  nation  itself  as  a
period  of  unique  glory  in  the  fortunes  of  the  monarchy;  and  its  memory  has  therefore  been
preserved  in  the  historical  narrative  with  the  most  exuberant  fulness  of  detail "  (Ewald).

II.  The  character  of  the  human  kingof  his  choice  portrayed.  The  interest
of  David's  reign  centres  in  David  himself;  his  activities,  achievements,  experiences,
utterances,  so  fuUy  recorded,  not  only  in  the  history,  but  also  in  his  psalms.  His
character  (more  completely  revealed  than  that  of  any  other  man)  was  the  growth
of  a  noble  and  gifted  nature  under  the  influence  of  Divine  grace.  1.  It  was  matured
by  long  and  varied  discipline.  While  keeping  his  father's  flock,  in  the  court  and  camp
of  Saul,  as  an  exile  at  the  head  of  his  heroic  band,  by  persecution,  calumny,  hardship,
meditation,  temptation,  prayer,  and  during  his  "apprenticeship  to  monarchy "  in
/Hebron,  his  natm-al  endowments  and  moral  qualities  were  strengthened,  developed,  and
perfected.  2.  It  was  marked  by  a  many-sided  excellence.  His  insight,  skill,  prescient
sagacity,  tender  sensibility,  sympathy,  imagination,  fervour,  versatility,  courage,  mag-
nanimity, power  of  leadership,  and  of  winning  the  passionate  attachment  of  others,  were
never  surpassed.  He  was  "one  of  the  greatest  men  in  the  world"  (Bayle).  "The
most  daring  courage  was  combined  in  him  with  tender  susceptibility ;  even  after  he
had  ascended  the  throne  he  continued  to  retain  the  charm  of  a  pre-eminent  aad  at  tha
same  time  childlike  peisonality  "  (Wellhausen).

"  Great,  valiant,  pious,  good,  asd  cleaB*
Sublime,  contemplatiTe,  sereiie.

Strong,  constant,  pleasaut,  wise  t
Bright  effluence  of  exceeding  grace;
Best  man  I  the  swiftness  and  &e  race,
The  peril  and  the  prize  I "

(Chrittopher  tear!)


20  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  i.  1—27


"There  never  was  a  specimen  of  manhood  so  rich  and  ennobled  as  David,  the  son  of
Jesse,  whom  other  saints  haply  may  have  equalled  in  single  features  of  his  character ;
but  such  a  combination  of  manly,  heroic  qualities,  such  a  flush  of  generous,  godlike
ezcelleuoes,  hath  never  yet  been  seen  embodied  in  a  single  man  "  ( Fdward  Irving).
"  The  most  thoroughly  human  figure,  as  it  seems  to  me,  which  had  appeared  upon  the
earth  before  the  coming  of  that  perfect  Son  of  man,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for
ever.  Amen  "  (Charles  Kingsley).  (1)  In  relation  to  God  he  was  eminent  in  faith,
hope,  and  love;  loyal  obedience,  fervid  zeal,  holy  aspiration,  enthusiastic  devotion,
lowly  submission,  and  thankfulness  (Neh.  xii.  36).  (2)  In  relation  to  men  he  was
tenderly  affectionate  toward  his  family  j  considerate  and  grateful  toward  his  friends ;
generous  and  forgiving  toward  his  enemies;  faithful  and  just,  self-denying  and  self-
sacrificing  toward  his  people.  (3)  Beyond  any  other  monarch  of  Isiael  he  was  a  truly
theocratic  king.  His  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God  (1  Kings  xi.  4).  "David
did  that  wliich  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  turned  not  aside  from  anything
that  he  commanded  him  all  the  days  of  his  life,  save  only  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the
Hittite "  (1  Kings  xv.  5).  3.  It  was  marred  by  grave  defects  and  aggravated  trans-
gressions. Although  these  were  in  great  measure  due  to  the  spirit  of  his  age,  the  effect
of  temptation  incideut  to  his  position,  contrary  to  the  general  course  of  his  life,  and
deeply  repented  of,  yet  they  incurred  heavy  guilt,  and  were  followed  by  severe  chastise-
ments. 4.  It  thus  a£fords  a  warning  as  well  as  an  example.  "  lu  this  history  we  have
the  pattern  of  a  pious  and  prudent  prince.  Its  utility  and  profit  for  example  of  life
appears  in  the  prudence,  piety,  zeal,  humility,  equity,  and  good  government  of  David,
and  all  other  his  heroic  and  godly  virtues  worthy  of  imitation.  As  also  are  set  down
David's  infirmities  and  falls,  as  examples  of  the  weakness  of  the  best  when  they  watch
not  over  themselves,  or  are  left  to  themselves,  proponed  to  be  eschewed,  ut  maforum
ruina  sit  minorum  cautela,  as  likewise  his  repentiince  to  be  imitated,  and  the  sharp
corrections  notwithstanding,  as  medicinal  corrasives  wherewith  he  was  chastised ;  as
we  see  in  the  Lord's  dealing  with  his  dearest  sons  and  servants  (Heb.  xii.  6,  7) "
(W.  Guild,  'The  Throne  of  David :'  1659).

in.  The  majesty  of  the  Divine-hdman  Kino  Messiah  fokbshadowbd.  David
is  to  be  regarded,  not  simply  as  an  individual,  but  as  a  noble,  though  imperfect,  repre-
sentation of  the  idea  of  a  theocratic  king,  and  therefore  also  as  an  adumbration  of
One  in  whom  that  idea  would  be  perfectly  realized  (Luke  i.  32).  "  His  relation  to  the
history  of  redemption  is  most  peculiar  and  remarkable.  The  aim  and  import  of  the
Old  Testament  history  to  prefigure,  prophesy,  and  testify  of  Christ  concentrated  in  him
as  in  a  fucus"  (Kurtz).  "As  we  have  a  great  increase  of  the  prophetic  light  breaking
forth,  and  encompassing  the  family  and  kingdom  of  David  so  subsequent  prophecy  reverts
often  to  the  same  subjects,  insomuch  that  there  is  no  individual,  king  or  other  person,
one  only  excepted,  of  whom  more  is  said  by  the  prophets  than  of  this  king  and  his
throne"  (Davison,  'On  Prophecy').  "It  is  David  who,  without  intending  it,  supplies
the  personal  foundation  of  all  the  Messianic  hopes,  which  from  this  time  contribute  with
increasing  power  to  determine  Israel's  career;  and  so  he  stands  at  the  turning-point  in
the  history  of  two  thousand  years  and  separates  it  into  two  great  halves  "  (Ewald).  High
above  him,  in  the  dim  and  distant  future,  rose  the  majestic  form  of  "  the  King  of  kings,
and  Lord  of  lords."  "A  person,  as  such,  can  never  be  a  symbol.  It  was  not  David,
or  Manasseh,  or  Ahab,  that  was  the  type  of  Christ  as  King  of  Zion ;  it  was  the  royal
office  with  which  these  were  invested,  symbolical  as  that  was  of  the  theocracy,  which
was  typical  of  the  kingly  dignity  of  the  Redeemer"  (W.  L.  Alexander,  'Connection  of
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,'  315,  418).  The  kingly  dignity  of  the  Messiah  appears
in :  I.  His  Divine  appointment  (Ps.  ii.  6,  7)  founded  on  the  Incarnation.  "  In  Jesus
the  Christ,  Jehovah  and  the  Son  of  David  becomij  one.  Heaven  and  earth  interpene-
trate, that  they  may  unite  in  him  and  be  united  by  him  "  (Delitzsch).  2.  His  glorious
exaltation  after  deep  humiliation  and  patient  endurance.  3.  His  righteous  administra-
tion (Ps.  Ixxii.  1,  2).  4.  His  advancing  triumph  over  the  enemies  of  his  kingdom  and
our  salvation— "  the  devil  with  all  his  retinue,  the  worid,  the  flesh,  sin,  death,  and
hell ;  whatever  doth-oppose  his  glory,  his  truth,  his  service ;  whatever  consequently  by
open  violence  or  fraudulent  practice  doth  hinder  our  salvation"  (Barrow).  5.  His
munificent  gifts  and  the  blessings  of  his  reign ;  refuge,  refreshment,  repose  (Isa.  xxxii.
1,  2) ;  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."    As  a  King  he  gatheri,


OH.  1.1—2?.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  SAMUEL.  21

governs,  protects,  and  perfects  his  people.  6.  Hta  wide  dominion.  7.  His  endless
continuance.    "  His  Name  shall  endure  for  ever."

ExHOBTATiON.  1.  Submit  to  his  rule.  "  Kiss  the  Son,"  etc.  (Ps.  ii.  12).  2.  Bejoicc
la  his  salTation.  8.  Co-operate  with  his  purposes.  4.  Look  forward  to  his  final
triumph. — D.

Vers.  1,  2. — (Zielag.)  A  change  of  dynasty.  "  When  he  came  to  David  he  fell  to
the  earth,  and  did  obeisance"  (vcr.  2).  The  title  of  David  to  the  throne  was  primarily
conferred  upon  him  by  the  will  of  God,  as  declared  by  Samuel.  But  it  remained  in
abeyance  while  Saul  lived,  and  began  to  take  effect  only  at  his  decease.  On  returning
to  Ziklag  from  his  pursuit  of  the  Amalekites,  David  occupied  himself  in  repairing  its
ruins,  and  awaited  tidings  from  the  field  of  battle.  On  the  morning  of  the  ttiird  day
there  came  a  young  man,  "  the  son  of  a  stranger,  an  Amalekite,"  bringing  news  of  the
defeat  of  Israel  and  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan.  In  proof  of  his  statement  he
brought  the  king's  diadem,  "a  small  metallic  cap  or  wreath  which  encircled  the  temples,
serving  the  purpose  of  a  helmet,  with  a  very  small  horn  projecting  in  front,  as  an
emblem  of  power  "  (Jamieson),  and  bracelet  (or  armlet  worn  above  the  ellx)w),  and  laid
them  at  the  feet  of  David,  as  the  future  king  (ver.  10).  His  conduct  reminds  us  of
a  well-known  custom,  according  to  which,  whenever  a  French  monarch  departed  this
life,  an  official  of  the  n^al  household  appeared  at  the  window,  broke  his  staff,  and  cried,
Le  roi  est  mart  I  ("  The  kin^  is  dead  I ") ;  then  tciok  a  new  staff  and  shouted,  Vive  le
roi  I  ("  Long  live  the  king  1 ").    The  change  that  occurred  was —

I.  Occasioned  by  the  fall  op  an  cnpaithpot.  ruler.  "  After  the  death  of  Saul "
(ver.  1).  1.  Men  are  entrusted  with  power  by  God  that  they  may  employ  it,  not
according  to  their  own  will  and  for  their  own  honour,  but  according  to  his  will  and  for
his  glory.  This  Saul  failed  to  recognize.  2.  Whenever  a  man  misuses  his  trust  he  is
sooner  or  later  deprived  thereof  and  suffers  the  penalty  of  his  sin  (1  Sam.  xv.  23).
3.  No  man  can  fall  into  sin  and  destruction  without  involving  others  in  his  ruin.
How  often  has  a  monarch's  unfaithfulness  caused  the  downfall  of  his  dynasty  1  4.  The
place  from  which  he  falls  is  thereby  prepared  for  a  more  faithful  man,  and  such  a  man
is  seldom  wanting  for  the  place.  "Take  therefore  the  talent,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  28).
"Saul's  elevation  was  a  first  experiment  in  monarchy  doomed  to  failure  from  the
beginning ;  it  was  only  when  the  people  had  been  trampled  ^own  by  his  tyranny  and
involved  in  his  fatal  defeat  that  a  lasting  monarch  was  set  according  to  the  Divine  will
in  the  person  and  family  of  David,  who  was  in  this  sense  the  man  after  G^'s  own
heart"  (P.  Smith,  '  Ancient  History,'  L  168).

IL  Awaited  with  patience  bt  a  bightful  bucobssor.  "  David  abode  in  Ziklag."
He  was  long  ago  assured  of  his  royal  destination.  But :  1.  The  purpose  of  God  is  often
slow  in  its  accomplishment;  which  requires  to  be  waited  for  in  faith  and  patience.

2.  Its  slow  accomplishment  presents  a  strong  temptation  to  impatience,  and  the  adop-
tion of  rash  and  unworthy  expedients  that  hinder  rather  than  prumote  the  desired  end.
David  was  subject  to  such  a  temptation,  and  for  the  most  part  overcame  it.  In  so  far
as  he  yielded  to  it  he  suffered  the  consequences  of  his  imprudence  (1  Sam.  zxvii.  1).

3.  By  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  men  are  best  prepared  for  what  God  has
prepared  for  them.  David  did  not  deem  the  crown  "  a  thing  to  l)e  grasped  at."  "  What
God  has  destined  for  him,  he  would  not  have  until  God  gave  it  to  him  "  (Hengstenberg).
"  Endurance  is  the  crowning  quality."     Qui  dura  vince  ("  He  conquers  who  endures  ).

4.  To  those  who  await  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  a  .right  spirit,  it
comes  surely  and  at  the  right  time,  often  suddenly  and  by  unexpected  mians.  " By
degrees  doth  the  Lord  perform  his  works  to  exercise  the  faith,  the  hope,  the  patience,
and  constancy  of  his  chosen,  but  at  last  to  the  full  he  accomplisheth  whatsoever  he
promiseth  "  (Guild).

III.  Recognized  as  inevitable  by  a  SELF-sBEKDra  obsebvke.  It  is  remarkable
that  one  of  an  aUen  and  hostile  race  should  be  the  first  to  perceive  and  acknowledge
the  speedy  and  certain  transfer  of  the  crown.  He  was  a  watchful  observer  of  the  course
of  events;  acquainted,  probably,  with  the  general  opinion  concerning  David,  and  with
his  present  position ;  and,  although  possessing  little  love  for  his  character  and  expecting
little  good  to  the  Amalekites  from  his  accession,  he  was  desirous  of  using  the  occasion
for  the  furtherance  of  his  personal  ends.    1.  The  tendency  of  human  affturs  is  often  so


22  THE  SECONB  BOOK  Of  SAMUEL.  [oH.tl— 2t.

apparent  that  its  result  may  be  easily  anticipated  by  all  but  the  most  obtuse.  2.  A
stranger  or  an  enemy  frequently  perceives  the  destination  of  a  man  of  ability  more
clearly  than  those  who  are  intimately  connected  with  him.  3.  One  who  is  supremely
concerned  about  his  own  interest  is  quick  to  see  anything  that  may  be  made  conducive
to  it,  however  blind  and  unfeeling  he  may  be  in  other  respects.  4.  His  attempt  to
turn  it  to  his  own  advantage  sometimes  turns  only  to  the  advantage  of  another,  and
to  his  own  disappointment  and  ruin.  "  David  had  been  long  waiting  for  the  crown,
and  now  it  is  brought  to  him  by  an  Amalekite.  See  how  God  can  serve  his  own
purpose  of  kindness  to  his  people,  even  by  designing  men  who  aim  at  nothing  but  to
set  up  themselves"  (Matthew  Henry).

IV.  Effected  bt  the  opebation  of  Divine  Providence.  "  The  Lord  slew  him,
and  turned  the  kingdom  unto  David  the  son  of  Jesse  "  (1  Chron.  x.  14).  "  God  is  the
Judge;  he  putteth  down  one  and  getteth  up  another  "  (Ps.  Ixxv.  7  ;  1  Sam.  ii.  1 — 10).
By  his  providential  working  :  1.  His  purposes  are  fulfilled  and  the  truth  of  his  Word
is  confirmed.  "  By  a  series  of  events  following  in  the  ordinary  course  of  Providence,
without  any  miracle  interposed,  this  prediction  (given  by  Samuel  and  exhibited  in  tlie
act  of  anointing)  was  brought  to  pass.  David  was  raised  to  his  divinely  appointed
station,  when  his  shepherd's  staff  became  a  sceptre,  and  his  flock  a  great  people ;  none
contributing  more  to  the  preparation  of  this  event  than  Saul  himself. .  . .  The  compli-
cated narrative  is  the  exposition  of  the  prophetic  prescience"  (Davison).  2.  Those  who
Ofipose  his  purposes  are  overthrown.  3.  He  who  humbly  waits  their  fulfilment  in  the
way  of  obedience  is  promoted.  4.  Individuals  and  nations  are  constrained  to  turn  from
their  own  way,  and  submit  to  his  plans  as  the  wisest  and  best  (ch.  ii.  4 ;  iii.  9  ;  v.  2).
"  The  secret  springs  of  revolutions  are  unaccountable,  and  must  be  resolved  into  that
Providence  which  turns  all  hearts  as  the  rivers  of  water  "  (Matthew  Henry).  "  Notwith-
staijding  those  appearances  which  obscure  the  providence  of  God,  it  often  makes  itseli
conspicuous  in  the  midst  of  them  all.  When  we  have  allowed  to  human  agency,  to  human
wisdom  and  human  power,  a  large  circle  of  events  imputed  to  nothing  else,  we  see  the
Divine  wisdom  frequently  disencumber  itself  from  all  communication  with  second
causes,  and  stretch  itself  out  in  the  face  of  all  men,  in  defeating  and  confounding  the
plans  of  human  wisdom,  in  the  failure  of  the  deepest  schemes  "  (R.  Hall). — D.

Vers.  2 — 10. — (Ziklag.)  Sdfish  craft.  Beyond  the  assertion  of  the  Amalekite  that
Israel  was  defeated  and  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  dead,  of  which  the  diadem  and  bracelet
afforded  proof,  it  is  uncertain  how  far  his  story  was  true.  His  statement  concerning
bis  own  conduct  cannot  be  satisfactorily  reconciled  with  that  of  1  Sam.  xxxi. ;  and,
although  credited  by  David,  it  was  probably  a  fabrication,  his  motive  therein  being  the
desire  of  reward,  as  David  himself  clearly  perceived  (ch.  iv.  16).  In  him  we  have  a
picture  of  what  sometimes  appears  in  others   under  higher  moral  influences,  viz.:

1.  Dominant  selfishness.  He  is  supremely  concerned  about  his  own  interest.  Self-love
in  an  original  principle  of  our  nature,  and,  when  properly  regulated,  points  in  the  direc-
tion of  virtue  and  happiness.  But  it  easily  degenerates  into  selfishness,  "  the  source  of
all  the  sins  of  omission  and  commission  which  are  found  in  the  World."  And  when  a
man  comes  under  the  dominion  of  the  latter,  he  may  sink  into  any  depth  of  meanness.

2.  t^ultle  scheming.  Amidst  the  dying  and  the  dead,  after  the  battle,  his  only  thought
is  of  gain;  and,  having  plundered  the  fallen  king  of  the  regalia,  he  coolly  calculates
how  he  may  dispose  thereof  to  the  gnatest  advantage;  and  then  hastens  a  long
distance  across  the  country  to  one  whom  he  expects  to  find  ready  to  welcome  the
prospect  of  his  own  elevation  by  an  enemy's  death,  and  to  pay  him  "  the  wages  of
unrighteousness."  3.  Feigned  sympathy.  He  comes  into  the  presence  of  David
"  with  the  marks  of  distress  and  dismay— dust  and  clay  smeared  over  his  face,  and  his
clothes  torn  "—on  account  of  the  disaster  which  has  befallen  Israel  (1  Sam',  iv.  12).
But  how  little  docs  his  appearance  correspond  with  the  feelin'_'s  of  his  heart  1  "Self-
love  sometimes  borrows  the  face  of  honest  zeal  "  (Hall).  4.  Obsequious  homage.  "  He
fell  to  the  earth,  and  did  obeisance;"  prostrating  himself  befoie  the  rising  sun  of  the
new  era  with  abject,  insincere,  and  wicked  mind.  "  To  tho^e  who  are  distinguished  in
the  kingdom  of  God  as  specially  called  and  favoured  instruments  of  grace,  falsehood
and  hypocrisy  draw  near  most  pressingly  and  corruptingly  in  the  guise  of  humility  and
ielf-abasement"(Erdmann).    5,  PUtusihle  lying.    (Vers.  6— 9.)    He  artfully  mingle*


Oft.  1.1-27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OE  SAMUEL.  23

falsehood  with  the  truth  he  utters,  for  the  saka  of  enhancing  the  value  of  his  good
offices.  If  he  had  been  satisfled  with  simply  telling  the  tidings  of  the  death  of  Saul,
all  would  have  been  well  with  him ;  but  by  his  gratuitous  inventions  he  entangles
himself  in  a  dangerous  snare.  6.  Unconsdous  self -accusation.  "  I  stood  upon  him,  and
slew  him,  because  I  was'sure  that  he  could  not  live  after  that  he  was  fallen  "  (ver.  10).
He  accuses  himself  in  the  excuses  he  makes  for  his  conduct.  Qui  s^excuse  s'accuse.
Even  the  request  of  Saul  would  not  have  justified  his  act  or  absolved  him  fro.m  respon-
sibility. And  how  could  he  be  sure  that  the  wounded  king  could  not  live  ?  Even  the
most  hardened  villain  deems  it  needful  to  endeavour  to  palliate  his  offence.  And  he  who  is
solely  intent  upon  his  own  interest  often  makes  admissions  that  clearly  reveal  his  guilt.
7.  Fatal  miscalculation.  He  judges  of  the  character  of  another  by  his  own,  meets  with
a  generosity,  loyalty,  and  justice  which  he  cannot  understand,  fails  of  his  purpose,  and
receives  a  reward  which  he  did  not  anticipate.  "The  incident  gives  us  the  opportunity
of  marking  the  immense  difference  in  the  order  of  mind  and  character  which  may  subsist
between  two  individuals  brought  together  by  one  event,  and  having  their  attention
occupied  by  one  and  the  same  object"  (J.  A.  Miller,  '  Saul ').  "  He  taketh  the  wise
in  their  own  craftiness  "  (Job  v.  13).  "The  wicked  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his  own
hands  "  (Ps.  ix.  16 ;  Prov.  vi.  15 ;  xviii.  7).— D.

Vers.  11,  12. — (Ziklag.)  Unselfish  grief.  "  They  mourned,  and  wept "  (var.  12).
Pew  things  are  more  remarkable  in  the  character  of  David  than  the  generosity  which
he  displayed  with  respect  to  Saul.  He  once  and  again  spared  his  life  ;  and,  instead  of
rejoicing,  he  was  overwhelmed  with  grief  at  his  death.  He  entirely  lost  sight  of  any
advantage  which  it  promised  to  himself,  in  his  sorrow  over  the  disaster  which  befell  the
king,  his  sons,  and  the  people  of  Israel.     We  have  here —

I.  The  news  op  a  great  calamity,  now  only  too  fully  confirmed  (vers.  5 — 11).  A
calamity  is  deeply  affecting  when,  as  in  this  case,  it :  1.  Consists  of  a  combination  of
mournful  events  (ver.  12).     2.  Falls  on  those  who  are  intimately  connected  with  us.

3.  Occurs  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  i.  Involves  irreparable  loss,  and  affords  little
prospect  of  alleviation.  And  the  cloud  of  affliction  is  peculiarly  dark  when  it  is
pervaded  by  Divine  wrath  (Hos.  xiii.  11).  "  Lover  and  friend  hast  thou  put  far  from
me,  and  my  acquaintance  into  darkness  "  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  18).

II.  The  scene  of  a  gkievous  MOtrnsiNO.  The  sincerity  and  intensity  of  David's
grief,  in  which  his  six  hundred  men  shared,  were  shown  by  (1)  rending  the  garments ;
(2)  wailing  aloud;  (3) fasting;  (4)  until  the  evening;  cpmmon  signs  of  sorrow  in  the
East,  as  genuine  as  any  other,  and  relieving  as  well  as  indicating  a  burdened  heart.
What  a  "day  of  trouble"  was  that  on  which  David  and  his  heroes  sat  there  watching
the  sinking  sun !  (For  other  days  of  a  like  nature,  see  ch.  ii.  24 ;  lii;  32 ;  vi.  9 ;
xii.  1, 16 ;  xiii.  21,  30 ;  tv.  13 ;  xviii.  33 ;  xx.  4 ;  xxi.  1 ;  xxiv.  13,  17.)

in.  The  proof  of  an  excellent  disposition.  Sorrow  is  an  evidence  of  love.
David's  disposition  was :  1.  Forgiving  toward  an  enemy.  "  For  Saul."  2.  Faithful
toward  a  friend.     "  For  Jonathan  his  son."    3.  Patriotic.    "  For  the  house  of  Israel."

4.  Devout.  "  For  the  people  of  the  Lord."  "  The  uprightness  of  his  heart  and  the
sincerity  of  his  feelings  cannot  for  a  moment  Ije  doubted  by  those  who  read  his  lament
over  Saul  and  Jonathan  with  an  unprejudiced  mind.  Pretended  sorrow  never  could
speak  thus"  (Hengstenberg).  "The  only  deep  mourning  for  Saul,  with  the  exception
of  the  Jabeshites,  proceedfS  from  the  man  whom  he  had  hated  and  persecuted  for  so
many  years,  even  to  the  time  of  his  death ;  just  as  David's  Successor  wept  over  the  fate
of  Jerusalem  even  when  it  was  about  to  destroy  himself"  (0.  von  Gerlach).

Observe:  1.  That  the  most  generous  grief  requires  to  be  restrained  within  due  bounds.
Its  excessive  indulgence  is  injurious  and  wrong.  2.  That  the  beneficial  effect  of  trouble
is  not  usually  experienced  at  "  the  present,"  but  "  afterward  "  by  means  of  reflection
and  submission  (Heb.  xii.  11).  3.  That  to  the  eye  of  faith  the  darkest  cloud  is
illumined  by  Divine  goodness  and  mercy.  "  At  eventide  weeping  cometh  in  to  tarry
for  a  night ;  but  with  the  morning  cometh  a  shout  of  joy  "  (Ps.  xxx.  5). — ^D.

Vers.  13— 16.— (ZlKLAG.)  Capital  punishment.  "Thy  blood  be  upon  thy  head"
(ver.  16).  The  grief  of  David  at  the  death  of  Saul  was  associated  with  indignation  at
the  conduct  of  the  Amalekite,  who,  according  to  his  own  confession,  had  taken  part  in


?4  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  i.  1—27.


its  infliction.     At  sunset  he  recalled  the  unhappy  messing,  r,  nnd  having  r.rther  ques-
tioBC'l  him,  testified  his  abhorrence  of  his  deed,  and  orilcrLd  his  execution,     ^"tictv-

I.  TuE  CRiMK  which  was  laid  to  his  chary:e,  viz.  the  intentional  and  unjustifiable
taking  nway  of  the  life  of  another:  1.  Proceeding,  like  every  act  of  murder,  from
indifference  to  the  sncredness  of  human  life  and  the  dignity  of  human  nature,  created
in  the  image  of  God.  2.  Aggravated  in  guilt  by  irreverence  toward  the  person  of  the
kinc,  "  the  Lord's  ano'ntcd,"  who  ought,  on  account  of  his  high  position,  to  have  been
held  in  special  honour  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  6  ;  xxvi.  11 ;  xxxi.  5).  "  When  the  Israelites  were
under  royal  authority,  it  would  appear  to  have  been  a  maxim  of  their  law  that  the
person  of  the  king  was  inviolable,  even  though  he  might  be  tyrannical  and  unjust ;
and,  in  fact,  this  maxim  is  necessary,  not  only  to  the  security  of  the  king,  but  also  to
the  welfare  of  the  subject ;  for  it  is  the  dread  of  assassination  and  treacheries  that
usually  makes  kings  tyrants,  and  novices  in  tyranny  absolute  despots'"  (Michaelis).
3.  Exhibiting  disobedience  to  the  command  of  God.  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill  "  (Exnd,  xx.
13),  i.e.  do  no  murder  (Bxod.  xxi.  12).  With  this  law  the  Amalekite  was  probably
acquainted.  He  knew,  at  least,  that  it  was  wrong  to  take  away  life  vidthout  adoquate
reason.  Hence  he  sought  to  justify  the  act  by  pleading  the  request  of  Saiu  (ver.  9),
and  his  suffering  conriUion,  which  it  was  mercy  to  terminate.  But  how  could  Saul
authorize  another  to  do  to  him  what  he  had  no  right  to  do  to  himself?  Genuine
loyalty  and  mercy  would  have  prompted  a  different  course  of  conduct  j  and  malice  and
selfishness  were  clearly  the  motives  of  the  deed.  There  was  in  it  nothing  praiseworthy,
but  everything  to  be  abhorred  and  condemned  (ver.  14).

IL  The  evidence  on  which  he  was  convicted.  "Thy  mouth  hath  testified  agaihst
th«e,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  His  confession  was :  1.  Voluntanly  made ;  not  extorted  from
nim  by  the  infliction  or  threatening  of  snifering,  or  the  promise  of  rewaid.  2.  Con-
firmed by  the  signs  of  his  connection  with  the  death  of  the  king  (ver.  10).  3.  A
sufficient  ground,  under  the  circumstances,  for  juHgmenl,  without  further  inquiry.
Even  if,  as  is  probable,  he  did  not  actually  commit  the  deed,  he  took  ujion  hiuiself  the
responsibility,  and  justly  incurred  the  consequences  thereol'.  But  w^hy  did  he  not
retract  and  repudiate  his  confession  ?  Perhaps  he  thought  that  it  would  be  of  no
avail ;  and  he  would  thereby  have  acknowledged  his  falsehood  and  mercenariness.  Pos-
sibly he  did  retract, and  was  not  believed.  For  "a  liar  is  not  believed  though  he  speak
tlie  truth."  Considered  in  relation  to  his  times,  the  evidence  on  which  Da  \  id  acted  was
sufficient;  but  the  incident  affords  an  illustration  of  the  uncertainty  which,  often
pertains  to  the  crime  of  murder  and  the  fallibility  of  human  judgment.

IIL  The  authobitt  by  which  he  was  condemned.  Allhimgu  David  was  not  yet
publicly  recognized  as  civil  ruler,  to  whom  the  right  of  judging  properly  belonged,  yet
he  was  fuliy  justified  in  as-^uniing  the  office,  inasmuch  as  :  1.  It  l^ail  been  virtually
conferred  upon  him  by  the  appointment  Of  the  Divin;'  King  of  Israel.  2.  The  chief
hindrance  to  its  exercise  was  removed  by  the  death  of  Saul.  There  was  no  higher
authority  than  his  in  tlie  land,  and  it  had  been  acknowledged  by  the  Amalekite  him-
self (ver.  10).  3.  Its  assumption  was  necessary  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  purpose  of  his
appointment,  the  manifestation  of  the  jusiice  of  God,  and  the  promotion  of  the  welfare
of  the  people.  H«  may  have  wished  to  clear  himself  from  the  suspicion  of  complicity
in  the  king's  death,  to  show  that  he  entertained  no  feeling  of  revenge  against  him,  aud
to  gain  the  esteem  of  the  people  of  Israel ;  but  his  main  motive  was  of  a  higher  nature.
He  acted  on  theocratic  principles,  as  6u  a  subsequent  occasion  (ch.  iv.  9 — 12).

IV.  The  PtTNiSHMBNT  whicb  he  suffered  (ver.  15).  "  When  the  sentence  of  death
was  pronounced  by  the  king,  it  was  executed  by  his  body-guard  "  (ch.  xv.  18  ;  xx.  23).
Cn7)toZp«77t8Amen(  may  be  upheld  on  the  ground  of :  1.  The  claims  of  justice.  It  has
been  generally  felt,  even  from  the  most  ancient  period  (Gen.  iy.  10,  14),  that  the
murderer  deserves  to  die.  2.  The  teaching  of  Scripture.  "  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,"
etc.  (Gen.  ix.  6).  "  This  was  the  first  command  having  reference  to  the  temporal
sword.  By  thoFe  words  temporal  government  was  established,  and  the  sword  placed  in
its  hand  by  God  "  (Luther).  It  eave  the  right  and  imposed  the  duty  of  inflicting
death ;  and  it  is  of  permanent  obligation  (Lev.  xxiv.  17  ;  John  xix.«ll ;  Acts  xxv.  11 ;
Rom.  xiii.  4).  3.  The  welfare  of  society.  It  exalts  the  principle  of  justice ;  declares
the  dignity  of  man  in  the  most  impressive  manner ;  effectually  prevents  the  offender
|rom  repeating  his  offence ;  powerfully  deters  others  from  following  his  example ;  aud


BH.  1.1— 27.]  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  25

thus  conduces  to  the  security  of  human  life.  Severity  to  one  la  mercy  to  many.  On
the  other  hand,  it  may  he  said  that :  1.  The  claims  of  justice  are  adequately  satisfied  hy
a  lifelong  penal  servitude.  2.  Scripture,  rightly  interpreted,  does  not  justify  the  infliction
of  death.  The  Noachic  precept  (if  it  be  such^  was  adapted  only  to  an  early  stage  of
society,  its  literal  fulfilment  is  no  longer  reqiiirerl,  and  the  principle  on  which  it  rests
(the  dignity  of  man)  is  preserved  and  more  fully  maintained  hy  the  revelations  and
influences  of  Christianity.  The  whole  spirit  of  the  New  Testament  is  in  favour  of
seeking  the  reformation  rather  than  effecting  the  destruction  of  the  offender.  "  Mercy
glorieth  againnt  judgment."  Even  the  fratricide  Cain  was  spared  (Gen.  iv.  5),  as  if  to
show  the  possibility  and  propriety  of  sparing  the  life  of  the  criminal.  3.  The  welfai"e
of  society  is  more  fully  promoted  by  sparing  his  life  than  by  taking  it  away.  Hardened
criminals  and  persons  under  the  influence  of  strong  passion  are  not  deterred  hy  the  fear  of
death ;  other  persons  are  more  powerfully  affected  hy  other  motives.  The  possibilitj
of  the  innocent  suffering  a  penalty  which  is  irreversible  causes  hesitation  in  its  in  flic
tion  where  there  is  the  least  doubt,  and  so  the  guilty  often  escape,  punishment  become,
uncertain,  and  men  are  tempted  to  commit  crime  in  the  hope  of  impunity.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  crime  does  not  increase  in  those  countries  where  capital  punishment  is
abolished.  "After  the  Divine  permission  to  inflict  capital  punishment  which  had  bfcn
given  for  a  considerable  period  of  time,  had  displayed  itself  as  the  most  extreme  madness
in  the  execution  of  Christ,  the  question  of  its  abolition  has  become  only  a  question  of
time.  The  questidn  is  whether  Christ  may  not  have  done  enough  for  this  "  (Ewald,
'Antiquities,'  p.  174).— D.

Vers.  17, 18. — (Ziklao.)  The  song  of  the  low.  I.  The  occasion  of  this  lament,
threnody,  elegy,  or  funeral  dirge,  was  the  arrival  of  fatal  tidings  from  Gilboa.  "  There
were  only  two  in  that  great  slaughter  concerning  whose  fate  David  was  eager  to  know
the  truth — ^his  enemy  and  his  friend.  '  How  knowest  thou  that  Saul  and  Jonathan  his
son  be  dead  ?'  (ver.  5).  When  the  news  was  fully  established,  he  immediately  went
through  all  the  signs  of  Eastern  grief.  He  and  his  six  hundred  heroes  sat  with  their
clothes  rent,  uttering  the  loud  Oriental  wail,  observing  the  rigid  Eastern  fast  until
the  sunset  of  the  fatal  day  released  them.  Then  David  roused  himself  to  action.
The  first  vent  to  his  grief  was  in  the  stern  exaction  of  the  life  of  the  unhappy  mes-
senger, according  to  the  hard  temper  of  those  fierce  times.  The  second  vent  was  in  the
touching  dirge,  which,  according  to  the  tender  spirit  of  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel,  he
poured  forth  over  the  two  departed  chiefs  "  ('  The  Songs  of  Israel,'  Good  Words,  1863).
It  was  probably  accompanied  by  his  harp,  that  had  long  been  silent,  but  was  now  taken
up  afresh  and  struck  to  a  song  of  sorrow  which  for  tenderness  and  intensity  has  never
been  surpassed.  "  The  genius  and  origin  of  the  elegy  among  the  Hebrews  may  be
clearly  traced  to  their  manner  of  celebrating  their  funeral  rites  "  (Lowth).  "  If  you
.  attend  to  David's  harp,  you  shall  hear  as  many  hearse-like  airs  as  carols  "  (Bacon).

II.  The  title  of  "  The  Bow  "  (Kesheth),  which  it  appears  to  have  received,  may  have
been  derived  from  the  mention  of  the -bow  in  ver.  22,  as  the  favourite  weapon  of
Jonathan  (1  Sam.  xviii.  4 ;  xx.  20),  as  it  was  of  his  tribesmen  (1  Chron.  xiL  2) ;  or
"  because  it  was  a  martial  ode  "  (Keil).  It  is  improbable  that  David  introduced  "  the
use  of  the  bow  "  (Authorized  Version)  into  the  tribe  of  Judah,  either  as  a  tribute  to  the
memory  gf  his  friend,  or  as  a  means  of  repairing  the  recent  disaster ;  for  that  had  been
long  familiar.  But  he  "  bade  them  teach  the  children  of  Judah  "  the  song  of  "  the
bow  "  (possibly  that  his  youthful  warriors  might  sing  it  in  their  military  practice  witiv
the  how) — a  title  given  to  it  in  the  Book  of  Jashar  (Josh,  x,  13),  or  collection  of
national  songs,  in  which  it  was  preserved.  "  When  the  writer  of  2  Samuel  transferred
the  dirge  to  his  own  pages,  he  transferred  it,  as  we  might  do  any  of  the  psalms,  with
its  title,  which  was  as  follows  :  'For  the  children  of  Israel  to  learn  by  heart.  Kashotli
from  the  Book  of  Jasher ' "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').

III.  Its  fobm  is  that  of  a  lyrical  composition,  the  oldest  as  well  as  the  most  commdn
species  of  Hebrew  poetry ;  and  (like  the  rest)  it  is  distinguished  by  parallelism  or
rhythm,  "  the  measured  rise  and  fall  of  feeling  and  utterance,  in  which  the  poet's  effort
to  become  fully  master  of  his  poetic  inspiration  finds  harmonious  expression,  and  the
external  rhythm  of  sound  is  properly  subordinated  to  the  rhythmic  pulsation  of
thought"  (JSritish   Quarterly  B«mw,  January,  1877).     It  contains  a  refrain  or


20  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  i.  1—27.

chorus,  twice  repeated;  and  falls  into  three  strophic  divisions  marked  by  its  recurrence,
either  at  their  commencement  (Keil)  or  their  close  (Kitio,  'Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical
Literature');  or,  according  to  more  common  arrangement,  into  five  or  six  stanzas.
"The  putting  of  lamentations  into  poems  made  them  the  more  moving  and  afi'ect-
ing,  and  the  more  lasting  "  (Matthew  Henry).

rV.  In  substance  and  general  character  it  is  an  outburst  of  natural  grief  (as  the
■ODg  of  Hannah  was  of  spiritual  gladness)  over  the  fallen  heroes,  and  a  celebration  of
their  worth.  "  We  can  hardly  call  it  religious  poetry.  It  is  not  a  psalm  or  hymn.
The  name  of  God  never  occurs  in  it.  It  is  a  war-song  which  sums  up  the  national
feelings  of  every  age  over  the  graves  of  its  departed  heroes "  (Stanley).  Yet  it  is
instinct  with  most  generous  and  devout  feeling.  "  As  in  view  of  the  remains  of  a
friend  all  the  pain  which  he  caused  us  while  living  is  forgotten  in  the  remembrance  of
his  excellences  and  the  kindness  which  he  showed  us,  so  David  no  longer  has  a  memory
for  the  period  of  persecution  now  past.  He  is  a  man,  and  not  the  judge  of  the  dead.
Therefore  Saul  stands  before  him  only  in  his  virtues,  and  he  celebrates  not  only
Jonathan,  but  also  Saul,  as  loved  ones  who  can  never  be  forgotten.  We  see  in  this
case  that  anger  belongs  only  to  the  accidental  utterances  of  noble  souls,  whose  constant
motive  is  love  "  (Delitzsch,  '  Old  Test.  Hist,  of  Eedemption ').  "  Though  God  often
reproved  his  ancient  people  for  paying  religious  homage  to  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  yet
we  never  find  that  he  reproved  them  for  paying  funeral  honours  to  departed  men  of
superior  merit  among  their  own  nation.  Their  example  in  this  respect,  therefore,
seems  to  have  a  Divine  sanction,  and  plainly  teaches  us  the  propriety  of  lamenting  the
death  and  commemorating  the  virtues  of  those  who  have  been  eminently  useful  in
life  "  (N.  Emmons).— D.

Vers.  19 — 27. — DavixPs  la/mentation  over  Saul  and  Jonathan.  In  this  lamentation
there  is —

I,   A  DECLABATION  OF  THE  CAUSE  OF  MOURNDJa.

"  0  pride  of  Israel,  on  thy  high  places  slain  I
Auu  I  fallen  are  the  heroes."

(Ver.  19.)
This  is  the  key-note.  It  contains  "the  theme  of  the  entire  ode."  1.  Men  of  rich
endowments  are  the  ornament,  beauty,  and  glory  of  a  people.  2.  Such  men  are  some-
times stricken  down  suddenly  and  under  unexpected  circumstances.  "  Not  on  the  level
plains  where  defeat  from  the  chariots  and  horses  of  the  enemy  might  have  been  expected
and  had  been  before  encountered,  but  on  the  high  places  whire  victory  seemed  the
rightful  prize  of  the  mountain  chiefs  and  the  indomitable  infantry  of  the  Israelitish
hosts" — there  the  towering  form  of  Saul  was  "hit  by  the  archers"  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  3),
the  heroic  heart  of  Jonathan  thrust  through,  the  splendour  of  Israel  eclipsed.  "All
fleshis  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field,"  etc.  (Isa.  xl.  6, 7 ;'
Jer.  ix.  23,  24).  3.  Their  loss  is  a  great  calamity,  and  a  source  of  bitter  grief  to  those
who  form  a  proper  estimate  of  their  worth,  and  possess  a  genuine  concern  for  the  public
good  (ver.  12).

n.   A  DEPRECATION  OF  THE   TRIUMPH   OF   THE   ENEMY.

"TellitnotinGath,
Publish  not  the  tidings  in  tlie  streets  of  Askelon;
Lest  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines  rejoice,
Lest  the  daughters  of  the  unoircumcised  exult."

(Ver.  20.)
In  imagination  the  poet  sees  the  swift-footed  messengers  bearing  the  tidings,  to  the
nearest  cities  of  the  Philistines— to  Gath  and  Askelon;  hears  their  songs  of^'victory;
and,  in  sympathy  with  his  people,  he  utters  the  wish,  "Oh  that  it  might  nol  have  been!"
1.  The  fall  of  men  of  eminence  among  the  people  of  God  causes  exultation  among  their
adversaries.  2.  The  triumph  of  the  wicked  (the  "  unoircumcised  ")  increases  the  suffer-
ing and  shame  of  the  godly  in  their  misfortunes  (Ps.  xliv.  9—26 ;  cxxiii.  4).  3.  What-
ever contributes  to  this  result  should  be  earnestly  deprecated  by  all  who  have  a  sincere
regard  for  the  reputation  of  the  great,  the  welfare  of  the  good,  and  the  honour  of  God,
That  which  makes  the  ungodly  rejoice  should  often  make  the  faithful  weep.


ea  1 1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


III.  An  imprecation  on  the  scene  of  disaster.


**  O  mountains  in  Gilboa,  nor  dew  nor  rain  (be)  upon  you,
Nor  fields  of  sacred  offerings  I
For  there  lies  rusting  the  shield  of  heroes,
The  shield  of  Saul  unanointed  with  oil."

(Ver.  21.)

"Over  against  the  exultant  joy  of  victory  of  Israel's  enemies,  which  he  would  he  gladly
spared,  l5avid  sets  the  attitude  of  mourning,  in  which  he  would  behold  the  muimtaiiis
of  Giilraajthe  scene  of  the  heroes'  death-strnggle  "  (Erdmann).  As  that  scene  firesents
itself  to  his  imagination,  its  beauty  and  fertility  appear  incongruous  with  the  degrada-
tion of  the  slain,  the  misery  of  Israel,  and  his  own  absorbing  grief.  Has  it  no  sympathy
vith  them  in  their  woe?  He  impatiently  resents  its  indifference  to  his  sorrow,  and
says  in  effect,  "  Oh  that  it  might  no  more  enjoy  the  favour  of  Heaven,  nor  produce  the
oblations  by  which  its  wrath  is  propitiated,  but  be  a  perpetual  memorial  of  the  mournful
event  1 "  (Ezek.  xxxi.  15).  1.  It  is  the  tendency  of  grief  to  dwell  upon  the  objects
that  are  associated  with  its  cause,  and  by  the  contemplation  of  them  it  becomes
intensified.  2.  Under  the  influence  of  strong  emotion  the  mind  seeks  sympathy  with
itself  even  in  material  and  inanimate  objects,  and  is  apt  to  indulge  in  wishes  that  are
incapable  of  literal  fulfilment.  3.  The  aspects  of  nature  correspond  in  greater  or  less
degree  with  the  mental  mood  in  which  they  are  regarded.  Sorrow  projects  its  shadow
over  the  external  world,  and  clothes  the  fairest  scenes  with  gloom.  4.  The  language
of  poetic  inspiration  must  not  be  interpreted  in  its  literal,  prosaic  sense,  but  in  the  light
of  the  feeling  and  imagination  of  the  poet.  David's  imprecation  was  no  more  intended
to  have  an  actual  effect  on  the  fields  of  Gilboa  than  Job's  (Job  iii.  1)  on  the  day  of
his  birth.

IV.  A   CELEBRATION  OF   THE   VIRTUES  OF  THE   FALLEN.

"From  blood  of  slain,
From  fat  of  heroes

The  bow  of  Jonathan  turned  not  backward,
And  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  unsatisfied.
Saul  and  Jonathan  I  the  beloved  and  lovely  I
In  their  lives  and  in  their  death  they  were  not  parted ;
Than  eagles  fleeter.
Than  lions  stronger."

(Vers.  22,  23.)

The  poet  turns  away  from  the  melancholy  scene  to  contemplate  the  heroes  as  he  had
known  them,  and  describes  their  warlike  prowess,  their  amiable  dispositions,  their
mutual  affection  and  faithful  companionship,  their  agility  and  strength.  Sincere
sorrow  over  the  dead :  1.  Imposes  a  becoming  silence  concerning  their  imperfections,
is  forgetful  of  personal  injuries,  and  puts  out  of  slight  everything  that  is  contrary  to
itself  (vers.  11, 12).  De  mortuis  nil  nisi  bonum.  2.  Delights  to  dwell  upon  the  special
aspects  of  their  character  which  are  worthy  of  admiration.  3.  Sees  in  their  extra-
ordinary virtues  a  measure  of  the  loss  that  has  been  experienced.  "The  nobility  of
Jonathan's  character  cannot  easily  be  over-estimated.  The  rival  claims  of  friendship
and  of  nature,  of  David  and  Saul,  were  adjusted  with  admirable  delicacy.  He
strengthened  his  friend's  hands  (1  Sam.  xxii.  16)  and  saved  his  life ;  but  he  clung  to
hJB  father.  The  shadows  were  falling  on  Saul,  yet  he  did  not  join  David's  party,
though  he  knew  that  he  would  succeed  to  the  throne.  With  a  gallant  loyalty  and  a
trae-hearted  despair,  he  followed  his  doomed  sire  to  Gilboa  "  (B.  Kent).

V.  An  enumeration  op  the  gifts  of  a  benefactor.

"  O  daughters  of  Israel,  wail  for  Saul  I
He  clothed  you  in  scarlet  with  loveliness ;
He  put  jewels  of  gold  upon  your  apparel
Alas  t  fallen  are  the  heroes
In  the  midst  of  the  battle."

(Vers.  24,  25.)

"The  stream  of  sorrow,  which  down  to  this  point  has  been  united,  here  divide*."
David  calls  upon  the  daughters  of  Israel  to  wail,  whiU  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines


28  THE  SECOJTD  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  1. 1— 2T.

triumph ;  and  reminds  them  of  tlio  hsneficence  of  Saul  in  distributing  among  them  the
.■-piiils  of  war  gained  in  his  former  victories.  1.  The  benefits  conferred  by  an  able  and
successful  ruler  upon  his  people  are  great,  and  deserve  a  grateful  recognition.  2.  The
value  of  those  benefits  is  seldom  fully  appreciated  until  they  can  be  no  longer  bestowed.
3.  Fulilic  mourning  is  as  appropriate  in  its  season  as  public  rejoicing  (1  Sam.  xiii.  7).
It  expresses  and  deepens  the  general  sorrow,  and  is  a  testimony  to  departed  worth.
The  chorus  is  here  repeated.  "  This  recurrence  of  the  same  idea  is  perfectly  congenial
to  tlie  nature  of  elegy,  since  grief  is  fond  of  dwelling  upon  the  particular  objects  of  the
passion,  and  frequently  repeating  them  "  (Lowth).

VI.   A   COMMBMOKATION  OF   THE   LOVE   OF   A    FRIEND.

"  O  Jonathan,  on  thy  high  places  slain  I
Woe  is  me  for  thee,  my  brother  Jonathan  I
Lovely  wast  thou  to  me  exceedingly.
Marvellous  (was)  thy  love  to  me  beyond  the  love  of  woman.
Alcta  1  fallen  are  the  heroes.
And  perished  the  instruments  of  battle."

(Vers  26,  27.)

"  At  this  culmination  of  grief  the  lament  again  sounds  the  key-note  of  the  whole,
and  returns  in  conclusion  to  its  chief  object,  the  sorrow  for  the  hero-glory  of  Israel
destroyed  in  Saul  and  Jonathan."  David's  expiession  of  sorrow  manifests  his  deep  love
to  his  friend ;  still  more,  commemorates  the  "  wonderful "  love  of  his  friend  to  him.
"  And  in  that  love  which  he  had  homo  towards  him,  there  was  something  '  separate
from  all  beside,'  '  miraculous,'  like  a  special  work  of  Ck)d  (this  is  the  force  of  the  word),
more  singular,  undivided,  and  devoted  than  the  love  of  women — even  of  Michal,  of
Ahinoam,  of  Abigail "  (Stanley).  1.  Pure,  fervent,  self-denying  love  is  the  chief
excellence  of  human  character.  It  is  the  greatest  of  all  preat  things  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13  •
Col.  ill.  14 ;  Jas.  ii.  8 ;  1  Pet.  i.  22).  2.  It  is  exalted  and  glorified  in  our  view  by  means
of  death.  3.  The  memory  of  those  in  whom  it  dwells  in  an  eminent  deo;ree  is  worthy
of  being  perpetuated  to  all  ages.  (For  translations  and  paraphrases  of  this  lament  see
Lowth;  Horsley,  'Bibl.  Grit.;'  Geo.  Sandys:  1636;  J.  Oldham:  1677.)— >D.

Ver.  19. — "  E<nv  are  the  mighty  fallen  I "  This  expression  suggests  numerous  reflec-
tions on —

I.  The  vanity  or  man  in  the  glory  of  his  might.  He  is  proud  of  his  exalted  state,
his  wisdom,  strength,  or  riches ;  and  he  is  admired  and  envied  by  others.  But :  1.  How
precarious  h\s  position  I  He  stands  on  "slippery  places."  All  his  graudeur  rests  on
life,  than  which  nothinc;  is  more  unsubstantial  or  uncertain.  2.  How  futile  his  pur-
poses .'  Formed  in  ignorance,  weakness,  and  presumption,  they  are  defeated  and  "  broken
off."  "  There  is  no  king  saved  by  the  multitude  of  a  host,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxxiii.  16).  3.  How
unsatisfying  his  possessions  I  They  afford  no  solid  peace  in  life  or  death.  "  Vanity  of
vanities,"  etc.  (Eccles.  i.  1).  4.  How  transient  his  duration  1  "  Man  is  like  to  vanity ;
his  days  are  as  a  shadow  that  passeth  away  "  (Ps.  cxliv.  4).  5.  How  signal  his  doion-
fall  I  "  How  are  they  brought  into  desolation  as  in  a  moment  1 "  (Ps.  Izxiii.  19).  (j.
How  evanescent  his /omei

"  Your  renown

Is  as  the  herb,  whose  hue  doth  come  and  go ;

And  his  might  withers  it,  by  whom  it  sprang

Crude  from  the  lap  of  earth."

(Dante,  <  Purg.,'  li.)
7  How  complete  his  hitmiliaUon !  The  sword  of  Saul  is  cast  away,  his  shield  covered
with  blood  and  rust,  his  sceptre  broken,  his  diadem  and  bracelet  pilfered,  his  head
plareil  in  the  temple  of  Dagon,  his  body  fastened  on  the  wall  of  Bethshan,  his  sons
sliiin,  iind  his  dynasty  destroyed.  "Man  that  is  in  honour,  and  understandetli  not  is
like  the  boasts  that  perish  "  (Ps.  xlix.  20 ;  xxxix.  5 ;  Dan.  iv.  31 ;  Acts  xii.  23).  "  'The
last  act  is  sanguinary,  beautiful  as  is  all  the  rest  of  the  play.  Dust  is  cast  upon  the
head,  and  there  is  an  end  and  lor  ever  "  (Pascal).

"Farewell,  a  long  farewell,  to  all  my  greatness  1
This  is  the  state  of  man  :  To-day  be  putteth  forth


CH.  1. 1— 27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  29

'J'he  tender  leaves  of  hope ;  to-morrow  blossoms,
And  bears  his  blushing  honours  thick  upon  him :
The  third  day  comes  a  frost,  a  killing  frost ;
And, — when  he  thinks,  good  easy  man,  full  surely
His  greatness  is  a-ripening, — nips  his  root,
And  then  he  falls,  as  I  do."

(Shakespeare,  'Henry  VUI.')

II.  The  peovidekce  of  God  in  the  fall  of  the  mighty.  "If  there  be  a  God,  the
world  must  be  governed  by  Providenie "  (1  Sam.  ii.  1 — 10 ;  ix.  1 — 25)i  1.  How
evident  its  existence!  "  The  Lord  reigneth."  It  is  not  only  declared  in  the  Scriptures,
but  also  plainly  shnwn  by  the  facts  of  history  and  daily  observation.  Of  Saul  it  is
said,  "  Thu  -Lord  slew  him  "  (1  Chron.  x.  14).  2.  How  great  its  p.,wer  1  "  He  bringeth
the  princes  to  nothing ;  he  maketh  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  vanity  "  (Isa.  xl.  23 ;  Dan.
iv.  25).  3.  How  vast  its  domain  I  All  space,  all  time,  all  orders  of  being  and  all
events,  the  least  as  well  as  the  gieatest  (Matt.  x.  29).  Even  the  actions  of  free  and
responsible  creatures,  of  individuals  and  nations,  the  Philistines  as  well  as  the  Israelites,
the  evil  as  well  as  the  good,  are  encircled  and  pervaded  by  it;  foreseen,  permitted,
directed,  controlled,  restrained,  or  overruled.  The  course  of  Saul  was  foreseen  at  his
appointment ;  yet  he  was  not  thereby  placed  under  the  necessity  of  acting  as  he  did.

"  CJontingenoy,  whose  verge  extendeth  not

Beyond  the  tablet  of  your  mortal  mold.

Is  all  depictured  in  the  eternal  sight ;

But  hence  deiiveth  not  necessity,

More  than  the  tall  ship,  hurried  down  the  flood.

Is  driven  by  the  eye  that  looks  on  it."

CPar.,'xviL)
4.  How  manifold  its  operations  i  What  skilful  adaptations  it  makes !  What  endless
instrumentalities  it  employs !  What  varied  issues  it  evolves  1  5.  How  mysterious  its
methods  I  The  fact  is  certain,  the  mode  unknown.  Its  ways  are  obscure,  perplexing,
completely  hidden  for  a  while,  and  then  made  apparent  and  fully  justified.  "  We  know
in  part."  6.  How  righteous  its  administration !  (Ps.  xxxi.  23 ;  xxxvii.  1 — 11 ;  xcvii.
2).  "  Saul  died  for  his  transgression,"  and  Israel  (whose  self-will  he  reflected)  was
chastised  through  the  man  of  their  own  choice.  7.  How  beneficent  its  aims  I  The
repression  of  sin,  the  salvation  of  men,  the  glory  of  God.  The  fall  of  Israel's  first  king
was  overruled  for  the  good  of  the  nation ;  the  fall  of  Israel,  in  subsequent  ages,  was
"  the  riches  of  the  world."     "  Oh  the  depth,"  etc. !  (Eom.  xi.  33—36).

Improvement.  1.  Glory  not  in  any  earthly  good,  but  only  in  the  Lord.  2.  Be
ambitious  to  serve  rather  than  to  rule.  3.  "Best  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for
him."    4.  Strive  for  the  crown  and  kingdom  that  will  endure  for  ever. — D.

Yer.  26. —  Wonderful  love.  Human  love  is,  in  proportion  to  its  purity  and  strength,
a  gift  of  Divine  love.  It  also  illustrates  the  love  from  which  it  proceeds,  by  reflecting
its  image  as  in  a  mirror.  It  is  of  a  twofold  nature — viz.  benevolence  or  charity  towards
all,  even  the  unworthy;  and  complacency  towards  those  in  whom  it  perceives  the  signs
of  excellence,  or  resemblance  to  itself.  Of  the  latter  kind  was  the  love  of  Jonathan  to
David;  and  it  was  wonderful,  considered  in  the  light  of  (1)  the  selfishness  that  prevails
among  men,  (2)  the  hindrances  that  stood  in  the  way  of  its- exercise,  (3)  the  Divine
grace  by  which  it  was  produced  and  maintained,  (4)  the  admirable  qualities  that  dis-
tinguished it,  and  (5)  the  services  and  sacriticps  in  which  it  was  evinced.  It  may  be
regarded  as  a  representation  of  the  unspeakable  love  of  Christ  towards  his  friends  (John
XV,  15)  and  brethren  (John  xx.  17) ;  which  is ;  1.  Appreciative  of  their  worth  (see
1  Sam.  xviii.  1 — 4).  It  sets  a  speciu  value  upon  them,  however  they  may  be  despised
by  others ;  looks  at  them  in  relation  not  merely  to  what  they  actually  are,  but  to  what
they  may  become ;  and  singles  them  out  as  objects  of  its  individual  concern.  "  Thy
love  to  me  was  wonderful."  "  He  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name  "  (John  x.  3).  2.
Sincere  and  thoroughly  disinterested  (1  Sam.  xix.  1 — 7).  It  seeks  their  welfare  rather
than  its  own ;  is  trustful,  unsuspecting,  and  watchful  over  their  interests ;  freely  com-
municates its  thoughts  and  feelings;  counsels  and  reproves;  faithfully  performs  its
promises ;   and  affords  protection  and  aid  act'ording  to  their  need.    3.  Sympathetic


JO


THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  1. 1—27.


(1  Sam.  XX.  1—9.)  It  finds  delight  in  their  society;  holds  familiar  mtercourse  with
them  ;  desires  a  return  of  its  affection;  makes  their  joys  and  sorrows  its  own  ;  and  is
considerate,  gentle,  tender,  and  kind.  "  Behold,  how  he  loved  him  1 "  (John  xi.  36).
4.  Intense.  (1  Sam.  xx.  10—42.)  "More  wonderful  than  woman's  love.  "No  less
ardent,  sincere,  and  sweet  than  the  highest  conjugal  affection ;  which  ought  to  be  (as
Stiigelius  here  glosses)  ardent  without  simulation,  sincere  without  any  suspicions,  and
sweet  without  morbsity  or  disdain"  (Patrick).  Its  intensity  is  shown  in  its  utterances,
efforts,  tears;  courage,  forbearance,  forgiveness,  and  unwearied ' patience.  5.  Self-
denying  and  self-sacrificing.  Jonathan  identified  himself  with  his  friend,  whose  life
was  in  imminent  peril ;  renounced  a  crown  and  suffered  shame  for  his  sake :  but  who
shall  lell  what  Christ  renounced  and  suffered  for  us  (Phil.  ii.  7,  8)?  6.  Enduring.
"  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the  world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end  "  (John
xiii.  1) ;  and  gave  them,  on  the  eve  of  his  departure,  a  proof  of  his  condescending,  pure,
undying  affection.  His  love  is  still  the  same;  and  it  "passeth  knowledge"  (Eph.
iii.  19).  7.  Influential  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  16 — 18)  in  attracting  love  and  constraining
devotion  ;  strengthening,  preserving,  comforting,  purifying  those  in  whom  it  dwells ;
perfecting  its  image  in  them  and  preparing  them  to  enter  into  its  eternal  joy.  *'  Unto
him  that  loved  us,"  etc.  (Rev.  i.  5). — D.

Vers.  6 — 10. — A  sad  end  of  a  perverse  life.  We  have  here  an  Amalekite's  account
of  the  death  of  Saul.  Whether  it  presents  the  truth,  and  can  therefore  be  harmonized
with  the  account  in  1  Sam.  xxxi.,  is  doubtful.  Possibly  Saul  did  not  die  at  once
when  he  fell  upon  his  sword,  and  being  in  anguish,  and  fearing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of
the  Philistines,  begged  the  Amalekite  to  despatch  him.  But  it  is  more  probable  that
the  account  was  false.  In  either  case  Saul  committed  suicide.  It  was  a  tragic  end  of
a  tragic  life — a  life  full  of  the  interest  which  arises  from  remarka'  'c  events,  contracted
characters,  the  working  of  powerful  passions,  etc.  But  we  have  to  view  it  in  the  aspects
which  tend  to  our  moral  and  spiritual  profit.

I.  It  was  the  end  of  a  life  whose  beginning  was  pull  of  promise.  Arising
from :  1.  Eis  personal  qualities.  Those  of  body — tall  and  commanding,  fitting  him
in  such  times  to  be  a  leader  of  men.  Those  of  moral  nature.  Character  is  the  most
powerful  factor  in  a  life ;  and  if  we  see  a  youth  of  good  character  we  hope  well  of  him.
Saul  comes  before  us  as  a  modest,  humble,  unassuming  youth,  diligently  discharging
his  duty  as  a  son,  and  affectionately  concerned  not  to  give  pain  to  his  lather  (1  Sam.
ix.  5,  whore  "  take  thought "  means  "  fear,"  "  be  anxious  ").  Still  even  then,  judging
from  the  silence  of  the  narrative,  he  was  without  decided  piety.     2.  Divine  calls  and

I  gifts.  Chosen  of  God  to  be  king,  he  was  anointed  by  Samuel,  and  received  unmistak-
able signs  that  the  prophet  was  the  representative  of  God  in  the  matter.  Chosen  also
by  lot,  although  some  were  disaOfected,  he  was  soon  able  to  secure  general  acceptance
by  his  prowess  and  able  leadership  in  war ;  and  was  solemnly  set  apart  as  sovereign.

•  Moreover,  a  change  passed  over  himself  which  fitted  him  for  his  post.  "  God  gave  him
another  heart "  (1  Sam.  x.  9).  He  became  also  a  partaker  of  the  spirit  of  prophecy.
(1  Sam.  X.  10.)  3.  Great  opportunities.  The  career  opened  to  Saul  was  one  of  peculiar
dignity  and  honour.  Called  to  be  the  first  king  of  God's  nation,  he  might  have  been
also  the  father  of  a  race  of  such  kings,  and  have  thus  occupied  no  mean  place  in  the
development  of  God's  plans  for  the  redemption  of  mankind.  And  his  immediate  work,
that  of  leading  the  people  to  victory  over  their  heathen  oppressors  and  clearing  the  lana
of  them,  and  then  of  drawing  the  tribes  of  Israel  more  closely  into  unity  and  framing
them  into  a  "  kingdom  of  God,"  was  worthy  of  the  highest  powers  and  the  strenuous
labours  of  a  long  life.  4.  Early  achievements.  Those,  for  instance,  recorded  in  1  Sam.
xi.,  in  which  he  manifested  both  couiage  and  capacity,  and  which  obtained  for  bim
the  general  cimsent  of  the  people  to  his  appointment.

II.  It  was  the  end  of  a  life  which  had  been  a  conbpiodous  FAiLniiK.  He  lost
his  opportunity,  forfeited  his  throne,  and  deprived  his  family  of  the  honour  of  succeed-
ing him.  He  was  tried,  found  wanting,  and  rejected.  He  had  shown  that  he  possessed
some  kingly  qualities.  Did  he  possess  the  most  essential  quality  for  the  king  of  such
a  people — &  king  under  God  as  supreme  Monarch — that  of  faith  in  God,  showing  itself
by  ready  and  hearty  obedience  even  under  difficulties  ?  It  was  peculiarly  important
that  the  first  king  should  not  {mil  in  such  qualities.    Twice  especially  he  was  put  to


OH.  1. 1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  81

the  proof  and  failed;  in  tlie  first  instance  (1  Sam.  xiii.)  by  doing  what  lie  ought  not
to  have  done,  and  in  the  second  (1  Sam.  xv.)  by  leaving  undone  what  he  ought  to
have  done.  Twice  his  doom  was  pronounced  by  Samuel,  who  then  sorrowfully  retired,
and  left  him  to  his  own  self-will  and  certain  fate.  But  though  he  thus  failed  in
securing  the  great  prize  set  before  him,  he  had  space  and  opportunity  for  repentance
and  its  fruits.  He  became  after  a  time  aware  who  was  to  secure  the  honour  which  he
had  forfeited,  and  had  he  been  humbled  in  spirit  and  penitent,  he  might  have  shown
by  his  conduct  to  David  that  he  acquiesced  in  the  Divine  will,  and  was  prepared  to  be
a  co-worker  with  God  in  its  accomplishment.  He  might  have  cherished  the  spirit  of
John  the  Baptist,  and  said  with  resignation,  if  not  joy,  "He  must  increase,  but  I  must
decrease."  Instead  of  this  he  cherished  envy,  which  ripened  into  hatred,  and  would
have  culminated  in  murder  but  for  the  special  providence  which  guarded  David's
life.  Baffled  in  his  repeated  attempts  on  his  life,  he  sought  to  kill  his  own  son,  because
he  pleaded  for  David;  and  actually  slew  eighty-five  priests,  their  wives,  children,  and
cattle,  because  one  of  them  had  shown  kindness  to  David,  in  ignorance  of  the  real  state
of  affairs.  Meanwhile  David  acted  towards  him  with  the  utmost  forbearance,  sparing
him  when  once  and  again  he  could  easily  have  taken  his  life ;  the  subsequent  know-
ledge of  which  softened  the  king,^  but  only  for  a  Uttle  while.  Yet  he  was  not  without
some  zeal  for  the  Law  of  God,  and,  besides  his  sacrificial  offerings,  "  had  put  away
those  that  had  familiar  spirits,  and  the  wizards,  out  of  the  land  "  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  3).
In  the  extremity,  however,  of  his  distress  and  perplexity,  he  sought  the  help  of  a
woman  that  had  a  familiar  spirit,  but  only  to  have  his  doom  once  more  pronounced.

III.  It  was  the  end  of  a  life  in  which  the  displeasuke  of  God  had  been  made
SIGNALLY  MANIFEST.  1.  By  the  Sentences  of  rtyection  pronounced  upon  Saul  ly  Samuel.
(1  Sam.  xiii.  14 ;  x  v.  23.)  2.  By  the  sorrowful  abandonment  of  him  ly  Samuel.  (1  Sam.
XV.  35.)  3.  By  the  departure  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  from  him,  and  the  entrance  into
him  of  "an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord."  The  Spirit  which  had  fitted  him  for  the  dis-
charge of  his  duties  forsook  him,  and  an  evil  spirit  troubled  him — an  habitual  melan-
choly, most  likely,  and  depression.  He  felt  he  was  not  the  same  man.  He  was
continually  haunted  with  the  sense  of  his  being  condemned  and  rejected,  of  the
Inevitableness  of  his  fate,  the  certainty  that,  however  long  he  might  continue  sovereign,
he  could  not  transmit  the  dignity  to  his  son.  And  this  gloom  sometimes  passed  over
into  frenzy.  He  was,  as  we  should  say,  subject  to  fits  of  insanity.  This,  doubtless,
furnishes  some  excuse  for  the  madness  of  his  conduct.  4.  By  the  refusal  of  Ood  to
answer  his  prayers  in  the  depth  of  his  distress.  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6.)  That  had  come  upon
him  which  is  described  in  Prov.  i.  24 — 31.  5.  By  his  miserable  end.  Nothing,  surely,
can  be  more  affecting  than  the  circumstances  of  his  death,  as  recorded  in  1  Sam.  xxxi.
3 — 6,  supplemented  by  our  text.

CoNOLDBiON.  1.  Every  man  has  a  Divine  mission.  Not  only  kings  and  great
men.  God  has  assigned  us  our  post,  and  expects  us  to  fill  it  as  under  him.  In  doing
so  he  gives  the  opportunity  of  great  distinction  and  honour,  even  the  attainment  of  an
everlasting  crown  of  glory.  2.  Habitual  regard  to  the  Divine  will  is  essential  to  the
fulfilment  of  our  mission.  And  how  shall  we  ascertain  it?  We  have  no  inspired
Samuel  by  our  side.  But  we  have  a  greater  than  he,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — the
Word  he  has  given  us,  the  Spirit  he  bestows,  the  principles  of  godliness,  holiness,  and
love  which  he  implants.  We  need  not  seriously  err.  3.  Disobedience  vnll  be  surely
followed  by  punisninent.  4.  One  serious  failure  in  obedience  to  Ood  may  blight  and
ruin  the  whole  life.  5.  Persistent  rebellion  issues  in  utter  rejection  of  Ood.  And  the
final  doom  may  be  foreshadowed  by  the  withdrawment  of  God's  Spirit,  and  entire
abandonment  to  the  spiiit  of  evil.  6.  Let  not  the  young  trust  to  their  good  moral
qualities.  Let  them  seek  at  once  through  Christ  that  change  of  heart  which  will  turn
their  virtues  into  holiness,  render  them  loving  and  loyal  to  God,  and  ensure  for  them
his  favour  now  and  evermore. — G.  W.

Ver.  14. — A  weighty  question.  David  could  consistently  ask  this  question,  for  he
had  throughout  acted  with  devout  regard  to  the  Divine  anointing  which  Saul  had
received.  When  the  opportunity  was  afforded  him  of  slaying  Saul,  and  he  was  urged
to  do  so,  he  again  and  again  steadily  refused,  notwithstanding  all  the  provocation  he
received,  and  although  he  knew  that  Saul  would  have  no  scruple  in  putting  him  to


32  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  1. 1— 27


death.  Yet  the  person  to  whom  this  question  was  addressed  could,  perhaps,  hardly
appreciate  its  significance.  Supposing  his  narrative  truthful,  he  may  have  been
actuated  by  compassion  in  what  he  did;  and  he  hoped  for  reward  from  David,  in  whom
he  saw  the  coming  king  of  Israel.  But,  however  this  mny  be,  the  question  may  be
used  as  applicable  to  those  who  assail  with  deadly  intention  him  who  is  pre-eminently
the  anointed  (the  Christ)  of  God.  First,  to  those  who  actually  slew  him,  or  took  part
in  his  death ;  and  then  to  all  who  become  sharers  in  their  guilt  by  endeavouring  to
destroy  his  authority  and  sway  amongst  men.

I.  Who  mat  be  thus  addressed.  1.  Those  who  assail  the  gospel  of  Christ.  2.
ITiose  who  endeavour  to  destroy  his  work  in  the  souls  of  men.  Such  as  resolutely
resist  and  suppress  the  thoughts  and  emotions  he  produces  in  themselves,  resisting  his
Spirit.  Such  also  as  set  themselves  to  prevent  or  destroy  his  influence  over  others ;
endeavouring  to  undermine  their  faith,  to  corrupt  their  morals,  to  entice  them  from  the
paths  of  piety  and  goodness  (see  Matt,  xviii.  6,  7).  3.  Those  who  persecute  his  people.
" Saul,  Saxil,  why  persecutest  thou  met"

II.  Why  thet  abe  not  afraid.  1.  Ignorance,  in  some,  of  what  they  are  doing.
As  seems  to  have  been  the  case  with  this  Amalekite.  'i'his  palliation  of  guilt  is
admitted  in  the  case  of  those  who  put  our  Lord  to  death  (Acts  iii.  17;  1  Oor.  ii.  8).
Aud  he  told  his  disciples  that  their  persecutors  even  unto  death  would  think  they  were
"  doing  God  service  "  (John  xvi.  2).  But  ignorance  itself  may  be  guiltiness,  though
not  so  gnat  as  sinning  against  the  light,  knowing  it  to  be  light  and  hating  it  on  that
account.  2.  Disbelief  as  to  the  truth  of  Christianity,  as  to  Qod  himself,  or  even  as  to
tlie  reality  and  worth  of  godliness  and  goodness.  3.  Moral  insensibility.  Which  may
spring  from  disbelief,  or  from  habits  of  godlessness  and  wickedness,  or  of  mere  worldli-
nesa.  4.  Expectation  of  impimity.  Because  of  the  seeming  weakness  of  hiiu  whom
they  assail  (Matt,  xxvii.  42,  43),  or  his  delay  in  punishing  (Eocles.  viii.  11),  or  from
falne  notions  of  the  goodness  of  God.  All  these  reasons  cannot  exist  in  the  same
person ;  but  some  in  one,  some  in  another.

III.  Why  THET  OUGHT  TO  BE  AFRAID.  1.  Because  Jesus  is  the  Lord's  Anointed—
the  Christ  of  Qod.  He  comes  to  men  with  Divine  authority,  appointed  to  be  their
King  and  Saviour.  There  is  sufficient  proof  of  this.  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son "  was
not  only  uttered  from  heaven ;  it  appears  in  the  whole  character,  teaching,  miracles,  in
the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ ;  in  the  correspondence  of  prophecy  and
history;  in  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  and  the  miracles  which  attested  their
mission ;  in  the  birth,  growth,  and  perpetuation  of  the  Church ;  in  the  mighty  beneficial
influence  of  Christianity  in  the  world;  in  its  effects  on  individual  character  and
happiness,  on  family  life  and  national  life.  It  is  echoed  in  the  hearts  and  consciences
of  men;  iu  the  happy  consciousness  of  every  Christian.  It  is  fashionable  now  to
apologize  for  unbelief,  and  treat  sceptics  very  tenderly,  as  if  their  love  of  truth  made
them  sceptics.  But  compare  the  sayings  of  our  Lord,  "  He  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth
my  voice,"  and  "If  any  man  willeth  to  do  his  will,  lie  shall  know  of  the  teaching,
wliether  it  be  of  God."  If,  then,  Jesus  be  God's  Anointed,  to  fight  against  him  is  to
fight  against  God,  which  is  both  impious  and  perilous.  2.  Because  of  the  penalties
incurred  by  opposition  to  Christ.  The  injury  they  do  to  themselves  now,  the  judg-
ment which  will  come  upon  them  hereafter.  Him  whom  they  assail  they  will  one  day
see  coming  in  the  clouds  of  hiaven,  to  take  vengeance  on  his  foes.  "Those  mine
enemies  .  .  .  bring  hither  aud  slay  them  before  me."  3.  Because  of  the  injury  they
do  to  others.  Men  with  any  legard  to  the  welfare  of  others  may  well  be  asked  to  pause
before  they  endeavour  to  rob  them  of  their  laith,  and  all  that  springs  out  of  it,  in  sound
moral  principles,  right  character,  happineas,  comfort  under  the  troubles  and  burdens  of
life,  and  hope  in  death;  especially  as  avowedly  they  have  no  adequate  substiiute  to
offer.  They  ought  to  bo  afraid  of  taking  a  course  which,  if  successful,  would  deprive
the  lowly  and  the  poor  of  their  chief  consolation,  leave  unrestrained  by  any  sufficient
check  the  passions  of  men,  and  so  demoralize  and  disorganize  society.

IV.  The  expostulations  which  should  bl  addressed  to  thkm.  "  How  is  it  thai
thou  art  not  afraid,"  etc.  ?  Christian  speiikers  and  writers  sometimes  oppose  those  who
are  opposing  Christ  iu  a  style  suitable  to  the  discussion  of  some  abstract  question.
The  conflict  is  conducted  as  if  it  wore  one  of  niere  ujiinion.  But  surely  those  to  whoir
Christ  ia  dear  ought  to  make  it  felt  that  Uiey  regard  the  question  of  his  position  and


ou.  I.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF   SAMUEL.  33

claims  as  one  of  life  and  death— one  in  which  all  that  is  most  valued  by  them  for  Uie
sake  of  themselves,  their  families,  and  society  at  large  is  involved.  And  it  is  due  tn
the  foes  of  Christ  themselves  that  this  should  be  done.  Their  consciences  should  bo
addressed  as  well  as  their  reasoning  faculty.  Bemonstranco  should  be  employed,  and
warning,  as  well  as  argument.-  Only  let  the  warmth  shown  be  that  of  love  and  intense
desire  for  the  salvation  of  men.

Finally,  let  the  Christian  rejoice  that  all  opposition  to  "  the  Lord's  Anointed  "  is,  and
must  be,  vain.  It  cannot  injure  him ;  it  cauuut  seriously  or  permanently  injure  his
cause.  It  can  only  recoil  on  those  who  engage  in  it  (see  Fs.  ii. ;  Luke  zx.  17,  18). —
G.  W.

Ver.  20. — Joy  amongst  th»  enemies  of  the  Church.  "  Tell  it  not  in  Q-ath,"  etc.  A
poetical  deprecation ;  for  already  had  it  been  told  among  the  Philistines,  and  triumphed
over;  and  yet  would  be.  The  language  expresses  David's  sorrow  at  the  joy  of  the
Philistines,  and  its  cause.  The  words  have  often  been  used  to  express  the  concern  of
good  men  when  Christians  give  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  Christ's  kingdom  to  rejoice.

L  The  occasions  or  such  jot.  1.  In  general,  the  misfortunes  of  the  Chv/rch,  what-
ever hinders  its  advancement  or  causes  reversal.  2.  In  particular,  the  inconsistencies
of  professing  Christians.  It  is  amazing  how  men  will  gloat  over  the  occasional  lapses
of  Christians  into  sins  which  they  are  themselves  habitually  committing.  Still  it  is
a  serious  enhancement  of  the  guilt  of  such  lapses  that  they  cause  "  the  enemies  of  the
Lord  to  blaspheme"  (ch.  xii.  14).  3.  Contentions  and  divisions  arnong  Christians.
When  these  are  rife,  the  world  is  apt  to  exclaim  in  scorn,  ''  See  how  these  Christians
love  one  another  I  "    4.  Failures  in  their  work.

IL  Thk  causes  of  8U0H  JOT.  1.  Hatred  of  Ood  and  goodness.  To  "rejoice  in
iniquity "  is  a  sure  sign  of  this ;  and  to  rejoice  in  the  enfeebling  of  the  power  which
most  of  all  tends  to  its  subjugation — the  power  of  Christian  life  and  teaching — is
scarcely  less  so.  It  ia  a  diabolical  joy.  2.  The  encouragement  in  sin  which  is  derived
from  the  favits  of  good  men.  Sinners  feel  as  if  justified  in  their  own  sins  whtn
Christians  fall  into  them  j  their  guilty  consciences  are  relieved.  As  if  sin  in  themselves
were  less  sinful  because  practised  by  those  who  profess  to  have  renounced  it ;  or  as
if  the  Law  of  God,  which  condemns  the  Christian's  occasional  sins,  did  not  at  least
equally  condemn  the  habitual  sins  of  others.  Hather  should  they  remembet  that  the
knowledge  of  the  evil  of  sin  by  which  they  condemn  others  is  to  their  own  condemna-
tion (Eom.  ii.  1,  3).  They  ought,  therefore,  to  take  warning  instead  of  indulging
satisfaction.

III.  How  Christians  should  be  affected  bt  it.  1.  They  should  he  careful  not
needlessly  to  publish  that  which  will  produce  it.  "  Tell  it  not,"  etc.  Not  needlessly ;
for  oftlimes  secrecy  is  impossible,  sometimes  it  would  be  injurious.  We  must  not
deny  facts,  nor  palliate  sin,  to  prevent  the  triumph  of  enemies.  But  we  ought  not  to
eagerly  announce  to  the  world  the  occurrences  which  tend  to  our  humiliation  and  their
exultation.  (1)  For  the  sake  of  those  who  would  exult.  That  they  may  not  add  to
their  sins  by  their  unholy  joy,  nor  become  more  hardened  in  them.  (2)  Lest  wo
should  put  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of  feeble  Christians:  or  (3)  discourage  our
hrsthran  in  their  conflicts  with  evil ;  or  (4)  lessen  the  power  of  the  testimony  of  the
Church  on  the  side  of  Christ  and  holiness.  2.  They  should  be  still  more  careful  so  to
Uveas  to  give  no  occasion  for  such  exultation.  "That  by  well-doing  ye  may  put  to
silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men "  (1  Pet.  ii.  15).  3.  They  should  in  no  degree
imitate  it.  Which  they  do  when  they  rejoice  at  any  scandal  which  arises  in  another
Church  that  they  regard  as  a  rival,  or  at  failure  on  its  part  in  efforts  to  do  good.
Christian  love  "  rejoioeth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth,"  and  will  be
grieved  at  sin  wherever  it  may  be  found,  and  at  the  failure  of  Christian  work  by
whomsoever  it  may  be  done. — G.  W.    .

Ver.  26. — A  beloved  friend's  death  lamented.  David's  lamentation  over  Saul  was
genuine.  He  saw  now  the  good  in  him,  and  passed  over  the  evih  He  remembered  his
early  kindnesses  to  himself,  and  thought  not  of  his  later  enmity.  He  associated  him
with  Jonathan,  and  was  softened  towards  him  on  that  account.  He  mourned  sincerely
tiiat  his  death  should  have  -been  caused,  though  not  directly  inflicted,  by  the  enemies,

n.  BAllUBU  B


84  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  1. 1— 27.

of  his  nation,  the  PMistines.  He  sympathized  with  the  people  in  their  loss,  and  in
the  troubles  which  would  surely  spring  from  his  death.  But  his  lament  over  Jonathan
was  of  another  order.  It  was  the  outburst  of  a  passionate  grief  at  the  tragical  death
of  an  affectionate  and  faithful  friend,  whom  he  tenderly  loved,  whose  life  had  been
lovely,  and  to  David  most  kind  and  helpful.

I.  Jonathan's  fbiendbhip  with  David.  1.  It  seems  to  have  originated  in  admira-
tion. The  qualities  of  David,  as  they  were  displayed  in  the  conflict  with  Goliath,
found  an  echo  in  Jonatharfs  own  soul,  which  became  "  knit  with  the  sovl  of  David,"
so  that  "Jonathan  loved  him  as  his  own  soul"  (1  Sam.  xviii.  1,  3).  There  were
natural  aiffinities — ^youth,  courage,  faith  in  God.  But  there  was,  doubtless,  also  that
subtile  something,  undiscoverable  by  analysis,  which  specially  adapts  one  soul  for
closest  union  with  another.  2.  It  was  very  vjarm  and  passionate.  See  the  above
quotation,  and  David's  words  in  the  text,  "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful,  passing  the
love  of  women."  3.  It  was  cemented  and  confirmed  hy  pledges  and  compacts.  (1  Sam.
xviii.  3, 4;  XX.  16, 17, 41, 42;  xxiii.  18.)  Note  especially  1  Sam.  xx.  17,  "Jonathan  caused
David  to  swear  again,"  etc.  His  love  was  so  strong  and  passionate  that  it  was  never
weary  of  pouring  itself  out  in  vows  and  protests  and  covenants.  4.  It  was  more  than
disinterested.  For  Jonathan  soon  saw  that  David  would  succeed  bis  father  on  the
throne,  and  the  prospect  was  strongly  represented  to  him  by  Saul  (1  Sam.  xx.  31).
But  no  jealousy  sprang  up  in  his  heart ;  he  was  content  to  be  second  where  David  was
first  (1  Sam.  xxiiL  17).  5.  It  was  shown  ly  practical  services,  fie  interceded  with  his
father  repeatedly  for  David,  and  exposed  himself  thereby  to  death  from  his  father's  rage.
He  warned  David  of  his  father's  deadly  purpose,  and  repeated  the  warning  when,
contrary  to  his  hope,  he  found  how  implacable  that  purpose  was.  He  visited  his  friend
when  banished  from  court  and  pursued  by  his  relentless  enemy.  He  "  strengtheued
his  hands  in  God."  lu  all  ways  he  proved  himself  a  "brother ;  "  yea,  "a  friend  that
stick  eth  closer  than  a  brother  "  (Prov.  xviii.  24).  6.  It  was  associated  with  strict
loyalty  to  his  father.  He  had  a  difficult  part  to  play,  but  he  played  it  well.  He  was
loving  and  devoted  to  Saul,  while  maintaining  so  warm  a  friendship  with  him  whose
life  the  father  sought.  David  would  only  the  more  admire  and  love  him  on  this
account,  for  he  was  equally  loyal  to  the  unhappy  king,  and  wovdd  have  served  him  as
devotedly  if  he  had  been  permitted ;  and  so,  when  both  were  slain  on  one  battle-field,
he  united  their  memories  in  his  elegy.  '■'  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  lovely  and  pleasant
in  their  lives,  and  in  death  they  were  not  divided."

II.  His  death.  The  dearest  friends  must  be  parted  by  death;  and  the  pleasure  they
have  enjoyed  in  each  other's  love  and  society  will  make  the  pain  the  more  severe.

"  There  is  no  union  here  of  hearts
'Which  finds  not  here  an  end."

Yet  this  is  not  strictly  true.     Christian  friendships  are  immortaL

III.  David's  lamentation.  A  worthy  tribute  of  friendship — ^tender,  sublime,  and
sincere.  David  would  feel  his  loss  irreparable.  No  friendship  equal  to  this  was  it
possible  to  form.  Happily,  while  lamenting  his  loss,  his  sorrow  was  not  embittered  by
the  memory  of  any  unkindness  or  unfaithfulness  on  his  part.  It  is,  however,  singulai
that  even  in  such  a  composition  no  reference  to  future  life  and  reunion  should  find
place.  The  consolations  so  natural  to  a  Christian  are  unnoticed.  They  were  not
ordinarily  known  with  sufficient  distinctness  to  be  of  much  service.  "Our  Saviour
Jesus  Christ  .  .  .  brought  Ufe  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel "  (2  Tim.

We  may  regard  the  friendship  of  Jonathan  for  David  as  a  picture  of —

I.  The  friendship  op  Jesus  fob  us.  This  is  "  wonderful  "  indeed,  in  its  condescen-
sion, its  spontaneousness,  its  disinterestedness,  its  sacrifices,  its  services  and  bestow-
ments.     And  it  never  ends.     This  Friend  never  dies,  never  changes  in  love  or  power.

II.  What  our  friendship  to  him  should  be.  It  cannot  be  purely  disinterested ;
we  owe  so  much  to  him,  and  expect  so  much  from  him.  Yet  may  our  love  be  far
raoia  than  gratitude;  we  may  love  him  for  his  own  sake,  and  shall  do  so  if  we  are  his.
Nor  let  us  restrain  our  affection,  but  lavish  it  upon  him — ardent,  tender,  even  passionate.
Ho  requires  and  deserves  to  be  loved  more  than  our  dearest  earthly  relatives  and
friends.    But  ever  let  us  remember  that  be  values  most  our  obedient  and  sclf-denyine


CH.  H.  1—32.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


86


service,  and  our  practical  love  for  his  sake  of  those  whom  he  loves  and  for  whom  ho
gave  his  life.

III.  What  our  fkiendship  with  bach  otheb  should  be.  Our  Lord  came  to  found
in  the  world  a  sacred  friendship,  a  brotherhood,  based  on  faith  in  him  and  love  to  him,
and  kept  alive  by  regard  for  his  love  to  us  all.  lu  Jonathan,  and  still  more  in  Jesus,
we  see  what  this  friendship  ought  to  be. — G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  n.


Ver.  I. — ^ITnto  Hebron,  As  soon  as  David
had  assuaged  his  grief,  his  thoughts  would
naturally  turn  towards  lils  country.  Fuller
news  would  reach  him  every  day  respecting
the  movements  of  the  Philistines,  who,  after
so  decisive  a  victory,  would  quickly  overrun
all  the  central  districts  of  Palestine,  where
the  battle  had  been  fought.  And  very
bitter  must  David's  feelings  have  been.
Had  be  coutinued  in  Israel,  he  and  his  six
hundred  men  would  now  have  hastened  to
the  rescue,  and  all  the  braver  warriors  of  the
laud  would  have  gathered  round  them.  As
it  was,  he  was  too  entangled  with  the
PIdlistines,  and  too  much  distrusted  by  the
northern  tribes,  to  be  of  much  use.  Still,
we  learn  from  1  Chron.  xii.,  that  brave  men
did  continually  swell  the  number  of  his
followers.  Detachments  of  the  tribes  of  Gad
and  Manasseh,  instead  of  joining  Saul  at  Gil-
boa,  went  to  David  as  he  withdrew  to  Ziklag.
And  while  he  remaiaed  there  a  consider-
able body  of  men  from  Benjamin  and  Judah
came  to  him  under  the  command  of  Amasa,
David's  nephew.  So  numerous  were  they
as  to  alarm  David,  who  went  out  to  meet
them,  fearing  lest  they  had  come  to  betray
him;  and  glad  was  he  to  hear  their  answer,
"Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  side,
thou  son  of  Jesse."  Thus  even  as  it  was,
his  forces  daily  grew  more  numerous ;  for
» from  day  to  day  there  came  to  David  to
help  him,  until  it  was  a  great  host,  like  the
host  of  God  "  (1  Chron.  xii.  22).  But  there
was  no  national  acknowledgment.  With
his  numbers  thus  continually  increasing,
David  was  encouraged  to  make  some  attempt
for  the  deliverance  of  Israel ;  but  his  position
was  one  of  serious  danger.  Great  was  the
risk,  but  ho  knew  w  iiere  to  go  for  guidance,
and  determines,  therefore,  to  put  the  matter
into  God's  hand.  He  summons  Abiathar
with  the  ephod,  and,  in  the  presence  of  his
captains,  asks  for  permission  to  go  up  to
some  city  of  his  own  tribe.  The  answer  is
favourable,  and  Hebron  is  the  city  selected.
It  was  a  place  of  ancient  sanctity,  was  weU
situated  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  for
defence,  and  as  the  Philistines  liad  not  yet
invaded  that  region,  but  probably  would
soon  try  to  ravage  it,  the  people  would  be
sure  to  welcome  the  presence  of  one  who


brought  with  him  a  powerful  body  of  trained
men.

Ver.  3. — They  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  Hebron.
Not  only  had  David  wives,  whom  he  took
with  him  to  Hebron,  but  many  of  his
warriors  were  married,  and  thus  they  and
their  households  formed  a  numerous  body
of  people,  for  whom  Hebron  could  scarcely
find  accommodation.  Moreover  they  had
flocks  and  herds  captured  from  the  Amale-
kites,  for  which  they  needed  pasturage.
And  therefore  David  dispersed  them  in  the
towns  and  villages  of  which  Hebron  was
the  capital,  posting  them  in  such  a  manner
as  to  render  it  easy  for  tiim  to  summon
them  together,  while  taking  care  that  they
did  not  injure  his  tribesmen,  or  dispossess
tliem  of  their  lands.  We  may  feel  sure
tliat  he  consulted  the  chief  men  of  Hebron
as  to  these  arrangements,  and  obtained
their  approval.

Ver.  4. — They  anointed  David.  Samuel's
anointing  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13)  had  been  private,
and,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  manner  in
which  Eliab  treated  David  (1  Sam.  xvii.  28),
even  his  own  family  had  not  attached  much
importance  to  it.  It  was  nevertheless  the
indication  of  Jehovah's  purpose,  and  now
the  anointing  of  David  by  the  elders  of
Judah  was  the  first  step  towards  its  accom-
plishment. And  this  was  an  independent
act,  though  the  knowledge  of  Samuel's
an<iinting  had  prepared  the  way  for  it ;  and
David  thus  acquired  a  legal  right  and
authority  by  the  nation's  will,  which  Samuel
could  not  have  given  him.  So  Saul's
anointing  by  Samuel,  and  hie  election  to
be  king  at  Gilgal,  were  independent  acts ;
and  while  the  former  gave  the  king  his
sacredness,  the  latter  conferred  upon  him
jurisdiction  and  power.  King  over  the
house  of  Judah.  How  came  the  Philistines
to  allow  this  ?  When  subsequently  he  was
again  anointed,  and  became  King  of  all
Israel,  the  Philistines  gathered  their  hosts
at  once ;  not  because  he  captured  Jerusalem,
which  was  then  a  mere  hill-fort  belonging
to  the  Jebusites,  but  evidently  because  they
thought  him  dangerons.  But  why  did  they
not  crush  him  now  ?  One  reason,  probably,
was  that  Judsea  was  a  difScult  country  for
military  operations.  The  tribe,  too,  had
stood  aloof  from  Saul,  and  its  strength  wa«
mibroken.    But  the  chief  reason  apparently


S6


THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[cH.  n.  1—32,


was  that  David  maintained  friendly  rela-
tions with  Aohish,  and  paid  him  tribute.
This  explains  the  curious  fact  that  Ziklag
continued  to  be  the  private  property  of  the
house  of  David  (I  Sam.  xxvii.  6).  The
doings  of  a  vassal  of  the  King  of  Gath  were
regarded  as  of  iittle  importance.  Had  he
not  even  marched  with  them  to  Aphek,  as
one  of  the  servants  of  Achish  ?  But  when
he  endeavoured  to  restore  the  kingdom  of
Saul,  they  first  made  a  hasty  rush  upon
him,  anil,  when  repelled,  they  gathered  their
forces  for  as  formidable  an  invasion  as  that
which  had  ended  in  their  victory  at  Gilboa.
Ver.  5. — David  sent  messengers  unto  the
men  of  Jabesh-Gilead.  This  was  David's
first  act  as  king,  and  it  was  worthy  of  him.
Some  suppose  that  when  David  wm  told
of  their  deed,  it  was  with,  a  view  of  pre-
judicing him  against  tliem.  But  this  is
not  credible.  By  this  time  all  men  knew
how  loyal  and  affectionate  were  David's
feelings  towards  hie  former  king ;  and  more-
over the  men  of  Jabesh  were  bound  to  Saul
by  no  ordinary  ties  of  gratitude  (1  Sam.  xi.).
Nor  could  David  wish  that  Saul's  remains,
and  tliose  of  Jonathan,  should  be  subject  to
indignity.  We  may  well  feel  sure  that
information  respecting  Saul ,  was  eagerly
welcomed  at  Hebron,  and  the  valiant  men
there  would  all  rejoice  at  finding  that  the
high  spirit  of  the  nation  was  not  quenched.
But  in  sending  to  thank  them,  in  promising
to  requite  them,  and  in  bidiling  them  per-
severe in  similar  conduct,  David  was  acting
as  the  head  of  the  nation;  and, to  justify
his  action,  he  informs  them  that  the  men  of
Judah  had  made  him  their  king.

Ver.  8.— Ahner.  This  hero  had  been  pre-
sent at  the  battle  of  Gilboa,  and  probably
had  rallied  many  of  the  defeated  Israelites,
and  made  as  much  resistance  as  was  possible
to  the  onward  march  of  the  Philistines.
And  as  soon  as  he  had  effected  his  retreat
into  the  region  beyond  the  Jordan,  his  power
would  be  supreme.  Tliere  was  no  one  there
to  oppose  the  commander-in  chief  of  what
remained  of  Saul's  army.  Certainly  all
that  remained  of  Saul's  body-guard  of  three
thousand  men  would  gather  round  Abner,
and  as  the  Philistines  did  not  push  their
pursuit  further  than  the  Jordan,  he  was
free  to  do  as  he  chose.  Nor  would  there  be
any  opposition.  Abner  was  bound  to  do
his  best  for  Saul's  family,  and  the  people
would  feel  this,  and  approve  of  his  conduct
in  standing  up  for  the  children  of  their  king.
Moreover,  David  by  his  conduct  had  made
himself  an  object  of  suspicion  to  all  the
valiant  men  who  had  formed  Saul's  army,
and  these  would  be  the  more  embittered
e<;ain8t  him  by  their  defeat.  Ishhosheth.
This  name  signifies  "  man  of  shame,"  that
it,   "  man   of  the   shameful   thing,"    the


idol.  Originally  he  was  named  Eshbaal
(1  Chron.  viii.  33:.ii.  89),  that  Is,  "man
of  Baal,"  the  word  eih  being  merely  s
dialectic  variation  for  iah,  equivalent  to
"  man."  At  this  early  date  Baal  was
not  the  speciflo  name  of  any  idol,  but
simply  meant  "lord,"  "master,"  "husband."
In  the  earlier  books  of  the  Bible  we  find
the  word  used  of  many  local  deities,  who
were  lords  of  this  or  thiat,  but  had  nothing
in  common  with  the  Phoenician  Baal,  whose
worship  Ahab  attempted  to  introduce  into
IsraeL  From  that  time  Baal  became  a  term
of  reproach,  and  Bosheth,  "  the  shame,"  was
substituted  for  it  in  the  old  names  of  which
it  had  formed  part.  Thus  Gideon  is  still
called  Jerubbaal  in  1  Sam.  xii.  11,  but  the
title  is  transformed  into  Jerubbesheth,  or
more  correctly,  Jerubbosheth,  "  let  the
shame  plead,"  in  ch.  xi.  21.  Originally,
therefore,  the  name  Ishbaal  had  no  dis-
creditable meaning,  but  signified,  "  man  of
the  Lord,"  or,  as  Ewald  supposes,  "  lordly
man."  It  was  not  till  long  afterwards,
when  Israel  had  been  horrified  by  Jezebel's
doings,  that  Baal,  except  in  the  sense  of
"husband,"  became  an  ill-omened  word.
Jonathan,  whose  own  name,  "Jehovah's
gift,"  in  Greek  Theodore,  is  proof  sufiScient
that  Saul's  family  were  worshippers  of  tlie
ti'ue  God,  called  his  son's  name  Merib-
baal,  "the  Lord's  strife"  (1  Chron.  viii.  34).
In  some  strange  way  this  was  altered  into
Mephibosheth,  that  is,  "from  the  face  of
the  shameful  thing  "  (ch.  iv.  4.  etc.).  l'6s-
sibly  it  is  a  corruption  of  Meribbosheth,  but
it  is  remarkable  that  a  son  of  Saul  by  his
concubine  Bizpah  also  bore  the  name  (ch.
xxi.  8).  Among  the  ancestors  of  Saul,  the
simple  name  Baal,  "  Lord,"  occurs  (1  Chron.
viii.  30).  Mahanaim.  Abner  chose  this  town
because  it  was  on  the  eai>tern  side  of  the
Jordan,  and  so  beyond  the  range  of  the
Philistines,  who  never  seem  to  have  crossed
the  river.  It  was  situated  on  the  borders
of  the  tribe  of  Gad  and  the  half-tribe  of
Manasseh,  from  both  of  which  valiant
warriors  had  joined  David;  but  the  people
generally  were  not  ill  affected  to  the  house
of  Saul.  As  having  been  assigned  to  tlie
Levites  (Josh.  xxi.  38),  it  had  a  quasi-
religious  character,  inherited  from  the  vision
of  angels  seen  there  by  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.  2).
As  a  safe,  out-of-the-way  place,  David
subsequently  took  refuge  there  (oh.  xvii.
24).  (On  its  exact  site,  see  Condor's  '  Heth
and  Moab,'  pp.  177—181.)

Ver.  9. — Make  him  king  over.  A  differ-
ent preposition  is  used  with  the  first  three
names  from  that  employed  afterwards,  as
though  Ishbosheth's  reign  over  Gilead  and
Jezreel  was  a  reality,  but  that  he  had  only  a
shadowy  claim  to  dominion  over  Ephraim,
Benjamin,  and  all  Israel.    Oilead.    As  Ma-


OH.  n.  1—32.]


THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


37


hanaim  lay  upon  the  boitlftrs  of  Gad  and
Manasseh,  Abner  would  easily  control  these
two  tribes,  and- Reuben,  whiota  was  never  an
active  or  enterprising  tribe,  would  follow
their  lead.  Of  the  Ashorites  nothing  is
known,  and  the  reading  is  uncertain,  as  the
LXX.  has  "  Thasir,"  and  the  Vulgate  and
Syriao  "  Geshur."  The  Chaldeo  paraphrase
boldly  gives  "  the  house  of  Asher ;  "  but  this
tribe  lay  close  to  Phoenioia,  on  the  extreme
north-  west.  There  are  two  places  called
Geshur  (sec  on  ch.  iii.  3),  but  neither  of
them  seems  meant,  and  more  probably  it
was  some  place  tlie  name  of  wliich  was  un-
common, and  so  was  wrongly  copied  by
scribes  until  the  present  confusion  arose.
Jezreel.  The  name  of  this  place,  as  specially
subject  to  Ishbosheth,  is  surprising ;  for  the
town,  at  this  time  of  no  importance,  lay  in
the  wide  plain  between  the  mountains  of
Gilboa  and  the  little  Hermon.  But  this
district  was  the  prize  won  by  the  Philistines,
and  was  a  region  where  their  cavalry  and
chariots  gave  them  a  great  advantage.  For
Ishbosheth  to  have  had  even  a  nominal
dominion  over  Jezreel,  he  must  either  have
become  a  tributary,  or  Abner  must  have
maintained  a  not  uusuccessFul  struggle  there
after  the  battle  of  Giiboa.  The  latter  is  the
more  probable.  In  safe  possession  of  all  the
country  east  of  the  Jordan,  Abner  was  not
likely  to  consent  to  anything  so  humiliating
as  submission  to  the  Philistines ;  while
David's  connection  with  Aoliish  made  it
neither  so  galling  to  him  nor  so  disadvan-
tageous. As  the  Transjordanio  tribes  as-
sembled at  Hebron  to  make  David  king  to
the  number  of  one  hundred  and  twenty
thousand  men  (1  Chron.  xii.  37),  Abner
plainly  had  large  resiiuroes  at  liis  command,
and,  though  the  people  were  not  very  earnest
in  the  cause  of  Saul's  house,  yet  they  would
probably  assemble  in  considerable  numbers
after  the  battle  of  Gilboa,  to  prevent  any
irruption  of  the  victors  into  their  country.
At  their  head  Abner  probably  gained  some
advantages  over  the  Philistines,  and  thus
became  powerful  enough  to  proclaim  Ish-
bosheth king,  and  as  Ephraim  and  Benjamin
acquiesced,  he  became  nominally  ruler  over
all  Israel.

Vers.  10,  11. — Ishbosheth  .  ,  .  two  years
.  .  .  David .  .  .  seven  years  and  six  mouths.
Where  are  we  to  place  the  five  years  and  a
half  of  difference  ?  The  usual  assumption  is
that  David  was  made  King  of  Israel  imme-
diately upon  Ishbosheth's  murder ;  but  this
is  wrong.  We  cannot  believe  that  Abner
would  allow  so  long  a  period  as  five  years  to
elapsi!  before  asserting  the  claims  of  Saul's
family,  especially  as  David  was  already
made  King  of  Judah  at  Hebron.  Still,  as
the  war  with  the  Philistines  was  the  first
object  of  his  care,   and  aa   some  form   of


popular  ratification  was  necessary,  some
months  may  have  passed  before  Ishbosheth
was  publicly  installed  as  king,  though
Abner  must  have  acted  in  his  name  from  the
first.  The  main  interval  of  five  years  before
David's  accession  must  have  been  after
Ishbosheth's  death.  That  murder,  and  still
more  so  the  murder  of  Abner,  must  have
made  David  an  object  of  great  suspicion  to
all  Israel.  Shimei,  when  he  called  him  "a
bloody  man  "  (ch.  xvi.  8),  was  but  uttering  a
slander  commonly  current  among  the  people.
Gradually  most  of  them  would  become  con-
vinced of  his  innocence;  and  all,  as  they
contrasted  the  anarchy  which  prevailed  in
their  country  with  the  peace  and  security
won  by  David  for  Judah,  would  regard  his
election  as  the  best  course  under  the  circum-
stances. As  the  Philistines  immediately
resented  their  action,  and  endeavoured  to
crush  the  king  before  he  could  concentrate
liis  power,  it  is  probable  that  during  these
five  years  they  liad  again  obtained  practical
command  of  the  more  fertile  districts  of
Palestine.  Ishbosheth . . .  was  forty  years  old.
In  the  previous  narrative  Jonathan  always
appears  as  the  most  important  of  Saul's
sous,  and  naturally  it  is  assumed  that  he
was  the  firstborn ;  yet  his  child  was  but  five
years  old  at  his  father's  death,  while  Ishbo-
sheth, his  uncle,  a  younger  brother  of  Jona-
than, is  described  as  a  man  of  forty.  Some
think  that  Ishbosheth  was  the  eldest  son,
but  in  1  Chron.  viii.  33  he  is  placed  last,
and,  though  a  weak  man,  was  not  so  feeble
as  to  have  been  set  aside  from  the  succes-
sion. But  confessedly  the  chronology  of
Saul's  reign  is  so  full  of  difficulties,  that  it
is  impossible  altogether  to  explain  it  (see
note  on  1  Sam.  xiii.  1).

Ver.  12. — ^Abnei  .  .  .  went  out.  This  ia
a  further  proof  of  considerable  success  on
Abner's  side.  Encouraged  by  the  result  of
numerous  skirmishes  with  the  Philistines,
and  the  gradual  restoration  of  the  king's
authority  in  Ephraim  and  Benjamin,  Abner
determined  to  make  the  attempt  to  win  back
Judah  also.  There  David  had  been  content
with  protecting  Judah,  and  establishing
good  order ;  and,  following  his  constant  cus-
tom, had  taken  no  steps  to  obtain  for  himself
the  kingdom  "over  all  Israel."  The  war
was  of  Abner's  chuosing,  and  shows  him  to
us  in  the  character  of  an  able  but  ambitious
and  restless  man.

Ver.  13. — ^The  pool  of  Gibeon.  As  Gibeon,
which  lay  about  six  miles  north-west  from
Jerusalem,  was  twenty-six  miles  distant  from
Hebron,  and  about  the  same  distance  from
Mahanaim,  it  is  plain  that  David  knew  of
Abner's  march.  Possibly  he  had  been  sum-
moned  to  yield  his  kingdom  up  to  Ishbosheth
as  the  rightful  lord,  but,  while  taking  no
measures  to  extend  his  rule,  he  felt  himself


39


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[oh.  h.  1—54


justified  in  defending  his  election  to  be  king
over  Judah.  The.  pool  of  Oibeon  is  described
by  Bobinson  ('  Eesparches,'  ii.  136)  as  "  an
open  tank  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet
in  length  and  a  hundred  in  breadth,  but-
rounded  by  a  grove  of  olive  trees.  Above  it,
excavated  in  the  rock,  ia  a  subterranean
reservoir,  to  receive  the  water  from  a  copious
spring,  from  winch  the  overflow  descends
into  the  tank  below."  As  neither  party  was
willing  to  shed  the  first  blood  in  a  civil  war,
of  which  the  Philistines  would  reap  the
benefit,  they  both  halted  in  sight  of  one
another  on  opposite  sides  of  the  hill,  with
ths  tank  below  them  in  the  middle.

Ver.  14. — let  the  young  men  now  arise.
"  Now "  is  not  an  adverb  of  time,  but  is
hortative,  and  therefore  rightly  translated
in  the  Revised  Version,  "  I  pray  thee."  It  is
by  no  means  cert.iin  that  Abner  meant  that
this  single  combat  should  decide  the  war ;
for  similar  preludes  before  a  battle  are  not
uncommon  among  the  Arabians,  and  serve,
as  this  did,  to  put  an  end  to  the  mutual
unwillingness  to  begin  the  onslaught.  So,
too,  games  often  preceded  outbreaks  of
Scandinavian  blood-feuds.  And  this  was
probably  Abner's  object.  He  was  the  as-
sailant, but  now  found  that  his  men  shrank
fi-om  mortal  combat  with  their  brethren.
There  is  thus  no  comparison  between  this
combat  and  that  of  the  Curiatii  and  Horatii
described  in  Livy,  i.  x.  25.  Let  them  play.
The  word  is  grim  enough,  though  intended
to  gloss  over  the  cruel  reality.  On  each  side
twelve  of  the  most  skilful  champions  were  to
be  selected  who  were  to  fight  in  stem  earnest
with  one  another,  while  the  rest  gazed  upon
the  fierce  spectacle.  The  sight  of  the  con-
flict would  whet  their  appetite  for  blood,  and
their  reluctance  would  give  place  to  thirst
for  revenge.  The  request  was  too  thoroughly
in  accordance  with  Joab's  temper  for  him  to
refuse,  and  his  immediate  answer  was.  Let
them  arise.

Ver.  16. — His  sword  in  his  fellow's  side.
The  absence  of  the  verb  in  the  original  sets
powerfully  before  us  the  rapidity  of  the
whole  action.  But  what  an  action !  Twenty-
four  experienced  men  each  take  the  other
by  tlie  head,  and,  without  any  attempt  at
self-defence,  thrust  their  swords  into  their
opponents'  side,  and  leave  their  own  sides
exposed  to  a  similar  thrust.  Were  they,
then,  unskilful  in  the  use  of  weapons?
Impossible.  Were  they  blinded  by  hatred
of  one  another?  But  no  rancour  would
make  a  man  forget  bis  skill  in  defence.
Here  there  ii  no  variety,  no  checkered
fortune  of  the  combatants,  but  all  twenty-
four  do  and  suffer  just  the  same ;  and  it  is
remarkable  that  they'  had  swords  only,
and  no  shields.  With  shields  on  their  arms,
they  could  not  have  seized  one  another  by


the  hair.  It  seems  certain,  therefore,  that
this  mutual  butchery  was  the  "  play ; "  nor
can  we  conceive  of  a  more'  murderous  and
savage  proceeding.  Abner,  at  the  head  ol
his  fierce  Benjamites,  thought,  perhaps,
that  Joab  had  no  men  among  his  followers
willing  to  throw  life  away  in  so  senseless
a  manner.  But  Joab  was  as  ready  as  Abner,
and  possibly  some  code  of  false  honour,
such  as  used  to  make  men  practise  duel-
ling, required  the  acceptance  of  the  chal-
lenge. And  so,  with  their  appetite  for  blood
whetted  by  the  sight  of  twenty-four  murders,
they  hastened  to  begin  the  flght.  Helkath-
hazznrim.  Literally  this  means  "the  field
of  flints ;  "  but  as  the  flint  is  constantly  used
for  any  hard  rock  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  20),  the
Authorized  Version  has  admitted  into  the
margin  a  paraphrase  taken  from  the  Vul-
gate, which  supposes  that  by  flints  are
meant  "  strong  men,"  and  renders,  "  the
field  of  strong  men."  So  in  Isa.  xxvi.  4
"  the  flint,"  or  rook, "  of  ages,"  is  even  trans-
lated "  everlasting  strength."  Flints,  how-
ever, were  constantly  used  by  the  Israelites
for  knives  whenever  extreme  sharpness  was
required.  Thus  for  the  circumcising  of
Israel,  Jehovah  commanded  Joshua  to  pre-
pare knives  of  flint  (Josh,  v  2) ;  and  in
course  of  time  the  sharp  or  whetted  edge
of  a  weapon  was  called  its  flint.  Thus  in
Ps.  Ixxxix.  43  we  read,  "  Thou  hast  turned
back  the  flint  of  his  sword."  The  name
therefore  probably  means  "  the  field  of  the
sharp  knives  "  (see  margin  of  the  Revised
Version),  and  refers  to  the  short  swords
with  which  they  murdered  one  another.

Ver.  17. — A  very  sore  battle.  The  pur-
pose of  Abner  was  thus  gained.  Excited
by  the  spectacle  of  merciless  slaughter,  the
armies  manoeuvred  no  longer,  but  rushed
fiercely  to  the  attack,  and  fought  with  fury.
But  the  mighty  men  of  David  were  irre-
sistible. Only  nineteen  of  his  warriors  fell,
while  Abner  lost  three  hundred  and  sixty,
and  was  forced  to  flee.

Ver.  19. — Asahel  pursued  after  Abner.
This  episode  is  fully  narrated,  both  because
of  Asahel's  rank  as  David's  nephew,  and
also  because  of  its  tragical  consequences  to
Abner  himself.  Asahel  was  a  son  of
Zeruiah,  David's  sister,  and,  while  his  own
brothers  were  of  little  use  to  him,  his
nephews,  Joab,  Abishai,  and  Asahel,  were
the  mainstays  of  David's  throne.  Afftlieir
father's  name  is  never  mentioned,  but  only
the  mother's,  Zeruiah  was  probably  a  woman
of  great  ability,  and  her  sons  inherited  it
from  her.  Possibly  she  had  married  beneath
her  station,  or  her  husband  had  died  early ;
but  certainly  her  sons,  thinking  more  of
her  than  of  their  father,  had  soon  thrown
in  their  lot  with  David  her  brother  (but
see  note  on  ver.  32).    The  youngest  of  the


OH.  n.  1—32.1


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


39


three,  Asahel,  was  remarkable  for  his  per-
sonal accomplishments,  and  especially  for
swiftness  of  foot,  for  which  lie  was  compared
to  the  Zebi,  the  camp-name  of  Jonathan
(ch.  i.  19).  It  now  caused  his  death.  For
conscious  that  Abner  was  the  sole  support
of  Ishboshetb's  party,  and  indignant  at  his
challenge  to  useless  slaughter,  he  pursued
after  him,  allowing  nothing  to  divert  him
from  his  object,  and  hoping  to  end  the  war
by  slaying  the  veteran  commander.  But
though  he  had  the  ileetness  of  an  Achilles,
he  had  not  his  robust  strength,  and  Abner,
knowing  that  the  combat  was  unequal,  re-
monstrated with  him,  and  bade  him  turn
aside,  and  be  content  with  winning  the
spoils  of  some  meaner  warrior.  It  is  evident
from  this  that  Abner  saw  in  this  defeat  in
a  battle  of  his  own  choosing,  the  certainty
of  the  near  downfall  of  the  house  of  Saul,
and,  as  he  would  then  be  in  Joab's  power,
he  was  unwilling  to  have  a  blood-feud  with
a  man  ofsuch  determined  character.  "How,"
he  asks,  "  should  I  hold  up  my  face  to  Joab
thy  brother  ?  "  It  would  be  his  duty,  as  the
avenger  of  blood,  to  slay  me.  Apparently,
during  this  conference,  he  was  standing
with  the  butt  end  of  his  lance  held  towards
Asal^el,  to  ward  olf  his  blows,  but,  as  the
spear-head  was  turned  the  other  way,
Asahbl  forgot  that  even  so  it  might  be  used
for  offence.  For  it  was  pointed,  that  it
might  be  stuck  in  the  ground  at  night
(1  Sam.  xxvi.  7),  and  possibly  shod  with
iron,  though  it  is  more  likely  that  it  was
only  hardened  by  being  thrust  into  the  fire.
So  when  he  saw  that  his  words  had  no
avail,  and  that  Asahel  was  not  on  his  guard,
he  suddenly  struck  him  with  it  so  violent
a  blow  that  it  pierced  his  body  right
throrgh,  and  Asahel  fell  down  dead.  It
is  pi'obiible,  from  the  merciless  force  used,
that  there  was  u  sudden  outburst  of  anger
on  Abner's  part.

Ver.  23 The  fifth  rib.    This  rendering

here  and  in  other  places  arises  from  the
derivation  of  the  word  from  the  numeral ^se,
but  this  notion  has  long  been  abandoned,
and  the  word  is  now  known  to  be  formed
from  a  verb  signifying  "  to  be  fat  or  stout."
Really  it  means  the  abdomen,  and  is  so
translated  in  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate,  while
the  Syriac  gives  only  the  general  sense,  and
renders  "  the  breast."  In  the  same  place ;
Hebrew,  under  him;  that  is,  immedi-
ately. So  violent  was  the  blow  that  Asahel
dropped  down  dead  without  a  struggle.  So
tragic  was  his  fate,  and  so  great  the  affec-
tion of  David's  men  for  the  young  warrior,
that  the  pursuit  ceased,  and  all,  as  they
came  up,  remained  standing  by  the  side  of
the  corpse.

Ver.  24. — Joab  alM  and  Ablshai  porsned
after  Abner;  really,  but  Joab  and  Abithai


pursued,  and  so  the  Revised  Version.
The  sight  of  their  slaughtered  brother
made  them  only  the  more  determined  in  the
pursuit,  and  doubtless,  at  their  command,
the  soldiers  would  leave  Asahel  and  follow
their  commanders.  Of  the  "  hill  of  Ammah  "
and  Giah  we  know  nothing ;  hut  it  is  evident
that  no  halt  was  made  until  sunset.

Ver.  25. — The  children  of  Benjamin  .  .  .
became  one  troop.  Benjamin  wus  probably
the  only  tribe  that  entered  keenly  into
Ishbosheth's  cause ;  for  the  maintenance
of  tlie  kingdom  in  the  family  of  Saul  meant
the  continuance  of  that  favouritism  which
had  enriched  them  at  the  expense  of  the
community  (1  Sam.  xxii.  7).  They  were,
too,  a  very  warlike  tribe,  and  Abuer  was
one  of  themselves,  and  probably,  therefore,
the  main  body  of  his  army,  and  certainly
his  most  trustworthy  men,  were  Benjamites.
Profiting  by  the  delay  caused  by  the  halt-
ing of  David's  soldiers  round  the  body  of
the  fallen  Asahel,  Abner  had  rallied  his
men,  and  posted  them  on  the  top  of  the
hill,  where  they  were  prepared  now  to  fight
on  more  equal  terms.

Ver.  26. — Knowest  thou  not  that  it  will
be  bitterness  in  the  latter  end  t  The  Vul-
gate renders  this,  "  Art  thou  not  aware  that
desperation  is  dangerous  I "  This  is  a  very
obvious  truth,  but  probably  Abner  had  in
his  mind  something  jnore  statesmanlike.
The  struggle  was  for  the  empire  over  all
Israel,  and  whoever  won  would  be  king
over  botii  sides.  But  every  man  slain
meant  a  blood-feud,  which  would  continue
even  after  the  kingdom  was  united;  and
Abner  probably  felt  that  his  own  slaughter
of  Asahel  that  day  would  render  his  position
'in  David's  realm  difficult  and  dangerous.
Among  the  Arab  tribes  quarrels  are  very
common,  but  bloodshed  rare,  because  of  the
blood-feud  which  follows.  Moderation  was
thus  necessary  on  both  sides,  while  cruelty
and  the  immoderate  use  of  victory  would
sow  the  seeds  of  future  trouble.

Ver.  27.-r-TJnles3  thou  hadst  spoken,
surely  then  in  the  morning  the  people  had
gone  up ;  or  as  the  Kevised  Version  renders,
had  gone  away,  nor  followed  every  man  hh
brother.  The  Revised  Version  makes  the
sense  more  plain.  Joab  throws  the  whole
blame,  and  rightly  so,  on  Abner.  David
would  imder  no  circumstances  have  at-
tacked Ishbosheth,  and  Joab  with  his  men
had  marched  to  the  tank  of  Gibeon  simply
to  repel  an  invading  force.  When  there,
Joab,  doubtldss  by  David's  orders,  had
remained  strictly  on  the  defensive,  and  go
unwilling  were  both  armies  to  fight,  that
Abner  had  to  resort  to  a  most  cruel  scene
of  butchery  in  order  to  inflame  their
passions  and  force  them  to  begin  a  conflict
of  brother  against  brother.    Bat  for  Abner's


40


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[oh.  n.  1—32.


challoTige,  both  armies  would  have  separated
RS  friends.  And  Joab  still  acts  upon  the
same  principle  of  forbearance,  and  gives  the
signal  for  stopping  the  pursuit.  He  was
not  B,  man  of  a  tender  heart,  but  he  was
wise  imd  sensible,  and  fully  aware  that  tlie
slaughter  of  Abner  and  his  men,  even  if
he  could  have  destroyed  them  all,  would
only  have  rankled  in  the  minds  of  all
Israel,  and  set  them  against  David  and  his
rule.

Yer.  29. — And  Abner  and  his  men  walked
all  that  night.  At  the  end  of  the  chapter
we  learn  that  Joab  did  the  same.  Each
army  had  about  twenty-six  miles  to  march,
and  the  night  was  less  exhausting  for  a
long  walk  than  the  day.  As  soon,  then,  as
Abner  saw  Joab  and  his  men  occupied  with
the  removal  of  Aealiel's  body,  he  withdrew
from  the  hill  of  Ammah,  and,  passing
through  the  Arabah,  or  plain  of  Jordan,
crossed  the  river  by  the  same  ford  which  he
had  used  when  starting  on  his  unfortunate
errand,  and  so  returned  home.  The  phrase,
all  Bithroa,  shows  that  this  was  a  district,
but  nothing  more  of  it  is  known.

Vers.  30,  31. — Nineteen  men  .  ,  .  three
hundred  and  three  score  men.  Though
David's  "  mighties,"  as  they  were  called,  ex-


celled in  the  tise  of  arms,  yet  the  diaparitf  of
numbers  is  remarkable ;  for  the  Benjamites
were  also  famous  warriors.  We  can  only
account  for  it  by  the  superiority  of  the
tactics  of  Joab,  who  was  a  man  of  consum-
mate military  skill,  and  who  knew  both
how  to  gain  a  victory  and  how  to  use  the
advantage  which  the  pursuers  have  over
the  pursued  to  the  full.  If  we  sometimes
wonder  that  David  endured  Joab  so  long,
we  ought  to  remember  how  much  he  owed
to  his  nephew's  genius,  and  that  Joab  was
always  faithful  to  himself.

Yer.  32, — The  sepnlohre  of  his  father,
which  was  in  Bethlehem.  The  name  of
Zeruiah's  husband  is  never  mentioned,  but
he  was  evidently  of  the  same  town  as  his
wife,  and  at  his  death,  when  probably  still
young,  he  had  received  honourable  stpul-
ture.  As  Bethlehem  is  about  eleven  miles
distant  from  Gibeon,  Joab  probably  marched
thither  straight  from  the  battle-field,  and
spent  the  next  day  in  paying  the  last
tribute  of  respect  to  his  brother,  and  ib
refreshing  his  men.  At  nightfall  he  re-
sumed his  march  to  Hebron,  which  was
fifteen  miles  further  to  the  south,  and  where
he  would  arrive  on  the  morning  following
that  on  which  Abner  reached  Mahanaim.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  facts  are :  1.  David,  knowing  that  time  was.  come  for  action,  and
being  in  doubt  as  to  what  movement  would  further  the  end  in  view,  seeks  guidance  of
God.  2.  Not  only  does  he  obtain  sanction  to  enter  Judab,  hut  is  even  instructed  to
make  Hebron  his  head-quarters,  3,  Entering  the  diotriot  amund  Hebron  with  his
family  and  attendants,  he  is  anointed  by  the  men  of  Judah  over  the  tribe  of  Judah.
4.  Being  informed  of  the  kind  and  valijint  act  of  the  men  of  Jabesh-Q-ilead  (1  Sam.
xxxi.  11 — 13),  David  sends  them  a  message  of  thanks,  and  assmes  them  of  the  Divine
blessing  and  of  his  own  grateful  remembianoe.  5.  He  also  reminds  them  that  the  crisis
in  the  affairs  of  the  nation,  in  the  death  of  Saul  on  the  one  hand,  and  his  ovm  elevation
by  the  men  of  Judah  on  the  other,  required  of  them  to  be  true  to  their  reputation  as
men  of  courage.  There  are  several  themes  suggested  by  these  facts.  Among  them,
consider —

The  beginnings  of  prosperity.  As  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel  introduces  a  turn  of
afiairs  in  the  national  experience,  so  this  second  chapter  introduces  a  turn  in  the
personal  experience  of  David.  He  passes  from  the  bitter  trials  of  the  past,  through
the  anguish  depicted  in  the  first  chapter,  into  the  more  prosperous  and  easy  circum-
.stances  of  free  public  activity.  Undoubtedly  he  was  conscious  of  a  sense  of  relief  from
burdens  almost  more  than  he  could  bear  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  1);  and  being  naturally  buoyant
and  hopeful  in  spirit,  the  hitherto  restrained  powers  of  his  nature  were  now  eager  to
manifest  their  energy.  His  day  had  come  after  a  long  night  of  waiting.  The  promises
of  the  past  were  about  to  be  fulfilled.  Jonathan's  dream  of  his  beloved  friend  being  a
more  worthy  successor  than  himself  ('Pulpit  Commentary,'  1  Samuel,  pp.  381,382)  was
coming  true.  In  one  sense  David  had  always,  even  during  his  exile  anii  sufferings,
been  a  prosperous  man,  for  he  was  God's  chosen  servant,  blessed  with  a  goed  conscience
and  the  favour  of  the  Eternal;  but  now  he  was  ail  that  with  the  additional  circum-
stance of  being  about  to  enter  on  a  position  of  commanding  influence  among  the  people
of  God.  We  have  a  counterpart  to  David's  position  at  this  juncture  in  som"  of  the
circumstances  pf  oar  life;  for  in  youth,  in  business,  in  Church  work,  and  in  national


OH.  n.  1—32.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  H

affairs  we  sometimes  meet  with  a  similar  beginning  of  prosperity.  In  bo  far  ae  the
passage  before  us  affords  teaching  on  this  subject,  observe —

I.  The  beginning  of  pbospebitt  is  a  time  op  peculiar  danoeb.  In  readmg  the
narrative  of  David's  trials  on  the  one  side,  and  of  his  prosperous  circumstances  on  the
other,  we  feel  at  once  that  in  so  far  as  his  religious  life  is  concerned  there  was  far  more
hope  of  him  under  the  former.  The  spiritual  uses  of  adversity  are  very  valuable,  while
on  the  other  hand  the  spiritual  dangers  of  prosperity  are  subtile  and  manifold.  And
likewise  the  transition  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  a  time  of  peculiar  danger.  For
David  the  occasion  for  dependence  on  God  was  not  so  obvious ;  and  the  demand  for
action  would  lay  him  open  to  mistakes  and  pacriflces  of  principle  new  in  his  experience.
The  dangers  of  such  a  time  may  perhaps  be  summarized  thus.  There  arises  a  new  and
fascinating  diversion  of  thought  and  feeling  from  God;  a  corresponding  absorption  of
mental  energy  in  the  externals  of  life.  The  self-culture  which  consists  in  the  watchful
and  constrained  subo id i nation'  of  every  feeling  and  motive  to  the  will  of  God  becomes
somewhat  relaxed.  Tlie  free  play  of  a  much  greater  variety  of  feeling,  passing  out
toward  the  attractive  objects  present  in  an  opening  success,  lays  us  open  to  the
insinuating  flatteries  of  events,  and  the  consequent  encouragement  to  substitute
expediency  for  si  ern  priiiciple.  The  presence  or  the  prospect  of  a  more  abundant  supply
of  material  comforts  cannot  but  give  vitality  to  whatever  of  latent  power  there  may  be
in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  The  conscious  elevation  which  awaits  us  is  sure  to  appeal  to
that  deeply  seated  human  priile  which,  when  developed,  looks  on  others  with  more  or
less  of  disdain,  and  in  proportion  as  the  human  lot  is  now  or  prospectively  free  from
care  does  the  heart  care  less  for  the  blessings  of  a  future  life.  The  youth  passing  from
the  restraints  and  discipline  of  years  into  the  wider  sphere  of  life,  and  so  enjoying  the
first  taste  of  freedom  and  of  manly  dignity,  stands  in  a  slippery  place.  Churches
passing  from  the  trials  of  persecution  into  the  ease  of  toleration  cannot  be  sure  of  the
old  fidelity.  Nations  springing  into  prominence  may  contract  habits  of  indulgence  and
arrogance  in  strange  contrast  with  their  former  self-control  and  devotion  to  duty.
Private  Christians  when  emerging  from  the  struggles  of  their  early  convictions  may
cease  to  watch  and  pray  as  heretofore,  and  soon  lose  the  vigour  of  their  former  faith.

II.  The  mobal  strength  acquired  dueinq  seasons  of  peepabation  will  show

ITSELF     IN    CONTINUED     DEPENDENCE     ON      TUB     GUIDANCE     AND      BLESSING     OF     GtoD.

Unquestionably  David  was  a  much  stronger  man,  as  a  consequence  of  the  protracted  trials
of  past  years,  than  he  would  have  been  had  there  been  no  waiting  for  the  realization  of
•hopes  enkindled  by  the  promise  of  God  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13).  In  the  spiritual  sphere,  as  in
the  material,  reserves  of  force  are  gathered,  by  the  action  of  special  laws,  in  view  of  a
demand  to  be  made  at  a  later  stage  of  development.  David  in  the  wilderness  and  caves,
Paul  in  the  retirement  of  Arabia  (Gal.  i.  17,  18),  other  good  men  during  seasons  of
discipline  and  culture,  fulfilled  the  Divine  law  of  acquisition  of  moral  power  prior  to
expenditure.  And  the  reality  of  this  acquisition  in  the  case  of  David  appeared  at  once
in  the  promptitude  with  which,  under  all  the  distracting  and  diverting  influence  of  a
sudden  elevation  to  importance,  he  acknowledges  his  need  of  the  guidance  and  blessing
of  God.  There  is  a  natural  necessity,  not  identical  with  true  godliness,  which  causes
men  to  turn  to  God  in  their  troubles.  It  is  the  instinct  of  a  genuine  piety  alone  which
prompts  towards  God  when  troubles  cease  and  success  begins.  It  is  a  blessed  omen
when  men,  on  the  dawning  of  their  prosperity,  and  when  flushed  with  the  prospect  of
realizing  long-chci  ished  hopes,  go  straight  to  God,  and  in  prayer  both  acknowledge  his
goodness  and  seek  his  special  help  for  the  occasion.  Thus  the  subtile  temptations  and
perils  of  the  new  circumstances  are  met  by  a  wise  use  of  that  spiritual  strength  which
)iad  been  stored  amidst  the  trying  influences  of  adversity  or  deferred  hope.  No  doubt
the  apostles  during  their  early  ministry,  on  and  after  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  were  giving
out  some  of  the  spiritual  power  gathered  into  their  nature  during  the  three  years  of
discipline  and  restraint  under  their  visible  Lord;  in  like  manner  men  who  go  forth  to
successful  encounter  with  evil  owe  much  to  the  spirit  trained  to  honour  God  in  all
thin  s.

III.  The  hope  of  coming  pbospebitt,  when  moderated  bt  piety,  induces  caution
AND  consideration  FOB  OTHERS.  Not  Only  is  continuous  prosperity  very  perilous  to
man's  higher  life,  but  the  prospect  of  it,  after  a  season  of  trial,  is  likely  to  be  charged
with  elements  of  danger  which  only  a  well-nourished  piety  can  neutralize.    David


42  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  n.  1—32.


could  not  but  think  much  of  himself  now  as  a  free  man,  an  object  of  public  interest,  on
the  high-road  to  afiduenoe,  and  about  to  enter  on  activities  that  would  render  him  the
chief  object  of  interest.  There  would  thus  arise  a  new  and  perilous  self-consciousness.
The  sobrieties,  caution,  and  self-restraint  acquired  in  adversity  might  now  seem  to  be
virtues  suited  to  a  bygone  time.  A  profound  knowledge  of  the  world  and  of  self  would
correct  this  judgment;  but  still  the  risk  would  be  considerable,  for  man  at  his  best-
estate  is  morally  weak.  It  is  just  here  that  a  sincere,  weU-oultiired  godliness_  comes
in  as  a  support  to  the  dictates  of  a  purely  moral  judgment  and  the  suggestions  of
expediency.  The  man  after  God's  own  heart,  because  of  being  such  a  man,  lopks  out
on  his  opening  prospects  with  a  careful  eye,  and  moves  with  as  much  caution  and
deference  to  a  higher  will  as  in  the  Former  days  of  trouble;  and  the  comfort  of  his
household,  as  well  as  the  advancement  to  comparative  ease  and  plenty  of  the  men  who
had  shared  his  sufferings,  engage  his  thought,  and  they  become  the  first  partakers  of  the
fruits  of  his  improving  fortunes  (vers.  2,  3).  The  same  moderating  influence  of  piety
is  seen  in  tlie  life  of  Joseph.  The  principle  involved  is  taught  by  our  Lord  in  his
perfect  freedom,  even  amidst  growing  honours,  from  self-absoi'ptiou.  With  the  measured
step  of  sobriety  he  marches  on  to  full  dominion,  and  with  tender  regard  for  the  welfare
of  all  who  have  known  the  "  fellowship  of  his  sufferings."  The  same  mind  in  us  will
tone  down  the  dangerous  excitement  of  succfsses,  and  induce  a  broad  and  generous
consideration  of  the  claims  and  requirements  of  others.

Tiie  following  genbbal  lessons  naturally  flow  from  this  subject  as  exhibited  in
the  life  of  David :  1.  The  consciousness  of  our  being  God's  servants,  living  supremely  to
effect  his  purpose  in  the  world,  gives  great  moral  power  to  our  conduct.  David  lived
and  moved  as  a  "  man  of  God."  Blessed  is  he  who  can  go  forth  daily  with  that  conviction !
2.  The  assurance  that  God  has  a  definite  will  in  reference  to  our  daily  movements  is
warranted,  not  only  by  philosophic  considerations,  but  also  by  the  record  of  his  actual
dealings  with  his  servants.  David,  the  "  sparrow,"  and  the  "  hairs  "  of  our  head  are  means
of  illustrating  that  nothing  in  our  life  is  too  insignificant  for  Divine  care,  snd  therefore  for
matter  of  supplication  (Matt.  x.  29 — 31).  3.  The  true  policy  of  man  is  another  name
for  what  is  the  will  of  God.  No  doubt  in  this  case  it  was  humanly  expedient  to  go
first  up  to  Hebron ;  and  because  God  knew  it  was  best  under  the  circumstances,  he
willed  David  to  go.  In  the  higher  moral  sphere,  God's  will  is  not  a  judgment  based  on
knowledge  of  circumstances;  but,  though  absolute,  yet  it  always  coincides  with  true
policy.  4.  The  means  of  ascertaining  the  main  lines  of  right  action  are  within  reach  of  a
good  man.  Gtod  speaks  in  providence,  conscience,  and  his  Word.  5.  There  is  immense
moral  support  to  our  action  when  we  have  deliberately  sought  and  have  learnt  the  will
of  God.    Firm  is  the  step  of  such  men,  steady  is  their  eye.

The  uses  of  partial  success.  David's  advancement  to  the  throne  of  Judah  was  a  great
step  towards  the  realization  of  the  ideal  which,  ever  since  the  day  of  his  anointing,  had
diawn  him  on  in  the  path  of  patient  endurance ;  but  it  was  far  from  being  all  that  he
wished.  As  compared  with  the  understanding  arrived  at,  and  encouraged  by  all  that
God  had  said  and  done  during  the  past  years  of  exile,  it  fell  below  what  he  had  a  right
to  expect,  for  he  was  chosen  of  God  to  be  ruler  over  the  whole  of  the  people ;  but,  at
the  same  time,  it  so  far  was  satisfying  that  it  became  a  pledge  of  still  further  advances
till  the  original  promise  should  be  literally  and  in  its  entirety  fulfilled.  Theio  is  no
indication  here  or  elsewhere  in  the  Psalms  that  David  was  vexed  and  fretful  because  he
did  not  all  at  once  succeed  Saul  as  king  of  the  entire  nation.  There  were  doubtless  in
the  circumstances  of  the  case  sufficient  pleas  for  an  unfilial  spirit  to  indulge  in  the
language  of  disappointment;  but  the  past  discipline  of  this  true  child  of  God  had
manifestly  wrought  in  him  such  confidence  in  the  order  of  Providence,  and  such  breadth
of  view  with  respect  to  Divine  methods,  as  to  render  him  deaf  and  indifferent  to
unhallowed  suggestions.  His  cheerful  acceptance  of  an  instalment  of  fulfilled  promise
is  in  keeping  with  his  former  patient  endurance  of  deferred  hope,

I.  There  are  many  converoing  lines  involved  in  oub  success  in  the  service
OF  God.  The  true  final  success  of  David's  career  lay  in  his  becoming  the  beloved  and
honoured  ruler  of  the  entire  chosen  race.  But  a  fact  of  this  kind  means  the  adjust-
ment, over  a  considerable  period,  of  countless  subtile  human  relationships,  the  kindling
of  apparently  divergent  interests,  and  the  physical  removal  of  barriers  by  the  action  of


ou.  n.  1— 52.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  43

natural  causes  directed  by  a  controlling  mind  towards  a  single  issue.  Not  only  must
Saul  be  put  aside  and  Jonathan  be  rendered  willing  to  give  place  to  another,  but  the
mass  of  the  nation  must  be  won.  The  hand  that  had  won  over  Jonathan  and  removed
Saul  now  operates  silently  on  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Judah — David's  own  kindred ;
and  their  recognition  of  him  as  king  at  Hebron  was  preliminary,  in  the  order  of
Providence,  to  the  acquisition  on  the  part  of  David  of  the  experience  that  would  qualify
for  sovereignty  over  the  entire  nation,  and  to  the  gradual  creation  in  the  various  tribes
of  confidence  in  his  character  and  abilities,  as  also  the  gradual  annihilation  by  a
natulal  process  of  the  interest  which  men  very  properly  felt  in  surviving  members  of
the  family  of  Saul.  As  many  lines  converged  on  his  reaching  the  throne  of  Judah,  so
this  elevation  was  the  opening  up  of  new  lines  that  would  ultimately  converge  on  the
complete  realization  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  his  life.  While  absorbed  in  our  own
individual  experience,  we  do  not  seehow  the  line  we  have  to  follow  is  what  it  is  because
of  being  one  of  many  terminating  in  a  common  issue.  Later  on  we  are  able  to  take  the
position  of  a  geographer,  who  surveying  the  watershed  of  a  region,  sees  the  convergence,
after  all  the  circuitnus  windings  round  rugged  mountains  and  through  wild  gorges,  of
various  water-courses  into  one  calm  and  majestic  stream.  Thus  we  now  interpret  the
lives  of  Jacob  and  Joseph,  and,  above  all,  the  varied  earthly  experiences  of  our  Saviour.
We  thus  have  warrant  for  believing  that  there  are  more  forces  working  toward  tlie  goal
of  our  life  of  godliness  than  we  can  at  present  trace.  We  ought  to  cherish  faith  in
God's  silent  action  on  the  spirits  of  men  for  the  furtherance  of  the  ends  for  which  we,
as  his  servants,  live  and  strive.  David  could  obey,  be  patient  and  step  forward  when
occasion  offered;  but  meanwhile  God  could  dispose  the  minds  of  Judah  towards  him,  and
educate  the  rest  to  recognize  in  due  time  his  fitness  to  be  their  king  also.  The  courses
of  nature  are  on  the  side  of  good  men.  The  social  world  is  not  a  chaos ;  there  is  a  Power
which  subdues  all  things  unto  itself.  This  should  comfort  and  strengthen  us  in  all  our
efforts  to  see  Christ  recognized  as  King  of  kings.

II.  Success  PARTIALLY  attained  is  both  a  pledge  of  Diviirai  faithfulness  and
A  gall  to  hioher  and  more  difficult  service.  The  elevation  to  the  throne  at
Hebron  was  certainly  a  great  success  in  the  long  and  weary,  and,  so  far  as  David  was
concerned  with  Saul,  bloodless  conflict.  It  must  have  given  to  the  act  of  anointing  by
Samuel  a  fulness  of  meaning  hithertonot  realized.  The  venerable  records  of  Gud's  faithful-
ness to  Abraham  and  Jacob  after  many  a  severe  trial,  which  doubtless  he  was  accustomed,
at  this  period  of  his  history,  to  read  and  meditate  upon  (Ps.  i.  2 ;  cf.  cxix.  97,  99),  were
seen  to  be  but  counterparts  of  what  he  now  could  write.  He  had  waited  long;  he  had
abstained  from  violent  means  and  forced  providences,  and  so  could  take  heart  and  believe
that  the  Lord  forsaketh  not  his  saints,  but  bringeth  to  pass  that  for  which  they  wait
(Ps.  xxxviii.  1 — 4).  And  yet  this  partial  success  was  to  him  the  starting-point  from
which  he  was  to  advance  still  further  in  the  fulfilment  of  life's  purpose;  it  demanded
of  him  more  skill,  more  watchfulness,  more  caution,  than  ever.  A  new  set  of  qualities
would  find  scope  for  development;  different  and  more  subtile  temptations  would  arise;
the  final  triumph  would  depend  on  present  use  of  partial  success.  Now,  the  case  of
David  reigning  at  Hebron  over  part  of  the  nation  is  the  case  of  all  who,  like  him,  are
engaged  in  maintaining  the  honour  of  God  in  a  sinful  world.  What  they  have  attained
to,  either  in  personal  self-conquest  or  in  subduing  men  to  the  obedience  of  faith,  may  be
taken  as  pledge  of  the  faithfulness  that  remains  yet  to  be  proved,  while  it  opens  up
wider  reaches  of  exertion  and  exposes  to  new  and  very  dangerous  forms  of  temptation.
The  history  of  the  Church  up  to  the  fourth  century,  and  its  subsequent  career  till  it
recovered  its  tone  in  the  time  of  the  Eeformation,  furnishes  abundant  illustration  of  this
double  aspect  of  partial  success.  Our  modern  missionary  achievements  furnish  distinct
pledges  of  God's  faithfulness,  but  they  impose  further  and  very  serious  obligations  with
a  view  to  consolidation,  and  at  the  same  time  expose  us  to  peculiar  temptations  which
find  no  room  in  the  season  of  early  enthusiasm  and  sturdy  endurance.  The  same
applies  to  our  own  personal  religion  and  the  bringing  of  our  entire  nature  into  subjection
to  Christ  (Luke  x.  17—20;  1  Cor.  x.  11,  12).

III.  Success  partially  attained  'furnishes  facilities  foe  greater  achieve-
ments. The  acquisition  of  Hebron  as  the  seat  of  government,  some  twenty  miles  south
of  Jerusalem,  and  situated  among  hills  that  rendered  both  defence  and  administration
more  feasible,  furnished  solid  ground  for  the  expectation  that  some  day  the  more


44  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  1—32.

important  city  would  become  the  centre  of  a  greater  kingdom.  The  memorable
historic  associations  of  the  place  (Gen.  xxiii.  2 — 20 ;  Josh.  x.  36  ;  xiv.  6—15 ;  sv.  13,
14 ;  xxi.  11—13)  could  not  but  create  in  the  mind  of  David  the  feeling  that  he  was
succeeding  men  who  were  substantially  engaged  in  the  same  cause  as  himself,  and
who  prospered  therein.  The  natural  position  of  the  city,  and  the  wise  measures  which
thence  would  go  forth  for  the  government  of  a  compact  tribe,  would  naturally  con-
solidate his  power,  and,  in  due  course,  issue  in  a  contrast  between  his  judicious  rule
and  that  of  rivals  in  Israel,  which  would  tend  to  break  down  prejudices  against  him,
and  give  force  to  his  claim  when  an  opening  occurred  for  his  assumption  of  sovereignty
over  the  twelve  tribes.  Using  well  his  moderate  gains,  he  would  convert  them  into
agencies  for  complete  triumph.  Herein  is  the  law  of  solid  advance.  In  the  organic
world  hi>»her  and  more  beautiful  forms  are  built  up  by  means  of  the  powers  latent  in
the  lower  forms  already  in  being.  Mental  life  becomes  "  ide  in  range  and  profound  in
thought  by  conversion  of  partial  knowledge  acquired  into  means  of  further. develop-
ment. Social  weal  may  proceed  by  stages,  in  which  for  a  time  progress  may  seem  to
be  checked ;  but  the  institutions  and  habits  consolidated  soon  become  points  from  which
other,  and  better,  are  formed.  The  growth  of  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Christian  means
the  successive  attainment  of  points  of  advantage,  which,  though  far  from  satisfying  the
earnest  soul  who  seeks  to  subdue  all  to  Christ,  yet  render  thcsubjugation  of  the  entire
man  to  the  Law  of  Christ  more  easy  and  certain.  Christian  enterimse  often  lays  hold
of  some  Hebron,  in  the  heathen  world,  or  in  the  midst  of  our  non-Christian  civilization,
and  working  thence,  with  memories  of  past  success  to  cheer  and  encourage,  gets  nearer
to  the  goal  of  all  prayer  and  effort — the  bringing  of  the  entire  race  into  cheerful  sub-
mis^on  to  Christ,  the  true  King  in  Zion.  Therefore,  like  David  in  Hebron,  we  all
should  gratefully  accept  what  is  vouchsafed  as  the  reward  of  effort  and  patience,  and
apply  our  new  resources  and  acquired  position  to  higher  issues.

An  instructive  episode.  The  sacred  narrative  is  in  the  main  concerned  with  the
great  national  events  which  point  on  to  the  coming  of  the  permanent  King  in  Zion ;
but  here  and  there  it  introduces  a  personal  incident,  which  forms  a  phasing  and
instructive  episode  amidst  the  public  transactions  which  are  the  staple  of  the  history.
So  here,  while  describing  the  important  facts  connected  with  David's  elevation  to  the
throne,  and  the  consequent  advance  in  the  unfolding  of  the  process  by  which  at  last
the  Christ  should  appear,  the  writer  relates  a  circumstance  of  a  more  private  character,
and  that  both  reveals  noble  qualities  in  David  and  sets  forth  truths  of  general  interest.
Observe,  then —

I.  That,  in  a  true  man,  affairs  of  state  do  not  extinquish  the  more  TiajDEB
AND  REFINED  SENTIMENTS  OF  LiFB.  To  become  monarch  by  a  people's  choice  ai-i  in
accordance  with  Divine  purpose  involves  the  pressure  of  heavy  responsibilities,  the
absorption  of  energy  in  onerous  duties,  and  the  exposure  of  the  spirit  to  manifold  tempta-
tions to  selfish  aggrandizement.  It  is  to  the  honour  of  David  that  he  retained,  amidst
all  these  new  and  perilous  conditions,  his  old  tenderness  of  feeling  and  noble  generosity.
He  found  time  and  faculty  for  thinking  lovingly  of  his  onqe  relentless  but  now  buried
foe,  and  for  cherishing  gratitude  and  respect  for  the  men  who  had,  at  much  personal
risk,  striven  to  pay  honour  to  the  dishonoured  corpse  (vers.  5,  6).  He  was  not  spoiled
as  a  man  of  generous  sentiments  by  becoming  a  king.  He  nourished  private  feelings
amidst  public  cares.  He  would  have  the  men  of  Jabesh-Gilead  know  how  fondly  he
cherished  the  remembrance  of  their  kindness  to  one  now  no  more.  How  unlike  many
who  have  gained  a  throne  through  the  disasters  brought  on  rivals !  How  free,  natural,
and  simple  the  expression  of  feeling  as  compared  vrith  the  formal  courtesies  which
sometimes  society  requires  toward  even  the  detested  deadl  In  these  respects  David  is
a  type  of  the  greater  One,  who,  amidst  all  the  cares  of  life,  cherishid  iu  his  heart  onW
pure,  kindly,  generous  feelings  towards-  even  those  who  by  others  would  have  been
forgotten.  In  like  manner  it  is  well  that  we  strive  to  keep  the  heart  fresh  and  warm
when  promotion  conies,  or  public  affairs  absorb,  or  temptat!ions  arise  to  be  indifferent  to
ihe  minor  claims  of  life.

II.  That  a  true  man  will  exhibit  in  his  conduct  the  supremact  of  his  life's
BFIBITUAL  PURPOSE.  There  is  an  obscurity  in  the  exhortation  sent  to  the  men  of
Jabesh-Gilead  arising  from  its  laconic  character  (ver.  7).  But,  read  in  the  light  of  what


OH.n.  1— 82.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  45

we  know  to  have  been  David's  faith  in  the  comiug  kingdom  of  God  ever  since  the
anointing  by  Samuel,  it  means  this:  "You  are  perplexed  and  anxious  about  the
interests  of  the  people  of  God  and  their  future.  Do  not  yield  to  that  state  of  mind.
Be  true  men;  do  your  part  as  patriots  in  this  time  of  change;  for  Saul,  your  master,!^
dead,  and  every  man,  therefore,  should  do  his  best  for  the  common  weal.  I  have  been
made  king  over  one  section  of  the  people  of  God,  and  I,  therefore,  am  in  a  position  to
do  my  part.  Let  us,  then,  work  as  brave  men  for  the  bringing  on  of  the  better  time."
Thus,  in  the  but  partial  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  by  Samuel,  and  amidst  the  private
affairs  of  life,  David  cherishes  clear  and  full  faith  in  the  on  working  of  the  Divine  purpose
towards  final  realization.  His  destiny  as  king  over  all  the  chosen  race,  in  God's  Name,
was  still  the  predominant  thought.  All  along  during  those  bitter  days  of  exilu  and
persecution  the  thought  was  uppermost,  and  nerved  him  with  patient  courage ;  and  even
now,  when  more  than  half  the  people  did  not  want  him  to  be  king,  he  keeps  the  thought
clearly  in  view.  So  was  it  with  our  Saviour.  He  came  knowing  he  was  to  be  Lord  of
all — Head  of  a  united  people.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  " — in  prospect  of
this — "he  endured  the  cross,  and  despised  the  shame; "  and  when  only  partially  recognized
as  Lord  by  a  few,  he  still  had  faith  in  the  outworking  of  Divine  purposes,  and  believed
that  to  him  "the  gathering  of  the  people"  would  be,  and  that  there  would  be  "one
flock  and  one  Shepherd."  Those,  also,  who  enter  into  the  Saviour's  Passion  likewise
keep  the  spiritual  purpose  of  life  clear  above  all  earthly  things,  and  adjust  the  partial
successes,  the  deferred  hopes,  and  even  the  private  intercourse  of  life  to  the  one
ibsorbing  ideal.  Blessed  men,  who  thus  see  Christ's  final  triumph  before  it  is  realized !
What  tone,  elevation,  and  patience  does  it  give  to  life  1

IIL  That  true  men  in  exalted  positioks  give  tone  to  society.  During  exile,
David  was  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  men,  and  now  he  became  the  ruler  of  a  people  with
title  of  king.  As  leader  and  chief  his  spirit  had  influenced  his  followers.  Now  that  he
is  king,  the  people  told  him  of  the  men  of  Jabesh-Gilead  burying  Saul.  Why  ?  Was
it  that  he  might  be  revenged  on  men  who  had  done  honour  to  a  persecuting  enemy  ?
Not  thus  had  they  learnt  of  their  leader.  They  knew  him  of  old  as  generous  to  Saul
(1  Sam.  xxvi.  9 — 12);  they  had  heard  his  pathetic  lament  over  Saul  (ch.  i.  17 — 27),
and  they  were  sure  that  he  would  be  comforted  in  knowing  how  poor  Saul's  corpse  had
be«n  cared  for.  Obviously,  the  leader  had  given  a  nobler,  more  generous  tone  to  men
benaath  him.  In  ordinary  life,  such  men  would  have  rejoiced  in  the  death  of  a  foe.
It  is  doubtless  true  that  the  tone  of  society  proceeds  largely  from  the  higher  to  the
lower  in  position.  A  good  monarch  affects  the  peasant  and  the  peer.  The  lower  grades
of  society  get  their  tone  very  much  from  what,  prevails  in  ranks  above  them.  If  our
rulers  and  persons  of  position  display  kindliness,  temperance,  and  piety,  they  do  much
thereby  to  fashion  the  character  of  others.  The  same  principle  appli'S  to  i  bought.
Ideas  are  wrought  out  by  the  highest  minds,  and  gradually  permeate  the  thinking  of
Ihe  undisciplined  and  uncultured.    Hence  the  serious  responsibilities  of  station!

Vers.  8 — 17. — Fanatical  patriotism.  The  facts  are :  1.  By  degrees,  and  with  the  aid
iDf  Abner,  those  parts  of  the  country  not  subject  to  David,  and  which,  during  the  decay
of  Saul's  power,  had  come  under  the  control  of  the  Philistines,  now  became  consolidated
under  the  rule  of  Ishbosheth.  2.  The  jealousy  between  Israel  and  Judah,  owing
mostly  to  the  hostility  of  Ishbosheth's  adherents  to  David,  assumes  threatening
form,  and  the  leaders  on  each  side,  attended  by  a  small  army,  come  together  face  to
face,  probably  to  consider  the  points  in  dispute.  3.  The  political  questions  not  being
solved  by  discussion,  Abner  proposes  (vers.  13,  14 ;  cf.  ver.  27)  as  alternative  a  settle-
ment by  a  combat  of  twelve  select  men  from  each  side.  4.  The  combat  issuing  In
mutual  destrnction,  the  main  forces  come  into  conflict,  and  Abner  suffers  defeat.  The
men  who  entered  into  the  strife  here  recorded  doubtless  prided  themselves  on  the  zeal
they  felt  for  their  country,  and  were  ready  to  justify  in  words  the  deeds  of  the  sword-
It  is  customary  to  credit  people  with  patriotism,  and  to  that  extent  condone  their  savage
passions.  But  too  often  the  plea  of  patriotism  is  only  a  cover  for  a  lack  of  reason  and
a  domination  of  inferior  impulses.

I.  Attachment  to  king  and  countbt  ib  bubobdinate  to  a  hioheb  law.  Con-
»der«d  in  the  abstract,  such  attachment  is  worthy  only  of  admiration,  and  it  forms  an
element  in  a  people's  well-being.    But  human  feelings,  with  their  corresponding  Mts,


46  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  1—32,


are  parts  of  a  great  complex  whole,  and  their  worth  in  any  particular  concrete  Instance
depends  on  antecedent  and  concomitant  facts.  There  ii  a  gradation  of  obligations,  and
virtues  in  name  cease  to  be  virtues  in  reality  when  they  appear  in  isolation,  or  con-
sequent on  a  disregard  of  a  higher  law.  The  men  of  Israel  were  bound  to  love  their
country,  and  to  show  love  to  it  by  asserting  the  rights  of  their  ruler.  But  at  the  same
time  they  were  bound  to  follow  the  guidance  of  God;  to  submit  to  his  supreme  will;
and,  making  this  the  standard  of  feeling  and  action,  to  modify  the  form  of  expressing
love  to  country  and  ruler  accordingly.  Now,  the  men  of  Israel,  especially  the  leaders,
ought  to  have  known,  from  the  events  and  words  of  Samuel's  life,  and,  indeed,  from  the
manifest  interposition  in  favour  of  David  and  against  Saul,  that  it  was  the  Divine  will
that  they  should  not  oppose  David ;  that,  in  fact,  love  of  country  was  to  show  itself  in
accepting  whom  God  had  chosen.  Any  personal  interest,  therefore,  which  they  may
hiive  felt  in  a  son  of  Saul,  and  any  regard  for  what  they  deemed  the  good  of  their  native
land,  should  have  shaped  its  form  of  expression  in  harmony  with  their  primary  and
higher  obligation.  The  principle  is  of  wide  range.  Any  passion  for  our  country  and
sovereign  must  be  exercised  within  the  limits  of  a  higher  love.  If  so-called  patriotism
involves  hatred  of  men  as  men,  or  injustice  to  them,  or  national  selfishness,  then  it  is
a  violation  of  the  second  great  commandment.  If  upholding  a  ruler  and  seeking  to
subdue  a  neighbouring  ruler  involves  a  contravention  of  God's  will,  revealed  iu  the
order  of  manifest  Providence  or  Scripture,  then  it  is  a  spurious  patriotism.  Human
leolings  are  not  the  tests  of  truth.

II.  Blended  laNOEANCB  and  passion  entail  bufferinq  and  slow  peogbbss  in
NATIONAL  LIFE.  Had  Israel  been  alive  to  the  lessons  which  God  was  teaching  them
all  through  the  life  of  Saul,  by  means  of  Samuel  and  David  and  Juuathan,  Hiey  would
never  have  allowed  the  sentiment  of  interest  in  a  monarch's  son  to  have  developed  into
a  strong  aversion  to  David  and  a  passionate  effort  to  expel  him  from  Judah.  Con-
sidering all  the  facts  of  the  case,  there  is  no  valid  excuse  for  their  ignorance,  aud,
therefore,  none  for  their  feelings,  even  though  patriotism  he  pleaded.  Thus  we  see  how
neglect  to  gather  up  and"  use  the  lessons  of  Providence,  slight  an  evil  as  it  may  seem  to
be  at  the  time,  really  is  the  seed-sowing  of  the  innumerable  miseries  of  a  civil  war.  If,
during  those  painful  years  of  contention,  the  energies  of  men  are  diverted  from  industrial
channels  into  the  wasting  channels  of  war,  and  if,  consequently,  national  progress  is
retarded,  the  cause  is  to  be  found  in  the  domination  of  ignorance  and  passion.  So  has
it  been  again  and  again.  That  vox  populi  has  alwaj's  been  vox  Dei  is  little  less  than
blasphemy.  Generations  looking  back  on  their  ancestors  see  how  wars  and  strifes  took
their  rine  in  stupidity ;  and  yet,  too  often,  there  is  an  unwillingness  to  pause  lest  the
same  evil  be  repeated.  The  woes  that  have  come  upon  nations  in  consequence  of  war
are  a  dark  foil,  setting  forth  in  wondrous  light  the  wisdom  and  sweet  reasonableness  of
the  gospel  of  Christ.  If  peoples  would  find  the  clue  to  progressive  national  development,
let  them  accept  and  put  into  practice  the  sober,  generous  precepts  and  principles  of  the
New  Testament.  This  harmony  of  Christ's  religion  with  economic  law  is  no  feeble
strand  in  the  evidence  of  its  Divine  origin.

III.  The  qebat  erbob  of  leaders  too  often  libs  in  theib  indisposition  to
TRACE  OUT  THE  LEADINGS  OF  THE  HioHEB  LAW.  Abucr's  Suggestion  that  the  dispute
should  be  settled  by  combat  of  twelve  on  each  side  was  an  appearance  of  humanity  and
sobriety  as  compared  with  the  indiscriminate  use  of  force.  But  in  the  light  of  reason
it  is  absurd ;  for  right  cannot  be  constituted  by  chance  superiority  of  might.  The
complication  in  which  he  found  himself  was  simply  the  result  of  previous  indisposition
to  find  out  the  Divine  meaning  of  Samuel's  dealings  with  Saul  and  of  Jonathan's  com-
pact with  David  (1  Sam.  xiii.  11—16  ;  xv.  24—31 ;  xvi.  6—13 ;  xx.  12—17  ;  cf.  xvi.
57;  xxvi.  3 — 16).  It  had  been  easier  to  follow  the  family  feeling  and  official  impulse
(1  Sam.  xiv.  50;  ch.  ii.  8,  9)  than  to  look  at  private  and  public  interests  in  the  light
of  such  revelations  of  God's  will  as  were  then  available.  It  is  a  good  maxim  in  moral
questions  that  first  promptings  are  best.  The  voice  of  conscience  is  quick  to  S))eak,
even  though  in  low  tone.  Most  probably  Abner  recognized  that  voice  telling  of  God's
will  in  David.  But  where  there  is  an  unwillingness,  because  of  personal  or  other
interests,  to  give  heed  to  that  voice,  it  soon  becomes  easier  to  follow  the  lower  impulses;
and  when  once  on  the  slippery  incline  of  lower  impulse,  every  movement  adds  to  the
momentum  downwards.    Herein  lies  the  danger  of  our  public  men.    They  especially


CH,n.  1— 32.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  «

need  the  "light  of  the  Lord."  Expediency  and  wrong  principles  gain  on  them  uncon-
sciously in  so  far  as  they  lose  the  primary  sensitiveness  of  conscience.  The  contagion
of  their  spirit  and  conduct  affects  the  lower  orders.  They  will  have  no  difficulty  in
finding  men  willing,  under  the  cover  of  patriotic  sentiment,  to  enter  the  "  field  of  sharp
edges,"  and  kill  and  be  killed.  Hence,  it  behoves  preachers  and  all  good  men  to  bring
the  light  of  the  higher  law  of  life  to  bear  with  all  its  clearness  and  directness  on  the
minds  of  those  in  authority.

Vers.  18 — 32. — The  facts  are  :  1.  Asahel,  a  younger  brother  of  Joab,  taking  part  in
the  pursuit,  fixes  his  eye  on  Abner,  and  keeps  on  his  track,  and,  being  swift  of  foot,
soon  overtakes  him.  2.  Abner,  conscious  of  superiority  in  arms,  and  remembering  the
high  family  connections  of  the  ra»h  youth,  chivalrously  urges  Asahel  to  try  his  prowess
on  some  one  else.  3.  The  counsel  being  proudly  disdained,  Asahel  falls  under  the
spear  of  Abner.  4.  At  the  close  of  the  day  the  scattered  men  of  Israel  concentrate  on
one  spot,  and  pause,  while  Abner,  perceiving  the  folly  and  misery  of  the  civil  war,
appeals  to  Joab  for  a  cessation  of  hostilities.  5.  Joab,  reproaching  Aimer  for  his  having
brought  on  the  conflict  by  his  own  acts  and  words  in  the  moruing,  sounds  the  recall  to
his  men,  and  henceforth  they  cease  to  fight  their  brethren.  6.  Abner  and  his  men
retire  to  the  east  of  Jordan,  while  Joab  and  his  men  bury  Asahel,  and  proceed  to
David's  seat  of  government.

Instructive  youthful  imprudence.  The  historian  here  gives  considerable  prominence
to  the  rash  conduct  of  Asahel  and  its  sad  consequences.  Without  at  all  straining  the
narrative,  or  indulging  in  fantastic  methods  of  interpretalion,  wo  may  call  attention  to
the  following  considerations  naturally  suggested  by  the  nariative.

L  The  principle  on  which  the  mateuials  bntbkino  into  the  sacebd  histohi
WEBB  SELECTED.  The  Bible  is  a  history  formed  by  a  selection  of  a  few  materials  ouj
of  many.  The  unwritten  history  of  a  people  is  more  ample  than  the  written.  The
question  naturally  arises — On  what  principle  did  the  sacred  historians  proceed  in  accept-
ing some  items  of  fact,  and  rejecting  others  equally  true  ?  Many  a  noble  youth  besides
Asahel  must  have  fallen  in  the  course  of  the  ages  traversed  by  the  biblical  story,  but
their  name  and  deeds  are  unrecorded.  The  theory  that  the  diRercut  writers  of  the
historic  fragments  which  from  time  to  time  appeared  in  Jewish  life,  and  now  make  up
the  whole  Bible,  were  literary  artists  or  philosophical  historians,  is  not  tenable.  There
is  in  the  narratives  an  entire  absence  of  the  art  and  the  philosophy  which  may  be
traced  in  such  writers  as  Thucydides,  Niebuhr,  Macaulay,  and  Fronde ;  while,  running
through  these  fragments,  there  is  a  unity  equal  to  anything  found  elsewhere.  The  case
of  Asahel  is  an  Illustration  of  the  whole.  The  somewhat  detailed  reference  to  the
occasion  of  his  death  is  obviously  connected  with  the  subsequent  reference  to  the
occasion  of  the  death  of  Abner,  and  the  death  of  Abner  is  closely  connected  with
the  removal  of  the  most  influential  barrier  to  David's  consolidation  of  the  entire  king-
dom, and  David's  life  and  reign  are,  we  know,  important  in  Hebrew  history,  because
of  their  bearing  on  the  line  of  providence  by  which  "David's  greater  Son"  at  last
came  to  reign  in  the  true  Zion.  Here,  then,  we  get  a  clue  to  the  principle  on  which,
by  the  unconscious  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  facts  were  culled  from  Hebrew
annals  and  incorporated  in  the  sacred  history.  Direct  or  indirect  bearing  on  the
redemptive  purpose  in  Christ  was  the  criterion  of  incorporation.  Not  that  everything
related  to  that  purpose  is  incorporated,  but  only  such  as  is.  The  same  doubtless
applies  to  the  principle  on  which  the  evaugelists  were,  unconsciously  perhaps,  guided
to  select  out  of  the  mass  of  fact  connected  with  the  life  of  Christ  such  items  as  we  have
in  the  four  Gospels.

n.  The  waste  involved  in  the  use  of  valuable  powees  to  unsuitablb  esds.
Asahel,  the  Hebrew  Achilles  without  his  skill  in  arnis,  was  swift  of  foot — ^a  valuable
quality,  and,  in  certain  uses,  likely  to  render  great  service  to  the  state ;  but,  as  employed
against  the  superior  prowess  of  Abner  in  personal  conflict,  it  only  proved  the  occasion
of  premature  unavoidable  death.  All  the  latent  capacity  for  service  in  years  to  come,
all  the  joys  of  domestic  life,  were  thrown  away  by  this  rash  encounter  of  the  fleet-footed
youth  with  a  man  of  war.  Looking  at  his  conduct  from  a  distance,  we  can  see  its
essential  folly.    Physical  and  mental  qualities,  like  limbs,  are  adapted  to  specific  uses,


48  TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  ii.  1—82.


and  when  applied  to  cases  in  which  their  excellence  can  turn  the  scale  of  advantage,
then  the  utmost  zeal  may  ha  displayed ;  but  apart  from  this  they  may  involve  us  in
great  trouble.  Judgment  in  the  use  of  small  gifts  will  often  achieve  better  results
than  can  be  secured  by  an  indiscreet  use  of  greater  gifts.  Pcssibly  Asahel  remembered
the  youthful  David,  skilled  with  the  sling,  going  forth  to  fight  Goliath  j  and  it  may  be,
also,  that  he  was  fully  conscious  of  being  on  the  side  of  the  Lord's  anointed.  But  the
case  of  David  was  not  parallel.  Then  there  was  an  imminent  peril  for  all  Israel,  and
no  other  means  available  for  warding  it  off;  while  here,  whatever  peril  had  existed
was  gone.  No  conviction  of  being  on  the  side  of  God  is  a  justification  for  rashness.
The  fall  of  Abner  as  a  foe  of  David  was  in  wiser  hands  than  those  of  the  fleet-footed
yonch.  We  have  all  to  learn  the  lesson  of  adaptation.  The  student  of  purely  physical
science  renders  great  service  where  physical  facts  and  conclusions  embodying  them  are
alone  concerned ;  but,  like  Asahel,  he  applies  his  powers  in  a  dangerous  direction  when
he  presumes  to  be  an  authority  on  super-physical  questions.  Much  of  the  waste  of
Christian  energy  arises  from  individuals  attempting  to  rid  the  world  of  evil  by  working
along  lines  unsuited  to  their  capacities ;  and  we  see  daily  instances  of  men  and  womei
wasting  their  mental  and  physical  substance  in  occupations  in  which  their  specialitiet
find  no  suitable  objects.     A  little  wisdom  goes  a  long  way  in  human  affairs.

in.  The  bnfobobd  suBJuaATiON  of  powerful  sentiments.  With  all  his  faults
of  lurking  ambition  and  infidelity  to  conscience,  Abner  was  not  destitute  of  chivalrous
qualities.  Possibly  the  conviction  that  his  ill-espoused  cause  was  on  the  wane  may
have  awakened  the  prudential  desire  to  obviate  as  far  as  possible  personal  offence  to
Joab,  the  rising  general ;  but  with  this  there  was  evident  pity  for  the  rash  youth,  and
a  chivalrous  wish  to  take  no  undue  advantage  over  a  noble  though  impetuous  foe.
His  position  was  one  of  extreme  difficulty.  His  own  death,  or  that  of  his  pursuer,
seemed  to  him  to  be  the  only  alternatives.  The  thought  of  surrender,  or  of  simply
disabling  his  foe,  appears  not  to  have  occurred ;  and  in  the  choice  of  death  to  Asahel
there  was  consequently  involved  a  subjugation  of  the  kindly,  generous  sentiments,  and
also  of  minor  expediencies,  to  the  love  of  self-preservation.  Junctures  of  a  similar  kind
occur  in  the  lives  of  most  men.  Contending  considerations  distress  the  spirit.  Deeds
have  to  be  done  which  any  way  entail  ndsfortune.  Abraham  had  to  part  company
with  his  kinsman  Lot,  or  perpetuate  painful  strifes.  Moscow  was  burnt  by  the  bands
of  its  inhabitants  to  save  themselves  from  possible  subjugation.  Commercial  men  can
point  to  instances  in  which  they  have  had  to  subordinate  strong  impulses  to  one  com-
manding call  to  safety  and  honour.

IV.  Public  hohaoe  to  ill-fated  bank.  The  general  honours  paid  to  Asahel
were  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the  ago,  which  made  persons  of  superior  birth
the  objects  of  unusual  attention.  In  this  case  there  was  conjoined  the  sentiment  of
admiration  for  enthusiasm,  rash  but  real.  In  so  far  as  man  can  find  a  reward  for  self-
sacrifice  in  the  sorrowful  attentions  to  mortal  remiuns  of  survivors,  this  young  man  did
not  die  in  vain.  The  instinct  of  men  which  leads  them  to  regard  with  tender  sympathy
the  death  of  a  young  hero  in  a  public  cause  is  very  sound ;  for  it  meaus  a  discernment
of  noble  qualities,  a  charity  toward  weaknesses,  an  unspoken  lament  over  promising
gifts  prematurely  lost  to  the  world,  and  sympathy  with  aspirations  not  realized.  The
addition  of  social  rank  intensifies  these  feelings,  and  at  the  same  time  infuses  over
them  all  the  superiority  derivable  from  rank  being  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  an  ideal
life  toward  which  human  nature  constantly  aspires.  The  hard  utilitarianism  that
would  banish  sentiment  as  a  mystical  superstitious  nuisance,  and  the  impossible
democracy  that  would  annihilate  social  differences,  will  ever  find  human  nature  too
strong  for  them.  It  is  a  fair  subject  for  study— What  are  the  functions  in  life  of  the
instincts  which  find  an  outlet  in  acts  of  homage?  How  much  does  society  owe  to
their  binding  power  ?  In  what  degrees  do  they  tend  to  tone  down  the  asperities  of  the
struggle  to  live  ?  How  may  they  be  made  subservient  to  the  cultivation  of  relieious
feeUng?  ^

Geneeal  lessons.  1.  We  should  endeavom  carefully  to  trace  analogies  between
tke  structure  of  the  Word  of  God  and  the  structure  of  the  other  works  of  his  hand.  2.
It  is  important  to  watch  against  the  temptations  arising  from  the  possession  of  qualities
developed  in  a  high  degree.  3.  The  more  prominent  our  gifts  are  in  a  particular
direction,  the  more  need  is  there  for  the  oultivation  of  a  calm  judgment,  if  we  would


on.  II.  1—32.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAM  DEL.  i»

give  the  world  the  full  henefit  of  their  exercise.  4.  In  a  choice  of  what  seem  to  be
opposing  evils,  w^  should  endeavour  to  be  guided  by  some  clear  and  bro^d  principio
tfrespective  of  oonsequeDcea.

The  alternations  of  passion  and  reason.  The  battle  between  the  forces  of  Abner  ttai
Joab  wag  a  small  affair  as  compared  with  many  of  the  conflicts  recorded  in  Jewish
history;  and  this  is  probably  to  be  ascribed  to  the  conviction  which  both  leaders
entertained  of  the  weakness  of  the  cause  of  Ishbosheth.  Abner  evidently  had  not
made  preparations  commensurate  with  an  unchangeable  determination  to  see  right
done  to  his  nominal  master.  The  gathering  of  his  few  broken  forces  on  the  brow  of  a
hill,  and  his  appeal  in  their  presence  to  Joab,  were  the  outward  signs  of  his  virtual
surrender.  In  his  plea  of  humfwity,  "  Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever  'i  "  and  in  Joab'is
prompt  answer,  we  get  revelations  of  human  character  common  to  every  age.

I.  It  is  thh  wwbb  passions  op  men  that  lead  them  to  seek  to  establish
WHAT  THKy  CALL  THE  RIGHT  BY  VIOLENT  MEANS.  Ostensibly  Abner  was  engaged  ip
establishing  the  right  of  Ishbosheth  to  the  nilership  over  the  entire  nation.  As  Joab
reminds  him,  it  was  his  will  that  led  to  war  that  day,  In  the  eye  of  ordinary  men,
and  judged  by  the  customs  of  both  ancient  and  modern  peoples,  Abqer  was  justified  in
Becking  to  establish  his  right  by  force.  But  in  his  case,  at  least,  the  use  of  force  was
not  the  result  of  calm  reason  and  conscience  applied  to  the  solution  of  a  question  of
right,  His  past  acquaintance  with  all  the  incidents  connected  with  Samuel's  recogni-
tion of  David,  and  with  the  generM  evidence  of  the  Divine  rejection  of  the  house  of
Saul,  piust  have  made  him  feel  that  however  much  persons^l  anibition  may  have
inclined  him  to  identify  himself  with  Isbbosbeth,  reason  and  conscience  poiqted  the
other  way.  In  the  depths  of  his  heart,  therefore,  he  knew  that  his  was  not  the  right
side.  The  same  may  be  said  of  most  of  the  wars  into  which  men  have  entered.  How-
ever much  they  may  have  talked  about  their  right,  it  has  been  passion-^^love  of
domination,  selfishness,  greed,  jealousy,  family  feuds,  or  sgnie  other  low-born  feeling —
that  has  darkened  the  eye  of  reason  and  drowned  the  voice  of  conscience.  I^t  any
one  study  the  words  and  read  the  feelings  of  a  people  at  war,  and  he  will  soon  see  how
low  and  base  are  the  passions  that  sway  their  conduct.  As  when  an  arm  is  stretched
out  to  smite  an  individual,  there  is  a  flow  of  psasion  that  dethrones  reason  for  a  while,
60  is  it  with  communities  when  they  enter  iqijo  strife.  As  to  the  abstract  question  of
right  being  enforced  by  might,  it  may  suffice  to  say  that  while  an  orderly  government
is  a  terror  to  evil-doers  (Rom.  xiji.  2,  3),  in  the  disputes  of  nations  no  might  cau
make  a  right,  and  if  rulers  and  people  will  but  suppress  passion  of  every  kind,  and  sjive
sole  heed  to  the  guidance  of  a  calm  reason  and  to  the  subtle  dictates  of  conscience,
they  will  not  be  long  in  doubt  as  to  what  the  right  is ;  and  seeing  it,  they  will  not  be
able  to  do  in  the  name  of  reason  and  conscience  what  can  only  come  from  the  domi-
nation of  low  passions.  The  fact  is  Christianity  is  consistent.  In  so  far  as  men  are
Oliristian  they  will  not  bring  on  war.  The  w(ir-spirit  is  a  disgrace  to  a  people  calling
themselves  Christian,  and  must  be  shocking  to  the  Blessed  One,  whose  acts  were  the
outcome  of  light  and  love.

II.  A   DEFEAT  OF   PLANS  AND  PUBPOSBS  AFFORDS  A  NEW   QHANOB   FOtt   THE   DICTATES

OF  REASON.  The  inflaming  of  some  of  the  worst  of  passions,  which  necessarily  takes
place  in  carrying  on  war,  is  a  sad  detriment  to  the  finer  susceptibilities  of  human
nature.  Abner  was  deaf  to  reason  before  and  during  the  turmoil  of  conflict,  when  the
lust  of  powei-  and  the  passion  of  self-defence  were  at  work  within  him.  The  frustra-
tion of  his  schemes  by  the  defeat  he  encountered  toned  down  these  strong  feelings,  and
gave  some  room  for  higher  influence  to  come  into  action.  The  animal  nad  spent  its
piiwers,  and  reason  remained.  On  the  brow  of  the  hill,  among  his  exhausted  men,  ha
thinks  of  peace,  and  recognizes  the  barbarity  and  folly  of  human  slaughter.  How  truly
is  he  a  type  of  others  I  How  often  have  nations  slain  and  inflicted  miseries,  and  when
the  fierce  passion  has  spent  itself  have  begun  to  speak  of  peace,  and  the  need  of  staying
the  devouring  sword!  That  the  defeated  are  the  first  to  do  this  makes  no  difference
to  the  bearing  of  the  fivct  on  the  moral  question,  since  before  defeat  they  were  as
much  the  slaves  of  passion  as  the  victors.  It  is  sad  to  think  how  little  human  life  is
.governed  by  high  and  holy  principle.  A  similar  reassertion  of  the  authority  of  reason
md  conscippco  on  the  occasion  of  defestt  of  purpose  is  se^p  in  in4ividuals  who,  haying


m  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [en.  ii.  1—32.

followed  in  their  private  life  the  heat  of  passion,  are  at  last  brought  lo^*-  by  disaster  ot
sickness,  and  constrained,  as  the  fires  of  passion  become  slack,  to  gjve  heed  to  the
higher  authority  within.  Though  life  may  have  been  wasted,  and,  as  in  Abner's  case*
may  have  caused  much  misery,  there  is  hope  of  a  better  end.  The  prodigal  son  ia  an
extreme  case  of  the  kind.

III.   IH  seasons  of  failure  men   are  OliAD  TO  AVAIL  THEMSELVES  OF   THE   HIGHER

CONSIDERATIONS  THEY  ONCE  SET  ASIDE.  Both  fools  and  every  man  of  sense  must  have
admitted  the  force  of  Abner's  appeal  (ver.  26).  Now  in  his  defeat  he  pleaded  con-
siderations of  humanity,  of  common  tribal  interests,  and  of  general  expediency.  One
might  have  thought  that  the  possibility  of  the  death  of  three  hundred  and  seventy
men  and  the  general  miseries  of  a  battle  would  have  been  of  force  with  Abner  in  the
morning  of  the  day;  but  it  is  only  when  failure  liad  come  that  he  can  use  the  higher
reasons  for  saving  himself  and  followers  from  still  greater  calamities.  So  is  it  that  men
can  use  moral  reasons  when  it  answers  their  purpose.  They  pay  homage  to  the
superiority  of  moral  reasons  by  pleading  them  with  emphasis  when  they  have  anything
to  gain  thereby.  France  could  appeal  to  Europe  against  what  were  termed  hard  and
ruthless  conditions  when  in  defeat,  but  no  question  of  humanity  or  common  European
interests  was  raised  when  she  entered  on  the  war  against  Germany.  Many  an  evil-
doer, overtaken  with  the  consequences  of  his  deeds,  speaks  of  the  desirability  of
mitigating  suffering  and  remembering  the  innocent  that  share  the  consequences  of
his  actions,  who,  while  in  the  path  of  his  wrong-doing,  was  heedless  of  the  pleadings
of  humanity.  In  these  facts  have  we  not  an  intimation  of  the  more  comprehensive
truth  that  the  day  will  come,  the  day  of  the  defeat  of  all  the  enemies  of  Zion's  King,
when  every  soul  shall  recognize  the  righteousness  and  expediency  of  the  great  principles
which  once  they  rejected  as  the  spring  of  conduct  and  which  enter  into  the  essence  of
Chi  ist's  government  ?

IV.  Amidst  the  din  op  life  men  sometimes  obtain  a  glimpse  or  a  better
ORDER  OF  things  THAN  THAT  THEY  ARE  IN.  Abner  was  painfully  impressed  with
the  miseries  consequent  on  that  day's  confiiot,  and  by  a  stretch  of  imagination  he
pictured  to  himself  what  would  be  the  issue  to  his  nation  if  the  spirit  of  war  which
then  prevailed  in  men's  hearts  were  to  move  on  unrestrained.  He  saw  only  "  bitter-
ness in  tbe  latter  end."  Then,  by  a  reversion  of  the  picture,  he  could  not  but  think  of
the  comparative  blessedness  that  would  ensue  should  the  sword  not  continue  to  devour.
Human  'life  as  we  see  it  is  a  spoiled  thing.  Nationally  and  personally  it  is  often  laid
waste.  Neither  individuals  nor  communities  have  attained  to  the  development,
physical,  intellectual,  and  moral,  which  is  the  ideal  of  life,  and  which  may,  if  men
will,  become  real.  Artists  sometimes  have  depicted  in  contrast  "  War  "  and  "  Peace,"
and  so  have  given  form  to  the  ideal,  which  often  steals  before  the  imagination,  of
a  more  blessed  state  of  things  than  that  familiar  to  us.  The  representations  of  the
Bible  encourage  us  to  dwell  on  the  beautiful  image  of  a  time  when  the  sword  shall  no
more  devour — when  men  shall  learn  the  art  of  war  no  more.  Also,  out  of  the  dull
and  beclouded  life  of  many  a  poor  victim  of  sin  there  arises,  consequent  on  the  revived
teaching  of  early  years,  a  lovely  and  apparently  unattainable  image  of  a  pure  and  blessed
life,  strangely  in  contrast  \fith  the  defiled  and  restless  past.  Such  a  "heavenly  vision"
has  a  message  to  which  it  behoves  us  not  to  be  disobedient.

V.  A    CONVICTION    OF    BEING    ENGAGED    IN    A    RIGHTEOUS    CAUSE    ENABLES    MEN    TO

ABSTAIN  FROM  STRIFE.  Joab  did  not  seek  to  carry  on  the  conflict.  He  contented  him-
self with  reminding  Abner  that  had  he  been  wiser  in  the  morning  he  would  not  have
had  occasion  to  lament  the  evils  of  the  evening.  Most  probably  he  knew  the  aversion
of  David  to  a  civil  war,  and  was  simply  carrying  out  the  wishes  of  his  king  when  he
ordered  his  men  back  to  Hebron.  Moreover,  his  presence  with  David  during  the  exile
gave  him  abundant  opportunities  of  knowing  the  validity  of  his  claim.  Subsequent
facts  show  that  Joab  was  not  of  the  highest  type  of  character,  but  he  was  sagacious,
and  could,  as  a  Hebrew,  recognize  the  force  of  the  supernatural  claims  of  David.  It
was  doubtless  the  assurance  that  he  was  on  the  right  side,  which  so  often  had  been
vindicated  by  (Jod's  providence,  that  induced  him  to  cease  from  war  and  abide  the  issue
of  events.  History  proves  that  too  often  it  is  the  men  who  are  least  conscious  of
rectitude  of  motive  and  justice  of  claim  that  press  on  with  the  sword,  as  though  time',
ike  healer  of  strifes,  would  be  sure  to  work  sgajflst  tUepu.   David's  ct^lw  wMting  during


OH.  n.  1—32.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  61


all  the  years  of  provocation,  when  Saul  was  eager  for  conflict,  was  here  showing  itself
again  in  the  moderate  conduct  of  his  general.  In  the  highest  sphere,  that  of  Christ's
life  and  kingdom,  we  see  how  assurance  of  right  was  conjoined  with  a  spirit  that  would
not  strive.  It  is  along  the  same  line  that  the  Church  should  move  to  moral  conquests,
and  kings  and  private  persons  may  also  do  well  to  act  in  the  same  spirit.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 4. — (ZiKiiAG,  Hebkon.)  Divine  guidance.  "  David  inquired  of  the  Lord"
(ver.  1).  A  new  chapter  in  the  life  of  David  now  opens.  By  the  death  of  Saul  and
Jonathan  the  obstacles  to  his  accession  were,  in  part,  remov&i.  The  time  of  patient
waiting  was  gone,  and  the  time  for  decisive  action  come.  As  he  had  not  run  before  he
was  sent,  so  he  did  not  expect,  without  running,  to  attain.  But  he  would  not  take
a  step  without  the  approval  and  direction  of  God.  His  inquiry  pertained  to  the  Divine
purpose  he  was  chosen  to  fulfil,  and  the  Divine  guidance  he  needed  for  its  accomplish-
ment. In  this  inquiry,  as  in  his  subsequent  conduct  and  experience,  he  was  a  pattern
to  us ;  since  thwe  is  for  every  man  a  Divine  plan  and  purpose  of  life,  which  he  should
seek  to  ascertain  and  strive  to  realize.  Consider  Divine  guidance  (in  the  way  to  a
crown)  as —

I.  Uegentlt  needed.  We  are  liable  Hike  travellers  in  a  strange  country)  to  go
astray  from  the  right  path  and  fall  into  danger.  1.  This  liability  arises  from  many
erroneous  paths  presented  to  our  view ;  their  attractive  appearance  and  strong  tempta-
tions. "  There  is  a  way  which  seemeth  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the
ways  of  death  "  (Prov.  xiv.  12).  2.  And  fi:om  the  imperfection  of  ow  own,  natwe;  our
ignorance,  and  our  disposition  to  please  ourselves  rather  than  deny  ourselves  and  please
God.  "  0  Lord,  1  know  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself,"  etc.  (Jer.  x.  23).  3.
It  is  evident  from  experience  of  past  failures.  David  had  taken  many  false  steps.  And
there  is  no  man  but  has  reason  to  feel,  in  looking  back  over  departed  years,  that  his
greatest  folly  has  been  to  walk  in  the  light  of  bis  own  wisdom,  and  his  greatest  wisdom
to  depend  upon  the  wisdom  of  God.  4.  The  need  of  it  is  specially  felt  by  us  when  about
to  enter  upon  a  new  enterprise,  or  a  course  of  action  to  which  we  are  impelled  by  out-
ward circumstances  or  inward  conviction,  but  the  exact  nature  of  which  is  uncertain,
or  which  is  dependent  for  its  success  upon  the  disposition  and  co-operation  of  other
persons.

II.  Diligently  sought.  Although  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  gone  (see  1  Sam.
xiv.  16 — 23 ;  xxiii.  1 — 12),  yet :  1.  There  are  certain  means  which  must  be  employed
for  a  similar  purpose — such  as  considering  our  own  capacities  and  condition ;  listening
to  the  voice  of  conscience ;  seeking  the  advice  of  good  men ;  observing  the  ways  of
Providence ;  studying  "  the  Scriptures  of  truth ;  "  and,  above  all,  offering  prayer  to  the
Father  "  in  the  Name  "  of  Christ.  2.  And  to  their  proper  employment  a  right  spirit
is  essential ;  viz.  sincerity,  docility,  trustfulness,  perseverance.  Such  was  the  spirit  of
David,  as  it  appears  in  his  psalms;  and  therefore,  while  Saul  exclaimed,  "God  answereth
me  no  more  "  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  15),  he  could  say, "  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me  "
(Ps.  xxxiv.  4).

III.  Graciously  afforded.  1.  In  various  ways,  in  accordance  with  the  means  just
mentioned,  and  especially  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  prepares  the  heart,  teaches  the
meaning  and  application  of  the  written  Word,  and  produces  impressions  and  impulses
in  harmony  therewith.  "Te  have  an  unction  from  wie  Holy  One,  and  know  all  things"
(1  John  ii.  20;  John  xvi.  13).  2.  JndividvaUy,  and  in  a  measure  fully  adequate  to
the  requirements  of  the  case  and  the  capacity  of  profiting  by  it.  3.  Certainly.  As  of
old,  so  now.  God  is  as  desirous  as  he  is  able  to  lead  us  in  the  way  wherein  we  should
go^  and  he  has  given  many  faithful  promises  to  this  effect.  "I  will  guide  thee  with
mine  eye"  (Ps,  xxxii.  8;  xxxvii.  23;  xlviii.  14).  "Thine  ears  shall  hear  a  voice
behind  thee,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxx.  21 ;  xlii.  16 ;  Prov.  iii.  6).

IV.  Faithfully  followed.  "  And  David  went  up  thither  "  (ver.  2).  1.  With
humble  obedience  and  entire  dependence,  as  a  child  relying  on  the  superior  wisdom  of
his  father.  2.  Without  hesitation,  questioning,  or  delay.  3.  Wi^h  phepifuloess,  aenjj
»n4  energy^.    It  is  iriwa.y»  given  with  »  pr»ctic»l  end  ip  yjew,


58  THE  SEOOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  n.  1—33.

v.  GiiADUALLT  CONFIEMED  in  ttiB  experience  of  him  who  obeyB.  "And  his  men
.  .  .  and  they  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  Hebron"  (ver.  3).  God  went  before  them  and
prepared  their  way,  so  that  they  met  with  a  peaceable  reception  and  found  "  a  cit\'  of
habitation."  1.  The  operations  of  Providouoe  concur  with  the  teachings  of  the  Word
and  the  Spirit.  2.  A  stronger  assurance  of  the  Divine  leading  is  possessed.  "  If  any
man  willeth  to  do  his  will,"  etc.  (John  vii.  17).  3.  More  light  is  given  for  further
advancement.  "  Then  shall  we  know,  shall  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  His  going
forth  is  fixed  like  the  mornwg  4awn ''  (Hog.  vi.  3) ;  and  it  will  brighten  on  our  path
into  the  radiance  of  perfect  day.

VI.  WiDBl-T  BENEFICIAL.  More  especially  it  contributes  to  the  good  of  those  who
are  associated  with  him,  and  wlio,  having  shared  his  perplexity  and  distress,  now  share
his  prosperity.  Those  who  are  tsuidpd  by  God  are  thereby  enabled  and  disposed  to
guide  and  bless  others  (Numb.  x.  39).

VII.  Gloriously  terminating.  "  They  anointed  David  king  "  (ver.  4).  And  all
who  truly  fulfil  the  Divine  plan  and  purpose  as  David  did  (Acts  xiii.  22)  are  made
"  kings  unto  God,"  and  receive  exalted  honour  among  men,  increased  power  ovei
them,  and  at  length  a  crown  of  life,  of  righteousness,  and  of  glory.  But,  alas!  how
many  go  stumbling  through  life  without  an  aim,  or  only  with  one  which  is  unworthy,
and  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  and  then  sink  into  "  the  blackness  of  darkness  for
ever "  1  "  The  wise  shall  inherit  glory ;  but  shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools "
(Prov.  iji.  35).-^D.

Ver.  4. — (Hbbbon.)  David  anointed  King  of  Judah.  Qouree  of  events  :  1.  David's
message  to  the  men  of  Jabesh  (vers.  5 — 7).  2.  Ishbosheth  made  King  of  Israel  by
Abner  (vers.  8 — 11).  3.  Civil  war,  and  the  death  of  Aaahel  (vers.  12—32).  4.
Increasing  strength  of  the  house  of  David  (ch.  iii.  1: — 5).  5.  Dissension  between  Ish-
bosheth aud  Abner.  6.  Abner's  negotiations  with  David,  restoration  of  Michal,  com-
munication with  the  tribes,  and  formal  league  (ch.  iii,  12 — 21).  7.  Abner  slain  by
Joab  (ch.  iii.  22—28).  8.  L;imen(;ed  by  David  (ch.  iii.  31^39).  9.  Ishbosheth
murdered  (ch,  iv.  1 — 8).  10.  His  assassins  executed  (oh.  iv.  9 — 12).  It  was  a  great
day  in  Hebron.  The  ancient  city  among  the  hills  of  Judah  (where  the  remains  of  the
patriarchs  had  slumbered  for  centuries)  was  stirred  by  the  assembling  of  the  elders  for
the  coronation  of  David.  His  presence  among  them, at  the  head  of  his  six  hundred  heroes,
had  been  virtually  a  ''public  assertion  of  his  claims  to  sovereignty  "  on  the  ground  of  his
Divine  consecration  by  Samuel.  His  first  anointing  was  essentially  of  a  private  nature.
"  This  second  one,  performed  by  the  elders  of  J  ud^h,  was  his  public  solemn  installation
(baaed  on  that  anointment)  into  the  royal  office."  Then  followed  the  acclamation  of
the  people  (1  Sam.  x.  24;  xi.  15).  "Now  doth  David  find  the  comfort  that  his
extremity  songbt  in  the  Lord  his  God ;  now  are  the  clouds  for  a  time  passed  over,  and
the  sun  breaks  forth;  David  shall  reign  after  his  sufferings"  (Hall).  It  has  been
supposed  that  he  wrote  about  this  time  Ps.  xxvii.  (inscription,  "  Before  the  anointing,"
LXj.)

"  Jehovah  is  my  Light  and  my  Salvation ;
Whom  shall  1  fear?
Jehovab  is  the  Streugth  of  my  life ;
Of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid?"

"  It  is  not  likely  that  David's  muse  went  to  sleep  when  the  det^th  of  Saul  at  Gilbua
opened  his  way  to  the  throne,  or  that  it  produced  nothing  but  such  comparatively
secular  songs  as  the  lament  for  Saul  and  Jonathan.  It  is  rather  remarkable,  however,
that  there  is  pot  a  single  ps^m  of  which  one  can  affirm  with  confidence  that  it  was
written  during  the  seven  years  and  a  half  that  David  reigned  at  Hebron  (.ver  the  tribe
of  Judah  "  (Binnie).  Those  who  took  p^rt  in  his  inauguration  acted  in  fulfilment,  not
only  of  the  Djvine  purpose  qpnceming  him,  but  also  of  the  Divine  predictions  concerning
themselves;  for  the  pre-eminence  of  Jy,dah  had  been  long  foretold  (Gen.  xlix.  8).  "  In  all
great  questions  the  men  of  Judah  are  tbe  foremost  and  the  strongest,  From  the  time
of  David's  establishnjent  on  the  throne,  the  greatness  of  the  tribe  follows  in  some
measure  that  of  his  family  (1  Chron.  v.  2 ;  xxxviii.  4) "  (Davison),  "  And  as  they
had  the  right  to  choose  tbe|r  own  prm«e,  they  might  reasonably  l»»ve  expected  th«t


CH.  II.  1-^32.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  63


the  other  tribes  would  have  followed  their  example^  audi  by  uniting  ii  David,  hftfre
quietly  submitted  to  the  appuintment  of  God,  as  they  thc&aelves  had  done"  (Chandler).
In  their  conduct  we  see^-

I.  Ak  exalted  estimate  op  his  personal  Worth.  One  of  themselves  (Deut.
xvii.  15), "  chosen  out  of  the  peOple  "  (Ps*  Ixxxix.  19),  he  could  understand  and  sympa-
thize with  them.  He  possessed  eminent  military  abilities  and  noble  moral  qualities;
and  he  had  rendered  invaluable  services  to  his  country,  fend  shown  special  kindness  to
the  elders  of  his  own  tribe  (1  Sam*  xxx.  26).  His  previous  career  was  well  known  to
them,  and  had  won  their  coniidence  and  affection.  The  character  of  a  people  is  com-
monly manifested  in  that  of  its  chosen  ruler.  Ab  Saul  embodied  and  i'eflected  the
prevailing  spirit  of  Benjamin  and  Ephraitn,  so  David  embodied  and  reflected  what  was
best  in  Judah;  its  independent  spirit,  lion-like  courage,  and  religious  devotion.

II.  Loyal  accEptanoe  or  His  DivnnS  appointment.  With  that  appointment  they
were  familiar.  They  recognized  Jehovah  as  their  King ;  the  Source  of  authority  lind  of
the  endowments  which  were  needful  for  the  kibgly  office*  Their  condition  isolated
them  in  feeling,  to  some  extent,  from  the  other  tribes  (as  afterwards  more  fully
appears) ;  but  in  acting  independently  Of  them  they  rebelled  against  no  existing  and
legitimate  authority,  and  they  neither  aimed  at  dominion  over  them  nor  separation
from  them.  They  displayed  a  truly  thepcfatic  spirit.  And,  in  the  election  of  a  rulet,
a  people  should  always  recognize  the  authority  and  obey  the  will  of  God.  "  Kings
derive  their  kingly  majesty  immediately  from  God,  bat  also  mediately  frbiri  their
subjects  "  (J.  Lange).

III.  Voluntary  submission  to  his  boYai/  authority.  He  was  to  them  "a
minister  of  God."  Their  obedience  to  God  required  their  submission  to  the  king  of  his
choice ;  whose  authority,  however,  great  nk  it  was.  Was  not  absolute.  It  is  not  said,  as
on  a  subsequent  occasion  (ch.  v.  3),  that  "he  made  a  league  with  them;"  but  they
doubtless  submitted  to  him  on  the  understanding  that  he  would  rule  according  to  the
Divine  will.  The  efficiency  of  a  ruler  depends  upon  the  free  submission  of  his  people;
and  there  is  not  a  nobler  exercise  of  freedom  than  submission  to  the  highest  order.

IV.  Unbounded  conpidencb  in  his  benepicbnt  rule.  They  expected,  under  the
government  of  "  the  man  worthy  of  the  sceptre,"  deliverance  from  their  enemies,  by
whom  they  were  now  threatened ;  the  establishment  of  justice,  from  the  want  of  which
they  had  long  suffered;  and  the  attainment  of  power  and  prosperity.  Nor  were  they
disappointed.  The  pre-eminence  of  this  tribe  wds  ordained  with  reference  to  the  advent
and  exaltation  of  Christ,  the  ptomi^ed  Shiloh,  "the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah"  (Rev.
V.  5);.  and  the  conduct  of  the  men  of  Judah  may  be  taken  as  illustrating  the  free
acceptance  of  "  him  whom  God  hath  anointed  with  his  Holy  Spirit "  on  the  p&rt  of
his  people;  their  humble  obedience  to  his  rule,  and  their  fervent  desire  for  his  universal
reign.     "  Thou  art  worthy."

"  Come,  then,  and,  added  to  thy  many  crowna.
Receive  yet  one,  the  crown  of  all  the  earth.
Thou  who  alone  art  worthy  I    It  was  thine
By  ancient  covenant,  ere  Nature's  birth ;
And  thou  hast  made  it  thiiie  by  ptircfaase  sin^
And  ovefpaid  its  value  with  thy  blbod.

Thy  saints  proclaim  thee  King ;  and  in  their  hearl*
Thy  title  is  engraven  with  a  pen
Dipped  in  the  fountain  of  eternal  love."

(Oowper.)

i).

Vers,  4 — 7. — (fleBRON.)  Commendation.  The  first  recorded  act  of  David  after  he
became  king  was  of  a  kingly  character.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  persons  who
informed  him  of  what  the  men  of  Jabesh  had  done  supposed  that  he  had  little  love  fur
the  memory  of  Saul,  and  was  apprehensive  of  opposition  from  his  "  house  "  (ver.  8),  and
wished  to  excite  his  jealousy  against  them ;  seeking  to  insinuate  themselves  into  hii
confidence  by  detraction  from  the  good  name  of  others.  But,  instead  of  yiehliug
to  suspicion,  he  sent  a  message  of  peace  and  good  wiil.     His  oommendaiion  was —

t  Well  desebvso  by  men  who  had  performed  a  noble  deed  (see  1  Sam,  jxii.


54  THE  SECOUB  BOOK  Of  SAMDEL.  [ch.  n.  1— 32.


11—13).  Their  conduct  displayed :  1.  Gratitude  toward  their  benefactor,  whose  kind-
ness they  returned  with  kindness.  2.  Fidelity  toward  their  king,  whose  faithfulness
they  repaid  with  faithfulness.  3.  Reverence  toward  their  trod.  "To  bury  the  dead
with  the  Jews  was  always  reckoned  an  instance  of  humanity  and  kindness,  and,  indeed,
oi  piety;  an  act  done  in  imitation  of  God,  who  buried  Moses;  and  so  it  might
be  expected  the  Divine  blessing  would  attend  it "  (Gill).

II.  Worthily  bestowed  by  a  king  of  royal  disposition.  1.  Unsuspecting.  Others
might  find  reason  for  suspecting  their  intentions,  but  he  could  see  only  what  was
deserving  of  praise.  2.  Generous,  with  respect  to  Saul ;  appreciating  and  sympathizing
with  their  kindness  to  their  master,  even  though  he  had  been  his  enemy.  "  Use  the
memory  of  thy  predecessor  fairly  and  tenderly ;  for  if  thou  dost  not,  it  is  a  debt  will
sure  be  paid  when  thou  art  goae"  (Bacon).  3.  Practical.  "David  sent  messengers,"
etc.  4.  Devout.  "  Blessed  be  ye  of  Jehovah,"  etc.  Recognizing  God  as  the  Observer
and  Eewarder  of  men,  he  invoked  for  them  his  commendation  and  blessing — kindness
for  kindness,  faithfulness  for  faithfulness— as  the  highest  good  (Ps.  xl.  11 ;  Ixxxvi.  15;
Matt.  V.  7 ;  Heb.  vi.  10).  5.  Becoming.  "  And  I  also"— as  one  whose  office  it  becomes
to  observe  and  recompense  good  as  well  as  evil — "requite  you  this  kinriness"  (send  you
this  message),  "because,"  etc.  6.  Encouraging  and  stimulating.  "And  now,"  as
heretofore,  "let  your  hands  be  strong,  and  be  ye  valiant"  in  the  new  circumstances
which  have  arisen  through  the  death  of  your  master.  7.  Candid,  considerate,  and
dignified.  "  For  me  have  the  house  of  Judah  anointed  king  over  them."  He  indicated
delicately,  but  not  obscurely,  his  claims  to  their  allegiance,  and  assured  them  of  his
protection  and  help.    "  To  act  nobly  is  always  the  best  policy."

"Where'er  •  noble  deed  is  wrought.
Where'er  is  spoken  a  noble  thought.

Our  hearts  in  glad  surprise

To  higher  levels  rise.
The  tidal  wave  of  deeper  souls
Into  our  inmost  being  rolls,

And  lifts  us  unawares

Out  of  all  meaner  cares.
Honour  to  those  whose  words  or  deed*
Thus  help  us  in  our  daily  needs ;

And  by  their  overflow

Baise  us  from  what  ia  low  I "

(Longfellow.)

in.  Wisely  adapted  to  effect  a  laudable  end.  1.  To  confirm  good  men  m  m
virtuous  and  praiseworthy  course.  2.  To  win  the  confidence  and  support  of  such  men.
3.  To  secure  the  benefit  of  their  services  to  the  nation  and  the  kingdom  of  God.  4.  To
maoifest  to  all  the  spirit  of  a  just  and  generous  rule.

Observations.  1.  One  good  action  tends  to  produce  another;  in  performing  it  one
Knows  not  how  far  its  influence  may  reach,  or  what  blessings  it  may  bring  upon  himselt
2.  Although  we  ought  not  to  do  good  simply  for  the  sake  of  reward,  yet  the  desire  of
the  approval  of  the  good  is  a  proper  motive  of  action.  3.  We  should  be  as  ready  to
give  commendation  as  to  receive  it.  4.  We  should  desire^  above  all  things,  the  appro-
bation of  God. — ^D.

Vers.  8 — 12. — (Mahanaim.)  Opposition  to  the  Divine  purpose.  The  purpose  of
God,  to  make  David  king  over  his  people,  was  as  yet  only  in  part  accomplished ;  and
its  fulfilment  was  opposed  by  Abner  (1  Sam.  xiv.  50 ;  xvii.  55 ;  xx.  25 ;  xxvi.  5)  on
behalf  of  "  the  house  of  Saul."  Having  escaped  from  the  battle  of  Gilboa,  he  "  took
Ishhosheth,  the  son  of  Saul "  (a  man  of  feeble  character,  and  fitted  to  become  a  tool  in
his  hands),  "  and  brought  him  over  to  Mahanaim,  and  made  him  king  over  Gilead,"  etc.
After  five  years  of  great  exertions  (while  David  reigned  peacefully  at  Hebron)  he  drove
the  Philistines  out  of  the  country,  openly  proclaimed  Ishbosheth  (now  forty  years  old)
"king  over  all  Israel,"  and  "went  out  from  Mahanaim  to  Gibeon"  with  the  view  of
subjecting  Judah  to  his  sway.  His  principal  motive  was  the  desire  of  maintaining  and
increasing  his  own  power.  "  He  was  angry  that  this  tribe  had  set  up  David  for  their
king  "  ( Josephus).    His  conduct  was  "  not  o^y  a  continuation  of  the  hostility  of  SaiU


oa.li.  1—32.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  56

towards  David,  but  also  an  open  act  of  rebellion  «gainst  Jehovah "  (Keil),  whose
purpose,  as  well  as  the  wish  of  the  elders  of  Israel,  he  well  kuew,  as  he  afterwards
acknowledged  (ch.  iii.  17,  18).  His  opposition  represents  and  illustrates  that  of  men  to
the  purposes  of  God  generally,  and  more  especially  to  his  purpose  that  Christ  shall  reign
over  them  and  all  mankind ;  of  which  observe  that —

I.  It  is  plainly  bevealed.  By  the  testimony  of:  1.  The  Divine  Word  (1  Sam.
xvL  1).  "To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness,"  etc.  (Acts  x.  43;  1  Pet.  i.  11).
2.  Significant  events,  in  confirmation  of  the  Word ;  the  overthrow  of  adversaries,  the
exaltation  of  "  his  Chosen,"  the  growth  of  his  power  (Acts  ii.  22 — 24).  3.  The  irre-
sistible convictions  of  reason  and  conscience,  and  the  confessions  which  even  opponents
have  been  constrained  to  make.  Abner  was  present  when  Saul  said,  "  Thou  shalt  both
do  great  things  and  shalt  also  still  prevail"  (1  Sam.  xxvL  25).  His  opposition  was
therefore  inexcusable.  "  While  men  go  on  in  their  sins,  apparently  without  concern,
they  are  often  conscious  that  they  are  fighting  against  God  "  (Scott).

II.  It  mat  be  wickedly  opposed  (in  virtue  of  the  freedom  which,  within  certain
limits,  men  possess)  because  of :  1.  The  delusions  of  imbelief.  The  tempter  whispers  as
of  old,  "Yea,  hath  God  said?"  (Gen.  iii.  1);  they  "wilfully  forget"  what  has  taken
place  (2  Pet.  iii.  5);  "neither  will  they  be  persuaded"  of  the  truth  and  obligation
of  the  Word  of  God  (Luke  xvi.  31).  2.  The  plea  of  present  expediency,  and  the  expec-
tation that,  if  ihey  must  submit,  there  will  come  a  "more  convenient  season"  for  doing
so.  Abner  thought  "  that  he  might  be  able,  upon  better  terms,  to  make  his  peace  with
David  when  the  time  should  come  that  the  Lord  was  to  advance  him  to  be  ruler  over
all  Israel"  (Chandler).  3.  iSeZ^sAn ess,  pride,  and  ambition;  the  love  of  pleasure  and
power,  the  habit  of  self-will,  the  self-confidence  engendered  by  success,  "  the  mind  of
the  flesh,"  which  "is  enmity  against  God."  "Ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost"
(Acts  viL  51).

III.  It  cannot  be  effectually  defeated.  "He  must  reign,"  in  fulfilment  of  the
Divine  decree  (Ps.  ii.  7 ;  ex.  1),  which :  1.  Changes  not.  "  The  Strength  of  Israel  vrill
not  lie,  nor  repent"  (1  Sam.  xv.  29).  2.  Is  effected  by  infinite  vrisdom  and  might,
against  which  the  skill  and  strength  of  men  contend  in  vain.  3.  Comes  to  pass  either
with  or  without  their  will,  in  mercy  or  in  judgment,  in  the  salvation  of  the  penitent  or
the  destruction  of  the  persistently  rebellious.  "These  mine  enemies  which  would  not
that  I  should  reign  over  them  bring  hither  and  slay  them  before  me  "  (Luke  xix.  27). — ^D.

Vers.  13 — 17. — (Gibeon.)  Fratricidal  strife.  "And  that  place  was  called  Helkath-
Hazzurim"  (ver.  16).  The  hostile  attitude  assumed  by  Abner  appeared  to  David  to
render  necessary  active  measures  in  self-defence.  It  is  not  said  that  he  inquired  of  the
Lord.  If  he  had  done  so  the  conflict  which  ensued  between  brethren  might  possibly
have  been  averted.  As  it  was,  he  sent  an  army  of  observation  under  ,the  command  of
Joab,  who  (although  not  mentioned  before)  had  doubtless  accompanied  him  in  his  exile
(1  SanL  xxii.  1),  and  was  now  general  of  his  forces.  And  Joab  and  "the  servants  of
David"  marched  to  Gibeon  and  encamped  opposite  Abner  "and  the  servants  of
Ishbosheth"  (ver.  13).  At  length  Abner,  impatient  of  delay,  challenged  a  conflict
between  certain  picked  men  on  each  side,  not  merely  "to  see  which  were  best"  (Jose-
phus),  but  either  to  decide  the  day  by  the  issue  or  to  draw  on  a  general  engagement.
Joab  readily  accepted  the  challenge,  and  the  conflict  commenced.    It  was —

I.  Beoun  beoklbsslt.  "Let  the  yovmg  men  arise  and  play  [fight]  before  us."
"Let  them  arise"  (ver.  14).  1.  Self-interest,  ambition,  and  envy  often  quench  the  love
of  brethren  (vers.  26,  27),  and  indispose  them  to  seek  reconciliation  with  each  other.
2.  The  indulgence  of  evD  passion  blinds  men  to  the  consequences  of  their  words  and
actions.  3.  Familiarity  with  scenes  of  strife  and  war  tends  to  produce  insensibility  to
human  suffering  and  slaughter.  That  a  deadly  struggle  could  be  spoken  of  as  a
pastime  shows  how  lightly  life  was  estimated  and  how  heartlessly  it  was  sacrificed.
"  Ambitious  and  bloody  men  often  consider  the  dire  trade  of  war  and  the  slaughter  of
their  fellow-creatures  as  a  mere  diversion  "  (Scott).

<*  Some  seek  diversion  in  the  tented  field.
And  make  the  sorrows  of  mankind  their  sport.
But  war's  a  game  which,  were  their  subjects  wise.
Kings  should  not  play  at."

(Oowpw.)


66  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  (pa.  u.  1—32.

II.  Waged  febociously.  "  And  they  caught  each  other  by  the  head,**  etc.  (ver.  16).
1.  When  the  love  which  should  prevail  among  brethren  gives  place  to  wrath,  that
wrath  is  g^  neraUy  most  intense  and  cruel.  Civil  wars  are  proverbially  more  bitter  than
any  other.  2.  Men  are  sometimes  so  intent  upon  injuring  their  opponents  as  to  forget
to  defend  themselves,  and  rush  upon  their  own  destniction.  3.  The  attempt  to  end
strife  by  means  of  strife  is  commonly  vain ;  "  it  is  rather  a  spur  to  further  effusion
of  blood  than  a  bridle  to  hinder  the  same."  "What  can  war  but  endle&s  war  still
breed?"  4.  The  issue  of  the  conflict  does  not  necessarily  prove  the  justice  of  the
cause.  5.  Mutual  strife  tends  to  mutual  extermination.  "All  they  that  take  the
sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  52).  The"  field  of  sharp  blades"  wa«
a  lasting  memorial  of  dtstructiveness  rather  than  of  courage ;  a  warning  rather  than  a
pattern.

III.  Extended  rapidly.  "  And  there  was  a  very  sore  battle  that  day,"  etc.  (ver.
17).  1.  The  strife  of  a  few  excites  the  wrathful  passions  of  many,  by  whom  it  is
witnessed.  2.  Every  injurious  word  and  act  furnishes  an  additional  impulse  to  wrath
and  retaliation!  and  the  conflict  goes  on  increasing.  3.  That  which  at  first  may  be
easily  checked  passes  entirely  beyond  control.  "  The  beginning  of  strife  is  as  when  one
letteth  out  water,"  etc.  (Prov.  xvii.  14 ;  xxvi.  21).

IV.  Ended  lamentably.  "Abner  was  beaten,"  and  three  hundred  and  sixty  of
his  men  died;  Joab's  brother  Asahel  was  slain,  with  nineteen  of  David's  sorvaats.  "  In
war  God  punishes  the  sins  of  both  parties."  1.  He  who  gave  the  challenge  and
commenced  the  conflict  was  the  first  to  complain  of  the  result  (ver.  20),  and  was
bitterly  reproached  as  the  cause  thereof  (ver.  27).  2.  He  who  accepted  the  challenge
was  filled  with  grief  and  revenge.  3.  Both  sides  experienced  heavy  loss  and  sorrow.
4.  Even  David  could  not  but  regret  the  weakening  of  the  nation  in  presence  of  the
common  fos;  or  fail  to  see  in  the  strife  of  brethren  the  consequences  of  his  own
faithlessness  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  1,  10,  11).  If  he  had  not  taken  up  his  abode  with  the
Philistines  the  conflict  would  probably  never  have  occurred.

Bemabks.  1.  When  men  commence  a  quarrel  they  little  kn6w  where  it  will  end.
2.  Strife  should  be  diligently  checked  at  the  beginning.  3.  "Let  us  fight  that  good
fight  only  whereof  the  apustle  speaks,  which  is  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit,  which
only  hath  the  profitable  end,  the  glorious  theatre,  the  godly  armour,  and  the  blessed
reward  of  assured  triimiph  "  (Guild). — ^D.

Vers.  18— 23.— (GlBEON.)  The  untimay  faU  of  AsaMt  to  young  men.  Asahel
was  the  youngest  of  three  brothers ;  the  others  being  Joab  and  Abishai.  They  were
the  sons  of  Zeruiah  (half-sister  of  David)  and  a  Bethloliemite  (ver.  32)  whose  name  has
not  been  recorded ;  and  they  had  much  ih  common.  When  Asahel  fled  to  DaVid  at  the
cave  of  Adullam  (some  ten  or  twelve  years  before  the  events  here  mentioned)  he  was
probably  a  mere  lad;  he  shared  his  uncle's  hardships  and  participated  in  his  exaltation,
lie  was  one  of  the  famous  thirty  (ch.  xxiii.  24),  "valiant  men  of  the  armies  "(1  Chron.
xi.  26) ;  accompanied  Joab  and  Abishai  in  their  march  to  Gibeon,  and  took  part  in  the
battle  with  Abner  and  "the  servants  [soldiers]  of  Ishbosheth."  He  was:  1.  Possesstd
of  eminent  giftt.  "Asahel  was  as  light  of  foot  as  a  gazelle"  (ver.  18);  like  "swift-
footed  Achilles,"  and  like  Harold  L  (son  of  Canute),  sumamed  Hare-foot,  "  because  he
was  light  and  swift  of  foot "  (Bapin).  He  was  also  distinguished  by  enterprise,  courage,
perseverance,  and  other  admirable  qualities.  Mental  endowments  are  incomparably
superior  to  physical ;  but  both  are  gifts  of  God,  and  should  be  recognized  as  such  j  they
enable  those  who  possess  them  to  render  valuable  service  to  his  people;  and  they  should
bo  employed  in  humble  obedience  to  his  will.  Yet  not  unfrequently  they  become  an
occasion  of  vain-glory,  and  are  perverted  from  their  proper  exercise  and  end.  2.  Actuated
hy  an  unwise  ambition.  "  And  Asahel  pursued  after  Abner,"  etc.  (ver.  19).  He  sought
to  take  him  prisoner  or  put  him  to  death,  and  so  end  the  conflict ;  and  doubtless,  also,
to  display  his  own  superior  speed  and  strength,  iind  obtain  the  glory  of  the  achievement!
He  was  on  the  right  side,  and,  considering  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  there  was
something  laudable  in  his  attempt.  But  it  is  possible,  even  in  connection  with  the
kingdom  of  God.  to  entertain  an  improper  desire  of  worldly  honour  and  power  (Mattxx.
20—23).  Those  who  do  so  generally  set  an  inordinate  value  upon  the  object  at  which
they  aim,  exhibit  an  undue  confidence  in  their  own  abilities,  depreciate  the  diffiwiltieg


ea.  11. 1^32 J  THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  SAMUEL.  67


of  its  augment,  and  expose  themselves  to  great  risk  and  peril  (Titus  ii.  6;  1  Tim.
vi.  9).

"  Ah  1  who  can  tell  how  hard  it  is  to  climb
The  steep  where  Fame's  proud  temple  shines  afar  ?  "

(Beattia.)

3.  Heedless  of  sdlutary  warning.  "  And  Abner  looked  behind  him,  and  said,"  etc.
(vers.  20 — 23).  "  Turn  thee  aside,"  etc.  "  Slay  one  of  the  cohimon  soldiers  and  take
his  accoutrements  as  booty,  if  thou  art  seeking  tor  that  kind  of  fame ''  (Eeil).  He  cared
little  about  the  safety  of  his  men,  and  was  chiefly  concerned  about  his  own ;  but  Ins
advice  w<»s  oonsiderati',  wise,  and  once  and  afiain  repeated.  Asahel,  though  swifter  of
foot,  was  not  his  equal  in  experience  and  skill ;  and  (like  many  other  youtlg  men)  he
deppised  the  warning  ol  the  old  warrior,  was  headstrong  and  over-confident  of  success,
arid  rushed  rasbly  and  blindly  upon  his  fate.  "  Heat  of  zeal  sometimes,  in  the  indis-
creet putsuit  of  a  just  adversary,  proves  mortal  to  the  agent,  prejudicial  to  the  service"
(Hall).  4.  Struck  doulh  in  youthful  prime.  "And  Abner  with  the  hinder  end  of  the
spear  smote  him,"  etc. ;  Suddenly,  unexpectedly,  and  when  he  seemed  on  the  point  of
accomplishing  his  purpose.  ■  With  one  blow  his  life  was  cut  short,  his  hope  disappointed,
his  promise  of  a  brilliant  future  extinguished.  "  Often  do  men  fancy  themselves  about
to  seize  upon  happiness,  *hen  death  stops  their  career  and  lays  them  in  the  dust.  And
if  they  will  rush  forward  in  the  road  to  destruction,  though  plaitily  Warned  of  their
danger,  they  can  blame  none  but  themselves  "  (Scott).

**  Fame  is  the  spur  that  the  clear  spirit  doth  ntisr
(That  last  infirmity  of  noble  mind)
To  scorn  delights,  and  live  laborious  days ;
But  the  fair  guerdon  when  we  hope  to  find.
And  think  to  burst  out  into  sudden  blaze,
Comes  tlie  blind  Fury  with  the  abhorred  sheart,
And  slits  the  thiD'spun  life."

(Milton, '  Lycidas.")

5.  Begarded  with  mournful  pity.  "  As  many  as  came  to  the  place  where  Asahrt  foil
down  and  died  stood  still ''  (see  ch.  xx.  12)^  overcome  with  surprise,  com|  assion,  and  grief ;
"  and  they  took  up  Asahel,  and  buried  him,"  etc.  (ver.  32),  6.  Bememhered  with  mis-
chievous resentment.  (Ch.  iii.  30.)  He  left  behind  liim  a  legacy,  not  of  peace  and  good
will,  but  of  wrath  and  revenge.  Pause  at  his  tomb  in  Bethlehem,  and  lay  to  heart  the
lessons  taught  by  his  untimely  fate  (Jer.  ix.  23).  Let  your  ambition  be  different  from
his;  to  overcome  carnal  and  selfish  ambition  in  your  own  heart,  to  save  life  rather  than
to  destroy  it,  to  follow  in  the  steps  of  him  who  was  servant  of  all  (Matt.  xx.  28).  Here
is  scope  for  your  noblest  aspirations  and  most  strenuous  efforts.  And  yoiir  hope  will
not  be  destroyed,  but  crowned  by  death.

"Fool  not;  for  all  inay  have,
if  they  dare  try,  a  glorious  life,  or  grave."

(Herbert;

D.

Vers.  24 — 29. — ((Jideon.)  Wa/r.  "Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?"  (ver.  26;
ch.  xi.  25).  The  sword  is  more  destructive  than  ravenous  beasts,  famine^  pestilence
(ch.  xxiv.  13 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  26),  earthquake,  tempest,  or  fire.  The  history  of  its  ravages
constitutes  a  considerable  portion  of  the  history  of  mankind,  Of  these  We  have  here  a
slight  but  noteworthy  instance.  Twenty-four  brave  men  of  the  same  nation  (half  of
them  chosen  from  each  of  the  opposing  forces)  fell,  pierced  by  each  other's  weapons.  In
the  succeeding  battle  and  flight  several  hundreds  were  slain  (ver.  31).  At  sunset  the
defeated  general  rallied  his  scattered  troops  on  the  hill  of  Ammah,  and  appealed  to  the
commander  of  the  pursuing  forces  to  withdraw  them  and  avert  the  bitter  consequences
that  would  otherwise  ensUe.  "  Now  the  battle  is  going  against  him  he  complains  of  the
devouring  sword ;  and,  though  it  bad  been  employed  but  a  few  hours,  it  seemed  long  to
him a  sort  of  eternity  "  (Gill),  Joab  answered  that  but  for  his  challenge  in  the  morn-
ing there  would  have  been  no  conflict  at  all;  but  (probably  as  yet  unacquainted  with
tlU)  de«th  of  his  teotber  Asahel)  he  sounded  a  retreat  (vet.  28) ;  and  Abner  and  Us  men


58  THE  SECONt)  BOOlt  OP  SAMUEU  [oh.  il  1— 32.

forthwith  departed,  not  to  Gibeon,  but  across  the  Jordan  to  Mahanaim  (yer.  29).
Regarding  the  question  not  merely  as  the  utterance  of  Abner,  nor  from  an  Old  Testa-
ment point  of  view,  we  may  take  it  as  expressive  of —

I.  A  CONVICTION  or  THE  EVILS  OP  WAE.  "Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?"  By
it :  1.  Numberless  lives  are  consumed.  The  immediate  and  avowed  object  of  war  is  the
destruction  of  men's  lives;  and  its  most  effective  instruments  (to  the  construction  of
which  the  utmost  ingenuity  is  devoted)  are  those  that  destroy  the  greatest  number  in
the  shortest  possible  time.  "  War  is  the  work,  the  element,  or  rather  the  sport  and
triumph,  of  death,  who  glories  not  only  in  the  extent  of  his  conquest,  but  in  the  richness
of  his  spoil"  (E.  Hall,  'Reflections  on  War').  Since  its  ravages  began  many  times
more  than  the  whole  number  of  the  present  population  of  the  globe  have  probably  been
its  victims.  2.  Incalculable  sufferings  are  inflicted ;  on  those  who  are  left  to  die  on  the
field,  or  are  borne  to  hospitals  and  linger  out  a  miserable  existence ;  on  the  non-com-
batant population  among  whom  the  devourer  pursues  his  way ;  on  whole  nations  and
multitudes  of  desolate  and  sorrowing  homes  far  distant  from  the  scene  of  strife.  3.
Mnormous  cost  is  incurred ;  in  the  maiotenance  of  armies  and  the  provision  of  materiel,
besides  the  withdrawal  of  great  numbers  frum  the  operations  of  productive  industry  and
serious  interference  with  commerce;  immense  national  debts  are  accumulated  and
burdensome  taxes  imposed  on  present  and  succeeding  generations.  There  are  nearly
thirteen  millions  of  men  in  Europe  who  have  been  trained  for  arms,  and  between  four
and  five  millions  actually  under  arms,  costing  in  all  ways  about  five  hundred  millions
sterling  a  year.  The  sum  total  of  the  national  debts  of  the  European  nations  amounts
to  nearly  five  thousand  millions  of  pounds  ('  Statesman's  Year-Book ').  4.  A  pernicious
influence  is  exerted,  with  respect  to  morality  and  religion.  "War  does  more  harm  to  the
morals  of  men  than  even  their  property  and  their  persons  "  (Erasmus).  It  has  its  origin
in  unregulated  desire  (Jas.  iv.  1 ;  1  John  ii.  16),  which  it  excites,  manifests,  and  intensifies.
"  The  causes  of  all  wars  may  be  reduced  to  five  heads :  ambition,  avarice,  revenge,  pro-
vidence (precaution),  and  defence  "  (Owen  Peltham,  '  Resolves ').  "  If  the  existence  of
war  always  implies  injustice  in  one  at  least  of  the  parties  concerned,  it  is  also  the  fruitful
parent  of  crimes.  It  reverses,  with  respect  to  its  objects,  all  the  rules  of  morality.  It  is
nothing  less  than  a  temporary  repeal  of  the  principles  of  virtue.  It  is  a  system  out  of
which  almost  all  the  virtues  are  excluded  and  on  which  nearly  all  the  vices  are  incorpo-
rated "  (R.  HaU).  What  angry  feelings  does  it  stir  up  between  nations  whom  "  God
hath  made  of  one  blood"!  What  infuriated  passions  does  it  arouse  in  contending
armies  I  What  cruel  deeds  does  it  commend  1  What  iniquitous  courses  of  conduct
does  it  induce!  What  false  views  of  glory  does  it  inculcate  1  What  bitter  and  lasting
enmities  does  it  leave  behind  I

"  One  murder  makes  a  villain,
MUlioni  a  hero  I    Princes  were  privileged  to  kill,
And  numbers  sanctified  the  crime  t
Ah !  why  will  kings  forget  that  they  are  men,
And  men  that  they  are  brethren  ?    Why  delight
In  human  sacrifice  ?    Why  burst  the  ties
Of  nature,  that  should  knit  their  souls  together
In  one  soft  bond  of  amity  and  love  7  "

(Bishop  PorteuB.)
7»  war,  then,  under  aZl  circumstances,  inexpedient  and  wrong  ?  It  is  maintained  that :
(1)  The  state,  like  the  individual,  has  a  natural  right  of  self-defence,  and  is  bound  (in
fulfilment  of  the  purpose  for  which  it  exists)  to  protect  its  citizens  by  repelling  external
invasion  as  well  as  repressing  internal  violence  (Whewell,  'Elements  of  Morality;'
Paley ;  Gisborne;  Mozley, '  University  Sermons').  (2)  By  means  of  war  national  sub-
jection is  sometimes  prevented,  national  grievances  are  redressed,  national  honour  is
upheld,  aggression  checked,  pride  abased,  liberty,  peace,  and  prosperity  secured,
patriotism  kindled,  powerful  energies  and  heroic  virtues  developed.  (3)  It  has  often
received  the  Divine  sanction  (Exod.  xvii.  14 ;  Josh.  viii.  1 ;  1  Sam.  xi.  6).  "  Perpetual
peace  is  a  dream,  and  it  is  not  even  a  beautiful  di-eam.    War  is  an  element  in  the  order

of  the  world  ordained  by  God.     In  it  the  noblest  virtues  of  mankind  are  developed

courage  and  the  abnegation  of  self,  faithfulness  to  duty,  and  the  spirit  of  sacrifice ;  the
ioldier  gives  his  life.     Without  war  the  world  would  stagnate  and  lose  itself  in


«a.  11. 1-32,]  m&  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  59

materjalism "  (Von  Moltke).  But  this  is  the  view  of  one  who  has  been  "a  man  of  war
fiom  his  youth"  and  "  shed  much  blood"  (1  Ghron.  xxii.  8).  And  it  maybe  said  that :
(1)  War  is  not  ordained  by  Grod  like  tempests  and  earthquakes  or  even  pestilence,  but
is  directly  due  to  the  wickedness  of  men.  That  which  is  in  itself  evil,  however,  often
becomes  an  occasion  of  good.  (2)  "  There  is  at  least  equal  scope  for  courage  and  mag-
nanimity in  blessing  as  in  destroying  mankind.  The  condition  of  the  human  race
offers  inexhaustible  objects  for  enterprise  and  fortitude  and  magnanimity.  In  relieving
the  countless  wants  and  sorrows  of  the  world,  in  exploring  unknown  regions,  in  carrying
the  arts  and  virtues  of  civilization  to  imimproved  communities,  in  extending  the  bounds
of  knowledge,  in  diffusing  the  spirit  of  freedom,  and  especially  in  spreading  the  light
and  influence  of  Christianity,  how  much  may  be  dared,  how  much  enduied ! "  (Channing).
(3)  The  right  of  resistance  to  evil  is  limited,  and  does  not  justiiy  the  tak  ing  away  of  life
(Way land, '  Elements  of  Moral  Science;'  Dymond, '  Essays ').  (4)  No  advantages  gained
by  war  are  an  adequate  compensation  for  the  miseries  inflicted  by  it ;  less  suffering  is
experienced  and  lugher  honour  acquired  by  endiuing  wrong  than  avenging  it;  the
exercise  of  justice,  forbearance,  and  active  benevolence  is  the  most  effectual  means  of
averting  injury  and  securing  safety  and  happiness.  (5)  The  Divine  sanction  given
to  specific  wars  in  the  Old  Testament  was  not  given  to  war  in  general,  and  it  does  not
justify  the  wars  which  are  waged,  without  the  like  authority,  at  the  present  time.
(6)  War  is  virtually  forbidden  by  numerous  precepts  and  the  whole  spirit  of  the  New
Testament  (Matt.  v.  9,  39,  44 ;  xxvL  52 ;  Eom.  xii.  18—21 ;  1  Thess.  v.  15 ;  1  Pet.  ii.
23 ;  iii.  9 — 13).  The  most  that  can  be  said  is  that  "  any  principles  upon  which  the
Christian  casuist  would  justify  war  in  certain  circumstances  would  not  justify  perhaps
one  in  ten  of  the  wars  that  have  been  waged  "  (J.  Foster, '  Lectures,'  vol.  ii.).

II.  An  appeal  roB  the  cessation  of  stkifb.  "Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?"
Its  ravages  may  be  stayed ;  and  means  must  be  employed  for  that  end,  such  as :  1.
The  consideration  of  the  real  nature  and  terrible  consequences  of  war ;  and  the  educa-
tion of  the  people,  especially  the  young,  so  that  they  may  cease  to  admire  military  glory
and  to  be  beguiled  by  "the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  war" — may  feel  an  intense
aversion  to  it,  and  seek  in  other  ways  their  common  interest  and  true  elevation.  2.
The  adoption  of  political  measures  for  the  settlement  of  international  disputes  and  the
removal  of  causes  of  strife;  viz.  arbitration  by  friendly  powers,  the  reduction  and
disbandment  of  standing  armies,  etc.  3.  The  repression  of  evil  passions  in  ourselves
and  others.  4.  The  practice  and  diffusion  of  Christian  principles ;  which  indispose  all
in  whom  they  dwell  to  break  the  peace  themselves,  and  dispose  them  to  make  peace
among  others.     "  The  sons  of  peace  are  the  sons  of  God."

III.  An  anticipation  of  the  peevalencb  of  peace.  "  Shall  the  sword  devour /or
ever  ?  "  Surely  not.  The  hope  of  universal  peace  is  warranted  from  :  1.  The  advancing
intelligence  of  men,  the  growth  of  popular  government  (making  war  less  dependent  than
heretofore  on  the  arbitrary  will  of  rulers),  the  possession  of  "  nobler  modes  of  life,  with
sweeter  manners,  purer  laws."  2.  The  better  understanding  and  more  perfect  realiza-
ti(Dn  of  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  3.  The  overruling  Providence  and  quickening  Spirit
of  "  the  God  of  peace."  4.  The  express  predictions  of  his  Word  concerning  the  effects
of  the  reign  of  "the  Prince  of  Peace"  (Isa.  ix.  7;  Micah  iv.  3;  v.  2,  5;  Ps.  Ixxii.  7).
"  It  is  in  war  that  the  power  of  the  beast  culminates  in  the  history  of  the  world.  This
beast  will  then  be  destroyed.  The  true  humanity  which  sin  has  choked  up  will  gain
the  mastery,  and  the  world's  history  will  keep  sabbath.  What  the  prophetic  words
affirm  is  a  moral  |)Ostulate,  the  goal  of  sacred  history,  the  predicted  counsel  of  God "
(DelitzBch,  on  Isa.  ii.  4).

"  O  scenes  surpassing  fable  and  yet  true ;
Scenes  of  accomplished  bliss ;  which  who  can  see
(Though  but  in  distant  prospect)  and  not  feel
His  Boul  lefireshed  with  foretaste  and  with  joy  7  "

(Cowper.)

D.

Veri.  30 — 32. — (Gibbon,  BBTHtKBEM,  Hbbron.)  2%e  sorrows  of  victory.  "  What  a
glorious  thing  must  be  a  victory,  sir ! "  it  was  remarked  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington.
"  The  greatest  tragedy  in  the  world,"  he  replied,  "  except  a  defeat "  ('  Recollections,'  by


66  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  1—32.


a.  Eogera).  The  rejoicing  hy  which  it  is  attended  is  usuaLy  mingled  with  weeping
and  Sometimes  swallowed  up  of  griet  Various  persons  are  thus  affected  for  various
reasons.  Think  of  the  sorrows  endured  :  1.  At  the  faM  of  feUow-soldierf,  "Nineteen
men  and  Asahel"  (vers.  23,  30)  who  come  not  to  the  muster  after  sunset  (vers.  24,  30),
nor  answer  to  the  roll-call,  hut  lie  in  the  chill  emhrace  of  death.  "  Alas  1  fallen  are  tbe
heroes."  2.  In  the  hurial  of  the  dead.  (Ver,  32.)  No  o{>portunity  is  nfforded  for  seeking
out  and  burying  all  the  slain ;  but  the  repaains  of  Asahel  are  carried  across  the  hills  by
night  (ver.  29)  and  laid  in  the  tomb  of  his  father  in  Bethlehem,  where  the  sorrow  of
the  preceding  day  is  lenewed.  It  reminds  us  of  a  pathetic  scene  of  recent  times
defscribed  in  the  familiar  lines —

"  We  buried  him  darkly  at  dead  of  night,

The  sod  with  our  bayonets  tilrning;
By  the  struggling  moonbeam's  misty  light,

And  our  lanterns  dimly  burning."

(Wolfe.)

3.  When  the  news  is  conveyed  to  their  homes.  "  They  came  to  Hebron  at  break  of
day;"  a  day  of  bitter  grief  to  many  bereaVcd  hearts.  "By  the  slaughter  of  a  war
there  are  thousands  who  weep  in  unpiticd  and  unnoticed  secrecy  whom  the  world  does
not  see  j  and  thousands  who  retire  in  silence  to  hopeless  poverty  for  whom  tbe  woiid
does  not  care"  (Dymond).  4.  For  the  miseries  of  fellotn-suffei era ;  the  enemy ^
defeatfd,  bereaved,  add  mouruing — for  they  too  are  "brethren,"  and  fcannot  but  be
remembered  with  sympathy  and  pity.  5.  Concerning  the  state  of  the  depattid.  A
soldier's  life  is  not  lavourable  to  piety  and  preparation  for  heaven,  and  the  passions  by
which  he  is  commonly  swttyed  when  his  earthly  probaton  is  suddenly  terminated  are
such  that  we  can  seldom  contemplate  his  entrance  into  the  eternal  world  with  feelings
of  cheerfulness  and  hope.  "  After  death  the  judgment."  6.  On  account  of  the  ani-
mosities of  the  living^  which  are  increased  by  conflict  and  victory,  and  are  certain  to  be
a  source  of  future  trouble  (ch.  iii.  1,  30j  33).  7.  Because  of  the  dishonour  done  to  the
cause  of  the  Lord's  Anointed.  Religion  suffers,  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  is  hindered,
and  the  King  himself  is  "grieved  for  the  misery  of  Israel."  "The  victory  that  day  was
turned  into  mourning"  (ch.  xix.  2).  8o  is  every  victory  gained  by  "the  devouring
sword."  But  there  are  victories  which  are  bloodless  and  tearless,  sources  of  unmingled
joy ;  spiritual  Victories  uVer  ignorance  and  sin  won  by  and  through  the  might  of  him
at  whose  birth  the  angels  sang  upuU  those  hills  of  Bethlehem,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the
highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  |!ood  will  toward  men."— ^D.

Ver.  X.'—Inquiririg  of  Ood.  David  had  now  arrived  at  a  very  important  point  in  his
career.  SnUl  being  dead,  his  way  to  the  throne  was  cleared ;  but  the  next  step  to  take
was  doubtful.  Under  thes  ■  circumstances  he  adopted  the  course  usual  to  him  when
in  difficulty,  .  He  "inquired  of  the  Lord,"  sought  directions  from  him  as  to  what  he
should  do.  The  high  priest,  Abiathar,  was  with  him  with  the  ephod  (1  Sam.  xxx,  7),
and  by  means  of  the  tlrim  and  Thummim  could  ascertain  for  him  the  Divine  will.
By  th&  method,  doubtleiiS,  he  redeiv  ed  directions  to  go  into  Judah  and  settle  at  Hebron ;
"and  the  men  of  Judah  came,. and  there  they  anointed  David  king  over  the  house  of
Judah."  We  cannot  ask  direction  from  God  in  the  same  manner  as  David,  but,  using
the  means  available  fof  us,  we  should  iuiitate  him  in  this  respect.

L   UnDEK   what   ClfiCtlMSTANCES   WE   SHOULD    INQtTIBB   OP   GoD.      1.    It    shoilld    hi    a

constant  practice,  Part  of  our  devotions  every  day  shotild  consist  of  endeavours  to
ascertain  more  fulh  and  accurately  the  will  of  Gfod  concerning  us,  seeking  of  him
guidance  in  all  our  ways,  that  we  may  know  what  the  general  commands  of  God  mean
for  us  in  our  position,  in  the  practical  details  of  our  individual  life.  2.  The  practice
should  he  made  special  under  special  douhis  and  difficulties.  (1)  When  like  David  we
have  to  make  a  choice  on  whicii  much  depends,  and  there  is  difficulty  in  choosing.
Wlieu  proposing  to  eater  on  a  new  enterprise,  to  form  new  connections  (especially
a  lifelong  alliance),  to  change  our  place  of  abode,  etc.  There  will  be  reasons  for  and
against,  promises  of  good,  possibilities  of  evil,  in  each  direction.  What  shall  be  done?
Inquire  of  the  Lord.  (2)  When  we  meet  with  perplexities  in  the  inquiry  after  truth.
It  is  not  by  mere  logical  processes  that  spiritual  truth  can  be  ascertained;  from  first
to  lost  we  need  guidance  &om  above,  and  should  earnestly  seek  it.


CH.  Ti.  1—32.]  THE  SECOND   BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  61


II.  How  BiroH  INQUIRY  SHOULD  BE  CONDUCTED.  1.  By  wMt  methods.  Where  sliall
we  find  a  Divine  oracle  to  answer  our  inquiries  ?  (1)  Keason  and  conscience  will  often
(if  we  allow  them  free  speech)  give  a  response  which  at  once  commends  its  11'  as
a  Divine  reply.  If  one  course  be  morally  right  and  the  other  morally  wrung,  uue  ia
manifest  accordance  with  the  laws  of  Christ,  the  other  in  plain  oppoRitiun  to  tlicm,  them
is  no  room  for  further  question.  (2)  Holy  Scripture  is  to  be  consulted.  Not  in  thu
way  of  bibliomanoy,  but  by  study  of  its  revelations  and  precepts.  The  New  Testament  is
eapeoially  the  Christian's  vadf^meoum,  from  whence  he  may  obtniii  all  needful  instruction
as  to  the  will  of  God.  (3)  The  providence  of  God.  Courses  to  which  we  are  prompted
by  the  best  desires  luay  be  seen  not  to  be  our  duty,  because  ability  and  oppirtunity
are  wanting  to  pursue  them.  (4)  The  counsels  of  wise  and  good  men.  Consulting
them,  our  course  will  often  become  clear.  Yet  we  may  not  submit  blindly  and  slavishly
to  our  fellow-men.  (5)  The  commands  of  superiors.  For  childreu  at  home  the  will  of
their  parents  is  the  will  of  God ;  for  servants,  the  commands  of  their  employers ;  always
supposing  in  both  cases  that  what  is  enjoined  is  not  clearly  sinful.  (6)  Withal  and
always,  prayer  for  Divine  guidance  should  be  resorted  to.  "  .ihow  me  thy  ways,  0
Lord;  teach  me  thy  paths"  (Pb.  jfxv.  4).  By  direct  influence  on  the  minds  and
hearts  of  those  who  seek  him,  God  becomes  their  Guide.  His  Spirit  lends  those  who
are  willing  to  be  led  by  him.  2.  In  what  spirit.  A  simple  ind  sincere  desire  to
know  and  do  the  will  of  God.  In  opposition  to  pride  and  self-will,  and  double-minded-
ness.  Many  seek  counsel  of  God  as  the  advice  of  men  is  often  sought.  Tliey  virtually
make  up  their  minds  before  they  inquire,  and  "  make  it  a  matter  of  prayer "  in  order
that  they  may  obtain  a  feeling  of  the  Divine  approval  of  the  course  tliey  have  chosen.
Not  avowedly,  not  consciously,  is  this  done.  But  '•  the  heart  is  deceitful,"  and  never
shows  its  deoeitfulness  more  than  ia  such  cases  (comp.  Kzek.  xiv.  1 — 5;  2  Thess.  ii.
10^14).

III.  Motives  to  such  inquiry.  1.  Our  ignorance.  "The  way  of  man  is  not  in
himsulf  J  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  dirpet  his  steps"  (.ler.  x.  23).  Human  affairs
are  so  complex,  appearances  so  deceitful,  men  often  so  untrusiwonhy,  our  vision  so
limited,  that  we  may  well  desire  and  shall  wisely  yield  oursuivos  to  the  guidance  of
God.  2.  2%e  right  and  power  of  Qod  to  direct  us.  As  supreme  Ruler,  as  perfect  in
knowledge,  wisdom,  and  goodness.  3.  His  promiseit.  (See  Ps.  xxv.  12,  14;  Jas.  i.  5.)
]']specjally  the  great  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  all  who  a.-ik  of  Gud  this  uospeakaWy
great  ajid  precious  gift  (Luke  :^i.  13).  4.  The  blessedness  of  lehiy  divinely  led.  In
[■rusent  wisdom,  holiness,  and  happiness,  and  in  eternal  life.  5.  Tlie  certainty  of  fatal
darkness  and  stumbling  to  those  who  do  not  inquire  of  Qod.  (See  Jer^xiiL  16;  John
xii.  35.)-G.  W.

Vers.  5-^7. — •Oratitude  and  poKey.  David  was  now  king  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  by
their  own  choice,  but  the  rest  of  the  tribes  had  not  declared  themselves.  Amongst
these  the  tribes  beyond  the  Jordan  were  of  special  importance  and  influence ;  and
David  took  an  opportunity  of  reminding  them  of  his  position  and  claims.  The  chief
city  amongst  those  tribes  was,Jabesh»Gilead.  Brave  men  from  that  city  had  rescued
the  boilies  of  Saul  and  his  sons  from  the  wall  of  Bethshan,  and,  after  burning  them,  had
buried  their  bones  under  the  tamarisk  tree  (Revised  Version)  at  Jabesh.  David,  being
made  acquainted  with  what  they  bad  done,  sends  messengers  to  assure  them  of  his
appreciation  of  their  conduct,  and  at  the  same  time  to  hint  that,  Saul  being  dead,  and
he  having  been  appointed  king  over  Judah,  the  way  was  clear  for  theui  to  aid,  if
so  disposed,  in  promoting  his  election  as  king  by  the  other  tribes.  The  message  was  at
once  a  suitable  expression  of  hi3  gratitude  and  a  politic  endeavour  to  ingratiate  himself
with  them.

I.  David's  gratitude.  1.  On  what  account.  Their  burial  of  Saul.  He  speaks  of
this  as  kindness  to  him.  We  can  show  kindness  to  the  dead  by  suitably  interring
them.  Other  ways  of  doing  this  would  be  upholding  their  reput.ttion,  caring  fur  those
they  leave  behind,  promoting  for  their  sakes  any  cause  in  which  they  wire  deeply
interested.  David  could  not  but  highly  appreciate  the  brave  deed  of  these  men.  His
own  marvellous  courage  would  impel  him  to"  admire  theirs.  But  it  was  the  respect  they
had  thus  shown  to  their  departed  sovereign  which  especially  moved  him  to  send
a  message  to  theiPi     His  gratitude  for  titis  was  quite  in  ^cordance  with  his  u^ual


r>2  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ih.  ii.  1— 32,


feelings  towards  Saul,  both  during  his  life  and  after  his  death.  2.  How  he  expresses  Mi
gratitude.  (1)  By  sending  the  messengers  and  message.  "  I  also  will  requite,"  etc.,
should  be  (according  to  Otto  Thenius  and  the  'Speaker's  Commentary')  "  I  also  show
you  this  goodness,"  viz.  sending  the  messengers  with  a  kind  message.  They  would
value  David's  message  as  soldiers  distinguishing  themselves  in  the  field  value  a  message
from  the  queen.  (2)  By  the  terms  of  the  message.  In  which  he  invokes  upon  them
the  blessing  of  God,  his  "  kindness  and  truth,"  his  true,  faithfiil,  constant  kindness.  A
phrase  common  in  the  Old  Testament  (7s.  xxv.  10;  xL  11,  etc. ;  Gen.  xxiv,  49;  xlvii.
29,  etc.),  and  reproduced  in  the  New  with  some  additional  meaning  (John  L  14).  To
pray  for  God's  blessino;  on  those  to  whom  we  feel  grateful  is  always  suitable.  When
we  can  do  nothing  else,  we  can  do  this;  and  when  we  can  show  gratitude  in  other
ways,  we  do  well  to  show  it  thus  also.  For  God's  blessing  far  surpasses  ours,  and  will
render  ours  more  valuable  and  effectual.  Only  we  should  be  careful  not  to  substitute
prayers  for  deeds  when  these  are  possible.  But  in  some  way  or  other  we  ought  to
express  as  well  as  cherish  gratitude  and  other  kindly  feelings  to  others.  It  ia  good  for
ourselves  and  good  for  others.  It  encourages  good  and  noble  deeds.  It  tends  to  bind
men  together  in  the  best  bonds.  It  promotes  happiness  of  a  high  order.  We  may
enlarge  the  thought.  We  are  required  to  conf  ss  God  and  our  Saviour,  as  in  other
ways  so  by  thanksgiving  and  praise.  It'  is  meet  and  right  so  to  do.  It  promotes  our
own  spiritual  good  and  that  of  others.    It  glorifies  Gk>d.

II.  David's  policy.  He  intended  by  this  message  not  only  to  give  to  brave  men
their  due,  but  to  win  their  favour  towards  himself.  He  justly  thought  that  those  who
had  at  such  hazards  honoured  their  deceased  king  would  be  fitting  helpers  of  himself,
and  likely  to  become  loyal  subjects.  There  was  nothing  unworthy  in  the  course  he
took,  for  there  was  no  flattery  in  his  expressed  appreciation  of  their  conduct,  and  his
endeavour  to  gain  their  co-operation  was  not  an  act  of  mere  selfishness  or  ambition,
but  of  regard  to  the  will  of  God  who  had  chosen  him  to  be  King  of  Israel,  and  to  the
welfare  of  the  people,  which  was  bound  up  with  his  speedy  and  peaceful  recognition
as  king.  We  have  here  an  illustration  of  mixed  motives ;  and  we  learn  that :  1.  We
should  not  hesitate  to  do  what  is  right  hecause  we  see  that  it  will  also  he  beneficial  to
oursdves.  All  piety,  rectitude,  and  benevolence  tend,  and  are  usually  seen  to  tend,
to  the  good  of  those  who  practise  them.  The  promises  of  God  are  promises  of  blessing
to  those  who  serve  him  and  their  brethren,  and  are  to  be  received  as  encouragements
in  doing  so.  2.  We  may  even  in  some  cases  aim  to  do  good  to  ourselves  hy  doing  what
is  right.  Only  we  must  place  first  that  which  is  first,  or  our  good  deeds  will  cease
to  be  good,  and  become  only  another  form  of  selfishness.  Where  motives  are  mixed,
we  need  carefnlfy  to  guard  our  hearts  lest  the  lower  predominate.  3.  We  should  be
glad  of  opportunities  of  showing  pure,  disinterested  kindness.  We  thus  most  closely
resemble  our  heavenly  Father  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  secure  the  best  evidence
of  our  being  the  ciiildren  of  God  (Luke  vi.  32 — 36 ;  John  xiii.  34,  35 ;  Eph.  v.  1,  2).
4.  We  ought  not,  without  clearest  evidence,  to  suspect  of  sdjish  motives  those  who  in
doing  good  secure  for  themselves  present  reward.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  only  few  are
like  the  contributor  to  some  charity  who,  being  asked  whether  he  wished  his  gift  to
be  publislied,  replied,  "Why  do  you  suppose  I  gave  it  to  you?"  And  when  the
motives  are  not  clearly  revealed,  it  is  often  as  just  as  it  is  charitable  to  give  credit  for
the  best.— G.  W.

Ver.  26. — Longing  for  the  cessation  of  wars.  "Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?"
"'liis  exclamation  of  Abner  respecting  the  pursuit  of  his  discomfited  troops  by  the
tonquering  troops  of  Joab,  has  often  been  uttered  in  respect  to  war  in  general.  As  so
employed  it  expresses  horror  of  war,  and  impatient  longing  for  its  final  termination.

1.  The  question.  The  feelings  which  it  indicates  are  excited  in  view  of:  1.  The
nature  of  war.  The  mutual  slaughter  of  each  other  by  those  who  are  "  brethren."  This
aspect  of  the  slaughter  of  one  part  of  the  chosen  people  by  another  presented  itself  to
Abner.  But  in  the  light  of  Christianity  all  men  are  brothers,  and  war  is  a  species
of  fratricide.  They  are  all  children  of  God,  brethren  of  Christ,  redeemed  by  his  blood,
and  capable  of  sharing  his  eternal  glory  and  "blessedness.  In  this  view  of  war,  not  only
the  actual  conflicts,  but  all  the  elaborate  preparations  made  for  them,  appear  verv
drpadful.    g,  JU  c<mm<    "  Wbense  co^ne  wws  mi  fightings  among  you  ?  copae  tney


OH.n.  1— 32.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  63

not  hence,  even  of  your  lusts  ?  "  (Jas.  iv.  1).    The  evil  passions  of  men  are  their  cause—
lust  of  territory,  of  dominion,  of  glory,  of  money ;  the  spirit  of  revenge  and  retaliation ;
even  the  love  of  excitement  and  adventure.     Not  less,  hut  if  possible  more  hideous,
is  the  cool,  calculating  policy  of  rulers,  which  sets  armies  in  motion  with  no  regard
to  the  lives  which  it  sacrifices  or  the  misery  it  occasions ;  or,  again,  the  desire  for
active  service,  with  its  opportunities  of  distinction,  promotion,  and  other  rewards,
which  springs  up  amongst  the  oCBcers,  if  not  the  rank-and-file,  of  stanrling  armies,  and
which  takes  no  thought  of  the  drep.dful  evil  which  "  active  service  "  inflicts.     3.  Its
effects     "  Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever  ?  "     War  is  like  a  huge  wild  beast  which
"  devours."     It  eats  up  human  beings  by  thousands  or  tens  of  thousands  at  a  time.    It
was  a  small  consumption  of  men  which  took  place  in  the  battle  and  pursuit  of  which
this  question  was  first  used.     Only  twenty  men  had  fallen  on  the  one  side,  and  three
hundred  and  sixty  on  the  other.     Midern  wars  "  devour"  on  a  far  greater  scale,  partly
in  actual  battle,  more  from  wounds  received  in  battle,  and  from  the  diseases  which  the
liardships  of  war  produce.      War  not  only  devours  men  in  vast  numbers,  and  thus
occasions  incalculable  sorrow  and  misery ;  it  consumes  the  substance  of  nations,  the
creation  of  peaceful  industry ;  it  wastes  their  mental  and  physical  energies.     And  stiU
more  sad  to  contemplate  are  the  moral  effects  both  on   the  actual  combatants  and
on   those  who  employ  them ;    the  hateful  passions  excited  and  strengthened,  the
deterioration  of  national  character  produced.     4.  Its  universal  prevalence.     Among
peoples  in  everj'  part  of  the  world,  in  every  stage  of  civilization,  and  down  through
every  age.     However  men  differ  in  other  respects,  they  are  alike  in  this  practice.
Whatever  changes  take  place,  this  survives.     The  progress  of  science  and  art,  of  dis-
covery and  invention,  and  of  mechanical  skill,  seems  to  have  no  other  effect  in  regard
to  war  than  to  increase  the  power  of  mutual  destruction.    War  lays  them  all  under
tribute  to  enlarge  its  ability  to  "  devour  "  and  destroy  more  easily  and  rapidly,  and  on  a
larger  scale.     In  view  of  all  these  considerations  good  men  may  well  sigh  and  cry,
"Shall  the  sword  devour  for  ever?"    There  have  doubtless  been  wars  on  which,  in
spite  of  all  the  evils  they  occasion,  lovers  of  their  kind  could  look  with  sympathy  and
satisfaction  so  far  as  ime  party  was  concerned.     Such  are  wars  of  defence  against
unjust  aggression,  wars  undertaken  by  a  people  to  obtain  liberty  as  against  some
crushing  tyranny,  wars  against  hordes  of  barbarians  who  threaten  devastation  and
destruction  to  hearths  and  homes,  and  all  that  civilized  men  value.     But  even  in  such
cases  we  may  well  ask — Will  it  ever  be  necessary  to  use  so  dreadful  an  instrument
as  war  in  the  endeavour  to  obtain  rights  or  abolish  wrongs?     Will  men  never  be
amenable  to  reason  ?    Must  there  ever  be  retained  the  power  to  resort  to  the  violent
methods  of  war  ?

**  The  cause  of  truth  and  human  weal,

O  God  above  1
Transfer  it  from  the  sword's  appeal

To  peace  and  love."

(Campbell.)

II.  The  beplt  which  mat  be  given  to  this  question.  No.  The  sword  shall
not  devour  for  ever.  Wars  will  at  length  come  to  a  final  end.  1.  Divine  prophecy
assures  us  of  this.  (Isa.  ii.-4 ;  xi.  6 — 9 ;  Micah  iv.  3,  4 ;  see  also  Ps.  Ixxii.  3,  7 ;  Zech.
ix.  10.)  Not  only  shall  wars  cease,  but  there  shall  be  such  a  feeling  of  universal
security  that  the  arts  of  war  shall  cease  to  be  learnt.  2.  An  adeguate  power  for
effecting  this  change  is  in  the  world.  Christianity — the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  with
the  accompanying  might  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  revelation  of  God  in  Christ,  espe-
cially of  the  relation  of  God  to  all  men  and  his  love  to  all ;  the  redemption  effected
for  all ;  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  inculcating  love  even  to  enemies,  and  the  doing
good  to  all ;  the  example  of  him  who  was  Love  Incarnate ;  the  dignity  and  worth  of
men,  and  their  relation  to  each  other,  as  seen  in  the  light  of  the  gospel ;  the  sacred
brotherhood  into  which  faith  in  Christ  brings  men  of  all  lands ;  the  prospect  of  a
heaven  where  all  Christians  will  be  united  in  service  and  blessedness ; — these  truths
go  to  the  root  of  the  evil  in  the  hearts  of  men.  They  cannot  be  truly  received  without
subduing  the  passions  which  lead  to  war,  and  implanting  the  affections  which  insure
peace.  3.  Experience  justifies  the  hope  that  this  peace-producing  power  will  at  length
be  triumi  ^ant.    tW  it  will  be  in  operation  everywhere,  and  everywhere  effectua'.


64


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh  m.  1— 3a


So  far  as  it  has  been  experienced,  it  has  made  its  subjects  gentle,  loving,  peaceful,
more  willing  to  sufifer  than  to  inflict  suffering.  Multitudes  exist  in  the  world  so  ruled
by  the  gospel  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  it  is  simply  impossible  they  should  on  any
account  take  to  killing  each  other.  What  has  transformed  them  can  transform  others.
Let  vital  Christianity  become  universal,  and  peace  must  be  universal  too.  It  is  on  the
way  to  become  universal,  though  its  advance  is  slow  to  our  view.  The  effect  of
Christianity,  so  far  as  it  has  prevailed,  on  war  itself  encourages  hope.  It  has  become
humane  in  comparison  with  wars  recorded  in  this  Book  and  in  the  pages  of  general  history.
And  amongst  civilized  nations  there  is  a  growing  indisposition  to  resort  to  war,  an
increasing  willingness  to  settle  their  differences  by  peaceful  methods.  This  is  doubtless
partly  the  result  of  the  tremendous  costliness  and  destruotiveness  of  modern  warfare,
but  partly  also  of  the  growth  of  a  spirit  of  reasonableness,  equity,  and  humanity.    ■

In  conclusion:  1.  Cherish  the  spirit  and  principles  of  peace,  i.e.  of  Christ  and
Christianity.  2.  Endeavour  to  diffuse  them.  And  do  this  earnestly  and  hopefully,
with  tlie  assurance  of  a  final  success  in  which  you  will  participate  joyfully.  3.  Use
your  influence  as  citizens  to  discourage  war.  "  And  the  God  of  peace  shaU  be  with  you  "
(2  Cor.  xiii.  11).— G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  in.


Ver.  1. — There  was  long  war.  As  Ish-
boslieth  reigned  only  two  years,  and  as
"  tlie  house  of  Saul "  is  the  phrase  used,
it  seems  probable  that  after  Islibosheth's
murder,  during  the  five  years  before  David's
election  to  the  throne  of  all  Israel,  the  linuse
of  Saul  had  some  puppet  representative  at
Alahanaim,  and  some  cummander  in  Abner's
pliioe.  But  after  the  death  of  this  ablt^  nuin
matters  would  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and,
though  David  probably  remained  on  the
defensive,  yet  the  contrast  between  tlie
peace  and  good  government  of  Judah  and
the  misery  in  Israel  made  all  the  tribes  wish
to  put  an  end  to  a  harassing  civil  war.  It
is  plain,  too,  that  the  Philistines,  repelled
at  first  by  Abner's  skill,  had  again  gained
the  ascendant,  and  regarded  themselves  so
completely  as  the  rulers  of  the  country,  that
they  resented  immediately  with  summary
vi(jlence  the  bold  act  of  the  northern  tribes
in  choosing  David  to  be  their  common
king.

Ver.  2. — Unto  David  were  sons  bora.
This  increase  of  his  wives  is  mentioned  as
a  proof  of  David's  prosperity.  For  though
contrary  to  the  Law  (Dent.  xvii.  17),  it  was
yet  looked  upon  as  part  of  the  statu  of  a
king,  and  as  such  had  been  practised  by
Gideon  (Judg,  viii.  30),  who  approjched
more  nearly  to  the  royal  dignity  than  any
other  of  the  judges.  But  it  is  the  rule  of
the  Books  of  Samuel  that  they  generally
abstain  alike  froip  praise  and  blame,  and
allow  facts  to  speak  for  themselves.  But
never  did  a  history  more  clearly  deserve
the  title  of '  A  Vindication  of  the  Justice  of
God.'  Alike  in  Eli,  in  Saul,  and  in  David,
their  sufferings  were  the  result  of  (lieir  sins,
uid  W  the  polygamy  and  lust  of  the  last


are  due  both  the  crimes  which  stained  hia
character  and  the  distress  of  the  last  twenty
years  of  his  life.  (For  Amnon,  his  flrgt-boni,
see  eh. .xiii.)

Vers.'S — 5. — Chileab.  The  Midrash  ex-
plains Chileab  as  meaning  "  Quite  like  the
father."  He  is  called  Daniel  in  the  parallel
genealogy  in  1  Chron.  iii.  1,  and  this  was
probably  his  real  name,  and  Chileab  a  name
of  affection.  He  must  have  died  young,  for
Adonijah  appears  as  David's  eldest  sou
s(fter  the  death  of  Amnon  and  Absalom ;
and  it  is  thus  natural  that  he  should  still
be  known  by  the  name  he  bore  as  a,  chijd.
Geshnr.  The  word  signifies  "  Bridgoland,"
and  is  the  name  of  two  districts,  one  nf
which  furmedthe  northern  part  of  the  tribe
of  Manasseh,  and  extended  on  both  sides  of
the  Jordan,  from  the  little  Hermon  to  the
sea  of  Geunesareth  (Dent.  iii.  14 ;  Josh.  xii.
6;  xiii.  13).  The  other  was  in  Syria  (ch.
XV.  8),  and  probably  was  situated  upon
some  river,  though  its  exact  position  is  not
yet  known.  Talmai,  its  king,  now  gave  Jiis
daughter  to  be  one  of  David's  wives,  and
though  he  was  probably  only  a  petty  prince,
still  it  is  a  proof  of  David's  growing  power
that  a  potentate  living  at  so  great  a  distance
was  willing  to  make  an  alliance  with  htm.
Of  the  other  wives  and  their  sons  noihing
is  known  except  of  Adonijah,  who  inherited,
on  the  death  of  Absalom,  the  dangerous
position  of  firstborn ;  and  who,  after  tryhig  to
make  hia  rights  good,  was  put  to  dcnth  by
Solomon  (1  Kings  ii,  ?5),  As  Eglah  is
especially  called  David's  wife,  the  Jewish
interpreters  hold  that  she  was  the  highest
in  rank  in  his  household,  and  therefore
identical  with  Michal,  who  was  restored  to
David  while  at  Hebron.  But  she  was  child-
less ;  and  more  prob.ibly  the  words  arc  to  be
taken  as  simply  closing  the  narrative,  and


OH.  m.  1—39.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


6S


as  belonging,  fheiefore,  equally  to  each  of
the  six.

Ver.  6. — Abner  made  himself  strong  for
the  honse  of  Satil.  The  Hebrew  really
means  that  until  this  miserable  qnarrel
about  Bizpah,  Abner  had  been  the  main-
stay of  Ishboslieth's  throne  and  dynasty.
She  is  proved  to  have  been  a  noble  woman,
with  a  warm  and  devoted  heart,  by  the
narrative  in  ch.  ssi.  8 — 11.  But  the  harem
of  a  deceased  king  was  looked  upon  as  the
special  inheritance  of  his  successor ;  and
Absalom,  by  taking  David's  concubines
(oh.  xvi.  21,  22),  treated  his  father  as  a
dead  man,  and  committed  so  overt  an  act  of
treason  as  made  reconciliation  impossible.
So  Solomon  put  his  brother  Adonijah  to
death  for  asking  Abiehag  to  wife  (1  Kings
ii.  23 — 25).  Still,  as  Bathsheba  there  saw
no  impropriety  in  Adonijah's  request,  and  as
Solomon  deposed  Abiathar  and  put  Joab  to
death  for  complicity,  as  we  must  conclude,
in  Adonijah's  request,  it  was  probably  part
of  some  scheme  of  oonspiraoy,  and  that,  if
granted,  it  would  have  been  used  by  Adoni-
jah as  a  proof  that  the  kingdom  really  was
his.  Here  there  was  no  plot,  and  as  Rizpah
had  probably  always  lived  apart  from  Ish-
bosheth,  Abner  may  have  expected  that  the
king  would  see  no  difficulty  in  the  matter.

Ver.  8. — Then  was  Abner  very  wroth.
This  extreme  indignation  on  Abner's  part
is  not  easy  to  understand ;  for  he  could
scarcely  have  expected  Ishbosheth  to  endure
quietly  what  at  least  was  a  great  insult.
But  probably  the  question.  Wherefore  hast
thou  gone  in  nnto  my  father's  conoubine }
does  not  mean  a  mild  expostulation  on  the
king's  part,  but  the  purpose  to  degrade
Abner  and  strip  him  of  his  office.  Probably
after  the  defeat  by  Joab  at  Gibeon,  the
army  was  less  satisfied  vrith  its  leader,  and
his  detractors  may  gladly  have  encouraged
the  king  to  use  this  opportunity  for  bring-
ing Abner  down  to  his  proper  place.  Weak
kings  often  try  to  play  the  strong  man ;  but
the  attempt  here  only  drove  the  imperious
soldierto  put  the  matter  to  the  proof, and  show
that  the  strength  was  his.  We  know  that
David  groaned  all  his  life  through  under
Joab's  iron  will,  and,  though  ho  tried, yet  that
he  never  succeeded  In  throwing  off  the  yoke.
But  Joab  never  behaved  unfaithfully  to  his
sovereign  as  Abner  did  here,  and  his  crimes
were  deeds  of  violence  committed  in  David's
cause.  Am  I  a  dog's  head,  which  against
judah,  etc.  ?  The  words  literally  are.  Am  I
a  dog's  head  that  it  for  Judah  i  and  are
rightly  rendered  in  the  Bevised  Version,  Am
I  a  dog's  head  that  ielongeth  to  Judah  f  Am
I  at  once  worthless  and  a  traitor,  a  thing  of
no  account,  and  on  the  side  of  thy  enemies  ?
In  the  words  that  follow  he  protests,  not  so
much  his  innocence  as  his  great  deserts,
n.  BAinrBL.


This  day — that  is,  at  this  very  time — I  am
showing  kindness  nnto  the  house  of  Saul
.  .  .  and  this  day  thon  wonldest  visit  upon
me— that  is,  punibh  me  for — the  fault  about
this  woman.  I  make  and  maintain  thee
as  king,  and  thou  wouldst  play  the  king
upon  me,  the  kingmaker  I

Ver.  9. — As  the  Lord  hath  sworn  to  David.
This  not  only  shows  that  the  prophetic
promise  of  the  kingdom  to  David  was
generally  known  (see  note  on  ch.  i.  2),  but
that  Abner  regarded  it  as  solemnly  ratified.
There  is  no  express  mention  of  any  such
oath,  but-Abner  was  a  man  of  strong  words,
and  possibly  only  meant  that  Jehovah's
purpose  was  becoming  evident  by  the  course
of  events.

Ver.  11. — ^Ee  oonld  not  answer  Abner.
Though  the  reply  was  one  of  open  treason,
and  was  spoken  with  violence,  yet  Ish-
bosheth did  not  venture  to  bring  the  matter
to  an  issue.  Perhaps  he  looked  round  upon
hisxifficers  to  see  if  any  would  take  his  side,
and,  when  all  were  silent,  he  was  too  feeble
to  dare  to  order  the  arrest  and  trial  of  his
too-powerful  captain.

Ver.  12. — Abner  sent  messengers  to  David
on  his  behalf;  Hebrew,  under  him.  The
Eevised  Version  renders  this  "where  he
was;"  but  the  phrase  really  means  "im-
mediately" (see  note  on  oh.  ii.  23).  And
this  agrees  with  the  haughty  temper  of
Abner.  Without  waiting  for  advice,  or
allowing  his  anger  to  cool,  he  at  once  sent
trusty  envoys  to  open  negotiations  with
David.  Whose  is  the  land  t  Abner's  mean-
ing in  these  words  is  plain.  You,  David,
he  seems  to  say,  will  answer  that  the  land
is  mine ;  for  Jehovah  has  promised  it  to  me.
But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  much  of  the  land
is  mine  (Abner's),  or  at  least  belongs  to  the
house  of  Saul,  whose  prime  minister  I  am.
Tours  is  an  abstract  right;  mine  is  actual
possession.  Come,  let  us  make  the  two
agree.  Give  me  fitting  assurances  of  safety
and  reward,  and  I  will  make  your  claim  a
reality.

Ver.  13. — Except  thou  first  bring  Miohal.
Besides  David's  affection  for  Miohal,  there
were  political  reasons  for  demanding  her
restoration.  Saul's  despotic  act  in  giving
her  in  marriage  to  another  man  (1  Sam.
XXV.  44)  had  been  a  public  disavowal  of
David  as  the  son-in-law  of  the  royal  house,
and  equivalent  to  a  proclamation  of  out-
lawry. David's  rights  were  all  declared
null  by  such  an  act.  But  now  Ishbosheth
must  with  equal  publicity  reverse  his  father's
deed,  and  restore  to  David  his  lost  position.
It  must  have  been  a  most  painful  humilia-
tion to  him  to  be  driven  thus  to  cancel  his
father's  decree,  and  declare  thereby  to  all
Israel  that  he  was  unable  to  refuse  his
assent  to  whatever   his   rival   demanded.


66


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  hl  1 — 39.


And  for  this  reason  David  sent  his  mes-
eengera  directly  to  Ishbosheth,  because  the
importance  of  Michal's  surrender  to  him
lay  in  its  being  a  public  act  of  the  state.
For  Midial,  in  cli.  zzi.  8,  we  onght  to  read
Merdb  (see  note  there).

Ver.  14. — A  hundred  foreskins.  This
was  the  nnmber  which  Saul  had  required
(1  Sam.  xviii.  25),  and  David  acted  rightly
in  not  boasting  that  he  had  really  given
twice  as  many  (1  Sam.  xviii.  27).  As  he
had  paid  her  father  the  stipulated  price,
Michal,  by  Oriental  law,  was  David's  pro-
perty.

Yer.  15. — ^Phaltiel  the  son  of  Laish.  lu
1  Sam.  XXV.  41  he  is  called  Phalti.  This
word,  in  Hebrew  lexicons,  is  usually  regarded
as  a  contraction  for  Phaltiyah,  "Jehovah
is  deliverance,"  while  Fhaltiel  means  "  El
is  deliverance."  The  substitution  of  El  for
Yah  is  one  of  those  changes  which  arose
out  of  the  superstitious  reverence  for  the
sacred  name  which  to  this  day  causes  the
word  LoBD  to  be  read  in  our  Bibles  where
in  the  Hebrew  are  the  four  consonants
Y,  H,  V,  H,  which,  by  attaching  to  them
the  vowels  belonging  to  the  Hebrew  word
edonay  (or,  adonay,  lord)  we  make  into
"  Jehovah  "  (  Yehovah).

Ver.  10. — ^Her  husband  went  with  her
along  weeping  behind  her.  "Along  weep-
ing" is  a  very  awkward  rendering  of  the
Hebrew  phrase,  "going  and  weeping."  The
Bevised  Version  is  far  better,  "  weeping  as
he  went  and  followed  her."  Phaltiel  had
been  Michal's  husband  for  eight  or  nine
years,  and  his  soitow  at  losing  her  excites
sympathy  for  them  both.  They  had  evidently
^oved  one  another,  and  riie  was  now  going
to  be  but  one  of  many  wives ;  and  though
David  may  have  desired  her  restoration
because  he  valued  her  and  cherished  the
remembrance  of  their  youthful  affection,
yet  there  was  a  large  admixture  of  political
motive  in  his  conduct.  At  GalUm  she  had
been  Phaltiel's  one  jewel,  and  had  been
loved  for  her  own  sake;  at  Hebron  she
would  have  many  rivals.  But  women  of
royal  rank  have  often  to  pay  the  price  of
sacrificed  affections  for  the  ends  of  state-
craft. Near  Bahurim,  on  the  road  from
Jerusalem  to  Gilgal,  in  the  valley  of  the
Jordan,  the  convoy  approached  the  borders
of  Judah,  and  Abner  will  not  allow  the
weeping  husband  to  enter  David's  dominions.
Painful  as  was  his  fate,  he  had  himself  done
wrong  in  marrying  another  man's  wife ;  and
if  he  was  weeping  now,  we  may  well  believe
that  David  had  felt  equal  anguish  when
Michal  was  torn  from  him  and  sold  to
another, — ^for  fathers  in  those  days  received
instead  of  giving  a  dowry  upon  the  mar-
riage of  their  daughters.  Saul  in  this
matter  was  most  to  blame,  and  if  he  had


not  committed  this  wrong,  David  might
never  have  sought  an  evil  solace  in  multi-
plying to  himself  other  wives.

Ver.  17. — ^And  Abner  had  communioation
with  the  elders  of  Israel.  Most  probably
this  had  taken  place  before  Abner  escorted
Michal  to  Hebron,  and  that  he  paid  David
but  one  visit — that  recorded  in  ver.  20.  He
would  probably  not  take  so  decided  a  step
as  the  surrender  of  Michal  without  sound-
ing the  elders,  that  is,  the  local  sheikhs,  and
finding  out  how  far  they  were  inclined  to
support  David  as  king  of  all  Israel.  When
everything  was  ready  he  would  take  Michal
to  Hebron,  and  so  have  the  opportunity  of
arranging  with  David  for  future  action;
and  though  Ishbosheth  would  dislike  the
matter  and  suspect  Abner  of  ulterior  pur-
poses, yet  he  could  not  refuse  so  specious
a  plea  as  the  escorting  of  his  sister.  His
previous  failure,  too,  had  taught  him  that
Abner  was  master.  We  may  further  be
sure  that  David  had  everywhere  many
adherents.  All  Israel  knew  that  he  was
marked  out  by  prophecy  to  be  their  king,
and,  moreover,  "all  Israel  and  Judah  loved
him  "  (1  Sam.  xviii.  16).  But  when  Abner
says,  Ye  sought  for  David  in  times  past  to
be  king  over  you,  he  makes  it  probable
that,  at  some  time  after  the  defeat  at  Oilboa,
the  attempt  had  even  been  made  to  elect
David  king.  But  Abner  had  then  opposed
it, 'and  his  success  in  resisting  the  Philis-
tines, and  David's  unfortunate  entangle-
ment with  those  inveterate  enemies  of
Israel,  had  made  the  attempt  faU.  And
now  Abner's  attempt  was  to  be  equally
unsuccessful.

Ver.  18.— The  Lord  hath  spoken.  Here
again  Abner's  statements  go  far  beyond  the
text  of  anything  recorded  in  Holy  Scripture,
but  probably  they  give  the  popular  inter-
pretation of  the  prophecies  respecting  David.
It  will  be  noticed  also  that  Abner  endeavours
to  meet  the  general  prejudice  against  David
by  asserting  that  he  was  Israel's  destined
deliverer  from  Philistine  oppression.  As
Abner's  speech  is  virtually  an  acknowledg-
ment of  failure,  we  may  also  be  sure  that
he  had  found  himself  unable  any  longer  to
make  head  against  tlie  Philistines  on  the
western  side  of  the  Jordan,  and  that  Judah
was  the  only  tribe  there  that  enjoyed  tran-
quillity. Everywhere  else  they  had  once
again  established  their  supremacy.  Though
a  brave  soldier,  Abner  was  inferior,  not  only
to  David,  but  also  to  Joab,  both  as  states-
man and  general ;  and  the  weak  Ishbosheth
was  no  help  to  him,  but  the  contrary.

Ver.  19. — In  the  ears  of  Benjamin.  This
tribe  alone,  probably,  was  really  loyal  to
the  house  of  Saul,  their  kinsman.  But
since  the  withdrawal  of  the  court  to  Ma-
hanaim,  they  got  but  little  good  from  it,


nn.  in.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


67


and  weie  left  to  resist  the  predatory  bands
of  the  Philistines  as  best  they  could.  So
warlike  a  tribe  too  would  despise  Ishbosheth,
and  long  for  a  braver  man  to  aid  them  in
fighting  their  enemies.

Ver.  20. — Twenty  men  with  him.  These,
we  may  feel  sure,  were  not  common  soldiers,
but  chieftains  selected  from  those  elders
who  were  on  David's  side ;  and,  though  the
honourable  escort  of  Miohal  was  the  pre-
text, yet  Ishbosheth  must  have  felt  sure
that  more  was  intended.  Most  of  them,
however,  would  join  Abner  on  the  road,
especially  those  who  represented  Benjamin
and  the  western  tribes.  On  arriving  at
Hebron  they  were  honourably  received,
and,  after  a  feast,  they  settled  the  condi-
tions on  which  David  was  to  be  made  king
of  all  Israel;  and  Abner  then  departed  in
peace,  after  giving  the  assurance  that  all
the  tribes  would  now  gladly  assemble,  and
by  solemn  compact  and  covenant  make
David  their  king.  The  terms  of  the  league,
and  the  conditions  agreed  upon  for  Ish-
bosheth, are  not  mentioned,  because  upon
Abner's  death  the  whole  plan  fell  to  the
ground,  and  David  had  to  wait  for  many
years  before  his  hopes  were  fulfilled.  But
we  gather  from  this  covenant  and  oh.  T.  3
(where  see  note)  that  the  early  kings  of
Israel  were  not  absolute  monarchs.

Ver.  22. — From  pursuing  a  troop.  This
gives  a  wrong  idea,  as  though  Joab  had
been  repelling  an  attack.  The  Bevised
Yersion  is  right  in  rendering  "  came  from  a
foray,"  the  troop  being  a  company  of  men
sent  out  on  a  predatory  excursion.  It  is  not
unlikely  that  David  had  arranged  this
expedition  in  order  that  his  interview  with
Abner  might  take  place  in  Joab's  absence ;
and  as  he  returned  with  "great  spoil,"  he
had  probably  been  away  for  some  nine  or
ten  days,  during  which  he  had  penetrated
far  into  the  country  of  the  Amalekites.
Had  David  acted  frankly  and  honourably,
Joab  would  not  have  stood  in  the  way  of
his  master's  exaltation,  and  the  blood-feud
between  him  and  Abner  might  have  been
arranged.  But  it  is  evident  that  David
secretly  disliked  and  chafed  under  the  con-
trol of  his  strong-willed  and  too-able  nephew.

Vers.  24,  25.— What  hast  thou  done?
David's  secret  dealing  makes  Joab  see  a
personal  wrong  to  himself  in  the  negbtia-
tion  with  Abner.  There  could  be  no  room,
he  feels,  for  both  of  them  in  David's  army,
and  David  meant,  he  supposes,  to  sacrifice
himself.  In  hot  haste,  therefore,  he  rushes
into  the  king's  presence,  and  reproaches
hira  for  what  he  has  done,  but  covers  his
.personal  feelings  with  professed  zeal  for  his
master's  interests.  Abner  is  a  mere  spy,
who  has  come  on  a  false  pretext,  and  with
the  real  intention  of  learning  David's  going


out  and  coming  in,  that  ii,  his  present
manner  of  life  and  undertakings.  >U1  that
thou  doest;  literally,  aU  that  thou  art
doing;  all  that  is  now  going  on,  and  thy
plans  and  purposes.  Abner  would  not  only
judge  by  what  he  saw,  but  in  his  interview
with  David  would  lead  him  on  to  talk  of  hia
hopes  and  prospects.  David  had  little  time
to  explain  the  real  object  of  Abner's  coming,
nor  was  Joab  in  a  mood  to  listen  to  any-
thing he  said.  He  had  detected  his  master
in  secret  negotiations,  and  would  regard  his
excuses  as  tainted  with  deceit.  And  after
giving  vent  to  his  anger  in  reproaches,  he
hurried  away  to  thwart  David's  plans  by  a
deed  of  most  base  villainy.  Had  David
acted  openly,  all  would  have  been  done
with  Joab's  consent  and  approval.

Ver.  26. — The  well — Hebrew,  eMern—ot
Sirah.  Josephus  ('  Ant.,'  viii.  1,  5)  says  that
this  cistern  was  situated  about  two  miles
and  a  half  north  of  Hebron.  There  was
probably  a  caravanserai  there,  at  which
Abner  halted,  intending  to  continue  his
march  homewards  as  soon  as  the  coolness
of  evening  set  in.  Here  Joab's  messengers
overtook  him,  and,  speaking  in  David's  name
— for  otherwise  Abner  would  not  have  fallen
into  the  trap — asked  him  to  return  for
further  conference,  mentioning,  perhaps,
Joab's  arrival  as  the  reason.  In  this  way
Abner's  suspicions  would  be  set  at  rest,  and
it  would  seem  quite  natural  for  him  to  find
Joab  waiting  for  him  at  the  gate.

Ver.  27.— -Joab  took  him  aside  in  the  gate.
As  we  read  in  ch.  xviii.  21  of  David  sitting
"  between  the  two  gates,"  and  of  "  the  roof
over  the  gate,"  and  in  ver.  33  of  "the
chamber  over  the  gate,"  Ewald's  idea  of
there  being  a  roofed  inner  space,  with  a
guard-room  over  it,  as  in  the  medissval  gate-
towers  in  German  towns,  is  probably  right.
Aa  the  "  two  gates  "  would  make  the  space
between  them  gloomy,  the  spot  would  just
suit  Joab's  purpose.  He  meets  Abner,  there-
fore, in  a  friendly  manner,  and  drawing  him
aside,  as  if  to  converse  with  him  apart  from
the  people  gc/ing  in  and  out,  there  assassi-
nates him.  The  place  was  so  public  that
the  deed  must  have  been  witnessed  by
multitudes,  though  the  gloom,  felt  the
more  by  them  from  the  contrast  with  the
bright  glare  of  sunshine  outside,  had  given
Joab  the  opportunity  of  drawing  his  sword
without  Abner's  observing  it.  for  the  blood
of  Asahel  his  brother.  Joab's  act  was  in
accordance  with  Oriental  feeling ;  and  the
duties  of  the  avenger  of  blood  might  with
some  straining  be  made  to  cover  his  retalia-
tion for  an  act  done  by  Abner  in  self-defence
(Xnmb.  XXXV.  26, 27).  It  is  remarkable  that
Hebron  was  itself  a  city  of  refuge  (Josh.  xx.
7),  and  this  may  have  led  Joab  to  murder  him
in  the  gate,  before  he  had  actually  entered.


68


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  m.  1—39.


StilJ,  Abner  did  not  expect  any  snoh  retri-
bution, and  suppoBing  that  Joab  knew  of
the  purpose  that  had  brought  him  to  Hebron,
he  could  not  suppose  that  he  would  be  so
indifferent  to  his  master's  interests  as  i»
put  a  summary  stop  to  the  negotiations  for
uniting  the  tribes  under  David.  As  it  was,
this  deed  brought  upon  David  an  evil  name,
and  four  or  five  years  bad  to  elapse  before
the  tribes  could  be  induced  to  take  him  for
their  king  Even  then  his  hold  over  them
was  far  less  than  it  would  otherwise  have
been;  for  though  the  shock  was  gradually
got  over,  yet  the  suspicion  still  clung  to
him.  And  if  the  deed  was  Joab's  own  act,
still  David  had  contributed  to  it  by  under-
hand dealings.  His  very  fear  of  Joab  bad
caused  him  to  wrong  his  able  general,  and
given  him  just  cause  for  resentment,

Ver.  28. — ^I  and  my  kingdom  are  guiltless.
By  this  David  means,  not  his  royal  house,
but  the  people  generally,  who  too  often
have  to  pay  the  penalty  for  the  sins  of  their
rulers  (see  oh.  xxi.  1).  Necessarily  this  is
the  case,  wherever  the  crime  is  a  state
crime ;  but  David  protests  that  Abner's
murder  was  a  private  crime,  for  which  Joab
and  Abisliai  alone  ought  to  suffer.

Yer.  29. — Let  it  rest  on  the  head  of  Joab.
The  Hebrew  word  is  very  strong, "  Let  it
roll  itself,"  or  throw  itself  upon  Joab's  head.
The  force  of  the  expression  thus  indicates
the  great  excitement  under  which  David
was  labouring ;  yet  even  so  it  was  no  slight
matter  to  utter  so  bitter  a  curse  upon  a  man
so  powerful,  and  whose  military  skill  was  so
essential  to  the  maintenance  of  his  throne.
To  a  man  of  David's  strong  sense  of  justice,
it  was  a  small  matter  that  by  Abner's
murder  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  was
lost  perhaps  for  ever;  what  he  hated  was
the  wickedness  of  this  mean  act  of  personal
revenge.  And  thus  his  imprecations  are
all  such  as  would  be  humiliating  to  a  family
so  distinguished  for  great  pbysi<^  as  well
as  mental  gifts,  as  the  house  of  Zeruiah.
Nor  was  David  content  with  this;  for  we
gather  from  1  Chron.  li.  6  that  during  the
intervening  years  Joab  was  deprived  of  his
office,  and  that  he  regained  it  only  by  an
act  of  daring  bravery.  (For  the  miserable
condition  of  one  suffering  with  an  issue,
see  Lev.  xv.  2,  etc. ;  and  for  that  of  a
leper.  Lev.,  xiii.  xiv.)  Instead  of  one  that
leaneth  on  a  staff,  some  translate  "  a  distaff-
holder,"  that  is,  a  poor  effeminate  creature,
fit  only  for  woman's  work.  The  true  sense  is
probably  a  cripple — one  who  needs  a  crutch.
That  falleth  on  the  sword;  more  correctly
the  Revised  Version,  that  falleth  hy  the  sword.
The  two  last  imprecations  mean  that  if  any
of  the  raoo  of  Joab  and  Abishai  escape  these
personal  blemishes,  yet  that  his  fate  shall
be,  in  war  an  inglorious  death,  and  in  peace


a  life  of  poverty.  This  corse  of  David  is
regarded  in  the  Talmud  ('Sanhedr.,'  48.  2)
as  very  sinful.  Undeniably  it  was  uttered
in  violent  anger,  and  while  Joab's  act  was
utterly  base  and  porfldious,  yet  he  had  the
excuse  for  it  of  Asabel's  death  and  David's
double-dealing.  The  latter  made  him
oon^ude  that  the  man  who  had  killed  his
brother  was  also  to  usurp  his  place.  Pos-
sibly this  suspicion  was  not  without  reason.
As  David  was  strong  enough  to  deprive
Joab  of  his  command,  it  is  plain  that  he
had  nothing  to  fear  from  telling  him  his
plans.  Joab  would  have  assented,  the
blood-feud  have  been  appeased  by  a  money
payment,  and  all  gone  weU.  But  David,  it
seems,  wished  to  hold  Joab  in  check  by
giving  at  least  a  share  in  the  command  to
the  veteran  Abner.

Yer.  30.-:^oab  and  Abishai  his  brother.
Nothing  is  said  of  Abishai  having  taken
part  in  the  murder,  but  the  words  suggest
that  it  was  a  premeditated  act,  and  tlutt
Abishai  was  privy  to  it.

Yer.  31. — ^Savid  said  to  Joab.  The  excuse
of  the  blood-feud  made  it  impossible  for
David  to  punish  Joab  further  than  by  de-
priving him  of  his  command ;  but  be  made
him  condemn  his  own  deed  by  taking  part
in  the  public  mourning  for  the  man  he  had
murdered.  This  mourning  consisted  in
going  in  solemn  procession,  clad  in  sack-
cloth, before  Abner's  body,  carried  on  a  bier
to  the  grave,  while  David  followed  as  chief
momner;  and  the  emphatic  way  in  which
he  is  called  King  David  suggests  the  thought
that  he  went  in  royal  state,  so  as  to  give
all  possible  dignity  to  the  funeral.  Hie
tears  and  lamentations  with  uplifted  voice
were  so  genuine  and  hearty  as  to  move  the
people  to  a  similar  outburst  of  gtief.  But
while  all  those  at  Hebron  bad  proof  that
David  was  innocent,  the  people  generally
would  know  only  that,  when  Abner  was
escorting  the  king's  wife  back  to  him,  and
arranging  for  his  election  to  rule  over  all
Israel,  he  was  treacherously  murdered  ai
the  gate  of  Hebron  by  one  who  was  chief
over  David's  army  and  also  his  nephew.

Yer.  33.— The  king  lamented.  The  word
is  the  same  as  that  used  in  ch.  i.  17.  The
word  rendered  "  fool "  is  nabal  (for  which  see
1  Sam.  XXV.  25).  Tlie  idea  contained  in
the  word  is  not  that  of  mere  silliness,  but
of  woi-thlessness  also ;  and  thus  in  Ps.  xiv.
1  we  find  that  thu  nahal  is  also  an  atheist.

Yer.  34. — Thy  hands  were  not  bound.
Abner  had  been  put  to  death  by  Joab  for
killing  Asaliel.  But  there  had  been  no
legal  process.  He  had  not  been  brought  in
fetters  before  a  judge  to  be  tried  for  the
crime  alleged,  but  murdered  for  private  ends.
And  thus,  "As  a  man  falleth  before  tha
children  of  iniquity,  so  hod  ho  fallen,"  that


oa.  m.  1—39.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


m


is,  by  Clime,  and  not  by  law.  These  words
n  re  probably  the  refrain  of  the  dirge,  like
those  in  oh.  i.  19,  25,  27,  and  were  followed
by  the  celebration  of  Abner's  bravery,  but
they  alone  are  recorded,  because  they  contain
the  main  point.  Abner's  death  was  not,
like  the  sentence  upon  Baanah  and  Eechab,
an  act  of  justice,  but  one  of  lawless  revenge ;
and  by  this  poem  David  proclaimed,  not
only  his  innocence,  but  also  his  abhorrence
of  the  crime.

Yer.  35. — The  people  oame  to  cause  David
to  eat  meat.  The  Jewish  commentators,
Phillppson,  Oahen,  etc,  consider  that  the
occasion  for  this  was  given  by  the  custom
of  taking  food  after  a  funeral  (Jer.  xvi.  7 ;
Ezek.  xxiv.  17),  which  In  time  degenerated
into  the  giving  of  a  costly  banquet  (Josephus,
'  Bell.  Jud.,'  2.  1).  To  this  day,  at  a  Jewish
funeral  in  Germany,  the  bearers  are  regaled
with  eggs,  bread,  and  wine.  While,  then,
others  were  partaking  of  the  food  that  had
been  provided,  David  remained  apart,  and
when  urged  by  the  assembled  multitude  to
join  them  in  their  meal,  he  protested  that
he  would  continue  fasting  until  sunset.  He
thus  proved  that  his  sorrow  was  genuine,
and  the  people  were  convinced  of  his  inno-
cence, and  pleased  at  the  honour  which  he
thus  did  to  the  fallen  soldier.

Ver.  36.— Whatsoever  the  king  did  pleased
all  the  people.  This  is  a  tribute  to  the
king's  conduct  generally.  The  people  would
have  been  grieved  and  astonished  if  David
had  been  guilty  of  this  mean  murder ;  but
his  indignant  disavowal  of  it  was  in  accord-
ance with  his  usual  justice  and  uprightness,
and  so  it  confirmed  their  high  opinion  of
him.  Thus  while  the  more  distant  tribes
condemned  David,  those  who  had  the  best
opportunity  for  forming  a  judgment  gave
their  verdict  in  his  favour.

Ver.  37. — AU  Israel  understood.  The
twenty  men  who  had  accompanied  Abner
would  be  witnesses  of  all  that  David  did,
and  would  carry  their  report  of  it  home,
and  of  the  high  estimation  in  which  his
character  was  held  at  Hebron.  And  this
gradually  would  be  told  througliout  the
tribes,  and  the  final  verdict  of  all  well-
disposed  people  would  be  in  David's  favour.


Ver.  38. — A  prince  and  a  great  man.
David  pronounces  this  high  estimate  of
Abner's  worth  to  his  servants,  that  is,  to  his
oflScers,  and  especially  to  the  six  hundred
mighty  men.  His  conduct  is  bold  and  open,
and  must  have  greatly  humiliated  Joab  and
Abishai.  But  thougli  the  six  hundred
approved  of  David's  conduct,  and  respected  .
him  for  it,  yet  probably,  as  Abner  had
killed  Asahel,  they  would  not  have  con-
sented to  any  further  punishment  than  the
disgrace  inflicted  on  Joab  by  his  being
deprived  of  the  command  of  David's
warriors.

Ver.  39. — I  am  this  day  weak  ...  the
sons  of  Zemiah  be  too  hard  for  me.  David
would  gladly  have  had  Abner  as  a  counter-
poise to  Joab's  too-grc  at  power.  As  it  was,
though  an  anointed  king,  tie  had  but  one
tribe  loyal  to  him ;  the  rest  were  the  sub-
jects of  a  rival;  and  the  Philistines  were
oppressing  all  alike.  Had  Abner's  enter-
prise been  carried  out,  all  the  tribes  would
have  been  united  under  his  sway.  He  could
thus  have  made  head  against  the  Philis-
tines, and  Abner,  in  command  of  the  Ben-
jamites  and  other  tribes,  would  have  curbed
the  fierce  self-will  of  Joab.  As  it  was,  the
sons  of  Zeruiah  might  be  reprimanded,  and
could  not  treat  David  as  Abner  had  treated
Ishbosheth ;  but  they  were  indispensable.
David  had  a  strange  set  of  men  around  him
in  those  outlaws  (1  Sam.  xxii.  2);  and
Joali,  brave,  skilful,  and  unscrupulous,  was
a  man  after  their  own  heart.  They  had
just  returned  with  great  booty  from  a  foray
under  his  command;  and  it  was  a  brave
and  manly  thing  in  David  to  reprove  him
so  openly,  and  dismiss  him  from  his  com-
mand. Had  he  attempted  more,  and  Joab
had  stood  upon  the  defence,  there  were
plenty  of  «  men  of  Belial"  (1  Bam.  xxx.  22)
to  side  with  him,  and  David  miglit  have
met  with  the  fate  threatened  him  at  Ziklag
(1  Sam.  XIX.  6).  As  it  was,  he  proved  him-
self to  be  king,  and  Joab,  in  spite  of  every-
thing, remained  a  most  faithful  officer,  and
the  right-hand  man  in  his  kingdom,  and
one  even  trusted  with  perilous  and  dis-
graceful secrets  (ch.  xi.  14).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 11. — BivcU  interests.    The  facts  are:   1.  A  desultory  war  is  carried  on

between  the  house  of  Saul  and  the  house  of  David,  in  which  the  latter  has  the  advan-
ttLoe.  2.  David  has  six  sons  bom  to  him  while  at  Hebron.  3.  A  quarrel  arises  between
Abner  and  Ishbosheth,  consequent  on  an  accusation  resented  by  Abner.  4.  Abner
charges  his  master  with  ingratitude,  and  threatens  to  transfer  Us  allegiance  to  David.
5.  In  seeking  to  give  emphasis  to  his  threat,  Abner  indicates  his  knowledge  i>f  the
Divine  will  concerning  David.    The  object  of  the  historian  in  vers.  1 — 5  is  obviou«ly  to


70  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  m.  1—39.

give  a  representation,  from  a  political  point  of  view,  of  David  prior  to  the  action  of
Abner  in  his  favovir ;  and  in  vers.  6 — H  to  state  the  circumstance  that  led  to  a  transfer
of  Abner's  support  from  one  side  to  the  other.  The  general  effect  of  the  war  betweer
the  two  royal  houses  and  the  growth  of  David's  domestic  establishment  are  the  two
prominent  items  of  the  situation  prior  to  Abner's  change  of  policy.  Judged  solely  by
the  standard  of  the  age,  they  pointed  in  the  direction  of  advancing  influence,  but  looked
at  in  the  light  of  a  higher  standard  they  suggest  a  qualified  prosperity.  The  general
truths  embodied  in  this  account  of  rival  interests  may  be  set  forth  as  follows.

I.  Defensive  action  m  a  just  cause  is  sometimes  the  best  pouct.  That  the
cause  of  David  was  jnst  is  evident  to  every  believer  in  the  truth  of  the  First  Book  of
Samuel,  and,  as  seen  there  and  in  the  Psalms,  the  conviction  of  this  governed  his  conduct.
From  a  purely  human  point  of  view  it  might  seem  contrary  to  natural  justice  to  set
aside  the  son  of  the  late  king ;  and  the  effort  of  Ishbosheth  to  urge,  by  force  of  arms,  his
own  claim  may  be  a  natural  sequence  of  thought  and  feeling.  But  kings  have  no
rights  apart  from  the  will  of  God ;  and,  as  the  sequel  shows  (ver.  10),  both  the  young
king  and  his  general  were  not  unacquainted  with  the  Divine  purpose.  The  right  being
with  David,  it  might  seem  strange  that  he  did  not  press  his  claim  to  entire  dominion
by  aggressive  war.  His  skill  and  valour,  the  coherence  of  his  following,  and  the
enthusiasm  created  by  his  personality,  to  say  nothing  of  the  demoralizing  effect  on
Abner  of  his  own  infidelity  to  conscience,  could  not  but  have  speedily  made  him  master
of  all  Israel.  Inslead  of  thatj  we  find  David  simply  authorizing  such  conflict  as  would
sufiBce  to  hold  his  own  and  check  the  aggressive  efforts  of  the  house  of  Saul.  It
is  interesting  to  see  here  the  same  David  as  of  old,  who  had  such  faith  in  God  and  the
gradual  unfolding  of  his  purposes  that  he  would  never  raise  a  liand  i^ainst  Saul,  or  do
anything,  except  in  necessary  self-defence,  that  could  be  construed  into  hostility.  Had
not  Abner's  evil  counsels  prevailed  with  Ishbosheth,  David  would  have  lived  in  peace  at
Hebron  till  a  mightier  hand  than  his  own  cleared  the  way  to  the  throne  of  a  united

vjeople.  Statesmen  would  do  well  to  take  such  an  example  in  many  of  the  painful
contingencies  that  arise.  To  a  just  man  it  is  half  the  victory  to  be  calm  and  strong  in
the  conviction  of  his  rectitude  and  the  righteousness  of  his  position.  There  is  a  watch-
ful Providence  cherishing  the  good  and  frustrating  the  evil.  Forces  under  the  direction
of  an  evil  genius  are  sure  to  wear  themselves  out  if  only  the  objects  of  their  hate  can
hold  their  own;  and  tht  wasting  of  their  strength  means  the  final  triumph  of  the  cause
of  truth  and  justice.  There  are  seasons  in  Church  life  when  this  policy  of  pure  defence
is  wise ;  for  al  such  times  God  has  ends  to  effect  which  work  in  with  the  scope  of  more
aggressive  endeavours.

II.  A  EIGHT  contention  WILL  COMB  TO  A  BIGHT  ISSUE.  "  David  WBXcd  Stronger
and  stronger."  Of  cotirse  he  did.  It  could  not  but  be  so,  for  he  was  a  chosen  servant,
not  seeking  or  doing  his  own  will,  but  simply  placing  his  life  in  the  hands  of  God,  to
work  out  for  his  people  and  for  future  ages,  purposes  the  precise  nature  of  which  he
could  not  understand.  No  weapon  formed  against  him  could  prosper.  He  who  contended
against  him  fought  against  Grod.  The  forces  of  nature  were  on  his  side.  Never  did
mortal  more  vainly  contend  against  fate  than  did  Ishbosheth  contend  against  David.
The  principle  involved  in  this  instance  is  of  wide  range.  Eight  is  sure  to  prevail  in
the  issue.  The  disturbing  element  introduced  by  sin  into  the  universe  causes  strife  of
the  most  grave  character.  The  whole  line  of  Divine  government,  so  far  as  we  can  trace
it,  seems  to  be  a  line  of  conflict  between  right  and  wrong,  holiness  and  sin.  The
antagonism  taken  up  in  Eden  runs  on  and  becomes  more  acute  on  Calvary,  and  is
apparent  now  in  a  "long  war"  between  the  children  of  light  and  the  kingdom  of  dark-
ness. Time  is  in  favour  of  righteousness.  There  is  an  endurance  in  truth  which  cannot
be  afBrmed  of  error.  As  perhaps  the  friends  of  David  thought  those  years  of  war  very
tedious  and  dispiriting,  and  sometimes  even  inconsistent  with  Tightness  of  claim  and
purpose,  so  we  may  be  weary  in  the  greater  strife  and  become  disturbed  by  cruel
questionings ;  yet  the  issue  is  sure.  "  Stronger  and  stronger  "  may  be  affirmed  of  the
kingdom  of  righteousness  on  earth.  For  even  the  seeming  failures  and  delays  only
become,  in  the  hands  of  Providence,  the  means  of  acquiring  the  hardier  and  mor«
enduring  virtues  by  which  at  last  the  final  victory  shall  be  won.  The  same  is  true  of
any  conflicts  in  wmch  character  is  at  stake.  Our  "  righteousness  shall  be  brought  forth
as  the  light,"  and  our  "judgment  as  the  noonday."    The  parallel  may  be  seen  also  ia


CH.  m.  1— 39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  71


the  conflict  of  the  "  old  "  and  the  "  new  man."    The  one  is  on  the  way  to  perish ;  tha
other  is  "  renewed  day  hy  day."

III.  The  unexpressed  woes  op  life  abb  vert  real.  "ITiore  was  long  war."
The  sentence  is  brief,  and  understandable  by  a  child.  It  is  repeated  with  careless  ease.
As  a  rule,  it  connotes  to  the  ordinary  reader  only  a  general  idea  of  men  seeking  to  slay
one  another.  But  to  read  history  aright  we  ought  to  bring  the  faculty  of  imagination
into  full  play ;  and  it  is  only  as  we  exercise  the  historic  imagination  that  we  get
a  glimpse  of  the  sad  facts  embodied  in  this  simple  form  of  expression.  Subjected  to
the  vilalizing  power  of  this  faculty,  what  unexpressed  woes  rise  up  to  view !  What
harsh  and  fierce  dispositions  1  What  weary  marchings  and  watchings !  What  mur-
derous blows  and  bleeding  wounds  and  agonizing  deaths !  Wliat  widows'  wailings  and
orphans'  tears  1  What  losses  to  homes  and  nation  of  strong  men  and  productive  toil!
This,  which  applies  to  the  brief  statement  of  the  sacred  narrative,  is  equally  true  of
greater  woes.  Men  read  of  great  battles  very  much  as  they  read  algebraic  symbols.
The  real  items  indicated  are  not  vivid  to  the  mind.  Men  read  also  of  the  banishment
of  the  wicked  to  outer  darkness  in  the  same  mechanical  way.  The  hurry  of  life  leaves
no  time  for  the  imagination  to  lay  hold  of  the  actual  facts  connoted.  Hence  the
power  over  the  will  of  mere  visible,  present  realities.  Hence  the  difficulty  of  getting
the  "  powers  of  the  world  to  come  "  to  influence  motive.  Hence,  also,  the  necessity  of
each  man  making  an  effort  to  bring  his  mind  into  actual  view  of  the  facts  covered  by
language,  and  of  the  preacher  and  teacher  rendering  the  aid  of  well-chosen  speech
to  further  this  effort.

IV.  Conventional  sthbnoth  mat  be  an  oooasion  of  hobal  weakness.  The
historian  tells  us  of  the  growth  of  David's  domestic  establishment  at  Hebron.  Estimated
by  the  customs  prevalent  in  the  East  at  that  time,  this  acquisition  by  David  of  wives
and  sons  was  supposed  to  add  to  the  splendour  and  stateliness  of  his  regal  position.
All  the  paraphernalia  of  a  court,  the  wide-reaching  influence  of  family  connections,  and
the  imposing  show  of  a  large  household  would  lead  ordinary  men  to  regard  him  as
among  the  gr§at  ones  of  the  earth.  The  accidental  surroundings  of  life  form  a
delusively  important  part  of  what  is  deemed  to  be  human  greatness.  We  are  aU
children  in  so  far  as  we  are  influenced  in  our  judgments  on  social  position  and  weight
of  character  by  the  circumstantials  of  life.  Even  the  more  educated  are  prone  to
either  identify  or  associate  greatness  with  large  establishments.  This  kind  of  con-
ventionalism plays  an  important  part  in  human  aflairs ;  but  it  is  not  God's  standard.
David's  polygamous  habits  were  consistent  with  the  conventional  morality  of  the  age,
and  his  domestic  establishment  projected  his  public  position  before  the  eye  of  the
people  in  a  form  accordant  to  princely  fashion ;  but  we  know  that  beneath  all  the  signs
of  wealth  and  greatness  there  were  influences  at  work  which  could  not  but  weaken  his
moral  force  and  mar  the  beauty  and  sweetness  of  his  private  life.  Oriental  splendour
and  conventional  moralities  were  indulged  in  at  great  moral  cost.  David  in  Hebron  with
many  wives  and  their  accompaniments  could  not  be  as  morally  robust  as  was  David  in
earlier  days.  The  same  danger  attends  all  who  conform  to  customs  not  based  on  strict
principles  of  purity  and  godliness.  Fashion  cannot  make  righteousness.  Goodness
may  live  amidst  habits  essentially  aUen  to  the  welfare  of  the  individual  and  to  saints,
as  surely  as  life  may  continue  in  an  atmosphere  charged  with  malarious  poisons ;  but
the  enervation  of  the  one  will  be  as  certain  as  of  the  other.  The  insensibility  of  the
man  to  the  subtle  action  of  the  evil  is  only  an  aggravation  of  its  action  and  in  no  wise
a  palliation.  Modem  Christians  should  severely  scrutinize  the  moral  quality  of  the
circumstances  and  habits  in  which  conventional  usage  allows  them  to  live.  This  can
only  be  done  by  making  use  of  tests  absolutely  given  by  God  apart  from  the  colouring
which  custom  is  apt  to  give  even  to  Divine  laws.

V.  Unrighteous  men  pay  homaoe  to  righteousness.  There  can  be  no  question
but  that  Ishbosheth  knew  well  the  nature  and  validity  of  David's  claims;  for  the
theocratic  rule  was  a  reality  in  Israel  during  and  subsequent  to  the  life  of  SamueL  It
was,  therefore,  wrong  for  him  to  put  forth  any  personal  claim  of  his  own.  Jonathan's
example  had  been  lost  upon  him ;  and  yet  this  man  recognized  the  evil  done  by  Abner
in  lustful  indu^ence,  and  even  ventured  to  protest  against  it.  On  the  other  hand,
Abner,  while  being  unrighteous  enough  to  indulge  in  sinful  lust  and  to  abet  the
invalid  claim  of  Ishbosheth,  nevertheless  is  fired  with  iiidignation  that  th«  1ot«  qI


12  THE  SECOirb  BOOK  OV  SAMUEL.  [<«•  ™- 1—39.


gratitnde  should  have  bten  violated  by  the  young  monarch.  Thus  men,  pursuing
a  course  which  they  know  to  he  contrary  to  the  will  of  Grod,  become,  when  personal  and
family  matters  are  involved,  zealous,  each  in  his  own  fashion,  for  what  is  right  and
proper.  Truly,  man  is  a  strange  compound  of  moral  light  and  darkness.  The  psycho-
logical explanation  is  a  study.  It  is  the  habituation  to  the  wrong  which  renders  men
so  dull  to  appeals,  so  insensible  to  the  real  demerit  of  their  actions,  and  it  is  the  latent
force  of  conscience  which  saves  them  I'rom  being  parties  to  a  course  on  which  they  have
not  taken  the  initial  step.  Hence  our  Lord's  reference  to  the  "gnat"  and  the  "camel."
The  prevalence  of  this  state  of  moral  confusion  is  very  wide  even  in  Christian  society.
In  the  same  individual  may  be  found  great  sensitiveness  and  great  obtuseness.  The
holding  of  slaves  and  gain  by  the  sale  of  them  has  coexisted  with  a  profound  regard
for  religious  worship.  Licentious  men  have  had  a  dread  of  dishonesty.  Multitudes
who  rob  God  of  the  love  and  obedience  due  to  him  are  indignant  if  an  ordinary  business
debt  is  not  paid.  The  Pharisees  could  conspire  to  kill  Jesus  Christ,  and  yet  feel  very
unhappy  if  they  omitted  any  of  the  ceremonials  of  religion.  It  is  a  common  thing  for
men  and  women  to  indulge  in  envy,  jealousy,  and  ill  will,  while  extremely  careful  to
keep  up  an  external  conduct  conformable  to  the  requirements  of  the  Decalogue.  There
is  much  scope  for  searching  of  heart  on  this  subject ;  and  in  dealing  with  it  the  preacher
needs  to  exercise  great  discrimination  and  delicacy  of  reference.  Abner  must  be  made
to  see  himself  as  Ishbosheth  sees  hira,  and  vice  versa.  "  Man,  know  th)  self,"  is  a
maxim  of  immense  importance  to  every  one.

VI.  Passing  events  may  serve  to  unveil  the  wokkinos  or  conscience.  Viewed
from  a  distance  by  the  people,  Abner  seemed  to  be  a  man  who  all  along  was  conscien-
tiously and  faithfully  subordinating  his  life  to  the  maintenance  of  a  just  cause.  So  far
as  we  can  see  from  the  narrative,  he  had  been  reticent  concerning  the  mental  processes
of  which  he  was  daily  conscious.  But  the  incident  of  Ishboshetli's  accusation  of
immorality  was  as  the  removing  of  a  veil  whereby  the  actual  thoughts  of  Abner  stood
revealed.  "  So  do  God  to  Abner,  and  more  also,  except,  as  the  Lord  hath  sworn  to
David,  even  so  I  do  to  him."  Thus  Abner  had  known  all  alon,-  that  it  was  God's  will
to  give  the  kingdom  to  David.  The  ideas  and  compunctions  connected  with  this  central
fact  had  evidently  been  covered  up  and  suppressed.  The  real  inner  life  of  struggle
against  right  and  God  was  now  exposed  by  his  own  act.  In  the  case  of  every  man
there  is  always  an  inner  life  necessarily  hidden  by  himself  from  ordinary  view.  It  is
a  necessity  of  social  existence  that  each  man  should  be  more  unknown  than  known
to  his  fellows.  Only  where  there  is  perfect  holiness  would  perfect  knowledge  of  others
be  helpful  to  love  and  confidence.  But  in  the  case  of  men  pursuing  a  deliberate  course
which  seems  to  others  to  be  conscientious,  but  is  known  to  themselves  to  be  contrary
to  right,  there  is  a  rigid  and  designed  concealment  of  their  self-condemnation.  They
gain  the  reputation  of  being  upright,  though  perhaps  misguided,  men,  while  their  own
conscience  gives  the  lie  to  this  public  judgment.  An  incidental  reference,  an  unguarded
hasty  admission  of  fact,  an  effort  to  justify  an  action,  may  be  as  a  sudden  rent  in
the  covering  of  the  real  life  within,  exposing  to  the  view  of  others  a  guilty  violation
of  truth,  a  perpetual  conflict  against  the  well-ascertained  will  of  God.  This  frequent
concealment  of  an  inner  guilty  life  and  its  possible  unveiling  by  incidental  events
should  be  a  guide  in  forming  an  estimate  of  conduct,  and  a  warning  to  evil-doers.  The
self-exposure,  also,  however  incidental,  is  to  be  taken  as  a  preintimation  of  ^e  final
exposure  when  God  shall  bring  hidden  things  into  judgment.

Vers.  12— 21.— The  facts  are :  1.  Abner,  disgusted  with  Ishbosheth's  conduct,  opens
negotiation  with  David  for  the  transfer  of  the  kingdom  to  him.  2.  David  consents  to
discuss  the  question  on  condition  that  Abner  first  of  all  undertakes  to  restore  unto  him
Miohal,  Saul's  daughter.  3.  Concurrent  with  Abner's  efforts  to  bring  this  to  pass,  David
makes  a  demand  on  Ishbosheth  for  the  restoration  of  Michal.  4.  Abner,  taking  chains
of  Michal  on  her  return  to  David,  effects  the  final  separation  from  her  weeping  husband.
5.  Reminding  Israel  and  Benjamin  of  their  former  preference  of  David,  Abner  seeks  to
bring  them  over  to  his  cause.  6.  Charged  with  instructions  from  the  people,  he  pro-
ceeds to  Hebron  as  a  legate  to  arrange  the  business  with  David.  7,  As  a  result  of  the
interview,  it  was  left  to  Abner  to  complete  the  formal  submission  of  all  the  people  to
the  authority  of  David.


en.  m.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMTJEL.  ?3


Faiihfulneit  in  small  things.  The  passage  here  In  reference  to  David  and  Michal
brings  out  a  feature  in  the  character  of  the  king  which  was  prominent  from  first  to
last.  According  to  the  common  estimate  of  things,  the  a  priori  belief  would  be  that,
when  a  ruler  desires  the  subjugation  of  a  kingdom,  he  will  readily  accept  oifers  of
submission  and  of  all  powerful  aids  to  bring  it  to  pass.  To  obtain  supremacy  over
Israel  was  the  one  thing  above  all  others  on  which  David's  mind  was  set,  and  the
co-operation  of  so  influential  a  man  as  Abner  was  a  virtual  realization  of  the  king's
purpose.  To  an  astute  unprincipled  man  like  Abner  it  was  doubtless  a  cause  of
amazement  that,  when  the  kingdom  was  within  the  king's  grasp,  he  should  practically
refuse  to  have  it  unless  a  certain  private  affair  was'first  arranged.  The  great  affairs  of
the  nation  were  made  to  wait  on  the  settlement  of  what  seemed  to  be  a  mere  matter
of  sentiment  and  personal  intereat.  Few  monarchs  in  the  Bast  would  thus  have  dealt
with  the  chance  of  gaining  the  ends  of  long-cherished  political  ambition.  In  David's
case  the  stipulation  was  consistent  with  his  character.  He  was  ever  generously  careful
of  maintaining  the  rights  of  individuals  and  of  sacrificing  his  own  ambition  to  the
justice  due  to  others.     He  was  faithful  in  that  which  is  least.

I.  The  claims  of  that  which  ib  least  ake  valid  and  abb  bcbstantial  pabts
OF  A  vast  system  OF  OBLIGATIONS.  Michal  was  David's  wife,  bonnd  to  his  heart  and
life  by  ties  sacred  and  memorable(l  Sam.xviii.  17 — 30).  To  political  schemers  it  would
seem  absurd  to  set  a  woman,  not  seen  for  many  years,  and  known  to  be  living  in  forced
matrimony  with  another  man,  over  against  a  whole  kingdom.  But  wrong  done  to  her
(1  Sam.  XXV.  44)  had  not  Invalidated  her  claim  on  David's  affection.  It  was  due  to
her,  due  to  the  memory  of  her  father  in  spite  of  his  follies,  due  to  the  force  of  his  own
character  on  others,  and  due  to  the  old  love  (1  Sam.  iviii.  20 — 28)  which  changing
fortunes  had  not  changed,  that  she  should  have  justice  done  heron  the  very  first  oppor-
timity  of  enforcing  it.  David's  vision  was  clear  enough  to  see  that,  if  his  claim  to  be
king  over  all  Israel  was  valid  because  of  the  appointment  of  God,  so  equally  the  claim
of  this  banished  woman  on  his  love  and  care  was  also  valid,  because  based  on  principles
which  God  had  ordained  for  the  regulation  of  domestic  life.  The  same  Divine  will
was  in  both ;  and,  moreover,  they  were  equally  parts  of  the  great  system  of  obligations
which  covers  the  whole  area  of  human  activity,  and  which  ia  productive  of  highest
good  to  man  when  the  different  parts  are  equally  held  as  sacred  and  are  rigidly  observed.
In  human  affairs  there  is  often  an  apparent  collision  of  what  are  called  small  and  great
obligations.  In  reality  there  is  no  such  thing.  There  may  be  a  question  of  order  in
which  actions  shall  be  done;  but  obligation,  in  the  moral  sense,  can  never  clash  with
obligation.  To  love  the  Lord  with  all  the  heart  is  the  prime,  the  chief  duty,  but  it
does  not  destroy  the  duty  of  love  to  our  neighbour.  To  take  part  in  public  affairs  may
be  an  obligation,  but  the  care  of  home  is  a  valid  claim  which  cannot  be  ignored.
There  are  duties  which,  entering  into  the  minutije  of  life  or  pertaining  to  the  home
rather  than  to  public  affairs,  may  be  regarded  as  relatively  small,  but  inasmuch  as  they
are  not  the  creation  of  custom  but  proceed  from  the  will  of  God  and  form  parts  of  the
great  scheme  of  life,  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  sacred  and  binding  as  those  which
figure  more  largely  before  the  public  eye.
II.  The  bkinoing  about  of  gkeat  events  involves  mobb  ohangbb  than  lib

WITHIN   OUK  OWN   ACTION,  AND   PbOVIDENCB   TAKES   OABE   OF   THEM.      The  event  of  all

Israel  submitting  to  David  would  imply  manifold  influences  brought  to  bear  on  the
elders  of  the  people,  and  through  them  on  the  masses,  and  in  such  a  process  of  change
there  might  arise  many  a  circumstance  adverse  to  the  desired  issue.  It  was  not  in
David's  power  to  effect  this  by  any  personal  action.  All  he  could  do  was  to  set  agencies
at  work  through  Abner,  and  trust  in  Providence  for  disposing  the  hearts  of  men  aright.
It  was  right  doubtless  for  the  people  to  own  him  as  king,  but  it  was  not  in  his  power
to  establish  this  right.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  in  his  power  to  do  justice  to  a
banished  woman,  and  demand,  as  a  prior  step,  that  she  be  restored  to  his  heart  and  home.
There  is  always  an  uncertainty  attending  our  efforts  to  bring  about  great  issues  in  the
world's  affairs,  even  though  those  issues  be  predicted  and  included  in  the  Divine
purpose ;  for  our  actions  are  but  a  few  among  myriads  of  forces  for  and  against  the  end
for  which  we  strive,  and  for  ages  the  goal  may  not  be  reached.  It  is  our  duty  to  do
what  we  can,  just  as  it  was  David's  to  use  means  for  winning  Israel  over  to  the  alle-
giance which  had  been  predicted  and  was  paii  of  the  theocratic  piurpose;  but  we  have  to


74  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  m.  1—39

act  in  faith  that  an  overruling  Providence  is  at  work  above  us  and  above  all  forces,  and
that  the  great  issue  will  in  some  unknown  way  and  time  be  brought  to  pass.  The
statesman  cannot  make  the  nation  great  and  strong ;  he  can  only  set  in  motion  social
and  material  forces  which  in  due  course  may  accomplish  the  purpose  in  view,  Th«
missionary  can  but  contribute  an  item  of  force  towards  rendering  the  whole  earth  sub-
missive to  Christ.  The  parent  can  contribute  but  some  of  the  elements  which  in  the
end  will  tend  to  form  the  final  character  of  bis  children.  The  far-reaching  aims  of  life
are  binding  on  us,  but  their  realization  is  not  all  in  our  power.  It  is  absolutely  within
our  power  to  perform  single  acts  of  justice  and  consideration  as  occasion  offers.  As  the
products  of  will,  they  may  fill  but  a  small  place  in  the  world  in  comparison  with  the
realization  of  those  other  wider  aims  which  are  products  of  many  wills;  yet  they
afford  opportunities  for  proving  our  fidelity  to  truth  and  righteousness  as  surely  as  do
the  great  events  to  bring  about  which  we  can  only  contribute  our  part.  David's  pro-
found regard  for  what  was  right  shone  forth  in  his  care  for  a  single  individual,  just  as
truly  as  his  faith  in  Providence  appeared  in  subordinating  the  attainment  of  his  political
ambition  to  this  act  of  justice.

.    III.  ^UMAN  DUTY   IS   PLEDGED   TO   THAT   WHICH    18    KNOWN   AND  DISTINCT.       David

knew  that  Miclial  was  his  wife,  that  she  had  been  forcibly  separated  from  him  in  the
day  of  adversity,  and  that  as  a  good  man  he  was  bound  to  amend  her  wrongs  as  soon
as  occasion  offered.  Though  a  king,  he  saw  that  domestic  were  prior  to  political  obliga-
tions. There  may  have  been,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  policy  in  showing  his  regard  in  this
way  for  the  house  of  Saul,  but  the  evident  motive  was  to  do  a  right  deed  as  soon  as  it
was  seen  to  be  right  and  scope  offered  for  its  performance.  In  morals,  prompt  action  is
homage  to  righteousness.  A  known  duty  and  scope  for  its  performance  should  never
be  deferred.  As  air,  in  obedience  to  the  law  of  its  action,  rushes  in  to  fill  a
vacuum,  so  does  a  just  mind  at  once  seize  opportunity  for  doing  what  is  clearly  known
to  be  right.  If  men  linger  and  hesitate  to  do  specific  acts  discerned  to  be  just,  it  is
clear  evidence  that  they  are  defective  in  righteousness  of  principle.  Their  inner  life  is
pro  tanto  alien  to  that  of  God.  This  explains,  in  one  way  at  least,  how  it  is  that  some
men  do  not  at  once  turn  from  positive  sins  and  surrender  themselves  to  Christ.  They
see  what  is  the  right  thing  to  do,  but  defer  it  till  some  great  scheme  of  their  life  is
completed.

IV.  Faithfulness  in  that  which  is  least  gives  moral  power  foe  other  acts.
Having  discharged  this  more  private  domestic  duty,  and  so  satisfied  his  conscience  in
reference  to  an  obvious  obligation  in  which  a  sufferer  was  concerned,  David  was  a
stronger  man  for  carrying  through  whatever  might  be  useful  for  realizing  the  great
purposes  of  Providence.  A  good  conscience  is  a  moral  tonic.  The  impression  produced
on  Abner  and  others  by  this  regard  for  what  is  right  in  the  more  private  sphere  of  life,
could  not  but  be  favourable  to  the  public  interests  of  the  king.  Evil  men  are  awed  by
pronounced  goodness,  and  the  haltipg  are  won  to  allegiance.  History  presents  many
instances  of  influence  augmented  by  conscientious  attention  to  duties  in  private  and
domestic  life.  The  habit  formed  by  such  carefulness  to  do  the  right  thing  in  minor
matters  gives  momentum  to  the  action  of  the  will  when  it  is  called  to  act  in  reference
to  great  questions  in  the  face  of  strong  opposition.  Many  men  become  morally
enervated  by  careless  inattention  to  obligations  of  a  private  nature,  yet  lying  close  at
hand  and  clear  as  daylight.  Their  influence  on  great  public  questwns  is  weakened
by  their  consciousness  of  neglect,  and  by  the  disgust  with  which  nen  regard  public
separated  from  private  righteousness.

Policy  without  principle.  The  Bible  narratives  do  not  enter  into  details  concerning
the  inner  motives  of  those  whose  actions  are  recorded ;  they  rather  state  outward  facts,
and  leave  them  to  produce  their  natural  impressions.  The  stiange  and  apparently
irreconcilable  procedures  of  Abner  are  no  doubt  resolvable  into  some  one  governin<'
feeling  which,  with  unvarying  consistency  though  in  varying  form,  shaped  his  entire
public  actions.  The  whole  facts  from  first  to  last  reveal  the  operation  at  the  base  of
his  conduct  of  one  master-passion — the  love  of  pre-eminence  ;  and  it  is  in  the  working
out  of  this  powerful  feeling  that  we  find  a  remarkable  illustration  of  a  policy  in  life
apart  from  principle.

L    A   LOVE  or  PBE-EMINENOE   IB  OFTEN   A   CLUE   TO  MUCH  IN   LIFE   THAT   IS  OTHKB-


OH.  m.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  78

WISE  tTNAOCouKTABLB.  It  Certainly  does  seem  strange  that  a  man  of  Abnei's  abilities,
brought  up  in  full  knowledge  of  the  special  relation  of  David  to  Samuel  and  Jonathan,
and  therefore  fully  aware  of  the  reason  why,  after  the  exile  from  Palestine,  David  should
assume  royal  state  at  Hebron  and  claim  dominion  also  over  the  entire  house  of  Israel,
should  give  up  his  services  in  favour  of  David's  rival.  In  the  light  of  mere  custom  and
regal  order  it  would  stem  to  be  patriotic  and  manly  on  his  part  to  identify  his  life  with
the  interests  of  a  son  of  the  reigning  house,  and  probably  he  flattered  himself  that
ordinary  men  would  put  this  interpretation  on  his  conduct.  But  the  best  solution
of  all  the  facts  of  his  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  hypothesis  of  his  passionate  love  of  pre-
eminence. With  so  strong  a  man  as  Joab  on  David's  side,  and  the  reputed  zeal  of  the
other  sons  of  Zeruiah,  there  was  little  chance  of  his  rising  to  the  position  of  power
which  alone  would  satisfy  his  ambition.  Although  his  ordinary  sense  must  have
assured  him,  to  say  nothing  of  the  latent  truth  recognized  by  the  conscience  (vers.  9, 10),
that  Ishbosheth  could  never  successfully  compete  with  so  brave  and  active  a  rival  as
David,  yet,  on  the  principle  that  it  is  "  better  to  reign  in  hell  than  to  serve  in  heaven,"
he  found  it  more  congenial  to  throw  in  his  lot  with  a  man  oper  whom  he  could  exercise
chief  influence  and  in  whose  cause  he  would  be  the  principal  flgure.  This  policy  void
of  principle  ran  through,  as  we  shall  soon  see,-the  actions  of  his  entire  course.  There
lies,  also,  at  the  spring  of  every  man's  conduct,  be  he  a  public  character  or  only  a
private  individual,  some  master-passion  to  which  all  other  feelings  and  aims  are  sub-
ordinate, and  it  is  good  for  each  one,  and  necessary  to  the  true  interpreter  of  life,  to
find  out  what  it  is.  In  public  affairs  there  can  be  no  question  that  in  veiy  many
instances  it  is  not  fear  of  Qod,  not  pure  patriotism,  not  regard  for  human  interests  as
such,  but  open  or  disguised  love  of  pre-eminence  which  furnishes  the  main  incentive
to  conduct.  The,  form  of  conduct  may  be  such  as  would  result  from  the  action  of
higher  and  better  feelings,  but  that  is  simply  the  result  of  policy.  This  feeling,  which
finds  its  scope  in  the  rivalry  and  struggle  of  individuals,  is  but  the  social  form  of  the
generic  feeling  known  as  selfishness,  or,  as  modern  theologians  term  it,  selfism,  which  in
its  essence  is  sin  and  probably  the  metaphysical  explanation  of  sin  itself,  and  which,
moreover,  is  the  solution  of  the  fact  that  men  do  not  recognize  the  eternal  King,  but
prefer  to  belong  to  an  inferior  order  of  things.  To  please  self,  men  will  even  consent  to
lose  moral  rank,  and  become  foes  rather  than  friends  of  the  Eighteous  One.

II.  Moral  humiliations  may  modify  the  toem  of  policy,  but  they  will  not
DE6TB0Y  THE  MASTEB-FASSION.  To  an  aspiring  man,  as  was  Abner,  it  was  intensely
mortifying  to  be  charged  with  wrong-doing  by  one  nominally  his  superior,  and  the
moral  sting  of  the  charge  probably  lay  in  its  truth.  This  was,  on  the  part  of  Ish-
bosheth, a  virtual  assumption  of  both  moral  and  legal  superiority ;  and,  a,<s  such,  was  a
blow  at  that  secret,  unexpressed  sense  of  superiority  which  Abner  had  all  along  felt  in
relation  to  the  weak  young  man  whose  cause  he  had  patronizingly  advocated.  In  even
bad  men  the  moral  sense  is  strong,  if  not  in  leading  to  right  Courses,  yet  in  making
them  wretched  for  wrong- doing.  Inwardly  and  morally  Abner  was  now  weak  in  the
presence  of  his  royal  master.  The  soul  that  is  humiliated  does  not  like  to  be  reminded
of  its  humiliation,  and,  if  possible,  the  occasions  of  such  reminders  must  be  avoided  and
punished.  The  change  wrought  in  Abner  lay  in  the  deep  region  of  unexpressed  and
inexpressible  feelings.  The  old  love  of  pre-eminence  was  untouched  by  the  collision
with  Ishbosheth.  The  masterful  springs  of  human  life  are  not  easily  dried  up  or
supplanted.  The  immediate  effect  was  simply  to  raise  up  a  minor  yet  strong  personal
feeling,  which  came  as  a  dam  between  the  old  love  of  pre-eminence  and  the  interests
of  Ishbosheth,  and  caused  it  to  flow  vrith  widened  channel  in  another  direction.  Emotions
stimulate  thinkings,  and  personal  feelings  arouse  ingenuity.  Swift  as  lightning  Abner
saw  that  he  could  be  a  yet  more  important  personage  than  ever,  and,  at  the  same  time,
qualify  his  moral  humiliation  by  the  sweets  of  revenge.  In  spite  of  Joab  and  the
other  son  of  Zeruiah,  he  would  figure  as  the  means  of  placing  the  crown  of  a  united
people  on  David's  head.  It  should  be  seen  that  what  war  could  not  do  Abner  had  the
})Ower  to  do.  The  names  of  David,' Israel,  and  Abner  would  henceforth  be  indissolubly
associated  in  the  annals  of  the  time.  Instead  of  pre-eminence  at  the  court  of  Ish-
bosheth, there  would  be  pre-eminence  at  the  court  of  David,  and  in  the  judgment  of  a
compact  nation.  There  have  been  other  instances  of  statesmen,  under  the  infiuence  of
rei^entment,  changing  their  course,  and  apparently,  but  not  in  reality,  their  principles.


?6  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  m.  1— 39,

The  policy  in  all  such  cases  has  heen  to  Bubordinate  public  interests  to  certain
cherished  feelings.  A  form  of  sound  principles  may  be  adopted  for  the  very  same  reason
as  previously  it  was  rejected.  Evil  men  are  prone  to  do  the  same  in  ecclesiastical
affairs.  In  private  life  men  have  been  known  even  to  assiune  a  form  of  godliness — to
quote  the  Divine  truth  (vers.  9, 10) — as  a  means  of  better  subserving  their  purpose.
It  were  well  if  rebuke  of  sin  (vers.  7,  8)  always  produced  the  godly  sorrow  that  leads
to  genuine  repentance,  and  then  the  adoption  of  the  true  principles  of  the  kingdom
would  be,  not  as  a  policy,  but  as  a  matter  of  conviction.  The  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  in
relation  to  the  spiritual  kingdom  stands  out  in  sharp  contrast  to  that  of  Abner  .in
relation  to  the  temporal  kingdom  (of.  Acts  ix.  5  —20).

III.  Ddbing  the  working  onT  or  the  wabteb-fabsion  the  truth  of  God  abides
AB  A  PERMANENT  WITNESS.  That  Abuer  should  have  so  explicitly  referred  to  the
Divine  purpose  (ver.  9)  cannot  be  ascribed  to  information  recently  received,  but  must
be  accounted  for  on  the  ground  that  he  had  all  along  had  the  truth  suppressed  in  his
own  mind.  He  here  im wittingly  unveils  his  own  conscience  and  condemns  his  past
course  as  a  violation  of  solemn  obligations  rising  far  above  social  considerations  and
personal  preferences.  To  the  people  he,  perhaps,  seemed  to  be  a  man  upheld  by  a  sense
of  right,  but  to  himself  he  was  known  as  a  rebel  against  Gk>d.  The  Divine  truth
asserted  inwardly  its  own  reality.  Its  light  revealed  to  himself,  whenever  he  calmly
reflected  on  his  conduct,  the  dark  and  damaging  characters  of  his  public  career.  And
though  he  was  now  adopting  right  principles,  and  so  would  in  future  escape  the  pain
of  knowing  that  his  actions  were  not  running  counter  to  their  direction,  yet,  being
conscious  of  adopting  them  for  unprincipled  reasons,  he  could  not  avoid  the  conviction
that  he  was  doing  the  right  thing  for  David,  not  because  of  a  love  of  God,  but  for
personal  ends.  The  sense  of  right  would  thus  reveal  to  him  the  essential  crookedness
of  ways  that  were  ostensibly  straight.  The  man  who  does  right  things  from  bad
motives  never  knows  the  blessedness  of  the  just.  Probably  there  is  no  determinate
course  of  wrong-doing  in  which  the  light  of  truth  does  not  bear  some  witness  more  or
less  distinct.  Even  those  who,  following  lower  passions,  change  the  glory  of  the  incor-
ruptible God  into  images  after  their  own  likeness  (Rom.  i.  23),  at  times  find  within  a
protest  against  their  conduct  (Bom.  ii.  15).  No  man  who  has  heard  the  claims  of
Christ  to  universal  dominion  as  clearly  and  authoritatively  set  forth  as  ever  Abner  had
heard  of  the  Divine  right  of  David,  can  live  opposed  to  him,  or,  as  a  mere  matter  of
policy,  fall  in  formally  with  his  rights,  without  being  sensible  at  times  of  a  voice  which
tells  him  of  his  dangerous  position  and  worthless  character.  Many  a  converted  man
has  borne  testimony  that,  for  years  previous  to  his  conversion,  the  truth  of  God  bore
faithfiil  witness  as  to  what  was  the  will  of  God  concerning  him  in  his  relation  to  the
Anointed  One.

IV.  The  working  out  of  a  policy  changed  in  outwabd  form  but  not  in

NATURE   necessitates    AND    ENSURES    MUCH    ZEAL    AND    INGENUITY.      The    change    of

allegiance  was,  for  Abner,  a  momentous  step.  For  onlookers  it  meant  on  his  part  a
judgment,  and  self-respect  demanded  that  that  judgment  should  be  justified  by  every
possible  means.  His  policy  being  the  same  along  an  altered  coiu^e,  he  must  so  act  as
to  make  it  appear  that  he  had  come  into  the  possession  of  new  and  true  principles,  and
so  get  the  credit  of  acting  on  principle  and  not  on  policy  void  of  principle.  Of  course,
a  man  who  sincerely  came  to  the  belief  that  God  had  purposed  David  to  be  king,  and
loved  the  doing  of  the  will  of  God,  would  at  once  go  and  offer  his  services  to  David.
Abner  did  this.  Of  course,  he  would  be  eager  to  fnlfil  all  conditions  that  might  be
spdcified  by  David  in  bringing  to  pass  the  will  of  God  (vers.  13 — 16).  This  was  true
of  Abner.  And  as  to  gaining  over  others  to  bis  new  view  of  things,  no  pains  would  be
spared  to  show  the  reasonableness  of  the  course  now  to  be  taken.  Abner  made  out
a  case  before  the  elders  of  Israel  and  the  more  sturdy  Benjamites,  and  was  able  to
report  to  David  complete  success  (vers.  17—21).  What  zeal  and  ingenuity  were
implied  in  all  this  may  be  imagined  by  those  only  who  know  how  hard  it  is  to  justify
sudden  changes  of  conduct  and  get  one's  followers  to  entertain  new  ideas.  But  Abner's
love  of  pre-eminence  in  national  afi'airs  must  perish  if  these  efforts  were  not  forth-
coming. The  same  will  apply  to  any  one  who  changes  sides  in  public  affairs,  and  at
the  same  time  desires  to  attain  to  the  distinction  formerly  obtained  or  secretly  longed
fw.    In  fact,  fiilly  to  gratify  the  cravings  of  selfish  ambition  means  toil  upon  toil


CH.in.  1— 39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  77

However  gratifying  the  completion  of  one's  aims  may  seem,  it  is  a  vain  and  miserable
issue  when  r^arded  in  the  clear  light  of  pure  principle.  In  the  real  moral  world — the
sphere  in  which  God  alone  awards  the  prizes  of  life — he  is  not  crowned  who  does  not
"  strive  lawfully"  (2  Tim.  ii.  5),  that  is,  is  not  observant  of  all  the  great  and  holy  prin-
ciples on  which  alone  Q-od  would  have  men  act.  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  men  of
the  Abner  stamp,  who  are  doing  the  right  things,  not  because  they  are  right  and  of
God,  but  for  personal  ends,  will  one  day  find  that  their  efforts  will,  while  being  used
up  by  God  in  furtherance  of  the  dominion  of  Zion's  King,  bring  to  themselves  none
of  the  glory  and  honour  which  alone  fall  to  those  who  persist  in  "  well-doing  "  (Eom.
ii.  6,  7).

General  lgsbons.  1.  It  becomes  ns  now  and  then  to  search  into  the  mainsprings
of  life,  to  ascertain  what  really  are  the  principles  or  feelings  which  dominate  our  conduct.
2.  We  may  rest  assured,  in  our  appeals  to  men  on  behalf  of  Christ,  that  there  is  in
their  conscience,  confronting  their  actual  life  of  rebellion,  a  witness  for  him  the  Divine
authority  of  which  they  must  secretly  recognize.  3.  Any  change  from  an  externally
wrong  to  an  externally  right  course  is  to  be  tested  by  its  being  or  not  being  the  out-
come of  pure  love  of  what  is  pleasing  to  God.  4.  There  is  a  day  coming  when  the
actions  which  seem  to  lie  in  the  direction  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and,  in  fact,  as
right  actions,  are  due  to  him,  will  be  unveiled  so  as  to  be  seen  in  their  relation  to  the
actual  feelings  in  which  they  originated,  and  then  those,  who  during  a  part  of  their
life  were  regarded  as  good  workers,  will  be  known  as  "  workers  of  iniquity  "  (Matt.  viL
21 — 23).  5.  In  the  lives  of  some  men  one  portion  is  spent  in  endeavouring  to  undo
the  deeds  of  former  misspent  days,  and  not  always  with  clean  hands  in  the  sight  of
God.  6.  The  secret  of  every  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  heart,  and  hence  the  need  con-
stantly of  the  prayer  that  God  would  create  within  us  a  clean  heart.  7.  It  is  a  right
thing  for  men  of  influence,  when  the  force  of  truth  is  openly  admitted  by  themselves,
to  do  what  lies  within  their  power  to  bring  others  over  to  its  practical  recognition.
8.  The  great  mass  of  the  people  are  very  much  influenced  in  the  course  they  take  in
public  affairs  by  the  reasonings  of  able  leaders;  hence  the  responsibilities  of  leaderships
in  the  government  of  God.

Policy  with  principle.  A  carefiil  examination  of  facts  will  show  that  David's
conduct  in  this  narrative,  and  indeed  all  through  his  early  career,  was  the  very  reverse
of  Abner's.  His  entire  course,  from  the  day  of  his  call  from  the  sheepfold  to  the
proffered  allegiance  of  Abner,  was  one  of  simple  honest  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God.
Again  and  again  had  he  resisted  temptations  to  grasp  at  power;  and  bis  conduct  in
tlie  interview  with  Abner,  and  use  of  his  services,  proceeded  from  the  same  principle,
that,  in  its  very  nature,  excluded  selfish  motive.

I.  Action  governed  by  Divine  purpose  is  the  normal  course  for  a  rational
CREATURE.  In  inanimate  and  irrational  things  the  Divine  purpose  is  so  stamped  upon
their  being  or  wrought  into  the  texture  of  their  nature  that  as  a  matter  of  course  they,
in  their  movements,  follow  in  the  line  appointed.  Their  action  is  necessarily  normc^.
In  creatures  endowed  with  a  rational  will  there  comes  in  the  prerogative  of  option.
The  possibility  of  an  abnormal  course  belongs  to  such  beings  as  an  essential  element
of  their  constitution^  The  angels  that  have  kept  their  first  estate,  and  fallen  angels
and  man,  illustrate  the  two  sides  of  the  case.  In  the  affairs  of  ancient  Israel  the
revealed  purpose  of  God  was  that  David  should  be  king  (ver.  9).  This  was  the  will
of  the  Eternal,  by  which  every  man,  from  Samuel  and  Saul.in  the  highest  ranks  to
the  lowliest  descendant  of  Jacob,  was  to  be  guided  in  his  political  life.  How  Samuel
and  Jonathan  conformed  to  this  law  is  beautifully  seen  in  their  respective  careers.
How  David  was  governed  by  it  is  to  be  seen  in  the  strong  faith  in  his  own  destiny
which  ran  through  his  patient  endurance  of  exile ;  in  his  firm  but  restriuned  opposition
to  Ishbosheth;  and  also  in  his  negotiations  with  Abner.  It  is  this  conscious  conformity
of  action  with  the  Divine  purpose  in  relation  to  public  affairs  that  raises  the  strong
assertions  of  integrity  in  the  Psalms  above  the  suspicion  of  being  the  outgoings  of  a
self-righteous  spirit  that  claims  perfect  internal  holiness  in  the  sight  of  God.  Ab  anile,
our  private  conduct  is  normal  in  so  far  only  as  it  is  the  carrying  out  in  action  of  the
definite  purpose  of  God  that  we  should  govern  self  for  him.  Hence  sin  is  properly  said
to  be  a  fall  (Hos.  xiv.  1).    Hence  our  Saviour's  was  the  only  true  life.    He  was  man


78  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  in.  1-^39.

S8  man  should  be.  It  was  his  meat  and  drink  to  do  his  Father's  will.  The  goal  of
redemption  is  to  raise  us  to  the  full  stature  of  men  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  view  of  human
life,  inwrought  as  a  principle  into  all  the  operations  of  heart  and  mind,  will  do  much  to
bring  about  the  final  harmony  of  our  own  lives,  and  indeed  of  all  things,  for  discords
will  cease  in  proportion  as  rational  created  wills  move  in  unison  with  the  Divine.
11.  The  PKiNoiPiiB  ON  which  life  should  be  conducted  being  oleably  beooch

NIZBD,   IT   SERVES  AS  A    LIGHT    TO  THE   CHOICE   AND   REJECTION    OF    MEANS  BY   WHICH

THE  ATTAINMENT  OP  THE  END  MAY  BE  SECURED.  Between  David's  revoalod  predes-
tinatiou  to  be  king  over  the  chosen  race,  and  the  realization  of  the  Divine  will  in  the
actual  facts  of  history,  many  acts  on  his  part  had  to  be  performed.  It  would  be  per-
plexing to  an  ordinary  mind  to  prestate  the  agencies  and  methods  by  which  the
shepherd-boy  and  exile  should  at  last  peacefully  ascend  the  throne  and  reign  over
a  united  people.  Had  human  passion,  or  bare  calculation,  or  mere  politic  balancing
of  advantages  been  taken  as  guide  and  governor  of  action,  there  would  doubtless  have
been,  in  his  case,  a  reproduction  of  the  tragic  struggles  so  often  recorded  in  the  history
of  public  affairs.  But  conformity  of  self  to  the  holy  will  of  God  being  th«  root-prin-
ciple of  life,  conjoined  with  the  never-absent  conviction  that  Providence  was  sure  to  be
on  his  side  in  seeking  to  conform  self  to  the  revealed  will,  this  illumined  his  pathway
even  amidst  the  darkest  of  earth's  shadows,  and  enabled  him  to  see  what  courses  should
be  avoided  and  what  pursued.  Clearly  he  must  not  give  scope  to  luere  lust  of  power ;
for  where  the  need  and  what  the  use  of  that  when  the  Holy  One  had  sworn  that  he
should  reign  ?  Clearly,  also,  he  must  not  use  force  and  conquer  the  people  over  whom
as  king  he  is  to  rule ;  for  had  not  God  chosen  him  to  be  king  over  a  chosen  race,  for
the  realization  of  high  spiritual  issues  stretching  far  into  a  glorious  future?  Equally
plain  was  it  that  there  is  no  need  to  have  recourse  to  the  cunning  and  craft  and  false-
hoods— the  policy  void  of  moral  principle — which  a  godless  spirit  might  suggest ;  for
was  he  not  the  chosen  servant  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  who  has  no  need  of  low-bom
policies  to  establish  his  dominion  over  men?  Hence  David's  patience  in  exile,  his
tender  regard  for  Saul  even  when  others  suggested  revenge,  his  merely  defensive  action
at  Hebron,  and  his  manifest  unwillingness  to  force  Ishbosheth  from  the  throne  and  to
compel  Israel  to  submit  to  himself.  He  had  faith  in  God  and  in  God's  supremacy
over  the  hearts  and  destinies  of  men.  In  so  far  as  he  had  a  policy  it  was  suggested  by
his  fundamental  principle,  and  embraced  three  things :  (1)  Use  of  peaceful  means.
(2)  Waiting  on  Providence  for  some  free  movement  on  the  part  of  Israel.  (3)  A  regard
for  the  susceptibilities  of  the  house  of  Saul  and  the  natural  interest  of  the  people  in
that  house.  Hence :  (1)  His  abstention  from  hostilities  during  Saul's  lifetime,  and  his
subsequent  non-aggressive  action  against  Ishbosheth,  as  also  his  willingness  to  accept
the  services  of  Abner  with  the  elders  of  the  people.  (2)  His  acceptance  of  the  alle-
giance of  Abner,  viewing  it  as  simply  a  fact  brought  about  apart  from  any  bribe  or  effort
on  his  part,  and  being  in  its  outward  fonn,  with  which  he  was  alone  concerned,  con-
formable to  the  revealed  purpose  (ver.  9),  and  consistent  with  his  belief  in  an  over-
ruling Providence  which  reaches  to  the  spirits  of  men.  (3)  His  laying  down  the
condition  (vers.  13 — 16)  on  which  he  would  accept  the  services  of  Abner ;  for  while
personal  affection  and  conjugal  duty  alike  suggested  the  restoration  of  Michal  from  her
enforced  banishment  (1  Sam.  xxv.  44),  such  a  course  would  prove  to  Ishbosheth  and
Israel  that  he  still  cherished  his  old  regard  for  the  house  of  Saul,  and  thus  tend  to  win
all  parties  over  to  a  peaceful  settlement.  Here,  then,  was  a  sound  and  wise  policy  grounded
on,  and  in  fact  issuing  out  of,  the  abiding  recognition  of  the  main  principle  that  God
had  a  wUl  concerning  his  life,  to  effect  which  was  at  once  his  glory  and  delight.  The
facts  suggest  their  own  application  and  lessons.  They  find  their  highest  and  truest
counterpart  in  the  life  of  the  Son  of  David,  whose  advance  to  universal  supremacy
proceeds  from  the  declared  will  of  God  (Ps.  Ixxii.),  and  is  secured  in  patience,  by  means
in  nature  pure  and  peaceful,  by  an  unseen  action  on  the  spirits  of  men  making  them
willing,  and  by  a  kind  and  considerate  regard  for  the  varied  susceptibilities  of  human
nature.  They  also  furnish  illustrations  of  how  the  Church  may  combine  policy  and
principle,  displaying  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  with  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove.
We  furthermore  learn  that,  in  pursuing  our  individual  course  through  the  world,  we
may,  by  keeping  the  main  principle  of  having  a  holy  Divine  purpose  to  work  out
clearly  before  the  mind,  ever  have  at  hand  a  pure,  bright  light  by  which  we  shall  see


CH.  ui.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  79

what  means  and  methods  in  detail  may  be  safely  and  honourably  used  for  seeking  the
end  we  have  in  view.

IIL   A   POLIOT   THD8    FOUNDED  ON    PBINCIPLE   IB    8TJBB   IN    THE   OOUBSE   OP    TIME    TO

ISSUE  IN  THE  TBiuMPH  OF  LIFE.  There  is  evidence  in  David's  early  career  that  he
had  to  endure  the  blame  of  eager  and  less  conscientious  men  for  being  so  very  scrupu-
lous in  the  use  of  means.  The  sons  of  Zeruiah  were,  also,  not  satisfied  with  what  they
would  call  his  timorous  policy  (vers.  24,  25,  39).  Those  years  spent  in  Hebron,  merely
keeping  in  check  the  assaults  of  Ishbosheth's  men  (vers.  1,  22),  seemed  to  give  a
doubtful  meaning  to  the  Divine  promise  which  had  become  the  property  of  both  David
and  the  true  sections  of  the  nation  (vers.  9, 10,  17, 18).  But  the  man  of  God  held
on,  and  would  not  swerve  from  the  policy  founded  on  clear  principle.  Events  proved
that  he  was  right  and  the  over-eager  men  wrong.  In  due  course,  Providence  so
governed  the  action  of  leading  forces,  that  the  entire  people  were  brought  (vers.  17 — 21)
under  influences  which  at  last  issued  in  his  realizing  the  end  on  which  his  heart  had
been  so  long  set.  In  fact,  he  allowed  God  to  work  where  man  cannot  work,  i.e.  on  the
spirits  of  men  beyond  the  reach  of  our  own  hand  and  voice.  Once  more  we  see  it
iUustrated  that  God's  time  and  methods  are  best.  The  same  peaceful  issue  is  coming
on  as  the  result  of  "  the  patience  of  the  saints,"  and  their  undying  faith  in  the  action
of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  the  spirits  of  men.  It  is  when  professing  Christians  lose  their
faith  in  God,  and  have  recourse  to  questionable  devices,  that,  in  seeking  to  hasten  on,
they  really  retard  the  j^rogiess  of  that  which  they  have  at  heart.  Taking  a  wide  view
of  the  government  of  God  in  the  unfolding  of  the  moral  order,  we  see  the  same  attain-
ment of  remote  ends  by  means  of  righteous  and  quiet  acting  through  long  epochs.
What  is  thus  true  on  a  large  scale  will  be  found  true  also  of  the  individual  life— the
effort  to  realize  the  holy  will  of  God  in  our  personal  experience.  In  public  and  private
affairs,  in  working  out  our  lines  of  policy  founded  on  principle,  we  should  not  forget  to
leave  a  very  broad  margin  for  the  action  of  God  beyond  anything  we  can  do  or  attempt.
This  has  ever  been  the  case  with  the  best  men.  There  are  springs  which  God's  hand
alone  can  touch.  He  can  govern  the  free  actions  of  leaders  of  men,  so  that  the  actual
course  they  freely  take,  though  not  most  pure  in  motive,  shall,  in  its  form,  harmonize
with  the  main  purpose  of  the  Eternal.  Would  that  man  had  more  faith  in  God  as  the
living  God!

Gehebai.  LESSONS.  1.  Tho  sincere  satisfaction  of  those  who,  like  David,  restrain
feeling  and  bad  impulse,  and  wait  for  God  to  open  the  way  and  change  the  course  of
events.  2.  The  important  contribution  to  the  realizing  of  the  purposes  of  Christ  the
Anointed  One  sometimes  made  by  men  whose  acts  are  not  pervaded  by  his  Spirit.
As  Abner's  acts  accelerated  God's  purposes,  so  the  gains  of  commerce,  of  science  and
art,  though  not  always  made  in  the  name  of  God,  become  means  of  advancing  his
kingdom.  3.  The  survival  of  sacred  feelings  amidst  and  in  spite  of  the  turmoil  and
commotions  of  life.  The  old  love  for  Michal  was  still  alive,  as  many  an  old  affection
cherished  in  early  days  reappears  and  asserts  itself  when  occasion  offers.  4.  The  deep
wounds  and  secret  sorrows  induced  by  harsh  and  arbitrary  acts.  As  the  cruel  deed  of
Saul  (1  Sam',  xxv.  44)  left  its  traces  in  the  lives  of  David,  Michal,  and  Phaltiel  (ver.  15),
80  it  is  with  other  deeds  of  the  same  spirit  but  different  in  form.  5.  The  apparent
subordination  of  great  public  interests  to  private  is,  in  the  case  of  men  of  principle,  only
on  the  surface ;  the  reverse  is  really  the  truth.  David's  promotion  of  the  unification
of  the  nation,  on  condition  of  getting  back  his  wife  (ver.  13),  was,  as  seen  above,  in  the
real  interests  of  the  unification  under  himself;  and  so  when  the  acts  of  really  good  men
are  traced  down  to  their  principles,  they  only,  in  outward  form,  appear  to  be  too  personal.
6.  The  great  extent  to  which  the  mass  of  men  are  biased  even  against  what  is  plain
truth  (vers.  9, 17,  18)  by  prejudice,  and  are  swayed  by  able  leadership.  7.  The  com-
pleteness with  which,  in  the  course  of  providence,  influence  slowly  gathered  and
widely  exercised  against  the  cause  of  God,  may  be  suddenly  turned  to  work  round  in
promotion  of  it  (cf.  Saul  of  Tarsus  and  Abner,  vers.  17 — 21).

Vers.  22 — 27. — The  facts  are :  1.  Joab,  returning  from  an  expedition,  finds  David  at
Hebron  after  Abner's  departure.  2.  Hearing  from  the  people  a  general  statement  of
what  had  transpired  between  the  king  and  Abnef,  Joab  reproaches  David  for  his
peaceful  conduct,  and  insinuates  that  Abner  was  simply  playing  the  spy.    3.  Sending


80  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  m.  1—39,

a  messenger,  unknown  to  David,  after  Abner,  be  iadaces  him  to  return  to  Hebron,
and,  under  pretence  of  a  quiet  conference,  he  leads  him  aside  and  assassinates  him.
4.  Hearing  of  the  affair,  David  at  once  repudiates  it,  and  in  strong  terms  desires  that
heavy  ju^mentti  may  fall  on  the  head  of  Joab  and  his  house.  6.  David  orders  a
general  mourning  for  Abner,  attends  his  funeral,  and  utters  a  pathetic  lamentation
over  him.  6.  The  king's  soirow  assumes  a  soleinn  and  impressive  form  throughout
the  day,  so  as  to  convince  the  people  of  his  utter  abhorrence  of  the  crime  and  his  sense
of  the  national  loss.  7.  David  causes  his  servants  to  know  that  he  cherished  a  regard
for  the  greal  abilities  and  possible  services  to  Israel  of  Abner,  and  was  pained  and
enfeebled  in  his  action  as  anointed  king  by  the  perverse  conduct  of  the  sons  of  Zeruiah.

Defective  lympathy.  The  first  impression,  on  reading  the  account  of  the  conduct  of
Joab,  is  that  of  the  most  villainous  treachery,  and  one  at  once  enters  into  the  anger  and
vexation  of  David.  But  the  treacherous  act  professedly  in  the  service  of  David  was  the
outcome  of  a  permanent  condition  of  mind.  Ostensibly  it  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the
resentment  cherished  on  account  of  the  death  of  Asahel ;  but  the  action  of  a  man
occupying  a  responsible  position  in  a  great  undertaking  is  not  governed  merely  by  the
presence  of  a  feeling  of  this  kind.  The  resentment  would  have  had  no  positive  power
to  issue  in  this  deed  had  not  the  mind  of  Joab  been  out  of  harmony  with  the  mind  of
David  in  the  views  taken  of  the  kingdom,  its  principles,  and  methods  of  consolidation.
A  public  servant  will  govern  his  private  passions  if  his  mind  is  in  full  sympathy  with
his  master's,  so  as  to  see  that  the  indulgence  of  them  would  be  uncongenial  to  him  and
injurious  to  his  interests.  Joab  was  deficient  in  sympathy  with  the  higlier  qualities
and  alms  of  his  great  master,  and  consequently  the  bad  qualities  found  an  outlet  which
otherwise  would  have  either  had  no  existence  or  would  have  been  suppressed  for  hii


I.  The  employment  of  men  of  dbfecttve  sympathies  is,  in  the  present  state
OF  the  world,  unavoidable.  That  Joab  was  not  in  full  sympathy  with  David's  pure
and  lofty  aspirations  is  seen  both  in  tliis  account  and  also  in  the  pressure  previously
put  upon  David  in  exile  by  his  chief  men  to  take  away  the  Ufe  of  Saul,  as,  again,  in
the  subsequent  allusions  to  his  conduct  (ch.  xix.  7).  That  such  a  man  should  have
been  at  the  head  of  military  affairs  in  David's  service  is  not  surprising,  for  David  had
from  the  first  to  take  such  men  as  were  disposed  to  follow  his  fortunes,  and  when  be
set  up  regal  authority  in  Hebron  it  was  in  the  nature  of  things  for  the  man  of  greatest
will-power  to  push  his  way  to  the  front.  Kings  cannot  make  their  ministers ;  they
can  only  use  what  the  age  produces.  It  was  not  David's  fault ;  it  was  the  natural
condition  of  things,  arising  from  myriads  of  concurrent  causes,  that  there  was  not  one
man  since  the  death  of  Samuel  and  Jonathan  that  was  so  spiritual  and  far-seeing  as  to
enter  with  full  enthusiastic  sympathy  into  his  conceptions  of  the  kingdom  of  Grod  and
the  holy  principles  on  which  it  should  he  established  and  governed.  The  evil  of  having
to  work  out  great  and  glorious  issues  in  conjunction  with  men  who  do  not  enter  into
the  inner  spirit  of  the  enterprise  is  remarkably  illustrated  in  the  case  of  our  Saviour.
There  was  not  one  who  could  enter  into  the  full  depth  and  breadth  of  his  work  in  the
world.  Relatively  his  blundering  disciples,  often  paining  his  heart  by  their  worldly
notions,  were  as  far  removed  from  him  as  was  Joab,  with  his  crude  ideas  and  low  feel-
ings, from  David.  Nor  could  it  be  otherwise  unless  men  were  supernaturally  trans-
former!. The  same  holds  good  now  in  the  instruments  Christ  has  to  use  in  carrying  on
his  work  in  the  wprld.  How  defective  many  labourers  and  followers  are  in  sympathy
with  his  holy  aspirations  and  methods !  Indeed,  it  is  the  same  in  every  secular  employ-
ment. Seldom,  if  ever,  does  the  servant  enter  fully  into  the  mind  of  the  master.  Ideas
and  feelings  cherished  by  the  directing  and  orisiinating  mind  are,  of  necessity,  inade-
quately appreciated  by  instrumentalities  not  perfectly  charged  with  them.  The  servant,
in  this  sense,  is  not  equal  to  his  lord.

II.  The  existence  op  this  depeotivb  sympathy  between  seevant  and  hasteh
IS  THE  OCCASION  OF  VARIOUS  EviLB.  Becauso  Joab  did  not  really  understand  the  pure
and  generous  spirit  of  David,  his  very  zeal  for  him  assumed  forms  not  only  opposed  to
the  king's  wishes,  but  fraught  with  evil  tendencies  for  the  kingdom.  It  is  obvious
from  ver.  24  that  Joab  misapprehended  the  peaceful,  generous  policy  of  David,  and
ver.  26  raveals  the  fact  that  he  was  iu  his  heart  actually  opposed  to  the  course  whick


CH.  m.  1— 39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  81

had  been  taken ;  for  he  actually  dares  to  rebuke  him  for  not  perceiving  the  cunning
spy  ia  the  man  of  peace.  So  far  was  he  out  of  sympathy  with  the  principles  and  policy
of  the  king,  that  he  stealthily,  and  with  the  aid  of  his  brother  (ver.  30),  even  allowed
the  personal  resentment  of  his  heart  to  issue  in  an  act  which  was  not  only  unjust  and
base  in  itself,  but  also  in  direct  opposition  to  the  will  and  measures  of  David.  Here  we
have,  as  the  outcome  of  his  worldly  spirit,  displeasure  with  his  king,  assumption  of
superior  wisdom,  indulgence  in  personal  revenge,  muider,  and  practically  assertion,  for
the  time  being  and  in  a  particular  instance,  of  supreme  power.  Not  one  of  these  evils
would  have  come  to  the  surface  of  life,  but  would  have  been  crushed  in  their  most
incipient  stage,  had  his  nature  been  more  in  sympathy  with  that  of  his  master.  Inas-
much as  by  full  sympathy  we  alone  can  really  understand,  appreciate,  fall  in  with,
delight  in,  and  surrender  every  faculty  and  subdue  every  errant  feeling  to  the  prompt
carrying  out  of  our  Lord's  designs,  so,  conversely,  a  lack  of  sympathy  cannot  but  result
in  the  evils  of  misapprehension  of  designs,  non-appreciation  of  motives  and  methods,
discontent  with  actual  deeds,  withholding  of  services,  and  free  scope  to  passions,  in  nature
and  consequences  at  variance  with  his  superior  will.  The  lives  of  the  apostles  during
our  Saviour's  ministry  on  earth  abundantly  illustrate  this.  Bred  in  an  atmosphere  of
formalism  and  religious  excluaiveness,  they  enteied  not  into  the  perfect  mind  of  Christ,
and  consequently  wondered  at  his  methods  (Luke  ix.  44,  45),  desired  what  was  contrary
to  his  Spirit  (vers.  46—56),  and,  in  the  case  of  Peter,  actually  rebuked  him  for  arranging
to  establish  his  kingdom  lay  a  method  which  seemed  to  them  to  be  unnecessary- and
unbecoming  (Matt.  xvi.  21 — 23).  The  persecutions  authorized  by  the  Church  in  dark
ages,  the  methods  introduced  by  Ignatius  Loyola  and  subsequently  adopted  by  his
followers,  the  bitter  spirit  cherished  towards  men  differing  in  minor  matters  of  faith
or  practice,  and  the  sundry  base  deeds  which  grow  out  of  a  professedly  Christian  life
because  it  is  not  well  nourished  in  fellowship  with  Clirist  himself, — ihese  are  some  of
the  evils  appearing  in  the  course  of  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of_  heaven  as  a
consequence  of  the  servants  of  .the  Lord  not  being  in  full  harmony  of  spirit  with  him
they  profess  to  serve.
III.  This  defective  sympathy,  if  not  gradually  ebmedibd,  max  involve  actions

PERMANENTLY   DAMAGING  TO  THE   MOST   POWERFUL  OF   MEN.      It  is  probable  that  Joab

was  with  David  in  exile,  and,  like  many  others,  he  may  have  been  drawn  over  to  his
side  partly  because  of  the  intimation  given  by  Samuel  and  recognized  by  Jonathan  of
the  Divine  choice  of  David,  and  partly  because  of  disgust  at  the  misgovemment  of  Saul.
However  much  he  might  have  failed  in  the  first  instance  to  comprehend  and  appn  ciate
the  holy  aims  and  principles  of  his  leader,  he  could  not  have  shared  so  long  in  David's
fortunes  and  misfortunes  without  having  many  opportnuities  of  learning  what  manner
of  person  he  was,  and  how  decidedly  spiritual  were  his  aims  and  purposes.^  He  appears
not  to  have  profited  by  these  privileges,  and  consequently,  by  the  action  of  a  well-
known  psychological  law,  the  original  secularity  of  his  nature  gained  in  power,  so  that
when  a  contest  arose  between  a  private  passion  and  acquiescence  in  his  master's  arrange-
ments, there  was  not  sufficient  moral  force  to  restrain  and  destroy  the  passion,  and  hence
the  dark  deed  which  disgraced  his  name  and  caused  him  to  be  in  the  future  a  man
distrusted  and  abhorred  (ver.  39).  The  reverse  is  s.en  in  the  case  of  the  apostles,
excepting  Judas,  who  all  grew  out  of  their  imperfect  sympathy  with  the  innermost  heart
of  Christ,  and  brought  forth  fruit  accordingly.  In  [)iivate  life  there  can  be  no  question
but  that,  when  opportunities  for  getting  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  mind  of  Christ  are
neglected,  the  lower  tendencies  of  human  nature  gain  force,  and  when  temptation  to
exercise  them  arises,  sad  deeds  are  done  and  reputations  aie  damaged.  Probably,  if  all
things  were  explained,  it  would  come  out  that  many  of  the  sad  crimes  perpetrated  by
persons  professedly  in  the  kingdom  and  service  of  Christ  are  connected  with  failure  to
maintain  and  deepen  the  sympathy  of  the  heart  with  all  that  is  in  Christ  and  his  work.
"  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing ;"  "  Abide  in  me."

General  lessons.  1.  The  incidental  evils  arising  from  imperfect  sympathy  with
the  holy  and  far-reaching  purposes  of  God  may  be  found  in  course  of  the  Mstorie
revelation  which  God  has  given  us,  and  should  bo  ascribed  to  their  proper  human
source  and  allowed  for  in  our  estimate  of  the  form,  matter,  and  incidents  of  the  revela-
tion. '  2.  A  critical  estimate  of  the  degree  of  the  triumphs  of  early  Christianity  should
be  formed  on  a  cuusideration  of  the  degree,  more  or  less,  to  which  the  leading  and  sub-

II.  SAMCEI..  ®


82  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  in.  1- -39.

ordinate  servants  of  Christ  understood  and  entered  into  his  spirit.  3.  In  a  selection  of
men  for  any  form  of  Christian  work,  great  stress  should  he  laid  on  their  quick  and
eager  perception  of  the  purely  spiritual  aspects  of  his  kingdom.  Intellectual  and  other
qualities  are  very  subordinate  to  this.  4.  It  becomes  us  to  be  on  our  guard  lest  mere
private  feelings  of  the  lower  order  should  gain  ascendency  over  the  more  general  con-
siderations that  pertain  to  the  kingdom  of  Grod.  5.  It  will  be  useful  if  we  now  and
then  calmly  reflect  on  the  degree  to  which  the  cause  of  God  may  have  suffered  through
our  own  defective  sympathy  with  its  more  spiritual  Interests.  6.  The  great  need  of
each  one  is  to  cultivate  close  fellowship  with  Christ,  so  as  mure  fully  to  enter  into  his
mind.

The  incidence  of  guilt.  When  a  great  crime  has  been  committed,  the  first  question
in  the  public  mind  is — Who  is  guilty  ?  In  national  affairs,  where  personal  actions  are
supposed  to  be  contjected  with  public  interests,  it  is  not  always  clear  at  first  whether
one  or  another  party  is  to  be  charged  with  blame  for  what  has  been  done.  It  was
impossible,  even  judged  by  the  low  standard  that  too  often  governed  the  conduct  and
opinions  of  Eastern  people,  but  that  the  death  of  Abner  would  be  regarded  with  con-
sternation, and  men  would  be  swift  in  their  judgment.  It  was,  therefore,  only  natural
that  David  should  take  steps  to  let  it  be  known  that,  although  Joab  was  a  public
servant,  the  guilt  in  this  case  must  rest  on  the  individual  himself,  and  not  in  any  sense
on  the  government  under  which  he  served.

I.  In  evert  case,  as  to  the  act0AIi  incidence  or  guilt,  there  is  no  uncbe-
TAINTY  IN  THE  MINDS  OF  THE  PARTIES  coNOEENBD.  To  men  of  low  moral  type
in  Judah,  who  may  have  suspected  Abner's  zeal  and  who  were  disposed  to  judge  of
David  as  they  would  of  themselves,  it  might  be  an  open  question  as  to  whether  he  did
not  really  connive  at  the  treachery  of  Joab.  To  men  iu  Israel,  who  were  mindful  of
Abner's  former  antagonism  to  David  and  who  were  themselves  of  implacable  temper,  it
might  be  conceivable  that  David  was  an  inactive  partner  in  the  crime.  In  the  absence
of  any  superior  court  of  inquiry,  or  of  any  statement  from  David,  disquieting  rumours
may  have  gained  temporary  currency.  Meanwhile  the  real  fact  would  stand  clear
before  the  conscience  of  both  Joab  and  the  king.  Popular  discussion  never  avails  to
alter  the  facts  of  conscience.  Joab  knew  himself  to  be  solely  guilty,  with  consent  of
his  brother  (ver.  30) ;  David  knew  himself  to  be  entirely  innocent.  Each  carried  within
himself  the  judgment  of  God.  It  is  here  that  we  see  the  dividing  line  between  the
opinions  and  discussions  of  the  world  and  the  invisible  moral  sphere,  where  actual  facts
are  registered  in  clear  and  ineffaceable  lines  so  as  to  admit  of  no  shadow  of  doubt.
What  though  outsiders  cannot  ascertain  reality,  it  is  there,  and  it  is  only  a  question
of  time  as  to  its  being  seen  by  others  besides  those  now  familiar  with  it.  The  secrecy
of  the  guilty  is  only  a  play  with  an  advantage  for  a  short  time.  Men  charged  with
public  crimes,  and  men  who  live  in  sin  against  God,  know  that  there  is  no  mistake  in
the  incidence  of  guilt.  They  possess  exclusive  knowledge,  perhaps,  but  there  is  no  con-
solation in  that.  Likewise  those  wrongly  charged  with  complicity  in  evil  are  possessors
of  a  secret  knowledge  which  enables  them  to  see  that  the  permanent  moral  order  is  on
their  side,  and  that  it  is  only  a  question  of  time,  more  or  less,  when  their  "righteousness
shall  be  brought  forth  as  the  light,"  and  their  "judgment  as  the  noonday."

II.  A    SACRED   CAUSE   IS    NOT    RESPONSIBLE    FOR    THE    DEEDS   OF    ITS    PROFESSED   SUP^

PORTERS.  A  hasty  judgment  would  conclude  that,  as  Joab  was  a  prominent  supporter
of  the  Davidic  cause,  it  must  bear  the  shame  and  guilt  of  his  murderous  deed;  but  the
only  warrant  for  that  being  a  true  view  of  the  case  would  be  that  the  general  spirit  of
David's  administration  favoured  treachery,  and  that  the  master  and  servant  wero  in
secret  collusion, — neither  of  which  suppositions  can  be  for  a  moment  entertained.  Kings
and  their  oflBcers,  masters  and  their  servants,  are  to  be  held  jointly  responsible  only
when  the  service  generates  the  wrong.  As  a  fact,  governments  and  employers  do  suffer
temporary  loss  of  prestige  when  those  in  positions  of  trust  act  out  their  own  individual
wickedness ;  but  in  due  course  men  will  distinguish  the  manifestation  of  the  individual
baseness  from  the  public  interests  with  which  it  was  associated.  The  separation  of
these  is  important  in  many  relationships  of  life.  The  divinely  appointed  kingdom  and
just  rule  of  David  must  not  be  confounded  with  Joab's  malice.  The  government
of  a  country  should  not  bear  the  guilt  of  men  whose  position  enables  them  to  violate


OH.  m.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  83

moral  laws  with  impunity.  Private  vice  is  not  one  with  public  crime.  The  evil  deeds
and  imperfect  character  of  men  whose  names  are  in  the  records  of  revelation  must  not  be
charged  on  the  revelation  of  God  or  his  method  of  educating  the  world  for  something
better.  The  foul  deeds  done  during  the  dark  days  of  the  Church's  life  by  some  of  the
leaders  of  Christianity  are  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  holy  cause  with  which  they  were
identified.  The  personal  vices  of  professors  of  religion  do  not  really  compromise  Christ.
In  all  these  cases  it  is  the  Joab-spirit,  and  not  the  spirit  of  the  king,  which  expregaes
itself,  and  it  is  condemned  by  the  very  cause  in  the  interests  of  which  it  may  at  first
seem  to  be  manifested.  Christ's  kingdom  is  one  of  unchangeable  righteousness  and
love,  in  spite  of  all  the  injustice  and  hate  of  men  bearing  the  blessed  Name.

III.  When  occasion  offers,  deeds  alien  to  the  spirit  of  a  good  cause  should
BE  DISTINCTLY  REPUDIATED.  As  a  matter  of  duty  and  policy,  David  felt  bound  to  take
an  early  opportunity  of  repudiating  any  association,  either  in  spirit  or  action,  with  the
crime  of  Joab.  It  was  due  to  himself  as  an  individual  and  as  prospective  king  of  a  united
Israel,  and  to  that  better  system  of  government  which  on  the  death  of  Saul  he  was
called  to  inaugurate.  Suspicions  cannot  be  prevented,  the  odium  of  connection  with
a  wrong-doer  cannot  but  arise,  malicious  foes  will  be  sure  to  turn  every  possible  event
to  his  detriment ;  but  as  soon  as  the  ear  of  the  nation  can  be  reached  self-vindication
becomes  imperative.  It  is  a  question  of  opportunity.  Sometimes  good  men  may  have
to  pass  years  "  under  a  cloud,"  and  even  go  down  to  the  grave  trusting  only  to  the
vindication  of  the  just  in  the  day  of  judgment.  David  escaped  that  sorrow.  His
declaration,  his  daring  to  denounce  so  powerful  a  man,  the  severity  of  his  curse  on  the
evil-doer,  the  evident  sincerity  of  his  sorrow  for  Abner,  and  the  suspension  of  public
duties  for  an  elaborate  funeral  ceremonial, — all  made  known  as  distinctly  as  possible
how  alien  was  the  spirit  of  his  life  and  government  from  the  cruel  treachery  of  Joab.
The  same  course  is  open  to  us  when  individually  our  fair  fame  may  be  compromised  by
others.  Modern  governments  often  have  to  disown  deeds  of  their  officials.  Our  Lord
himself  has  laid  down  principles  in  the  New  Testament  by  which  he  may  in  all  ages
have  wherewith  to  repudiate  the  evil  deeds  and  spirit  of  some  of  his  professed  friends ;
and  in  course  of  history,  when  danger  arises  of  confounding  his  holy  kingdom  with  vile
actions,  his  providence  brings  out  the  true  spirit  inculcated  in  sharp  contrast  with  the
evil.  As  occasion  offers,  we  in  our  age  should  be  careful  to  let  men  see  that  he  is  not
responsible  for  the  abuses  which  have  sprung  out  of  the  imperfections  of  some  of  his
servants.     Never  did  the  world  more  need  to  see  clearly  Christ  and  his  kingdom  as

'  they  are  in  contrast  with  much  that  is  done  and  maintained  in  his  Name.

IV.  Time  favours  the  bight  assignment  of  quilt.  If  any  were  disposed  to  doubt
the  sincerity  of  David's  disclaimer — and  there  are  such  suspicious,  unfriendly  men  in
every  age — he  could  afford  to  wait.  The  true  interpreter  of  our  actions  in  the  past
is  to  be  found  in  the  tenor  of  our  life.  The  years  to  come  would  reveal  the  true  David
and  the  true  Joab.  The  pure  feeling  that  prompted  this  quick  repudiation  would
reappear  in  a  life  of  kindliness  and  generosity  and  justice,  and  every  good  deed  and
generous  sentiment  would  only  make  more  clear  his  freedom  from  complicity  in  this
crime ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  hard,  stern,  vindictive  feeling  which  continued  to
hold  and  fashion  the  life  of  Joab  would  only  render  more  clear  and  emphatic  the  judg-
ment against  him.  So  of  much  past  Church  history ;  time  will  only  tend  to  bring  out
more  distinctly  the  separation  between  Christianity,  as  it  is  in  Christ  and  his  teaching,
and  those  actions  and  feelings  which  too  often  were  identified  with  his  service.
Individual  deserts  also  will  become  manifest,  however  obscure  the  facts  may  be  to
present  observers.  The  future  is  against  the  wicked  and  on  the  side  of  the  just.  Evil
men  may  well  dread  the  coming  of  the  day  when  the  hidden  things  of  darkness  shall
be  made  manifest,  when  the  exact  incidence  of  guilt  will  be  seen ;  good  men,  those
who  have  made  their  peace  with  God  and  have  received  the  Spirit  of  the  kindgom,  may
lift  up  their  heads  in  confidence  in  prospect  of  that  same  great  day.

General  lessons.  1.  It  adds  to  the  guilt  of  a  man  when,  knowing  that  he  is  solely
responsible  for  certain  deeds,  he  allows  others  with  whom  he  has  been  associated  to  fall
under  suspicion.  Joab  ought  to  have  voluntarily  cleared  David.  2.  Good  men  unavoidably
under  suspicion  may  find  consolation  in  that  some  of  the  best — Joseph,  David,  and  even
the  best,  Christ  (Luke  xxiii.  2 ;  John  xix.  12) — were  suspected  of  wrong.  3.  Although
the  "  peace  of  God  "  is  the  heritage  of  the  just  as  a  personal  boon,  yet  it  is  due  to  the


84  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  m.  1— 39.

cause  dear  to  their  hearts  to  seek  self-vindication,  as  in  the  case  of  David  and  Paul,  and
this  will  be  the  chief  motive  for  a  disclaimer.  4.  It  behoves  Christian  people  especially
to  exercise  a  very  calm  and  sober  judgment  when  any  one  known  as  a  servant  of  Christ
is  accused  of  or  imagined  to  be  in  complicity  with  evil  transactions.  5.  The  general
character  of  a  man  under  suspicion  ought  to  give  great  weight  to  any  disclaimer  ha
may  make,  and  be  to  us  a  set-off  against  aWprimd  facie  evidence.

Deferred  punishment.  It  is  natural  to  ask — If  Joab's  crime  was  so  base,  and  David's
repudiation  of  complicity  with  it  so  emphatic,  why  was  he  not  punished  as  an  offender
against  morality  and  the  principles  of  the  new  administration?  The  answer  is  nigh  at
hand.  David  was  averse  to  signalize  the  establishment  of  his  supremacy  over  all  the
tribes  of  Israel  by  the  shedding  of  blood,  and  a  less  punishmeirt  than  death  in  those
times  would  have  been  misinterpreted  to  hi?  injury.  His  cause  at  that  juncture  was  in
a  critical  position,  and  to  have  cleared  off  so  competent  and  influential  a  man  would
have  been  perilous.  Moreover,  the  execution  of  Joab  would  have  tallied  best  with
complicity  in  his  guilt ;  the  sparing  of  his  lil'e  and  abiding  the  issue  of  events  was  most
favourable  to  the  establishment  of  his  own  innocence.  But  most  of  all  he  was  desirous
of  leaving  the  judgment  in  the  bands  of  God,  having  in  most  scathing  language  stated
his  own  sense  of  the  evil  desert  of  the  man  (ver.  29).     Herein  we  may  trace  analogies.

I.  The  present  stage  of  the  government  of  God  dobs  not  provide  foe  thb
IMMEDIATE  PUNISHMENT  OF  ALL  SIN.  Many  a  modcm  Joab  does  not  at  once  suffer  for
liis  sin  as  conscience  and  public  opinion  would  demand.  There  are  vile  deeds  per-
formed, horribly  vices  indulged,  characters  and  fortunes  ruined,  and  widespread  miseries
induced,  by  persons  whose  actions  are  not  discovered,  or,  if  discovered,  are  such  as  civil
authority  does  not  touch.  The  common  judgment  of  men  is  that  severe  punishment  is
due  to  such,  but  it  comes  not  in  their  life.  The  betrayer  of  purity,  the  licentious  liver
who  hides  his  vices,  the  forger  who  escapes  discovery,  are  but  instances  of  many.  They
seem  to  escape  any  open  and  public  infliction  of  punishment,  and  carry  no  more  on
their  conscience  than  Joab  did  on  his,  which  would  be  little  just  in  proportion  as  it  was
debased.  The  solution  of  this  apparent  anomaly  is  really  to  be  found  in  the  considera-
tion that  the  government  uf  God  extends  over  an  area  wider  than  this  present  life,  and
that  for  profound  rtasons,  not  all  revealed,  it  is  not  best  for  judgment  to  fall  all  at  once
and  at  the  time  of  the  committal  or  even  discovery  of  the  sin.  Bishop  Butler  has
dwelt  on  this  aspect  of  the  Divine  government  with  great  wisdom  and  sobriety  of
judgment.  With  God  a  thousand  jears  are  as  one  day.  His  methods  of  ruling  men
here  evidently  proceed  on  the  fact  that  there  is  a  future  and  a  great  day  of  account,
when  men  shall  receive  according  to  ihe  deeds  done  in  the  body.

II.  Although  punishment  is  deferred,  the  perpetrators  op  evil  abb  under
THE  personal  DISPLEASURE  OF  Goo.  David's  mind  was  averse  to  Joab.  He  cherished
distrust  and  displeasure  toward  him.  He  had  scope  for  action,  and  possibly  for  true
repentance,  but  in  his  monarch's  estimation  he  was  a  base  and  condemned  man.  No
easy,  jaunty  spirit  on  the  part  of  Joab  could  alter  this  serious  fact.  There  existed  in
the  mind  of  his  king  the  condition  of  feeling  which  was  prophetic  of  a  doom  one  day
to  be  actualized.  In  like  manner  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day."  Those
who  soem  to  escape  present  punishment  are  already  condemned  in  the  sure,  infallible
judgment  of  God.  Merciful  and  pitiful  as  he  is,  and  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,
lie  cannot  but  regard  their  secret  sins  with  abhorrence,  and  see  in  them,  unless  they
repent  and  seek  newness  of  life  and  forgiveness  ia  Christ,  a  debased  form  of  humanity
gradually  maturing  to  receive  into  themselves  the  wrath  treasured  up  against  the  day
of  wrath  (Rom.  ii.  4—6).  The  prosperous  wicked  seldom  reflect  on  how  the  Holiest
and  Wisest  of  all  looks  on  them.  Men  great  and  esteemed  in  the  world  are  often
despised  by  God  because  he  knows  what  their  true  character  is.

III.  The  mind  or  God  is  revealed  to  his  servants  as  to  the  desert  of  thb
wicked,  and  some  intimation  IB  given  of  what  will  come  upon  THEM.  The
imprecation  (ver.  29)  of  David  the  king  was  his  way  of  revealing  to  all  offended  by
the  crime  of  Joab  his  sense  of  desert;  and,  considering  how  a  distinguished  posterity
was  regarded  in  the  East  as  the  crowning  good  of  a  long  life,  and  how  evidently
ambitious  Joab  was  to  figure  in  history,  it  was  not  easy  for  the  king  to  select  terms
nore  indicative  of  a  terrible  punishment.    The  utterance  was  not  that  of  vindictive*


«fl.  lit.  1— 39.J  'ME  SECOND  COOK  Of  SAMUEt.  8S

ness  or  malice,  but  of  a  mind  anxious  to  show  its  sense  of  the  desert  of  the  evil-dotr  ;
and  no  doubt  it  intimated  his  belief  that  some  such  terrible  issue  would  in  the  course
of  providence  be  the  reward  of  the  crime.  This  is  analogous  to  what  God  has  been
pleased  to  do.  To  remove  the  fears  and  perplexities  arising  from  the  fact  that  sin  is
often  long  unpunished  in  this  world,  he  has  distinctly  made  known  bow  he  regard's  it,
what  terrible  issues  will  come  of  it,  and  how  just  is  the  outcome  of  all  crime  on  the
perpetrator.  The  words  of  David  concerning  Joab's  desert  are  mild  compared  with
those  of  Christ  and  his  apostles  concerning  the  desert  of  those  who  deliberately  reject
Christ,  pierce  him  with  their  sins,  and  trample  on  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant
(Matt.  xi.  20—24;  Heb.  x.  26—31).

IV.  Meantime,  God  does  manifest  much  sympathy  with  those  who  buffer
Fsou  WBONa-DOiNG.  David's  lament  over  Abner  as  one  noble  in  position  and  in  some
aspects  of  character,  and  yet  brought  to  a  premature  end  as  though  he  were  a  mean,
weak,  and  inferior  person ;  his  taking  upon  his  own  heart  the  anguish  which  he  knew
must  afflict  multitudes ;  his  abstention  from  food  and  present  comfljirts  because  of  the
common  calamity ;  his  revulsion  of  feeling  from  the  "  men  too  hard  "  for  him ;  and  his
use  of  authority  for  securing  for  Abner  the  highest  funeral  honours ; — all  this,  so  natural
aud  beautiful  in  Israel's  king,  so  soothing  to  the  hearts. of  the  troubled  people,  is
strikingly  suggestive  of  the  wonderful  way  in  which  God,  while  denouncing  sin  and
foretelling  its  punishment,  manifests  his  sympathy  with  a  world  afflicted  with  the  deeds
of  evil-doers.  This  is  largely  the  meaning  of  our  Saviour's  life  among  men.  This  is
one  element  which  enters  even  into  the  great  transaction  on  Calvary.  This  is  the
explanation  of  the  manifold  ministries  of  comfort  and  encouragement  raised  up  by
the  Head  of  the  Church  for  the  relief  of  those  who  are  bowed  down,  and  the  mitigation
of  many  of  the  calamities  which  come  in  consequence  of  the  sins  of  others.

V.  While  peovidino  thus  fob  the  due  punishment  of  sin  and  the  mitigation

OF   THE    calamities   IT    ENTAILS,    GoD    ALSO    EXERCISES   A    EESTBAININO    POWBB    OVER

evil  TENDENCIES.  The  Continued  presence  of  David,  asserting  his  rightful  authority
and  infusing  his  own  generous  spirit  into  the  administration  of  affairs,  could  not  but
have  the  effect  of  lessening  the  influence  of  Joab  and  setting  a  limit  to  the  range  of
evil  he  otherwise  might  do.  The  king  was  among  his  people  for  their  good  and  the
restraint  of  one  who,  in  spirit,  was  their  calamity.  Here,  again,  do  we  not  get  a  glimpse
of  what  is  true  in  the  spiritual  sphere?  God  does  not  leave  evil  men  entirely  unrestrained
to  carry  out  their  designs  and  to  afflict  the  world  with  their  base  spirit.  As  responsible
beings,  they  have  their  freedom  to  act  for  a  while,  but  he  "  restrains  the  wrath  of  man ; "
he  is  present  in  our  human  affairs,  checking  and  controlling  so  that  other  influences  less
powerful  in  appearance  shall  be  brought  to  bear  and  find  full  and  free  scope.  It  is  never
to  be  forgotten  that,  though  there  are  Joabs  amongst  us,  "  hard"  in  spirit  and  cruel  of
purpose,  and  bearing  on  their  conscience  the  blood  of  others,  there  is  amongst  us  the
eternal  King,  whose  love,  generous  sympathy,  and  determination  to  care  for  the  faithful
never  fail.

G£Nj!:iiAL  LESSONS.  1.  It  is  characteristic  of  a  just  man  that,  tree  from  personal  ill-
will,  he  will  have  faith  in  the  retribution  of  wrong-doing,  and  will  even  forecast  and
acquiesce  in  its  form.  2.  A  righteous  indignation  will  induce  a  denunciation  of  men
in  power  in  spite  of  any  resentment  that  may  arise.  3.  The  guilty  conscience  is  so
cowardly  that  righteous  denunciation  may  even  increase  the  moral  power  of  the  just
over  the  unjust  man.  4.  It  is  important  to  cherish  strong  faith  in  God's  methods  of
government  if  we  would  be  calm  and  strong  in  assertion  of  right  and  awaiting  a  proper
adjustment  of  rewards.  5.  It  will  be  a  matter  of  sincere  grief  to  a  generous  mind  to
see  men  of  great  abOitles  come  to  an  ignoble  end,  even  though  in  the  past  those  abilities
have  not  been  used  in  the  desired  direction — allowance  being  made  for  the  strong
temptations  to  which  such  men  are  liable.  6.  A  manifestation  of  sympathy  with  the
sorrows  of  a  people,  and  an  effort  to  draw  out  their  more  tender  feelings,  is  a  sure  way
to  the  exercise  of  a  moral  influence  more  potent  than  the  assertion  of  authority.  7.
A  man  proves  his  capacity  for  ruling  others  when,  without  sacrifice  of  principle,  he  can
by  generous  sentiments  win  their  good  will  and  awaken  a  prevailing  kindly  sentiment
towards  himselt


86  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oa.  m.  1— 39.


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — (Hebron.)  "  77ie  home  of  David."  1.  The  theocracy  had  its  chie^
support  in  David  and  his  house.  On  him  also  rested  the  Messianic  hope  (ch.  vii.  13).
Hence  the  importance  which  attaches  to  events  of  his  life  that  would  otherwise  have
been  left  unrecorded.  2.  "  The  summary  narrative  of  these  seven  years  presents  the  still
youthful  king  in  a  very  lovable  light.  The  same  temper  which  had  marked  his  first
acts  after  Saul's  death  is  here  strikingly  brought  out.  He  seems  to  have  left  the
conduct  of  the  war  altogether  with  Joab,  as  if  he  shrank  from  striking  a  single  blow
for  his  own  advancement.  When  he  does  interfere,  it  is  on  the  side  of  peace,  to  curb
and  chastise  ferocious  vengeance  and  dastardly  assassination.  The  incidents  recorded
all  go  to  make  up  a  picture  of  rare  generosity,  of  patient  waiting  for  God  to  fulfil  his
purposes,  of  longing  that  the  miserable  strife  between  the  tribes  of  God's  inheritance
should  end"  (A.  Maclaren).  3.  In  the  house  of  David,  at  war  with  the  house  of  Saul,
we  see  an  embodiment  of  the  great  conflict  between  good  and  evil ;  a  representation  of
"  the  household  of  faith "  as  opposed  to  the  world,  and  the  spirit  as  opposed  to  the
flesh  (Gal.  v.  17).    Notice—

I.  Its  pboteaoted  antagonism.  "And  there  was  long  war,"  etc.  It:  1.  Is
rendered  necessary  by  the  opposite  nature  and  aims  of  the  contending  parties.  "  These
are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other."  2.  Implies  a  state  of  constant  warfare,  and  involves
many  a  painful  struggle.  "What  grievous  tales  of  distress  are  folded  up  in  these
brief  words  1"  3.  Is  permitted  by  God  for  wise  and  beneficent  purposes :  to  test  the
principles  of  his  servants ;  to  exercise  their  faith  and  patience ;  to  strengthen,  purify,
and  perfect  their  character.  4.  And  must  go  on  to  the  end.  "  This  is  a  battle,  from
which,  as  it  ends  only  with  life,  there  is  no  escape ;  and  he  who  fights  not  in  it  is  of
necessity  either  taken  captive  or  slain  "  (Scupoli).

II.  Its  inobeasino  stkbnqth.  "David  waxed  stronger  and  stronger,"  in  the
number  of  his  followers,  the  amount  of  his  resources,  the  unity  and  vigour  of  their
em|.jloyment,  the  stability  of  his  position,  the  extent  of  his  influence,  the  assurance  of
his  success.  And  all  who  "strive  against  sin"  within  and  without  also  "go  from
strength  to  strength:"  1.  In  patiently  waiting  upon  God  and  faithfully  doing  his
will.  "Wait  on  the  Lord,  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  heart"
(Ps.  xxvii.  14).  2.  By  the  bestowment  of  his  grace  and  the  co-operation  of  his  provi-
dence, directing,  protecting,  and  prospering  them,  in  accordance  with  his  promises.
Their  strength  is  not  self-derived,  but  "cometh  from  the  Lord."  "And  he  that  is
feeble  among  them  at  that  day  shall  be  as  David ;  and  the  house  of  David  shall  be  as
God,"  etc.  (Zech.  xii.  8) ;  "  Greater  is  he  that  is  in  you  than  he  that  is  in  the  world  "
(1  John  iv.  4) ;  "I  have  all  strength  in  him  that  giveth  me  power "  (Phil.  iv.  13).
.3.  And  theieby  they  show  that  God  is  with  them,  and  that  his  righteous  purposes
concerning  them  will  be  accomplished.

III.  Its  declining  opponents.  "  And  the  house  of  Saul  waxed  weaker  and  weaker,"
relatively  and  proportionately  to  the  growth  of  David's,  and  in  consequence  of  the
protracted  antagonism  and  increasing  strength  of  the  latter.  1.  In  wilful  separation
from  God,  and  seeking  their  own  selfish  ends  in  opposition  to  his  will  (see  ch.  ii.  8 — 12).
Those  who  fall  away  from  God  fall  into  self-division  and  self-contention  (ver.  8);
"  and  a  house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand."  2.  By  the  immovable  might  of
God  against  whom  they  set  themselves  (Ps.  ii.  4),  and  his  wrath,  which  is  "revealed
from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness,"  etc.  (Rom.  i.  18).  They  are  like  a  wave  that
dashes  against  a  rock  and  is  broken  and  scattered  in  foam.  "  The  face  of  the  Lord  is
against  them  that  do  evil"  (1  Pet.  iii.  12).  3.  And  thereby  they  prove  that  God  is
against  them,  and  are  taught  that  their  purposes  will  assuredly  fail  and  they  themselves
be  overthrown.  From  the  time  of  his  defeat  (ch.  ii.  17),  if  not  from  the  very  first,
Abner  probably  felt  that  the  cause  in  which  he  had  embarked  was  hopeless.  "  He
recognized  now  most  distinctly  in  David  the  rising  star  in  Israel ;  and,  however
haughtily  his  words  might  sound,  he  only  sought  to  conceal  behind  them  his  despair
of  Ishbosheth  "  (Krummacher).

IV.  Itspebilous  bblationships.  (Vers. 2 — 5.)  "The  increasing  political  strength
of  David  was  shown,  as  usual  among  Eastern  monarchs,  by  the  fresh  alliances  through


ea.ffi.l— 3&.]  TfiS  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtJEL.  6?

marriage  into  which  he  now  entered  "  (Edersheim).  In  addition  to  his  three  wives,
Miohal,  Ahinoam  (mother  of  Amnon),  and  Abigail  (mother  of  Chileab,  who  appears  to
have  died  early),  he  had  "  Maacah  the^daughter  of  Talmai  king  of  Geshur"  (mother  of
Absalom  and  Tamar),  Haggith  (mother  of  Adonijah),  Abital,  and  Eglah ;  and  he  after-
wards still  further  enlarged  the  royal  household  (ch.  iv.  13 — 16).  "  None  of  his  bodb
here  mentioned  were  eminent  for  virtue,  and  some  of  them  were  notorious  for  their
sins."  Polygamy  was  tolerated  by  the  Law  of  Moses  (1  Sam.  i.  2),  although  the  king
was  forbidden  (Deut.  xvii.  17)  to  "  multiply  wives  to  himself; "  and  it  was  practised
by  David  in  conformity  with  ancient  and  prevalent  custom,  from  political  considera-
tions and  natural  inclinations,  without  reproof  (ch.  xii.  8) ;  but  (as  his  subsequent
history  shows)  it  fostered  in  him  a  sensual  tendency,  undermined  his  moral  strength,
and  produced  innumerable  enmities  and  other  evils  in  his  family.  "One  deadly
element  of  future  woe  mingled  itself  with  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  David —
he  brought  into  his  family  the  curse  of  the  harem.  An  utter  lack  of  discipline  was
one  of  its  first  fruits ;  and  it  brought  yet  deeper  ill  even  than  that ;  for  it  poisoned  all
the  springs  of  family  life,  and  tainted  it  with  ever-recurring  impurity;  working  in  him
and  all  around  him  its  universal  fruits  of  impurity,  jealousy,  hatred,  incest,  and  blood  "
('  Heroes  of  Heb.  Hist.').  "  It  was  the  immemorial  custom  in  all  those  countries  for  the
magnificence  and  power  of  a  ruler  to  display  itself  in  the  multiplication  of  his  establish-
ment, that  is,  of  his  wives ;  for  every  wife  involved  a  separate  establishment.  It  shows
the  utmost  depravity  when  Christians  seek  to  shelter  their  own  unjust  and  shameless
lives  under  an  appeal  to  that  of  David,  and  that,  too,  although  none  of  their  other
proceedings  show  the  smallest  trace  of  David's  noble  spirit,  and  although  they  are  by
no  means  ready  to  bear  as  David  did  the  consequences  of  their  shame  "  (Ewald).  "  If
we  want  exemplifications  of  all  the  miseries  and  curses  which  spring  from  the  mixture
of  families  and  the  degradation  of  woman  in  the  court  and  country  where  polygamy
exists,  David's  history  supplies  them.  No  maxims  of  morality  can  be  half  so  effectual
as  a  faithful  record  of  terrible  effects  like  these  "  (Maurice).  In  view  of  these  effects
we  learn  that  no  strength  or  prosperity  can  be  lasting  where  "  the  friendship  of  the
itiorld "  is  cherished,  and  "  the  lusts  of  the  flesh "  are  suffered  to  prevail ;  and  that
victory  over  some  opponents  may  be  followed  by  defeat  by  other  more  subtle  and
dangerous  foei. — D.

Ver.  6. — (Mahanaim.)  The  character  of  Abner.  Abner,  son  of  Ner,  was  first  cousin
of  Saul,  probably  about  the  same  age,  commander-in-chief  of  his  army  (1  Sam.  xiv.  50),
and  contributed  greatly  to  his  early  successes.  He  introduced  David  to  the  king  after
his  victory  over  Goliath,  sat  at  the  royal  table  (1  Sam.  xx.  25),  was  well  acquainted
with  their  relations  to  each  other,  took  part  in  the  persecution  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  14),  and,
after  the  battle  of  Qilboa,  became  the  main  support  of  the  house  of  Saul  (oh.  ii.  8).
"  •  Abner  made  himself  strong  for  the  house  of  Saul,'  but  God  strengthened  David,  whom
Abner  knew  to  have  been  designed  for  the  kingdom  by  God  "  (Wordsworth).  Notice :
1.  His  eminent  abilities — military  skill,  prudence,  energy,  courage,  and  perseverance ;
as  shown  by  the  honourable  position  he  so  long  held  in  the  service  of  Saul,  and  his
successful  efforts  after  his  death  (ch.  ii.  8 — 12).  "  Abner's  act  was  not  an  ordinary  act
of  rebellion  against  the  person  of  David  and  his  rightful  claim  to  the  throne ;  because
JTehovah  had  not  yet  caused  David  to  be  set  before  the  nation  as  its  king  by  Samuel  or
any  other  prophet,  an,d  David  had  not  yet  asserted  the  right  to  reign  over  all  Israel,
which  had  been  secured  to  him  by  the  Lord,  and  guaranteed  by  his  anointing  as  one
whom  the  nation  was  bound  to  recognize  "  (Keil).  Nor  was  he  destitute  of  generous
sentiments.  If  he  could  not  be  called  a  good  man,  he  was  "a  prince  and  a  great  man"
(ver.  38).  2.  His  worldly  ambition  and  carnal  selfishness.  This  was  probably  the
main,  if  not  the  only,  motive  of  his  opposition  to  the  Divine  purpose  ;  and  to  it
Ishbosheth  evidently  attributed  the  conduct  with  which  he  charged  him,  regarding  his
act  as  ap  assertion  of  royal  rights  (ver.  7).  His  pride  and  self-esteem  are  also  apparent
in  his  haughty  answer  (ver.  8).

"Ambition's  like  a  circle  on  the  water.
Which  never  ceases  to  enlarge  itself,
Till  by  broad  spreading  it  disperse  to  nought.'


88  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  in.  1— 39.  •

3.  Bit  passionate  resentment,  which,  as  is  commonly  the  case,  was  an  imlication  of
the  tnith  of  the  charge  brought  against  him ;  nor  did  he  deny  it,  but  contemptuously
declared  that  he  was  too  great  a  man  .and  had  rendered  too  many  services  to  be
accused  of  such  a  "  fault ; "  and  then  took  an  oath  to  avenge  the  insult  by  translating
the  kingdom  to  David,  "as  the  Lord  had  sworn"  to  him  (vers,  9,  10).  "This  was
Abner's  arrogancy  to  boast  such  great  things  of  himself,  as  if  he  had  carried  a  king  in
his  pocket,  as  that  great  Earl  of  Warwick  in  Edward  IV.'s  time,  is  said  to  have  done  "
(Trapp).  "  No  man  ever  heard  Abner  godly  till  now ;  neither  had  he  been  so  at  this
time  if  he  had  not  intended  a  revengeful  departure  from  Islibosheth.  Nothing  is  more
odious  than  to  make  religion  a  stalking-horse  to  policy  *  (Hall).  4.  His  altered  pur-
poses. The  change,  although  right  and  good  in  itself,  was  due  to  a  passionate  impulse
and  probably  the  desire  of  personal  advantage;  and,  in  its  announcement,  Abner
betrayed  his  previous  ungodliness  and  present' hypocrisy.  "Alas!  how  eloquently
can  hypocrites  employ  the  Name  of  God,  and  take  the  sanction  of  religion,  v?hen  by
such  means  they  think  to  advance  their  present  interests ! "  (Lindsay).  But,  on  the
other  hand,  it  may  be  said  that  his  sudden  wrath  was  only  the  occasion  of  his  open
avowal  of  an  irrepressible  and  growing  conviction  of  duty,  and  of  his  taking  the  decisive
step  which  he  had  been  long  contemplating;  and  that  he  henceforth  faithfully
endeavoured  to  make  amends  for  his  former  errors  and  sincerely  sought  the  welfare  of
the  nation.  "  When  an  opposer  of  God's  Word  honestly  turns,  we  should,  without
reluctance,  give  him  the  hand,  without  undertaking  to  pass  judgment  on  the  motives
that  are  hidden  in  his  heart "  (Erdmann).  David,  unlike  Joab  (ver.  25),  put  the  best
construction  on  Abner's  conduct.  5.  Bis  energetic  action  and  extensive  influence.  He
sent  messengers  "  immediately "  (LXX.)  to  David,  recognizing  his  authority,  etc.
(rer.  12);  had  communication  with  the  elders  of  Israel  (ver.  18);  spake  in  the  ears  of
Benjamin  (ver.  19),  who  might  be  jealous  of  the  transfer  of  sovereignty  to  Judah ;  and,
having  obtained  their  consent,  c:ime  himself  to  Hebron  with  twenty  men,  "representa-
tives of  Israel,  to  confirm  his  overtures  by  their  presence,"  partook  of  .an  entertainment
"  of  the  nature  of  a  league,"  and  went  away  in  peace.  "  David  believed  that  in  this
offer  of  Abner  a  Divine  providence  was  to  be  observed  which  would  make,  as  he  hoped,
a  full  end  to  the  unhappy  civ  U  war"  (Krummacher).  6.  His  cruel  fate.  "Now  is
Ishbosheth's  wrong  avenged  by  an  enemy"  (Hall).  Even  though  his  present  course
was  in  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  purpose,  it  averted  not  the  consequences  of  his  former
conduct;  and  retribution  came  upon  him  suddenly,  unexpectedly,  and  by  a  wicked
hand.  "  One  wicked  man  is  made  to  be  another's  scourge."  "Human  sin  must  serve
the  purposes  of  God's  kingdom"  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  "David's  kingdom  is  not  promoted
by  Abner's  treason,  as  David  so  expected,  but  rather  by  the  taking  away  of  Abner ;
thus  the  Lord,  in  the  promotion  of  his  kingdom,  chooseth  not  the  instruments  nor
alloweth  even  the  means  which  appear  good  to  men  ;  but,  by  the  contrary,  he  taktth
away  the  same  instruments  and  means  in  which  men  have  most  confidence,  and  by
others  more  unlikely,  and  without  men's  expectation,  he  advanceth  the  cause  of  the
Church  and  worketh  great  things  "  (Guild). — D.

Vers.  7 — 11. — (Mahanaim.)  The  dissensions  of  the  wicked.  1.  The  union  of
wicked  men  rests  only  upon  regard  for  their  own  interests.  It  is  not  founded  on
mutual  esteem,  and  does  not  constitute  true  friendship  (L  Sam.  xviii.  1 — i).

"  The  friendships  of  the  world  are  oft
Confederacies  in  vice,  or  leagues  in  pleasure."

(Addison.)

2.  Whrn  their  interests  come  into  collision,  their  dissensions  begin.  And  occasions  of
such  collision  are  sure  to  arise.  "  Let  us  mark  the  inherent  weakness  of  a  ba  I  cause.
Godless  men  banded  together  for  selfish  ends  have  no  firm  bond  of  union.  The  very
passions  which  they  are  united  to  gratify  may  begin  tt  rage  against  one  another.  They
fall  into  the  pit  which  they  have  dug  for  others  "  (Blaikie).  3.  Wicked  men,  en , aged
in  a  common  enterprise  against  God,  are  not  indifferent  to  their  reputation  in  the  sight
of  one  another.  "  Am  I  a  dog's  head,"  etc.  (ver.  8)  ?  Their  conscience,  though  per-
verted, is  not  dead ;  their  self-esteem  and  love  of  approbation  are  fully  alive ;  and  they
estimate  to  the  full  their  claims  upon  the  gratitude  of  others.    They  would  even  hq  ve


OH.  m.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  89

tteir  crimes  connived  at  for  the  sake  of  the  benefits  which  they  confer,  4.  Nothing
more  surely  tests  and  manifests  the  character  of  the  wicked  than  being  reproved  by
each  other  for  their  faults.  "  Proud  men  will  not  bear  to  be  reproved,  especially  by
those  to  whom  they  have  been  obliged"  (M.  Henry).  It  is  otherwise  with  the  good
(Ps.  cxli.  5).  5.  The  siron(/  despise  the  weak,  and  passionately  resent  their  complaints,
however  reasonable  and  just.  6.  The  weak  suspect  the  strong,  and,  although  they  may
feel  justified  in  speaking,  are  put  to  silence  by  their  fears.  "  And  he  could  not  answer
Abner  a  word  again,  because  he  feared  him."  7.  The  dissensions  of  the  wicked  are
the  most  effectual  means  of  their  common  overthrow,  usually  turn  out  to  the  advantage
of  the  righteous,  and  promote  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  God. — D.

Vers.  12 — 16. — (Bahurim.)  A  domestic  episode.  Michal  was  the  first  wife  of
David  (1  Sam.  xix.  11 — 17).  Of  her  he  had  been  deprived  when  he  fled  from  the
court  of  Saul ;  she  was  given  to  Phaltiel  (Phaiti),  the  son  of  Laish,  of  Gallim  (1  Sam.
XXV.  44),  by  her  father,  perhaps  as  a  piece  of  policy,  to  attach  him  to  his  house,  and
they  lived  together  for  many  years,  apparently  in  much  domestic  comfort.  We  have
here —

I.  An  injuked  husband  demanding  his  just  right.  "  Well ;  I  will  make  a  league
with  thee :  but  one  thing  I  require,"  etc.  (ver.  13).  The  demand  was :  1.  Founded
n^on  Justice  s  David  having  been  unjustly  and  contemptuously  treated.  2.  Beverer<dal
toward  the  Law,  which  had  been  flagrantly  violated.  It  does  not  appear  that  Michal
was  ever  legally  divorced  from  David.  3.  Incited  by  affection  toward  her  and  the
memory  of  her  early  love  to  hiip.  4.  Adapted  to  test  the  sincerity  and  fidelity  of
Abner,  and  prepare  the  way  for  further  negotiations.  5.  Consistent  with  his  honour.
He  could  not  suffer  his  wife  to  live  as  the  wife  of  another  man  without  shame.  6.
Calculated  to  remind  the  northern  tribes  of  hLs  former  services  against  the  Plulistines
(vers.  15,  18).  7.  And  to  increase  his  influence  over  them  by  the  maintenance  of  his
family  alliance  with  the  house  of  Saul  and  the  public  recognition  of  his  power.  There
was  policy  as  well  as  principle  in  the  condition  imposed.

n.    A   FEEBLE   EULEB   ENFORCING  A  HUMILIATING  REQUIEEMENT.      "  And  David  Bent

messengers  to  Ishbosheth,  Saul's  son,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  "Not  to  Abner,  but  to  Ish-
bosheth  (for  the  league  between  David  and  Abner  was  a  profound  secret),  whom  David
knew  must  act  feebly,  as  he  was  at  Abner's  dictation  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary  *), "  to
demand  the  restoration  of  Michal,  that  her  return  might  take  place  in  duly  legal  form"
(Keil),  and  that  it  might  be  apparent  that  he  "had  not  taken  her  by  force  from  her
husband."  Nothing  is  said  of  Ishbosheth's  feelings  on  receiving  the  message.  Like
other  incapable  monarchs,  he  never  exhibited  any  spirit  except  on  the  point  of  his
royal  dignity;  and,  even  on  this,  his  wrath  was  extinguished  before  the  frown  of
Abner.  Under  constraint,  he  sent  Abner  himself,  and  took  his  sister  from  her  husband.
And  the  effect  of  this  concession  must  have  been  to  discredit  him  in  the  eyes  of  the
people  and  hasten  his  downfall.  Henceforth  it  was  hardly  necessary  that  Abner
■hould  disguise  his  intentions  (ver.  17).  There  is  no  more  pitiful  sight  than  that  of
a  man  who  holds  the  royal  office  without  adorning  it  with  royal  qualities.

III.  A  HELPLESS  SUBJECT  SUBMITTING  TO  A  PAINFUL  NECESSITY.    (VerS.  15,  16.)    The

scene  is  a  pathetic  one.  Michal  conducted  forth,  attended  by  her  husband,  "  weeping
behind  her"  to  Bahurim  (ch.  xix.  17),  on  the  borders  of  Judah,  where,  he  was  com-
pelled to  part  from  her,  with  the  contemptuous  order,  "  Go,  return."  "  And  he
returned  "  in  bitter  disappointment,  grief,  and  shame.  Yet  he  had  brought  his  trouble
on  himself.  How  fruitful  in  domestic  misery  are  imprudence,  ambition,  and  sinful
expediency  I  It  may  be  long  delayed,  hut  it  surely  comes.  Men  reap  as  they  sow.
"Wherefore  all  Phaltiel's  tears  move  no  pity  of  mine.  Caueat  raptor,  let  him  beware
who  violently  takes  another  man's  wife,  seeing  shame  and  sorrow  are  the  issue  of  such
ungodly  marriages"  (T.  Fuller).  "His  tears  ought  to  have  been  tears  of  repentance
for  his  sin  against  God  and  against  David  "  (Wordsworth).  Perchance  tliere  lay  hid
m  the  evil  he  now  suffered  the  seed  of  future  good.    But  here  his  history  ends.

IV.  A  HAUGHTT  PRINCESS   RESTORED   TO   HER   LEGITIMATE  LORD.      Nothing  is  Said  of

their  meeting.  1'his  silence  is  ominous ;  and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  the  reunion  was
not  one  of  unmingled  satisfaction.  Time  and  circumstances  may  have  changed  her
feelings  toward  David  (1  Sam.  xriii.  20),  separated  her  more  widely  from  him  in


95  THE  SECOND  SOoK  Of  SAMtJfiL.  [ofl.  m.  1— S&.

spiritual  sympathy,  and  developed  in  her  heart  her  father's  pride.  She  was  now  only
one  of  many  wires.  At  a  subsequent  meeting  (oh.  vi.  20)  she  was  scornful,  jealous,
and  unspiritual.  And  that  which  David  anticipated  with  pleasure  became  an  occasion
of  pain  and  lasting  trouble. — D.

Vers.  17, 18. — An  urgent  appeal :  an  evangdistk  address.  "  Now  then  do  it "  (rer.
18).  Having  resolved  to  transfer  his  allegiance,  Abner  here  persuades  the  elders  of
Israel  to  make  David  king  over  the  whfile  land ;  as  they  afterwards  did  (ch.  v.  1 — 3).
A  similar  appeal  may  be  addressed  to  others,  urging  them  to  submit  to  the  royal
authority  of  Christ,  of  whom  David  was  a  type  (1  Sam.  ii.  10).  Translated  into  New
Testament  language,  it  is,  "  We  beseech  you,  on  behalf  of  Christ,  be  ye  reconciled  to
God"(2Gor.  V.  20).     Consider—

I.  What  tou  should  do.  Jesus  Christ  is  King,  anointed  and  exalted  to  the  right
hand  of  God ;  he  reigns  in  grace  and  righteousness  in  many  hearts ;  but  his  kingdom
is  not  yet  fully  revealed  and  universally  extended  on  earth,  and  it  cannot  be  set  up
"within  you"  except  by  your  own  consent.  You  must:  1.  Beceioe  him  heartily  as
your  King  and  Lord,  your  absolute  Owner  and  supreme  Ruler,  as  well  as  your  Redeemer
and  Saviour ;  by  a  personal,  inward,  voluntary  act ;  in  the  renunciation  of  whatever  is
opposed  to  his  will,  and  the  submission  and  surrender  of  your  whole  being  to  his
direction  and  control.  "  Now  be  ye  not  stiff-necked,  as  your  fathers  were,  but  yield
yourselves  unto  the  Lord  "  (2  Chron.  xxx.  8 ;  Rom.  vi.  13).

"  Our  wills  are  ours,  w6  know  not  how  ;
Our  wills  are  ours  to  make  them  thine."

2.  Confess  him  openly,  by  uniting  with  his  people,  testifying  your  faith  in  him,  and
proclaiming  his  Name  before  men.  "  With  the  heart  man  believeth,"  etc.  (Rom.  x.  10 ;
2  Cor.  viii.  5).  "Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me,"  etc.  (Matt.  x.  32).  3.  Serve
him  loyally,  by  obeying  his  commandments,  assisting  his  friends,  resisting  his  foes,
seeking  his  honour  and  the  spread  of  his  kingdom.  "It  is  not  enough  that  I  should
love  the  Lord  myself  alone;  every  heart  must  love  him,  and  every  tongue  speak  forth
his  praise."

II.  Why  you  should  do  it.  "  Now  then  do  it :  for  Jehovah  hath  spoken,"  etc.
1.  It  is  the  purpose  of  Ood  that  he  should  reign  over  you.  "  He  must  reign,"  either  in
mercy  or  in  judgment.  2.  It  is  the  promise  of  Ood  that  through  him  you  may  be
saved  from  your  enemies — sin,  Satan,  death,  and  hell.     "  There  is  none  other  Name."

3.  It  has  been  your  own  desire  in  times  past  that  he  might  be  your  King.  "  Te  sought
for  David  both  yesterday  and  the  day  before  to  be  king  over  you :  now  then  do  it."
Under  the  bitter  oppression  of  the  ruler  chosen  by  yourselves,  in  view  of  the  superior
worth  of  "  the  man  of  God's  choice,"  in  weakness,  fear,  and  misery,  you  have  often  said.
"  Oh  for  one  glorious  hour  of  him  who,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  smote  Israel's
most  formidable  foe !  "  But  your  wishes  led  to  no  practical  result.  "  Your  goodness
was  as  the  morning  cloud."  And  now  your  reason,  conscience,  and  all  that  is  best
within  you  urge  you  to  accept  Christ  as  your  King.  Let  your  feelings  be  translated
into  definite  and  decisive  action,  without  which  they  are  worse  than  useless.  "  Now
then  do  it."     "  Crown  him  Lord  of  all."

III.  When  tou  should  do  it.  Whatever  reason  exists  for  doing  it  at  all  should
induce  you  to  do  it  now.  There  are  not  a  few  who"  are  persuaded  of  their  duty,  yet
break  the  force  of  every  appeal  by  delay  and  the  intention  of  doing  it  at  a  future  time.
But :  1.  The  present  is  a  most  favourable  opportunity.  The  King  "waits  to  be  gracious,"
and  sends  you  the  message  of  reconciliation.  "  Men  and  brethren,  to  you  is  the  word
of  this  salvation  sent."  "  Behold,  now  is  the  acceptable  time ;  behold,  now  is  the  day
of  salvation  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  1,  2).  2.  If  you  do  it  to-day,  to-morrow  and  aU  your  fuiwe
days  will  be  days  of  peace  and  happiness.  3.  If  you  wait  till  to-morrow,  it  is  prohahle
that  you  will  never  do  it.  Your  susceptibility  to  Divine  influences  will  be  lessened,
your  indisposition,  which  is  the  real  cause  of  delay,  will  be  Increased ;  life  is  uncertain,
probation  is  brief,  the  end  is  nigh.  "  Our  gracious  Ahasuerus  (Esth.  iv.  11)  reacheth
out  the  golden  sceptre  to  all  that  hive  a  hand  of  faith  to  lay  hold  of  it ;  but  then  he
shall  take  his  iron  mace  or  rod  in  his  hand  to  bruise  his  enemies  and  break  them
In  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel."  Say  not,  with  the  procrastinator,  "  To-morrow  "  (Exod.


OH.  m.  1—390  THfi  SECOND  BOOK  Of  SAMUEL.  91

viii.  10) ;  "  Go  thy  way  for  this  time  "  (Acts  xxiv.  25) ;  for  "  the  Holy  Ghost  saith,
To-day  "  (Heb.  iii.  7).  " '  Cras  1  eras ! '  (To-morrow  1  to-morrow !)  is  the  cry  of  the  raven.
This  is  the  thing  that  destroys  many ;  while  they  are  saying,  '  Cras !  eras  1 '  suddenly  the
door  is  shut "  (Augustine).  "  The  man  that  procrastinates  struggles  ever  with  ruin  "
(Epictetus).  "  There  is  a  circumscribed  space  of  time  appointed  thee,  which  if  thou
dost  not  employ  in  making  all  calm  and  serene  within,  it  will  pass  away  and  thou  wilt
pass  away,  and  it  never  will  return  "  (Marcus  Antoninus,  ii.  4).

"  Defer  not  till  to-morrow  to  be  wise ;
To-morrow's  sun  to  thee  may  never  rise."

D.

Vers.  22 — 30. — (Hebron.)  The  vengeance  of  Joab.  \_Seferences:  (1)  Early  life
(1  Sam.  xxii.  1) ;  (2)  conflict  with  Abner  (ch.  ii.  13,  24,  30) ;  (3)  capture  of  tlie  strong-
hold of  Zion  (1  Ohron.  xi.  6) ;  (4)  captain  of  the  host  (ch.  viii.  16 ;  xx.  23) ;  (5)  conflicts
with  the  Ammonites  and  Syrians  (ch.  a.  7);  (6)  reduction  of  the  Edomites  (1  Kings  xi.
15, 16) ;  (7)  complicity  in  the  murder  of  Uriah  (ch.  xi.  14) ;  (8)  capture  of  Eabbah
(ch.  XI.  1 ;  xii.  26);  (9)  relations  with  Absalom  (ch.  xiv.  1, 29) ;  (10)  defeat  and  murder
of  Absalom  (ch.  xviii.  2,.  14) ;  (11)  upbraiding  the  king  (ch.  xix.  5) ;  (12)  replaced  by
Amasa  (oh.  xx.  4)  ;  (13)  murder  of  Araasa  (ch.  xx.  10) ;  (14)  defeat  of  Sheba  (ch.  xx.
22) ;  (15)  remonstrance  with  David  (ch.  xxiv.  3)  ;  (16)  defection  to  Adonijah  (1  Kings
i.  7) ;  (17)  denounced  by  David  (1  Kings  ii.  5) ;  (18)  put  to  death  by  Benaiah  at  the
command  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  ii.  28,  34).]  1.  Among  those  who  played  a  prominent
part  in  David's  reign  the /oremosi  man  was  his  nephew  Joab.  He  was  possessed  of  great
physical  strength  and  daring,  clear  judgment  and  strung  will,  eminent  military  skUl,  and
immense  power  over  others ;  "  a  bold  captain  in  bad  times."  With  the  ruder  qualities
of  activity,  courage,  and  implacable  revenge,  "he  combined  something  of  a  more  states-
manlike character,  which  brings  him  more  nearly  to  a  level  with  his  youthful  uncle ;
and  unquestionably  gives  him  the  second  place  in  the  whole  history  of  David's  reign.
In  consequence  of  his  successful  attempt  at  the  siege  of  Jehus,  he  became  commander-in-
chief,  the  highest  oiBce  in  the  state  after  the  king.  In  this  post  he  was  content,  and
served  the  king  with  undeviating  fidelity.  In  the  wide  range  of  wars  which  David
undertook,  Joab  was  the  acting  general,  and  he  therefore  may  be  considered  as  the
founder,  as  far  as  military  prowess  was  concerned,  the  Marlborough,  the  Belisarius,  of
the  Jewish  empire  "  (Stanley).  His  patriotism  was  unquestionable ;  nor  was  he  without
piety  (ch.  x.  12).  2.  His  natural  gifts,  good  qualities,  and  invaluable  services  were
more  than  counterbalanced  by  his  moral  defects  and  numerous  vices.  "  He  ever  appears
wily,  politic,  and  unscrupulous  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  "  He  is  the  impersonation
of  worldly  policy,  secular  expediency,  and  temporal  ambition,  eager  for  his  own  personal
aggrandizement,  and  especially  for  the  maintenance  of  his  own  political  ascendency,
and  practising  on  the  weaknesses  of  princes  for  his  own  interests;  but  at  last  the
victim  of  his  own  Machiavellian  shrewdness  "  (Wordsworth).  3.  "  Joab  was  a  type  of
the  national  aspect  of  Judaism.  He  was  intensely  Jewish,  in  the  tribal  meaning  of
the  word,  not  in  its  higher,  world-wide  bearing;  only  Judsan  in  everything  that
outwardly  marked  Judaism,  though  not  regarded  in  its  inward  and  spiritual  reality.
Nor  is  it  without  deep  syrdbolical  meaning,  as  we  have  the  higher  teaching  of  history,
that  Joab,  the  typical  Eastern  Judjean — may  we  not  say,  the  type  of  Israel  after  the
flesh  ? — should,  in  carrying  out  his  own  purposes  and  views,  have  at  last  compassed
his  own  destruction  "  (Edersheim).

I.  Evil  deeds  are  seldom  wrought  without  plausible  pretexts.  It  is  uncer-
tain whether  Joab  was  aware  of  former  negotiations  between  David  and  Abner ;  but
on  returning  to  Hebron  from  a  military  expedition-(against  marauding  troops,  ch.  iv.  2),
being  informed  of  the  league  that  had  just  been  made,  his  suspicion  was  aroused;  he
hastened  to  the  king  with  the  view  of  inducing  him  to  share  it,  probably  believing  that
Abner  was  not  to  be  trusted;  and  finding  the  result  doubtful  or  contrary  to  his
expectation,  resolved  to  take  the  matter  into  his  own  hands,  on  the  ground  of:  1.  Quilt
incurred  by  a  public  enemy.  2.  Zeal  inspired  for  the  king's  safety  (ver.  25).  3.  Ohli-
gation  imposed  by  personal  .injury,  according  to  the  custom  of  blood-revenge  (Exod.  xxi.
13 ;  Numb,  xxxv,  9 — 35 ;  Deut.  x!k.  1 — 13).  This  is  twice  mentioned  by  the  historian


92  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMOEL.  toH.in.l— 39.

(vers.  27,  30)  as  the  ostensiMe  ground,  and  was  perhaps  popularly  regarded  as  a
BufScient  justification  of  Ms  deed.  "  The  act  of  Abner  was  justifiable  homicide ;  but  it
was  precisely  to  such  cases  that  the  rule  applied,  not  to  those  of  murder,  against  the
penalties  of  which  no  sanctuary  afforded  protection.  Besides,  unless  the  right  of
avengement  for  blood  did  apply  to  such  cases  as  this,  whence  the  deep  necessity  of.
Abner  to  avoid  slaying  Asahel  (oh.  ii.  22)?  It  may  be  admittted  that  a  case  of  this
nature  may  have  involved  some  doubt  as  to  the  application  of  the  rule  to  it,  and  very
likely  it  was  not  in  such  cases  often  enforced.  But  where  any  room  for  doubt  existed,
Joab  and  Abishai  might  interpret  it  in  their  own  favour  as  their  justification  for  an  act
the  true  motives  of  which  durst  not  be  alleged,  and  as  a  ground  on  which  they  might
claim  exemption  from  the  punishment  due  to  murder"  (Kitto,  'Daily  Bible  Illus.').

II.  Plausible  prbtkxtb  often  cover  the  basest  motives,  though  they  cannot
entirely  conceal  them.  1.  Vindictiveness.  Joab's  act,  even  if  it  fell  within  the  letter
of  the  Law,  which  allowed  punishment  for  homicide  under  certain  circumstances  (Numb.
XXXV.  22),  was  shown,  by  the  place,  the  time,  and  the  manner  of  it,  to  have  been  done,
not  from  regard  for  justice,  but  from  deliberate,  unwarrantable,  malicious  revenge.  So
David  regarded  it  (ver.  28) ;  denouncing  it  as  the  "  shedding  of  the  blood  of  war  in
peace"  (1  Kings  ii.  5),  and  joining  it  with  the  murder  of  Amasa.  2.  Jealousy  and
ambition  (1  Sam.  xviii.  6 — 16).  This  was  his  main  motive."  He  was  "afraid  of  losing
his  command  of  the  army  and  his  dignity  with  the  king,  and  lest  he  should  be  deprived
of  those  advantages  and  Abner  shotild  obtain  the  first  rank  in  David's  court "  (Josephus).
Hence  his  suspicion  and  slander  of  Abner  (ver.  25).  "Through  envy  of  the  devil
came  death  into  the  world  "  (Wisd.  of  SoL  ii.  24).

• "  Envy  at  others'  good  is  evermore
Malignant  poison  setting  on  the  soul ;
A  double  woe  to  him  infected  by  it —
Of  inward  pain  the  heavy  load  he  bears,
At  sight  of  joy  witlwut  he  ever  mourns."

(iHschyluB.)

3.  Presumption.  He  rudely  remonstrated  with  the  king  (ver.  24),  presuming  upon
liis  [lositiuu;  an.l  alierwardji,  without  the  king's  authority,  whilst  seeming  to  act  under
it,  1  cciilled  the  man  who  had  been  sent  away  under  the  king's  protection  ;  and  gratified
his  private  revenge,  regardless  of  the  effect  of  his  conduct  on  the  king's  dignity  and
reputation.  4.  Treachery.  Under  the  pretence  of  speaking  with  him  in  a  friendly
and  confidential  maimer,  he  drew  his  victim  aside  in  the  middle  of  the  gate,  and  smote
him  there.  Possibly  Abishai  alone  was  witness  of  the  act.  "Cursed  be  he  that
smiteth  his  neighbour  secretly.  And  all  the  people  shall  say,  Amen"  (Deut.  xxvii.  24).
HI.  Impunity  in  cbime  is  commonly  productive  of  disastrous  effects.  Under
the  circumstances,  it  would  hardly  have  been  possible  for  David  to  punish  Joab  and
Abishai.  "  Probably  public  feeling  would  not  have  supported  the  king,  nor  could  he,
at  this  crisis  of  his  afiairs,  have  afforded  the  loss  of  such  generals,  or  brave  the  people
and  the  army  "  (Edersheim).  Great  men  often  owe  their  exemption  from  punishment
to  their  position.  But  crime,  although  unpunished  by  man :  1.  Incurs  the  righteous  dis-
pleasure of  Ood.  (Vers.  29,  iiQ.)  Human  punishment  does  not  and  cannot  always  accord
with  the  Divine.  Although  David  could  not  punish,  he  durst  not  forgive.  His  words
"  express  his  moral  horror  at  this  evil  deed,  and  at  the  same  time  the  everlasting  law
of  God's  requiting  justice."  "The  extension  of  the  curse  to  the  descendants  clearly
refers  to  the  threatenings  of  the  Law ;  and  in  both  cases  the  offensive  character  dis-
appears if  we  only  remember  that  whoever  by  true  repentance  freed  himself  from
connection  with  the  guilt,  was  also  exempted  from  participation  in  the  punishment "
(Hengstenberg).  2.  Incites  other  men  to  similar  crimes.  It  is  not  improbable  that
Baauah  and  Rechab  were  iniUiced  to  assassinate  Ishbosheth  (ch.  iv.  6)  by  the  unavenged
death  of  Abner.  3.  Uncowayes  the  criminal  to  continue  his  evil  course,  increases  his
obduracy,  and  causes  him  to  "  wax  worst  and  worse."  "  Joab  prospered  even  after  his
sin.  God  gave  him  time  for  repentance.  But  he  hardened  his  heart  by  sin.  And  in
the  end  he  was  cut  off."  "  Successful  crime  is  splendid  misery."  4.  Escapes  not  for
tv*r  the  retribution  which  it  deserves.     '"Evil  purcueth  sinners"  (Proy.  xiiL  21:


CH.  m.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  63

xxix.  1).  Joab  Binnerl  with  a-strong  and  violent  hand,  and  by  a  strong  and  violent
hand  he  at  length  periiiLcd  (1  Kings  ii.  34;  Fs.  Iviii.  11).

"O  blind  lust  I
O  foolish  wrath  I  who  so  dost  goad  us  on
In  the  brief  life,  and  in  the  eternal  then
Thus  miserably  overwhelm  us  I "

(Dante, '  Purg., '  xil

D.

Vers.  31 — 35. — (Hebron.)    David's  lament  over  Abner,

*'Ab  a  fool  dies  should  Abner  die?^

Thy  hands  unbound,

Thy  feet  not  set  in  fetters :
As  one  falls  before  the  wicked,  thou  didst  fall  I "

On  hearing  of  the  death  of  Abner,  David  exhibited  the  same  generous  spirit  as  formerly
at  the  death  of  Saul  (ch.  i.  11,  12).  1.  He  disclaimed  (before  his  trusted  servants,  as
afterwards,  ver.  38)  against  having  had  arty  part  therein ;  declaring,  "  I  and  my  kingdom
are  guiltless  before  the  Lord,^'  etc.  Malicious  persons,  judging  others  by  themselves,
might  accuse  him  of  it ;  and  if  it  had  been  instigated  by  liim,  he  would  have  brought
guilt  upon  his  people  as  well  as  himself  (ch.  xxi.  1 ;  xxiv.  1,  17).  2.  He  invoked  a
curse  on  the  head  of  the  author  of  tlje  deed;  not  from  a  feeling  of  personal  hatred  and
vindictiveness,  but  of  righteous  indignation  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  19).  3.  He  ordered  a,  public
mourning  in  honour  of  the  deceased.  "And  David  said  to  Joab,"  etc.  (ver.  38).
Although  he  dnrbt  not  arrest  him,  he  clearly  indicated  what  he  thought  of  his  conduct,
and  sought  to  remove  the  odium  which  it  cast  on  his  own  good  name.  4.  He  followed
in  the  procession  as  chief  mourner,  wept  at  the  grave  (John  xi.  35),  and  fasted  until
sunset.  "  There  is  no  more  beautiful  picture  in  his  life  than  that  of  his  following  the
bier  where  lay  the  bloody  corpse  of  the  man  who  had  been  his  enemy  ever  since  he
had  known  him,  and  sealing  the  reconciliation  which  dealh  ever  makes  in  noble  souls
by  the  pathetic  dirge  he  chanted  over  Abner's  grave"  (A.  Maclaren).  "Tliis  short
poem  is  not  only  a  dirge;  it  is  also  an  apology  for  David  and  for  Abner  himself"
(Wordsworth).     It  expresses —

I.  Admibation  of  eminent  worth.  Abner  was  not  a  villain  (fool)  or  murderer,
deserving  of  being  put  in  fetters  and  dying  a  felon's  death ;  but  brave,  capable,  noble-
minded,  "  great  in  council,  great  in  war,"  and  worthy  of  respect  and  honour.  A  gene-
rous man  sees  and  appreciates  what  is  best  in  other  men.  "The  generous  spirit  of
David  kept  down  all  base  and  selfish  feeling,  and  added  another  to  those  glorio;is  con-
quests over  his  own  heart  which  were  far  higher  distinctions  than  his  other  victories,
and  in  which  he  has  left  us  an  example  which  all,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  should
try  to  emulate  "  (Blaikie).

IL  Affliction  for  a  public  loss.  A  light  was  quenched  "in  Israel"  {ver.  38).
His  presence  and  influence  would  have  contributed  to  the  reconciliation  of  the  tribes
and  the  welfare  of  the  nation  (ver.  21).  David's  sorrow  was  sincere;  his  tears  (ia  con-
firmation of  his  words)  evinced  the  tenderness  and  sympathy  of  his  heart,  moved  the
people  also  to  tears,  and  (in  contrast  with  the  bearin^;  of  Joab)  convinced  them  of  his
innocence  and  uprightness.

III.  Astonishment  at  an  extraordinary  fate.  "The  point  of  this  indignant,
more  than  sorrowful,  lament  lies  in  the  mode  in  which  Abner  was  slain  "  (Kitto, '  Cyc.').
How  stran-je  that  Abner  should  have  fallen  in  the  full  possession  of  sti  ength  to  defend
iiimself  and  liberty  to  flee  from  danger ;  neither  as  a  prisoner  taken  in  battle  nor  (in
allusion  to  the  right  of  blood-revenge  which  Joab  claimed)  as  a  murderer  delivered  up
in  bonds  to  the  avenger  by  lawful  authority,  as  he  would  have  been  if  he  were  guilty !
His  fall — so  different  from  what  might  have  been  expected  and  from  what  he  meritsd —
could  be  accounted  for  only  by  its  having  been  caused  by  the  treacherous  malice  and
murderous  violence  of  "sons  of  wickedness."

IV.  Abhorbenck  of  a  wicked  deed.  (Vers.  29,  39.)  The  death  of  Abner  was,  even
more  than  his  life  would  have  been,  conducive  to  David's  interests.  "  It  must  have
seemed  to  him,  from  a  prudential  point  of  view,  that  it  was  a  piece  of  good  fortune.


94  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  in.  1—39.

But  the  strength  of  his  moral  indignation  does  not  suffer  itself  to  be  assuaged  by  worldly-
considerations  "  (Delitzsch).  Hatred  of  wrong  is  a  sign  and  measure  of  the  love  of
right.  "  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  evil "  (Ps.  xcvii.  10).  David  was  as  severe  toward
evil-doers  as  he  was  tender  and  pitiful  toward  the  victims  of  their  wickedness.  "  He
was  a  man  extreme  in  all  his  excellences — a  man  of  the  highest  strain,  whether  for
counsel,  for  expression,  or  for  action,  in  peace  and  in  war,  in  exile  and  on  the  throne  "
(E.  Irving).— D.

Vers.  36 — 38. — (Hebron.)  Acceptance  with  the  people.  "And  all  the  people  took
notice  of  it,  and  it  pleased  them,"  etc.  (ver.  36).  David's  conduct  not  only  freed  him
from  suspicion,  but  also  won  the  confidence  and  affection  of  "  all  the  people  "  (1  Sam.
xii.  3—5).

I.  The  conduct  or  one  in  authoritt  is  oarepullt  observed  by  the  people.
Because  of:  1.  His  elevated  position,  which  (like  a  mountain-peak)  attracts  their  atten-
tion, and  exposes  him  to  their  constant  gaze.  2.  His  responsible  position,  which  leads
them  to  compare  his  actions  with  the  principles  according  to  which  he  ought  to  rule.
3.  His  influential  position,  which  makes  them  watchful  of  his  course,  out  of  concern  for
their  own  interests.

II.  Acceptance  with  the  people  is  an  object  worthy  op  beiko  diligently
BOUGHT.  It  is  not  the  highest  object,  and  ought  not  to  be  sought  supremely.  Truth
and  justice  are  of  greater  worth  than  popularity.  The  praise  of  God  must  be  loved
more  than  the  praise  of  men  (John  xii.  43).  But  it  should  not  be  neglected  or  despised,
because :  1.  It  conduces  to  his  safety  and  happiness.  2.  It  renders  his  measures  less
likely  to  be  suspected  and  opposed ;  enables  him  to  effect  his  purposes  for  their  good ;
increases  the  measure  of  his  usefulness.  3.  It  aids  him  in  his  endeavours  to  promote
the  glory  of  the  supreme  Euler.

III.  There  is  no  way  to  secure  it  more  effectual  than  the  exhibition  op
an  upright  and  generous  spirit.  1.  Other  ways  are  uncertain  and  variable,  like  the
changing  moods  of  the  people.  2.  This  appeals  to  what  is  noblest  and  most  permanent
in  them,  and  secures  the  sympathies  of  the  most  reliable  men.  3.  It  also  obtains  the
favour  and  help  of  God,  who  disposes  their  hearts  to  approve,  submit,  and  obey.

IV.  Its  attainment  is  honoukablb  and  beneficial  to  the  people  themselves.

1.  It  shows  a  readiness  to  be  pleased,  and  a  disposition  to  admire  genuine  excellence.

2.  It  confirms  his  devotion  to  their  welfare,  and  encourages  him  to  persevere  in  well-
doing. 3.  It  tends  to  their  improvement  in  virtue,  and  thus  contributes  to  their  peace
and  unity,  power  and  prosperity.

Conclusion.  What  has  been  said  applies  to  other  relations  besides  that  of  ruler  and
subject.  "  A  good  name  is  better  than  precious  ointment "  (Eccles.  vii.  1)  or  "  great
riches"  (Prov.  xxii.  1);  "Let  every  one  of  us  please  his  neighbour  for  his  good  to
edification "  (Bom.  xv.  2 ;  1  Cor.  x.  33 ;  Titus  ii.  9) ;  "  Whatsoever  things  are  of  good
report,  think  on  these  things  "  (Phil.  iv.  8). — D.

Ver.  38. — (Hebron.)  The  fall  of  a  prince  and  a  great  man.  The  world  is  some-
times startled  by  the  fall  of  an  eminent  man  in  a  sudden  and  violent  manner — ^like  that
of  the  Czar  of  Eussia  or  the  President  of  the  United  States.  Here  is  the  epitaph  al
such  a  man.  Eeflect :  1.  How  uncertain  is  the  continuance  of  human  life !  This
familiar  but  little-heeded  truth  is  set  forth  in  an  impressive  manner  by  such  an  event,
teaching  that  no  station  is  exempt  from  the  approach  of  death,  no  safeguards
effectual  against  it.  "  Death  is  come  up  into  our  windows,  and  is  entered  into  our
palaces"  (Jer.  ix.  24).  2.  How  imstablo  is  the  foundation  of  earthly  greatness!  It  is
built  upon  the  sand,  and  in  a  moment  crumbles  into  dust.  Goodness  alone  (the  essence
of  true  greatness)  endures  and  goes  with  the  soul  into  "  everlasting  habitationa."  3.
How  deplorable  is  the  loss  of  superior  excellence !  The  world  is  made  poorer  by  its
removal.  4.  How  dreadful  is  the  prevalence  of  diabolical  wickedness !  One  assassina-
tion begets  another.  And  at  times  there  is  abroad  in  society  a  spirit  of  lawlessness,
recklessmess,  and  ungodliness,  which  is  full  of  peril,  and  calls  for  the  earnest  efforts  and
prayers  of  good  men  that  it  may  be  overcome.  5.  How  mysterious  are  the  ways  of
Divine  Providence,  in  permitting  the  innocent  to  perish,  the  godless  to  succeed,  the
guilty  to  be  spared !     6.  How  often  is  evil  overruled  for  the  promotion  of  beneficent


CH.  m.  1— 39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  95

ends  (ch.  iv.  1 ;  v.  1) !  7.  How  profitable  is  the  remembrance  of  a  noble-minded  man  1
"Know  ye  not,"  etc.  ?    "  He  being  dead,  yet  speaketh." — D.

Ver.  39. — (Hbbbon.)  The  sons  of  Zeniiah.  The  mental  and  moral  qualities  of  men
are  largely  traceable  to  hereditary  tendencies.  If  Joab  and  Abishai  resembled  their
mother,  she  must  have  been  a  woman  of  strong  mind,  and  of  a  suspicious,  irascible,  and
intolerant  temper,  rather  than  noted  for  her  simplicity,  meekness,  and  forbearance.
And  so  much  may  be  inferred  from  the  manner  in  which  David  associates  the  name  of
his  sister  with  her  sons  (ch.  xvi.  10 ;  xix.  22 ;  1  Kings  ii.  5).  Their  spirit  and  conduct
were  different  from  his,  obnoxious  to  him,  and  constrained  him  to  make  this  confession
to  his  confidential  servants  on  the  evening  of  the  day  of  Abner's  funeral.  "  It  was  one
of  those  moments  in  which  a  king,  even  with  the  best  intentions,  must  feel  to  his  own
heavy  cost  the  weakness  of  everything  human,  and  the  limits  of  himian  supremacy  "
(Ewald).

I.  No  MAN,  HOWEVER  HIGHLY  EXALTED,  IS  EXEMPT  FROM  WEAKNESS.     "  I  am  this  day

weak  [tender,  infirm],  and  an  anointed  king."  The  most  absolute  monarch  cannot  do
all  he  would.  Truly  good  men,  though  anointed  and  endued  with  spiritual  power,  are
by  no  means  perfect,  but  are  "  compassed  with  infirmity."  The  weakness  of  a  strong
man  is  felt:  1.  In  contending  against  the  evil  that  surrounds  him  and  presses  in  upon
him  like  "  the  proud  waves."  2.  In  performing  the  duties  that  rest  upon  him,  and
attaining  the  ideal  of  character  at  which  he  aims.  "  I  wiU  walk  within  my  house  with
a  perfect  heart,"  etc.  (Ps.  ci.  2 — 8).  3.  In  effecting  the  purposes  which  he  may  have
formed  for  the  good  of  others.

II.  The  weakness  op  a  stkong  man  is  often  occasioned  by  his  eelationship
WITH  other  MEN.  "And  these  men,  sons  of  Zeruiah,  are  too  hard  [rough,  obstinate,
powerful]  for  me."  His  relationships  with  them  (formed,  it  may  be,  independently  of
his  choice,  and  conducive,  in  some  respects,  to  his  good)  not  unfrequently :  1.  Enable
them  to  acquire  undue  power,  and  incite  them  to  pursue  a  presiimptuous,  obstinate,
unjustifiable  course.  "  A  man's  foes  are  they  of  his  own  household  "  (Matt.  x.  36 ;
Numb.  xii.  1).  2.  Bring  him  into  intimate  association  with  those  who  have  little
sympathy  with  his  noblest  feelings,  and  expose  him  to  the  influence  of  their  adverse
principles  (Luke  ix.  54 ;  Matt.  xvi.  22,  23).  3.  Become  an  occasion  of  hindrance,
temptation,  and  peril.  For,  unlike  him  in  whom  the  prince  of  this  world  "had
nothing  "  (John  xiv.  30),  every  man  possesses  an  inward,  carnal  propensity  on  which
outward  evil  may  take  hold,  and  thereby  cause  him  to  stumble.

III.  The  consciousness  or  his  condition  fills  him  with  deep  distress.  "  I  am
this  day  weak,"  etc.,  which  is  a,  complaint  of:  1.  Painful  restraint  imposed  upon  him
with  respect  to  conduct  he  cannot  approve.  2.  Necessary  endurance  of  men  whom
he  cannot  punish,  and  with  whom  he  may  not,  out  of  regard  to  his  own  position  and
the  common  good,  enter  into  open  conflict.  3.  Partial  and  not  altogether  hlameless
failure  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  obligations  of  his  high  calling.  David  has  been  severely
condemned  for  not  punishing  the  sons  of  Zeruiah ;  but  in  order  to  justify  such  condem-
nation, we  should  have  a  better  acquaintance  with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.
He  was  not  without  sinful  infirmity.  Yet  whose  conviction  of  what  is  absolutely  right
exactly  corresponds  with  his  consciousness  of  actual  performance  ?  "  The  spirit  indeed
is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak."

IV.  The  chief  alleviation  of  his  trouble  is  confidence  m  the  righteous
retribution  of  God.  "Jehovah  reward  the  doer  of  wickedness  according  to  his
wickedness."  This  is  expressive  of :  1.  Dependence  on  the  Divine  power  to  accomplish
what  he  himself  cannot  do.  2.  Faith  in  the  Divine  permission  of  unrequited  evil  for  a
time,  for  wise  and  beneficent  euds.  3.  Desire  for  the  maintenance,  vindication,  and
triumph  of  eternal  righteousness  in  the  earth  (vers.  22—30).  "The  Lord  will  render
to  him  according  to  his  works  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  14).  "  Jehovah  shall  reward,"  etc.  This
was  the  text  to  which  Lady  F.  Cavendish  directed  attention  on  the  occasion  of  the
lamented  death  of  her  husband,  Lord  Frederic  Cavendish ;  and  which  was  so  remarkably
fulfilled  in  the  fate  that  afterwards  overtook  his  assassins.  "  It  is  the  hope  of  the
oppressed  and  the  patience  of  the  saints." — D.

Vers.  9 — 12. — Doing  right  urrongly.     A,bner  knew  well  that  David  was  appointed


96  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEu  [ch.  in.  1—39.

by  God  to  be  king  over  all  Israel  Yet  he  set  up  Ishbosheth  as  king  over  the  eleven
tribes  in  opposition  to  David,  and  thus  caused  much  unnecessary  and  useless  delay
and  bloodshed.  When,  however,  Ishbosheth  (wliether  rightly  or  wrongly)  remonstrated
with  him  for  his  conduct  towards  Bizpah,  he  calls  to  mind  the  purpose  and  promise
of  God,  and  resolves  to  co-operate  with  him  (1)  in  placing  David  over  all  the  nation
(ver.  9) ;  and  he  opens  communications  with  David  with  this  view.  The  known  will
of  Ood  thus  becomes  a  convenient  pretext  for  the  gratification  at  once  of  his  revenge
and  his  ambition.  His  own  lips  convicted  him  of  insincerity  and  hypocrisy.  His
tardy  obedience  to  the  truth  he  knew  was  unreal  and  unacceptable  to  God,  however
useful  to  David.  It  was  self,  and  not  God,  that  ruled  him  throughout.  Abner  has
many  imitators— men  who,  instead  of  simply  and  sincerely  obeying  the  truth  they
know,  make  it  wait  on  their  ambition  or  covetousness,  now  neglecting  it,  now  acting
accorditig  to  it,  and  professing  great  regard  for  it,  as  their  selQsh  aims  may  prompt.
They  choose  their  side  in  religion  or  politics,  not  according  to  conviction,  but  according
to  tbeir  supposed  interests;  and  if  they  change  sides  it  is  not  because  of  changed
convictions,  but  because  their  ambition  or  avarice  has  been  disappointed — they  have
not  been  made  enough  of,  or  they  have  quarrelled  with  some  one,  or  their  pride  has  been
mortified,  or  they  see  that  they  have  been  on  the  side  of  a  decaying  cause  which
cannot  be  of  much  more  service  to  them.  Such  men  may  be  welcomed  to  the  side
they  join,  and  may  be  of  some  service  j  but  they  will  not  be  trusted,  and  their  service
will  be  of  doubtful  value.  In  religion  especially  the  adherence  of  such  persons  is
to  be  deprecated  as  wanting  in  the  right  spirit,  and  likely  to  be  injurious  rather  than
beneficial.  They  tend  to  corrupt  the  society  in  which  they  are  active  and  influential,
and  deprive  it  of  its  true  strength — that  of  sincere,  spiritual,  consistent  character.
Observe :  1.  The  importance  of  simple  and  uniform  obedience  to  the  known  will  of  Ood.
To  obey  as  it  suits  our  worldly  aims  is  not  to  obey  at  all,  and  the  pretence  of  obedience
is  hypocritical  and  hateful  to  God.  Such  obedience  may  have  its  uses  to  others ;  God
may  overrule  it  for  good;  but  it  will  bring  no  blessing  to  the  doer.  2.  The  hnguage
of  Abner  may  be  adopted  by  us  in  relation  to  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
"  As  Jehovah  has  sworn  to  his  beloved  Son,  even  so  I  do  to  him."  Our  knowledge  of
the  purpose  and  promise  of  God  to  establish  Christ's  rule  over  all  men  should  stimulate
us  to  devoted  service  in  his  cause.  It  assures  us  that  to  be  on  his  side  is  to  be  on
God's  side,  on  the  side  that  must  succeed.  In  being  thus  workers  with  God  we  cannot
labour  in  vain ;  and  labouring  not  in  pretence,  but  in  truth,  we  shall  ultimately  share
in  the  glory  and  power  of  the  great  King  whose  cause  we  espouse  (Rev.  iii.  21).

Ver.  38. — Death  of  a  great  man.  Abner  had  great  qualities,  fiUed  a  high  position,
seemed  likely  to  be  of  great  service  to  David,  who  sincerely  lamented  his  untimely
end,  and  the  wicked  treachery  and  violence  by  which  he  fell.

I.  Geeat  men  should  be  highly  valued.  Great  generals  and  naval  commanders.
If  war  must  be,  it  is  of  vast  importance  that  it  should  be  conducted  by  able  captains.
But  not  only  these,  men  great  in  the  arts  of  peace, — great  statesmen,  philosophers,
historians,  scientists,  poets,  artists,  preachers,  etc.  Especially  when  distinguished
ability  is  combined  with  unselfish  devotion  to  the  good  of  the  nation  or  the  race.  For
selfish  ambition  belittles  the  great,  and  moral  corruption  renders  them  powerful  for
evil  instead  of  good.  Abner's  greatness  was  marred  by  his  unscrupulous  ambition,
and  Joab  was  worse  than  he.  The  multitude  are  very  dependent  on  great  leaders,
whether  in  war  or  peace,  and  can  do  little  without  them.  "Thou  art  worth  ten
thousand  of  us "  (ch.  xviii.  3).  Leading  and  inspiring  the  many,  they  make  them
partners  in  their  own  peatness.  The  influence  of  their  deeds,  or  (in  the  case  of  intel-
lectual leaders)  their  tnoughts,  raises  others  towards  their  own  leveL  The  character
as  well  as  the  progress  of  a  people  depends  a  good  deal  on  its  great  men.

II.  Great  men  must  die.  In  some  conditions  of  society  their  lives  are  more
exposed  to  peril  than  the  lives  of  others — whether  from  the  assausin,  or  from  fickle
monarchs  or  ambitious  rivals,  using  the  forms  of  law  to  put  them  out  of  their  way ;  or
the  cares  incident  to  greatness  may  shorten  their  days.  "  I  have  said,  Te  are  goiis  .  •  .
but  ye  shall  die  like  men  "  (Ps.  Ixxxii.  6,  7)— a  truth  they  should  bear  in  mind  to  keep'
them  sober  and  humble,  to  stimulate  their  diligence,  and  preserve  in  thom  a  sense


OH.  in.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  67

of  responsibility  to  Gud ;  a  truth  which  others  should  remember,  that  they  may  not
idolize  the  great,  nor  unduly  confide  in  them  (see  Ps.  oxlvi.  3,  4)  or  dread  their  anger
(Isa.  li.  12),  nor,  to  secure  their  favour,  sin  against  him  who  lives  for  ever ;  and  that
they  may  be  themselves  the  more  content  to  die.

III.  Great  men  should  be  honoured  after  death;  By  general  mourning ;  by
honourable  burial;  by  commemoration  of  their  virtues  and  services,  in  elegies  (as
here),  or  biographies,  or  monuments  to  their  memory;  by  carrying  out  their  unaccom-
plished purposes  for  the  public  good  ;  and  withal  by  praise  to  God  for  them  and  their
services.  Such  honour  is  due  to  the  men  themselves,  and  tends  to  the  good  of  society
by.  exciting  emulation,  etc.

In  conclusion:  1.  Let  Britons  bless  Goil  for  the  large  number  and  long  succession
of  great  men  who  have  adorned  and  served  thuir  country  in  all  departments ;  and  pray
that  the  succession  may  be  maintained  to  the  latest  times.  Not  only  are  such  men
invaluable  while  they  live ;  their  works  and  memories  survive  them  as  a  perpetual
treasure.    The  truly  great  do  not  die  altogether.

"  But  strew  his  ashes  to  the  wind
Whose  sword  or  voice  has  served  mankind—
And  is  he  dead  whose  glorious  mind

Lifts  thine  on  high  ?
To  live  in  hearts  we  leave  behind,
la  not  to  die."

(Campbell.)

2.  Let  us  be  thankful  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  great  in  order  to  be  either  happy
or  useful  Goodness  is  the  essential  thing.  A  comfort  to  the  many  who  can  never  be
distinguished.  3.  Yet  real  greatness  is  possible  to  all.  Through  faith  in  Christ  we
become  children  of  God,  "heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ,"  to  be  "glorified
together  "  with  him  (Rom.  viii.  17).  In  the  kingdom  of  heaven  greatness  is  secured
by  conscientious  obedience  to  the  Divine  commandments  (Matt.  v.  19),  humility  (Matt.
iviiL  4 ;  Luke  ix.  48),  and  self-abasing,  self-denying  service  of  others  (Mark'  x.  42 —
46).  Such  greatness  is  substantial  and  immortal  (1  John  ii.  17).  4.  Let  us  rejoice
that  the  great  "Captain  of  our  salvation"  lives  for  ever,  in  fulness  of  power  to  save
and  bless  all  who  trust  in  him. — G.  W.

Ver.  39. — A  weak  king.  "  I  am  this  day  weak,  though  anointed  king."  David,
indignant  and  distressed  on  account  of  the  murder  of  Abner,  could  not  venture  to
attempt  to  punish  the  murderers.  They  were  too  powerful  for  even  him.  Hence
this  lamentation.  It  was  hardly  wise  to  express  his  feeling — it  would  help  to  confirm
the  power  of  Joab  and  his  brother.  Many  a  monarch  has  been  similarly  weak,  owing
to  the  power  of  those  who  are  nominally  his  servants.  This  is  injurious  when  it
prevents  the  execution  of  justice ;  but  as  to  measures  of  government  it  is  often  best,
the  servant  being  wiser  and  abler  than  the  sovereign.  We  may  take  the  words  as
a  picture  of  what  has  place  in  human  nature.  Man  has  over  him  rightful  kings,  which
too  often  are  not,  in  fact,  his  rulers.

I.  The  xtil.  1.  Olg'ectively.  Truth,  the  expressed  will  of  God,  is  rightful
sovereign  of  men,  but  it  very  partially  rules.  Many  "  sons  of  Zeruiah"  are  "  too  hard
for"  it,  silence  its  utterances,  oppiisc  its  power,  prevent  its  sway.  But  it  is  king  not-
withstanding, and,  by  the  Divine  judgments  it  expresses,  will  determine  men's  destiny,
though  they  may  refuse  to  let  its  precepts  regulate  their  conduct.  2.  Subjectively.
Conscience,  enlightened  by  truth,  is  anointed  by  God  as  king.  "  Had  it  strength  as
it  had  risht,  had  it  power  as  it  had  manifest  authority,  it  would  absolutely  govern
the  world "  (Bishop  Butler).  But  in  actual  government  it  is  often  "  weak."  The
lower  part  of  human  nature  is  in  rebellion  against  the  higher.  Appetite  and  passion
and  ili-regulated  lawful  affections,  and  all  these  hardened  into  habits,  are  "  too  hard  "
for  it.     Hence  come  degradation,  ruin,  misery,  now  and  hereafter.

II.  The  kemedy.  The  redemption  effected  by  the  death  of  our  Lord,  realized  in
the  heart  by  faith  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  only  effectual  remedy.
"Our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,  that
henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin."    "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you ;  for  y*,

n.  SAUVEL.  ■


88  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ra.  1—39.


are  not  under  law,  but  under  grace"  (Rom.  vi.  6,  14).  The  revelation  of  God  and
man,  of  sin  and  holiness,  in  the  cross  of  Christ ;  the  deliverance  from  condemnation
secured  thereby ;  the  new  Divine  power  which  is  imparted  to  the  believer ;  the  love
to  his  Redeemer  which  is  planted  in  his  heart;  the  filial  relation  into  which  he  ia
brought  to  God ;  the  new  hopes  by  which  he  is  inspired ; — these  rescue  him  from
slavery  to  sin,  and  give  him  freedom  and  will  and  power  to  serve  God  and  righteous-
ness (see  Rom.  vi.  and  vii.,  and  viii.  1 — i).  The  rightful  Sovereign  is  replaced  on  the
throne,  strong  to  govern,  not  yet  with  absolutely  universal  and  perfect  sway,  but
with  the  assured  prospect  of  it.  Let,  then,  those  who  groan  under  the  consciousness
of  their  moral  weakness  accept  the  great  Deliverer,  and  submit  themselves  to  his
methods  of  imparting  strength  to  the  soul.

III.  The  seeming  bbsemblanoe  between  David  and  his  Divine  Son.  It  mi^ht
seem  as  if  our  Lord  Jesus,  like  David,  might  say,  "  I  am  .  .  .  weak,  though  anointed
King."  Long  has  he  been  exalted  to  his  throne  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  Lord  of  all;
"  from  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool "  (Heb.  x.  13).  Yet  how
small  a  portion  of  mankind  is  actually  under  his  moral  and  spiritual  sway!  and  these
how  imperfectly  1  How  much  power  have  his  foes,  even  where  he  does  really  rule!
And  his  open  foes  and  false  friends  seem  to  speak  and  act  as  they  please  with  impunity.
It  is  not,  however,  that  he  is  "weak,"  or  that  any  are  "too  hard  for"  him.  He  is
long-sufifering,  and  delays  to  execute  judgment ;  but  let  his  enemies  continue  impenitent
and  incorrigible,  and  they  will  learn  by  experience  that  he  is  strong  to  punish  them.
"  Vengeance  has  leaden  feet,  but  iron  hands."  "  The  mill  of  God  grinds  late,  but  it
grinds  to  powder."  Mi  an  while  he  uses  his  foes  as  slaves  to  aid  in  working  out  his
purposes.  And  as  to  the  limits  of  his  moral  and  spiritual  rule,  we  must  remember
that,  in  extending  and  perfecting  it,  he  pays  respect  to  the  freedom  of  men.  It  is  not
a  matter  of  mere  power,  but  of  instruction  and  persuasion.  He  counsels,  warns,  invites,
manifests  his  own  yearning  pity  and  love,  stirs  the  conscience,  moves  the  heart ;  but
he  does  not  compel — carinot  do  so  consistently  with  his  own  purpose  or  the  nature
of  man  and  of  the  rule  he  would  establish.  But  let  us  yield  ourselves  heartily  to  him,
and  we  shall  find  that  he  is  as  strong  as  ever  to  save  and  make  strong  those  who  trust
in  him. — G.  W.

Ver.  39. — Sure  retribution.  "The  Lord  shall  reward  the  doer  of  evil  according  to
his  wickedness."  In  the  Revised  Version  the  words  are  rendered  as  a  wish :  "  The  Lord
reward  the  wicked  doer  according  to  his  wickedness."  ^  he  substantial  meaning  is  the
same  in  both  translations.  "In  his  impotence  to  punish  Joab  himself,  David  remits
l)im  to  the  just  judgment  of  God"  ('Speaker's  Commentary').  The  words  may  be
taken  in  respect  to  all  evil-doers.  None  can  escape  the  judgment  of  God,  even  if  they
escape  punishment  from  men.

I.  The  certainty  op  the  Divine  punishment  of  evil-doers.  This  follows
from :  1.  Uie  relations  of  God  to  men.  As  Ruler,  Lawgiver,  Judge.  He  will
certainly  not  fail  in  the  exercise  of  the  functions  which  belong  to  these  relations.
Even  if  we  think  of  him  as  Father,  we  may  be  equally  certain  that  impenitent  sinners
wiU  not  go  unpunished.  What  would  a  father  bo  worth  who  should  allow  a  depraved
son  to  defy  himself,  and  seriously  injure  other  children  of  the  family,  with  impunity?
If  he  can  by  any  means,  gentle  or  severe,  reform  him,  well, — this  he  will  prefer;  but  if
not,  he  must  banish  and  abandon  him.  And  to  say  that  Omnipotent  love  need  not
and  cannot  resort  to  this  extremity  of  punishment  is  to  go  beyond  our  knowledge  and
contrary  to  the  plain  statements  of  Holy  Writ,  where  the  chastisement  which  refoi-ms
and  the  punishment  which  crushes  are  clearly  distinguished.  To  make  Gehenna  a  pur-
gatory is  certainly  to  add  to  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  respecting  it.  2  Ms  threattn-
ings  Those  of  conscience  and  those  of  Holy  Writ.  They  abound  throughout  the
Bible  and  are  nowhere  more  frequent  and  awful  than  in  the  teaching  of  the  tender
and  loving  Christ.  3.  His  character.  As  holy  and  just,  lovln?  rlehteousness  and
hating  iniquity ;  truthful  in  regard  to  his  threatenings  as  well  as  his  promises  4  Hi.
tmmscunce.  Men  often  succeed  in  hiding  their  evil  deeds  or  themselves  from  "thpir
fellow-men;  but  it  is  impossible  thus  to  escape  Divine  judgments  (see  Job  xxxiv  21
ii).  5.  His  omnipotence.  Cnmmals  may  in  some  states  of  societv  be  like  Tnnh"  trv,'
•trong  to  be  punished  by  those  in  authority;  but  God  is  mightier  than' the  inightie^


OH.  IT.  1—12,]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


99


There  is,  therefore,  no  possibility  of  resisting  his  judgments.  6.  2%e  teachings  of  expe-
rience. The  penalties  which  follow  violations  of  natural  law.  The  results  of  wrong-
doing upon  hody,  mind,  circumstances.  The  penalties  inflicted  by  society  on  those
who  practise  certain  forms  of  wickedness,

II.  The  batisfaotion  with  which  this  oebtaiktt  is  sometimes  beoakdbd  by
THE  EIGHTBOUS.  Accordiiig  to  the  Revised  Version  the  words  are  a  wish,  a  prayer;
but  even  according  to  the  Authorized  Version  they  are  uttered  with  evident  satisfac-
tion. David  desired  that  justice  should  be  executed  on  Joab;  and,  feeling  his  own
inability  to  execute  it,  was  relieved  by  the  assurance  he  felt  that  it  would  not  therefore
fail  of  execution.  Would  such  a  feeling  be  wrong  in  a  Christian  ?  St.  Paul  did  not
think  so.  "Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me  much  evil:  the  Lord  reward  [or,
'  will  reward ']  him  according  to  his  works "  (2  Tim.  iv.  14,  where  there  are  two
readings,  as  here  two  renderings).  In  the  case  of  powerful  villains  injuring  and  tram-
pling; down  the  weak,  but  who  cannot  be  reached  by  human  justice,  can  any  one  doubt
that  the  feeling  of  confidence  that  the  justice  of  God  can  and  wiU  reach  them  is  a
proper  feeling  to  cherish,  although  it'  should  be  associated  with  the  desire  that  they
may,  if  possible,  be  converted  ?  In  the  case  of  impenitent  sinners  in  general,  it  is  the
known  purpose  of  God  to  punish  them  according  to  their  works.  Shall  his  children
disapprove  his  conduct,  or  only  silently  submit ;  or  not  rather  acquiesce,  approve,  and,
at  times  at  least,  cherish  complacency  ?  Does  not  the  prayer  divinely  taught  to  them,
"  Thy  will  be  done,"  apply  to  this  part  of  his  will  ?  They  bear  the  image  of  God's
righteousness  as  well  as  loving-kindness.  They  have  strong  regard  for  his  character
and  honour,  as  well  as  for  the  happiness  of  his  creatures.  They  cannot  but  desire  that
all  rebellion  against  him  should  be  put  down  by  the  power  of  his  love  on  the  hearts
of  the  rebels,  if  it  may  be ;  if  not,  by  the  severe  measures  of  his  justice.  In  the  case
of  serious  wrong  done  to  ourselves,  we  are  doubtless  to  suppress  all  emotions  of  revenge,
and  to  pray  for  and  be  ready  to  forgive  the  wrong-doer ;  yet  the  above-cited  expression
of  St.  Paul  shows  that,  in  certain  circumstances,  we  may  remit  the  offender  to  Divine
justice ;  and  in  another  place  (Rom.  xii.  19)  he  gives  this  as  a  reason  for  not  avenging
ourselves:  "It  is  written.  Vengeance  is  mine;  I  will  repay, saith  the  Lord."  The  lovo
which  is  so  characteristic  of  Christianity  is  not,  then,  incompatible  with  hatred  of  sin
and  the  desire  that  sin  should  be  punished.  The  two  are  identical  when  the  punish-
ment is  desired  that  the  sinner  may  be  led  thereby  to  repentance.  They  are  not
incompatible,  when,  the  persistence  and  impenitence  of  the  sinner  being  supposed,  love
for  others  and  zeal  for  the  law  and  government  of  God  produce  at  least  acquiescence
in  his  judgments.  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  such  emotions  as  we  have
been  speaking  of  are  to  form  but  a  small  part  of  the  inner  life  of  the  Christian.  Indig-
nation against  evil,  and  desire  for  its  punishment,  need  rather  to  be  restrained  and
guided,  than  inculcated  and  cherished.  The  sentiments  towards  others  which  should
ordinarily  predominate  are  those  of  pure  and  direct  benevolence.  Yet  let  sinners  lay
to  heart  that,  unless  they  repent  and  seek  salvation  through  Christ,  God  will  certainly
render  to  them  according  to  their  wickedness,  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."
"  Repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."— G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CUAPTER  IV.

Ver.    1.— 'When    Sard's


son  heard  that
Abner  was  dead.  The  news  of  Abner's
death  must  have  had  a  doubly  depressing
effect  upon  Ishbosheth ;  for  he  learned,  not
only  that  the  mainstay  of  his  kingdom  was
slain,  but  that  even  he,  in  despair  of  a  suc-
sessful  issue,  had  been  engaged  in  treason-
able negotiations  with  his  rival.  All  the
Israelites  were  troubled.  Their  trouble  was
uaused  rather  by  uncertainty  than  by  fear.
Abner's  plans  had  fallen  through,  and  the


fact  of  his  murder  threw  grave  suspicions  on
David.  Had  he  now  attacked  Israel,  the
chiefs  would  most  probably  have  stood
loyally  by  Saul's  house.  But  he  did  nothing,
and  his  innocence  slowly  but  gradually  was
made  clear.  They  were  thus  in  a  state  of
suspense,  and  waiting  till  some  brave  man
arose  to  lead  them  to  a  decision.  Unfor-
tunately, a  fresh  crime  threw  everything
back  into  hopeless  confusion.

Ver.  2. — Saul's  son  had  two  men  captains
of  bands.  The  bands  mentioned  were  light-
armed  troops,  used  in  forays,  such  as  that


100


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[CH.  IV.  1—12.


mentioned  in  ch,  iii.  22.     Their  captains
would  be  men  of  importance  with  Ishhosheth,
who  is  here  described  somewhat  contemptu-
ously, not  as  king,  nor  by  his  own  name,  but
as  "  Saul's  son."    Beeroth.   This  place,  lite-
rally the  Welle,  was  one  of  the  four  towns
reserved  for  the  Gibeonites  (Josh.  ix.   17),
though  nominally  belonging  to  Benjamin
(Josh,  xviii.   25).     The  note,  that  it  was
reckoned  to  Benjamin,  suggests  that  it  had
until  quite  lately  been    occupied   by  the
Canaanlles,  whoso  flight  to  Gittaim  had  no
doubt  been  caused  by  Saul's  cruel  attack
upon  them  referred  to  in  ch.  xxl.  1,  2.  ^  It
was  thus  remarkable  that  the  destruction
of   Saul's    dynasty   was  the  work  of  the
Gibeonites  of  Beeroth,    As  we  find  another
of  these  Beerothites,  Naharai,  holding  the
o£Bce  of  aimour-bearer  to  Joab  (1  Chron.  Xi.
39),  it  seems  probable  that  many  of  them
saved  themselves  from  expulsion  by  becom-
ing soldiers.     But  among  David's  worthies
a  large  number  were  strangers,  and  some
even  men  of  foreign  extraction.     Beeroth,
however,  was  probably  seized  in  Saul's  reign
by  the  Benjamites,  by  force,  and  occupied
by  them,  as  its  citizens  returned  in  large
numbers  from  the  exile  (Ezra  li.  25),  and
are  counted  as  genuine  Israelites.    More-
over, by  thus  dispossessing  the  natives,  Saul
was  able  to  give  his  tribesmen  "  fields  and
vineyards"  (1  Sam  xxii.  7),  which  otherwise
would  have  been  in  violation  of  the  Mosaic
Law.

Ver.  3. — Gittaim.  This  word  is  a  dual,
and  means  "  the  two  Gaths ; "  the  one
being,  probably,  the  acropolis,  or  upper
town,  at  the  foot  of  which  nestled  a  new
Gath,  protected  by  the  ancient  stronghold.
It  is  mentioned  as  belonging  to  Benjamin
in  Neh.  xi.  33 ;  but  conld  not  have  been  an
Israelite  town  at  this  time,  as  the  Beerothil  cs
are  described  as  eojourners,  that  is,  dwelloi-s
in  a  foreign  country.  When  expelled  from
Beerotli,  they  probably  seized  Gittaim  by
force,  and,  on  the  reconciliation  effected  by
the  execution  of  Saul's  sons,  returned  to
their  allegiance  to  Israel.

Ver.  4  — Jonathan,  Saul's  son,  had  a  son.
This  is  mentioned  to  show  that  Saul's  line-
ago  virtually  became  extinct  on  Ishbosheth's
death.  Miphibosheth,  the  heir,  was  a  cripple,
and  physically  incapable  of  reiguin°;.  Saul
had,  indeed,  sons  by  a  concubine,  and  giaud-
childreu  by  his  daughter  Merab  (ch.  xxi.
8).  But  tlu-oughout  the  history  there  is  no
hint  that  any  of  these  were  regarded  as  the
representatives  of  Saul's  house.  (For  the
name  Mephiboshoth,  see  note  on  ch.  ii.  8.)

Vers.  6,  7. — As  though  they  ■would  have
fetched  wheat.  Not  only  is  the  narrative
confused,  but  the  versions  offer  extra-
ordinary varieties  of  reading.  The  murder
of  Ishbonheth  is  fully  drjcribed  in  vin.  7,


and  is  there  in  its  place,  while  it  is  out  of
place  in  ver.  6.  And  that  the  captains  would
themselves  fetch  wheat,  instead  of  having
it  carried  from  the  granary  by  their  men  ;
and  that  they  would  go  through  the  king's
chamber  to  obtain  it ;  are  both  improbable.
The  very  act  of  going  to  get  vvheat  at  mid-
day, when  everybody  was  having  his  siesta,
would  itself  be  suspicious.  The.  Syriac  says
nothing  about  ^heat,  but  that  these  "wicked
men  took  and  smote  him."  The  Vulgate
and  LXX.  lay  the  blame  on  the  woman  who
kept  the  door,  the  narrative  of  the  latter
being  as  follows :  "  They  entered  into  the
house  of  Ishboslieth  in  the  heat  of  the  day,
and  he  was  asleep  in  his  midday  chamber
Arid  behold,  the  woman  that  kept  the  door
of  the  house  had  been  winnowing  wheat,
and  she  slumbered  and  slept.  And  the
brothers  Rechab  and  Baanah  entered  the
house  without  being  noticed,  and  Ishboshcth
was  asleep  on  his  bed  in  his  chamber,  and
they  smote  him,"  etc.  There  is,  confessedly,
considerable  confusion  in  the  text,  but  the
versions  do  not  altogether  clear  it  up ;  and
until  we  have  better  materials  for  forming
a  judgment,  we  must  be  content  to  wait.
In  ver.  5,  instead  of  "  who  lay  on  a  bed  at
noon,"  the  Hebrew  has  "  as  he  was  taking
his  noonday  rest."  In  ver.  7  the  feed  is  the
divan,  or  raised  bank,  which  in  an  Oiiental
house  runs  along  the  wall,  and  is  supplied
with  pieces  of  carpet,  or  cushions,  on  which
to  sit  cross-legged  or  recline.  For  sleep,  the
corners  were  the  favourite  places.  Even
the  public  rooms  h»d  these  divans.  But
Ishbosheth  had  probably  retired  for  his
siesta  into  a  private  chamber,  where  the
captains  knew  that  he  would  be  alone.  The
plain  through  which  they  fied  was  the
Arabah,  or  Jordan  valley,  as  in  oh.  ii.  29.

Ver.  8.— Whioh  sought  thy  life.  Saul  had
sought  David's  life,  but  Ishbosheth  was
innocent  of  any  such  attempts.  Still,  had
ho  been  victorious,  David,  as  his  rival,  would
certainly  have  been  put  to  death.  Jehovah
hath  avenged  my  lord  the  king.  The  ordinary
language  of  the  East  is  so  religious  that
these  words  imply  nothing  more  than  that
these  wicked  men  saw  in  their  base  act  a
step  towards  the  carrying  out  of  a  Divine
purpose.  But  in  thus  referring  to  the  com-
mon belief  that  David's  kingdom  was
assured  to  him  by  Johovahj'they  evidently
intended  to  commend  their  deed  to  the
really  devout  mind  of  the  king.

Vers.  9, 10.— And  David  answered.  David's
answer  is  worthy  of  him.  His  appeal  to
Jeliovah,  as  One  that  had  saved  him  in  all
time  of  adversity,  was  a  declaration  that
he  had  no  need  of  criminals.  And  through-
out he  had  carefully  abstained  from  taking
any  steps  to  bring  about  the  accomplish-
ment of  God'iB  will,  and  had  been  upright


OH.  IV.  1—12.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


101


and  forbea'  hig  alike  to  Xshbosheth  and
Saul.  Hovi  noble  his  conduct  was  we  see
by  the  contrast  with  Micbeth,  whose  better
nature  was  poisoned  and  spoiled  by  the
hope  that  he  should  be  feing  hereafter.  At
the  end  of  the  verse  the  force  is  weakened
in  the  Authorized  Version  by  the  insertion
of  irrelevant  words.  What  David  said  is,
"  I  slew  him  in  Ziklag,  and  that  was  the
reward  I  gave  him  for  his  tidings."

Ver.  11. — A  righteous  person.  Ish-
bosheth  was  probably  a  weak  rather  tlian
a  wicked  man ;  but  David  is  not  speaking
of  him  generally,  and,  as  regards  Becbab
and  Baanah,  he  was  quite  guiltless,  and
their  crime  was  not  in  revenge  for  any
wrong  done  them.

Ver.  12. — They  out  off  their  hands  and
their  feet.  This  was  not  intended  for  the
purpose  of  mutilation,  but  to  carry  out  an
Eastern  idea  of  retaliation.     The  hands


were  out  off  because  they  had  committed
the  murder ;  the  feet,  because  they  had
brought  the  head  to  Hebron.  Still,  David
was  violating  the  spirit  of  the  Mosaic  Law.
It  ordered  that  the  body  of  a  man  who  had
been  put  to  death  should  be  buried  the  same
day  (Dent.  xxi.  23).  In  the  face  of  this
humane  enactment,  it  is  wonderful  that  the
laws  of  Christian  countries  should  have
allowed  the  mutilation  of  the  bodies  of
traitors,  andi  the  hanging  on  gibbets  of
criminals  convicted  of  smaller  crimes.  Re-
membering, therefore,  the  customs  of  our
fathers,  we  must  not  blame  David  much  for
suspending  the  hands  and  feet  of  these
murderers  at  the  pool  of  Hebron,  that  all,
when  coming  for  water,  might  know  of
their  puninhment.  The  head  of  Tshbosheth
was  honourably  buried  in  Abner's  grave
(see  ch.  iii  32).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  facts  are  :  1.  On  the  death  of  Abner,  consternation  seizes  Ishbo-
sheth  and  his  friends.  2.  The  only  other  representative  of  the  house  of  Saul  was  a,
mere  boy,  whose  age  and  bodily  infirmity  rendered  his  coming  to  the  front  out  of  the
question.  3.  Two  of  Ishbosheth's  officers,  forming  a  secret  design,  visit  Ishbosheth  as
though  on  business  connected  with  their  duties,  and  slay  him.  4.  Stealing  away  by
night,  they  carry  the  head  of  Xshbosheth  to  David  at  Hebron,  and  think  to  satisfy
thereby  his  love  of  revenge.  5.  David,  eagerly  reminding  himself  that  God  had
always  delivered  him  without  his  having  recourse  to  bloodshed,  reminds  his  visitors
also  of  the  punishment  he  had  inflicted  on  others  in  a  similar  case  at  Ziklfig,  and
denounces  their  deed  as  even  more  atrocious.  6.  Thereupon  David  causes  the  murderers
to  be  executed,  and  their  limbs  to  be  exhibited  in  Hebron  as  a  warning  to  the  wicked,
and  meanwhile  he  bestows  fuiii-rsal  honours  on  the  head  of  Xshbosheth.

Worldly  hlindness  the  parent  of  sorrow  and  wrong.  The  whole  of  the  events  of  this
chapter  proceed  from  the  inability  of  mtn  to  read  the  high  principles  that  governed  the
conduct  of  David.     The  general  truth  may  be  developed  as  follows.

X.  The  bodinos  of  ignobancb  fill  a  large  bpaob  in  the  lives  op  some  men.
When  it  is  said  that  Ishb'osheth  and  his  people  were  paralyzed  and  troubled  by  the
news  of  the  death  of  Abner,  the  question  comes — Why?  Was  it  because  now  the
healing  policy  of  Abner  and  David  (ch.  iii.  17 — 21)  would  yield  to  the  more  fierce  policy
of  Joab?  Did  the  young  king  and  his  followers  imagine  that  now  it  was  simply  a
question  of  best  tenns,  and  that  submission  was  inevitable  ?  Or  were  they  apprehensive
that,  although  David  made  terms  with  Abner  for  the  sake  of  securing  his  aid,  now,
when  that  aid  was  no  longer  available  for  the  consolidation  of  his  power,  he  would  take
revenge  on  all  who  had  supported  the  cause  of  Ishbosheth  ?  In  any  case,  their  fears
were  not  warranted  by  the  governing  facts  of  the  situation.  Their  safety  and  welfare
rested  with  David,  and  had  they  known  him,  had  they  read  his  principles  aright,  they
might  have  been  quite  at  ease  in  allowing  events  to  take  their  course  in  his  supremacy.
Their  forebodings  of  trouble  sprang  from  ignorance  of  the  man  they  had  to  deal  with.
They  formed  their  estimate  of  his  possible  future  conduct  on  the  standards  familiar
amongst  themselves.  His  life  was  too  lofty  in  tone  and  aspiration  for  them  to  under-
stand. How  much  of  human  life  is  spoiled,  is  charged  with  sorrows  and  fears,  which
would  have  no  place  were  our  vision  clearer  and  our  estimate  of  others  more  just  and
true !  Men  too  often  judge  of  the  thoughts  and  ways  of  God  by  their  own  standard,
and  go  apprehend  what  never  need  have  troubled  them.  Our  ignorance  of  coming
events  exercises  a  larger  influence  over  our  feelings  than  is  proper ;  for  though  we  da


102  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF   SAMUEL.  [oh.  rv.  1—12.

not  know  exactly  -what  will  occur,  we  onght  to  know  that  all  things  are  in  the  wisest
and  kindest  of  hands.  In  human  relationships  men  make  troubles  by  supposing  their
fellow-men,  often,  to  he  otherwise  affected  than  they  actually  are.  Even  the  disciples
were  troubled  in  consequence  of  their  blameworthy  ignorance  of  the  wisdom  and  power
of  their  Master,  and  they  were  challenged  to  get  rid  of  the  sorrows  bred  of  ignorance
by  reposing  in  him  a  trust  as  absolute  as  they,  pious  Hebrews,  were  wont  to  repose  in
the  Eternal  (John  xiv.  1,  2),

II.  The  attachment  of  men  not  bpieituallt  enlightened  is  of  doubtfui,
PBEMANENOB.  The  attachment  of  the  sons  of  Rimmon  and  others  to  the  cause  of
Ishbosheth  was  based  on  anything  but  enlightened  views  of  the  theocracy,  or  a  clear
interpretation  of  the  events  of  the  life  of  Saul  and  David,  which  must  have  been  well
known.  Indeed,  as  in  the  days  of  "  David's  greater  Son "  the  mark  of  distinction
among  men  lay  in  the  spiritual  recognition  of  him  as  Divine  amidst  his  sorrows  and
trials,  so  in  David's  time  only  true  unworldly  men,  whose  eyes  were  open  to  see  the
spiritual  element  in  his  life,  formed  political  attachments  on  superior  knowledge.  That
which  is  earthly  partakes  of  the  instability  of  earth,  and,  however  outwardly  zealous
the  supporters  of  Ishbosheth  may  have  been  and  even  sincere  according  to  their  light,
they  were  open  to  the  influences  to  change  which  are  sure  to  arise  in  times  of  trouble,
but  which  could  never  move  a  mind  that  saw  the  higher  principles  involved  in  David's
claim.  The  historian  seems  to  imply  this  in  his  reference  to  the  age  and  infirmity  of
Mephibosheth,  as  much  as  to  say  there  was  no  one  else  of  the  house  of  Saul  around
whom  men  might  rally  in  case  Ishbosheth's  cause  should  faiL  No  resort  was  left  hut
to  abandon  the  young  king  in  his  troubles,  and  form  new  and  more  promising  attach-
ments. Imagine  a  Jonathan  slackening  his  attachment  to  David  in  his  time  of  stress !
or  a  Paul  losing  interest  in  Christ  when  persecutions  arose !  On  the  other  hand,  there
are  many  instances  in  which  the  weakened  attachment  of  the  sons  of  Rimmon,  pro-
ceeding as  that  attachment  did  from  low  and  mere  conventional  views,  finds  a  coimter-
part  in  human  "life.  Companionships  based  on  community  of  sensual  enjoyments  are
held  by  bonds  which  perish  in  adversity.  Friendships  are  perishable  in  so  far  as  they
are  pervaded  by  a  worldly  element.  Whatever  ties  are  formed  on  any  feelings,  interests,
or  considerations  than  those  which  make  us  all  one  in  Christ,  cannot  but  vanish  as  we
pass  from  the  earthly  scene  into  the  world  where  alone  the  spiritual  bond  endures.
And  in  the  Church  militant  the  adherence  of  numbers  lacks  a  permanence  to  he  counted
on  in  proportion  as  it  is  based  on  custom,  convenience,  fashion,  superstition,  defective
knowledge  of  Scripture,  and  dimness  of  spiritual  apprehension.  Plato  was  not  far  from
the  truth  in  saying  that  knowledge  and  reality  were  one.  Scripture  everywhere  gives
prominence  to  the  unifying,  ennobling  power  of  spiritual  perception.  The  distinc-
tion of  children  of  light  and  of  darkness  proceeds  thereon.  The  "  spiritual  man  judgeth
all  things."  The  rejection  of  Christ  was  connected  with  blindness  to  the  higher  and
more  spiritual  qualities  of  his  life  (1  Cor.  ii.  8 — 16).

III.  Men  op  uSspXRiruAL  views  ake,  by  reason  of  theib  blindness,  open  to
terrible  temptations,  and  mat  be  careied  away  to  evil  by  the  lower  passions
of  their  nature.  These  sons  of  Rimmon,  like  others,  began  to  consider  what  course
would  be  most  advantageous  to  themselves,  now  that  the  cause  of  Ishbosheth  seemed
to  he  on  the  wane.  Looking  on  the  position  of  the  two  kings  as  simply  the  consequence
of  purely  worldly  forces  coming  into  competition,  and  caring  most  of  all  to  he  on  the
winning  side,  they  asked  themselves  what  conduct  on  their  part  would  be  sure  to  win
the  favour  of  David,  the  stronger  of  the  two.  Had  they  at  that  juncture  in  the  process
of  thought  conceived  of  David  as  a  man  of  God,  of  higli  spiritual  aims,  destined  to
work  out  a  Divine  purpose  on  principles  of  righteousness,  and  ambitious  to  translate
the  purest  principles  of  private  life  into  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom,  they  would  only
have  thought  of  doing  some  deed  of  justice  and  mercy,  such  as  a  man  of  that  character
would  delight  in.  But  being  destitute  of  these  spiritual  perceptions,  regarding  all
things  on  the  low  base  level  of  a  worldly  ex|iediency,  and  judging  David  to  he  much
such  a  man  as  themselves,  there  arose  in  their  process  of  thoi^ht  fair  opportunity  for
the  cruellest  and  basest  propensities  of  their  nature,  to  put  forth  their  strength  and
sugge.it  the  murder  of  the  unfortunate  king  as  an  act  of  present  wisdom.  It  takes
many  impulses  and  thoughts  of  advantage  and  disadvantage  to  bring  about  a  great
crime,  and  it  is  difficult,  in  analyzing  the  mental  antecedents  of  the  crime,  to  assign  to


OH.  IV.  1—12.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  103

each  its  exact  influence;  but  it  is  obvious  in  this  case  that  worldliness  of  view,  lack  of
spiritual  apprehension,  undue  estimate  of  a  lofty  character,  rendered  the  crime  possible,
and  even  cleared  away  the  barriers  of  reason  against  its  accomplishment.  They  judged
David  to  be  as  themselves,  and  they  acted  accordingly.  The  belief  that  he  would  be
glad  inspired  the  concoction  of  the  plot,  and  gave  tone  of  exultation  in  their  approach
to  him  with  the  head  of  the  murdered  man.  Their  darkness  was  dense,  and  in  this
sense  theirs  was  a  deed  of  darkness.  It  is  often  that  men  fall  into  the  snare  of  the
devil  in  consequence  of  their  lack  of  spiritual  perception.  The  false  is  glossed,  the
true  is  veiled.  Even  disciples,  not  clearly  perceiving  the  purely  spiritual  character  of
their  Lord's  mission,  desired  fire  from  heaven  to  destroy  the  unbelieving.  During  the
"dark  ages"  men  perpetrated  dreadful  deeds  to  please  Christ,  not  rising  to  a  true
appreciation  of  his  character  and  methods.  Low  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  the
kingdom  of  Christ  as  it  is  in  the  world,  now  induce  men  professing  an  interest  in  it  to
render  service  in  forms  that  would  never  be  entertained  were  his  kingdom  regarded
as  he  regards  it — one  of  purity,  of  love,  and  of  righteousness.  And  as  this  worldly
mindedness  was  a  sore  cause  of  sorrow  and  trouble  to  David,  and  hindered  the  establish-
ment of  his  authority,  so  the  same  evil  militates  much  against  the  final  triumph  of  our
Lord.  Hence  the  need  of  teaching  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  open  the  eyes
of  the  blind,  that  they  may  appreciate  and  regulate  their  actions  by  the  high  principles
embodied  in  the  character  and  kingdom  of  Christ.

General  lessons.  1.  Destitution  of  the  power  of  spiritual  apprehension  and  appre-
ciation is  a  radical  evil  of  human  nature,  and  can  never  be  removed  by  any  other
means  than  those  which  God  has  provided  in  his  truth  and  the  grace  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  2.  If  we  would  have  men  knit  in  imperishable  bonds  of  affection  and  common
interest,  we  must  seek  to  get  them  to  see  Christ  as  he  is,  and  enter  into  relationships
on  the  basis  of  his  kingdom.  3.  In  all  our  dealings  with  men  we  should  be  careful
not  to  put  forward  our  own  feelings  and  aims  as  a  standard  by  which  to  judge  them.

Clustered  truths.  It  is  not  easy  to  weave  all  the  teaching  of  this  chapter  on  one
line,  and  yet  the  various  incidents  recorded  all  centre  in  the  disaster  which  befell  the
King  of  Israel  consequent  on  the  secession  and  death  of  Abner.  It  may  thus  be  advan-
tageous, for  the  sake  of  securing  unity  of  form,  to  look  at  the  remaining  leading  truths
of  the  chapter  as  clustering  around  this  sad  event.

L  The  smaller  fiqubes  of  hibtoby.  Mephibosheth  here  figures  as  an  insignificant
person  in  the  narrative  of  persons  and  events  connected  with  the  gradual  unfolding  of
the  purposes  of  God.  A  mere  boy,  lamed  by  a  careless  nurse,  a  son  of  one  who  had
renounced  all  claim  to  the  throne  1  His  name  and  misfortune  are  mentioned,  and  the
tide  of  events  moves  on.  Now  and  then  we  meet  with  such  incidental  references  in
the  Bible  history.  They  are  but  specimens  of  multitudes  equally  insignificant  who
played  a  small  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  and  are  unknown  for  ever.  Their  selec-
tion for  brief  allusion  is  doubtless  part  of  a  vast  providential  method  by  which  the
historians  were  unconsciously  guided  to  refer  to  whatever  might  illustrate  the  process
of  elimination  by  which  God  at  last  accomplished  his  purpose  in  first  raising  up  David
to  supreme  dominion  of  his  people,  and  afterwards  the  true  David  of  the  present  dispen-
sation. The  poor  lad  little  knew  that  he  was  an  elemeut  in  the  working  out  of  a  great
purpose,  and  that,  small  as  was  his  figure  in  life,  it  served  as  a  foil  to  God's  greater
characters.  Modern  science  teaches  us  that  nothing  is  really  lost,  that  all  small  items
are  used  up  in  the  great  development  of  things  towards  a  future  higher  condition.  So
the  humbler  forms  of  human  life  are  not  all  lost.  They  play  their  part,  and  to  some
extent  modify  all  that  comes  after  them.  In  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  little  ones,  feeble
and  uninfluential  in  a  worldly  sense,  have  some  part  to  perform  La  the  great  spiritual
development  which  God  is  working  out.  Our  Mephibosheths  are  not  lost  to  mankind.
The  smaller  figures  of  life  render  the  totality  of  life  more  varied,  and  develop  qualities
which  uniform  greatness  could  never  originate.

II.  NoTOKious  EBMOKTALITT.  These  sons  of  Bimmon  have  won  for  themselves  a
notorious  immortality.  Had  it  not  been  for  their  base  and  cruel  deed,  their  names
would  never  have  appeared  on  the  page  of  history.  Their  crime  has  given  them  a
prominent  placa  as  compared  with  wiser  and  better  men.  In  this  case,  the  reason  of  it
is  doubtless  to  be  found  in  the  circumstance  that  their  deed  served  to  bring  out  into


104  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  it.  1—12.

more  distinctness  tlie  character  of  the  kingdom  Jirhich  God  was  then  establishing  by
means  of  David,  and  so,  incidentally,  it  forms  one  of  the  links  in  th»t  singular  chain  of
events  by  which  at  last  the  Christ  found  a  way  prepared  for  him  to  dwell  among  men.
There  is  a  base  passion  in  some  men  for  this  kind  of  notoriety.  Some  criminals  have
gloried  in  it,  and  have  seemed  to  derive  some  satisfaction  from  the  thought  that,  at  all
events,  they  have  created  a  sensation,  and  will  for  a  time,  and  perhaps  for  ever,  figure  in
history.  Miserable  consolations  of  sin  1  The  utter  delusiveness  of  sinful  reasoning !  The
charm  and  delight  could  only  be  for  a  few  days ;  the  anguish  and  shame  would  come  when
the  eye  saw  the  world  no  more  and  the  ear  ceased  to  listen  to  the  hum  of  the  people,  and
then  abide  for  ever.  The  curse  of  the  righteous  rests  on  the  notoriety,  and  so  it  becomes
a  very  occasion  of  deep  and  recurring  disgrace.  In  modem  times  incalculable  injury
is  done  by  a  low  literature  that  feeds  this  morbid  love  of  notoriety  of  evil,  and  in  the
education  of  youth  too  much  care  cannot  be  given  to  secure  them  from  the  infection.

III.  Implicit  aspersion  of  character.  When  these  sons  of  Eimmon  went  to
David  with  the  head  of  Ishbosheth,  no  doubt  openly  and  even  boasting  before  they
reached  his  presence,  they  by  that  act  implicitly  cast  on  his  character  the  foulest  and
most  painful  aspersions.  It  was  in  act  a  declaration  to  men  that  David  was  a  man  ol
blood,  that  he  looked  on  the  son  of  Saul  as  a  foe  to  be  got  rid  of  by  any  means,  and
that  if  only  supremacy  could  be  obtained  over  all  the  peo'plp,  he  cared  not  particularly
as  to  the  means.  To  David  this  was  the  interpretation  of  the  act,  and  the  people  about
him  could  not  but  regard  it  in  that  light.  Character  may  be  aspersed  by  deeds  in
various  forms,  and  by  people  who  do  not  see  that  there  is  aspersion  in  their  conduct.
The  flatteries  of  some  men  are  virtually  reflections  on  purity  of  life.  The  requests  of
some  men  for  a  certain  line  of  action  are  founded  sometimes  on  a  supposition  of  cha-
racter that  would  he  repudiated  and  scorned.

IV.  RiOHTBoas  indignation.  David  at  once  saw  the  varied  bearings  of  the  conduct
of  these  sons  of  Eimmon;  its  base  treachery,  its  cold  cruelty,  its  political  treason,  its
disregard  of  the  claims  of  misfortune,  its  foolish  policy,  and,  not  least,  its  false  and
wicked  misrepresentations  of  his  own  character.  To  the  man  called  of  Grod,  who  had
ill  all  his  adversities  trusted  in  God,  whose  mission  was  to  establish  a  rule  more  wise
and  just  than  that  of  Saul,  and  to  raise  the  ideas  of  the  people  to  a  higher  level  and
prepare  them  to  perform  a  part  in  opening  the  way  for  the  great  Messiah,  this  insult
must  have  been  agonizing.  His  quick  spiritual  sensibilities  were  at  once  stirred,  and
yet  his  indignation  was  the  more  strong  and  impressive  in  that  he  selected  words
wherewith  to  show  to  them  the  enormity  of  their  guilt,  and  then  delivered  them  to  the
execution  they  deserved.  Apart  from  his  natural  aversion  to  "  bloody  men,"  and  his  regard
for  the  sacredness  of  human  life  even  in  the  case  of  those  who  injured  ■him,  he  could
not  but  dwell  in  his  own  private  reflections  on  the  shameful  insult  offered  to  himself  in
the  supposition  that  he  could  glory  in  such  a  deed.  A  fire  burned  in  his  soul.  All
good  men,  who  regard  purity  and  righteousness  of  life  as  above  all  things,  will  fully
sympathize  with  David.  Have  we  not  here  a  clue  to  the  Saviour's  anguish  when  evil
men  s^/pposed  that  he  performed  miracles  by  means  of  the  power  of  Beelzebub?  And
was  not  this,  perhaps,  the  deadly  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  (Matt.  xii.  24 — 32)  ?

V.  Generosity  to  unfortunate  men.  David  was  a  man  rich  in  noble  feelings.
His  proud  indignation  at  the  insult  paid  to  him  was  accompanied  with  immediate
regard  for  the  unfortunate  king  whose  life  had  been  brought  to  so  untimely  an  end.
For  hira  he  cherished  true  pity.  He  regarded  him  as  the  son  of  Saul  the  anointed  of
the  Lord,  a  man  forced  probably  into  a  position  of  danger  by  stronger  wills,  and  at  least
mistaken  in  his  views  as  to  what  was  best  for  the  tribes  on  the  death  of  his  father ;  and
hence,  with  the  generosity  so  characteristic  of  him,  he  had  his  few  remains  buried  with
all  honour  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  distinguished  captain.  Here  comes  out  the  unworldli-
ness  of  David's  character.  Success  in  life  and  rise  to  a  high  position  too  often  render
men  irdifferent  to  those  on  whom  fortune  has  not  smiled.  There  are  many  like  Ishbo-
sheth— men  who  have  been  pushed  into  positions  for  which  they  were  unfitted,  or  have
been  swayed  by  feeble  reasons  of  their  own  into  a  course  of  life  not  useful,  or  have
striven  in  vain  against  great  social  obstacles,  and  so  have  come  to  disappointment  and
grief.  As  aur  Lord  was  compassionate  and  considerate  of  the  lowly,  so  all  who  cherish
his  spirit  will  find  out  means  of  showing  kindness  to  the  unfortunate,  even  though  they
may  have  been  in  the  position  of  opponents.


OH.  IV.  1—12.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  105


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS.

Verg.  1 — 3. — (Mahanaim.)  Tha  unhappy  lot  of  Ishhosheth.  Of  the  varied  types  of
character  which  these  chapters  furnish,  that  which  appears  in  Ishhosheth  (Eshbaal,
1  Chron.  viii.  33)  is  a  most  pitiable  one.  The  last  surviving  son  of  Saul,  he  bore  little
resemblance  to  liis  heroic  father ;  owed  his  life  4o  his  incapacity  for  military  enterprise ;
was  the  legitimate  successor  of  Saul  according  to  the  law  of  Oriental  succession ;  after
the  brief  suspense  in  which  the  elders  of  Israel  seemed  disposed  to  accept  David  as  king
(ch.  ii.  7  ;  iii.  17),  was  taken  under  the  patronage  of  Abner ;  at  the  end  of  five  years  was
fully  recognized,  being  forty  years  old ;  and  reigned  two  years  (ch.  ii.  10).  It  is  uncertain
how  far  he  was  aware  of  David's  Divine  designation  to  the  throne,  and  consciously  opposed
its  fulfilment ;  and,  since  the  latter  was  not  chosen  by  the  elders,  he  was  not  guilty  of
usurpation.  Although  David  could  not  speak  of  him  as  king,  he  called  him  "  a  righteous
person  "  (ver.  11) — "  a  man  who  had  done  no  one  any  harm  "  (Josephus) — ^in  the  same
magnanimous  spirit  as  he  always  exhibited  toward  the  house  of  Saul.  He  was:  1.
Raised  to  a  position  for  which  he  was  wnfit.  "  The  Scripture  presents  in  him  a  living
example  of  how  the  sacredly  held  right  of  legitimate  inheritance  has  no  root  when  it  is
not  ennobled  by  vigorous  personality.  When  the  Divine  calling  is  lacking,  no  legiti-
mate pretensions  help  "  (Cassel).  He  was  destitute  of  mental  force,  courage,  and  energy ;
ambitioua  of  royal  honour  and  ease ;  not  of  royal  service  and  beneficence.  The  highest
offices  should  be  held  by  the  best  men.  In  an  ideal  state  of  society  it  cannot  be  other-
wise ;  but  in  its  actual  condition  we  often  see  "  servants  upon  horses,  and  princes  walk-
ing as  servants  upon  the  earth"  (Eccles.  x.  7).  He  who  seeks  or  consents  to  occupy  a
position  of  influence  and  responsibility  for  which  ho  is  unfit,  and  those  who  seek  or  accept
his  appointment  to  it,  inflict  a  serious  injury  upon  themselves  and  one  another.  The
rule  of  the  "bramble"  results  in  the  destruction  of  all  the  trees  of  the  forest  (Judg.
X.  15).  2.  Deprived  of  the  support  on  which  he  relied.  "  Abner  was  dead ; "  by  whom
he  had  been  exalted  and  sustained,  and  to  whom,  rather  than  to  God,  he  looked  for
counsel  and  help.  Although  he  had  alienated  him  by  imprudent  remonstrance  (ch.  iii.  7),
yet  "he  may  have  hoped  to  obtain  an  honourable  satisfaction  by  his  mediation"
(Hengstenberg).  This  hope  was  now  cut  off.  "  Cursed  be  the  man  that  trusteth  in
man,"  etc.  (Jer.  xvii.  5 ;  Ps.  cxliii.  3,  4).  3.  Beduced  to  a  condition  of  extreme  weakness.
"His  hands  became  feeble."  Nothing  remained  but  unconditional  submission  or
ineffectual  and  hopeless  resistance.  He  was  prepared  for  neither,  and  surrendered  himself
to  despair ;  suffering  the  consequences  of  his  own  "  foolishness  "  (Prov.  xii.  3).  4.  Con-
tributory to  the  distress  of  a  whole  people.  "  And  all  Israel  was  troubled  " — agitated,
alarmed,  confounded,  desponding  ;  having  no  confidence  in  his  ability,  participating  in
his  fears,  and,  like  him,  experiencing  the  effects  of  former  errors.  "  By  his  death  the
treaty  with  David  was  broken  off;  or  there  was  no  one  to  manage  it  with  such  authority
and  prudence  as  Abner  had  done  "  (Patrick).  6.  Exposed  to  the  villainy  of  wnfaithful
servants.  "  And  Saul's  son  had  two  men,"  etc.  They  belonged  to  his  own  tribe,  and
should  have  been  his  protectors ;  served  him  in  prosperity,  when  he  could  reward  them ;
but  turned  against  him  in  adversity,  when  he  could  no  longer  serve  their  interests;  and,
although  they  had  suffered  no  wrong  at  his  hands  (ver.  11),  acted  toward  him  unjustly
and  with  "  treasonous  malice,"  craft,  and  cruelty.  6.  Smitten  at  a  season  of  apparent
security.  "  At  noon,  in  his  own  house,  upon  his  bed ; "  where  he  sought  a  brief  repose,
and  slept  to  wake  no  more.  He  was  loft  unguarded,  and  perished  "  unawares "  (Luke
xxi.  34).  His  head  wns  buried  "  in  the  sepulchre  of  Abner  in  Hebron ; "  and  the
opposition  to  "  the  house  of  David  "  was  at  an  end.  None  survived  of  "  the  house  of
Saul "  save  an  afflicted  son  of  Jonathan  (ver.  4),  who  could  be  supposed  to  have  any
claim  to  the  crown.  7.  Removed  as  the  last  obstacle  to  the  accession  of  a  worthier  man.
And  herein  the  overruling  providence  of  God  again  appears  in  bringing  to  pass  "  the
word  of  the  Lord  by  Samuel "  (ch.  i.  1,  2).  "  It  is  significant  that  the  destruction  of
Saul's  house  and  kingdom  should  have  issued  from  Beeroth,  the  Gibeonite  city  (ch.
xxi.  1,  2)  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '). — D.

Ver.  4. — (QiBEAH.)  An  unfortunate  prince :  a  sermon  to  children.  Mephibosheth
was  the  only  son  of  Jonathan,  the  "friend  of  David  and  eldest  son  of  King  Saul.    When


106  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  iv.  1—12


he  was  five  years  old  the  country  was  invaded  by  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  xxix.  1),  hii
father  went  Ibrth  with  the  king  from  Gibeah  to  fight  against  them  in  Jezreel,  and  he
was  left  at  home  in  the  care  of  a  nurse  (his  mother  probably  being  dead).  They  waited
anxiously  for  news  of  the  conflict ;  and  at  length  there  came  a  messenger  saying  that
the  battle  was  lost,  the  king  and  Jonathan  were  dead,  and  the  terrible  Philistines
were  coming  to  plunder  and  bum  the  place.  The  nurse  caught  up  the  child,  and  carried
him  away  on  her  shoulder ;  but  in  her  flight  across  the  hills  she  stumbled,  and  the
little  prince  fell,  was  hurt  in  both  his  feet,  and  became  a  helpless  cripple  for  the  rest  of
his  days.

I.  Childhood  is  beset  by  many  perils.  No  other  creature  on  earth  is  weaker,
more  helpless  or  dependent  at  the  commencement  of  life,  than  a  chUd.  He  is  peculiarly
liable  to  accident  and  susceptible  to  disease ;  incapable  of  defending  himself  from  harm
or  preserving  his  own  life ;  and  is  cast  entirely  u,  on  the  care  of  otiiers.  A  little  neglect
on  their  part  may  prove  fatal.  More  than  a  fourth  of  all  the  children  that  are  bom  die
before  they  are  five  years  old.  There  is  the  still  greater  danger  to  your  souls  of  being
allowed  to  grow  up  in  ignorance  and  led  into  "  the  way  of  transgressors,"  stumbling
and  perishing  therein  (Matt,  xviii.  6).  Be  thankful  to  your  parents,  nurses,  and  teachers
for  their  care  over  you ;  still  more  to  your  heavenly  Father  who  has  taught  them  such
care,  appointed  his  holy  angels  to  be  your  guardians,  sent  his  Son  to  bless  you,  and
himself  loves,  preserves,  watches  over  you,  and  seeks  your  salvation  (Matt,  xviii.  10—14).

II.  Even  a  pbince  is  not  fbee  fhom  misfortune.  You  may  sometimes  wish  that
you  belonged  to  a  royal  or  wealthy  family,  lived  in  a  palace,  and  had  numerous  servants
to  wait  upon  you ;  supposing  that  you  would  be  happier  than  you  are.  Well,  here  is
a  prince ;  yet  motherless,  fatherless,  homeless,  helpless,  and  hopeless.  How  much  better
is  your  condition  than  that  of  this  poor  little  orphan  cripple!  No  condition  of  life
is  above  the  reach  of  trouble ;  none  beneath  the  possession  of  enjoyment.  Envy  not
the  lot  of  others,  nor  fret  and  be  dissatisfied  with  your  own.  Hear  a  fable  of  three  little
fishes  that  dwelt  in  a  beautiful  stream.  On  being  asked  what  they  wished  for,  one
said,  "  Wings,"  and  when  these  grew  he  flew  away  so  high  and  so  far  that  he  could  not
get  back,  sank  exhausted,  and  breathed  his  last ;  another  said,  "  Knowledge,"  and  when
he  obtained  it,  became  anxious  and  fearful,  and  durst  not  touch  a  fly  or  a  worm  or  eat
any  food,  lest  it  should  contain  a  fatal  bait,  pined  away  and  died ;  the  third  said,  "  I
wish  for  nothing,  but  am  contented  with  my  lot,"  and  this  little  fish  had  a  long  and
happy  life.  Have  you  not  heard  of  the  apostle  who  was  a  prisoner  for  Jesus'  sake,  and
said,  "I  have  learned  in  whatsoever  state  lam  therewith  to  be  content "  (PhiL  iv.  11)?

"There  is  a  cross  in  every  lot,

And  an  earnest  need  for  prayer ;
But  a  lowly  heart  that  leans  on  thee
Is  happy  anywhere."

When  a  little  blind  girl  was  asked  the  reason  of  her  a£9iction,  she  replied,  "  Even  80^
Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight."

III.  The  unfortunate  are  never  left  without  a  friend.  And  "a  friend  in
need  is  a  friend  indeed."  What  became  of  Mephibosheth?  He  was  carried  beyond
the  river  Jordan,  out  of  the  reach  of  the  Philistines ;  found  a  home  "  in  the  house  of
Machir,  the  son  of  Ammiel,  in  Lo-debar  "  (ch.  ix.  4 ;  xvii.  27),  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Mahanaim,  among  the  mountains  of  Grilead  ;  was  treated  with  kindness ;  and  dwelt  in
a  place  of  safety  until  he  became  a  man.  Only  a  few  persons  knew  where  he  lived,  or
whether  he  were  alive  ;  and  when  King  David  heard  of  him,  he  invited  him  to  Jem-
salem,  that  he  might  show  him  kindness  "  for  Jonathan's  sake."  AfBiction  appeals  to
our  pity,  and  tends  to  call  forth  our  sympathy  and  help.  We  should  never  despise  the
unfortunate  nor  mock  at  their  misfortune ;  but  always  try  to  do  them  good.  Above  alL
in  our  trouble  we  should  trust  in  God,  in  whom  "the  fatherless  findeth  mercy"  (Hos.
xiv.  3).  "  When  my  father  and  mother  forsake  me,  then  the  Lord  will  take  me  up"
(Ps.  xxvii.  10).

IV.  A  GREAT  M.8F0BTUNE  OFTEN  PROVES  A  GREAT  BLESSING.      If  Mephiboshsth  had

not  been  made  lame  by  the  accident  of  his  childhood,  he  would  have  been  tempted  to
aim  at  the  crown,  and  might  have  rushed  into  ambitious  and  godless  enterprises  as
others  did,  and  perished  in  like  manner.     As  it  was,  he  spent  his  days  in  quietness  and


CH.  iv.l— 12.j  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  107

peace.  His  affliction  was  the  meaas  of  making  him  humble,  thankful,  patient,  and
devout.  His  father's  property  was  restored  to  lum  by  his  father's  friend ;  and  he  had
an  honourable  place  assigned  to  him  at  the  royal  table  (oh.  ix.  13).  How  often  is  an
orphan  taught  by  the  loss  of  his  father  to  seek  his  father's  God !  The  hand  of  God
overrules  evil  for  good.  And  all  earthly  trouble,  when  endured  in  a  right  spirit,  is  a
preparation  for  a  heavenly  home. — D.

Vers.  5 — 8. — (Mahanaim.)  Assassins.  "  And  they  brought  the  head  of  Ishbosheth
unto  David  to  Hebron  "  (ver.  8).  1.  What  useful  purpose  can  the  record  of  the  atrocious
deeds  of  such  men  serve  ?  To  throw  light  upon  the  condition  of  the  age  in  which  they
occurred.  To  conflrm  inspired  testimony  concerning  human  depravity  (Ps.  xiv.).  To
exhibit  the  tendency  of  the  evil  principles  and  passions  by  which  these  men  were
actuated,  and  incite  hatred  and  abhorrence  of  them.  To  show  that  the  wickedness  of
the  wicked  is  subject  to  restraint  and  returns  upon  their  own  heads  in  significant
punishment.  To  make  us  grateful  for  our  preservation  from  crime  and  from  calamity ;
thankful  for  the  improved  condition  of  society,  and  zealous  for  its  further  advancement.
2.  The  crime  of  the  two  brothers,  Baaiiah  and  Keohab,  which  has  given  them  an
infamous  immortality,  was  not  an  ordinary  murder.  What  their  former  course  had
been,  and  whether  they  were  influenced  by  any  other  motive  besides  the  love  of  gain,
we  know  not.  But  in  taking  away  the  life  of  the  head  of  their  tribe,  the  ruler  under
whom  they  held  their  position,  and  in  their  subsequent  conduct,  they  acted  disloyally,
ungratefully,  deceitfully,  basely.    Notice  their —

I.  Deliberate  treason.  Having  lost  the  feeling  of  reverence  and  obligation,  they
marked  the  helplessness  of  Ishbosheth,  and  resolved  to  take  advantage  of  it ;  consulted
together  as  to  the  time  and  means  of  effecting  their  design ;  "  went,  and  came  about
the  heat  of  the  day,"  etc.  (ver.  5) ;  "  and  behold,  the  woman  who  kept  the  door  of  the
ho\ise  winnowed  wheat,  and  she  slumbered  and  slept.  And  the  brothers  Rechab  and
Baanah  got  through  unobserved,"  etc.  (LXX.).  1.  In  proportion  to  the  duty  of  men  to
do  good  to  others  is  their  guilt  in  doing  them  evil.  2.  Premeditated  sin  greatly  aggra-
vates its  gmlt.  3.  Those  whose  hearts  are  set  on  crime  are  lured  on  by  circumstances
to  its  commission.

II.  Heartless  cruelty.  "  He  lay  on  his  bed  in  his  bed-chamber,"  taking  his  mid-
day siesta,  "  and  they  smote  him  "  etc.  (ver.  7).  Men  of  violence,  with  more  than  the
ordinary  fierceness  of  their  tribe,  they  "  murdered  sleep,  the  innocent  sleep,"  without
pity  and  without  compunction,  being  "  past  feeling ; "  escaped  with  their  ghastly
trophy ;  and  "  gat  them  away  through  the  plain  [of  the  Jordan]  all  night "  to  Hebron
(a  distance  of  sixty  miles),  knowing  not  that  they  were  swiftly  pursued  by  raemesis  with
unerring  aim,  and  hurrying  to  theij  doom  (Acts  xxviii.  4).

III.  Hypocritical  meanness.  "  Behold  the  head  of  Ishbosheth  thine  enemy,"  etc.
(ver.  8).  In  order  to  gain  the  favour  of  David  they  hesitated  not  to  blacken  the  cha-
racter of  their  former  master  by  attributing  to  him  feelings  of  personal  revenge;  called
him  their  lord  the  king;  and  represented  their  crime  as  an  act  of  judgment  performed
by  them  under  the  sanction  of  Jehovah.  How  often  do-  ungodly  men  profanely  and
hypocritically  use  the  name  of  God  when  it  suits  their  purpose ;  and  even  paint  their
shameful  villainies  as  praiseworthy  virtues !  "  Hypocrisy  is  the  homage  which  vice
pays  to  virtue."

IV.  Mercenary  selfishness.  Like  the  Amalekite  (ch.  L  2),  they  sought,  not  David's
welfare,  but  their  own  iaterest  (ver.  10).  Hence  "their  feet  were  swift  to  shed  blood"
(Isa.  lix.  7;  Rom.  iii.  9 — 18),  and  "their  mouth  was  full  of  deceit"  (Ps.  x.  3 — 10).
"  Cursed  be  he  that  taketh  reward  to  slay  an  innocent  person"  (Dent,  xxvii.  26).  For
thirty,pieoes  of  silver  Judas  betrayed  the  Lord.

V.  Self-blinded  misjudgment.  They  were  probably  acquainted  with  the  manner
in  which  Abner  had  been  treated  (ch.  iii.  20)  and  with  the  impunity  of  his  murderer ;
and  not  unnaturally  supposed  that  whatever  promoted  the  interests  of  David  would  be
pleasing  to  him.  The  nature  of  the  wicked  is  ever  to  measure  others  by  themselves.
Their  ruling  motive  giv^  its  colouring  to  their  views  of  everything,  and  leads  them  to
attribute  to  the  same  motive  actions  which  are  due  to  one  entirely  different.  Their
delusion  is  sometimes  suddenly  dispelled,  and  they  fall  into  the  pit  which  they  have
digged  (Ps.  vii.  15 ;  xxxvii.  15).    "  Hell  is  truth  discovered  too  late."


108  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  iv.  1—12.

VI.  Justly  deserved  doom.  (Ver.  12.)  "  David  acted  with  strict  justice  in  this  casu
also,  not  only  to  prove  to  the  people  that  he  had  neither  commanded  nor  approved  the
murder,  but  from  heartfelt  abhorrence  of  such  crimes  and  to  keep  his  conscience  void  of
offence  toward  God  and  toward  man  "  (Eeil).  "  Indeed,  in  a  war  of  five  years'  continuance
which  followed  upon  Saul's  death,  David  never  lifted  up  his  sword  against  a  subject ;
and  at  the  end  of  it  he  punished  no  rebel ;  he  remembered  no  offence  but  the  murder
of  his  rival."  "  Though  Mephibosheth  (the  next  avenger  of  blood)  was  lame  and  could
not  overtake  them,  yet  God's  justice  followed  and  punished  them  when  they  little
expected  "  (Wordsworth). — D.

Vera.  9 — 11. — (Hbbbon.)  A  good  man's  motto.  "As  Jehovah  liveth,  who  hath
redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  adversity,"  etc.  1.  An  oath,  such  as  David  took,  is  properly
an  act  of  worship-^  direct  and  solemn  appeal  to  God  as  a  witness,  in  confirmation  of
an  assertion  or  of  a  promise  or  expressed  obligation.  There  is  implied  an  imprecation
of  Divine  displeasure  if  the  truth  be  not  spoken  or  the  engagement  be  not  fulfilled.  It
was  customary  from  ancient  times  (Gen.  xiv.  22 ;  ixi.  23) ;  often  enjoined  in  the  Law
(Deut.  vi.  13 ;  Exod.  xxii.  10) ;  and  served  important  purposes  (Heb.  vi.  16).  Nor  is
it  absolutely  prohibited  under  the  Christian  dispensation  (Matt.  xxvi.  63;  Bom.  i.  9;
2  Cor.  L  23 ;  Phil.  i.  8).  "  The  Saviour  forbids  absolutely  such  oaths  only  as  are
hostile  to  the  reverence  that  is  due  to  God"  (Tholuck, '  Serm.  on  the  ITount; '  Hodge,
'  Syst.  Theology,'  iii.  307 ;  Paley ;  Dymond,  *  Essays ').  2.  Baanah  and  Eechab  virtually
claimed  the  Divine  sanction  to  their  deed,  which,  they  said,  was  an  act  of  judgment
on  David's  enemies,  and  a  means  of  preserving  his  life.  But  David  could  not  admit
their  claim,  and  would  have  no  part  in  their  crime,  however  it  might  seem  to  promote
his  interest ;  and  (lifting  up  his  right  hand  toward  heaven,  Deut.  xxxii.  40)  he  appealed
to  the  living  God,  on  whom,  and  not  on  man,  least  of  all  on  man's  wickedness,  the
preservation  of  his  life  depended,  in  confirmation  of  his  purpose  to  inflict  upon  them
the  pimishment  of  death,  which  was  more  richly  deserved  by  them  than  by  one  on
whom  he  formerly  infiicted  it  when  he  confessed  to  a  similar  deed.  3.  His  appeal,
considered  with  reference  to  the  principles  and  feelings  it  involved,  may  be  regarded  as
a  statement  of  the  matto  of  his  life  and  expressive  of —

I.  Belief  in  the  living  God.  "  Living  (is)  Jehovah,"  equivalent  to  *"  as  surely  as
Jehovah  liveth  "  ( Judg.  viii.  19 ;  Ruth  iii.  13 ;  1  Sam.  xx.  3 ;  xx v.  34 ;  xxix.  6 ;  Jer.  xxxviii.
16,  "  who  has  made  for  us  this  soul ").  "  Along  with  the  name  of  God,  the  person  swear-
ing would  at  the  same  time  designate  his  other  attributes,  his  power  and  greatness,  or
whatever  else  of  the  essence  of  this  God  appeared  to  him  at  the  moment  of  swearing  of
special  significance"  (Ewald,  'Antiquities').  "Jehovah  liveth"  (ch.  xxii.  47;  1  Sam.
X  vii.  26).  A  godly  man  believes  in :  1 .  His  actual  existence  and  self-originated,  personal,
independent  life.  With  him  "  is  the  fountain  of  life  "  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9).  He  "  hath  life
in  himself"  (John  v.  26).  He  "only  hath  immortality"  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).  The  life  of
all  creatures  he  gives,  sustains,  or  takes  away  as  it  pleases  him.  2.  His  immediate
presence  and  accurate  observation  of  everything  as  it  really  is,  every  thought,  word,  and
action ;  and  his  approbation  or  disapprobation  of  it,  according  to  its  moral  character.
He  is  "a  true  and  faithful  Witness"  (Jer.  xlii.  3;  Isa.  Ixv.  16).  3.  His  active  inter-
vention in  human  affairs,  with  wisdom  and  might,  justice  and  mercy.  "  He  is  the
living  God,  and  an  everlasting  King"  (Jer.  x.  10),  and  gives  to  every  man  his  due
reward  (Heb.  xi.  6).  Faith  is  not  merely  a  general  persuasion  of  these  sublime  truths,
but  also  an  intense  realization  of  them,  and  a  personal  surrender  to  their  influence.  It
is  "an  intelli>jent  conviction  of  the  truth,  a  hearty  affection  for  the  truth,  and  a
practical  submission  to  the  truth."

II.  Gbatitude  fob  past  deliverance.  "  Who  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all
adversity " — an  expression  often  on  the  lips  of  David  (1  Kings  i.  29 ;  Ps.  xxv.  22 ;
xxxiv.  22  ;  ciii.  4 ;  oxvi.  8),  and  never  uttered  without  thankfulness  to  God.  1.  The
path  of  even  a  good  man  is  beset  by  many  dangers.  What  a  scene  of  peril  was  David's
life  from  his  youth  upwards  (ch.  xix.  7)  1  2.  He  traces  his  deliverance  from  them  to
the  hand  of  God,  and  sees  therein  an  evidence  of  his  loving,  constant,  and  distinguishing
care  for  his  "  soul."  3.  He  is  wont  to  cherish  the  recollection  of  such  deliverance ;  and
is  incited  thereby  to  "  speak  the  praise  of  the  Lord."  Nothing  is  more  becoming  or
beneficial  than  a  thankful  spirit;  but  it  is  by  no  means  a  common  possession.


OH.  IV.  1—12.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  loe

"  Some  murmur  when  their  sky  is  clear
And  wholly  bright  to  view,    •
If  one  small  speck  of  dark  appear

In  their  great  heaven  of  blue ;
And  some  with  thankful  love  are  filled.

If  but  one  streak  of  light,
One  ray  of  God's  good  mercy,  gild
The  darkness  of  their  night''

(Trench.)

III.  Consciousness  of  present  besponsibilitt.  A  good  man  feels  that  he  in
accountable  to  God ;  not  impelled  by  forces  over  which  he  has  no  control,  nor  liberatoo
from  moral  law  ;  but,  whilst  free  to  act,  bound  by  the  highest  motives  to  obey.  His
faith  in  the  living  God  quickens  his  oonscieuce,  and  shows  him  plainly  the  way  of
duty ;  his  gratitude  for  past  deliverance  incites  him  to  walk  therein.  1.  By  abhorring
that  which  is  evil,  and  avoiding  it.  2.  By  sincerity  of  heart,  speaking  the  truth,  and
doing  what  is  just  and  right.  3.  By  using  the  authority  and  power  entrusted  to  him,  not
according  to  his  own  will  and  for  selfish  ends,  but  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  fur
his  honour  and  the  well'are  of  men.  His  motto  is  Ich  dien  ("  I  serve").  He  ever  lives
under  a  sense  of  obligation,  and  finds  in  faithful  service  his  strength  and  jo  •  (John  iv.
34).  "I  must  work"  (John  ix.  4).  "Remember  now  and  always  that  life  is  no  idle
dream,  but  a  solemn  reality ;  based  upon  eternity,  and  encompassed  by  eternity.  Find
out  your  task :  stand  to  it :  the  night  oometh  when  no  man  can  work  "  (Carlyle).

IV.  Confidence  in  future  pbesebvation.  The  path  of  peril  is  not  yet  past.  But
a  good  man  looks  to  God  rather  than  to  men  to  protect  him  against  the  wrath  of  men
and  deliver  him  from  all  evil.  And  his  confidence  is  strong,  because  of:  1.  His  convic-
tion of  the  Divine  faithfulness.  "  Jehovah  liveth,"  to  fulfil  both  his  promises  and  his
threateuings.  2.  His  experience  of  the  Divine  favour  (see  1  Sam.  xvii.  32 — 37).  3.
His  obeflience  to  the  Divine  will,  and  express  assurances  of  safety  and  of  a  "  crown  of
life  "  to  every  faithful  servant.  "  The  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  "  Into  thine
hand  I  commit  my  spirit :  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  0  Lord  God  of  truth"  (Ps.  xxxi.  5).
"  The  foundation  of  David's  character  is  a  firm  unshaken  trust  in  Jehovah,  a  bright  and
most  spiritual  view  of  creation  and  the  government  of  the  world,  a  sensitive  awe  of  the
Holy  One  of  Israel,  a  striving  ever  to  be  true  to  him,  and  a  strong  desire  to  return  after
en-ors  and  transgressions  "  (Ewald). — D.

Ver.  12. — (Hebbon.)  The  reward  of  the  wicked.  This  book  contains  an  account  of
many  sudden  and  violeut  deaths  (in  addition  to  those  that  took  place  in  battle)  by
assassination,  suicide  (ch.  xviL  23),  the  direct  judgment  of  God  (ch.  vi.  7),  the  judicial
sentence  of  man.  Capital  punishment  for  murder  was  of  old  deemed  right  and  necessaiy
and  divinely  sanctioned  (see  ch.  i.  13 — 16).  In  this  execution,  we  see  that :  1.  The
agents  by  whom  the  purposes  of  God  are  effected  (ver.  8)  without  his  commission  and
from  selfish  motives  are  not  entitled  to  the  reward  of  faithful  service,  although  they
sometimes  expect  to  obtain  it,  being  turned  aside  by  "  a  deceived  heart."  2.  The
reward  which  wicked  men  obtain  for  their  wickedness  is  the  opposite  of  that  which
they  expect  (ver.  10).  Even  if  they  gain  their  immediate  object,  they  fail  to  find  I  herein
the  happiness  they  anticipated,  and  sooner  or  later  suffer  loss  and  woe.  3.  The  guilt
of  the  crime  which  such  men  commit  against  a  fellow-man  is  aggravated  by  his  inno-
cence and  the  circumstances  tmder  whiph  the  crime  is  committed.  "  A  righteous  person
in  his  own  house  upon  his  bed."  4.  The  authority  to  which  they  vainly  appeal  in
justification  of  their  conduct  surely  requires  their  condemnation.  "  He  will  by  no
means  clear  the  guilty"  (Bxod.  xxxiv.  7).  What  they  did  as  private  persons  to  Ish-
bosheth  without  Divine  commission,  David,  as  king  and  "  minister  of  God,"  was  com-
missioned to  do  to  them,  and  "  take  them  away  from  the  land  "  which  the  Lord  had
given,  but  which  they  had  polluted  and  were  unworthy  to  enjoy.  "  Gather  not  my
soul  with  sinners,  nor  my  life  with  bloody  men"  (Ps.  xxvi.  9).  5.  The  example
afforded  by  ^  severe  and  signal  punishment  is  sometimes  necessary  to  maintain  public
justice ;  to  manifest  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  certainty  of  retribution ;  to  deter  others
from  wrong-doing.  The  hands  that  did  the  deed  and  the  feet  that  "  ran  eagerly  for
reward  "  were  cut  off,  and  their  bodies  exposed  to  open  shame.


110  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  iv.  I— li

•'  He  that's  merciful
TTnto  the  bad  is  cruel  to  the  good."
6.  The  termination  of  strife  in  a  land  is  usually  attended  with  melancholy  circnm-
(jtances.  "  And  they  took  the  head  of  Ishbosheth,"  etc.  7.  The  saddest  events  are
often  succeeded  by  a  season  of  gladness  (1  Chron.  xii.  40)  and  prosperity,  and  even
directly  conducive  to  it.  With  the  death  of  Ishbosheth  "the  whole  resistance  to
David's  power  collapses ; "  and  "  thus  at  last,  not  by  his  own  act,  but  through  circum-
stances over  which  he  had  no  control — allowed  by  him  who  gives  liberty  to  each  man,
though  he  overrules  the  darkest  deeds  of  the  wicked  for  the  evolving  of  good — David
was  left  undisputed  claimant  to  the  throne  of  Israel.  Faith,  patience,  and  integrity
were  vindicated ;  the  Divine  promise  to  David  had  come  true  in  the  course  of  natural
events ;  and  all  this  was  better  far  than  even  if  Saul  had  voluntarily  resigned  his  place
or  Abner  succeeded  in  his  plans  "  (Edersheim).  "  Thus  God  will  make  all  the  sins  of
evil  men  to  be  one  day  ministerial  to  the  extension  and  final  settlement  of  the  universal
dominion  of  Christ "  (Wordsworth). — D.

Ver.  4. — A  lifelong  affliction.  Wars  inflict  innumorable  evils  which  find  no  place
in  the  history  of  them.  This  verse  affords  an  illustration.  When  news  reached  the
household  of  Saul  that  he  and  his  sons  had  been  slain  in  battle,  a  grandson,  a  boy  of
five  years,  was  hurrietlly  borne  away  by  his  nurse,  and,  falling,  was  lamed  in  both  feet.
His  lameness  continued  throughout  life,  and  involved  him  in  serious  disadvantages  and
troubles.  There  are  many  who,  like  Mephibosheth,  are  weak  and  suffering  from  child-
hood to  death.  Either  inheriting  weakness  of  constitution,  or  deriving  it  frpm  some
early  attack  of  disease,  or  injured  through  accident  or  the  carelessness  of  those  in  charge
of  them  when  children,  they  are  permanently  disabled  more  or  less.  With  reference
to  such  troubles,  notice —

I.  The  evils  thet  involve.  1.  Sometimes  constant  hodih/  suffering.  2.  Always
many  privations.  Incapacity  for  active  employments  and  their  emoluments.  Yet  it  is
wonderful  how  far  this  may  be  conquered.  The  writer  knew  a  lady  who  was  one  of
many  pupils  who  learnt  drawing  from  a  teacher  born  without  arms  or  legs,  but  who^
by  indomitable  perseverance,  became  proficient  in  the  art.  Such  affliction  also  involves
inability  to  share  in  many  enjoyments.  3.  Much  dependence  on  others.  And  hence
liability  to  be  neglected,  ill  treated,  imposed  upon,  robbed,  etc.  Ziba's  conduct  to
Mephibosheth  is  an  instance  (ch.  xvi.  3,  4;  xix.  24 — 27).  4.  Various  temptations.
To  despondency,  spiritlessness,  indolence ;  to  discontent,  inurmuring,  fretfulness ;  to
resentment  against  those  who  may  have  occasioned  the  affliction ;  to  envy  of  such  as
are  free  from  similar  trial.

II.  The  duties  they  impose.  1.  Trustful  resignation  and  patience.  However
they  may  have  arisen,  they  are  the  appointment  of  the  infinitely  wise  and  good  Father,
who  thereby  calls  for  and  exercises  faith  and  submission.  If  active  service  of  God  be
impossible,  the  service  of  patient  endurance  is  not,  and  may  be  equally  acceptable  and
useful.  2.  Thankfulness.  For  the  blessings  which  remain,  and  those  of  which  the
affliction  is  a  channel ;  and  for  the  affliction  itself,  as  a  sign  of  God's  fatherly  love
and  care.  3.  Watchfulness  against  the  peculiar  temptations  of  such  a  condition.  4.
Endeavours  after  the  good  which  is  attainable  notwithstanding,  or  hy  means  of,  the
affliction.

III.  The  alleviations  and  oompensationb  by  which  they  are  often  attended.
1.  Larger  enjoyment  of  spiritual  blessings.  If  the  earthly  is  a  good  deal  closed  by  such
a  trouble,  the  heavenly  is  all  the  more  open  and  accessible.  The  needs  of  the  soul  may
be  the  more  constantly  felt,  and  their  supply  the  more  habitually  sought.  Eeading,
reflection,  and  prayer  may  be  more  practised.  The  grace  of  God  may  be  more  abun-
dantly enjoyed.  Constant  affliction  brings  the  Christian  into  fuller  communion  with
the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  larger  participation  of  his  Spirit  and  realization  of  his  love
and  salvation.  The  consolation  received  may  outweigh  the  suffering.  2.  Hence  a
higher  Christian  life  and  more  beautiful  Christian  character  are  often  attained  by  those
who  are  so  afflicted.  They  become  more  fully  "partakers  of  God's  holiness."  3.
Human  sympathy  and  kindness  are  usually  enjoyed  in  greater  measure  and  continuance.
A  source  both  of  pleasure  and  profit.  4.  Even  the  power  for  good  over  others  is  often
increased.     The  increased  Christian  intelligence  and  force  and  beauty  of  character  th«


CH.  IV  1—12.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  Ill

patience,  cheerfulness,  and  thankfulness  displayed,  move  the  hearts  of  others  towards
him  who  is  their  source.  The  habitual  sufferer  might  often  adopt  St.  Paul's  words
in  2  Cor.  iv.  10 — 12 ;  xii.  9,  10.  His  weakness  may  be  made  the  occasion  of  the  more
powerful  manifestation  of  the  living  energy  of  Christ  through  him  for  the  spiritual
profit  of  relatives  and  friends.

IV.  How  THET  SHOULD  BE  EEaABDED  AND  TREATED  BY  OTHERS.   1.  With   pity

and  sympathy.  2.  With  practical  assistance.  The  weak  and  suffering  are  especially
commended  by  our  Lord  to  the  care  and  kindness  of  the  strong.  His  example  enforces
his  words.  To  minister  consolation,  and,  where  necessary  and  practicable,  material
assistance,  blesses  him  that  gives  as  well  as  him  that  receives.  The  lifelong  afBiction
of  one  may  thus  become  a  lifelong  discipline  and  blessini;  to  his  benefactors.  But  to
treat  the  feeble  with  hardness  or  contempt,  or  to  take  advantage  of  their  weakness  for
our  own  selfish  purposes,  is  peculiarly  base,  and  will  not  be  forgotten  by  him  who  will
condemn,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  even  the  neglect  of  the  poor  and  suffering  (Matt.  xxv.
41—46).

Finally:  1.  If  we  enjoy  freedom  from  lifelong  afflictions,  or  at  least  serious  ones  (for
few,  perhaps,  are  quite  free  from  them),  thankfulness  should  impel  us  to  care  the  more  for
those  who  are  burdened-  with  them ;  and  if  wo  suffer  from  them,  our  sympathies  should
be  the  keener  with  fellow-sufferers,  and  such  help  as  we  can  render  he  all  tlie  more
cheerfully  given.  2.  Let  those  who  suffer  much  and  long  in  this  life  make  sure  that
their  life  hereafter  shall  he  free  from  suffering,  and  that  their  afflictions  shall  work  out
for  them  an  eternal  greater  glory  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  These  unspeakable  blessings  are  the
portion  of  those  who  have  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  receive  his  teaching,  and
follow  his  directions. — G.  W.

Ver.  9. — Bedemption  from  all  adversity.  "  As  the  Lord  liveth,  who  hath  redeemed
my  soul  out  of  all  adversity."  An  expansion  of  the  form  of  oath  common  with  the
Hebrews,  "  As  the  Lord  liveth."  By  adding  the  words,  "  who  hath  redeemed,"  etc.,
David  reminded  himself  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  him,  and  kept  alive  and  expressed
his  gratitude.  The  same  form  of  oath  as  used  by  him  occurs  in  1  Kings  i.  29  (where
the  words  of  the  original  are  precisely  the  same).  Occurring  thus  at  the  beginning  and
the  end  of  his  reign,  we  may  reasonably  conclude  that  it  was  employed  in  the  inter-
vening years,  reminding  him,  in  the  height  of  his  prosperity  and  power,  of  the  days  of
adversity  which  had  preceded  them,  and  of  him  who  had  rescued  and  exalted  him.
This  representation  of  God  would  probably  be  more  helpful  to  the  piety  of  David  than
grander  but  more  general  conceptions  of  him.  So  shall  we  find  it  well  to  include  in
our  thought  of  God  what  he  has  been  to  us  and' done  for  us  individually  (comp.  Gren.
xlviii.  15,  16).  As  to  the  words  :  "  redeemed  "  is  not  to  be  taken  here  in  the  significa-
tion suggested  by  its  etymology,  "bought  back,"  "ransomed,"  but  simply  "delivered."
The  use  of  the  words,  "my  soul,"  must  not  lead  us  to  suppose  that  David  is  thinking
of  the  "  redemption  of  the  soul "  in  the  spiritual  sense.  He  refers  to  his  deliverance
from  the  perils,  hardships,  and  anxieties  of  his  previous  life,  through  the  enmity  of
Saul  and  his  attempts  to  destroy  him.  The  phrase  is  substantially  equivalent  to  "  me,"
though  it  may  suggest  that  the  seat  of  all  the  "  distress  "  that  attends  adversity  is  the
soul.     The  words  are  suitable  to  be  used —

L  In  view  of  actual  deliverance  from  varied  or  prolonged  troubles.  As
David  used  them.  They  recognize  and  call  to  mind:  1.  The  eatent  of  the  deliverance.
"  From  all  adversity."  The  reference  is  to  the  past.  David  did  not  mean  that  he  had
done  with  adversity.  Nor  can  we  in  this  world  use  the  words  in  that  sense ;  but  as
from  time  to  time  troubles  arise  out  of  which  we  are  delivered,  be  they  adversities  in
the  ordinary  sense,  or  troubles  of  the  soul  strictly  (temptations,  conflicts,  falls,  pangs  of
remorse,  fears,  insensibility,  gloom),  let  us  mark  and  record  our  deliverance.  *.  The
Deliverer,  "  The  Lord,"  Jehovah,  the  God  who  "  liveth."  Not  self,  not  men,  but  God.
David  had  employed  his  own  great  powers  of  thought  and  action,  and  had  been  well
served  by  human  helpers,  but  he  does  not  ascribe  his  deliverance  to  the  one  or  the
other,  but  to  God.  He  well  knew  that  all  power  for  self-help,  and  all  human  helpers,
are  the  gift  of  God ;  that  they  are  effectual  through  his  working  with  them ;  and  that
apart  from  them  God  operates  in  ways  transcendental  and  inexplicable.  The  great-
ness and  variety  of  his  troubles,  the  imminence  of  his  perils,  the  wondrous  special


112


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  v.  1— 2N.


mcidente  whicli  had  contributed  to  his  deUverance,  all  rendered  conspicuous  the  hand  of
God.  To  him,  therefore,  he  gave  the  glory.  Most  of  our  lives  will,  if  carefully  reviewed,
furnish  similar  proofs  of  the  operation  of  the  living  God,  not  merely  of  matter  and^^dead
laws,  and  of  friends.  And  we  should  gratefully  recognize  and  confess  his  goodness.
Hence  will  spring  humility,  continuance  and  increase  of  thankfulness,  and  also  confi-
dence and  hope  in  respect  to  future  adversities  (see  2  Cor.  i.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  17,  18).

II.  In  view  ov  the  bedemption  from  all  evil  effected  fob  us  bt  cub  Lobd
Jesus  Christ.  The  word  "  redeem "  will  in  this  case  have  the  fiill  signification  of
"ransom  by  payment  of  a  price."  "We  have  "redemption  through  his  blood,_the
forgiveness  of  sins."  In  redeeming  us  from  our  sins,  he  redeemed  us  from  all  kinOK
and  degrees  of  evil.  All  who  accept  him  as  their  Redeemer  and  Lord  are  thus  assured
of  complete  deliverance  from  all  that  now  distresses  them,  and  from  all  in  the  future
world  that  would  have  distressed  them  but  for  his  redeeming  work ;  and,  in  the  certainty
that  the  purposes  of  his  death  will  be  accomplished,  may  speak  of  their  deUverance  as
already  effected.  Nor  can  they  fail  to  remember  with  unutterable  thankfulness  and
perpetual  thanksgiving  the  redemption  thus  wrought  for  them.

III.  By  those  who  have  experienced  final  and  complete  delitbbancb  fboh
ALL  THE  EVILS  OF  THIS  PRESENT  woRiiD.  What  a  blcssed  thing  it  will  be  to  look  back
on  all  the  evils  of  this  present  state,  including  death  itself,  as  actually  past  I  and  to
look  forward  to  an  eternity  of  complete  freedom  from  evU,  of  full  enjoyment  of  good  I
No  sin,  no  want,  no  sickness,  no  pain,  no  sorrow,  no  peril ;  but  perfect  peace,  perfect
service  of  God,  perfect  communiou  with  him,  "  fulness  of  joy  "  and  "  pleasures  for  ever-
more "  (Ps.  xvi.  11 ;  Rev.  vii.  14 — 17  ;  xxl.  4).  And  evermore  will  the  "  redeemed
from  the  earth  "  be  mindful  of  their  DeUverer,  and  unite  in  praise  of  God  and  the  Lamb.
In  view  of  this  glorious  aad  complete  redemption :  1.  Let  Christians  be  patient  and
thankful  while  enduring  the  adversities  which  belong  to  their  condition  on  earth.  2.
Take  heed  lest,  redemption  being  effected,  you  fail  to  attain  to  its  actual  experience
To  reject  Christ  is  to  reject  deliverance  fi:om  death  and  misery. — G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTBB  V.


Vei.  I. — Then  came  all  the  tribes  of
Israel.  Aa  IsUbosheth  reigned  only  two
years,  and  David's  reign  at  Hebron  lasted
for  seven  years  and  a  half,  there  is  an  in-
terval of  more  than  five  years  to  be
Booounted  for;  and  we  liave  given  reason
for  believing  (see  note  on  eh.  ii.  10)  that  it
must  be  placed  after  the  death  of  Ishbosheth.
The  treaeheroua  murder  of  Abner,  and  the
tragic  fate  of  Ishbosheth  following  upon  it
BO  rapidly,  must  have  filled  all  Israel  with
horror,  and  made  them  look  upon  David  as
"a  bloody  man"  (eh.  xvl.  8).  But  gradually
his  iunocence  became  clear  to  all  except
inveterate  partisans,  and  as  the  prejudice
against  him  passed  away,  the  evident  ad-
vantage of  union  under  so  able  a  ruler
would  force  itself  upon  their  attention,
and  their  decision  would  be  hastened  by
the  advantage  which  the  Philistines
would  be  sure  to  take  of  their  anarchy.
How  much  they  had  profited  by  it  we
gather  from  the  haste  with  which  they
endeavoured  to  crush  David's  kingdom.
The  enormous  gathering  at  Hiabron  to
anoint  David  king  proves  not  merely  the
uuauiuiily  uf  the  tribes,  but  that  lii»  election


was  the  result  of  long  preparation  and
arrangement.  We  have  fuller  details  of  it
in  1  Chron.  xii.  23 — 40,  where  we  learn
that  the  people  assembled  in  large  numbers,
the  total  beiug  computed  in  the  '  Speaker's
Oommeutary '  at  348,222 ;  and  it  is  remark-
able that  of  this  vast  array  only  sixteen
thousand  nine  hundred  oame  from  the
tribes  of  Judah,  Simeon,  and  Benjamin,
wliich  were  situated  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Hebron.  On  the  other  hand,  the  two
and  a  half  trans-Jordanio  tribes  sent  no
loss  than  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand
men,  and  the  three  unimportant  tribes  of
Zebuluii,  Asher,  and  Kaphtali  mustered
a  hundred  and  eighteen  thousand;  while
Issaohar  was  content  to  send  only  two
himdred,  who  were  all,  however,  "  men  that
had  understanding  .  .  .  and  their  brethren
were  at  their  commandment."  These  words
suggest  the  probable  explanation  of  the  dis-
parity in  the  numbers,  which  to  many  seems
BO  strange  that  they  think  they  must  be
corrupt.  Each  tribe  settled  for  itself  in
what  way  it  would  be  represented,  and  the
more  distant  sent  a  large  pi  oportion  of  their
men  of  military  age  on  what  would  be  an
enjoyable  holiday.  As  thev  spent  three
days    at    Hebron,    '/he    expedition    wcnld


OH.  V.  1—25.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


113


oconpy,  even  for  those  most  remote,  little
more  than  a  week;  and  it  was  well  worth
the  while  of  the  tribes  thus  to  come  to-
gether. It  made  them  feel  the  value  of
unity,  and  gave  them  a  knowledge  of  their
strength.  Their  tribal  independence  during
the  time  of  the  judges  had  made  them  too
weak  even  to  maintain  their  liberty;  but
now,  welded  by  the  kingly  power  into  a
nation,  they  soon,  not  only  won  freedom  for
themselves,  but  placed  their  yoke  upon  the
shoulders  of  their  neighbours.  As  for  the
difiioulty  of  supplying  them  with  food,  all
would  bring  victuals  from  home;  and  the
neighbouring  tribes  showed  great  hospi-
tality. Especially  wereadthatthose  who  were
nigh  unto  Hebron,  "  even  as  far  as  lasachar
and  Zebulnn  and  Kaphtali,  brought  bread
on  asses,  and  on  camels,  and  on  mules,  and
on  oxen,  victual  of  meal,  cakes  of  figs,  and
clusters  of  raisins,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and
oxen,  and  sheep  in  abundance:  for  there
was  joy  in  Israel "  (1  Chron.  xii.  40).  It
was  a  grand  national  festival,  joyously  kept
because  the  people  saw  in  the  election  of
David  an  end  to  all  their  troubles ;  and  so
vast  a  gathering  overbore  all  opposition,  and
gave  iMth  to  them  and  their  king  the  con-
sciousness of  their  might.  But  while  we
find  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles  the  account
of  this  mighty  multitude,  it  is  here  (ver.  3)
expressly  said  that  it  was  the  elders  who
made  a  league  with  David,  and  anointed
him  king.  The  people  by  their  presence
testified  their  joyful  assent  to  what  was
done ;  but  David's  election  was  made  legiti-
mate by  the  decision  of  the  constituted
authorities  in  each  tribe.  It  would  be  most
interesting  to  know  the  various  steps  taken,
and  how  the  agitation  grew  and  spread  from
tribe  to  tribe,  until  all  hesitation  and  re-
sistance were  overcome.  But  the  object  of
this  book  is  to  show  ua  the  great  qualities,
the  sin,  the  repentance,  and  the  punishment
of  the  man  who  added  to  the  old  routine  of
sacrifice  bright  services  of  song,  and  who
was  the  author  of  that  book  of  devotion
which  to  this  day  best  expresses  the  feelings
of  the  heart,  a»  well  in  the  joys  as  in  the
sorrows  of  life.  The  manner  of  his  election
throws  no  light  upon  his  character,  and  is
passed  over.  Enough  to  know  that  in  those
five  years  after  Ishbosheth's  murder  David
won  the  approval  of  all  Israel,  and  that  his
appointment  to  the  kingdom  was  by  the
free  choice  of  the  tribes,  acting  in  a  legiti-
mate manner,  and  sending  each  their  elders
to  Hebron  to  notify  to  David  their  consent ;
and  that  their  decision  was  ratified  by  this
joyful  gathering  of  a  mighty  multitude  from
all  parts  of  the  land.  Three  reasons  are
given  by  the  elders  for  David's  election,
and  we  may  be  sure  that  they  represent  the
arguments  used  in  their  popular  afsemblies.

II,  SAMUEL.


The  first,  that  they  were  David's  bone  and
flesh.  In  other  words,  the  tribes  were  all  of
one  race,  and  united  by  the  closest  ties  of
relationship.  For  the  descendants  of  a
common  ancestor  to  be  at  war  with  one
another  was  both  morally  and  politically
wrong.  The  second,  that  David  had  been
their  actual  leader  in  war  even  in  Saul's
time.  His  personal  qualities,  therefore,
justified  their  choice  of  liim  to  be  their
deliverer  from  the  evUs  which  had  over-
whelmed the  land  after  the  disastrous  defeat
at  Gilboa,  when  Saul  had  no  longer  the  aid
of  David's  presence.  The  third,  that  Je-
hovah had  by  the  mouth  of  big  prophet
given  the  throne  to  David.  It  is  remarkable
that  the  elders  place  this  last.  Their  view
probably  was  that  the  Divine  command
must  be  proved  by  outward  circumstances,
that  so  reason  might  confirm  faith.  So
Saul's  public  appointment  by  Samuel  was
ratified  by  the  people  only  after  he  had
shown  himself  worthy  to  be  a  king  by  the
defeat  of  the  Ammonites.

Ver.  2.— Thou  shalt  feed.  In  biblical
language  the  pastoral  office  is  that  of  the
civil  and  not  of  the  spiritual  ruler.  Captain ;
Hebrew,  nagid,  prince ;  so  the  Eevised
Version  (and  see  note  on  1  Sam.  ix.  16).  The
word  refers  not  to  military  matters,  but  to
the  civil  administration.  David  had  proved
himself  a  competent  leader  in  war  when
Saul  was  king.  What  Jehovah  now  gives
is  the  government  of  Israel  in  time  of  peace.
The  Authorized  Version  renders  "  captain  "
from  not  perceiving  that  the  Divine  pro-
mise ensured  to  David  far  more  than  a
military  chieftainship.

Ver.  3. — A  league.  The  early  kings  of
Israel  were  not  invested  with  despotic
power.  Thus,  on  Saul's  appointment,
"Samuel  wrote  in  a  book  the  manner  of
the  kingdom  "  (1  Sam.  x.  25,  made  most
emphatic  in  the  Bevisel  Version  by  the
note  in  the  margin,  that  the  Hebrew  is  "  the
book  ").  The  revolt  agaiust  Behoboam  was
the  result  of  the  too  great  extension  of  the
royal  power  in  the  days  of  Solomon  (1  Kings
xii.  4).  Though  subsequently  the  kings
seemed  to  have  retained  their  supremacy,
yet  when  the  good  and  patriotic  Jehoiada
restored  the  famUy  of  David  to  the  throne,
he  reverted  to  the  old  nays,  and  "made  a
covenant  between  the  king  and  the  people"
(2  Kings  xi.  17).  Besides  personal  rights,
the  tribes,  accustomed  to  their  own  leaders,
and  unused  to  yield  obedience  to  a  ciiitral
authority,  would  certainly  stipulate  for  a
large  measure  of  tribal  independence,  arid
the  management  of  local  matters  by  them-
selves. They  anointed  David  king.  This
was  the  public  ratification  of  Samuel's
anointing,  and  by  it  David  became  de  facto,
as  well  as  de  jure,  king.   The  prophets  could

I


Ul


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  v.  1—25.


not  gire  any  right  over  the  people  without
the  consent  of  tiie  people  themeelvea.  But
all  religious  men  would  see  in  the  Divine
command  an  obligation  upon  their  con-
science to  accept  as  their  king  the  man
whom  the  piophet  had  anointed;  and  Saul
acted  in  an  irreligious  manner  in  seeking  to
frustrate  God's  will.  And  this  impiety  cul-
minated in  his  murder  of  the  priests  at  Nob,
which  was  the  open  avowal  that  he  would
trample  all  scruples  of  conscience  underfoot.
Ver.  4. — David  was  thirty  years  old.  As
David  was  probably  about  eighteen  or  nine-
teen years  of  age  at  the  time  of  his  combat
with  Goliath,  the  events  recorded  in  1  Sam.
xvii. — xxxi.  must  have  occupied  about  ten
or  eleven  years.

Ver.  6. — The  king  and  hit  men  went  to
Jemsalem.  This  expedition  took  place  im-
mediately after  David's  coronation,  and  pro-
bably he  was  moved  to  it  by  the  presence  of
so  large  a  number  of  the  warriors  of  Israel.
He  had  long  foreseen  the  arrival  of  the  time
when  he  would  be  king  of  all  the  tribes,
and  must  have  debated  in  his  mind  the
problem  of  his  future  capital.  He  could
not  remain  in  Hebron,  as  it  was  too  far  to
the  south,  nor  would  haughty  tribes  such
as  Ephraim  have  consented  to  be  merged
into  Judah.  On  the  other  hand,  he  could
not  move  far  away,  as  Judah  was  his  main
strength.  But  living  in  its  neighbourhood,
he  must  often  have  noticed  the  remarkable
position  of  the  city  of  Jebus,  and  admired  its
rock-girt  strength  (Ps.  xlviii.  2).  Though
the  Jebusites  had  been  conquered  by  Joshua
(Josh.  xi.  3),  and  Jerusalem  captured  (Judg.
i.  8),  yet,  as  the  children  of  Judah  did  not
occupy  it,  but  "set  the  city  on  fire,"  it  seems
to  have  been  soon  repeopled  by  its  old  in-
habitants, wlio  there  maintained  their
independence,  and,  owing  to  the  impreg-
nable nature  of  its  site,  could  not  be  treated
as  Saul  tieated  the  Gibeonite  inhabi-
tants of  Beeroth.  Kven  subsequently,  the
Jebusite  chief  who  possessed  what  pro-
bably was  Mount  Moriah,  still  bore  the
titular  rank  of  king ;  for  the  words  in  ch.
xxiv.  23  literally  are,  "  All  this  did  Araunah
the  king  give  imto  the  king."  The  explana-
tion of  this  long  independence  of  the  Je-
busites is  to  be  found  not  only  in  the  feeble-
ness of  the  tribes  during  the  troubled  times
of  the  judges,  but  even  more  in  the  confor-
mation of  the  site  of  their  stronghold.
Jerusalem  is  situated  on  the  edge  of  the
precipitous  wall  which  forma  the  western
boundary  of  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  and
occupies  a  promontory,  on  three  aides  of
which  are  ravines  so  abrupt  and  steep  that,
were  it  not  for  their  vast  depth,  they  might
seem  to  have  been  the  work  of  man.  On  the
north  side  alone  it  is  open  to  attack,  but
even  there,  when  the  besieger  has  obtained


ftn  entrance,  he  finds  the  city  divided  by
another  ravine  into  two  parts ;  whereof  the
western  portion  contains  the  strong  citadel
of  Mount  Zion,  while  the  eastern  and
smaller  portion  contains  the  less  elevated
mountain  of  Moriah.  Though  actually
raised  above  the  sea-level  several  hundred
feet  less  than  Hebron,  it  seems  to  the  eye
more  emphatically  a  mountain-city;  and
being  well-nigh  encircled  by  the  valleys  of
Ben-Hinnom  and  Jehoshaphat,  it  seems  to  sit
enthroned  above  the  Jordan  valley,  compared
with  which  it  enjoys  a  cool  and  refreshing
climate.  To  its  inhabitants  it  was  "  beautiful
in  elevation,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth"
(Ps.  xlviii.  2,  Revised  Version);  to  the
exiles  it  was  "  the  city  of  God,"  to  which
their  hearts  ever  turned;  to  ns  Christians  it
is  the  type  of  Christ's  Church  on  earth,  and
of  his  kingdom  in  heaven.  It  was  an  act
worthy  of  David's  genius  to  foresee  the  great
future  of  the  place,  and  to  inaugurate  his
kingdom  by  its  capture.  We  gather  from
Ezek.  xvi.  45  that  at  the  time  when  the
Hittites  were  the  dominant  race  in  Syria,
Jerusalem  was  one  of  their  fortresses.  The
name  is  a  dual,  literally  Terushalalm,  and
probably  the  town  was  so  called  because  it
consisted  of  two  parts — ^the  upper  and  the
lower  city.  Shalalm  means  the  "two
Salems,"  thus  carrying  our  minds  back  to
the  city  of  Melchizedek  (Gen.  xir.  18).  In
Ps.  Ixxvi.  2  Salem  is  apparently  contrasted
with  Zion,  and  so  woold  be  the  lower  town,
containing  Motmt  Moriah.  Of  the  other
part  of  the  word,  Teru,  numerous  deriva-
tions are  given,  of  which  the  only  probable
one  is  that  which  connects  it  with  "  Yehovah-
yireh" — "God  will  see  to  it,"  the  name
given  to  the  spot  where  Abraham  on  this
mountain  offered  a  vicarious  sacrifice  for
his  son.  We  must,  however,  bear  in  mind
that  towns  retain  the  names  which  they
bore  in  primitive  times,  and  that  the  name
of  a  Hittite  fortress  belongs  probably  to  the
language  of  that  people.  Except  thou  take
away  the  blind  and  the  lame,  thou  shalt  not
oome  in  hither.  These  words  have  been  a
sore  puzzle  to  commentators,  and  many
strange  explanations  have  been  given.
Bashi  says  that  the  hlind  meant  Isaac,  and
the  lame  Jacob,  and  that  the  words  referred
to  an  old  compact  by  which  Abraham  gave
Jerusalem  to  the  Jebusites,  and  that  Isaac
and  Jacob  had  confirmed  this  agreement.
Unless,  then,  David  was  prepared  to  violate
this  covenant,  he  must  abstain  from  the
attack.  We  get  no  help  from  1  Chron.  xi.
5,  as  the  words  are  there  omitted,  probably
because  they  were  not  supposed  to  have  any
important  meaning.  The  Orientals  delighted
in  dark  sayings,  and  possibly  there  was  here
some  local  reference  which  the  people  of
Jerusalem  wonld  understand,  but  which  ia


m.  V.  1—26.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


lis


lost  for  US.  But  evidently  it  was  a  boastful
defiance,  and  may  mean  that  the  Jebuaiteg
pretended  that  it  would  be  enough  to  post
only  their  feeblest  men,  the  blind  and  the
lame,  for  defence,  and  that  David  would  try
in  vain  to  break  through  them.  Thinking ;
Hebrew,  to  eay;  answering  to  our  phrase
"  that  is."  It  should  be  translated,  "  mean-
ing."

Yer.  7. — ^The  stronghold  of  Zion :  the  same
is  the  city  of  David.  Zion  was  the  hill  on
the  south-western  side  of  the  city ;  but  we
learn  from  ver,  9  that  the  Jebusites  had
not  ocoupiedthe  whole  of  it,  but  a  part  only,
which  was  their  stronghold,  round  which
there  would  be  scattered  dwellings,  as  the
whole  tribe  dwelt  there.  The  total  area
of  the  hill-top  was  about  sixty  acres,  and  it
was  now  quickly  covered  with  houses,  and
called  "  the  city  of  David,"  after  its  captor.
The  view  of  Dr.  Birch  and  others,  that  the
stronghold  of  Zion  was  Ophel,  is  rendered
untenable  by  the  fact  that  this  southern
tongue  of  Mount  Moriah  is  completely
commanded  by  other  parts  of  the  hill.  Ac-
cording to  Gesenius,  Zion  means  "  sunny ;  "
others  render  it  "  the  dry  hill ; "  others,
"  lofty ; "  and  Furst,  "  the  castle."  None  of
these  derivations  is  of  any  real  value,  as
the  word  is  probably  Hittite.

Yer.  8. — Whosoever  getteth  ap  to  the
gutter.  The  word  rendered  "  gutter  "  occurs
elsewhere  only  in  Pg.  slii.  7,  where  it  is
translated  "  waterspout."  Josephus  thinks
that  it  was  an  imderground  passage  or  drain.
Ewald  argues  that  it  was  a  precipice,  and
others  that  it  was  a  dent  or  hollow  in  the
rocky  face  of  the  ravine,  which  David  had
noticed  and  thought  practicable.  The  view
of  Josephus,  suggested  to  him  probably  by
his  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  the  site
of  Jerusalem  is  honeycombed  by  tunnels,
has  been  wonderfully  confirmed  by  the  dis-
coveries made  by  Sir  C.  Warren  ('Ee-
oovery  of  Jerusalem,'  pp.  240,  sgg.).  At  the
northern  end  of  the  Pool  of  Siloam  he  found
an  arched  passage  gradually  narrowing  down
from  a  considerable  height,  till  finally  there
was  a  passage  of  only  fourteen  inches,  and
as  there  was  a  depth  of  ten  inches  of  water,
there  were  left  but  four  inches  of  space  for
breathing.  But  through  this  his  men  strug-
gled, and,  at  the  end  of  four  hours'  labour,
they  reached  the  light  of  day  at  the  spring
called  the  Virgin's  Fount.  Beginning  hero
on  a  subsequent  day,  they  went  along  a  pas-
sage sixty-seven  feet  in  length,  and  came  to
a  perpendicular  shaft  leading  up  through  the
solid  stone  of  the  hill ;  and,  having  scaled
this,  they  next  came  upon  a  sloping  passage,
which  mtally  conducted  them  to  a  spot  on
the  hill  of  Ophel  within  the  fortifications.
Now,  there  are  reasons  for  believing  that
this  passage  is  older  than  the  wall  built  by


Solomon,  and  through  it,  or  some  such  tunnel,
Joab  and  a  few  men  may  have  worked  their
way,  and  so  have  effected  an  entrance  into
the  city,  which  otherwise  was  impregnable.
It  was  probably  the  entrance  near  the  Vir-
gin's Fountain  which  they  had  observed,  and
David's  words  mean,  "  Whoever  will  under-
take this  dangerous  enterprise,  let  him  try
this  underground  passage,  and  when  he
has  entered  the  fortifications  by  its  means,
let  him  smite  tlie  lame  and  the  blind,
that  are  hated  of  David's  soul,"  because
of  the  boast  of  the  Jebusites,  that  their
cripples  were  a  match  for  bis  heroes.  It
must  be  noticed,  however,  that  the  K'tib,
or  written  text,  has  "  who  hate  David's
soul;"  and  as  this  is  what  the  Jewish
Massorites  found  in  the  manuscripts,  it  has
more  authority  than  their  correction.  These
Jebusites  had  probably,  in  their  boastful
insult,  spoken  of  David  with  contempt,  and
even  said,  like  Goliath,  that  they  would
give  his  flesh  to  the  vultures  (1  Sam.  xvii.
44).  We  learn  from  1  Ohron.  xi  6  that
David  promised  the  ofSce  of  commander
of  the  host  to  the  man  who  undertook  this
exploit;  and  when  Joab  had  volunteered
and  succeeded,  he  regained  thereby  the
post  which  he  had  forfeited  by  the  murder
of  Abner.  The  blind  and  the  lame  shall
not  come  into  the  house.  The  proverb  is
one  of  contempt  for  these  poor  cripples,  and
forbids  the  exercise  of  hospitality  to  them.
Such  people,  if  they  took  to  mendicancy,
were  to  meet  with  refusal,  though  at  their
own  homes  they  were  fit  objects  of  charity.
This  way  of  describing  tramps  as  "the
blind  and  lame"  arose,  we  are  here  told,
from  this  Jebusite  taunt.

Yer.  9. — David  dwelt  in  the  fort.  It  was
the  stronghold  or  citadel  of  Zion  which
David  took  for  his  abode ;  but  as  he  needed
space  for  the  dwellings  of  his  mighty  men,
and  for  those  who  would  soon  flock  for
trade  and  security  to  the  capital,  David
proceeded  to  fortify  the  whole  of  the  sum-
mit. His  works  began  from  "the  Millo,"
rendered  "the  citadel "  by  the  LXX.  Many,
deriving  the  name  from  a  Hebrew  root
signifying  "to  fill,"  think  that  it  was  a
mound,  but  Nature  had  herself  supplied  fit
heights  fur  defence,  and  it  is  evident  that
the  place  was  called  "the  Millo"  when
Duvid  captured  the  city.  We  find  "  Beth-
Millo"  also  in  Judg.  ix.  6,  20,  where  it
signifies  those  who  held  the  citadel  of
Shechem ;  and  this  Millo  at  Jerusalem  was
without  doubt  the  old  Jebusite  keep,  and
the  explanation  of  its  name  must  be  sought
in  the  Jebusite  language.  As  it  formed
one  of  the  strongest  defences  of  the  city,
it  was  rebuilt  by  Solomon  (1  Kings  ix.  24  •
xi.  27),  and  repaired  by  Hezekiah  (2  Ohron.
xxxii.  S)  in  preparation  for  the  Assyrian


116


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  v.  1 — 25.


attack.  Probably  it  stood  at  a  corner,
whence  the  phrase,  "round  about  from
the  Millo  and  inward,"  or,  as  it  la
expressed  in  1  Ohrou.  xi.  8,  "from  the
Millo  inward,"  that  is,  starting  from
the  Millo,  the  walls  enclosed  the  space
behind  it.  In  the  parallel  place  (1  Chron.
xi.  8)  we  find  an  interesting  addition  to  the
narrative,  namely,  that  "  Joab  repaired  the
rest  of  the  city."  It  appears  from  this  that
the  Jebusites  had  occupied  a  good  deal  of
the  ground  with  their  habitations,  though
probably  the  number  of  the  tribe  was  not
great ;  or  possibly  there  remained  old
buildings  which  were  the  remains  of  the
Hittite  city,  and  which,  beiug  of  massive
oonsLruction,  were  easily  made  fit  once  again
for  human  habitation.  We  see  also  proof
of  Joab's  great  ability  in  peace  as  well  as  in
■war.  He  it  was  who  had  captured  the
stvODghold,  and  it  was  now  his  office  to
•rrange  the  streets  and  plan  of  the  city,
and  to  assign  dwellings  to  David's  mighty
men.  This  would  be  a  work  sure  to  cause
jealousy  and  heart-burnings,  and  no  one
but  Joab,  their  old  commander,  could  have
satisfied  them.  We  find  that  he  assigned
to  one  of  them,  Uriah  the  Hittite,  a  space
of  ground  for  a  dwelling  close  to  tlie  royal
palace.  We  may  suppose,  then,  that  David
■was  now  fully  reconciled  to  the  "  hard  sons
of  Zeiuiah  "  (ch.  iii.  89),  and  in  the  stern
wars  which  followed  David's  election,  he
needed  and  had  the  full  benefit  of  their
vigour  and  ability.

Ver.  10. — David  virent  on,  and  grew  great.
This  is  the  Hebrew  phrase  for  "  David  grew
greater  and  greater."  In  this  and  tlie  six
following  verses  (10—16)  we  have  a  sum-
mary of  David's  reign,  telling  us  how  he
increased  in  prosperity  because  of  the  bless-
ing of  "  Jehovah  God  of  hosts."  The  birth
of  Solomon  even  is  recorded  in  it,  though
it  took  place  long  afterwards.  The  inser-
tion in  this  summary  of  Hiram's  acknow-
ledgment of  David  proves  that  this  event
made  a  great  impression  upon  the  minds
of  the  people.

Ver.  11.— Hiram  King  of  Tyre.  At  first
Bight  it  seems  as  if  the  Hiram  who  so
greatly  aided  Solomon  in  the  building  of
the  temple  was  the  same  person  as  David's
friend  (1  Kings  v.  10 ;  2  Chron.  ii.  3),  but
this  identification  is  disproved  by  the  ex-
press statement  in  2  Chron.  ii.  13,  and  by
the  chronology.  For  granting  that  this
account  of  Hiram's  embassy  occurs  in  a
general  summary,  yet  David  would  not  long
defer  the  erection  of  a  palace,  and  in  the
history  of  Bathsheba  wo  find,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  that  it  was  then  already  buUt  (ch.
xi.  2).  But  as  Solomon  was  grown  to  man-
hood at  his  father's  death,  David's  sin  must
have  been  committed  not  more  tlian  nine


or  ten  years  after  he  became  king  of  all
Israel.  Now,  we  are  told  by  Josephus
('  Contr.  Apion,'  i.  18),  on  the  authority  of

Menander  of  Ephesus,  that  Hiram  reigned
in  all  thirty  years.  But  in  1  Kings  ix.  10 —
13  we  have  an  account  of  a  transaction  vrith
Hiram  in  Solomon's  twentieth  year.  In
another  place  ('  Ant.,'  viii.  3. 1)  Josephus  tells
us  that  Hiiam  bad  been  King  of  Tyre  eleven
years  when  Solomon,  in  the  fourth  year  of
his  reign,  began  the  building  of  the  temple.
He  would  thus  have  been  a  contemporaiy
of  David  for  only  the  last  seven  or  eight
years  of  his  reign.  But  the  history  of  this
embassy  is  given  as  a  proof  of  David's
establishment  in  his  kingdom,  and  cannot
therefore  be  referred  to  so  late  a  period  in
his  lifetime,  when  it  would  have  lost  its
interest.  The  improbability  of  two  succes-
sive kings  having  the  same  name  is  not,  after
all,  so  very  great,  especially  as  we  do  not
know  what  the  word  Hiram,  or  Baram,
exactly  means.  Nor  is  Meuander'a  state-
ment conclusive  against  it,  where  be  says
that  Hiram's  father  was  named  Abibal —
"  Baal  is  my  father."  This  would  probably
be  an  official  name,  borne  by  Hiiam  as  the
defender  of  the  national  religion,  or  as  a
priest-king.  There  is,  therefore,  no  real
reason  for  rejecting  the  statement  in  2  Chron.
ii.  13  that  Hiram,  or  as  he  is  there  called
Iluram,  David's  friend,  was  the.  father  of
the  Huram  who  was  Solomon's  ally.  Cedar
trees.  Cedar  wood  was  greatly  valued  both
for  its  fragrance  and  durability,  owing  to
the  resin  which  it  contains  preserving  it
from  the  attacks  of  insects.  Its  colour  also
is  soft  and  pleasing  to  the  eye,  as  may  be
Been  in  the  Jerusalem  Chamber  in  West-
minster Abbey,  the  panels  of  which  are
of  cedar.  It  did  not  grow  in  the  Antilibanus,
or  eastern  part  of  Lebanon,  which  belonged
to  Israel,  but  only  iu  the  western  part,  which
belonged  to  Tyre.  Cedar  from  the  time
of  D.ivid  became  the  favourite  material  at
Jerusalem  for  the  interior  of  houses  (Jer.
xxii.  14),  and  Isaiah  charges  the  people  of
Samaria  with  pride  for  not  being  content
with  the  native  sycomores  which  had  satis-
fied their  fathers,  but  substituting  for  it
this  costly  foreign  timber  (Isa.  ix.  10).
Carpenters  and  masons.  The  necessity  of
importing  "workers  of  wood,  and  workers
of  stone  for  walls,"  as  the  words  literally
mean,  proves  how  miserable  was  the  social
state  of  Israel  in  David's  time.  Though
they  had  been  slaves  in  Egypt,  yet  at  the
Exodus  the  Israelites  had  men  capable  of
working  in  thepreoioua  metals  and  jewellery,
in  waving  and  embroidery,  in  wood-carving,
and  even  in  the  cutting  of  gems  (Exod.
XXXV.  80—35).  During  the  long  anarchy
of  the  judges  they  had  degenerated  ir  to  a
race  of   agricultural   drudges,  whom    the


OH.  V.  1—25,]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


117


Philistines  had  debarred  from  the  nse  of
even  the  simplest  tools  (1  Sam.  xiii.  19).
Possibly  in  Saul's  time  there  was  a  faint
restoration  of  the  arts  of  civilized  life  (oh.  i.
24);  but  when  we  find  Joab  killing  Absalom,
not  with  darts,  but  with  pointed  stakes
(oh.  xviii.  14),  the  weapons  probably  of
most  of  the  foot-soldiers,  we  see  that  not
much  had  been  done  even  then  in  metal-
luigy ;  and  here  earlier  in  his  reign  David
has  to  send  to  Tyre  for  men  who  could  saw
a  plank  or  build  a  wall.  When,  then,  we
call  to  mind  the  high  state  of  culture  and
the  magnificence  of  Solomon's  reign,  we  can
form  some  idea  of  the  vigour  with  which
David  raised  hb  subjects  from  a  state  of
■emi-barbarism.

Ver.  12. — And  David  perceived.  We  may
well  believe  that  David  had  many  seasons
of  despondency  and  misgiving  after  he  be-
came king.  His  subjeoto  were  brave  and
energetic,  but  turbulent,  unwilling  to  obey,
and  but  half -civilized.  His  election  had
put  an  end  to  civil  war  at  home,  but  only  to
arouse  the  hatred  of  the  enemies  who  had
long  oppressed  them.  The  tragical  fate,  too,
of  Saul,  who,  after  so  many  heroic  struggles,
had  seen  the  earlier  glories  of  his  reign  fade
away,  and  had  songht  deliverance  from  his
misery  by  suicide ;  all  this  must  have  often
depressed  his  spirits.  But  gradually  his
fears  passed  away ;  and  when  he  had  twice
defeated  the  Philistines,  and  been  able  to
establish  his  rule,  and  with  it  some  degree
of  orderly  government  throughout  the  twelve
tribes,  David  saw  in  all  this,  and  in  the
embassies  from  foreign  nations,  the  proof,
not  of  his  own  ability,  but  of  Jehovah's  pur-
pose to  exalt  his  Mngdom  for  his  people
Israel's  sake.  In  this  David  was  still  a
man  after  God's  own  heart,  in  that  he  felt
himself  to  be  only  an  instrument  for  the
doing,  not  his  own  will,  but  the  purpose  of
his  Divine  Master.

Ver.  13. — David  took  him  more  oonoubines.
Thus  with  increase  of  power  came  also  the
increased  gratification  of  David's  weakness
and  sin.  Well  for  him  would  it  have  been
if,  like  Saul,  he  had  been  content  with  one
wife.  But  this  enlargement  of  his  harem
was  gradual,  and  the  list  includes  all  the
sons  bom  at  Jerusalem.  Of  these  four,
namely,  Shammuah,  Shobab,  Nathan,  and
Solomon,  were  his  children  by  Bathsheba
(see  1  Chron.  iii.  5,  where  the  names  are
differently  spelt).  Besides  a  variation  in
the  spelling,  two  sons  are  mentioned  in
Chronicles,  Nogah  and  an  earlier  Eliphelet,
whose  names  are  not  given  here,  perhaps
because  tliey  died  young.  From  1  Chron.
iii.  9  we  learn  that  only  the  names  of  the
sons  of  wives  are  given  in  these  tables.

Ver.  17. — But  when  the  Philistines  heard.
After  the  battle  of  Gilboa  the  Philistines


becamo  the  virtual  rulers  of  much  of  the
country  west  of  the  Jordan,  and  probably
even  David  and  Judah  paid  them  tribute.
On  its  eastern  bank,  though  Abner  kept
them  from  molesting  Ishbosheth's  kingdom,
yet  the  rule  of  Saul's  house  in  Ephraim  and
Benjamin  must  have  been  nominal  only,
and  the  Philistines  would  have  seen  him
with  pleasure  wasting  his  strength  in  civil
war.  After  Ishbosheth's  death  they  had
tightened  their  grasp  over  the  central  dis-
tricts of  Palestine,  though  probably  content
with  exacting  tribute.  They  must  now  have
seen  with  displeasure  the  consolidation  of
the  tribes  under  one  able  ruler.  Even  in
their  divided  state,  the  natural  strength
of  the  country  and  the  bravery  of  the  people
had  made  it  a  task  too  great  for  the  Philis-
tine power  entirely  to  crush  Israel's  inde-
pendence. But  if  they  could  destroy  David
before  he  had  had  time  to  establish  himself
in  his  kingdom,  they  would  at  least  prolong
indefinitely  that  feebleness  of  Inael  which
had  made  it  so  long  subject  to  their
dominion.  Of  this  supremacy  the  Philis-
tines have  hsmded  down  a  token  for  ever  in
giving  to  the  whole  country  the  name  of
Palestine,  the  Philistines'  land.  David  . .  .
went  down  to  the  hold.  Many  commen-
tators identify  the  hold  with  the  cave  of
AduUam,  and  certainly  the  account  of  the
brave  deed  of  thiee  of  David's  heroes,  in
breaking  through  the  Philistine  garrison
of  Bethlehem  to  bring  him  water  thence,
gives  great  probability  to  this  view.  For
we  read  there  that  "the  Philistines  were
encamped  in  the  valley  of  Bephaim,  and
that  David  was  then  in  the  hold"  (oh.
xxiii.  13, 14,  where  note  that  the  word  "hold"
has  the  definite  article).  There  are,  how-
ever, many  difficulties  connected  with  this
view ;  for  the  cave  of  AduUam  was  in  the
valley  of  Elah,  on  the  road  from  Hebron  to
Philistia  (1  Sam.  xxii.  1),  but  the  valley  of
Bephaim  is  close  to  Jerusalem  (Josh.  xy.
8),  abutting,  in  fact,  upon  the  valley  of
Ben-Hinnom.  Baal-Perazim  also  is  in  the
same  neighbourhood,  being  the  rocky  height
which  forms  the  border  of  Ben-Hinnom,  and
bounds  the  valley  of  Bephaim  on  the  north.
Still,  the  passage  in  ch,  xxiii.  13,  14  seems
too  precise  to  be  lightly  set  aside,  and  we
must  suppose,  therefore,  that  the  Philistines,
alarmed  by  the  gathering  of  half  a  million  of
men  and  women  at  Hebron,  sent  messengers
throughout  their  country  to  assemble  their
warriors.  It  was  the  weakness  of  ancient
warfare  that  its  vast  hosts  of  people  melted
away  as  rapidly  as  they  had  gathered.  For
provisions  were  soon  spent,  and  the  men
had  to  return  to  their  farms  and  their  cattle.
Thus  David,  having  used  some  of  that  large
concourse  of  strong  men  for  the  capture  of
Jerusalem,  was  left  immediately  afterwards


lis


TfiM  SilCONt)  BOOK  OS*  SAMtffiL.


[Oft.  V,  1—25.


with  no  other  protection  than  that  of  his
"mighty  men."  Saul  had  endeavoured  to
have  always  round  him  three  thousand
trained  men  (I  Sam.  xiii.  2),  and  David  sub-
sequently had  probably  quite  as  many  (eh.
XV.  18);  but  at  this  early  stage  he  had
probably  not  many  more  than  he  had
brought  with  him  from  Ziklag  to  Hebron,
He  could  not,  therefore,  make  head  against
the  Philistines  coming  with  all  the  militia
of  their  land ;  but,  leaving  his  wives  and
the  wives  of  Ms  mighty  men  in  the  Jebusite
stronghold  of  Jerusalem,  we  may  well  believe
that  he  sped  away  to  gather  the  warriors  of
Israel.  But  what  seems  strange  is  that  he
biiould  have  gone  to  the  rear  of  the  Philis-
tines, especially  as  they  had  come  in  such
vast  numbers  as  to  occupy  the  whole  coun-
try— a  garrison,  for  instance,  being  posted
at  Bethlehem,  and  doubtless  at  other  fit
spots.  Still,  this  country  was  well  known  to
David,  and  he  could  gather  there  old  friends,
whose  bravery  he  had  often  tried  before.
And  while  thus  waiting  for  the  mustering  of
such  as  God  would  move  to  help  him,  in
deep  distress  at  so  terrible  a  reversal  fol-
lowing 80  quickly  upon  his  exaltation,  a
strange  longing  for  water  from  the  well  of
his  native  town  seized  him.  He  was  suffer-
ing apparently  from  fever,  of  body  as  well
as  from  distress  of  mind,  and  soon  there  was
relief  from  both.  For  three  of  his  heroes
heard  the  words  burst  from  his  parched
lips,  and,  hastening  to  Bethlehem,  broke
through  the  Philistine  garrison,  and  filled
a  waterskin  from  the  well  at  the  gate  of
the  city.  Such  an  act  naturally  made
a  great  impression  upon  David.  What
room  was  there  for  despair  when  he  had
such  men  around  him?  Pouring  out,
then,  the  water  as  a  drink  ofiering  to  Je-
hovah, his  heart  was  now  filled  with  hope,
and  inquiring  of  the  Lord  whether  he
might  attack  the  Philistines,  he  received
the  assurance  which  he  had  already  ga-
thered from  the  exploit  of  his  heroes,  that
God  would  deliver  them  into  his  hand.

Ver.  18.— The  valley  of  Eephaim.  This
fruitful  valley  (Isa.  xvii.  5)  is  about  three
miles  in  length,  and  two  in  breadth.  Occu-
pying it  in  vast  numbers,  the  Philistines
sent  out  bodies  of  men  to  plunder  the  whole
country,  while  a  sufficient  force  watched
Jerusalem,  intending  to  take  it  by  famine.
The  Eephaim  were  an  aboriginal  race,  first
ig^entioned  in  Gen.  xiv.  5,  and  evidently  in
ea'rly  times  very  widely  spread  in  Palestine.
The  idea  that  they  were  giants  has  no  more
to  be  said  in  its  favour  than  that  they  were
ghosts — the  meaning  of  the  word  in  Isa.  xxvi.
14,  19.  No  sensible  fihilologist  will  endea-
vour to  explain  the  names  of  these  primitive
races  and  of  their  towns  by  Hebrew  roots,
though  there  has  been  too  much  of  this


craze  in  past  times.  The  Eephaim  seem,
however,  to  have  been  physically  a  well-
developed  people,  and  several  races  of
Canaan  of  great  stature  are  described  in
Deut.  ii.  11  as  having  belonged  to  them,  as
did  Og,  who  was  a  man  of  extraordinary
dimensions  (Deut.  iii.  11).

Ver.  20. — Baal-Ferazim ;  literally,  pos-
sessor  of  breaches,  that  is,  the  place  where
the  attack  burst  forth.  It  is  called  Mount
Perazim,  "the  hill  of  breaches,"  in  Ps.
xxviii.  21,  and  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  the
rooky  height  on  the  north  of  the  valley  of
Eephaim.  David  must,  therefore,  have  stolen
round  the  army  of  the  Philistines,  creeping,
probably  by  night,  i^p  to  this  ridge  of  Ben-
Hinnom,  and  thence  at  the  dawn  of  day
have  rushed  down  upon  the  camp.  And
his  onset  was  sudden  and  irresistible,  like
the  rush  of  the  waters  of  some  mountain
lake  when,  swollen  with  rains,  it  bursts
through  the  opposing  dam,  and  carries  hasty
destruction  to  everything  that  lies  in  its
way.

Ver.  21. — They  left  their  images.  This
is  a  fiuther  proof  of  the  suddenness  of  the
attack,  and  the  completeness  of  the  Philis-
tine discomfiture.  For  images  we  find
"gods"  in  the  parallel  place  in  1  Chron.
xiv.  12,  and  the  word  used  here  is  rendered
"idols"  in  1  Sam.  xxxi.  9.  As  the  Philis-
tines supposed  that  these  images  of  their
deities  would  ensure  their  victory,  they
would  set  great  store  by  them,  as  the  Israel-
ites did  by  the  ark  (1  Sam.  iv.  4),  and  the
French  by  the  oriflamme.  Their  capture,
therefore,  was  a  feat  as  great  as  the  winning
of  the  eagle  of  a  Boman  legion.  David  and
his  men  burned  them ;  Hebrew,  took  them
away.  This  translation  of  the  Authorized
Version,  made  to  force  the  words  into  verbal
agreement  with  1  Chron.  xiv.,  12,  is  utterly
indefensible ;  and,  like  most  wrong  things,
it  is  absurd.  The  Bible  cannot  be  improved
by  frauds,  and  really  the  two  narratives
complete  one  another.  David  and  his  men
carried  off  these  images  as  trophies,  just  as
the  Philistines  carried  off  the  ark  (1  Sam.
iv.  11).  But  the  ark  proved  mightier  than
the  Philistine  gods,  and  in  terror  the  people
restored  it  to  Israel.  But  no  avenging  hand
interfered  to  rescue  these  gods,  and,  afbtr
being  paraded  in  triumph,  they  were  made
into  a  bonfire.

Ver.  22. — The  Philistines  came  up  yet
again.  Their  first  defeat  had  probably  not
been  accompanied  by  much  slaughter;  for
David's  men  were;  few  in  number,  though
brave  as  lions.  Eetreating  then  to  some
distance,  the  Philistines  called  in  their
garrisons,  and  waited  also  for  reinforcements
from  home,  and  then  advanced  again  to  the
same  spot.  And  as  David  was  prepared
to  attack  them  in  front,  be  also  must  now


oa.  V.  1—25.]


TfiE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


119


have  gathered  round  him  the  chivalry  of
Israel.

Ver.  23. — Thou  shalt  not  go  up.  The
attack  in  front  ia  forbidden,  and  the  anawer
shows  that  the  priest  with  the  ephod  did
more  than  give  a  mere  affirmative  or  nega-
tive reply.  For  David  receives  full  instruc-
tions. Taking  advantage  of  the  valleys,  he
is  to  creep  round  into  the  rear  of  the  Philis-
tines, and  approach  them  under  cover  of
a  thicket  of  baca  trees.  Uulberry  trees;
Hebrew,  baco  treei.  This  suggests  the  idea
that  David's  place  of  attack  was  the  Baca
valley  (Ps.  Ixxziv.  6),  and  that  there  was
such  a  valley,  though  this  is  not  certain.
For  the  Revised  Version  translates  "  valley  of
weeping,"  concluding  that  baca  is  not  there
a  proper  name.  By  baca  trees  the  LXX.
and  Vulgate  understand  "pear  trees,"  but
as  iacah  means  "to  weep,"  it  is  probably
some  balsamic  slirub,  from  which  a  resin
exudes.  The  Bevised  Version  puts  here  in
the  margin,  "  balsam  trees."  Dr.  Tristram
thinks  it  was  a  sort  of  aspen,  but  the  autho-
rity of  the  Vulgate  is  great  in  such  matters,
as  Jerome  obtained  his  infoimatioa  in
Palestine  itself.

Ver.  24. — The  sound  of  a  going ;  Hebrew,
a  marching.  Under  the  cover  of  this  thicket
David  was  to  wait  until  he  heard  the  sound
Kg  of  the  regular  tramp  of  an  army  in  the
tops  of  the  baca  trees.  It  would  be  in  the
morning  that  the  wind  would  shake  the  tree-
tops,  but  the  sound  was  to  be  something
more  than  the  soft  wliispera  of  u  gentle
breeze.  A  gale  was  to  put  them  into  sudden
motion,  and  then  the  soldiers  would  know
that  their  Jehovah  had  gone  forth  to  battle,
and  David  must  immediately  bestir  himself.
The  enthusiasm  of  his  men  must  not  cool
down,  but  as  soon  as  the  wind  rustled  he
must  charge  the  enemy,  and  his  warriors,
feeling  that  they  were  going  with  the  host
of  God,  would  break  down  all  resistance  by
their  impetuous  onset.

Ver.  25. — From  6eba  until  thou  come  to
Gazer.  In  1  Chron.  xiv.  16  "  Gibeon  "  is  sub-
stituted for  "  Geba,"  and  it  is  one  of  those
corrections  which  a  commentator  is  inclined
to  adopt,  because  it  makes  all  things  easy.


For  Gibeon  lay  directly  on  the  road  from  the
Bephaim  valley  towards  Gazer,  and  the
armies  must  have  passed  it  in  the  fight.
But  if  "Geba"  be  the  right  reading  here,
then  the  battle  must  have  been  most
sternly  contested.  For  it  ia  the  "  Gibeah  of
Benjamin,"  Hebrew,  "  Geba  of  Benjamin,"
described  in  1  Sam.  xiii.  16.  The  Pliilis-
tines  had  a  garaison  there  in  Saul's  time  (1
Sam.  xiii.  3),  and  had  probably  again  oc-
cupied it  as  a  military  post  after  their
victory  at  Gilboa.  To  reach  it  the  line  of
retreat  would  go  nine  miles  northward  ovtr
difficult  ground;  but  this  was  not  disadvan-
tageous to  a  retreating  army  as  long  as
it  remained  unbroken,  and  the  Philistines
would  expect  to  be  able  to  make  a  successful
defence  at  a  strong  citadel  like  Geba,  held
by  a  garrison  of  their  own  troops.  But  when
driven  by  David's  "mighty  men"  from  this
fortified  hill,  being  hemmed  in  by  the  defile
of  Michmash  on  the  east,  they  would  have  no
choice  but  to  hurry  down  the  valleys  to  the
west,  and,  still  passing  by  Gibeon,  so  flee  to
Gazer.  Thus  the  reading  "Geba"  implies
a  stout  and  long  resistance  ending  in  a  most
complete  victory.  And  confessedly  this  was
a  decisive  battle,  fought  with  larger  forces,
and  causing  far  larger  loss  to  the  Philistines
than  that  at  Baal-Perazim,  where,  attacked
by  only  a  few  men,  they  were  seized  with
panic,  and  saved  themselves  by  a  head-
long flight.  Gazer  lay  upon  the  border  of
Ephraim,  and  was  one  of  the  royal  cities  Of
the  Canaanites,  and  so  strong  that  it  was
left  in  the  hands  of  its  old  possessors  (Josh,
ivi.  3,  10;  Judg.  i.  19).  Subsequently
Solomon  fortified  it  (I  Kings  ix.  17),  as
being  the  key  of  the  defiles  which  led
from  Ekron  and  the  plain  of  Pbilistia  up
to  Jerusalem.  We  also  find  it  mentioned  as
an  important  military  post  in  the  days  of
the  Maccabees  (1  Macc.'ix.  52).  The  pursuit
would  naturally  stop  here,  as  the  fugitives
would  now  be  in  their  own  country,  and
succour  would  be  close  at  hand.  Probably,
too,  the  Canaanites  who  held  the  fortress
were  friendly  to  them,  and  gave  them
shelter.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  facts  are :  1.  The  tribes  of  Israel  come  to  Hebron  to  formally
acknowledge  David  as  rightful  king.  2.  They  assign  three  reasons  for  their  united
action.  (1)  That  David  was  of  their  kindred.  (2)  That  he  had  rendered  valuable
services  in  times  of  need.  (3)  'Phat  God  had  expressed  his  wiU.  3.  A  solemn  league
being  made  between  David  and  the  tribes,  they  anoint  him  king  over  Israel.  4.  The
question  of  the  crown  being  settled,  David  applies  himself  to  the  acquisition  of
Jerusalem  as  the  seat  of  government.  5.  Being  proudly  defied  by  the  Jebusites,  on
account  of  the  strength  of  their  position,  he  cliallenges  his  ofScers  to  take  the  lead  in
the  Bubjugation  of  the  fortress,    6.  Acquiring  possession,  he  calls  the  place  after  his


120  THE  SECOND  feOOK  OE  SAMUEL.  [ca.y.l—^B.

name,  and  extends  the  fortifications.    7.  The  continued  favour  of  God  ensures  to  him
great  prosperity.

2%e  triumph  of  patient  fidelity.  The  first  three  verses  bring  into  view  the  realization
of  David's  most  cherished  desires,  the  ripe  consummation  of  all  his  wearying  toils  and
cares.  The  goal  on  which  Samuel  had  directed  his  eye  (1  Sam.  x.  1 ;  xvi.  1 — 13)  was  now
attained.  The  wisdom  of  his  self-restraint  when  persecuted,  and  of  his  trusting  more
to  Divine  care  than  to  human  weapons,  was  now  fully  justified.  The  historian  places
together  the  human  popular  view  of  the  situation,  and  the  Divine  purpose  that  had  to
he  effected.  The  being  bone  of  their  bone,  and  the  great  services  rendered  to  Israel  in
days  of  trial,  were  the  natural  and  political  facts  which  warranted  the  great  gathering
at  Hebron  on  that  day ;  and  the  treasured-up  saying  of  the  Lord  that  this  very  man
should  feed  his  people  and  be  their  captain,  was  the  Divine  declaration  now  seen  by
them  to  harmonize  with  the  natural  and  political  facts.  There  is  here  the  language
of  expediency,  and  a  kind  of  apology  for  past  opposition  to  David;  for  the  fact  that
God  had  so  spoken  ought  from  thefirst  to  have  prevented  all  controversy  and  rendered
the  nation  one  in  enthusiasm  for  the  divinely  chosen  man.  The  acceptance  of  the
authority  of  the  declaration  is  not  absolute,  but  because  .they  now  see  what  they  pro-
fess not  hitherto  to  have  seen — that  by  nature  and  services  he  is  fit  to  be  the  shepherd
and  captain  of  Israel.

I.  God's  appointments  abe  based  on  natural  principles.  The  selection  of
David  out  of  the  sons  of  Jesse  was  not  a  mere  arbitrary  act  warranted  by  no  considera-
tions of  propriety  and  fitness.  He  was  the  best  of  the  family  and  of  the  nation  for  the
specific  purpose  to  be  wrought  out.  His  qualities  were  not  bestowed  after  the  call  to
the  position — though  grace  would  abound  for  development  of  what  was  already  pos-
sessed ;  they  were  in  him  by  nature.  God  uses  up  what  he  has  prepared  in  the  work-
ing out  of  ordinary  natural  processes.  Wher,  the  people  said,  "  We  are  thy  bone  and
thy  flesh,"  they  were  referring  to  one  prominent  instance  of  natural  fitness  for  the
position  of  authority  then  assigned  to  David ;  his  common  kinship  with  them  would
ensure  the  sympathy  which  ought  ever  to  exist  between  ruler  and  ruled.  The  Divine
appointment  rested,  among  ither  fitnesses,  on  this  natural  basis.  The  formal  fitness
lay  in  the  fact  of  kinship ,  but  God  saw  also  that  in  the  case  of  this  man  the  sympathies
natural  to  the  fact  of  kinship  were  exceptionally  strong  and  deep  and  broad.  There
was  also  a  Divine  recognition  of  those  other  natural  qualities  of  statesmanship  and
valour  and  generosity,  which  would  render  a  decree  that  he  should  be  king  but  the
formulation  of  a  natural  adaptation  plus  the  infofmation  to  men  that  the  Supreme
Being  will  so  regulate  affairs  that  this  natural  adaptation  shall  manifest  itself.  We
may  be  sure  that  the  same  holds  good  of  all  that  God  ordains.  He  uses  up  what  is
best  in  nature  for  the  ends  in  view.  Abraham  was  the  fittest  man  to  be  commissioned
to  found  a  family  through  which  Messiah  should  come.  The  choice  of  Moses  to  lei\d
the  people  out  of  Egypt,  and  administer  law  among  a  people  hitherto  without  law,  was
evidently  based  on  his  natural  and  acquired  qualities.  That  which  may  seem  to  be
an  exception  to  this  rule  is  no  exception,  namely,  the  appointment  of  plain  and
unlettered  men  to  first  establish  the  kingdom  of  Christ  «fter  his  ascension.  For  looking
at  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  kingdom,  that  it  is  diffused  by  the  spiritual  renovation
of  men  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  was  befitting  that  men  who  had  no  brilliant-
gifts  wherewith  to  dazzle  others,  and  so  induce  the  impression  that  the  new  cause  was
one  in  which  human  wisdom  prevailed,  should  become  the  channels  through  which  the
power  of  God  might  assert  itself  (1  Cor.  i.  23 — 31 ;  ii.  4,  5).  The  most  illustrious
instance  of  the  truth  before  us  is  that  in  the  case  of  our  Saviour.  By  condescending  to
become  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  made  like  unto  his  brethren,  there  is
laid  a  natural  fitness  for  his  becoming  the  Feeder  of  his  people  and  the  Captain  of  our
salvation.  The  sympathy  of  nature  thus  rendered  possible  sets  forth  the  wisdom
which  appointed  him  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.  History  reveals  no  exceptions  to
the  rule.

II.  The  evidenoe  to  men  or  Divine  appointment  will  lib  in  berviobs  aotuallt
RENDERED.  The  Original  Divine  appointment  of  David  was  prior  even  to  his  appearance
before  Goliath ;  for  God's  purposes  are  not  the  product  of  changes  in  time,  and  the
declaration  by  Samuel  to  David  was  only  for  his  guirlance  and  encouragement  in  riew


ott.  V.  1—25.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  12t

of  the  troubles  that  were  coming.  David  had  to  act  so  as  to  render  the  words  ol
Samuel  credible  to  the  people ;  he  had  to  make  his  "  calling  and  election  sure "  by
a  line  of  conduct  that  would  destroy  the  supposition  that  possibly  Samuel  the  prophet,
in  this  instance,  was  mistaking  the  surmisings  of  his  own  mind  for  the  purpose  of  God.
Those  long  years  from  the  day  he  left  the  sheepfold  to  the  death  of  Tshbosheth,  formed
the  period  in  which  he  was  to  bring  out  before  men  the  great  wisdom  of  God  in  his
selection.  As  the  other  Anointed  One  later  on  lived  among  men  in  such  a  way  as  to
show  to  them  that  he  was  from  the  Father,  that  he  had  a  work  to  do  for  the  people  of
God,  and  was,  in  fact,  appointed  to  be  the  Redeemer  of  the  race,  so  David  had  to
justify  all  that  Samuel  had  said,  and  all  that  was  implied  in  the  prior  Divine  choice.
It  is  a  noble  thing  when  a  man  believes  that  God  has  ordained  him  to  a  work  in  the
world,  and  strives  to  so  regulate  his  life  that  every  act  sliall  be  a  demonstration  of  the
wisdom  and  fitness  of  the  Divine  appointment.  How  David  did  this,  by  sympathy
with  all  classes,  by  carrying  on  his  heart  the  sorrows  of  his  people,  by  deeds  of  valour
which  broke  asunder  the  chains  of  Philistine  oppression,  by  gentle  forbearance  toward
those  who  sought  his  life,  by  abstention  from  pride  and  acts  of  violence  to  further  his
interests,  also  by  patient  trust  in  the  covenant-keeping  God  during  days  of  terribla
suflfering,  as  by  wise  administration  among  his  own  followers, — the  history  of  his
early  life  fully  records.  However  obstinate,  for  personal  and  political  reasons,  men
were  in  refusing  him  as  successor  to  Saul,  they  could  not  but  yield  at  last  to  the  force
of  evidence  that  he  was  the  man  for  the  position,  and  so  far  demonstrated  to  be  the
chosen  of  God.  By  a  similar  method,  Christ  is  creating  history  which  will  be  the
vindication  of  his  claim  to  be  Lord  of  all.  Likewise  the  Church,  as  the  body  of  Christ,
answers  to  her  calling  and  duty  only  so  far  as  she  does  deeds  and  manifests  a  spirit
that  will  furnish  unanswerable  evidence  of  the  Divinity  of  the  Christian  religion.
"  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  The  test  of  salt  lies  in  the  presence  of  its
peculiar  savour.

IIL  The  bbalization  of  Gob's  pubpos^  theouoh  tss  loyalty  of  his  servants
IS  ONLY  A  QUESTION  OF  TIME.  It  would  hav6  Seemed  that  when  Samuel  made  known
the  will  of  God  it  would  have  been  enough  at  once  to  have  secured  the  abdication  of
Saul  and  the  hearty  concurrence  of  the  chosen  race.  But  there  was  the  same  free  way
of  dealing  with  Divine  declarations,  the  same  perversity  of  understanding,  as  in  the
days  of  Christ ;  so  that  men  did  not  thoroughly  accept  and  act  upon  what  was  said.
Jonathan  and  a  few  elect  souls  read  aright  the  Divine  intent,  and  rejoiced  therein;  but
the  rest  found  reasons  for  doubt,  as  men  always  can  when  the  spirit  is  not  thoroughly
humble  and  devout.  Occasionally,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  Abner  (ch.  iiL  9, 10),
there  was  a  recognition  of  truth  generally  suppressed.  A  man  of  less  faith  than  David
would  have  despaired  of  witnessing  the  day  when  the  whole  nation  would,  by  a  solemn
act  of  coronation,  fall  in  with  the  purpose  of  God.  But  through  the  loyalty  of  David
and  the  few  devout  men  who  were  the  companions  of  his  heart,  the  issue  was  brought
to  pass.  It  was  not  a  question  of  truth  or  falsehood,  of  national  policy  or  individual
striving ;  the  word  of  God  had  gone  forth,  true  and  unchangeable,  that  so  it  was  to  be ;
whether  scheming  politicians  fell  in  with  it  or  not,  the  course  of  nature  was  the  course
of  God.  Time  would  prove  to  be  the  element  for  solving  all.  Faithfulness  to  God  has
the  power,  in  a  mysterious  way,  of  winning  over  the  forces  of  nature  and  society  to  its
side.  The  hour  came  when  all  Israel  simply  met  to  do  what  God  all  along  intended
should  be  done.  Herein  do  we  see,  on  a  small  scale,  what  is  yet  to  be  illustrated  on  the
grandest  scale.  It  is  a  question  of  time.  The  hour  is  coming  when  every  knee  shall
bow  to  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord,  and  every  tongue  confess  that  he  is  the  Christ,  to  the
glory  of  God  the  Father.  The  world  wiU  then  simply  recognize,  as  a  whole,  what  now
the  faithful  followers  of  Christ  know  to  be  true.  In  spiritual  things  the  world  does
not  acquire  truth ;  it  simply  comes  to  admit  to  be  true  what  Christ's  people  all  along
have  affirmed  is  true.    The  Church  is  not  outstripped ;  its  conclusions  are  accepted.

General  lessons.  1.  We  cannot  fully  estimate  the  cumulative  force  of  Christian
consistency  in  bringing  about  the  final  triumph  of  Christianity.  2,  There  is  a  parallel
between  our  modern  religious  conflicts  with  unbeUef  and  the  struggle  of  many  in
Israel  against  the  revealed  purpose  of  God,  and  we  may  rest  assured  that  the  truth
with  us,  long  resisted,  will  in  the  end  be  accepted.  3.  It  behoves  every  Church  and
private  Christian  to  consider  how  much  the  solution  of  our  modem  difficulties  4ep«nd»


m  f fiE  SfiCOKD  BOOK  OS*  SAMtJEU  [«=•  ▼•  1—25.


on  our  own  faithfulness  in  dtuly  life.    4.  It  is  helpful  to  the  observance  of  obligations
that  we  recognize  them  with  the  solemn  sanctions  of  religion,  "  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3).

The  acquisition  and  Tmilding-up  of  Zion.  This  narrative  exhibits  David  as  a  new
man — free  from  the  old  trials  and  embarrassments,  and  with  a  clear  course  before  him
to  raise  up  the  government  which  should  embody  the  religious  principles  of  the
theocracy,  and  be  prospective  of  a  grand  spiritual  development  in  the  distant  future.
As  one  relieved  from  great  cares  and  conscious  of  vast  unexpended  energy,  he  at  onco
applies  himself  to  the  adoption  of  the  means  which  at  that  stage  of  affairs  seemed  most
conducive  to  the  attainment  of  ulterior  issues.  The  principles  on  which  he  acted,
while  excellent  for  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  admit  of  a  wider  application  to
human  affairs,  and  with  this  in  view  we  may  indicate  the  wisdom  of  his  conduct  and
the  bearing  of  the  narrative  on  other  matters  by  a  succession  of  single  terms  suggestive
of  both  facts  and  principles.

I.  Initiation.  All  along,  even  in  exile,  David  had  learnt  to  regard  his  life  as  linked
m  the  providence  of  God  with  some  great  events  in  the  far-distant  future.  His  mission
to  the  world  and  his  own  nation  was  understood  to  be  the  raising  of  his  own  people  to
such  a  position  of  social  order  and  righteousness  as  should  fit  them  to  be  most  perfectly
instrumental  in  hastening  on  the  latter-day  glory.  Now  that  he  was  made  king,  and
had  the  confidence  of  the  people,  he  devises  those  initiatory  measures  which,  being  well
planned  and  executed,  will  render  the  attainment  of  remoter  ends  more  probable.  The
record  tells  us  of  the  facts,  and  we  have  to  fill  in  the  mental  processes  by  which  David
was  led  to  the  particular  course  recorded.  His  work  was  great,  far-reaching,  and,  full
of  energy  and  faith  and  confidence,  he  makes  a  beginning  in  the  work  of  consolidation
and  administration.  The  first  movement  was  horn  of  faith  in  his  call  to  service — faith
in  the  bearing  of  his  life's  work  on  the  destinies  of  men,  faith  in  the  existence  of  a
Divine  purpose  which  had  to  be  wrought  out  in  connection  with  the  chosen  race,  faith
in  the  value  of  human  labour  in  relation  to  Divine  purposes,  and  faith  in  the  presence
and  help  of  God  in  all  undertaken  in  his  service.  How  wisely  and  broadly  the  founda-
tion was  now  about  to  be  laid  we  may  notice  further  on ;  the  fact  here  to  be  noted  is
the  laying  of  a  foundation  in  deeds  for  subsequent  efforts.  All  wise  rulers  and  govern-
ments, when  entering  into  recognized  power,  take  initiatory  measures  as  their  wisdom
may  suggest.  The  first  stages  of  action  bear  an  important  relation  to  what  follows.
The  same  holds  good  of  other  departments  of  human  activity.  This  reminds  us  of
the  initiatory  work  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ;  how  his  life,  sufferings,  death,  and
resurrection  may  be  regarded  as  the  initiation  of  that  long  course  of  activity  by  which
the  king  in  Zion  will  wondrously  affect  the  destinies  of  the  world.  We  know  with
what  clear  prevision,  what  sense  of  being  sent  of  God,  what  faith  in  the  value  of
human  effort  and  in  the  presence  and  blessing  of  the  Eternal,  all  that  was  done  which
constituted  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord.  '

II.  Clearance.  In  making  a  survey  of  the  inheritance  into  which,  as  king,  he  had
come,  David  saw  that  the  presence  of  alien  Jebusites,  defiant  of  himself  and  worshippers
of  blind  and  lame  idols,  was  an  evil  which  ought  at  once  to  be  got  rid  of.  For  such
an  alien  element  to  occupy  a  stronghold  in  the  very  heart  of  the  country  was  a  most
galling  thought  to  one  intensely  patriotic  and  brave,  and  could  not  but  have  suggested
to  him  the  defective  courage  and  faith  of  his  ancestors  in  Israel,  who  allowed  such  a
thing  to  be  possible.  It  was  no  mere  love  of  fighting,  no  desire  to  create  a  diversion
on  acceding  to  power,  that  induced  him  to  challenge  his  best  men  to  seize  the  position ;
it  was  statesmanship,  regard  for  the  purity  of  the  national  life,  and  the  honour  of  him
who  originally  gave  the  land  to  Israel  for  an  inheritance.  The  people  of  God  must  be
separate  from  the  heathen.  Powers  of  darkness  must  not  dwell  in  the  land  of  light.
A  beautiful  example  this  to  aU  who  have  an  inheritance  to  hold  for  Christ.  Our  nature
is  a  h)ly  land,  in  which  he  alone  is  to  be  honoured,  and  it  is  a  prime  duty  that  we
take  strenuous  measures — call  upon  the  co-operation  of  our  best  powers — to  cast  out
the  evil  elements  from  the  centre  of  our  nature,  so  that  there  may  be  nothing  within  that '
defileth,  or  is  an  abomination,  or  that  maketh  a  lie.  The  work  may  be  diflScult,  the
forces  strong  and  defiant,  and  faint-hearted  rulers  may  suffer  the  evils  to  remain  from
sheer  lack  of  courage  and  confidence ;  but  their  removal  at  an  early  stage  of  life  is  a
condition  of  a  prosperous  government,  in  the  name  and  service  of  God,  of  the  powers


m.  V.  1-28J  f HE  geeONB  SOOK  0»  SAMtJEL  123

that  make  up  our  human  nature.  In  one  respect  also  ve  see  an  analogy  in  our  Lord's
work.  His  mission  in  its  widest  reach  is  to  gather  into  one  all  things  in  himself
(Eph.  L  10),  to  sway  a  blessed  sceptre  over  a  perfected  humanity,  to  maintain  a  kingdom
of  peace  and  righteousness  that  shall  never  end  (Ps.  Ixxii.) ;  and  his  first  work  on
ascending  the  throne  is  to  seek  the  casting  out  from  the  heart  and  life  of  humanity  of
the  alien  spirit,  the  Jebusite,  that  so  long  has  usurped  the  place  of  influence,  and  done
serious  injury  to  all.  The  work  is  now  going  on,  and  the  Jebusite  will  be  cast  down
from  his  stronghold,  and  the  entire  world  won  at  last  to  the  Prince  of  Peace.

III.  Construction.  In  reformation  and  restoration  there  is  a  negative  and  a  positive
side.  David  had  to  clear  out  the  foe  of  his  people,  and  so  secure  free  scope  fol:  their
activities  and  their  happiness.  But  a  positive  work  had  to  follow  the  removal  of  the
evil  forces.  Hence,  in  his  sagacity,  he  resolved  to  construct  on  the  site  cleared  of  the
alien  a  stronghold  that  should  serve  the  important  ends  of  commanding  the  entire
country  from  an  impregnable  position,  of  giving  local  prominence  to  his  seat  of  govern-
ment, and  of  facilitating  the  administration  of  affairs.  The  possession  of  Zion,  and  the
immediate  development  of  its  military  advantages,  were  positive  advances  in  the  rear-
ing of  the  stable  state  which  was  to  stand  out  so  markedly  in  contrast  with  the  disin-
tegration and  weakness  of  Saiil's  time.  True  wisdom  is  constructive.  Evil  is  destruc-
tive aud  disintegrating.  Men  prove  their  capacity  to  lead  and  govern  by  what  they
can  gradually  build  up.  The  aim  and  effort  of  David  all  through  his  reign  evidently
was  to  form  a  national  life  on  solid  foundations,  and  richly  developed  in  all  that  con-
stitutes true  greatness.  How  truly  typical  of  the  Son  of  David,  who,  by  supremely
wise  acts  in  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom,  laid  the  foundation  for  a  superstructure
of  human  good  which  is  ever  going  on  toward  perfection !  How  suggestive  of  the  true
wisdom  of  missionary  enterprise — laying  solid  foundations,  in  central  positions,  with  a
view  to  bless  whole  lands  with  the  peace  and  blessedness  of  the  gospel,  and  then
gradually  adding  to  the  first  work  by  positive  developments  of  the  same  stable  cha-
racter 1  Likewise  in  education  and  in  individual  self-culture  in  godliness,  construction
should  be  ever  aimed  at,  ever  going  on,  proceeding  upon  definite  solid  foundations  of
success,  laid  with  care  in  the  very  centre  of  the  heart  and  intellect.  Hereby  also  do
we  learn  the  extreme  importance  of  getting  supreme  mastery  of  those  powerful  central
forces  of  our  nature  which  are  to  the  details  and  outward  aspects  of  our  personal  life
what  the  stronghold  of  Jehus  was  to  the  varied  hills  and  valleys  of  the  land  of  Israel.

IV.  Inspiration.  The  step  taken  by  David  was  the  natural  outflow  of  his  own
enthusiasm.  The  force  was  latent  in  him,  and  now  came  the  occasion  for  its  manifes-
tation. It  was  a  new  thing  for  the  tribes  to  see  a  man  of  spirit,  conscious  of  a  high
destiny  to  work  out  and  urged,  as  by  a  Divine  inspiration,  to  dare  deeds  not  dreamt
of  for  many  generations  (Josh.  xv.  63;  Judg.  xix.  10t-12).  The  man  rose  with  his
position.  The  consciousness  of  new  and  heavy  responsibilities  developed  heroism.
Even  the  barbarous  occupants  of  the  stronghold  (ver.  8)  seemed  surprised  that  any  one
should  dream  of  touching  them.  The  strong  expression,  "hated  of  David's  soul,"  only
reveals  the  high  and  all-commanding  spirit  that  could  not  brook  the  defilement  of  the
holy  land  by  idolatrous  feet.  But  the  infection  of  an  enthusiastic  spirit  is  rapid,  and
this  action  of  the  king  at  once  raised  the  national  tone.  It  made  men  feel  that,  as  a
people,  they  were  entering  on  a  new  era ;  the  possibilities  of  a  great  future  opened  before
them;  an  ambition  of  a  lofty  kind  was  enkindled;  the  dismemberment  of  the  nation,
the  low  political  status  of  Saul's  time,  when  they  could  scarcely  hold  their  own  against
heathen  tribes,  must  cease  to  be  imagined,  and  the  great  ideas  of  Abraham  and  of  Moses
once  more  must  become  regnant  in  their  minds.  Possibly  on  that  day  of  coronation,
when  the  elders  of  the  tribes  would  come  into  close  conference  with  David,  he  would
speak  out  from  his  own  clearer  vision  of  their  function  in  the  world  as  the  people  of
God  and  his  own  strong  faith  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  so  that  the  deeds  on  Mount
Zion  would  illustrate  in  impressive  form  words  of  power  (Ps.  xL  9, 10).  Likewise  the
inspiration  given  to  the  Church  in  days  of  the  founding  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  has
raised  the  tone  and  put  a  strong  and  masterful  confidence  in  the  heart  of  man.  None
can  fully  estimate  the  widespread  and  mighty  influence  exerted  by  the  lofty  spirit  dis-
played by  our  Lord.  It  has  raised  new  hopes,  developed  a  bolder  courage,  fixed  men's
eyes  more  steadily  on  the  glorious  future,  and  produced  the  feeling  that  the  faithftd  are
engaged  in  an  enterprise  not  only  sanctioned  by  God,  but  pervaded. by  the  very  life-


124  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  v.  1-25,

giving  presence  of  the  Lord  of  all  power  and  glory.  In  so  far  as  we  each  enter  on  our
appointed  work  for  Christ  in  the  same  spirit,  we  carry  on  the  inspiration  and  swell  the
moral  forces  that  are  to  win  the  world  for  Gtd.

V.  Meuobieb.  David,  as  we  know  from  his  early  experience  and  from  the  Psalms,
was  a  man  of  much  meditation — one  who  was  well  versed  in  the  memorials  of  his
nation  and  deeply  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  devotion.  Was  it  nothing  to  him  that  the
seat  of  Melchizedek's  rcisn  as  King  of  Salem  was  possibly  this  spot  where  now  the
impious  Jebusites  dwelt?  Could  he  forget  that  here  it  was  Abraham  displayed  the
marvellous  faith  which,  more  than  anything,  won  fur  him  the  name  ever  to  be  cherished,
"father  of  the  faithful"?  It  was  creditable  to  his  religious  instincts  and  to  his
lagacity  that  one  of  the  first  acts  of  his  reign  was  to  recover  a  place  so  sacred  to  the
memory,  and  to  gather  the  associations  of  the  place  around  his  own  seat  of  government.
Piety,  poetry,  and  statesmanship  are  here  combined.  Great  and  hallowed  associations
tend  to  beget  corresponding  deeds ;  and  doubtless  it  was  with  the  fond  hope  that  as
king  he  might  still  further  consecrate  that  sacred  spot,  that  he  made  it  the  centre  of  his
administration.  History  tells  u?  how  age  after  age  memories  clustered  more  and  more
richly  and  often  sadly,  yet  instructively,  around  that  holy  hill,  until  the  name  of  Zion
has  become,  perhaps,  more  rich  in  pathetic  story  and  suggestive  splendour  and  bliss
than  any  word  in  human  language — next,  of  course,  to  the  one  "  Name  that  is  above
every  name."

"  Glorious  things  of  thee  are  spoken,
Zion,  city  of  oui  God ;
He  whose  Word  cannot  be  broken
Formed  thee  for  his  own  abode."

Vers.  11 — 25. — The  facts  are:  1.  The  King  of  Tyre,  being  friendly  with  David,
supplies  him  with  means  of  building  his  house  on  Mount  Zion.  2.  David  regards  the
varied  successes  of  his  enterprises  as  confirmation  of  his  belief  that  he  was  indeed
appointed  by  God  to  reign  over  Israel.  3.  He  establishes  a  court  on  a  larger  scale,  after
-Oriental  style.  4.  The  Philistines,  hearing  of  his  accession  to  the  throne,  prepare  for  an
attack  upon  him,  whereupon  he  seeks  guidance  of  God,  defeats  them  at  Baal-Perazim,
and  destroys  their  images.  5.  Subsequently  the  Philistines  come  to  a  second  attack,
but  on  inquiring  of  God,  David  is  not  allowed  to  assail  them  in  front.  6.  Adopting  the
strategy  reconunended  him,  David  secures  the  overthrow  of  the  enemy  unto  Gazer.

Divine  favour  vouchsafed  to  imperfect  men.  The  Bible  teaches  that  the  hearts  of
kings  and  people  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  and  that  he  turns  them  so  as  to  advance
the  great  purpose  he  is  working  out.  The  friendly  attitude  of  so  important  a  personage
as  Hiram  must  be  regarded  as  a  mark  of  God's  favour  to  David.  To  us  the  record  makes
clear  that  David  was  indeed  called  of  God,  and  had  the  special  help  of  the  Almighty,
and  yet  ver.  12  suggests  that  there  were  hours  when  he  himself  felt  the  need  of  con-
firmatory signs.  Some  of  the  Psalms  indicate  the  same.  He  is  here  represented  as
overcoming  any  doubts  and  fears  arising  from  his  own  deep  consciousness  of  moral
imperfection,  by  considering  the  unmistakable  blessings  wherewith  his  efforts  so  far
were  crowned.  It  was  all  of  the  Lord.  He  was  not  in  error  in  supposing  that  he  was
in  the  path  of  duty.  And  yet  the  very  next  verses  of  the  narrative  (vers.  13 — 16)  tell  us
of  a  weakness  in  David's  character — an  inferiority  to  much  that  later  on  was  attained  to
by  others — so  that  we  cannot  but  note  this  conjunction  of  great  and  manifold  favours
conferred  on  one  whose  standard  of  moral  and  social  life  was,  relatively  to  ours,  very
inferior.    To  the  right  understanding  of  this  we  have  to  observe —

I.  Domestic  relationships  are  matters  op  positive  enactment.  Moralists  dis-
tinguish rightly  between  obligations  moral  in  their  own  nature  and  obligations  created
by  precept.  Obviously  there  is  not  the  same  kind  of  obligation  for  a  man  to  have  only
one  wife  as  there  is  to  love  God  with  all  his  heart.  The  one  depends  on  considerations
subsequent  to  the  existence  of  more  than  one  person ;  the  other  holds  from  the  very
nature  of  the  feeling,  and  cannot  but  be  the  right  thing.  That  it  is  wisest,  best,  most
conducive  to  personal  moral  perfection  and  to  social  welfare  that  men  should  not  have
plurality  of  wives,  is  certain  ;  but  that  arises  from  the  constitution  of  society  and  the
partiouiar  purposes  God  intends  to  wcrk  out  by  means  of  the  domestic  institution,  and


OH.V.  1— 25.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  126

consequently  the  prohibition  to  have  more  than  one  wife  partates  of  the  nature  of  a
positive  precept.  Had  man  not  been  told  what  he  should  do,  he  would  not  have  felt
and  known  absolutely  that  only  one  wife  must  be  taken.  Had  he  not  been  told  what
he  should  do,  he  would  nevertheless  have  felt  and  known  that  to  love  not  God,  to  dis-
obey God,  to  prefer  vileness  to  purity,  was  wrong.  David,  left  to  himself,  would  see  evil
in  aversion  to  God,  but  he  would  not  so  distinctly  and  certainly  see  evil  in  having  many
wives.

II.  The  800IAL  conditions  of  life  in  ancient  times  were  inherited.  Inheri-
tance does  not  make  wrong  right,  but  being  over  a  long  series  of  generations  it  tends  to
prevent  those  who  are  the  subjects  of  it  from  seeing  the  evils  which  others  fresh  to  the
facts  might  soon  discover.  This  applies  especially  to  those  forms  of  evil  which  are  so
in  a  secondary  sense,  being  the  opposite  of  what  is  termed  good  by  positive  precept.
Polygamy  was  a  custom  very  ancient,  running  through  long  generations  of  good  men,
and  among  sheiks  and  heads  of  nations  it  became  one  of  the  marks  of  distinction  and
an  inevitable  appendage  of  wealth.  That,  of  course,  does  not  make  it  useful  or  morally
right,  but  it  accounts  for  good  men  adopting  it  with  as  little  compunction  of  conscience
as  others,  in  modern  times,  have  bought  and  sold  slaves,  or  sold  diink,  which  are  known
to  be  the  occasion  of  great  evils.

III.  The  means  op  eduoatino  men  to  more  pbefect  forms  of  social  life  are

GBADUAL    IN   OPERATION,   AND   THE   FORCE   OF   PRECEPTS   CONCERNINO  THEM   IS  NOT  AT

ONCE  RECOGNIZED.  No  doubt  mouogamy  was  the  will  of  God— the  common  law  from
the  beginning  (Matt.  xix.  4,  5).  The  subsequent  practice  of  polygamy  by  good  men
was  tolerated,  but  it  was  the  evident  design  of  the  Mosaic  regulations  to  moderate  and
minimize  it  (Deut.  xvii.  17 ;  Exod.  xxi.  10, 11 ;  Deut.  xxi.  1 1 — 17).  The  elevation  of  the
people  above  the  degrading  practice  was  a  slow  process,  and,  accordiuG;  to  the  Talmudists,
even  the  distinct  precept  (Deut.  xvii.  17)  was  understood  in  a  non-literal  sense.  It  is
possible,  therefore,  that  David,  inheriting  practices  straight  from  Abraham,  should  be
disposed  to  anticipate  the  Talmudic  interpretation,  and  understand  "  multiply  "  to  refer
to  an  "  inordinate  number,"  and  the  reason  assigned  to  be  a  matter  of  discretion.  The
same  difficulty  in  educating  men  to  rise  to  the  full  recognition,  in  social  relations,  of
some  of  our  Saviour's  precepts  set  forth  in  Matt.  v.  and  vi.,  is  obvious  to  us  even  now.
In  the  case  of  Oriental  polygamy  in  Old  Testament  times  the  difficulty  was  greater
from  the  circumstance  that  the  wife  in  chief  held  her  place,  and  others  improperly  called
in  English  "concubines"  were  secondary,  and  often  served  in  court  as  "  maids  of  honour  "
do  now.

IV.  It  is  THE  METHOD  OF  GoD  TO  WORK  BY  IMPERFECT  AGENTS  UP  TO  A  HIGHER  FORM

OF  LIFE.  All  things  in  the  earlier  stages  of  constrnctive  work  are  in  an  elementary
condition,  and  in  that  sense  inferior.  Out  of  the  elemental  forms  organisms  arise,  and
from  the  lower  organisms  higher  types  have  appeared.  Out  of  our  own  imperfect
mental  condition  there  arises,  by  use  of  that  imperfect  condition,  a  superior  form  of
mental  life.  The  same  holds  good  of  our  moral  habits.  By  use  of  the  weak  and
inferior,  with  a  tendency  upwards,  there  comes  to  pass  a  moral  elevation  that  can  never
descend  to  the  old  conditions  out  of  which  it  sprang.  Likewise,  in  constructing  a
perfect  human  society  on  the  purest  and  noblest  gospel  principles,  it  is  God's  way  to
use  men  as  he  finds  them,  with  their  inherited  notions  and  tendencies,  and  by  precept
•nd  inspiration  gradually  raise  them  above  themselves,  and  so  make  them  instruments
of  raising  others  to  a  higher  level  of  life.  Had  God  waited  till  men  became  as  clear  in
their  conceptions  of  social  proprieties  and  utilities  and  as  strong  in  purity  as  Christ,
nothing  would  have  been  done  for  the  world.  He  is  a  Father  who  pitieth  his  children.
He  remembereth  that  we  are  but  dust.  It  is,  therefore,  in  unison  with  general  prin-
ciples  of  government  that  David,  though  a  polygamist,  was  blessed,  and  for  the  same
reason  many  a  slave-owner's  life  has  been  attended  with  spiritual  blessing.  Were  it
not  so,  who  of  us  dare  hope  for  favour  ?

V.  The  BLESSING  of  God  is  restricted  by  ouk  imperfections.  Had  David  risen  to  the
dignity  of  true  monogamy,  and,  with  clear  vision  and  firm  spirit,  entered  on  a  domestio
life  in  keeping  with  gospel  principles,  he  would  doubtless  have  exerted  a  wider  and
more  powerful  spiritual  influence.  But  as  it  was,  the  kind  and  measure  of  prosperity
vouchsafed  to  him  were  proportionate  to  his  imperfect  domestic  life.  God's  blessing
is  only  restrained  by  the  channel  through  whjch  it  has  to  flow.    The  more  we  can


126  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [pa.  v.  1—^5

anticipate  the  more  holy  and  consecrated  and  enlightened  future  by  our  present  eleva*
tioD  of  life,  the  more  surely  will  the  blessiog  rest  on  us  and  our  deeds.  According  to
our  faith  and  love,  as  seea  in  perfect  conformity  of  feeling,  perception,  and  action  to
the  blessed  life  of  Christ,  so  may  we  expect  the  favour  and  blessing  of  God.

Genebal  lessons.  1.  It  becomes  us  every  now  and  then  to  make  careful  scrutiny
of  our  lives,  to  see  what  elements  there  are  in  them  derived  from  an  ungodly  inheritance
and  resting  on  mere  fashion  and  custom.  2.  The  best  light  by  which  we  may  discover
what  is  merely  traditional  and  perhaps  morally  defective  in  our  characters  is  that  derived
from  a  close  study  of  the  spirit  that  animated  our  Saviour  and  the  ideal  he  set  up  for
our  model.  3.  la  our  anxiety  to  know  whether  we  are  really  accepted  of  God  and  are
enjoying  his  favour,  we  may  safely  reckon  prosperity  in  our  calling,  if  only,  like  David,
we  are  conscious  of  going  forth  in  his  Name  and  not  for  personal  ends.  4.  We  may,
like  David,  after  seasons  of  long  trial  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  well  take  courage  when  the
tide  of  success  flows  freely  in,  and  should  be  careful  at  such  times  to  ascribe  all  to  God.
5.  We  see  how  the  essence  of  religion,  namely,  trust  in  God,  desire  to  know  and  do  his
will,  and  maintenance  of  righteousness  in  all  affairs  according  to  the  measure  of  light
obtained,  is  distinguishable  from  the  form  of  social  morality  which  custom  or  tradition
may  have  generated.

2%e  renunciation  of  human  strength  and  wisdom  he/ore  Ood.  The  historian  is  here
fragmentary  in  his  records.  Having  noted  David's  first  efforts  towards  consolidation
of  his  power  and  his  general  prosperity,  he  refers  to  the  troubles  that  arose  in  con-
sequence of  the  assaults  of  the  Philistines.  These  natural  enemies  of  Israel  had
doubtless  observed  with  satisfaction  the  gradual  decay  of  Israel's  power  during  the
reign  of  Saul,  and  probably  were  hopeful  that  the  threatened  civil  war  between  the
adherents  of  David  at  Hebron  and  the  friends  of  Ishbosheth  would  still  further  place
the  people  at  their  mercy.  The  seizure  of  Jehus  was,  however,  so  startling  an  event
as  to  awaken  the  fear  that  the  near  settlement  at  Hebron  and  removal  of  the  court  to
Jerusalem  might  be  the  beginning  of  trouble  for  themselves.  The  remembrance  of  the
prowess  of  David  in  years  gone  by  must  have  intensified  this  fear.  It  was  therefore
in  accordance  with  the  best  human  policy  that  they  should  bring  all  their  forces
together  and  seek  to  crush  him  by  a  single  blow.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  the
conduct  of  David  under  those  circumstances.

I.  The  strong  and  sagacious  man  seeks  the  ouidanoe  and  help  of  God.  Thai
David  was  a  man  of  courage,  brave,  hardy,  and  capable  of  great  endurance,  is  the  record
of  his  life.  Naturally  he  was  capable  of  great  things.  Also  his  whole  conduct  revealed
a  remarkable  sagacity,  such  as  fitted  him  for  military  leadership  and  statesmanship.
If  there  was  one  in  Israel  who,  reckoning  on  personsd  qualities  and  acquired  renown,
was  justified  in  facing  the  Philistines  in  sole  dependence  on  his  own  gifts,  David  was
the  man,  and  yet,  instead  of  that,  he  turns  at  once  to  his  God,  and  seeks  guidance  and
help  of  him.  This  was  not  an  act  of  superstition ;  not  the  result  of  sudden  change  of
character,  in  which  fear  took  the  place  of  courage  and  mental  confusion  the  place  of
calmnesri.  It  was  the  product  of  enlightened  piety — a  policy  of  profound  wisdonl,  a
sagacious  estimate  of  all  the  facts  and  probabilities  of  the  case.  He  was  the  servant
of  Jehovah,  bound  to  carry  out  his  purposes  and  cause  his  great  Name  to  be
reverenced  in  all  human  affairs.  Therefore  it  was  due  to  the  ever-present  and  ruling
Lord  to  honour  him  by  seeking  to  know  his  will  and  trusting  in  his  aid.  Past
successes  in  his  Name  suggested  the  same.  It  was  true  then  as  now  that  the  Eternal
Spirit  could  act  on  masses  of  men  and  their  leaders  so  as  to  change  the  course  of  events ;
and  for  aught  David  knew  to  the  contrary,  it  might  have  been  the  Divine  will  to  force
them  back  by  some  other  agency  than  by  his  arms.  Prudence,  reason,  piety,  all  sound
principles  and  sentiments,  concurred  in  renunciation  of  all  human  powers  before  the
Eternal,  that  his  power  might  be  manifest.  This  is  the  course  pursued  by  every  strong
and  wise  man  in  whom  piety  is  a  force.  The  Apostle  Paul  was  a  notable  instance  of
strong  will  and  great  general  ability  laid  prostrate  before  Christ,  that  his  power  might
work  through  human  channels  (2  Cor.  iv.  6,  7).  The  more  distinguished  the  rnan
in  natural  gifts  and  in  grace,  the  more  thoroughly  is  God  sought,  as  in  the  case  of
Augustine.  Men  of  strong  will  and  great  force  of  intellect  who  refuse  to  depend  on
God  are  not  strong  and  wise  all  round ;  they  are  morally  weak  and  spiritually  blind


OH.  V.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  127

The  more  perfectly  the  whole  man  is  developed  the  more  complete  will  be  the  turning
to  Ood  for  guidance  and  help.

II.  The  8TB0NQ  AND  SAGACIOUS  MAN  FOLTiOws  THE  LIGHT  oiVEN.  David  leamt  that
it  was  God's  will  that  the  national  foe  should  be  smitten,  not  by  pestilence  or  sudden
terror  subjectively  produced,  but  by  the  national  arm ;  and  in  the  two  cases  by  different
methods  of  procedure.  Whatever  was  the  method  of  learning  the  will  of  God,  and
whatever  degree  of  distinctness  the  revelation,  the  fact  to  be  noted  is  that  David  was
not  "disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision."  His  generalship  was  regulated  thereby.
We  have  no  Urim  to  consult,  no  high  priest  to  receive  special  communication  for
specific  emergencies ;  but  in  our  times  of  danger  to  business,  domestic  interests,  Church
affairs,  and  personal  religious  life — to  say  nothing  of  national  events — we  can  seek
God  by  prayer,  by  reading  his  will  in  the  pure  conscience,  in  the  steady  lines  of
providence,  and  in  the  principles  of  his  written  Word.  It  should  be  a  cardinal  truth
with  us  that  God  is  interested  in  our  affairs,  and  has  ways  of  making  himself  known
to  the  earnest  spirit.  Especially  does  it  behove  each  Christian  and  the  Church  as
a  body  to  seek  guidance  and  help  when  assaults  are  being  made  on  our  holy  faith,  and
the  enemy  threatens  to  deprive  us  of  our  goodly  heritage.  There  are  ways  and  methods
of  meeting  the  foe  which  God  can  reveal,  and  our  success  will  depend  on  the  care  with
which  we  adopt  the  methods  approved  of  God.  Infidelity  and  atheism  are  to  be
confronted  or  attacked  in  the  rear  on  principles  Divine,  not  on  maxims  of  human
expediency.

III.  The  8TBONO  and  saoaoious  man  is  willdjo  to  let  God  wobk,  so  that  the
HAND  op  man  shall  kot  BE  MOST  CONSPICUOUS.  David  acquiesced  in  the  front  attack
when  enjoined,  and  equally  in  the  restrained  action  of  himself  when  (vers.  23,  24)  an
unseen  influence  was  brought  to  bear  on  the  foe.  In  this  lies  the  beauty  of  true
godliness,  that  it  is  content,  when  God  wills  it,  that  man  should  not  be  seen  if  only  the
purposes  of  God  are  carried- through.  David  cared  not  for  military  distinction  if  the
finger  of  God  'could  only  be  seen.  His  strategy  in  this  case  was  Divine.  He  stood
aside  for  Providence  to  work  till  the  hour  for  human  action  arrived.  This  was  the
apostolic  spirit  in  the  early  days  of  Christianity,  based  in  its  exercise  on  the  truth  that
the  living  God  was  the  great  Worker  on  the  souls  of  men.  The  same  feeling  and
belief  should  ever  actuate  us  in  all  our  endeavours  to  subdue  enemies  to  the  cross.
We  are  only  instruments,  and  a  true  estimate  of  ourselves  will  lead  us  to  rejoice  in  our
being  counted  as  nothing  and  lost  sight  of  in  the  display  of  saving  power  straight  from
God.  Perhaps  there  is  less  success  because  we  want  to  appear  in  front  of  the
"mulberry  trees."

General  lessons.  1.  We  have  to  hold  our  own  heart  and  our  Church  life  against
the  inroads  of  our  natural  enemies,  "the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,"  and  the
remembrance  of  this  should  always  make  us  watchful.  2.  In  times  of  great  stress  in
this  conflict  we  should  make  special  requests  to  God,  and  not  simply  proceed  on  the
prestige  of  former  achievements.  3.  In  dealing  with  modern  forms  of  attack  on
Christianity,  we  have  need  to  ponder  well  tlie  methods  and  principles  of  procedure;
and  the  entire  Chmch  should  make  it  a  matter  of  special  thought  and  prayer.


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Yera.  1 3  (1  Chron.  xi.  1 — 3). — (Hebron.)     David  anointed  Mng  of  aU  Tsrael.

1.  About  twenty  years  had  elapsed  since  David  was  anointed  by  Samuel,  seven  years
and  a  half  since  he  was  anointed  King  of  .Tudah ;  and  at  length,  at  the  age  of  thirty-
seven,  his  faith  and  patience  were  rewarded,  every  obstacle  was  removed  out  of  his
path,  and  the  Divine  purpose  concerning  his  royal  destination  fulfilled.  "In  the
fulness  of  time,  at  the  right  moment,  in  perfect  vigour  of  mind  and  body,  he  grasped
the  supremacy  which  was  offered  to  him,  having  passed  through  every  outward  stage
of  power  and  honour,  and  every  inward  test  of  heavy  trial  and  varied  strife  "  (Ewald).

2.  His  anointing  (performed  by  prophet  or  priest)  took  place  at  the  instance  of  the
tlders  (ver.  3)  as  the  representatives  of  all  the  tribes  (ver.  1),  in  accordance  vfith  the
former  summons  of  Abner  (ch.  iii.  17, 19,  21),  and  doubtless  after  consultation  in  their
national  asseml./  (1  Sam.  viii.  4) ;  now  desirous  and  even  eager  (after  long  resistance)


128  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh,  v.  1—25,

to  accomplish  the  purpose  of  Otoi,  having  "  learnt  by  experience  "  the  kind  of  king
they  needed,  and  being  constrained  by  the  pressure  of  circumstances.  3.  "  By  his
anointing  by  Samuel  he  acquired yus  ad  regnum,  a  right  to  the  kingdom;  and  by  his
present  anointing  he  had  a  Jus  in  regno,  authority  over  the  kingdom  "  (A.  Clarke),  It
was  not  merely  a  designation,  but  an  inauguration  to  his  office;  a  recognition  and
acceptance  of  his  Divine  appointment,  as  well  as  a  symbol  of  his  Divine  endowment
vfith  all  needful  gifts  (see  1  Sam,  x.  1,  10;  xvi.  12) ;  and  it  distinguished  his  person  as
sacred  (1  Sam,  xxiv.  6 ;  zxvi.  11),  inasmuch  as  he  represented  the  authority  and  power
of  the  Divine  King  of  Israel.  His  anointing  for  the  third  time  uiarl;s  one  of  the
greatest  days  of  Israel's  history  (ch,  iL  4 ;  1  Sam.  ix,  28 ;  x.  24 ;  xi,  15) ;  and,  in  con-
nection with  it,  observe —

I.  The  reasons  absioked  by  the  eldebs  fob  theib  pboposal.  1,  His  personal
relationship.  "  Behold,  we  are  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh  "  (Gen,  xxix.  14),  expressive  of
their  claims  upon  him,  and  of  his  qualification  to  rule  over  them ;  to  understand  their
wants,  sympathize  with  their  aspirations,  and  promote  their  weljfare  (Deut.  xvii.  15).
"  The  elders  speak  as  if  they  had  not  been  very  sure  whether  they  were  to  regard
David  as  a  Hebrew,  or  as  a  naturalized  Philistine ;  but  now  their  doubts  are  gone,  they
dwell  on  his  blood-relationship  to  them  as  a  conclusive  evidence  that  he  would  be  out
and  out  a  Hebrew — that,  therefore,  he  was  worthy  of  the  Hebrew  crown  "  (Blaikie).
So  "  in  all  things  it  behoved  "  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  "  to  be  made  like  unto  his
brethren  "  (Heb,  ii.  17).  2,  His  proved  ability  and  eminent  services  (ver.  2),  indicative
of  his  proper  calling  and  the  general  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  (1  Sam.  xvi.  5) ;
"  the  bond  of  fellowship  and  love  which  had  bound  him  to  them,  even  under  Saul,  as
leader  in  their  military  undertakings."  3.  Eis  previous  designation.  "  According  to  the
word  of  the  Lord  by  Samuel"  (1  Chron.  xL  3);  making  it  their  duty  to  seek  his  leader-
ship as  weU  as  his  to  undertake  it.  "  Why  should  they  refer  to  Grod's  choice  of  David?
(1)  Because,  although  they  had  known  all  along  that  David  had  been  fore-appointed
to  the  throne,  they  had  yet  been  struggling  against  that  arrangement ;  and  so  it  was
fitting  now  that  they  should  express  their  repentance  and  declare  their  readiness  to
receive  him  in  Gk>d's  name,  and  as  from  God's  hand.  (2)  Because  they  wished  to
remind  him  and  themselves  that  the  royal  king  of  their  nation  was  Jehovah,  and  that
he  and  they  were  in  allegiance  to  him"  (W.  M.  Taylor).  He  did  not  "take  this
honour  imto  himself"  without  being  "called  of  God"  and  desired  by  the  people.  It
sought  him  rather  than  he  it.  And  the  grounds  of  his  acceptance  of  it  were  (as  is  not
always  the  case  with  those  who  assume  royal  office)  imselfish,  patriotic,  and  devout

II.  The  covenant  made  bt  the  kino  with  the  elders.  "And  King  David
made  a  covenant  with  [to]  them  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3).  This  covenant,  agreement,
or  promise  (whatever  may  have  been  its  precise  terms):  1.  Expressed  directly  and
chiefly  an  engagement,  on  his  part,  to  rule  over  them  according  to  the  Divine  will
(Deut.  xvii.  16 — 20;  1  Sam.  x.  25).  He  was  by  no  means  to  be  an  absolute  and
irresponsible  monarch,  or  "  a  king  ruling  arbitrarily  as  in  heathen  kingdoms,  where  at
most  a  few  nobles,  the  populace,  or  an  imperfect  oracular  system  limited  his  power  ; "
but  to  be  subject  to  the  Law  and  to  the  voice  of  prophecy.  2,  Involved  the  obligation,
on  their  part,  to  obey  him  according  to  the  same  will  (ch.  iii.  21).  "  The  Law  of  God
was  the  rule  and  square  of  his  government,  whereunto  both  prince  and  people  are
sworn;  which  was  a  bridle  against  his  absolute  power  or  their  rebellious  manners"
(Guild).  3.  Was  ratified  in  the  most  solemn  manner — "  in  a  form  in  which  the  theocratic
principle  is  distinctly  recognized."  "Tlie  end  and  cause  why  Grd  imprints  in  the
weak  and  feeble  flesh  of  man  the  image  of  his  own  power  and  majesty  is  not  to  puff
up  fleb'h  in  the  opinion  of  itself;  neither  yet  that  he  that  is  exalted  above  others  should
be  lifted  up  by  presumption  and  pride,  and  so  despise  others;  but  that  he  should
consider  he  is  appointed  lieutenant  of  One  whose  eyes  continually  watch  upon  him  and
see  and  examine  how  he  behaves  himself  in  his  office  "  (John  Knox).

III.  The  spirit  displayed  by  the  people,  not  only  by  the  presence  of  the  elders
but  klso  by  that  of  the  armed  hosts,  the  flower  of  the  nation,  who  marched  to  Hebron
from  all  parts  of  the  country,  numbering  (in  addition  to  his  "  mighty  men,"  1  Chron.
xi.  10— -47;  ch.  xxiii.  8 — 39  ;  and  those  who  had  come  to  him  during  his  exUe,  1  Chron,
xii.  1—22)  339,600,  with  two  hundred  chiefs  of  Issachar  "and  all  their  brethren,"
one  thousand  chief*  of  Naphtali,  and  Zadok  and  twenty-two  chiefs  (1  Chron,  xii.


CH.  V.  1—25.]  THE   SECOi-TD  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  12»

23 — 40).  "  All  these  men  of  war  that  could  keep  rank  came  with  a  perfect  heart
to  Hebron,  to  make  David  king  over  all  Israel ;  and  all  the  rest  also  of  Israel  were
of  one  heart  to  make  David  king."  1.  Yolwitary  suhmisaion.  "  Thy  people  shall
be  williaf!  in  the  day  of  thy  power  "  (Ps.  ex.  3\  2.  National  unanimity ;  such  as  is
celebrated  in  Ps.  cxxxiii.  (written  subsequently),  '  Brotherly  love ' —

"  Behold  1  how  good  and  lovely  it  is
That  (those  who  are)  brethren  should  also  dwell  together ! "

3.  Enthusiastic  deuotion.  "And  there  they  were  with  David  three  days,  eating  and
drinking ;  for  their  brethren  had  prepared  for  them,"  etc.  4.  Abounding  Joy.  "For
there  was  joy  in  Israel."  This  "  gathering  of  the  people  "  (Groii.  xlix.  10)  was  a  most
memorable  one  (vers.  4,  6).  In  it  the  good  hidden  in  their  reprehensible  desire  for
a  king  (1  Sam.  viii.  4 — 22)  becomes  apparent ;  we  see  the  fruit  of  past  labour,  conflict,
chastisement,  and  the  seeds  of  future  enterprise,  success,  advancement.  "  The
kingship,  as  administered  by  David,  appears  neither  as  a  necessary  evil  nor  an
improved  constitution,  but  as  a  new  ethic  potency  "  (Oehler,  '  Theology  of  the  Old
Testament,'  sec.  165).,  "His  career  constitutes  the  culmination  of  that  general
advancement  towards  which  the  people  of  Israel  had  been*  aspiring  with  increasing
energy  for  more  than  a  century  "  (Bwald). — D.

Vers.  2, 10,  12  (l.Ohron.  xi.  2,  9;  xiv.  2). — (Hebbon.)  The  shepherd-king.  This
is  the  first  occasion  on  which  we  find  the  occupation  of  a  shepherd  made  use  of  to
describe  the  office  of  a  king.  Jacob,  who  had  "fed  Laban's  flocks,"  spoke  of  "the
Shepherd,  the  Stone  of  Israel"  (Gen.  xlix.  24;  xlviii.  15);  Moses,  who  had  "kept  the
flock  of  Jethro,"  prayed  that  Jehovah  would  "  set  a  man  over  the  congregation  "  as
his  Buccessor,  so  that  they  might  not  be  "  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd  "  (Numb,  xxvii.
7);  here  the  elders  declare  that  Jehovah  said  (through  Bamnel)  to  David,  who  "fed
his  father's  sheep  at  Bethlehem,"  concerning  his  royal  destination,  "  Thou  shalt  feed
\raah,  equivalent  to  'tend,'  'act  as  shepherd  towards']  my  people  Israel"  (ch,  vii.  7;
Ps.  Ixxviii.  70—72;  Isa.  xliv.  28 ;  Jer.  xxiii. ;  1.  5;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  1,  23 ;  Micah  v.  4;
Zech.  xiiL  7,  etc.).  "  The  business  of  a  shepherd  is  a  preparation  for  the  office  of  a  king
to  any  one  who  is  destined  to  preside  over  that  most  manageable  of  all  flocks,  man-
kind ;  for  which  reason  kings  are  called  shepherds  of  their  people,  not  by  way  of  reproach,
but  as  a  most  especial  and  pre-eminent  honour  "  (Philo, '  Life  of  Moses ').  "  Shepherds
are  not  owners  of  the  sheep  j  but  their  office  is  to  feed  and  govern :  no  more  are  kings
proprietaries  or  owners  of  the  people.  '  The  nations,'  as  the  Scriptures  saith,  are  '  his
inheritance ; '  but  the  office  of  kings  is  to  govern,  maintain,  and  protect  people.  And
that  is  not  without  a  mystery  that  the  first  king  that  was  instituted  by  God,  David
(for  Saul  was  but  an  untimely  fruit),  was  translated  from  a  shepherd"  (Bacon).  What
was  said  to  David  applies  to  every  king,  ruler,  magistrate,  master,  in  the  sphere  over
which  he  has  legitimate  authority.    Consider —

I.  The  Divine  idea  of  his  office.  It  is  an  office  in  which  authority  and  power :
1.  'Are  entitisted  by  the  ordination  of  Ood,  the  Proprietor,  Ruler,  Chief  Shepherd  of  the
people ;  not  self-derived  nor  unlimited ;  yet  investing  every  under-shepherd  with
dignity.  2.  Should  be  exercised  according  to  the  will  of  Ood  (Ps.  ci.),  in  aifectionate
interest  in  the  people ;  intimate  acquaintance  with  them,  guiding  them,  providing  for
them,  defending  them,  restoring  them,  and,  generally,  seeking  their  welfare  with
diligence,  considerateness,  tenderness,  patience,  self-denial,  and  self-sacrifice.  "  Chrysos-
tom  virriteth  that  the  shepherds  in  Cappadocia  have  such  love  unto  their  flock,  that
sometimes  for  three  days  together,  in  following  them,  they  are  overwhelmed  with  snow,
and  yet  they  endure  it ;  and  in  Lydia,  how  far  they  travel  with  the  sheep  for  a  month
together  in  the  waste  deserts  and  parching  heat  of  the  sun ;  who  herein  do  teach  such
as°are  shepherds  of  men  that  they  should  even  not  spare  their  own  lives  for  the  common
good "  (Willet).  3.  Must  he  accounted  for,  as  to  their  use,  before  the  presence  of  Ood.
"  These  sheep,  what  have  they  done  ?  "  (ch.  xxiv.  17).  "  A  king  is  a  mortal  god  on  earth,
unto  whom  the  living  God  hath  lent  his  own  name  as  a  great  honour ;  but  withal  told
Mm  he  should  die  like  a  man,  lest  he  should  be  proud  and  flatter  himself  that  God  hath
with  his  name  imparted  unto  him  his  nature  also  "  (Bacon).

il.  The  Divine  soubue  of  uib  prosperity.    "And  David  went  on  going  and

U.  BAUUEL.  S


130  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  t.  1—25.

growing"  after  the  conquest  of  the  stronghold  of  Zion,  etc.  (vers.  6 — 10),  which  he
achieved  as  captain,  "leader  and  commander  of  the  people"  (as  well  as  their  shepherd)
"  waxed  greater  and  greater  "  (ch.  vii.  9)  in  power  and  fame ;  "  and  Jehovah  the  God  of
hosts "  (1  Sam.  L  3)  "  was  with  him  "  (as  his  Shepherd,  Ps.  xxiii.  1,  and  Captain,  ch.
xxii.  35 — 37).  1.  Approving  of  the  manner  in  which  he  devoted  himself  to  his  >\cdUng.
Fidelity  is  the  necessary  condition  of  the  special  favomr  of  God ;  which  is  ever  testified
in  the  heart  and  conscience,  and  often  shown  hy  outward  events  (Gen.  xxx:x.  2,  21).
2.  Assisting  him  in  the  performance  of  the  duties  of  his  calling;  strengthening,
upholding,  directing,  protecting  him.  3.  Accomplishing  the  aim  of  his  endeavows  in
his  calling ;  for  no  skill  nor  effort,  vrithout  Divine  co-operation,  can  ensure  success.
"Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1).  While  God  was  with  him
(1  Sam.  x.  11)  Saul  prospered ;  when  left  to  himself  he  lost  his  kingdom  and  his  life.

III.  The  Divine  pubpobe  of  his  exaltation  aud  establishment  in  his  orrioB.
"And  David  perceived,"  from  the  friendly  aid  of  Hiram,  the  erection  of  his  palace
(ver.  11),  which  he  appears  to  have  regarded  as  a  pledge  of  the  stability  of  his  kingdom
(Ps.  XXX.,  inscription),  and  his  continued  prosperity,  "  that  Jehovah  -had  established
him,"  in  accordance  with  his  former  choice,  "  king  over  Israel,  and  that  he  had  exalted
his  kingdom  "  (1  Chron.  xiv.  2,  17)  "  for  his  people  Israel's  sake ; "  because  he  had
chosen  them  to  be  his  people,  "  the  sheep  of  his  pasture "  (Ps.  c.  3),  and  sought  their
prosperity  and  exaltation,  according  to  his  faithful  promises  (ch.  vii,  23)  that  through
them  all  nations  might  be  blessed,  and  the  whole  earth  filled  with  his  glory.  A  faithftil
servant  recognizes  in  his  successes :  1.  An  immediate  purpose  of  good  toward  himself;
beholding  therein  the  hand  of  God  and  "  the  kindness  and  truth "  by  which  it  is
directed ;  ascribing  his  prosperity,  not  to  himself,  but  to  the  Lord.  2,  An  ulterior  and
larger  purpose  of  good  toward  others,  for  whose  benefit  rather  than  his  own  he  ia
exalted  (ch.  vii.  8,  16).  3.  A  powerful  incentive  to  thankfulness,  hopefulness,  and  fresh
consecration  to  the  service  of  God  and  his  people.  "  It  was  the  successiveness,  the
continuity  of  the  steps,  in  his  history,  which  assured  him  that  Qoi'a  hand  had  been
directing  the  whole  of  it.  Had  David,  instead  of  maintaining  the  crown,  which
circumstances  pointed  out  to  him  as  his,  seized  violently  that  which  was  not  his,  he
would  not  have  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  made  him  King  of  Israel ;  he  would  have
felt  that  he  had  made  himself  so,  and  would  have  acted  upon  that  persuasion,  'i'he
government  which  a  man  wins  for  himself  he  uses  for  himself;  that  which  he  inwardly
and  practically  acknowledges  as  conferred  upon  him  by  a  righteous  Being  cannot  be
intended  for  himself.  And  thus  it  is  that  the  early  and  mysterious  teaching  of  David
while  he  was  in  the  sheepfold  bore  so  mightily  upon  his  life  after  he  beoams  king.  The
deepest  lesson  which  he  had  learnt  was  that  he  himself  was  under  government ;  that
his  heart  and  will  was  the  inmost  circle  of  that  authority  which  the  winds  and  the  sea,
the  moon  and  the  stars,  obeyed  "  (Maurice).

Bemares.  1.  The  lowliest  occupation  is  often  a  preparation  for  the  highest ;  and  he
who  shows  fidelity  in  the  least  is  rewarded  with  opportunity  for  its  exercise  in  the
greatest.  2.  The  possession  of  authority  and  power  severely  tests  men's  characters,
and  sometimes  proves  their  destruction.  3.  It  is  a  good  sign  when  one  who  is  exalted
shows  more  concern  about  performing  the  duties  than  enjoying  the  honours  of  his
position.  4.  God  sends  good  rulers  out  of  his- regard  for  the  welfare  of  the  people.
5.  The  best  rulers  are  those  who  sympathize  most  with  the  Divine  purposes,  and  most
humbly  and  faithfully  "  serve  their  generation."  6.  Even  the  best  are  imperfect,  and
often  fail  to  attain  their  loftiest  aims  or  fulfil  their  early  promise.  7.  In  One  alone  do
we  behold  the  perfect  Shepherd-King  (John  x.  14 ;  Heb.  xiii.  20 ;  1  Pet.  ▼.  4  j  Rev.
vii.  17).— D.

Vers.  6 — 9  (1  Chron.  xi.  4 — 9). — Jerusalem.  David's  first  act  after  his  anointing
amidst  the  assembled  tribes  (1  Chron.  xii.  38 — 40)  was  to  place  himself  at  the  head
of  his  army,  and  march  against  Jebus,  the  capital  of  the  Jebusites.  With  this  place
he  was  familiar  from  his  boyhood,  and  often,  perhaps,-wondered  why  it  was  sufiered  to
remain  so  long  unsubdued  (Josh.  i.  3,  4).  He  perceived  its  advantages  as  a  site  for  the
capital  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  necessity  of  its  reduction  in  order  to  the  establishment
and  extension  thereof.  His  enterprise,  whatever  may  have  been  its  immediate  cause,
was  completely  successful.    Henceforth  supreme  interest  centres  in  Zion,  the  city  of


OH.  T.  1—25.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  131

David,  Jerusalem  ("  foundation  of  peace  "),  beyond  any  other  city  mentioned  in  s»cred
history,  poetry,  or  prophecy.  "  Jerusalem  was  destined  to  become  the  seat  of  the
Hebrew  government,  and  the  scene  of  the  most  extraordinary  events,  and  more  strange
and  awful  vicissitudes,  than  any  other  city  of  the  universe,  not  excepting  Borne"
(Milman).     Note —

L  Its  peculiar  situation.  In  the  heart  of  the  country,  remote  from  the  great
roads  of  communication  with  the  East ;  on  a  mountainous  table-land,  and  entrenched
on  a  cluster  of  hills,  the  highest  of  which  was  crowned  with  the  stronghold,  rock-
fortress,  or  acropolis  of  Zion  (ver.  7);  on  the  border-line  between  Benjamin  and
Judah,  belonging  equally  to  both  parts  of  the  now  united  kingdom.  Its  selection  was
a  striking  proof  of  David's  military  ability  and  political  insight,  and  was  probably
determined  by  a  higher  wisdom  (Deut.  xii.  5 ;  2  Chron.  vL  6).  "  God  intended  not
Jerusalem  for  a  staple  of  trade,  but  for  a  royal  exchange  of  religion,  chiefly  holding
correspondency  with  heaven  itself,  daily  receiving  blessings  thence,  duly  returning
praises  thither ;  besides,  God  would  not  have  his  virgin  people  the  Jews  wooed  with,
much  less  wedded  to,  outlandish  fashions  "  (Thos.  Fuller).

II.  1t8  previous  histokt.  As  the  city  of  Melchizedek  (Gen.  xiv.  18 ;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  2  ;
Josephus,  'Wars,'  vi.  10),  traditions  of  whose  ancient  greatness  may  have  lingered
around  the  spot,  and  fired  the  poet's  imagination  (Ps.  ex.  4);  of  Adonizedec  the
Amorite  (Josh.  x.  1),  a  man  of  different  character,  like  Adonibezek  (Judg.  i.  7);
smitten  by  Judah,  occupied  by  Benjamin  conjointly  with  the  Jebusites  (not,  perhaps,
driven  out  of  their  citadel),  and  afterwards  entirely  by  the  latter  (Josh.  xv.  63 ;  Judg.
i.  8,  21 ;  iii.  5 — 7 ;  xix.  10 — 12).  "  Joshua,  and  Deborah,  and  Samuel,  and  Saul,  and
David  must  have  passed  and  repassed  the  hills,  and  gazed  on  the  tower  of  the  city,
unconscious  of  the  fate  reserved  for  her  in  all  subsequent  time  "  (Stanley, '  Sinai  and
Palestine ').

III.  Its  hbeoio  conquest.  David  found  little  resistance  in  taking  the  lower  city,  in
contrast  with  the  upper  city  or  citadel  (Josephus),  the  defenders  of  which,  relying
on  the  strength  of  their  position,  said,  derisively,  that  "blind  and  lame  "  were  sufficient
to  repel  his  attack.  Bi;t:  1.  Self-confidence  is  fraught  with,  danger.  (1  Sam.  xiv.  22.)
"  The  enemies  of  God's  people  are  often  very  confident  of  their  own  strength,  and  most
secure  when  their  day  to  fall  draws  nigh "  (Matthew  Henry).  2.  Scorn  is  a  spur  to
a  resolute  spirit.    "  And  David  said  on  that  day —

" '  Whoso  smiteth  a  Jebusite  (first).

Let  him  hurl  down  the  precipice  (watercourse)
Both  the  lame  and  blind,
Who  are  hateful  to  David's  soul.' "

And  "he  shall  be  chief  and  captain"  (1  Chron.  xi.  6).  3.  Great  inducements^  procure
great  achievements.  4.  The  prize  is  sometimes  won  hy  those  for  whom  it  is  least  intended.
"  So  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  went  first  up,  and  was  chief,"  his  power,  of  which  David
bitterly  complained  (ch.  iii.  39),  being  thereby  confirmed.  5.  The  language  of  con-
tempt comes  hack  on  those  who  employ  it,  to  their  lasting  humiliation.  It  became  a
proverb :  "  The  blind  and  lame  [ironically  applied  to  the  over-confident]  shall  not
come  into  the  house  [succeed  in  anything]."  6.  Severity  should  be  Joined  iuith  mercy.
Although  a  hard  fate  befell  some,  yet  most  of  the  Jebusite  inhabitants  were  incorporated
into  Israel  (Zech.  ix.  7),  and  one  of  them  (ch.  xxiv.  18)  dwelt  peacefully  on  an  adjacent
hill  (2  Chron.  iii.  1).  7.  One  victory  is  of  ten  followed  by  many.  The  capture  of  a  fortress
by  national  and  world-wide  consequences.

IV.  Its  permanent  occupation,  strengthening,  and  extension.  "A.nd  David
dwelt  in  the  stronghold  [of  Zion],  and  called  it  the  city  of  David"  (see  Conder, ' Handbook,'
p.  337).  "And  David  built  round  about  from  Millo  ['the  citadel,'  LXX.]  and  inward"
(ver.  9).  "  And  Joab  restored  the  rest  of  the  city  "  (1  Chron.  xi.  9J.  "  The  erection  of
the  new  capital  at  Jerusalem  introduces  us  to  a  new  era,  not  only  in  the  inward  hopes
of  the  prophet-king,  but  in  the  external  history  of  the  monarchy"  (Stanley,  'Jewish
Church;'  Bwald).  '  .      ,  ,.

V.  Its  theocratic  relation,  which  was  its  chief  distinction.  As  the  metropolis
of  the  chosen  people,  the  residence  of  the  Lord's  Anointed  (Messiah),  the  seat  of  govern-


132  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  v.  1—26


ment,  the  centre  of  religion  and  Divine  service,  the  source  of  far-reaching  iuflnence,  it
was  "  the  city  of  the  great  King  "  (Matt.  v.  35),  where  he  dwelt,  reigned,  manifested
his  glory,  and  "  commanded  his  blessing,  even  life  for  evermore."  So  Jerusalem  was
described  by  psalmists  and  prophets,  and  won  the  passionate  attachment  of  her  children,
in  which  love  of  country  and  home,  devotion  to  God,  and  hope  for  the  world  were
inseparably  blended.  "  GHorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  0  city  of  God"  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.
3;  xlviii. ;  cxxii. ;  cxxv.  1,  2;  cxxxvii.).

VI.  Its  EXTBAonDiNART  VICISSITUDES.  "In  the  fifteen  centuries  which  elapsed
between  those  two  points  (Jadg.  i.  8 ;  Luke  xxi.  20),  the  city  was  besieged  no  fewer
than  seventeen  times ;  twice  it  was  razed  to  the  ground ;  and  on  two  occasions  its  walls
were  levelled.  In  this  respect  it  stands  without  a  parallel  in  any  city,  ancient  or
modern "  (Smith's  '  Dictionary ').  What  a  scene  did  it  present  during  these  ages  of
military,  political,  religious  strife,  of  prophetic  activity  and  demoniacal  wickedness,  of
mercy  and  of  judgment  (Amos  iii.  2) !  With  its  rejection  of  "  the  Son  of  David  "  its
lingering  theocratic  glory  departed,  and  its  walls  became  a  desolate  heap.  "O
Jerusalem !  "  (Luke  xiii.  3i  ;  xx.  41 — ii).

VII.  Its  spiritual  forbshadowino.  "  In  the  progress  of  tiie  city  of  God  through
the  ages,  David  first  reigned  in  the  earthly  Jerusalem  as  a  shadow  of  that  which  was  to
come  (Augustine,  '  City  of  God,'  xvii.  14.  20)  ;  "  Mount  Zion,  the  city  of  the  living
God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem"  (Heb.  xii.  22);  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  which  Christ
is  King,  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  which  he  is  the  Head;  the  lofty,  free,
mother-city  of  us  all  (Gal.  iv.  25,  26) ;  "  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem  "  (Rev.  xxi.  1) ;
glorious,  unchanging,  everlasting  (Heb.  xi.  10;  xiii.  14).  "  0  holy  Zionl  where  all  ia
kbidiag,  and  nothing  passes  away ! "

"  O  happy  harbour  of  the  aalntg  1
0  sweet  and  pleasant  soil  I
In  thee  no  sonow  may  be  found.
No  grief,  no  care,  no  toil."

n.

Ver.  12  (1  Chron.  xiv.  1). — Hiram,  King  of  Tyre.  Hiram  wag  another  of  those
heathen  princes  with  whom  David  stood  in  friendly  relation  (Achish  of  Gath  ;  the  King
of  Moab,  1  Sam.  xxii.  3;  Talmai  of  Geshur,  ch.  iii.  3;  Toi,  or  Tou,  of  Hamath,  oh.
viii.  9;  Joram,  or  Hadoram,  his  son,  1  Chron.  xviii.  10;  Nahash,  the  Ammonite
king  of  Eabbali,  ch.  x.  1,  2;  Shobi,  his  son,  ch.  xvii.  27).  He  was  king  of  "the
strong  (fortified)  city.  Tyre  "  (Josh.  xix.  29) ;  chief  of  those  Phoenician  cities  "  whose
flag  waved  at  once  in  Britain  and  the  Indian  Ocean"  (Humboldt);  celebrated  alike  for
its  maritime  enterprise,  commercial  activity,  and  mechanical  arts  (Isa.  xxiii.  8 ;  Ezek.
xxvii.).  "  Hiram,  like  David,  had  just  established  his  throne  securely  upon  the  ruins
of  the  rule  of  the  shophetim,  or  judges,  and  raised  the  country  to  a  position  of  power
and  independence  which  it  had  not  previously  enjoyed"  (A.  S.  Wilkins,  'Phasnicia  and
Israel').  Notice:  1.  His  politiad  sagacity.  In  seeking  to  secuTe  a  "commercial
treaty  "  with  the  King  of  Israel,  by  means  of  which  his  people  might  receive  com,  oil,
etc.  (Acts  xii.  20),  in  exchange  for  manufactured  goods,  Tyrian  purple,  articles  of  tin
and  bronze,  weapons  of  war,  jewellery,  etc.,  and  might  not  be  prevented  from  continuing
their  commercial  pursuits  along  the  groat  caravan  lines  of  traffic  with  Egypt,  Arabia,
Babylon,  and  Assyria,  that  ran  through  the  country.  2.  Bis  peaceable  disposition.  In
Bending  "  messengers "  with  friendly  communications,  either  of  his  own  accord,  or  in
response  to  an  embassy.  "  How  little  David  resembled  the  later  Assyrian,  Chaldean,
and  Persian  disturbers  of  the  world  is  most  immediately  and  clearly  shown  by  the  fact
that  he  did  not,  like  these  great  conquerors,  seize  upon  the  Phoenician  maritime  towns,
but  always  remained  on  the  best  terms  with  the  little  Phoenician  states,  which  were
entirely  occnpied  in  commerce  and  the  productive  arts,  and  readily  sought  peace  with
him  "  (Ewald).  3.  His  generous  appreciation.  Without  jealousy  or  suspicion  of  David,
of  whom,  doubtless,  he  had  heard  much,  on  account  of  his  ability,  energy,  and  integrity,
confirmed  by  personal  intercourse.  "  God  knows  how  to  incline  toward  pious  rulers  the
minds  of  neighbouring  princes  and  kings,  that  they  may  show  them  all  friendly  good  will"
(Starke).  4.  Hit  valuabh  aisistauee.  With  "cedar  trees"  (from  Lebanon,  as  subsequently.


Ctt.t.  1— 2S.]  tfiE  SECOiSTD  BOOK  Of  SAMUEL.  133


1  Kings  v.),  "and  carpenters,  and  masons,"  in  building  a  "house  of  cedar"  (ch.  vii.  2;
vi.  16 ;  ix.  13  ;  xi.  2),  or  stately  palace  iu  Zion,  the  city  of  David ;  perhaps  in  erecting
and  adorning  other  nouses  in  the  city,  and  generally  promoting  the  arts  and  industries
of  Israel  (1  Ohron.  xxii.  2).  The  intercourse  thus  commenced  was  immensely  beneficial,
though  it  ultimately  proved  an  occasion  of  evil.  "  Many  have  excelled  in  arts  and
sciences  that  were  strangers  to  the  covenants  of  promise ;  yet  David's  house  was  never
the  worse  nor  the  less  fitting  to  be  dedicated  to  God  for  its  boiog  built  by  the  sons  of
the  stranger "  (Matthew  Henry).  -5.  His  steadfast  friendship  with  David  during  his
life,  afterwards  with  Solomon,  contributing  to  the  maintenance  of  peace  and  the  increase
of  prosperity  among  both  peoples.  "  Hiram  was  ever  a  lover  of  David  "  (1  Kings  v.  1).
6.  Sis  reverential  spirit.  "Blessed  be  Jehovah,"  etc.  (1  Kings  v.  7).  Without  entirely
renouncing  the  worship  of  "  the  Lord  Melkarth  [king  of  the  city],  Baal  of  Tyre,"  he  was
drawn  to  the  faith  of  Israel;  and,  to  that  extent,  represented  the  gathering  of  the
Gentiles  to  "  the  Desire  of  all  nations"  (Ps.  xlv.  12;  Matt.  xv.  27;  Acts  xxi.  3 — 6).
He  was  an  extraordinary  man,  eminent  in  life,  honoured  in  death  (by  the  erection  of
"the  tomb  of  Hiram,"  Robinson,  ii.  456);  and  he  wiU  "rise  in  the  judgment  and
condemn"  the  unfaithful  under  higher  privileges  (Matt.  xi.  21). — D.

Vers.  17 — 20  (1  Chron.  xiv.  8 — 11). — (The  Valley  or  Bbphaim.)  Victory  over  the
Philistines.  {References:  ch.  viii.  1,  12;  xxi.  15, 18,  19;  xxiii.  9,  11,  13;  1  Kings  ii.
39.)  "  Therefore  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  Baal-Perazim  "  (ver.  20).  So  long
as  David  reigned  over  a  single  tribe  and  was  at  war  with  the  house  of  Saul,  he  was  left
unmolested  by  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  xxix.  1 — 11),  whose  suzerainty  he,  perhaps,
acknowledged;  but  when  they  heard  that  he  was  chosen  king  over  all  Israel,  that  an
immense  army  had  gathered  around  him  not  far  from  their  own  border,  and  that  the
Jebusite  "stronghold  of  Zion"  had  fallen  before  him,  they  took  alarm,  mustered  all
their  forces,  marched  up  "to  seek  [attack]  David"  (the  chief  object  of  their  suspicion
and  fear),  and  "spread  themselves  in  the  Valley  of  Eephaim"  (near  Jerusalem).  In
the  condition  and  conduct  of  David  (as  representing  the  servants  of  God  in  conflict
with  their  adversaries)  we  observe —

I.  Pbeiloub  bmeegbnct,  which :  1.  Often  occurs  after  unusual  success  and  honour ;
being  adapted  to  check  undue  self-confidence  ami  self-security.  "Lest  I  should  be
exalted  above  measure,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  xii.  7).  2.  Clearly  manifests  the  spirit  which  men
possess,  whether  of  faith  and  courage,  or  of  fear  and  cowardice  (1  Sam.  xvii.  11).
3.  Makes  personal  effort  indispensable.  The  conflict  was  forced  upon  David.  It  could
not  be  avoided  without  disobedience  (ch.  iii.  18),  dishonour,  and  destruction.  And  it  is
the  same  in  other  cases.  "  Ye  approach  this  day  unto  battle  against  your  enemies,"  etc.
(Deut.  XX.  3).

II.  Peudbntial  aotivett.  "  And  David  heard  of  it,  and  went  down  to  the  bold,"
the  stronghold  of  Zion  (ver.  7),  from  his  residence  on  the  highest  and  safest  part  of  tho
mountain  ridge ;  or  more  probably  the  stronghold  in  the  desert  of  Judah,  where  he  had
formerly  found  refuge  (1  Sam.  xxii.  5 ;  xxiv.  22 ;  ch.  xxiii.  14).  It  may  be  sonietimes
necessary  to  "sit  still"  and  quietly 'wait  for  Divine  deliverance;  but  we  should:
1.  Not  remain  inactive  through  sloth,  vain-confidence,  or  presumption.  2.  Nor  rush
into  confiict  rashly,  or  enter  upon  new  courses  unadvisedly.  3.  But  after  due  con-
sideration adopt  those  measures  which  afford  the  fairest  prospects  of  safety  and  success.
"  A  prudent  man,"  etc.  (Prov.  xxii.  3).

III.  Peayehful  inquiry.  "  And  David  inquired  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  (ch.  ii.  1 ;  xvi.
23 ;  xxi.  1).  1.  After  the  utmost  thought  and  endeavour  of  our  own,  we  often  find
ourselves  in  perplexity  as  to  the  course  we  should  pursue.  2.  Our  best  resource  in  per-
plexity is  to  seek  Divine  counsel ;  and  those  who  have  had  experience  of  its  t  fficacy
will  not  fail  to  do  so  (1  Sam.  xiv.  16—23 ;  xxiii.  1 — 12).  3.  Nor  shall  we  fail  to  find
adequate  directions  and.  enconriLgmg  promises  if  we  s6ok  it  in  a  right  manner.  "  Go  up,"
etc.  "David  did  not  seek  Divine  counsel  (by  consulting  the  Urim)  whether  to  attack
Jebus,  ap]  arently,  because  his  mind  was  clear  that  the  enterprise  was  advantageous.
But  when  Ziklaghad  been  burned  by  the  Amalekites,  and  now  when  a  dangerous  army
is  at  hand,  he  is  glad  of  such  advice.  It  would  appear  that  he  regarded  it  as  a  Divine
aid  in  times  of  perplexity,  but  only  to  be  sought  for  in  such  times.  He  had  no  idea  of
Abdicating  his  duties  as  a  military  leader,  and  putting  the  movements  of  his  army  into


134  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  v.  1—25.

the  control  of  the  priest.  Hence,  perhaps,  it  is  that,  as  his  ccnfidence  in  his  troops  and
in  his  own  warlike  experience  increased,  he  ceased  altogether  to  consult  the  sacred
Urim,  for  we  hear  no  more  of  it  in  his  later  wars"  (P.  W.  Newman).

IV.  Practical  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  WORD  OF  THE  Lord.  "  And  David  came,"  etc.  When
the  path  of  duty  is  made  plain,  nothing  remains  but  to  walk  therein  with :  1.  Ewnility,
simplicity,  alacrity ;  as  a  soldier  at  the  word  of  command.  The  habit  of  immediate  and
absolute  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  is  essential  to  "a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."
2.  Dependence  on  Divine  strength  and  confidence  in  Divine  promises.  3.  Courage,
concentration  of  purpose  and  energy  in  performance.  "  Do  it  with  thy  might."  David's
attack  was  made  with  such  impetuosity  that  it  was  like  the  breaking  forth  of  water,  a
torrent  or  inundation  which  bursts  through,  disperses  and  sweeps  away  whatever  opposes
its  course.

V.  PuBLio  THANKsaiviNO  AND  PRAISE.  "  Jehovah  hath  broken  forth  upon  mine
enemies  .  .  .  Therefore  he  called  the  name  of  thai  place  Baal-Perazim,"  i.e.  properly,
lord,  master,  possessor,  and,  tropically,  place  (which  possesses  or  is  distinguished  by
something)  of  breaches,  inundations,  dispersions,  defeats  (Gesenius).  1.  The  spirit  in
which  success  is  really  sought  appears  in  the  manner  in  which  it  is  used.  When  sought
by  and  for  God  it  will  be  ascribed  to  him.  "  Not  unto  us,"  etc.  "  His  right  hand  and
his  holy  arm  hath  gotten  him  the  victory"  (Ps.  xcviii.  1).  2.  The  help  which  is
graciously  and  openly  vouchsafed  by  God  should  be  gratefully  and  openly  acknowledged
by  men  (Ps.  1.  14,  15).  3.  Of  Divine  benefits  a  record  should  be  made  by  those  who
receive  them,  for  the  instruction  of  "the  generation  to  come"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  4);  and  the
place  which  is  distinguished  by  them  should  become  a  permanent  memorial  of  Divine
power  and  goodness.  This  victory  was  long  remembered.  "  For  Jehovah  will  rise  up
as  on  the  mountain  of  Perazim,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxviii.  21).  "  The  military  stamp  of  the  first
part  of  David's  reign  is  the  preindication  of  the  military  character  of  the  whole  of  it.
In  the  Psalms  of  David  we  hear  the  echo  of  this  warlike  and  victorious  theocracy.  They
are  mostly  songs  of  conflict  and  victory  in  praise  of  the  God  who  saved  his  people  from
their  enemies  "  (Erdmann). — ^D.

Ver.  21  (1  Chron.  xiv.  12). — (Baal-Pbrazim.)  The  destrtiction  of  images.  The
religion  of  the  Canaanite  people  was  "  an  apotheosis  of  the  forces  and  laws  of  nature ;
an  adoration  of  the  objects  in  which  those  forces  were  seen  and  where  they  appeared
most  active"  (Movers).  The  Philistines  carried  (probably  on  sacred  carts)  their  imaget
or  gods  (commonly  regarded  as  identical)  into  battle,  expecting  victory  by  their  aid;
but  so  sudden  was  their  defeat,  and  so  hasty  their  flight,  that  they  were  compelled  to
leave  them  behind,  and  "David  and  his  men  took  them  away;"  and  "David  gave  a
commandment,  and  they  were  burned  with  fire."  "  When  the  ark  fell  into  the  Philistines'
hands  it  consumed  them ;  but  when  these  images  fell  into  the  hands  of  Israel  they  could
not  save  themselves  from  being  consumed"  (Patrick).  In  their  destruction  we  see:
1.  A  proof  of  the  vanity  of  idols.  These  images  (atsdbim,  equivalent  to  "  things  fashioned
with  labour  ")  were  only  "  the  work  of  men's  hands  "  (Ps.  cxv.  4 — 8),  and  "  profitable  for
nothing "  (Isa.  xl.  19 ;  xli.  7 ;  xliv.  9 — 20 ;  xlvi.  6,  7),  disappointing  completely  the
confidence  reposed  in  them.  Who  could  henceforth  regard  them  or  others  with  fear  or
respect  ?  2.  .4  testimony  to  the  power  of  Jehovah,  the  living  and  true  God,  the  Holy
One  of  Israel.  It  was  against  him  that  the  Philistines  fought  in  attacking  his  people ;
and  by  him  they  and  their  idols  were  overthrown,  as  aforetime  (1  Sam.  v.  3 ;  vii.  7 ;
xvii.  38 — 54).  Yet  how  persistent  was  their  opposition  (ver.  22) !  3.  An  expression
of  abhorrence  of  idolatry,  and  zeal  for  the  worship  of  God  alone;  the  personal  fidelity
of  David  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  theocracy  (Ps.  xvi.  4).  During  his  reign
idolatry  found  no  place  in  Israel.  4.  A  fulfilment  of  the  injunctions  of  the  Law.  "  Thou
shalt  utterly  overthrow  them,  and  quite  break  down  their  images "  (Exod.  xxiii.  24),
"and  burn  their  graven  images  with  fire"  (Deut.  vii.  5).  Idolatry  was  a  direct  crune
against  the  state,  high  treason  against  tlje  Divine  King  of  Israel,  and  might  not  be
tolerated  in  any  form.  5.  A  precaution  against  exposure  to  temptation,  by  the  influ-
ence ot  their  presence,  forms,  names,  associations,  on  hearts  always  too  prone  to  go
astray.  "  Thou  shalt  not  desire  the  silver  or  gold  that  is  on  them,  nor  take  it  imto
thee,  lest  thou  be  snared  therein,"  etc.  (Deut.  vii  25,  26).  No  sacrifice  was  too  great
to  AToid  such  a  snare  (Acts  xix.  19).     "  Here,  perhaps,  the  admirer  of  ancient  sculpture


cu.  V.  1—25.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  135

will  be  ready  to  drop  a  tear  of  regret  over  the  fine  statues  and  other  monuments  of
antiquity  that  must  have  been  destroyed  in  consequence  of  the  Mosaic  mandate ;  but
he  may  safely  dry  it  up,  for  the  chef  oCceuvres  of  this  period  were  not  worth  sparing  "
(Michaelis).  Even  if  they  had  been  the  finest  specimens  of  art,  their  preservation  from
the  flames  would  have  been  an  ill  compensation  for  the  moral  evil  which  it  would  have
induced.  6.  A  representation  of  the  design  of  the  true  religion.  "To  destroy  the
works  of  the  devil"  (1  John  iii.  8),  and  to  maintain  and  extend  the  knowledge,  love,
and  service  of  God;  not,  indeed,  by  force,  but  by  the  truth  (2  Cor.  x.  4 ;  see  1  Sam.  v.  3).
7.  A  prophecy  and  an  earnest  of  the  complete  demolition  of  idols  (Isa.  ii.  18 — 20),  and
the  earth  being  "  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  (Numb.  xiv.  21).  "  Thou  hast  kept
me  to  be  head  of  the  heathen,"  etc.  (ch.  xxii.  44,  60).

"  All  nations  whom  thou  haet  made,
Sliall  come  and  bow  themselves  down  before  thee,  O  Lord;
And  shall  give  glory  to  thy  Name."

(Ps.  Ixxxvi.  9 ;  xxii.  27 ;  xcvii.  7 ;  xcvi.  3,  5, 10.)

Conclusion.  Those  who  are  zealous  in  destroying  the  idols  of  others  should  not
spare  their  own.  What  is  an  idol  ?  That  object  (whatever  it  may  be)  which  a  man
sets  up  before  his  face  or  in  his  heart,  and  which  he  thinks  about,  delights  in,  and  relies
upun,  more  than  God.  "  Plee  from  idolatry! "  (1  Cor.  x.  14;  Col.  iiL  6 ;  Phil.  iii.  19 :
1  John  V.  21).— D.

Vers.  22,  23  (1  Chron.  xiv.  13, 14). — (The  Valley  or  Befhaim.)  Renewed  conflict.
1.  The  life  of  a  godly  man  on  earth  is  a  warfare  which  is  perpetvally  renewed.  Hardly
has  one  con-flict  been  passed  through  before  another  awaits  him  with  old  or  new  and
more  formidable  foes :  the  world,  the  flesh,  the  devil ;  ignorance,  idolatries,  oppressions,
sin  and  misery  of  all  kinds  (1  Sam.  xvii.  1 — 11).  Yea,  each  day  the  "  good  warfare  "
begins  afresh.  "  The  approach  of  duty  is  as  a  battle-field  "  (Essenian  maxim).  "  On
awaking  in  the  morning,  the  first  thing  to  be  observed  by  thine  inward  sight  is  the
listed  field  in  which  thou  art  enclosed ;  the  law  of  the  combat  being  that  he  who  fights
not  must  there  lie  dead  for  ever"  (ScupoU).  2.  Signal  sticcess  in  one  conflict  does  not
ensure  the  like  in  the  next;  and  it  ought,  therefore,  to  be  always  associated  with
humility,  watchfulness,  aad  prayer;  from  lack  of  which  many  a  victoty  has  been
turned  into  a  defeat.     It  was  a  motto  of  King  Alfred  ("  Si  modo  victor  eras,"  etc.) — ■

"If  to-day  thou  be  conqueror,  beware  of  the  fight  of  to-morrow;
If  to-day  thou  be  conquered,  prepare  for  the  fight  of  to-morrow."

3.  One  victory  affords  ground  for  the  confident  expectation  of  another,  when  the  latter
is  looked  for  in  the  same  spirit  as  the  former,  with  dependence  on  the  strength  of  God,
submission  to  his  will,  devotion  to  his  glory  and  the  good  of  his  people.  "  David
inquired  of  the  Lord  again"  4.  The  special  means  to  be  employed  in  every  new  con-
flict must  be  adapted  to  the  special  circumstances  of  the  case ;  and  both  the  wisdom  to
perceive  them  and  the  might  to  make  them  effectual  are  from  the  Lord.  "  Thou  shalt
not  go  up"  (directly,  in  front  of  them,  as  in  the  former  conflict,  and  as  he  was  about  to
do  again);  "go  round  about  them  to  their  rear,  and  come  upon  them  opposite  the  mul-
berry trees "  (a  spot,  probably  well  known  to  David  and  his  men,  where  a  cluster  or
grove  of  baca  trees  would  favour  their  attack),  etc.  "  The  words  teach  us  that  in  our
own  strength,  and  merely  with  the  human  weapons  of  reason  and  science,  we  are  not  to
make  war  against  the  adversary.  Success  can  only  be  calculated  upon  when  the  conflict
is  undertaken  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  breathed  forth,  and  in  the
immediate  blessed  experience  of  the  gracious  presence  of  the  Lord  and  of  the  truth  of
his  Word  "  (Krummaoher). — ^D.

Vers.  24,  25  (1  Chron.  xiv.  15— 17).— (The  Valley  of  Eephaim.)  Signs.  "The
sound  of  a  going  (as  of  footsteps,  Judg.  v.  4 ;  ch.  vi.  13)  "  in  the  beginnings  "  (oa  the
tops  or  at  the  entrance  of  the  grove)  "  of  the  baca  trees,"  which  David  heard,  was  a
sign  appointed  by  God,  occurring,  either  by  his  extraordinary  and  miraculous  operation
for  a  special  purpose ;  or  by  his  ordinary  operation  in  nature  and  providence  (the  rust-
ling of  the  leaves  in  a  still  season  by  a  fresh  breeze,  such  as,  in  the  East,  usually  «pringg


136  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  ^cn.  v.  1—25,


up  about  day-dawu),  and  made  use  of  by  him  for  that  purpose.  It  is  not  stated  that  it
was  intended  for  or  perceived  by  any  one  else  but  David.  To  him  it  was  "the  sound
of  his  Master's  feet"  (2  Kings  vi.  32);  the  "going  out  before  him"  of  "the  Captain  of
the  Lord's  host "  (Josh.  v.  14)  at  the  head  of  legions  of  angels  "  to  smite  the  Philistines,"
and  summoning  hiin  to  follow.  And  the  enemy,  wrapped  in  slumber,  and  attacked  at
an  unexpected  time  and  place,  was  surprised  and  routed.  Are  there  now  no  signs  of  a
similar  nature?  1.  They  are  needed,  at  certain  seasons — in  order  tothe  proper  under-
standiDg,  enforcement,  and  application  of  the  truths  and  duties  contained  in  the  written
Word ;  especially  when  iniquity  abounds,  love  waxes  cold,  labour  is  vain,  and  fear  and
perplexity  prevail ;  when  "we  see  not  our  signs"  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  9),  nor  receive  "a  token  for
good  "  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  17).  2.  They  ai-e  afforded  in  various  ways— by  a  striking  concur-
rence of  events  with  the  Word  (1  Sam.  x.  7)  or  their  peculiar  combination ;  by  manifest
tendencies,  yivid  impressions,  spiritual  suggestions,  or  an  unusual  expectancy ;  some-
times with  "a  still  small  voice,"  sometimes  with  "the  sound  of  a  trumpet,"  "thunder
and  rain  "  (1  Sam.  xii.  17),  or  "a  rushing  mighty  wind."  They  are  never  wholly  absent;
but  do  we  hear  or  see  them  ?

"  Earth's  crammed  with  heaven.
And  every  common  bush  afire  with  God ;
But  only  he  who  sees  takes  oS  his  slioes."

(Mrs.  Browning,/
Consider  them  an —

I.  Perceived  by  a  vigilant  observbb.  "When  thou  hearest  the  sound  of  a  going,"
etc.  Having  "  inquired  of  the  Lord,"  and  received  the  promise  of  aid,  David  watched
for  the  sign  thereof.  "I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,"  etc.  (Hab.  ii.  1).  Such  a  watch-
man: 1.  Fixes  his  attention  on  the  spiritual  realities  by  which  the  world  of  sense  is
surrounded,  supported-  pervaded ;  and  becomes  conscious  of  what  is  hidden  from  others,
whose  attention  is  who/ly  absorbed  in  earthly  things ;  hearing  a  voice  they  cannot  hear,
and  seeing  a  hand  they  cannot  see.  2.  Relies  upon  the  promises  which  have  been
graciously  spoken  by  "him  who  is  invisible."  3.  Looks  for  their /M{/iZme)j<  with  fervent
oesire  and  unwearied  patience,  "  more  than  they  that  watch  for  the  morning  "  (Ps.  cxxx.
6,  6),  until  at  length  the  sign  and  then  the  reality  which  it  denotes  are  fully  revealed,
ETery  thing  depends  upon  a  thoughtful,  believing,  waiting  spirit  1

Signs  summon  not  Faith :  but  they  wait  for  her  call ;
For  in  her  own  right  she  holds  nature  in  thrail.
Where  sense  sees  a  blank  space,  with  nought  to  inspire;
She,  seer-like,  finds  horses  and  chariots  of  Are.
Sense  ransacks  all  space  for  the  proofs  of  a  God;
Faith  finds  them  at  home,  at  the  end  of  her  rod.
And  he  who  complains  of  no  God-prints  below
Will  find  nothing  but  sense-prints  where'er  he  may  go."

"There  are  chemical  experiments,  in  which,  if  a  certain  condition  be  wanflog,  the
element  sought  for  cannot  be  elicited.  It  is  present,  waiting,  ready  to  leap  into  activity
the  moment  the  condition  is  present.  But  as  long  as  that  is  wanting,  the  element  is
imprisoned,  separated  by  an  impassable  barrier,  and  might  almost  bo  said  to  be  non-
exiMtent.  Similarly,  the  preoccupied  mind  might  sleep  at  the  very  gate  of  heaven — ^no
celestial  dreams  would  visit  it.  The  worldly  mind  might  find  itself  in  the  house  of  God,
in  the  holiest  of  all ;  but  the  cloud  of  glory  would  sweep  by  it  unnoticed.  A  mind  keen
after  earthly  objects,  and  engrossed  by  the  interests  of  time,  might  live  here  three  score
years  and  ten,  with  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  all  the  time  surrounding  it,  soliciting
it,  pressing  in  upon  it ;  and  yet  never  once  recognize  a  single  indication  of  the  Divine
presence.  And  he  who  finds  nothing  of  heaven  on  earth  would  find  nothing  but  earth
in  heaven  "  (J.  Hai  ris).

II.  PossEssiNO  INVALUABLE  siGiHFiOANOB.  "  Then  Will  Jehovah  go  out  before  thee,"
etc.  The  sign  in  itself  is  little ;  the  thing  signified,  as  it  is  revealed  to  the  waiting  soul,
is  great,  innsmuoh  as  it  relates  to  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  includes :  1.  .His  presence  with
US  in  a  very  special  manner  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11;  xx.  12;  xxxii.  6 — 8).  If  a  soldier  is
inspirfd  with  courage  and  strength  by  knowing  that  his  commander  is  near  and  his  eye
upon  him,  much  more  should  we  be  similarly  inspired  by  the  conviction  of  the  Divine


OB.  V.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  187

presence.  2.  His  worleing  for  us  and  ill  us.  "  The  Lord  Is  my  Helper,"  etc.  (Heb.  xiii.  6).
3.  His  will  concerning  us,  with  respect,  not  only  to  our  welfare,  but  also  to  our  duty,
the  spirit  we  should  cherish,  the  conduct  we  should  pursue,  the  manner,  place,  and  time
of  our  activity.  There  is  no  greater  joy  to  a  faitliful  servant  of  God  than  to  feel  assured
that  he  is  where  God  would  have  him  to  be,  and  doing  what  God  would  have  him  to  do.
And  this  joy  is  his  strength.

III.  BEQUiRiNe  FSBBONAL  EXERTION.  "  Then  bestir  thyself  J  go  out  to  battle.  And
David  did  so  as  Jehovah  comiiianded  hira."  There  is  a  time  to  work  and  fight  as  well
as  to  pray  and  watch.  As  it'  is  presumptuous  and  vain  to  stir  before  the  signal  for  action
is  given,  so  it  is  slothful  and  ruinous  to  wait  after  it  ia  received.  "  Wherefore  criest  thou
unto  me  ?  ...  Go  forward  "  (Esod.  xiv.  15 ;  Josh.  vii.  10).  Divine  assistance  is  not  meant
to  supersede  our  exertion,  but  to  quicken  it.  Because  God  works  we  must  work,  with
a  feeling  of  grateful  obligation,  reverence,  and  confidence  (Phil.  ii.  12).  "  The  Captain
of  our  salvation "  goes  out  before  us  that  we  may  follow  him  (Rev.  xix.  14)  with :
1.  Implicit  obedience  to  hia  every  direction  and  movement  (see  1  Ssm.  xiii.  1 — 7).  2.
Strenuous  effort  and  whole-hearted  devotion.  3.  The  utmost  promptitude.  Now  or
never.  The  opportunity,  if  allowed  to  slip,  returns  no  more.  "  Consider  that  this  day
ne'er  dawns  again  "  (Dante).

"'Charge!*  was  the  captain's  cry.
Theirs  not  to  make  reply;
Theirs  not  to  reason  why;
Theirs  but  to  do  or  die.

IV.  CoNDuoTiNQ  TO  iMi'ORTAUT  ISSUES.  "  And  he  smote  the  Philistines,"  etc.  By
such  a  victory :  1.  The  imminent  danger  that  threatened  is  removed.  2.  The  final
overthrow  of  the  enemy  is  assured  (ch.  viii.  1).  3.  The  firm  establishment  and  wide
extension  of  the  kingdom  are  promoted.  It  became  possible  to  bring  up  the  arli  to  Zion
(ch.  vi.  2)  and  to  subdue  surrounding  adversaries.  "And  the  fame  of  David  went  out
into  all  lands,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xiv.  17).  God  fails  not  to  fulfil  his  promises ;  disappoints
not  the  tiust  that  is  placed  in  him;  but  makes  the  faithful  "more  than  conquerors."

Application.  With  reference  to:  1.  The  individual.  2.  The  family.  3,  The
Church.    4.  The  nation.    "Can  ye  not  discern  the  sw^ns  of  the  times?" — D.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Tardy  acceptance  of  a  divinely  appointed  ruler.  Abner  and  Ishbo-
sheth  being  dead,  and  Mephibosheth  incapable  from  his  lameness,  the  eleven  tribes
that  for  upwards  of  seven  years  had  not  only  held  aloof  from  David,  but  waged  war
with  him,  now  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  best  to  become  his  sulijects,  and  again
be  united  with  Judah  in  one  kingdom.  They  accordingly  make  their  submission  to
him  and  solemnly  accept  him  as  their  sovereign.

I.  The  orounds  op  their  acceptance  of  him.  1.  Close  relationship.  "Behold,
we  are  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh  "  (oomp.  Bph.  v.  30).  God  has  given  to  us  a  King  who
is  one  with  us  in  nature.  The  Buler  of  the  Church,  yea,  of  all  things,  is  a  Man;  the
throne  of  the  universe  is  filled  by  a  human  form  (see  Heb.  ii.  5,  et  seq.) — a  fact  which
endears  the  Christ  to  his  willing  subjects.  2.  Previous  service.  (Ver.  2.)  "  In  time
past,"  etc.  In  which  service  David  had  both  displayed  and  increased  his  capacities
for  ruling  men.  With  this  may  be  compared  Christ's  period  of  service  when  on  earth,
especially  during  his  public  ministry  and  lust  sufferings.  By  these  he  was  trained  and
prepared  for  his  throne  (made  "  perfect  through  sufferings,"  Hub.  ii.  10) ;  and  it  is  in
and  by  these  that  he  reveals  himself  and  attracts  the  hearts  of  men.  3.  Divine
appointment.  (Ver.  2.)  "The  Lord  said  to  thee,  Thou  shalt  feed  ['  shepherd,'  'be  the
Bhe|iherd  of]  my  people  Israel,  and  thou  shalt  be  a  captain  [literally, '  foremost  man,
leader ']  over  Israel."  A  king  is  to  be  as  a  shepherd  to  his  subjects,  not  only  ruling  them,
but  caring  for,  watching  over,  protecting,  guiding,  uniting  them;  guarding  and  preserv-
ing the  weak  from  violence  and  oppression,  as  a  shepherd  his  lambs.  The  image  was
natural  to  the  Hebrews,  and  runs  through  the  Scriptures,  extending  even  to  the  visions
of  heaven  (Eev.  vii.  17).  The  kin;;  was  also  to  be  leader  in  peace  or  war,  ever  "  to  the
front,"  worthy  to  be  followed,  first  and  foremost  in  all  noble  deeds,  accepting
courageously  the  perils  of  such  a  position.  David  was  such  a  king,  imperfectly!
Christ  Is  such  a  ri-.g,  perfectly.    Both  were  divinely  designated  to  the  office  of  Buler


138  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  t.  1— 2&

of  God's  people,  Kings  by  Divine  right  in  the  strictest  sense.  As  such  David  is  here
recognized  at  length  by  the  tribes  of  Israel,  as  before  by  the  tribe  of  Jiidah.  As  such
the  Lord  Jesus  is  recognized  by  his  followers.  These  reasons  had  existed  and  should
have  been  as  powerful  immediately  after  Saul's  death ;  but  they  had  not  been  allowed
to  operate.  But  the  experience  of  these  tribes  whilst  holding  aloof  from  David,  their
present  disorganized  condition,  possibly  also  their  knowledge  of  the  benefits  of  David's
rule  to  Judah,  combined  to  open  their  eyes,  and  so  impress  these  considerations  on
their  hearts  as  to  produce  a  general  willingness  to  accept  him  whom  they  had  been
rejecting.  And  thus  it  is  with  many  in  respect  to  the  great  King.  His  claims  are
known,  but  other  lords  are  preferred,  until,  after  delay  more  or  less  protracted,  they
become  convinced  of  their  sin  and  folly,  and  surrender  themselves  to  him.  Let  those
who  are  thus  procrastinating  beware  lest  they  become  convinced  too  late.

IL  The  solbmuities  by  which  their  acceptance  of  David,  and  his  of  them,
WEBB  SIGNIFIED.  1.  A  fnutual  Covenant.  He  engaging  to  rule  them,  and  they  to
serve  him  according  to  the  Law  of  God  (Deut.  xvii.  14—20).  In  like  manner,  when
men  receive  Christ  as  their  King,  promising  loyalty  and  obedience,  he  on  his  part
prcaaises  to  be  to  them  all  that  his  gospel  represents  him.  These  Israelites,  indeed,
may  have  imposed  special  stipulations  not  expressed  in  the  Law ;  but  we,  in  accepting
Christ,  have  simply  to  submit  to  the  terms  of  the  Divine  covenant,  as  we  are  not  in  any
degree  independent  parties.  2.  The  anointing  of  David  as  king.  The  third  time  he
was  anointed — once  by  Samuel,  once  by  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  now  by  the  rest  of  the
tribes.  For  the  people  could  in  a  measure  give  him  authority  over  them.  But  our
King  Jeaus  can  receive  no  authority  from  us.  He  is  the  Christ  (the  Anointed)  of  God ;
we  have  simply  to  recognize  his  Divine  authority.  3.  The  presence  of  Ood  was  recog-
nized. "  Before  the  Lord."  This  was  fitting,  as  he  was  supreme  Monarch,  to  whom
both  king  and  people  were  bound  to  submit,  whose  blessing  was  necessary  to  render
the  union  happy ;  and  an  engagement  made  as  in  his  sight  would  be  felt  as  peculiarly
binding.  So  should  we,  in  accepting  Christ,  place  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  God,
first  in  secret,  then  in  his  house,  and  at  the  Lord's  Table.  4.  A  joyful  feast  conchided
the  proceedings.  (See  1  Chron.  xii.  39,  40.)  It  was  to  the  whole  people  a  suitable
occasion  for  rejoicing.  They  were  again  one  nation.  Their  union  would  be  cemented
by  eating  and  drinking  together.  They  would  the  better  retain  the  feeling  of  union
when  they  had  separated  to  their  various  localities  and  homes,  and  would  be  the  better
prepared  to  perform  their  common  duties  to  the  king  and  the  nation.  Thus  also  our
Lord  enjoins  his  subjects  to  eat  and  drink  together  in  his  Name,  that  they  may  recog-
nize each  other  as  his,  rejoice  together  in^  their  privileges,  and  be  more  closely  united
to  him  and  the  whole  "  Israel  of  God."

In  conclusion :  1.  Happy  is  the  nation  whose  rulers  and  subjects  alike  recognize
God  as  the  supreme  Ruler  over  them,  and  his  will  as  their  supreme  law ;  act  as  in
his  sight,  and  invoke  his  blessing.  2.  Closer  union  amongst  Christians  must  spring
from  more  thorough  acceptance  of  the  royal  authority  of  Christ.  They  are  one  in
him,  and  they  will  become  more  completely,  more  consciously,  and  more  manifestly
one  in  proportion  as  they,  all  alike,  renouncing  merely  human  authorities,  come  to
Christ  himself,  listen  to  him,  and  submit  to  his  authority  in  all  things. — G.  W.

Ver.  10. — Desirable  greatness.  "  And  David  went  on,  and  grew  great,  and  the  Lord
God  of  hosts  was  with  him."  The  growing  greatness  of  David  was  owing  to  the
presence  and  favour  of  God,  and  was  accompanied  with  them.     It  was,  then —

I.  Grbatitess  WBLL-DEEIVED.  All  greatuess  is  in  some  sense  from  God ;  but  all
does  not  spring  from  his  favour.  "  Surely  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  places ;  thou
castedst  them  down  into  destruction  "  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  18).  He  that  becomes  "  a  great  man  "
through  unjust  violence,  the  oppression  and  swallowing  up  of  the  weak,  low  cunning,
unscrupulous  ambition,  insatiable  avarice,  or  an  absorbing  activity  of  mind  and  body
which  excludes  God  from  thought  and  life,  cannot  rightly  attribute  his  success  to  the
blessing  of  God.  Such  greatness  is  disastrous,  and  carries  a  curse  with  it.  It  is  reached
by  serving  Satan,  and  accompanied  with  slavery  to  him  and  participation  of  his  doom.
He  was  not  altogether  lying  when  he  said  (Luke  iv.  6,  7)  that  the  power  and  glory  of
the  world  were  given  by  him  to  those  who  would  worship  him.  The  world  abounds
in  instances  of  greatness  so  won.     But  the  greatness  which  is  a  gift  of  God's  favour


OH.  T.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  V39


is  reached  by  paths  of  truth  and  uprightness  and  piety;  by  the  strenuous  employment
of  all  the  powers, indeed,  but  ia  harmony  with  the  Divine  will;  not  so  much,  therefore,
with  the  purpose  to  grow  great  as  to  be  of  service  to  others.  It  is  rather  accepted
as  a  gift  of  God  than  sought ;  and  is  accepted  "  with  fear  and  trembling,"  lest  the  strong
temptations  which  accompany  all  worldly  greatness  should  become  victorious.  Such
greatness  is  accompanied  with  a  good  conscience,  and  may  be  without  serious  peril
to  the  soul.  It  may  foster  principles  of  godliness  and  benevolence.  It  qualifies  for
high  service  of  others,  and,  so  employed,  enlarges  the  heart  and  elevates  instead  of
degrading  the  character.  It  thus  ministers  to  the  truest  greatness— that  which  is
spiritual  and  eternal.

II.  Gbeatnbss  well-accompanied.  Some,  the  greater  they  grow  the  less  of  God
they  enjoy ;  they  gradually  forsake  him,  and  he  at  length  abandons  them.  But  there
are  those  of  whom  it  may  be  said,  as  they  grow  great  in  this  world,  still  "  the  Lord
God  of  hosts  is  with  them."  1.  How  the  great  may  secure  this  blessing.  By :  (1)
Humility  (Deut.  viiL  13,  14;  Ps.  cxxxviii.  6;  Jas.  iv.  6).  (2)  Devotion  of  their
enlarged  powers  to  the  service  of  God  and  of  man.  (3)  Constant  prayer.  On  the  other
hand,  pride,  selfishness,  and  prayerlessness  will  separate  them  from  God.  '  2.  The  benefits
they  will  derive  from  it.  (1)  The  highest  and  purest  enjoyment  to  which  worldly
honours  and  resources  can  mmister.  (2)  Preservation  from  the  perils  of  their  position.
(3)  The  power  to  gain  the  best  kind  of  good  from  it.  (4)  And  to  do  the  most  good  by
it.    (5)  Greatness  thus  accompanied  is  likely  to  be  lasting.

Pinaily,  spiritual  greatness  combines  in  a  pre-eminent  degree  the  two  excellences  of
being  God-derived  and  God-accompanied.  It  springs  from  the  favour  of  God,  and
secures  its  constant  enjoyment.  It  consists  in  abundance  of  spiritual  wisdom,  holiness,
and  love,  and  consequent  power  for  good ;  in  the  honour  which  these  bring  from  God,
and  in  the  confidence,  affection,  and  respect  with  which  they  inspire  men.  It  has  the
advantage  of  being  accessible  to  all,  its  conditions  being,  first,  faith  in  Christ  ami  God ;
and  then  the  fruits  of  faith,  such  as  love,  humility  (Matt,  xviii.  4),  obedience  to  God
(Matt.  V.  19),  self-control  (Prov.  xvi.  32),  self-denying  service  (Matt.  xx.  20—28).
Such  greatness  is  intrinsic  and  essential.  It  is  best  for  ourselves  and  best  for  others.
It  is  inseparable  from  the  man  himself,  and,  surviving  all  worhlly  distinctions,  goes
with  him  into  eternity,'and  abides  for  ever  (see  1  John  ii.  17). — G.  W.

Ver.  12. — Perception  of  Divine  agency  and  purpose.  These  words  are  introduced
after  the  narration  of  the  taking  of  the  fortress  of  Ziun,  the  erection  of  additional
buildings  around  it,  and  especially  the  building  of  a  royal  residence  for  David.  It  was
the  establishment  of  a  metropolis  for  the  whole  kingdom,  and  both  evidenced  and
promoted  a  settled  state  of  things.  David's  thoughts  upon  the  matter  are  given  in  the
text.  He  recognized  that  it  was  God  who  made  him  king,  and  that  his  exaltation  was
for  the  sake  of  God's  people  Israel.

I.  The  facts  pbrobived.  1.  The  Divine  operation.  God  had  raised  David  to  the
throne  and  settled  him  on  it.  At  every  step  the  hand  of  God  was  clear ;  especially
clear  was  that  hand  as  the  whole  series  of  steps,  their  connection  and  issue,  were
regarded.  2.  The  Divine  purpose.  All  was  "  for  his  people  Israel's  sake."  Not  for
the  sake  of  David  and  his  family,  that  they  might  be  rich,  luxurious,  and  honoured ;
but  for  the  good  of  others.  That  the  tribes  might  be  united  and  consolidated  as  one
natiop,  free,  settled,  safe,  prosperous,  and  glorious.  That  the  people  might  be  elevated
in  their  moral  and  religious  life;  and  that  they  might  be  better  fitted  to  fulfil  the  great
end  of  their  election  as  God's  people,  witnessing  for  him,  maintaining  his  worship,
preserving  his  truth,  showing  forth  his  praise,  and  promoting  his  kingdom  in  the
world ;  and  that  ultimately  from  them  might  come  the  Saviour  and  salvation.  Similarly,
tiie  Son  of  David  is  exalted,  not  for  himself  alone,  but  that  he  may  deliver,  "  gather
together  in  one  "  (John  xi.  52),  teach,  sanctify,  elevate,  and  eternally  save,  the  people
of  God.-  He  is  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church  "  (Bph.  i.  22).  In  like  nianner,  all
power,  elevation,  authority,  etc.,  with  which  men  are  endowed  are  given  to  them  for
the  sake  of  others,  and  ultimately  for  the  sake  of  God's  people,  to  whom  in  Christ  all
things  belong  (1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23),  that  they  may  be  blessed  and  be  made  a  blessing  to
mankind.  i

XI.  David's  pebception  of  these  facts.    I.  Be  recognized  that  hit  exaltation  wa§


140  THB  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEt.  {aB.t.i-^iL

from  Ood.  This  would  check  pride  and  produce  hunjility  and  gratitude.  2.  E«
recognized  that  his  exaltation  was  for  the  sake  of  the  people.  This  would  check  Selfish
ambition  and  produce  cordial  devoteoent  to  the  good  of  the  nation.  And  thus  should
we  seek  to  have  a  clear  perception  and  deep  impression  of  the  agency  and  purpose  of
God  in  our  lives.  We  should  regard  all  we  have  of  being,  faculty,  position,  or
possessions,  temporal  and  spiritual  alike,  as  from  him ;  and  all  as  given  us,  not  merely
or  chiefly  for  ourselves,  but  for  the  sake  of  others,  especially  for  their  salvation — that
they  may  become,  if  they  are  not,  God's  people,  and  that  as  God's  people  they  may
prosper,  be  united,  victorious  over  all  the  foes  of  God  and  man,  and  powerful  to  bless
mankind.  For  this  is  the  Divine  purpose,  and  as  we  make  it  our  own  we  become
intelligent  co-workers  with  God,  and  our  lives  are  filled  with  meaning,  dignity,  and
worth,  and  a  fitting  preparation  for  tlie  world  where  all  are  consciously,  willingly,  and
habitually  engaged  in  doing  the  will  of  God  (Matt.  vi.  10).---G.  W.

Ver.  19. — Divine  assurance  of  victory.  The  enlargement  and  establishment  of
David's  kingdom,  while  a  joy  to  Israel,  was  a  grief  to  their  old  and  formidable  enemies,
the  Philistines.  These  came  in  great  numbers  into  the  territory  of  Israel,  hoping  to
seize  David  himself  (ver.  17),  as  the  shortest  way  of  putting  an  end  to  the  newly  united
state.  So  formidable  was  the  invasion  that  the  king  found  it  desirable  to  leave  his  new
city  and  go  "  down  to  the  hold,"  the  fortress  probably  of  AduUam,  with  such  forces  as
he  could  collect ;  and  when  the  enemy  "  spread  themselves  in  the  Valley  of  Eephaim,"
he  sought  direction  and  promise  of  victory  from  God  before  attacking  them,  and
received  the  answer,  "  Go  up,"  etc.  Christians  are  called  to  a  warfare  with  powerful
enemies,  who  are  the  enemies  of  Christ  aud  his  kingdom ;  and  it  is  their  satisfaction
that  they  have  received  Divine  assurance  of  victory.  They  have  to  fight  against  the
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  as  they  assail  themselves  and  endanger  their  salvation,
and  as  they  prevail  in  the  world  and  even  invade  the  Church.  They  are  powerful  foes,
with  many  resources  at  command,  and  their  onset  is  at  times  alarming.  As  the  Philis-
tines with  David,  they  may  be  expected  to  make  specially  violent  assaults  when  special
prosperity  has  been  attained,  but  the  results  are  not  yet  fully  established.  But  it  is  the
joy  of  Christ's  warriors  that  victory  is  certain.  Each  faithful  soul  shall  successfully
fight  his  own  way  to  heaven,  and  the  Church  shall  gain  final  and  complete  success  in
the  battle  with  evil.

I.  How  THE   ABBUBANOE   OF  YIOTOBY   18  lUFABTED.      HoW  doCS  God  aSSUre  US  that

we  shall  be  successful  in  the  Christian  war  ?  1.  By  the  intuitions  of  the  soul.  When
we  distinctly  place  before  our  minds  the  combatants,  we  cannot  doubt  which  will
ultimately  be  victorious.  It  is  a  conflict  between  good  and  evil,  truth  and  error,  right
and  wrong,  holiness  and  sin,  God  and  Satan.  Evil  is  mighty,  but  good  is  almighty,
because  the  living,  true,  and  holy  God  is  almighty.  2.  By  the  promises  and  prophecies
of  his  Word.  These  assure  victory  to  every  faithful  soul  in  his  own  personal  contest
(see  1  Cor.  x.  13 ;  Eph.  vi.  10 — 13 ;  Jas.  iv.  7 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  13),  and  triumph  to  the
Church  in  the  conflict  with  error  and  sin  in  the  world,  notwithstanding  the  deep  and
firm  hold  they  have  upon  men,  their  extensive  prevalence,  their  long  reign.  These
assurances  abound  throughout  the  Scriptures,  culminating  in  the  descriptiolis  of  the
conflict  in  the  Apocalypse,  and  of  the  victories  of  the  great  Leader  and  his  forces,  and
summed  up  in  the  triumphant  shout  of  the  great  voices  in  heaven :  "The  kingdoms  of
this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ,  and  he  shall  reign
for  ever  and  ever"  (Rev.  xi.  15).  3.  By  the  mission  and  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  He  came  as  our  "  Leader  and  Commander  "  (Isa.  1  .\  4),  and,  by  his  personal
conflict,  endurance,  and  conquests,  not  only  led  the  way  for  his  followers,  but  secured
victory  for  them.  "Be  of  good  cheer,"  he  says,  "I  have  overcome  the  world"  (John
xvi.  33 ;  see  also  Heb.  ii.  9,  10,  14 — 18 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  24,  25);  4.  By  the  victories  already
won.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  his  mighty  operations  in  apostolic  times  and  all
through  the  Christian  centuries.  The  victories  over  the  old  paganism;  theBeformation;
the  revivals  of  religion  at  various  periods ;  the  successes  of  modern  missions.  Every
true-hearted  Christian  has  in  his  own  experience  not  only  a  pledge  of  final  victory  for
himself,  bat  an  encouragement  to  seek  the  salvation  of  others.

II.  The  effect  which  buch  assurance  should  have  upon  va.  "  Go  up.''  Engage
in  the  battle  with  @Til ;  and  do  so  with :  1.  Cor^dence  and  courage,    2.  Besolute  zeal


OH.  V.  1—25.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMOBL.  Ul


and  determination.  3.  Persistency,  notwithstanding  all  delays,  discouragements,  and
partial  failures.  4.  Songs  of  victory.  Not  only  for  every  advantage  gained,  but  for
the  final  and  complete  victory  already  to  faith  as  good  as  won.  If  the  hojie  of  victory
in  other  conflicts  produces  such  efl'eots,  much  more  should  the  absolute  certainty  which
the  soldiers  of  Christ  have.  An  altogether  ill  effect  is  that  which  the  Divine  assurances
produce  on  some.  They  say  that,  as  the  battle  is  the  Lord's,  and  he  is  sure  to  conquer,
their  efforts  are  needless.  As  relates  to  a  man's  own  salvation,  such  a  persuasion  is
fatal ;  for  victory  is  promised  only  to  the  earnest  combatant,  and  the  assurance  of
Divine  operation  is  made  a  reason  why  we  should  "  work  out  our  own  salvation  "  (Luke
xiii.  24 ;  1  Tim.  vi  12  ;  Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  And  as  respects  the  spread  and  triumph  of
the  kingdom  of  Christ,  such  a  feeling  indicates  ignorance,  indifference,  indolence,  and
unfaithfulness,  rather  than  faith  in  God.  It  is  quite  inconsistent  with  both  Scripture
and  reason,  and  will  deprive  those  who  cherish  it  of  all  share  in  the  joy  of  final  victory,
even  if  they  are  not  utterly  cast  away  as  "  wicked,  slothful,  and  tuprofitable "  (Matt.
XXV.  26,  30).— G.  W.

Ver.  24. — Divine  omens  of  coming  victory.  "When  thou  hearest  the  sound  of
marching  .  .  .  then  is  the  Lord  gone  out  before  thee,"  etc.  (Revised  Version).  The
Philistines  were  a  brave  and  determined  people,  not  easily  beaten.  Repulsed  and
scattered  "as  the  breach  of  waters,"  they  reunite  and  return.  David,  inquiring  of
God,  receives  directions  differing  from  those  given  him  on  the  former  occasion.  He  is
instructed  not  to  "  go  up "  to  the  higher  ground  occupied  by  the  Philistines,  but  to
make  a  circuit  to  their  rear,  where  was  a  plantation,  and  when  he  hears  a  sound  as  of
marching  on  the  tops  of  the  trees,  then  to  attack  the  foe  with  spirit  and  energy,
knowing  that  God  was  gone  before  to  give  him  certnin  victory.  The  enemies  of  the
Christian  and  the  Church  are  similarly  persistent,  and  must  be  assailed  and  defeated
over  and  over  again.  Indeed,  the  conflict  is  continuous.  There  are,  however,  certain
times  when  we  are  specially  to  "bestir"  ourselves,  with  assurance  of  conquest;  and
these  are  often  indicated  by  special  signs  that  the  supernatural  powers  are  "marching"
on  to  lead  us  and  give  us  success.

I.  In  respect  to  the  whole  ChKISTIAN  WABFAKE  and  WOBK,  the  8TJPEBNATUBAL
EVENTS   BY  WHICH   CUE   BELIGION  WAS  INAUQUBATBD  MAT  BE  THUS  BEOAEDED.      In  the

incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  his  supernatural  revelations,  the  miracles  of  his  lit',
death,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  in  tl;e  all-sufBcient  sacrifice  he  offered  for  sin,  and  in
the  descent  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  God  went  before  his  people  to  lead  them  on
to  victory.  They  were  not  for  the  men  of  that  age  only,  but  for  all  ages.  We,  recalling
them  to  mind,  may  over  take  courage  in  the  assurance  that  we  are  following  where
God  has  led  and  still  leads.  Evermore  they  remain  as  calls  to  us  to  "  bestir  "  ourselves
with  confldence  of  success;  the  eternal  motives  to  energy  and  hope;  the  eternal
armoury,  too,  from  which  we  draw  the  offensive  and  defensive  arms  we  need  in  the  war.

II.  In  BBSPECT  TO  OUE  OWN  PEBSONAL  SALVATION,  THEBE  ABE  AT  TIMES  SPECIAL
INDICATIONS   THAT   GOD   IS   GOING  BBFOEE   US   TO  GIVE   US  SPECIAL   HELP  AND  BLESSING.

We  ought  not,  indeed,  to  wait  for  these.  The  knowledge  of  our  duty,  the  memory  of
Christ,  the  promise  of  Divine  aid,  the  experiences  of  the  past,  constitute  sufficient
reasons  for  habitual  diligence,  prayer,  and  hope ;  and  special  inspirations  may  be  most
confidently  expected  by  such  as  are  thus  ever  "exercising  themselves  unto  godliness,"
ever  striving  against  evil  and  for  the  attainment  of  greater  good.  But  there  are
moments  of  peculiar  sensibility  which  afford  peculiarly  favourable  opportunities  and
special  calls  to  "bestir"  ourselves  that  we  may  secure  the  blessings  which  they  promise.
Startling  events  which  deeply  move  the  conscience  and  heart ;  personal  afflictions  which
compel  retirement  and  produce  impressions  favourable  to  religious  exercises;  bereave-
ments which  bring  face  to  face  with  death ;  losses  which  make  the  uncertainty  and
insufficiency  of  earthly  good  felt ;  sermons  which  unusually  touch  the  heart ;  earnest
appeals  of  a  friend  which  produce  deep  emotion ;  whatever,  in  a  word,  brings  God  and
eternity,  Christ  and  salvation,  nearer,  and  creates  a  sense  of  their  supreme  importance,
whatever  excites  a  craving  for  a  higher  good,  are  signs  that  God  is  working  for  us,  and
calls  to  "bestir"  ourselves  by  special  meditation,  prayer,  etc.  Wo  may  at  such  seasons
obtain  more  spiritual  blessing  in  an  hour  than  at  others  in  a  month.

III.  Is   BESPEOT  TO   THE   WARFABE   AND  WORK   OF   THE  ChUKCH   FOE  THE   ADVANCE


142


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  vl  1—23.


MBNT   OF   THE    KINGDOM   OF   GoD,   THERE   ABE    SIMILAR  SIGNS    FBOM   HEAVEN    ADAPTED

TO  STIMULATE  AND  ENCOUEAGB.  Such  are :  1.  EemorJsable  openings  made  for  the
entrance  of  the  gospel.  The  operations  of  Divine  providence  preparing  a  way  for  the
operations  of  Divine  grace.  These  may  be  on  a  small  scale,  laying  open  to  Christian
effort  an  individual,  a  family,  or  a  neighbourhood ;  or  on  a  large  scale,  0{^ening  a  con-
tinent crowded  with  scores  of  millions  of  the  human  race.  The  discoveries  of  travellers,
and  the  removal  of  barriers  and  obstacles  by  military  conquests,  are  thus  to  be  regarded.
India,  China,  Japan,  and  Africa  furnish  instances  of  God  going  befort  his  people,  and
calling  on  tliem  to  "bestir"  themselves  and  follow  whither  he  leads.  2.  Impressions
favnurable  to  religion.  In  one  person,  or  in  a  family,  a  congregation,  a  town,  or  a
nation.  Impressions  by  sickness,  by  war,  pestilence,  or  other  calamities;  or  by  signal
displays  of  the  Divine  goodness.  By  these  God  goes  before,  and  prepares  the  way  for
his  people  to  publish  more  diligently  and  earnestly  the  gospel,  with  good  assurance  of
success.  3.  Unvsual  religious  earnestness  in  Christians  themselves.  Extraordinary
emotions  of  love  and  zeal  towards  God  and  Christ  and  the  souls  of  men,  and  of  longing
to  rescue  the  perishing  and  enlarge  the  Church,  however  they  may  have  been  excited,
are  to  be  regarded  as  the  yearnings  of  God's  Spirit  in  the  Christian  heart,  and  as  calls
and  encouragements  to  exertion.  The  sign-  that  God  is  working  and  leading  his  people
to  victory  is  more  conspicuous  when  these  emotions  are  shared  by  many.  4.  Successes
in  the  Christian  war  summon  to  new  efforts  and  encourage  the  hope  of  new  successes.
Tbey  show  that  God  is  working,  and  assure  us  that  he  will  continue  to  work  with  his
faithful  servants. — G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEE  VI.


Ver.  1. — And  David  gathered  together.
The  lonp;  subjection  to  the  Philistines  was
at  an  end,  and  David's  first  care  is  to  bring
the  arlc  of  Jehovah  from  Kirjath-jearim  to
Jerusalem.  In  this  he  had  a  twofold  object.
For,  first,  it  was  au  act  of  piety,  testifying
David's  gratitude  to  God,  who  had  so  quickly
raised  him  from  the  condition  of  a  despairing
fugitive  hiding  away  in  the  cave  of  Adullam
to  that  of  a  victorious  king  reigning  over  an
independent  and  free  people.  But  David
had  also  a  political  purpose.  The  weakness
of  Israel  in  the  past  was  the  result  of  its
divisions.  He  would  heal  this  by  giving  it
a  capital,  whither  the  tribes  would  come  up
for  worship,  and  where  they  would  feel  that
they  formed  one  nation.  David  had  seen
the  evils  of  a  divided  sovereignty,  when  he
and  Ishbosheth  were  wasting  the  strength
of  Israel  in  civil  war.  For  more  than  half
a  century  he  remedied  this,  but  before  there
had  been  time  for  the  union  of  the  tribes  to
be  cemented  by  the  gradual  influence  of
religion,  Solomon's  oppressive  levies  of  un-
paid workmen,  forced  to  labour  in  his  costly
buildings,  and  the  despotic  stupidity  of
Eehoboam,  broke  up  united  Israel  iuto  two
feeble  states,  whioli  henceforward  had  to
struggle  hard  for  a  mere  existence.  The
condition  of  Israel  was  very  similar  to  that
of  the  United  States  of  North  America
before  their  great  civil  war ;  except  that
their  president,  elected  by  all  tlie  people.
Bind  their  Congress  at  Washington,  were  far
«tronger  bonds  of  union  than  any  that  were


possessed  by  the  Israelites.  Bat  when  there
was  danger  of  even  these  failing  to  keep
them  together  as  one  people,  the  statesmen
of  the  north  put  forth  their  utmost  powers,
and  spared  neither  life  nor  treasure,  because
they  saw  clearly  that  the  victory  of  the
south  meant  the  breaking  up  of  their  empire
into  a  multitude  of  feeble  governments,
which,  by  their  mutual  jealousies,  would  pa-
ralyze and  thwart  one  another.  With  equal
discernment  David  endeavoured  to  counter-
act the  jealousy  and  separate  action  of
the  tribes,  which  was  bringing  about  the
disintegration  of  Israel,  by  giving  them  a
point  of  union.  Had  he  gone  further  north
for  his  capital,  he  might,  perhaps,  have  over-
awed the  stubborn  tribe  of  Ephraim,  which
was  always  the  most  unmanageable  of  the
sections  of  Israel.  But  the  situation  of  Jeru-
salem upon  the  borders  of  Benjamin  and
Judah,  on  a  hill-top  which  neither  had
really  possessed,  and  which  was  marked  out
for  noble  use  by  its  wonderful  natural  con-
formation, fully  justified  David's  choice ;  and
it  has  had  the  assent  of  mankind  ever  since.
David  then  made  this  unrivalled  spot  his
capital,  and  placed  there,  first  of  all,  his
royal  residence,  whereby  it  became  the
centre  of  all  public  business  and  of  the
administration  of  law;  and,  secondly,  as
a  matter  of  still  higher  importance,  he
made  it  the  head-quarters  of  their  national
religion  and  the  abode  of  their  God.  We
see  the  weight  of  this  religious  influence  in
the  anxiety  of  Jeroboam  to  counteract  it,
and  in  the  strength  given  to  Rehoboam  by
the  migration  into  Judah  of  those  who  valued


m.  VI.  1—23.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


143


the  temple  services  more  than  their  worldly-
prosperity.  Even  Saul  had  valued  the
national  religion,  and  had  estahliehed  its
head-quarters  at  Nob;  but,  giving  way  to
the  ungovorned  anger  of  a  despot,  he  had
destroyed  his  own  work.  It  was  left  to  one
who  to  the  bravery  of  a  soldier  added  the
discernment  of  a  statesman  to  consolidate
the  tribes  into  a  nation  by  establishing  their
religion  upon  a  sure  and  influential  basis.
For  this  reason  also  he  made  their  services
full  of  delight  and  enjoyment  by  the  insti-
tution of  choral  chants  and  the  use  of  instru-
ments of  music;  while  the  psalms  which  his
singers  recited  were  so  spiritual  and  enno-
bling that  we  to  this  day  use  them  in  our
solemn  worship.  Granting  that  there  are
expressions  in  them  harsher  and  more  in-
tolerant than  a  disciple  of  the  loving  Jesus
would  now  apply  to  any  earthly  enemy,  yet,
as  a  whole,  the  Fsalms,  written  in  these
rough  far-off  times,  still  form  our  best  book
of  devotion!  In  the  parallel  place  in  the
First  Book  of  Chronicles  we  have  the  narra-
tive of  this  re-establishment  of  the  Mosaic
Law  given  as  looked  at  on  the  Levitical  side,
and  with  many  interesting  additions.  -  Here
the  narrator  looks  at  it  with  the  eye  of
a  statesman.  We  must  not,  however,  sup-
pose that  the  history  there  given  is  arranged
in  chronological  order,  as,  if  so,  the  two
victories  in  the  Valley  of  Eephaim  would
have  both  taken  place  in  the  three  months
during  which  the  ark  was  resting  in  the
house  of  Obed-Bdom.  If  this  were  so,  then
David  would  iirst  have  had  more  than  three
hundred  and  forty  thousand  warriors  with
him  at  Hebron  to  anoint  him,  and  with
their  aid  would  have  captured  Jerusalem.
He  would  next  have  assembled  thirty  thou-
sand picked  men  to  bring  the  ark  up  to
Zion;  and  yet  would  have  had  only  his
body-guard  of  "mighty  men"  wherewith  to
fight  Israel's  battles  and  win  its  indepen-
dence. Most  piobably  the  order,  both  here
and  in  Chronicles,  is  not  chronological,  and
the  course  of  events  was  as  follows.  With
the  help  of  the  men  gathered  at  Hebron
David  captures  Jerusalem.  As  soon  as  it  is
made  safe  they  withdraw,  and  leave  him
occupied  with  planning  out  and  biulding
his  city.  Alarmed  at  the  vast  concourse  at
Hebron,  and  made  angry  by  David's  seizure
of  a  strong  fortress,  the  Philistines  hastily
pounce  upon  him  in  numbers  too  vast  for
him  to  resist.  He  escapes,  leaving  but  a
few  men  to  defend  Jerusalem,  and  hides  in
his  old  fastness.  Encouraged  there  by  find-
ing three  of  his  mighties  more  than  a  match
for  the  garrison  at  Bethlehem,  he  gathers
the  more  valiaat  spirits,  and  makes  a  sudden
attack  upon  the  Philistines,  who  were  en-
gaged in  ravaging  the  country  as  a  punish-
ment for  its  rebellion.    They  are  defeated,


but  with  no  great  loss;  and  so  with  unbroken
strength  they  again  invade  the  country,  and
march  up  once  more  to  Jerusalem,  prepared
to  fight  a  pitched  battle,  and  seize  that
fortress  as  the  prize  of  victory.  Again,
David,  with  far  larger  forces,  surprises  them,
and,  driving  them  from  ridge  to  ridge,  so
utterly  vanquishes  them  that  the  power  of
Philistia  was  destroyed  for  ever.  It  was
after  this  double  victory  that  Hiram,  King
of  Tyre,  whose  dominiouB  bordered  upon
the  Philistines',  and  who  had  found  them
disagreeable  neighbours,  made  a  close  alli-
ance with  David;  and  so  at  length,  free
from  all  fear  at  home,  and  honoured  abroad,
he  was  able  to  turn  his  thoughts  to  the
consolidation  of  his  kingdom  and  the  estab-
lishment of  Jehovah's  worship.  And  in
the  Book  of  Chronicles  we  have  the  details
of  that  spiritual  service  of  psalmody  which
David  added  to  the  Levitical  routine  of
sacrifice,  and  which  bears  the  significant
name  of  "  prophecy,"  as  being  the  expression
of  the  moral  and  spiritual  side  of  the
Mosaic  Law  (1  Chron.  xxv.  1).  Instead  of
"Again  David  gathered,"  the  words  of  the
Hebrew  are  "  And  David  gathered  together
all  the  chosen  men  of  Israel."  The  first
gathering  was  at  Hebron  (ch.  v.  1),  and
before  they  came  David  must  have  given
kis  consent  to  their  wishes,  and  invited
their  presence  at  his  anointing.  They
soon  gather  together  a  second  time  to
endow  their  new  kingdom  with  the  safe-
guards necessary  for  their  spiritual  welfare,
and  the  maintenance  among  them  of  morality
and  virtue  and  the  fear  of  God.  Chosen
men.  This  usually  means  picked  men  fit
for  war.  But  doubtless  on  this  occasion  the
elders  and  all  good  men  possessed  of  power
and  influence  would  be  present  to  strengthen
the  king's  hand.  Thirty  thousand.  A  large
number,  but  not  too  large.  David  probably
chose  one  of  the  great  feasts  for  the
occasion,  and  by  the  presence  of  a  large
number  of  warriors,  and  the  display  of
much  military  pomp,  he  would  impress  upon
the  minds  of  the  people  the  value  of  re-
ligion. They  would  thus  learn  also  to
respect  their  new  capital  as  being  the  place
where  was  the  presence  of  their  Deity,  and
where  they  were  to  come  to  worship  him.

Ver.  2. — ^From  Baale  of  Jndah.  We  learn
from  Josh.  iv.  9,  60  that  Baalah,  or  Kirjath-
Baal,  "  the  city  of  Baal,"  was  the  old
Canaanite  name  of  Kirjath-jearim,  the  "  city
of  woods."  It  lay  about  eight  miles  west-
ward from  Jerusalem  (see  1  Sam.  vi.  21 ;
vii.  1,  2).  The  preposition  "  from  "  is  very
startling,  as  really  David  went  to  Baale.
Yet  all  the  versions  have  it,  but  they  put
on  Baale  an  incorrect  meaning.  Baal
means  "  lord,"  "  master,"  and  they  render,
"  David  went  with  all  the  people  that  were


lU


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[CH.  VI.  1—23.


with  him  from  [at,  of]  ihe  citizens  of  Judali,"
understanding  by  "master"  a  householder,
one  who  was  master  of  »  family.  The  real
explanation  probably  ii  that  the  narrator
wrote  according  to  the  sense,  and  not  accord-
ing to  the  grammar.  The  thought  in  his
mind  was  the  bringing  up  of  the  ark  from
its  long  resting-place,  and  not  the  prior
physical  necessity  of  going  down  to  the
place  where  it  was.  With  all  the  people.
David  had  consulted  with  "  the  captains  of
tbousanils  and  hundreds,  and  every  leader  "
(I  Chron.  xiii.  1),  and  it  was  with  their
good  will  that  he  drew  the  ark  of  God  out
_of  its  long  concealment.  A  select  body  of
these  nobles,  or  sheiks,  would  accompany  the
king,  while  the  rest,  with  their  attendants,
would  be  posted  along  the  eight  miles  of
road.  Whose  name  is  called  by  the  name.
In  the  Hebrew,  the  word  "  name  "  is  twice
repealed,  the  words  literally  being,  the  ark
of  JElohim,  wliereon  is  called  the  Name,  the
Name  of  Jehovah  of  Sabaoth.  Most  of  the
versions  omit  the  second  Name,  and  the
translators  of  the  Authorized  Version  also
felt  it  to  be  a  difficulty,  which  they  have
tried  to  escape  by  inserting  words  be-
tween the  two.  Eeally  it  is  a  most  in-
teresting sign  of  the  existence  at  this  early
date  of  a  special  reverence  for  the  name
"  with  four  consonants "  which  wo  call
"  Jehovah."  Subsequently  it  was  never  pro-
nounced, but  the  word  "Lord"  was  read  in-
•tead.  in  the  Revised  Version,  the  impor-
tance of  the  passage  is  well  brought  out  by
the  first  Name  being  written  with  a  capital,  of
the  use  of  which  the  Bevisers  ar.e  very  chary.
With  their  usual  inconseontiveness,  they
retain  Lobd  for  Jehovah,  thongh  this  is  "  the
Name,"  and  though  they  have  restored  the
word  Jehovah  in  several  less  important  plnces.
Ver.  3.— And  they  set  the  ark  of  God
(Hebrew,  made  it  ride)  upon  a  new  cart.
This  was  contrary  to  the  Levitical  Law,
which  required  that  only  Levifes  should
bear  the  ark,  and  ,that  it  should  be  veiled
even  from  their  eyes  (■Numb.  iv.  15).  But
this  misfal<e  is  not  surprising.  It  is  easy
enough  lor  us  to  turn  to  our  Bibles,  and  see
what  tlie  exact  letter  of  a  command  was.
But  such  reference  was  no  easy  matter  when
Iho  Law  was  contained  in  manuscripts  which
wore  rare  and  costly.  We  cannot  imagine
that  David  or  even  Abiathar  carried  a
manuscript  about  with  them  in  their  wandet-
12^3.  Duvid  very  probably  had  a  consider-
able Icuowloilge  of  the  Pentateuch,  gained
in  Samuel's  schools,  and  stored  up  in  his
memory,  iis  wms  the  custom  in  old  days
when  books  were  scaice.  But  this  know-
ledge would  be  chiefly  of  its  narratives  and
dootrincB,  and  would  comprise  such  portions
ng  Samuel  thought  most  fitting  to  influence
the  liveB  of  his  scholan,    Abiathar  probably


added  to  this  a  knowledge  of  all  such  rituu!
as  was  in  daily  nse  in  the  sanctuary  at  Nob.
He  had  fled  thence  in  terror,  escaping  alone
from  the  cruel  destruction  of  the  priests
by  Saul's  decree ;  but  even  there  the  restora-
tion of  the  Levitical  sprvices  had  been  too
recent  to  have  given  time  for  much  study  of
the  old  Law.  We  can  quite  believe  that  the
murder  of  the  priests  at  Nob,  following  upon
the  catastrophe  at  Shiloh,  had  reduced  the
knowledge  of  the  priests  to  a  very  low  ebb.
Now,  the  exact  way  of  bearing  the  ark  wag
a  matter  that  had  long  been  dismissed  from
their  memories,  but  they  would  call  to  mind
thnt  it  had  been  brought  to  Abinadab'g  house
in  a  new  cart  drawn  by  oxen ;  and  they  would
take  this  as  a  precedent,  which  would  justify
them  in  acting  in  the  same  manner  a  second
time.  But  in  so  solemn  a  matter  the  priests
ought  to  have  made  diligent  search,  and
have  gone  for  instruction  to  the  copies
which  they  possessed  of  the  Divine  Law,
David  did  so  subsequently  (1  Chron.  xv.  2),
but  possibly  there  was  no  such  copy  at
present  in  Jerusalem,  and  they  would  have
to  go  to  Kamah,  where  Samuel  would  deposit
whatever  records  he  had  saved  from  the  ruin
of  Shiloh,  and  where  the  great  work  of  the
prophets  was  to  study  the  sacred  books,
and  even  copy  them.  But  this  want  of
Inquiry  and  easy  assumption,  that  as  the  ark
was  brought  In  a  cart  to  Abinadab's  house,
so  in  a  cart  it  should  be  carried  away,  was
an  act  of  great  irreverence,  and  all  the
guilty  were  punished.  The  heaviest  blow
fell  on  the  house  of  AbinaJab,  which  lost  a
dear  son.  Entrusted  for  seventy  years  with
the  care  of  so  sacred  a  symbol  of  Jehovah'g
presence,  Ablnadab  and  his  family  ought  to
have  made  a  special  study  of  the  laws  con-
cerning it.  Apparently  they  left  it  very
much  to  itself;  for  it  is  never  said  that  God
blessed  them  for  their  care  of  it  as  he  did
Obed-Edom.  And  David  also  was  in  fault ;
for  he  ought  to  have  commanded  the  priests
to  make  diligent  search.  His  punishment
was  the  breaking  out  of  the  Divine  wrath,
terrifying  the  people,  and  turning  the  jny
of  the  (lay  to  mourning.  The  house  of  Abl-
nadab that  was  in  Gibeah  ;  really,  that  was
upon  the  hill.  TTzzah  and  Ahio,  the  sons  of
Abinadab.  "  Sons  "  in  Hebrew  is  used  in  a
large  sense,  and  these  two  men  were  probably
the  grandsons  of  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Abina-
dab, who  had  been  set  apart  to  keep  the  ark
For  seventy  years,  as  it  stems,  hud  passei
since  the  ark  was  hurriedly  put  in  Abina-
dab's house,  namely,  twenty  during  the
Phihstlne  supremacy  up  to  the  battle  of
Ebenezer,  forty  during  the  reign  of  Saul
and  about  ten  since.  As  Eleazar  niust  hav
been  thirty  years  of  age  for  his  conseora
tion  to  be  legal,  he  must  liavt  died  long  ago,
and  his  sons  would  be  old  and  decrepit


OH.  VI.  1— .23.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


145


men.  His  grandaons  would  be  in  the  prime
of  life.

Ver.  4. — ^Aooompanying  (Hebrew,  with)
the  ^rk.  The  Terse  ib  evidently  corrupt,  aid
we  have  no  aid  from  the  parallel  place  in
Chronicles,  except  the  fact  tliat  it  is  omitted
there.  The  most  probable  explanation  is
that  the  first  half  of  the  verse  has  been
repeated  from  rer.  3  by  the  error  of  some
copyist,  and  that  the  original  words  were
"  Uzzah  and  Ahio  drove  the  new  cart  with
the  ark  of  God,  and  Ahio  went  before  the
ark."  While  Uzzah  walked  at  the  side,  Ahio
went  before  the  oxen  to  guide  and  manage
them,  as  tbe  Basques  may  be  seen  at  tlie
present  day  doing  intlie  south  of  France.

Ver.  5. — ^Flayed.  The  word  does  not  mean
"played  on  a  musical  instrument,"  but
"  danced  and  rejoiced."  On  all  manner  ...  of
fir  wood.  The  Hebrew  literally  is,  with  all
cypreia-iBoods.  In  1  Obron.  xiii.  8  we  find
"  with  all  their  might,  even  with  songs,"  etc.
Gesenius,  in  his  '  History  of  the  Hebrew
Language,'  describes  this  as  a  mere  guess  at
a  misunderstood  text,  ai(d  Maurer  ridicules
it  as  a  stupid  emendation.  More  sensibly
Thenius  regards  it  as  the  right  reading,
and  the  words  here  as  a  corruption  of  it,
caused  by  some  scribe  misspelling  the  words,
which  are  nearly  identical.  In  our  version
the  ambiguous  meaning  of  the  word  "  played  "
makes  the  passitge  less  startling.  For  "  they
danced  with  all  cypress-woods"  is  unintelli-
gible. The  musical  instruments  mentioned
here  are  the  harp,  Hebrew  chinnor,  a^itar ;
the  psaltery,  Hebrew  neJiel,  a  kind  of  harp
of  a  triangular  shape,  with  the  point  down-
wards; the  timbrel,  Hebrew  tof,  a  tambour-
ine or  small  drum;  the  oomet,  Hebrew
mena'na',  a  bar  on  which  were  a  number  of
loose  metal  rings,  which  were  shaken  in  time
to  the  music,  but  others  think  that  "casta-
nets "  are  meant,  which  are  pieces  of  wood
beaten  in  time.  The  Bevised  version  adopts
this  rendering.  And  finally  cymbals.  For
"cornets"  we  find  in  the  parallel  place
"  trumpets,"  whence  the  translators  of  the
Authorized  Version  took  their  rendering;
but  the  Hebrew  word  means  "things  to
shake."

Ver.  6. — ^ITachon's  threshing-floor.  .  In  the
parallel  place  (1  Chron.  xiii.  9)  we  find
"  the  threshing-floor  of  Chidon,"  and  "  Chi-
don  "  is  proved  to  have  been  a  proper  name  by
the  feebleness  of  the  attempts  made  to  find
for  it  a  meaning.  We  therefore  gather  that
"  Nachon  "  ia  also  a  proper  name,  but  other-
wise we  should  certainly  have  translated  it
"  a  fixed  threshing-floor."  The  people  did
indeed  thresh  or  trample  out  their  com  often
on  summer  threshing-floort  (Dan.  ii.  3.5),  that
is,  on  fitting  spots  in  the  fields  themselves.
But  as  a  large  quantity  of  earth  was  sure  in
this  ca'je  to  be  mixed  with  tbe  corn,  they

n.  SAMUEL.


preferred  to  use  places  with  solid  floors  oi
pavements,  which  lasted  for  many  genera-
tions, and  often  became  well-known  spots
(Gen.  L  10).  Even  if  "  Nachon  "  be  a  proper
name,  this  would  be  a  permanent  floor,  paved
with  stones,  the  approaches  to  which  would
be  worn  and  made  rough  by  the  tracks  of
tlie  carts  bringing  the  corn.  Here  the  oxen
shook  it;  Hebrew,  etumbled,  and  so  the
Kovised  Version.  Nothing  is  said  of  the
ark  being  in  danger.  Uzznh's  act  was  one
of  precaution.  The  ground  was  rough,  the
oxen  stumbled,  and  he  put  forth  his  hand
to  hold  the  ark  till  the  cart  had  reached
level  ground.  If  the  threshing-floor  was
formed  in  tlie  natural  rock,  those  who  have
been  in  Spain,  and  seen  how  the  tracks  in
the  Pyreneus  are  worn  by  the  native  carts
into  deep  ruts  in  the  solid  stone,  can  well
undcrotund  that  the  neighbourhood  of  this
much-frequented  spot  would  need  very  care-
ful driving.

Ver.  7. — £rror.  The  word  so  translated
is  one  quite  unknown, -and  Ewald  renders  it
"  unexpectedly."  The  Bevised  Version  puts
"  rashness  "  in  the  margin.  But  all  threo
alike  are  more  guesses,  of  which  "error"
is  tliat  approved  by  Keil  and  others.  The
Syriac  has  the  same  reading  here  as  that
found  in  1  Ohron.  xiii.  10,  namely, "  because
he  put  his  hand  to  the  ark."  Tliis  would
require  the  insertion  of  four  or  five  letters
iu  the  Hebrew.  By  the  ark.  The  word
translated  "accompanying  the  ark"  in
ver.  4.

Ver.  8. — David  was  displeased;  Hebrew,
David  was  angry.  Neither  David  nor  his
people  had  intended  any  disrespect,  and  so
severe  a  punishment  for  what  was  at  most
a  thoughtless  act  seemed  to  him  unjust.
Uzzah'e  death  was  probably  caused  by  apo-
plexy, and  the  sudden  effort  of  stretphing
forth  his  hand  and  seizing  the  ark  had  been
its  immediate  cause.  So  tragic  an  event
spoiled  the  happiness  of  the  disty,  filled  all
present  with  disappointment,  made  them
break  off  in  haste  from  the  grand  ceremonial,
and  placed  David  before  his  subjects  in  the
position  of  a  malefactor.  He  had  prepared
a  great  religious  festival,  and  Jehovah  had
broken  in  upon  them  as  an  enemy.  In  his
first  burst  of  displeasure  he  called  the  place
Perez- Uzzah,  the  word  "Perez,"  or  "Breach,"
conveying  to  the  Hebrews  the  idea  of  a
great  calamity  (Judg  xxi.  15)  or  of  a  sudden
attack  upon  a  foe  (ch.  v.  20).  The  historian
adds  that  the  place  bore  this  name  unto
his  day ;  but  we  cannot  tell  whether  these
are  the  words  of  the  original  compiler  of  the
Book  of  Samuel,  or,  as  is  more  probably  the
case,  those  of  some  subsequent  editor  or
scribe.  Many  such  remarks  are  supposed
to  have  been  inserted  by  Ezra  and  the  men
of  the  great  synagogue.


146


THE  SECOND  BOOK  CP  SAMUEU


[oh.  vl  1—23.


Ver.  9. — ^Da-vid  was  afraid.  This  was  his
next  feeling.  Neither  he  nor  Uzzah  had
offended  wilfully,  and  bo  severe  a  punish-
ment  for  an  "  error "  made  him  dread  the
presence  of  so  dangerous  a  thing  as  the  ark
seemed  to  be.  Instead,  therefore,  of  taking
it  into  "  the  city  of  David,"  he  turns  aside
and  leaves  it  in  the  house  of  the  nearest
Levite.  In  both  liis  anger  and  his  dread
David  manifests  himself  to  us  as  one  whose
ideas  about  God  were  somewhat  childish.
He  regards  Jehovah  as  a  powerful  and  ca-
pricious Being,  who  mast  be  appeased.  He
had  attained  to  juster  views  in  Ps.  xvi.  and
other  such  trustful  hynins.

Ver.  10. — Obed-Edom.  We  find  two  Levites
of  this  name  among  David's  officials — one
belonging  to  the  family  of  Merari,  a  singer
end  doorkeeper  for  the  ark  (1  Chron.  xv.  18,
21,  24) ;  the  other  of  the  family  of  Korah
(1  Chron.  xxvi.  4,  5).  And  as  it  is  there
said  that  "God  blessed  him,"  he  probably
it  was  into  whose  house  the  ark  was  taken.
He  is  called  a  Gittite,  because  he  belonged
to  Gath-Bimmon,  a  Levitical  city  in  the
(lilie  of  Dan  (Josh.  xix.  45;  xxi.  24).

Ver.  11. — Jehovah  blessed  Obed-Edom.  So
far  from  there  being  anything  unlucky  in
the  ark,  its  presence  brings  with  it  a  manifest
blessing,  and  thus  David's  fears  are  allayed.
But  before  he  returns  to  his  purpose,  he
commands  that  proper  inquirer  be  made.
The  priests  must  examine  the  holy  book,
snd,  having  learned  from  it  where  his  former
conduct  was  wrong,  he  assembles  the  people
once  again  to  carry  the  ark  to  its  home
(1  Chron.  xv.  2,  12—15).

Ver.  12. — With  gladness.  The  words
mean,  "  in  a  joyful  procession  with  music
and  dancing."

Ver.  13. — When  they  that  bare  the  ark  of
Jehovah  had  gone  six  paces,  he  sacrificed
oxen  and  fatUngs;  -Hebrew,  an  ox  and  a
falling.  Many  suppose  that  David  sacri-
ficed an  ox  and  a  fatling  every  six  paces
along  the  whole  way  from  the  house  of
Obed-Edom,  which  was  probably  near  or
even  in  Jerusalem,  unto  the  tent  prepared
for  the  ark  in  Zion.  "Evidently  the  way
to  the  holy  city  was  a  way  of  blood.  The
stained  streets  of  Zion,  the  rivers  of  blood,
the  slaughtered  heaps  and  the  blaze  of  altar-
fires  formed  a  strange  contrast  to  the  danc-
ing, the  singing,  and  the  harping  of  the
multitudes  who  crowded  the  city"  (Sime,
'  Kingdom  of  All  Israel,'  p.  288).  It  is  not
nects.ary  to  suppose,  with  some  objectors,
that  the  ark  waited  till  each  sacrifice  was
completed,  or  that  the  road  thus  lined  with
victims  was  many  miles  in  length.  The
ark  did  not  remain  at  Perez-Uzzah,  but  was
carried  in  silent  awe  to  the  house  of  a
Levite ;  and  such  a  house  probably  was  not
to  be  found  until  they  were  inside  the  city


walls.  There  were  no  oonntiy  houses  in
a  region  lately  twice  ravagedby  the  Philis-
tines. But  there  is  an  objection  to  this
view,  namely,  that  it  is  not  the  sense  of  the
Hebrew.  What  is  there  said  is  that  at
starting,  after  stepping  six  paces,  David
sacrificed  an  ox  and  a  fatling  (by  the  hands,
of  course,  of  the  priests),  to  ask  a  blessing
upon  the  removal  of  the  ark,-  and  avert  all
misfortune.  In  Chronicles  we  read  nothing
of  this,  but  of  a  sacrifice  of  seven  bullocks
and  seven  rams  offered  by  the  Levites.
The  one  was  David's  offering  made  at  the
beginning,  to  consecrate  the  removal;  the
other  was  made  at  the  end,  and  was  a  thank
offering  of  the  Levites,  because  they  had
carried  the  ark  safely  (1  Ohron.  xv.  26).
The  Vulgate  has  a  remarkable  addition
to  ver.  12,  taken  doubtless  by  Jerome
from  manuscripts  which  existed  in  his
day.  It  is  as  follows :  "  There  were  with
David  seven  choruses  and  a  calf  as  victim."
The  fact  is  not  in  itself  improbable,  and
means  that  the  musicians  and  dancers
were  divided  into  bands  which  mutually
relieved  one  another.  And  as  a  sacrifice
was  also  a  feast,  each  band  had  a  calf
provided  for  it.  The  LXX.  omits  the  thir-
teenth verse  altogether,  and  substitutes  for
it,  "  And  seven  choruses  accompanied  him,
bearing  the  ark,  and  a  calf  and  lambs  as
a  sacrifice."

Ver.  14. — And  David  danoad.  The  word
used  means  the  springing  loond  in  half-
circles  to-  the  sound  of  music.  Conder  has
given  a  very  interesting  account  of  the
dancing  of  the  Malawiyeh,  which  consisted
in  turning  ronnd  in  whole  circles,  resting
on  the  heel  of  the  left  foot  ('Heth  and
Moab,'  p;  65,  ete.).  As  David  danced  with
all  his  might,  he  was  evidently  strongly
excited  with  religious  fervour.  We  have
the  expression  of  his  feelings  in  the  psalm
composed  for  this  occasion  (1  Chron.  xvi.
7 — 36) ;  subsequently  it  seems  to  have  been
rearranged  for  the  temple  service,  as  it  is
broken  up  into  Ps.  xcvi.  and  cv.  1 — 15.
Dancing  was  usually  the  office  of  the  women
(Exod.  XV.  20;  Judg.  xi.  34;  xxi.  21 ;  1  Sam.
xviii.  6);  but  men  may  also  have  often  taken
part  in  it,  as  Michal's  objection  was  that  it  was
unbefitting  a  king.  David  was  girded  wiin
a  linen  ephod.  David  wore  this  as  a  tightly
fitting  garment,  which  left  him  free  to  exert
himself  in  the  dance.  So  far  from  the  use
of  it  being  an  assumption  of  the  priestly
office,  it  was  regarded  by  Michal  as  an  act
of  humiliation,  as  it  was  a  dress  worn  even
by  a  child  when  admitted  to  service  in
a  priest's  family  (1  Sam.  iL  18).  Probably
David  did  mean  to  rank  himself  for  the
time  among  the  inferior  servitors  of  the  ark.
He  might  have  claimed  more.  In  the  theo-
cracy he  was  the  representative  of  Jehovah,


CH.  VI.  1 — 23.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


147


and  his  anointing  was  a  solemn  consecration
to  a  religious  office.  To  have  bnmed  incense
or  offered  sacrifice  would  have  been  to
invade  the  priestly  office,  an  office  parallel
to  "  the  administration  of  the  Word  and  the
sacraments,"  denied,  in  the  Thirty-Seventh
Article  of  the  Chuich  of  England,  to  princes.
To  wear  the  garb  of  a  servitor  was  to  do
honour  both  to  Jehovah  and  to  his  priests.

Ver.  16. — Kiohal  Saul's  daughter.  Pos-
sibly these  words  are  merely  to  identify
Michal,  but  they  suggest  the  thought  that,
as  a  king's  daughter,  she  valued  her  royal
dignity.  The  procession  evidently  passed
near  David's  palace,  and  his  wives  and
children  would  be  eager  spectators.

Vex.  17. — In  the  midst  of  the  tabernacle
(i.e.  tent).  This  tent  would  be  arranged  as
nearly  as  possible  like  that  erected  by  Hoses
in  the  wilderness.  The  ark  would  be  placed
in  the  holy  of  holies,  a  shrine  probably  of
cedar-wood,  and  the  burnt  offerings  and
peace  offerings  would  then  be  offered  and
would  consecrate  the  whole.  When  it  is
said  that  David  offered  them,  it  means  that
the  sacrifices  were  at  his  cost  and  by  his
command.

Ver.  18. — ^David .  .  .  Messed  the  people  in
the  name  of  Jehovah  of  hosts.  Blessing
the  people  was  an  important  priestly  func-
tion, for  which  a  special  formula  was  pro-
vided (Numb.  vi.  22—26).  But  this  did
not  deprive  the  king,  wlio  was  Jehovali's
anointed  representative,  of  the  right  of
also  blessing  them,  and  Solomon,  at  the
consecration  of  the  temple,  followed  his
father's  example  in  a  very  solemn  manner
(2  Ohron.  vi.  3).

Ver.  19.— A  cake  of  bread,  and  a  good
piece  .  .  .  and  a  flagon.  Of  the  first  of
the  three  gifts  thefe  is  no  doubt.  It  was  the
round  dough  cake  baked  for  sacrificial  meals
(Lev.  viii.  26).  So,  too,  there  is  no  doubt  of
the  third;  it  means  "a  cake  of  raisins"
(see  Cant.  ii.  5 ;  Hos.  iii.  1,  in  which  latter
place  raisins,  or  dried  grapes,  are  expressly
mentioned,  boldly  rendered  in  the  Authorized
Version  "  wine  ").  The  Revised  Version  has
given  the  correct  rendering  of  the  passage.
The  second  word  occurs  only  hero,  but  the
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version  is  that
of  the  Jews;  and  as  it  is  some  common
domestic  term  not  likely  to  be  found  in
literature,  but  well  known  in  every  kitchen,
they  are  most  probably  right.  On  the  same
sort  of  locial  authority  Jerome  renders  it  in
the  Vulgate  "  a  piece  of  beef  for  roasting."
As  it  is  coupled  with  the  bread  and  the
raisin-cake,  we  may  feel  sure  that  it  was
a  portion  of  the  flesh  of  the  animals  which
had  been  killed  in  Bacrifioe,  and  which  the

Cple  were  now  permitted  to  take  to  their
[les.  '  ^     .,  .

Yef,  20— lo  bless  his  household.  David,  ia


the  midst  of  his  public  duties,  was  not  for-
getful of  the  nearer  claims  of  his  own  family.
Doubtless  there  also  a  joyful  feast  would  be
prepared,  and  all  be  gathered  together  to
praiseOod  andrejoicewith  oneconsent.  Who
uncovered  himself  ...  as  one  of  the  vain
fellows  shamelessly  uncovereth  himself!
David's  offence  in  the  eyes  of  Michal  was,
not  his  dancing,  but  his  divesting  himself  of
his  royal  robes,  and  appearing  before  his
subjects  clad  in  the  dress  of  an  inferior
class.  The  Levites  were  to  occupy  a  humble
social  position  (see  Dent.  xiv.  29 ;  xxvi.  12),
and  Miclial's  words  are  a  proof  that  such
was  in  David's  time  the  case.  The  language
of  Michal  is  that  of  a  woman  vexed  and
irritated.  After  reminding  David  of  his
high  office  as  "  King  of  Israel,"  she  re-
proaches him  for  appearing  on  a  grand
public  occasion  without  the  upper  and  be-
coming robe  in  which  an  Oriental  enwraps
himself.  And  this  he  bad  done  before  the
female  slaves  of  his  own  servants,  with  no
more  self-respect  than  that  shown  by  the
"  vain  fellows."  "  Vain  "  is  the  "  raca  "  of
Matt.  V.  22,  and  means  "empty,"  void  of
virtue,  void  of  reputation,  and  void  of  worldly
means.  The  Hebrews,  when  expressing  the
greatest  possible  contempt  for  a  man,  called
him  an  "  empty,"  and  no  word  could  be  found
better  conveying  the  meaning  of  thorough
worthlessness.

Ver.  21. — It  was  before  He  Lord.  The
Hebrew  is  mnch  more  forcible  than  the
confused  rendering  of  our  version.  "  Before
Jehovah,  who  chose  me  above  thy  father,
and  above  all  his  house,  to  appoint  me
prince  over  Jehovah's  people,  over  Israel,
yea,  before  Jehovah  I  have  rejoiced  "  (Autho-
rized Version,  "played;"  but  see  notes  on
ver.  5).  The  preference  of  David  over  Saul
was  proof  that  that  king's  affectation  of
royal  state,  and  his  self-importance,  were
not  pleasing  in  Ood's  eyes.

Ver.  22.— And  of  the  maidservants  which
thou  hast  spoken  of;  of  them  shaU  I  be  had
in  honour.  These  words  have  been  variously
interpreted,  but  their  simplest  meaning  is
also  the  best ;  that  even  the  most  uneducated
women,  though  surprised  at  first  at  David's
want  of  stateliness,  would,  on  reflection,  be
led  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  greatness
of  God;  and  would  then  feel  that  even
a  king  was  right  in  owning  himself  to  be
nothing  in  God's  presence.

Ver.23.— Therefore  Michal.  The  Hebrew  is,
and  Michal  had  no  child.  Michal's  barren-
ness was  long  antecedent  to  this  outburst  of
pride,  and  was  not  a  punishment  for  it.  It
is  noticed  as  a  proof  that  the  blessing  of  God
did  not  rest  upon  her ;  and  as  such  it  waa
regarded  by  the  people,  and  doubtless  it
lessened  David's  affection  for  her.  We  must
not,  however,  suppose  that  he  imposed  apon


143


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  vt  1—23.


her  any  pTinishment  farther  than  this  ver-
bal reproof.  Nor  does  the  interest  lie  in
Miohal'B  conduct,  but  in  the  glimpse  which
the  narrative  ^ives  us  of  David's  tender
piety  towards  God,  so  exactly  in  agreement
with  the  feelings  which  animate  very  many
of  the  psalms.  To  unite  with  this  a  harsh
bitterness  to  the  woman  who  was  his  first
love,  who  Jiad  so  protected  him  in  old  time,
and  whom  he  had  summoned  back  at  the  first
opportunity  because  of  his  affection  f.n-  her,
is  a  thing  abhorrent  in  itself,  and  contrary
to  David's  character.  His  fault  in  domestic
matters  rather  was  that  he  was  over-fond,
not  that  he  was  unfeeling.  A  little  more
sternness  towards  Amnon  and  Absalom
would  liave  saved  liim  muuh  sorrow.  As
for  Michal,  the  story  sets  her  before  us  as
caring  a  great  deal  for  David,  and  not  much
for  Jehovah.  She  could  not  hiive  approved
of  such  a  number  of  rivals  in  David's  house-
hold, but  she  had  not  lost  her  love  for  him.
And  the  narrative  represents  her  as  not
having  Jehovah's  blessing  in  a  matter  so
greatly  thought  of  by  Hebrew  women,  and
as  valuing  too  highly  royal  state,  and  for-
getting that  above  the  king  was  God.  But
she  did  David  no  great  wrong,  and  received
from  him  nothing  worse  than  a  scolding.
In  the  parallel  place  (1  Chron.  xv.  29)  the
matter  is  very  lightly  passed  over ;  and  the
reason  why  it  holds  an  important  place  in
tliis  book  is  that  we  have  here  a  history  of
David's  piety,  of  bis  sin  and  his  punish-
ment. In  itself  a  slight  matter,  it  yet  makes
us  clearly  understand  the  nature  of  David's
feelings  towards  Jehovah.  It  is  also  most
interesting  in  itself.  For  David  is  the  type
of  a  noble  character  under  t?ie  influence  of
grace.  Michal,  too,  is  a  noble  character,  but
she  lacked  one  thing,  and  that  was  "  tLie  one
thing  needful."

The  removal  of  the  ark  is  a  matter  so
important  as  to  call  for  careful  considera-
tion. For  the  time  it  established  two  centres
of  worship — one  with  the  ark  at  Zion,  the
other  at  Gibeon.  The  ark  in  Saul's  days
had  been  forgotten  (1  Chron.  xiii.  3).  It
had  long  lain  in  the  house  of  a  simple
Levite  in  the  city  of  woods,  and  Saul's
religious  ideas  were  too  feeble  for  him  to
be  capable  of  understanding  the  importance
of  establishing  a  national  religion.  Still,
such  as  they  were,  they  made  him  summon
Ahiah,  the  grandson  of  Eli,  to  be  his
domestic  priest  (1  Sam.  xiv.  3);  and  sub-
sequently he  even  set  up  at  Nob  the
tabernacle  with  its  table  of  shewbrrad,  and
other   lioly  furniture,  saved  somehow  from

tJie  mil}  of  BUilols,  with  AUiroelechaa  high


priest  (I  Sam.  zxi.  1).  Bnt  when  in  a  fit
of  senseless  jealonsy  he  destroyed  hia  own
work,  the  nation  was  left  for  a  time  without
an  established  religion.  Gradually,  how-
ever, this  primary  necessity  for  good  govern-
ment and  national  morality  was  supplied— >
how  we  know  aot  j  but  we  find  a  tabernacle
at  Gibeon,  with  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings,
and  the  morning  and  evening  sacrifice,  and
apparently  the  same  service  as  that  erewhile
set  up  at  Nob;  only  Zadok  of  the  line  of
Eleazar  is  high  priest  (1  Chron.  xvi.  39,  40).
He  thus  belonged  to  the  senior  line,  while
the  last  survivor  of  the  race  of  Ithamar,
Abiathar,  Eli's  great-grandson,  was  with
David,  Gibeon  was  in  the  centre  of  the
tribe  of  Benjamin,  some  few  miles  from
Jerusalem,  with  Nob  lying  half-way  be-
tween; and  probably  Saul  had  permitted
this  restoration  of  Jehovah's  worship  at
Gibeon,  both  because  he  half  repented  of
his  deed,  and  because  the  worship  there  was
ministered  by  priests  not  allied  to  Ahimeleoh
and  Abiathar.  But  now  the  ark,  which
was  Jehovah's  throne,  had  been  brought  out
of  its  obscurity,  and  solemnly  placed  in  a
tabernacle  in  Zion,  with  Abiathar,  David's
friend,  the  representative  of  the  junior  line,
as  high  priest ;  and  probably  the  only  differ-
ence in  the  service  was  that  David's  psalms
were  sung  to  music  at  Zion,  while  the  Mosaio
ritual,  with  no  additions,  was  closely  followed
at  Gibeon.  There  was  thus  the  spectacle  of
two  high  priests  (ch.  viii.  17),  and  two  rival
services,  and  yet  no  tuDught  of  schism.
Zadok  had  been  one  of  those  foremost  in
making  David  king  of  all  Israel  (1  Chron.
xii.  28);  he  and  Abiathar  were  the  two  who
moved  Judah  to  bring  David  back  after
Absalom's  revolt  (oh.  xix.  11).  The  whole
matter  had  grown  out  of  historical  faots,
and  probably  David  always  intended  that
Zion  should  absorb  Gibeon,  and  be  the  one
centre  required  by  the  Levitical  Law.  But
he  was  content  to  wait.  Had  he  acted  other-
wise a  conflict  would  necessarily  have  arisen
beiween  the  rival  lines  of  the  priesthood,
and  between  Abiathar  and  Zadok,  the  two
men  who  represented  them,  and  who  were
both  his  true  friends.  We  find  even  Solomon
doing  great  honour  to  the  tabernaole  at
Gibeon  (2  Ohron.  i.  3,  etc.),  but  after  the
temple  was  bnilt  it  passed  away ;  and  the
race  of  Ithamar,  weakened  b^  the  calamity


OH.  VI.  1—23.]


tHjl  S&Gonh  BOOK  Oif  SAMtJEL.


m


at  Shiloh,  and  still  more  by  the  catting  off  of
80  many  of  its  leading  members  at  Nob,  never
recovered  itself  after  Abiathar  was  set  aside
by  Solomon  for  taking  part  with  Adouijah.
The  line  continued  to  exist,  for  members  of
it  returned  from  Babylun  (Ezra  viii.  2) ;  but
though  it  produced  a  prophet,  Jeremiah,  it
never  again  produced  a  high  priest,  and  there-
fore only  the  line  of  Eleazar,  to  which  Ezra
himself  belonged,  is  given  in  1  Chron.  vi.

Tlius  Abiathar's  misconduct  and  the
growing  fame  of  Jerusalem  put  an  end  to
all  fear  of  schism.  We  easily  trace  in  the
Psalms  the  increase  of  the  nation's  regard
for  Zion.  In  Ps.  xxiv.,  written  probably  by
David  to  celebrate  the  entry  of  the  ark
thither,  it  is  simply  "  the  bill  of  Jehovah
...  his  holy  place."  In  Ps.  ix.  it  is  "  his
dwelling,"  but  in  Ps.  xx.  n  higher  note  is
struck.  Zion  is  "the  sanctuary"  whence
Jehovah  sends  "help"  and  "strength;"
and  in  Ps.  xlviii.,  written  at  a  later  date,
Zion  is  found  installed  in  the  very  heart
of  the  people's  love.  Thus  the  Divine
blessing  rested  fully  upon  David's  work.
To  Jehovah's  Trorship  he  gave  a  grand
and  noble  centre,  which  from  his  day
has  bad   no  rival,  unless  it  be   in  some


respects  Rome.  The  city  of  David's  choic*
has  been,  and  continues  to  this  hour  to  be,
the  most  holy  sput  upon  earth  alike  to  the
Jew  and  to  the  Christian,  though  to  the
latter  it  is  so  because  of  David's  Son.  At
Zion,  moreover,  David's  spiritual  addition  to
the  Mosaic  ritual  has  given  the  Church  ita
best  book  of  devotion  and  the  brightest
part  of  its  services ;  for  every  hymn  sung
to  Grod's  glory,  and  every  instrument  of
music  played  in  God's  house,  is  but  the
continuance  of  the  prophesying  with  harp,
psaltery,  and  cymbal  (1  Chron.  xxv.  1),  first
instituted  by  David,  though,  like  all  that
was  best  in  David  personally  and  in  his
institutions,  it  grew  out  of  Samuel's  in-
fluence and  the  practices  of  his  schools  (1
Sam.  xix.  20).  Finally,  the  temple  services
were  doing  much  to  weld  the  discordant
tribes  into  one  nation,  and  would  have
succeeded  in  so  doing  but  for  the  unhappy
degeneracy  of  Solomon's  latter  years,  and
the  obstinacy  of  his  son.  Yet  even  so,
Jerusalem  remains  for  ever  a  memorial  of
the  genius  and  piety  of  this  extraordinary
man,  and  the  symbol  of  "Jerusalem  the
golden,  the  home  of  God's  elect."


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 11. — ^The  facts  are:  1.  David,  deeming  the  time  to  he  come  for  renfg^inizing
the  religious  services,  raises  a  select  force  wherewith  to  bring  .the  ark  liom  its
obscurity  at  Kirjath-jearim.  2.  Providing  a  new  cart,  the  ark  is  set  thereon,  and
brought  out  of  the  house  of  Abinadab  under  charge  of  his  two  sons.  3.  David  and  the
people  move  in  joyous  procession  before  the  ark  to  music  from  all  manner  of  instru-
ments. 4.  Arriving  at  a  certain  place,  Uzzah,  putting  forth  his  hand  to  steady  the  ark,
is  smitten  for  his  rashness,  and  dies  before  the  ark.  5.  Thereupon  David's  spirit  is
much  troubled,  and  is  filled  with  dread  at  the  thought  of  taking  charge  of  bo  sacred
and  terrible  a  treasure.  6.  David  is  restrained  by  this  apprehension  from  his  purpose,
and  meanwhile  leaves  the  ark  in  the  house  of  Obed-Edom.  7.  The  sojourn  of  the  ark
in  the  house  of  Obed-Edom  for  three  months  proves  an  occasion  of  great  blessing  to
him  and  his  family.  The  remarkable  events  of  this  section  naturally  arrange  themselves
in  a  threefold  order — the  bringing  up  of  the  ark ;  the  judgment  on  Uzzah ;  and  the
suspension  of  the  undertaking.  We  here  find  three  topics,  which  we  will  take  in
succession.

Bdigiotts  restorations.  L  Religion  is  the  foundation  of  national  prospebitt.
This  is  the  interpretation  of  David's  action  in  seeking  to  bring  the  ark  out  of  its
obscurity  to  the  central  seat  of  government.  Prom  the  time  when  the  ark  was
captured  by  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  iv.)  and  its  deposit  at  Kirjath-jearim  (1  Sam.  vi.
21),  all  through  the  reign  of  Saul,  with  the  exception  of  the  brief  revival  at  Ebenezer,
the  religion  of  the  nation  had  been  at  a  low  ebb.  That  so  sacred  a  treasure  should
have  been  left  In  obscurity,  without  the  forms  and  order  of  worship  enjoined  in  the  Law
of  Moses,  was  an  indication  of  spiritual  decadence,  and  goes  far  to  account  for  tb^


150  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1— 2a

political  weakness  of  the  nation  during  the  life  of  Saul.  David  saw  clearly  that  the
elevation  of  his  people  depended  chiefly  on  two  things — ^vigorous,  enlightened  statesman-
ship, and  fidelity  in  all  things  to  their  covenanted  God.  The  establishment  of  a  strong
centre  of  government  at  Jerusalem  was  one  step ;  but  he  saw  that,  if  the  nation  was  to
fulfil  its  highest  destiny,  the  prosperity  he  desired  must  also  rest  on  a  strictly  religious
foundation.  Hence  the  effort  to  restore  religious  life  by  bringing  up  the  ark  of  the
covenant.  Leaving  out  of  view  the  particular  form  of  religion,  and  the  symbolism
appropriate  to  that  stage  in  the  development  of  God's  revelation,  we  can  see  how
profoundly  wise  David's  judgment  was.  The  human  activities  developed  in  national
civilized  life  can  only  be  counted  on  to  run  into  right  and  safe  channels,  and  to  avoid
mutual  destruction,  when  they  are  pervaded  by  the  spirit  of  true  godliness.  Wealth,  art,
science,  commerce,  military  display,  free  and  easy  interchange  of  thought, — these  are
not  self-preservative,  these  do  not  give  rest  to  the  heart,  these  do  not  check  the
tendencies  that  carry  in  themselves  the  germs  of  decay  and  death.  Only  when  the
national  mind  is  pnrified,  rendered  calm,  self-restrained,  and  God-like  in  feeling  by
knowledge  and  worship  of  the  Holy  One  is  there  a  guarantee  that  all  will  go  well  and
endure.  This  is  taught  in  the  history  of  Greece,  Rome,  and  other  lands  where  God
was  not  honoured  by  proper  worship,  and  his  Spirit  not  cherished  in  daily  life ;  and  it
is  the  strenuous  teaching  of  prophets  and  apostles,  and  especially  of  the  Saviour,  who
makes  clear  what  is  the  light  of  the  world  and  the  healing  of  the  nations.

IL  The  bbstoeation  of  bbligion  is  an  event  of  gbbat  jot.  The  very  idea  of
a  restoration  of  the  piety  of  former  days  was  to  David  an  inspiration.  His  calling  the
chief  men  from  all  quarters  of  the  land,  his  expounding  to  them  his  sense  of  what  was
due  to  the  symbol  of  God's  presence,  his  grand  processional  march,  and  the  exuberant
delight  with  which  he  sang  and  danced, — reveal  the  high  appreciation  he  bad  of  the
great  turn  now  coming  in  the  religious  life  of  the  nation.  The  awakening  of  a  new
enthusiasm  by  his  influence  certainly  was  a  remarkable  incident  in  the  national  life
regarded  in  contrast  with  the  stolid  indifference  of  the  age  of  Saul.  The  power  of
a  new  and  healthy  religious  emotion  over  all  the  faculties,  and  consequently  over  all
departments  of  activity,  is  very  great,  giving  elevation,  spring,  and  purpose  to  all  that
is  done  or  attempted.  In  this  case  there  were  special  elements  entering  into  the  joy.
The  ark  was  the  symbol  of  God's  presence;  it  contained  the  overshadowed  mercy-seat,
which  told  of  forgiveness  and  communion ;  it  was  the  exponent  of  covenant  relation-
ship, and  the  prophetic  indicator  to  the  devout  mind  of  a  glory  yet  to  be  revealed,  and
of  a  covenant  on  wider  basis  and  embracing  vaster  blessings.  Ezra  knew  something
of  this  joy  of  restoration  of  religion  to  its  proper  position.  There  was  joy  also  when,
after  centuries  of  error  and  wrong,  the  attention  of  men  was  directed  once  more  by
Luther  and  his  coadjutors  to  the  mercy-seat  where  men  could  find  a  new  and  living
way  of  access  to  the  Father.  No  greater  occasion  for  joy  could  arise  for  our  own  land
than  a  full  national  enthusiasm  for  those  sacred  deposits  of  truth  and  holy  influence
which  God  has  given  us  in  his  revelation  and  in  the  institutions  of  his  Church.  What
is  thus  true  of  restorations  on  a  large  scale  holds  of  our  own  lives,  when,  after  seasons
of  dreary  separation  from  our  God  and  cold  miserable  observance  of  occasional  acts  of
worship,  we  go  forth  with  all  our  soul  after  the  living  God,  and  welcome  him  afresh  to
our  love  and  trust  as  the  God  of  our  salvation.

IIL  Indirect  personal  influence  conduces  to  a  kestokation  of  beliqion.  It  is
instructive  to  see  how,  in  the  providence  of  Gud,  great  movements  have  sprung  out  of
individual  consecrations.  The  soul  of  David,  purified,  elevated,  and  aroused  to  grasp
spiritual  realities,  was  the  human  spring  of  this  great  change.  Of  course  his  official
position  would  secure  attention  to  his  requests  and  commands;  but  it  depended  on  the
bent  of  his  mind  as  to  the  form  and  scope  of  his  commands.  This  reformation  pro-
ceeded from  him,  but  not  entirely  by  direct  personal  influence.  His  tone  and  manner,
his  habits  of  devotion  and  strict  regard  for  God's  will,  would  tell  on  those  in  direct
contact  with  him;  but  that  was  not  enough.  Hence  in  his  sagacity  he  summoned
select  men  from  all  parts  of  the  land,  and  through  them  sought  to  act  on  the  thousands
who  could  not  leave  their  hom£s.  This  call  from  all  towns  and  villages  would  awaken
thought  there,  would  lead  to  explanations,  would  quicken  conscience,  would  disseminate
his  ideas  and  the  enthusiasm  of  his  spirit,  would  create  the  feeling  that  a  holier  and
wiser  time  was  at  band ;  and  when,  subsequently,  the  thirty  thousand  returned  home,


CH.  VI.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  151

they  would  further  diffuse  the  influence  caught  by  contact  with  the  godly  king,  and
contribute  elements  of  good  to  their  respective  localities.  The  great  reformations  of  the
world  have  all  been  effected  thus.  Few  come  into  direct  personal  contact  with  the
originators.  The  multitude  get  the  secondary  influences.  Nor  can  we  tell  how  far  our
influence  may  thus  be  diffused.  The  wave  moves  on  in  proportion  to  the  susceptibility
of  those  who  first  receive  its  impact.  The  question  of  indirect  influence  deserves  much
consideration  on  the  part  of  Churches  and  individuals.

IV.   A  TIME  OF  BEFORMATION    IN    RELIGION  DEVELOPS  MUCH   FEELING   NOT   PURELT

SPIRITUAL.  Although  a  great  interest  was  awakened  by  David's  zeal  in  the  restoration
of  the  more  regular  worship  of  God,  yet  we  must  discriminate  between  such  devout
feelings  and  clear  views  of  spiritual  things  as  were  true  of  him,  and  the  vague  sentiments
of  the  multitude.  If  Ps.  Ixviii.  and  cxxxii.  may  be  taken  as  indicative  of  his  real  state
of  mind,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  all  the  rest  who  joined  in  the  procession  or  were
stirred  to  excitement  in  tiieir  homes  rose  to  the  same  height  in  the  religious  life.
Men  cannot  help  being  roused  when  powerful  religious  minds  put  forth  their  energies  ;
and  in  some  instances  they  are  awakened  to  a  really  new  spiritual  life ;  but  contagion  of
thought  and  sentiment  and  fervid  interest  in  a  great  public  movement  are  not  the  same
as  vital  godliness.  They  may  be  better  than  dull  indifference,  and  may  even  serve  as
a  step  to  a  higher  and  more  permanent  elevation,  yet  if  they  be  all  the  reformation  is
very  superflcial.  Forming  an  estimate  on  the  general  rules  that  govern  human  action,
we  may  be  sure  that  many  who  sang  and  danced  before  the  ark  were  only  nominal
worshippers,  and  liad  but  slight  sympathy  with  the  deep  meaning  of  the  words  of  the
psalmist.  The  same  was  true  of  the  Protestant  Beformation.  Multitudes  took  an
interest  in  doctrinal  discussions  and  in  the  freedom  from  priestly  domination  who
knew  little  of  that  inner  spiritual  life  which,  in  the  case  of  Luther  and  the  leaders,
found  its  core  in  personal  union  with  Christ.  Our  modern  revivals  are  to  be  estimated
in  the  same  way.  We  may  be  thankfui  that  crowds  flock  to  sing  and  hear  and
welcome  ostensibly  the  true  Ark  of  the  covenant,  and  many,  no  doubt,  sing  with  the
understanding  and  rejoice  in  spirit,  but  the  mass  have  still  to  be  regarded  as  relatively
atrangers  to  &e  new  and  deeper  life.

Human  jvdgments  on  Divine  acts  of  jvdgment.  The  part  of  the  narrative  referring
to  the  conduct  of  Uzzah  and  the  consequences  to  himself  always  awaken  in  the  reader
a  feeling  of  surprise  at  the  apparent  disproportion  of  the  punishment  to  the  offeuce.
Sympathy  is  felt  with  the  feeling  of  David,  who  was  "displeased,"  and  could  no
further  carry  out  his  project  of  conveying  the  ark  to  Jerusalem.  Evil-minded  men
have  not  been  alone  in  pointing  to  this  record  as  an  evidence  of  what  they  would  call
the  unworthy  representations  of  the  Divine  Being  contaiaed  in  the  Old  Testament.  It
is  well  to  look  this  difBculty  fully  in  the  face,  and  see,  if  possible,  how  lar  man  is
warranted  to  express  a  judgment  at  all  upon  an  event  so  terrible  and  seemingly  inex-
plicable, on  such  principles  at  least  as  govern  human  acts  of  justice.    Note  here —

I.  The  reasons  fob  Divine  judgments  are  not  always  apparent  to  man,  and
YET  may  be  most  VALID.  It  is  a  first  principle  that  the  "  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "
cannot  but  do  right.  That  is  the  solid  rook  on  which  to  rest  when  events  occur  in
proviueiice  that  do  not  admit  of  explanation.  It  is,  further,  a  sound  position  that  God
looks  at  the  inner  life  of  men,  and  knows  exactly  the  tone  and  spirit  concealed  from
human  view;  and  it  is  this  condition  of  the  inner  man,  and  not  the  bare  outward  act,
which  constitutes  the  real  character  and  determines  the  moral  value  of  the  action  in
the  sight  of  God.  Also,  incidental  actions  are  incidental  in  their  form  because  of
passing  circumstances;  but  the  state  of  mind  out  of  which  they  spring  is  permanent;
for  given  two  minds  of  different  spiritual  tone  and  bias,  they  will,  when  placed  under
pressure  of  the  same  external  circumstances,  produce  totally  different  actions.  Now,
we  have  a  right  to  assume,  prima  facie,  that,  if  there  are  no  adequate  reasons  for  the
sudden  terrible  punishment  discoverable  in  the  bare  and  apparently  well-disposed  act
of  Uzzah,  there  must  have  been,  in  his  habitual  state  of  feeling  towards  the  symbol  of
God's  presence  and  the  whole  events  of  the  day,  something  determinately  evil,  and  of
which  that  which  seemed  to  others  to  be  an  innocent  act  was  known  by  God  to  be  the
natural  outcome.  That  was  the  case  in  the  destruction  of  Dathan  and  Abirain.  The
falsehood  of  Ananias  was  outwardly  only  like  other  falsehoods,  but  we  are  told  that


162  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—23,


God  Baw  something  more  than  the  ordinary  antecedent  of  a  lie  in  common  life.  There
have  been  judgments  on  nations  and  families  and  individuals,  and  are  still,  which
do  come  in  the  providence  of  God,  but  the  hidden  reasons  of  which  only  eternity  will
reveal  As  our  Saviour  during  his  earthly  life  often  spoke  to  the  unuttered  thoughts
of  men,  and  not  to  meet  definite  words,  so  here  and  in  other  cases  the  Divine  act
was  doubtless  to  meet  an  unuttered,  a  permanent,  not  fully  expressed  state  of  mind,  of
which  Uzzah  was  conscious,  hut  of  which  men  knew  little.  The  same  will  be  true
of  future  judgments  of  God ;  they  will  be  based,  not  on  the  ostensible  act  merely,  but
on  the  tenor  of  the  whole  life  (Matt.  vii.  22,  23  ;  xxv.  40 — 46).

II.  The  aniLT  of  actions  is  depekdent  vert  much  on  privileges  enjoyed.
The  Philistines  had  handled  the  ark  (1  Sam.  v.  1,  2),  and  no  immediate  evil  came  to
them  for  so  doing.  Their  subsequent  affliction  seems  to  have  been  owing  to  their
detention  and  mockery  of  the  ark  (I  Sam.  v.  3 — 7),  not  to  the  fact  of  touching  it.
But  it  was  a  positive  injunction  that  the  Levites  should  not  touch  the  sacred  thing
(Numb.  iv.  15) ;  and  the  particular  injunction  was  illustrated  and  rendered  more
significant  by  the  regulation  that  the  ark  should  always  be  carried  on  staves,  thus  not
needing  the  touch  of  any  hand.  The  Philistines  were  men  "without  law;"  Uzzah
was  a  man  "  under  law."  The  whole  history  of  his  people  in  relation  to  ceremonial
had  been  full  of  instruction  of  the  same  kind.  The  guilt  of  a  deed  depends  on  previous
knowledge  or  means  of  obtaining  knowledge.  Capernaum  is  not  judged  by  ttie  same
rule  as  the  [leople  of  Sodom.  The  Jew  is  pronounced  Jnexcusable  because  of  his
superior  light  (Rom.  ii.).  Severer  punishment  comes  on  those  who,  possessing  gospel
light,  do  deeds  worthy  of  darkness  (John  iii.  19  ;  Heb.  x.  29).  Judgment  may  fall  on
the  "  house  of  God"  which  would  not  come  on  those  not  in  the  house  (1  Pet.  iv.  17).

III.  Ikdiffebenok  to  Divine  laws  is  pkoseessivb.  The  disregard  of  the  well-
known  injunction  in  this  case  was  probably  the  culmination  of  an  indifference  which
had  been  growing  for  a  long  time.  An  evil  tendency  or  mental  habit  may  be  in  pro-
cess of  formatiou,  and  may  constitute  a  state  of  actual  spiritual  degeneracy,  a  long  time
before  an  occasion  occurs  for  its  manifestation  in  any  overt  act  that  is  distinctly  in
violation  of  positive  law.  The  degeneracy  which  was  far  too  common  during  the
reign  of  Saul  doubtless  had  penetrated  to  the  home  of  Uzzah,  and  the  neglect  of  honour
paid  to  the  ark  during  those  long  years  of  its  stay  in  his  father's  abode,  together  with
the  kind  of  familiarity  with  it  bred  of  its  presence  as  a  relic  of  a  former  elaborate
ritual,  could  not  but  have  resulted  in  a  rather  decided  insensibility  to  the  sacredness
of  minute  regulations.  The  act  of  touching  the  ark  may  have  been  a  consequence  of
this  condition,  and  the  "  error,"  or  "  rashness,"  spoken  of  (ver.  8)  may  indicate  that
there  was  not  in  him  that  quickness  of  spiritual  sensibility  which  would  at  once  have
seen  that  no  casual  circumstance  cau  set  aside  a  command  based  on  a  great  and  Divine
order  of  things.  There  is  not  a  more  subtle  evil  of  our  life  than  this  gradual  deepening
of  indifference  arising  from  neglect  of  spiritual  culture  and  encouraged  by  unthoiightful
familiarity  with  sacred  things.  The  conscience  passes  through  stages  of  dejieneration
till  we  come  to  do  things  without  compunction  which  once  would  have  caused  us
anguish  of  spirit.  How  far  our  children  are  in  danger  from  constant  familiarity  with
religious  phrases  and  usages  is  a  serious  question.  The  same  applies  also  to  oralnary
worshippers  in  our  sanctuaries.

IV.  Thebe  is  positive  impiety  ih  distrusting  God's  provision  fob  the  safety
OP  his  own  globy.  The  ark  was  the  visible  symbol  of  God's  presence.  His  glory  was
there,  so  far  as  it  could  be  manifested  in  visible  form  to  man  at  that  stage  of  his
religious  education.  The  command  that  no  Levite  should  ever  touch  it  was  among
the  arrangements  made  for  its  stay  among  the  people.  All  such  arrangements  of  Gbd
are  made  on  full  prevision  of  every  possibility.  To  say  that  circumstances  might  arise
when  the  command  would  be  inadequate  to  the  maintenance  of  the  ark  in  its  integrity
among  men,  would  be  an  impeachment  of  the  Divine  wisdom  and  power.  The  com-
mand had  reference  solely  to  human  action,  and  did  not  reveal  what  reserve  of  power
and  appliance  there  might  be  for  securing  the  safety  of  the  ark  at  all  times.  Common
sense,  to  say  nothing  of  religious  faith,  ought  to  have  taught  that  the  Eternal  would
take  care  of  his  own  if  he  declined  the  aid  of  man,  or  at  least  that  it  was  his  will  that
his  own  should  suffer  temporary  injury  now  and  then.  It  was  irrational  and  imjaous,
therefore,  to  distrust  his  provision  for  securing  his  own  ends.    The  putting  forth  of  ths


OH.  VL 1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  163

hand  in  contravention  of  the  command  may  have  been  the  expreesion  of  this.  lt«
same  applies  equally  to  the  New  Testament  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God  In
Christ,  for  times  of  danger  and  of  seeming  safety  he  has  enjoined  on  us  certain  con-
duct in  relation  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  which  proceeds  on  the  presupposition  that
he  has  means  of  securing  the  integrity  of  that  kingdom  on  the  basis  of  our  restricting
our  conduct  to  that  prescribed  order.  By  prayer,  by  truthfulness,  by  spirituality  of
mind,  by  love,  by  persuasive  words,  by  blameless,  meek  lives,  by  quiet  faith  in  the  invisible
power  of  the  Spirit,  we  are  to  do  our  part  in  relation  to  the  preservation  of  the  integrity
of  the  kingdom,  and  to  its  processional  march  to  final  triumph.  If,  when  supposing  it
liable  to  suffer,  or  when  observina;  a  great  shook  arising  from  the  circumstances  of  its
position  in  our  time,  we  depart  from  the  order  laid  down,  and  trim  to  the  world  and
become  uiispiritual  and  untruthful,  or  depend  less  on  faith  in  the  invisible  power  of  the
Holy  Spirit  than  on  mere  human  science  and  social  influences,  then  we  virtually  fall
into  this  view  of  the  sin  of  tJzzah,  we  distrust  God's  provision  for  securing  in  the
wurld  those  interests  that  are  bound  up  with  the  work  and  Person  of  Christ.  Man  is
responsible  for  the  observance  of  what  is  enjoined,  not  for  imaginary  temporary  con-
sequences that  will  ensue  from  an  observance  of  what  is  enjoined.  Here  is  the  clue  to
hosts  of  failures  of  duty  and  wretched  expediencies.

V.  Profound  beverencb  ab  an  element  of  chakacteb  is  of  fbime  iufobtanob
IN  PERSONAL  AND  NATIONAL  LIFE.  No  great  character  is  formed  without  profdund
revorence  as  a  chief  feature.  Men  are  mean,  weak,  morally  low,  in  so  far  as  they  are
trifling  and  destitute  of  awe.  The  spirit  of  levity,  which  treats  all  things  as  common
and  fit  subjects  for  free  and  thoughtless  handling,  never  reads  the  great  lessons  of
existence,  and  never  wins  respect.  A  reverent  man  alone  forms  a  true  estimate  of  him-  ^
self  in  relation  to  the  vast  oi'der  of  things  of  which  he  is  but  a  part.  An  irreverent
nation  lacks  the  strong,  sober  qualities  which  alone  grow  out  of  reverence  as  their  root,
and  which  alone  can  produce  noble,  strenuous  actions.  Now,  the  whole  drift  of  the
Mosaic  ritual  and  commands  was  lo  develop  and  foster  reverence  in  the  people.  The
solemnities  and  details  in  reference  to  the  ark,  the  sanctuary,  the  altars,  the  sacrifices,
the  cleansings,  and  assemblies  were  rational  in  their  specific  relations.  The  great  gather-
ing at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  and  the  solemn  restrictions  there  laid  dovro  (Exod.  xix.),  were
evidently  designed  to  develop  a  becoming  "  fear  of  the  Lord"  and  profound  regard  for
sacred  things.  The  judgment  on  Dathan  and  Abiram  was  a  check  on  a  tendency  to
irreverence.  The  very  hope  of  the  people  depended  on  the  due  maintenance  of  this
reverent  spirit.  All  had  understood  the  command  not  to  touch  the  ark  in  that  light,
and  the  judgment  on  Uzzah  for  the  violation  of  that  command  was  only  another  solemn
way  of  impressing  the  people  with  the  prime  importance  of  this  feeling.  Hence,  also,
our  care  to  encourage  such  forms  of  worship  as  best  foster  reverence  of  spirit,  and  such
styles  of  teaching  as  exhibit  the  facts  and  principles  from  the  recognition  of  which
reverence  will  naturally  arise.  Hence,  again,  our  appreciation  of  those  providential  events,
such  as  sickness,  bereavement,  and  stupendous  manifestations  of  untraceable  wisdom
and  power,  which  awaken  or  strengthen  the  feeling,  "  Great  and  holy  is  the  Lord :  who
shall  stand  in  his  presence  ?"

VI.  Thebb  is  an  EDUCATIONAL  CHABACTBB  IN  JUDOHENT8.  The  dull  heart  of  man
often  needs  something  more  than  the  still  small  voice  and  quiet  order  of  events  to  arouse
it  to  a  sense  of  what  is  due  to  God  and  what  is  wisest  and  best  for  man.  In  every
judgment — say  of  Sodom,  of  Pharaoh,  of  Dathan,  of  Ananias — there  is  pure  justice;  no
wrong  is  done  to  the  individuals  concerned ;  but  the  acts  have  a  reference  beyond  the
persons  atfected  thereby.  The  contemporaries  of  Abraham,  the  Egyptians,  Israel  In  the
desert,  and  the  primitive  Church,  were  instructed  by  what  occurred  in  their  midst.
Many  judgments  are  connected  with  the  explicit  statement  that  "the  nations  may
know."  The  judgment  on  Uzzah  formed  part  of  the  educational  process  by  which  God
was  bringing  the  people  out  of  their  low  spiritual  condition  to  the  elevation  in  tone
which  would  render  them  more  effective  in  carrying  out  Divine  purposes  in  the  world.
We  cannot  fully  estimate  how  much  we  owe  to  the  influence  over  us  of  the  record  of
God's  judgments  contained  in  his  Word.  Nor  is  it  enough  to  say  that  they  are  repres-
sive in  their  influence,  and  not  conducive  to  the  developing  of  love  and  filial  trust  and
the  free  joy  of  a  superior  life ;  for  the  repression  and  restraint  of  evil  tendencies  is
reauisite  in  creatures  strongly  under  their  influence,  and,  while  checking  from  what


154  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1— 2a

would  Boon  be  utter,  hopeless  ruin,  ttey  open  the  way  for  the  action  of  other  gentle,
tender  influences  which  do  develop  the  free  joyous  spirit  of  the  obedient  child.

VII.  The  bkveeitt  and  goodness  or  God  aee  perfeotlt  consistent  and  often
COEXIST.  It  is  bad  theology  based  on  defective  knowledge  of  Scripture  to  represent
God  in  an  exclusive  aspect  of  mildness.  Though  we  need  not  become  material  in  our
conceptions,  and  think  of  contrary  attributes  in  him  as  so  many  quasi-physical  forces
contending  one  against  the  other  or  finding  an  outlet  at  the  expense  of  one  another,  yet
the  very  conception  of  love,  when  just,  implies  a  rigid,  severe  guardianship  of  the  order
of  things  on  which  the  welfare  of  the  holy  depends.  This  combination  shines  forth  in
the  death  of  Uzzah.  In  case  he  was  a  really  devout  man,  and  simply  in  an  unguarded
moment  of  unwatchfulness  put  forth  his  hand,  then  his  sudden  death — though  neces-
sary to  the  maintenance  of  the  ritual  which  we  have  seen  was  based  on  the  principle
of  inculcating  reverence,  and  useful,  as  an  educational  act,  for  the  people — would  not
include,  necessarily,  loss  and  ruin  in  the  next  life.  He  might  be  saved,  though  as  by
fire.  This  combiuation  of  severity  and  goodness  shines  forth  most  conspicuously  in  the
work  of  our  Saviour,  in  whose  life  and  death  the  reprobation  of  sin  and  the  outflow  of
mercy  to  sinners  form  the  two  elements  which  reader  the  cross  a  mystery  of  justice
and  mercy.

Distrust  a  foil  to  faith  and  love.  It  is  said  that  David  was  displeased,  and  in  his
displeasure  there  arose  a  fear  hitherto  unknown  to  him,  and,  as  a  consequence  of  the.'^e,
the  enterprise  on  which  he  had  entered  with  so  much  joy  and  confidence  was  abandoned
till,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  the  reward  which  came  to  Obed-Edom's  laith  and  love,
standing  in  contrast  with  David's  gloomy  imaginings,  brought  him  round  to  a  better
mind.

I.  Discontent  with  the  okdee  op  Pkovidence  pboceeds  from  a  combination
OF  self-will  and  ignoeance.  David  was  dissatisfied  and  vexed  in  spirit  with  what
had  occurred  to  interrupt  the  joyous  carrying  out  of  his  programme.  It  was  not
so  much  dissatisfaction  with  what  Uzzah  bad  done,  or  pain  that  he  was  dead,  but
annoyance  that  for  such'a  deed  the  great  terror  of  death  should  have  come  on  them  all.
Had  he  spoken  out  all  his  feelings  and  thoughts,  he  would  have  said  that  such  an
event  was  undesirable,  out  of  proportion  to  the  deed,  and  an  intrusive  disturbance  of
a  great  and  important  ceremonial.  Had  he  been  at  the  head  of  authority,  no  such
calamity  as  that  should  have  interfered  with  a  grand  national  undertaking.  Possibly,
apart  from  frustration  of  his  own  immediate  plans  for  festivity,  he  may  have  been
apprehensive  of  the  effect  of  such  a  dreadful  doom  upon  the  mass  of  the  people  whom
he  was  anxious  to  interest  in  the  restoration  of  religion.    But  we  can  now  see  how  all

,  this  was  the  outcome  of  self-will  and  ignorance.  He  wanted  things  to  go  on  in  his  own
way ;  he  did  not  know,  as  he  might  have  known  on  more  profound  reflection,  that  to
maintain  the  authority  of  law  and  inculcate  reverence  and  check  national  tendencies  to
levity  were  for  the  highest  good  of  the  people,  and  that  these  could  be  most  assuredly
promoted  by  this  sad  event.  We  have  here  an  instance,  in  conspicuous  form,  of  the
very  common  circumstance  of  men  secretly  complaining  of  the  order  of  events  which
Providence  chooses.  A  rainy  season,  a  sweeping  earthquake,  a  transmission  of  evil
consequences  from  parent  to  child,  the  destiny  of  the  wicked,  and  many  other  things
which  do  come  in  consequence  of  the  constitution  of  the  physical  and  moral  worlds,
olten  raise  within  the  heart  the  feeling  that  some  other  arrangement  would  surely
have  been  better,  and  that  had  we  our  way  such  things  would  not  be  possible.  This
is  really  self-assertion,  love  of  our  own  way,  ignorauce  of  the  innumerable  ramifica-
tions of  single  events  and  acts,  and  inability  to  penetrate  into  the  conditions  on  which
alone  a  permanent  and  generally  beneficial  order  of  things  can  be  secured.  The  psalmist
rose  to  wiser  thoughts  and  holier  feelings  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  13 — 22  j  xciL  4—6 ;  cf.  Matt.
xi.  25,  26 ;  Rom.  xi.  33,  34).

II.  Stbong  unholy  feeling  impairs  the  conception  of  truth  and  duty.  That
David's  annoyance  with  the  order  of  Providence  was  a  decidedly  unholy  feeling  is
obvious — it  was  the  opposite  of  that  meek,  loving  acquiescence  in  the  ways  and  acts  of
God,  even  when  they  are  most  painful,  which  characterizes  the  truly  filial  spirit ;  and
that  it  was  strong  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  from  that  moment  he  failed,  under  its  action,
to  8ee  the  glorious  truth  enshrined  in  the  symbol  before  him,  and  was  mored  to  abandon


ca.  VI.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  165

the  work  to  which  he  had  committed  himself  and  the  people.  Psjxhologically  it  can
he  proved  that  all  emotion  affects  more  or  less  the  steadintss  of  intellectual  perception.
Morally  it  is  a  matter  of  experience  that  an  emotion  of  anger,  distrust,  or  annoyance
always  interferes  with  a  clear  perception  of  spiritual  truth.  Plato  was  right  in  affiim-
ing  that  the  voSs  unaffected  hy  the  storms  of  passion  and  sense  alone  can  see  reality.
The  god  of  this  world,  hy  engaging  and  exciting  feelings,  blinds  the  minds  of  men,  so
that  they  see  not  the  glory  which  shines  in  the  face  of  Christ.  David's  fear  of  the  ark,
his  dread  lest  something  should  happen  (ver.  9),  was  contrary  to  all  he  had  felt  before.
Hitherto  the  ark  had  been  to  him  the  symbol  of  that  blessed  presence  which  had
brought  joy  and  comfort  to  his  heart — a  reminder  of  the  mercy  which  endureth  for
ever.  It  was  not  possible  to  see  this  precious  truth  through  the  mists  of  unholy  feeling
thut  had  been  permitted  to  rise  in  his  soul.  And  this  shrinking  from  what  had  once
been  reverently  regarded  as  the  spring  of  purest  joy  and  satisfaction  at  once  weakened
the  resolve  he  had  formed  to  bring  the  blessed  symbol  to  his  stat  of  government  and
give  it  there  the  honour  due.  Duty  gave  way  to  the  disgust  and  disappointment  and
foolish  apprehensions  generated  by  his  own  proud  will.  The  correlative  truths  are
clear,  namely,  in  so  far  as  we  are  lowly  and  absolutely  acquiescent  in  the  Divine  will
is  our  spirit  calm  and  clear  and  strong  in  its  recognition  of  highest  spiritual  truth,  and
in  so  far  as  this  truth  is  perceived  the  path  of  duty  is  steadily  followed.  None  knew
the  truth  and  pursued  the  path  of  duty  as  Christ,  because  none  were  so  pure  and  calm
and  one  in  will  with  the  Father.  Herein  is  a  lesson  to  teachers  and  taught ;  to  those
who  meet  with  trouble  and  those  who  move  on  in  joyful  procession.

III.  Faith  and  love  bxbecised  in  a  time  of  ebligious  backsliding  are
ABUNDANTLY  REWARDED.  David's  piety  was  now  at  fault ;  he  had  slipped  backwards
in  the  path  of  godliness;  his  conduct  was  an  unjust  reflection  on  Providence  and  on
the  holy  symbol  that  shadowed  forth  the  presence  of  the  people's  real  Protector  and
Friend.  Had  men  followed  his  example  or  caught  his  temper,  they  would  have  shrunk
from  the  ark  as  from  the  source  of  death ;  and  it  would  have  been  left  in  an  obscurity
and  neglect  equal  to  that  of  Kirjath-jearim.  But  all  this  serves  as  a  foil  to  set  forth,
in  striking  beauty,  the  conduct  of  Obed-Edom,  who,  not  dreading  with  slavish  fear
the.  Holy  One  of  Israel,  but,  doubtless,  in  a  quiet  way,  proud  of  the  privilege,  welcomed
the  ark  to  his  house.  Whether  he  first  sought  the  honour,  or  whether  this  was  the
nearest  Levite's  house,  we  know  not.  In  any  case  we  can  imagine,  from  the  tenor  of
the  narrative,  how  with  careful  haste  the  house  was  cleansed  and  prepared  for  its  holy
guest ;  the  best  and  fairest  chamber  made,  if  it  might  be,  yet  more  meet  for  such  high
honour ;  the  Levite  and  his  sons  purified,  that  they  might  fitly  bear  in  the  ark  to  its
destined  place,  venturing,  perhaps,  as  they  bore  it  along,  to  utter  or  think  of  the
ancient  words, "  Return,  0  Lord,  unto  the  many  thousands  of  Israel  1 "  Honoured,  happy
Obed-Edom  !  What  faith  in  God  I  what  love  for  the  blessed  presence  1  Did  sleep  fall
upon  him  that  first  night  ?  Was  there  not  a  joy  that  would  make  "  songs  in  the
night "  ?  The  bliss,  later  on,  of  Zacch^us  was  in  a  sense  forestalled  by  Obed-Edom.
The' reality  of  the  faith  and  love,  and  its  continued  manifestation,  in  various  forms  of
reverential  interest,  is  proved  by  the  rich  blessing  that  came  upon  him  and  all  belonging
to  him.  The  house  became  the  abode  (if  the  higher  forms  of  religious  sentiment  which
in  themselves  are  choicest  treasures.  Honour  fell  upon  parents,  and  children  felt  the
blessed  charm.  Servants  began  to  feel,  as  never  before,  that  their  services  were  more
than  attentions  paid  to  man.  Providence  smiled  on  field  and  vineyard.  Men  saw  that
somehow  this  home  was  now  blessed  above  all  homes.  What  lessons  here  for  all  I  Who
would  dread  with  slavish' fear  the  Christ,  the  Manifestation  of  the  glory  of  the  Father?
Who  would  not  welcome  him  as  chief,  most  cherished  Guest  ?  Who  would  not  sub-
ordinate all  the  arrangements  of  home  life  that  he  may  be  duly  honoured  there?  Who
would  not  rejoice  that  the  Holy  One  does  condescend  to  dwell  thus  with  man,  ani
brighten  the  fairest  scenes  of  home  life  ?  Blessings  abound  where  he  is  welcome  Guest.
No  fear  of  flashing  fire  to  destroy.    To  faith  and  love  there  is  only  mercy  and  peace.

"  O  happy  house,  O  home  supremely  blest,

'Where  thon,  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  art  entertained
As  the  most  welcome  and  helovM  Guest,
With  true  devotion  and  with  love  unfeigned;


156  THE  SfiCOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—23

Where  all  hearts  beat  in  unison  with  thine ;

Where  eyes  grow  brighter  as  they  look  on  thee;
Where  all  are  ready,  at  the  slightest  sign,

To  do  thy  will,  and  do  it  heartily  I "

Generai.  lessons.  1.  Times  of  religious  excitement  may  arise  in  the  natural  pro-
gress of  religion,  but  they  obviously  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  normal  condition  of
tliought  and  feeling,  and  they  may,  by  their  absorption  of  one  clasB  of  feelings,  lay  us
open  to  peculiar  temptations.  2.  In  every  sea.-ion  of  apparent  and  real  prosperity  in
religion  we  ought  to  exercise  self-control  in  prospect  of  the  possibility  of  events  arising
through  the  imperfection  of  men  which,  from  their  nature,  mar  our  joy.  3.  Secret
murmuring  against  what  Providence  ordains  is  a  sin  to  which  all  are  very  proue,  and
therefore  it  is  important  to  watch  against  it  very  closely,  especially  as  it  does  more
damage  to  our  inner  life  than  is  often  supposed.  4.  We  ought  to  ponder  carefully  the
enormous  injury  dune,  both  by  our  loss  of  personal  influence  and  the  force  of  example,
when  we,  out  of  a  feeling  of  sudden  disappointment,  throw  aside  solemn  duties.  5.
Those  who  render  service  to  the  cause  of  God  in  times  of  urgency  may  be  sure  that  a
rich  blessing  will  come  that  will  cause  them  to  forget  any  temporary  inconvenience
experienced.

Vers.  12 — 23. — ^The  facts  are :  1.  David,  learning  the  blessing  that  had  come  upon
the  house  of  Obed-Edom,  resolves  to  bring  up  the  ark  to  Jerusalem.  2.  Having  made
arrangements  in  accordance  with  the  Law  for  the  proper  bearing  of  the  ark,  he  inaugu-
rates the  procession  by  a  sacrifice.  3.  Girded  with  a  linen  ephoid,  he  dances  before  the
ark,  and  with  music  and  shouting  it  enters  Jerusalem.  4.  Placing  the  ark  in  the
tabernacle  he  had  provided  for  it,  he  offers  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  before
the  Lord,  pronounces  a  blessing  on  the  people,  and  distributes  to  them  meat  and  drink.
5.  Returning  to  his  house,  he  is  met  by  his  wife  Miohal,  who,  having  witnessed  his
dancing  before  the  ark,  now  reproaches  him  with  having  demeaned  himself  in  the  eyes
of  the  people.  6.  With  mildness  of  temper,  but  great  firmness,  he  not  only  admits  the
fact,  but  glories  in  it  as  due  unto  God,  and  affirms  his  readiness  to  again  debase  himself
in  the  same  manner,  being  sure  of  winning  the  esteem  of  others  less  prejudiced.  7.
Michal  his  wife  remains  childless.  We  have  here  a  great  change  in  David's  religious
condition ;  an  event  of  supreme  national  interest;  and  the  domestic  sorrows  of  *  devout
man.    The  topics  suggested  may  be  taken  in  succession.

Joy  restored.  There  is  a  marked  change  in  the  David  mentioned  in  vers.  13 — 15
as  compared  with  the  David  of  vers.  8 — 10,  and  in  general  terms  it  may  be  expressed
as  a  restoration  to  the  joy  of  his  life.     But  it  is  w  ell  to  notice  the  ])rocess  implied.

L  The  sins  and  ekroks  of  a  really  good  man  cause  him  oreat  sdfferino.
In  general  terms,  all  sin  entails  suffering;  but  fads  prove  that  the  degree  of  personal
suffering  cnnse.juent  on  particular  sins  depends  on  the  actual  goodness  of  the  man  who
sins.  David  was  truly  a  "man  after  God's  own  heart,"  a  man  of  pvu:e  sensitive  nati:re,
of  enlightened  conscience  and  intense  sincerity.  In  some  respect  his  very  sin  (ver.  ,8)
was  consequent  on  his  noble  ambition  to  see  God  glorified  in  a  great  national  demon-
stration. We  may  be  sure,  although  the  historian  says  nothing  of  it,  that  the  days
immediately  after  his  return  to  Jerusalem  were  full  of  bitterness.  The  fact  that  a
great  project,  in  which  the  nation  was  concerned,  had  come  to  a  sudden  collapse,  that
elders  and  common  people  throughout  the  land  would  be  talking  of  his  chagrin,  that
strange  impressions  would  be  conveyed  as  to  the  stability  of  his  purposes,  and  the
consciousness  that  his  God  was  not  to  liim  now  as  he  had  been  in  days  past,  must
have  robbed  him  of  former  peace  and  embittered  all  the  relationships  of  life.  Peter's
life  was  anguish  after  his  fall,  because  he  was  so  good  a  man..  Dark  days  and  painful
sense  of  solitariness  are  the  lot  of  many  of  the  faithful  after  having  turned  their  heart
in  distrust  from  their  God.

II.  Eefleotion  arises  and  gradually  tones  down  thb  tumult  of  feblino.
For  a  time  the  passion  of  discontent  and  distrust,  like  a  storm,  would  rage,  and,  while
making  David  wretched  by  virtue  of  their  own  nature,  would  throw  the  reflective
powers  into  confusion.  No  sinner  is  perfectly  sane  v\  lion  under  the  stormy  influence
Qf  liis  sin.    In  the  case  of  a  really  bad  man  the  couf>isioa  becomes  worse  by  deliberate!


CH.  vLl— 23.]  TRE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  157

indulgBQce  in  fresh  sins  in  order  to  get  rid  of  what  slight  uneasiaess  is  experienced ;
but  with  Pavid  the  disturbing  force  of  sin  would  graiiually  expend  itself,  and  the
reflective  powers  would  begin  to  review  the  situation  and  gradually  allow  the  influence
of  truth  and  fact  to  reveal  the  folly  and  shame  of  what  had  been  done.  The  monarch
retired  from  the  cares  and  toils  of  the  day,  and,  though  fretted  and  vexed  by  the  bad
impression  his  people  might  entertain  aa  to  his  persistency  of  purpose,  he  could  not  but
ponder  tlie  recent  path  of  his  feet,  and  the  great  truths  on  which  he  had  formerly  been
wont  to  "  meditate  day  and  night "  (Ps.  i.  2).  In  good  men,  though  fallen  and  wretched,
the  intellectual  faaulties,  as  under  the  action  of  a  magnet,  will  be  sure  to  concentrate
on  the  truths  th*<t  help  to  recovery.

III.  ThB    MINP   comes    in   DDE   COURSE    INTO   DIRECT   CONTACT   WITH   ACTOAI.   FACTS

AND  THE  Word  of  God.  Beflection  would  clear  away  the  mists  of  passion,  and  David
would  see  in  the  light  of  the  written  Word  the  error  of  setting  out  with  the  ark  on  a
cart;  the  exposure,  therefore,  by  his  own  arrangement  or  connivance,  of  the  man  to  the
temptation  to  violate  -the  Law,  and  the  justice  of  the  blow  which  fell,  as  also  its  use
in  cheohing  a  spirit  of  indiffereuoe  and  inculcating  reverence  for  sacred  things.  The
piety  of  his  nature,  thus  brought  into  direct  contact  with  truth,  would  at  once  recognize
its  forco,  the  shamefulness  and  folly  of  the  discontent  and  distrust,  and  the  desirability
of  placing  the  life  once  more  in  its  proper  relation  to  the  general  interests  of  religion.
Penitents  and  backsliders  are  not  far  from  restoration  when  once  they  gaze  with  calm
and  steadfast  eye  on  the  actual  facts  as  illumined  by  the  light  of  God's  Word,  The
revealed  truth  of  God  is  the  material  on  which  the  reflective  powers  act,  and  so  the
truly  sorrowful  spirit  does  not  become  the  victim  of  false  imaginings.

IV.  ThEBB   18    BROUGHT   ABOUT   A    VIVID    REOOaNITION    OF    THE    MBROV    OF    GOD    IN

Christ.  As  long  as  the  passions  engendered  by  indulgence  in  sin  darken  the  soul,
there  is  a  loss  of  that  clear  and  restful  view  of  God  which  is  the  peculiar  privilege  of
the  pure  in  heart.  David's  sin  (ver.  8)  had  transformed  the  all-merciful,  covenanted
God  into  an  object  of  dread  (ver.  9).  But  now  that  passion  was  subsiding,  and  the
Word  was  allowed  once  more  to  shed  its  light  on  the  facts  of  the  case,  the  true  character
of  God,  as  set  forth  in  the  sacred  symbol,  reappeared;  and  love,  and  mercy,  and  faith-
fulness, and  care  were  seen  to  be  concentrated  in  the  glory  over  the  mercy-seat.  The
memory  of  all  that  the  ark  had  been  to  Israel,  in  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  and  else-
where, also  confirmed  the  returning  conviction  of  the  most  precious  of  all  truths.
Once  more  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  was,  as  of  old,  the  revelation  of  Divine
love  and  mercy.  The  same  spiritual  change  occurs  in  men  now  when,  on  the  subsidence
of  the  passions,  the  full  light  of  Scripture  falls  on  the  soul.  God  ceases  to  be  full  of
terrors — an  object  of  dread  and  avoidance.  Christ  is  seen  to  be  the  express  Image  of
the  Father's  Person,  full  of  grace  and  truth.  The  old  relation  to  him  as  God  manifest
in  the  flesh  is  restored ;  and  the  vastness  and  freeness  of  the  mercy  in  him  outshine
all  other  truth,  and  shed  a  radiance  on  every  thought  and  feeling.  There  is  another
transfiguration  (Matt.  xvii.  2).

V.  The  facts  of  history  abb  seen  to  illustrate  the  truth  eeoognized.  It
was  told  David  how  the  Lord  was  blessing  the  house  of  Obed-Edom.  The  experience
of  the  godly  who  loved  and  trusted  the  ark  as  a  symbol  of  the  true  character  of  God
was  thus  in  accord  with  the  conviction  arising  from  the  exercise  of  reflection  and  the
subsidence  of  sinful  passion.  History  was  in  accord  with  the  best  thought  concerning
God,  and  furnished  striking  instances  of  the  reality  of  a  love  and  mercy  by  no  means
to  be  dreaded.  Thus  wonderfully  does  God  interweave  the  experiences  of  his  people  for
the  comnum  good  of  the  Church  and  for  the  special  help  and  cheer  of  those  who  have
fallen  into  the  snare  of  the  evil  one.  Many  a  lowly  Ohed-'Edom,  by  means  of  a  love
and  trust  simple  and  strong,  and  the  blessedness  resulting  therefrom,  has  been  the
instrument  of  restoring  to  right  views  and  feelings  others  whose  position  and  powers
were  far  more  distinguished.  Nothing  is  lost  in  the  kingdom  of  God;  small  and
obscure  persons  and  things  are  employed  for  great  ends.  The  bearing  of  the  actual
experiences  of  sincere  and  humble  Christians  in  the  common  walks  of  life  upon  the
formation,  by  the  more  gifted,  and  influential,  of  just  conceptions  of  the  revelation  of
God  in  Christ,  is  a  subject  worthy  of  much  consideration.

VI.  Thk  tbdth  BEDfO  FULLT  BKcooNiZED,  THE  OLD  JOT  EBTUEN8.  The  narrativft
Bptu  fprtb  thp  strong  abounding  J07  of  Pavid  exhibiting  itself  in  forms  which,  judged


158  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMLEL.  [oh.  vi.  1— 2&

by  the  cool  feelings  and  conventional  standards  of  Western  life,  seem  almost  fanatical.
The  question  of  form  and  degree  is  here  really  one  of  naturalness,  and  of  this  there  can
be  no  doubt.  The  king  gave  himself  up  to  the  full  dominion  of  the  present  joy.  The
spring  of  that  joy  lay  in  his  restored  perception  of  what  the  ark  of  the  covenant  really
was  to  himself  and  his  people.  It  was  not  now  the  seat  of  flaming  fire  and  source  of
destruction,  but  was  the  visible  sign  of  the  presence  and  favour  of  the  God  merciful
and  gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in  redemption.  It  told  of  protection,  and-
guidance,  and  pardon,  and  holy  communion.  It  was  the  reconciling  meeting-place,
where  the  trembling  sinner  became  the  loving,  trustful  child  once  more.  The  Jordan,
the  walls  of  Jericho,  the  restfulness  of  pious  souls  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  all
told  of  what  a  blessed  heritage  is  theirs  whose  God  is  the  Lord ;  and  could  he  as  a  man
and  a  king  feel  other  than  boundless  joy  now  that  the  Refuge  and  Dwelling-place  of  all
generations  was  coming  to  make  a  permanent  abode  in  the  very  midst  of  his  people?
So  it  is  with  us  all  when,  having  known  the  oppression  and  darkness  of  sin,  we  come
to  see  in  Christ  the  Manifestation  of  the  reconciling  God,  who  forgiveth  our  iniquities,
shelters  us  from  condemnation,  comes  into  close  sympathetic  fellowship  with  our
spirits,  and  abides  with  us  as  Guardian  and  Friend.  There  are  seasons  when  this
restored  joy  is  so  pure  and  strong  that  all  song  and  music  seem  too  meagre  for  its  due
expression — ^when  the  spirit  exults  inexpressibly  in  the  God  of  salvation.  If  dancing,
when  natural,  is  the  gesticulated  expression  of  what  cannot  be  put  into  word  or  tone,
then  it  might  be  an  outlet  for  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.

Wise  religious  leadership.  The  narrative  from  vers.  13 — 19  describes  David'g  con-
duct throughout  the  great  processional  march  to  Jerusalem.  He  was  here  acting  the
part  of  leader  of  a  great  religious  movement,  and  in  his  spirit  and  deeds  we  see  the
conditions  of  a  wise  religious  leadership.

I.  Absolute  defbebncb  to  the  authokitt  of  God.  By  comparing  this  account
with  the  fuller  record  in  1  Ohron.  xv.,  it  will  be  seen  that  David  was  most  anxious  that
every  step  taken  should  be  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God.  On  the  former
occasion  he  seems  to  have  left  the  people  to  follow  the  precedent  set  by  the  Philistines
(1  Sam.  vi.  7 — 9;  cf.  ver.  3),  and  we  have  seen  with  what  sad  consequences.  The
bitter  experience  of  the  past  few  months  had,  at  all  events,  issued  in  the  desire  to
pay  deference  to  the  revealed  will  of  God  in  everything,  and  no  longer  adopt  the
questionable  methods  of  men.  This  feeling  is  the  first  prerequisite  to  all  spiritual
success.  Leaders  whose  minds  are  charged  with  the  feeling  that  God  is  supreme,  and
that  his  will  enters  into  all  things  and  is  first  of  all  to  be  considered,  carry  with  their
own  actions  and  words  a  force  of  the  highest  character.  Their  work  is  Divine,  and  God
should  fill  the  whole  area  of  their  vision.  In  so  far  as  the  thought  of  God  as  supreme
dominates  our  mental  life  do  we  ensure  action  on  sound  principles,  and  put  force  and
determination  into  our  words  and  deeds.

II.  Manifestation  of  a  spirit  suitable  to  the  occasion.  Whether  the  wearing
of  the  linen  ephod  meant  the  assumption,  by  inspiration  of  God,  of  priestly  functions
in  combination  with  the  kingly  and  prophetic — typical  of  him  wiw  is  our  Prophet,
Priest,  and  King — or  whether  it  was  but  a  garment  of  royalty  used  en  special  sacre'd
occasions,  this  is  clear:  that  by  it  David  manifested  a  spirit  appropriate  to  a  very  holy
and  blessed  occasion.  He  would  have  people  see  that  this  was  a  time  of  consecration
to  the  Lord,  a  time  for  purity  to  be  the  clothing  of  all,  a  time  of  exceptional  sacredness.
The  impression  on  the  people  could  not  but  be  serious  and  elevating.  Men  who  lead
others  have  much  in  their  power  by  virtue  of  the  general  spirit  they  manifest.  It
should  always  be  in  harmony  with  the  occasion,  indicating  its  special  character,  and
bringing  other  minds  into  holy  sympathy  with  the  end  in  view.

III.  Acknowledgments  of  gratitude  and  dependence.  There  must  have  been
among  the  people  some  trepidation  on  the  first  movement  of  the  ark,  and  it  was  a  wise
arrangement  that,  on  clearing  the  house  of  Obed-Bdom,  sacrifice  should  be  offered
expressing  gratitude  for  mercies  vouchsafed,  and  a  sense  of  dependence  on  God  for
pardon  and  all  needful  good.  The  same  is  true  of  the  offerings  at  the  end  of  the
journey.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  leadership  of  Moses  that  he  sought  to  cultivate
these  seniiments  in  the  minds  of  Israel  all  through  the  desert.  We  do  wrong  to  our-
selves and  to  God  when  we  fail  to  recognize  our  obligations  to  him  on  every  stage  of


OH.  VI.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  159

our  life's  course.  Thankfulness  of  heart  for  the  past,  and  trustful  submission  for  all
things  needed,  are  the  fwo  elements  of  a  cheery,  earnest,  and  lowly  service.  The
preacher,  the  missionary  leader,  the  teacher,  and  parent,  who  knows  how  to  foster  these
sentiments  in  others,  is  in  a  fair  way  of  carrying  through  any  spiritual  work  that  may
be  in  hand  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7).

IV.  Pbevision  for  completeness  of  work.  David  not,  only  sought  to  bring  up
the  ark  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  the  will  of  God,  and  by  such  personal  bearing  and
special  arrangements  as  should  impress  and  elevate  the  people,  but  he  looked  on,  and,
by  preparing  a  tabernacle  beforehand,  secured  a  completion  of  the  work  befitting  its
nature.  Many  a  good  undertaking  is  left  incomplete  for  want  of  this  prevision.  It  is
true  each  man  should  be  intent  on  the  work  of  the  hour,  but  the  work  of  each  hour
is  to  be  regarded  as  having  relations  to  all  future  time ;  and  so  far  as  lies  in  our  power
we  may  anticipate  the  success  of  the  succeeding  hours  and  prepare  the  crowning  work.
The  architect  provides  for  the  cupola  while  careful  of  the  foundations.  The  statesman
arranges  for  participation  in  wider  privileges  while  educating  the  people  up  to  them.
The  religious  reformer  looks  on  to  the  need  of  positive  instruction  and  formation  of  new
institutions  on  newly  recognized  principles  even  before  releasing  the  people  from  the
supposed  errors  of  the  past.  The  evangelist  who  seeks  to  arouse  the  people  and  bring
them  up  to  a  better  life,  if  wise,  will  anticipate  the  result  of  his  efforts  by  providing  solid
instruction.  Church  leaders  who  seek  to  conduct  the  Churcii  through  phases  of  faith  and
practice,  will  forecast  what  is  necessary  when  the  present  discipline  has  done  its  work.

V.  HelpfdIi  woeds  and  broad  sympathies.  The  people  must  have  felt,  when
David  stood  up  and  blessed  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  then  sent  them  home
with  substantial  tokens  of  his  sympatliy,  that  he  was  indeed  a  leader  of  whom  they
might  well  be  proud.  The  right  choice  of  words,  and  the  deeds  which  express  a
personal  interest,  are  things  which  give  a  just  and  beneficial  power  over  men.  Human
life  is  very  dependent  for  its  highest  welfare  on  words  fitly  spoken  and  on  deeds  which
symbolize  affection  and  interest.  A  master  of  words  that  really  convey  blessing  to
human  hearts  is  indeed  a  great  man,  a  worthy  leader.  It  is  not  by  mere  assertion  of
official  authority,  or  performance  of  deeds  strictly  in  accord  with  propriety  and  law,
that  hearts  are  won  and  characters  moulded  to  a  nobler  type.  The  leader  who  can  send
his  people  home  thankful  for  his  existence  and  satisfied  with  the  largeness  of  his  heart,
is  wise  in  that  he  not  only  blesses  men,  but  also  renders  them  accessible  in  future  to
his  influence.

Domestic  hindrances  to  piety.  A  day  of  high  festivities  and  holy  gladness  was  closed
by  an  event  which  must  have  made  David  feel  how  imperfect  is  the  best  estate  at
which  man  can  arrive  in  this  world.  The  reviling  of  his  wife  Michal  was  indeed  a
bitter  element  in  the  cup,  and  suggests  to  us  a  saA.  subject,  too  frequently  illustrated  in
the  lives  of  good  men,  namely,  the  hindrances  to  piety  in  domestic  life.

I.  The  most  perfect  human  condition  is  mabbbd  bt  some  blemish.  To  an
ordinary  observer  David  would  seem  to  have  been  on  that  day  the  happiest  and  most
honoured  of  men — monarch  of  the  chosen  race,  in  the  flush  of  health  and  fulness  of
power  and  intellect,  beloved  by  his  people,  and  filled  with  joy  in  having  brought  to
pass  an  event  of  great  religious  significance.  But  even  for  him  there  was  a  bitterness
most  bitter.  In  his  home,  where  love  and  joy  and  full  sympathy  with  all  his  noble
aspirations  ought  to  abound,  there  awaited  him  scorn,  distrust,  and  the  venom  of  spite.
Truly,  royal  personages  are  not  free  from  common  woes.  The  fairest,  most  beautiful
life  is  shaded  by  some  sorrow.  Every  heart  knoweth  its  own  -bitterness.  In  this  we
have,  doubtless,  an  illustration  of  what  has  been  true  in  all  ages  of  all  men.  Behind
all  grandeur  there  is  some  destroying  moth.  The  most  charming  prosperity  is  attended
with  some  defect.  There  is  "  a  crook  in  every  lot."  Even  the  great  apostle  knew  the
"thorn  in  the  flesh."

II.  Domestic  opposition  to  personal  piety  is  among  the  most  bitter  op  trials.
Though,  as  king  amongst  men  of  stubborn  will  and  perverse  disposition,  David  carried
on  his  heart  many  a  care,  there  was,  doubtless,  no  trouble  of  his  life  comparable  to
that  of  the  opposition  of  his  favourite  wife  to  the  conduct  which  he,  as  a  pious  man,
felt  bound  to  adopt.  Such  sorrow  presses  heavily  in  the  home  where  only  joy  ought  to
be  found,  and  attends,  as  a  dark,  unwelcome  shadow,  the  pathway  of  daUy  duty  out  of


160  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1^23.

the  home.  In  bo  &r  as  we  believe  godliness  to  be  the  best  of  all  things,  aod  the
particular  expression  of  it  we  may  adopt  as  the  tribute  due  to  God,  so  must  the
antagonism  of  those  we  love  most  of  all  embitter  the  spirit.  This  wearies  and
worries  when,  after  the  toil  of  day,  the  domestic  circle  is  sought  for  repose  and  refresh-
ment of  heart.  Apart  from  the  pain  of  being  opposed  in  what  is  most  sacred  and
binding  and  precious,  there  is  the  oppressive  feeling  that  two  human  beings  abiding
under  the  same  roof,  and  pledged  to  mutual  love  and  confidence,  are  pressing  towaids
eternity  with  no  assurance  of  being  one  there.  This  is  a  tender  subject,  the  very
mention  of  which  may  open  the  floodgates  of  weeping.

III.  The  forms  op  antagonism  mat  vary,  but  the  aim  is  one — to  wtn  or  drive
FROM  HI8H-T0NBD  SERVICE.  The  sharp  tongue  of  Michal  was  employed  to  reproach
David  for  a  form  of  service  in  which  he  rejoiced,  and  which  he  believed  to  be  due  to
God  and  for  the  good  of  the  people ;  and  the  ulterior  aim  was  to  hinder  his  adopting
such  courses  in  future.  Others  may  meet  with  smiles  and  persnasions  and  all  the
engaging  arts  of  the  charmer,  which  in  themselves  do  not  assume  the  form  of  anta-
gonism, but  are  designed  for  the  same  end.  The  manifestation  of  earnest  piety  is  too
earnest,  too  spiritual,  too  elevated,  for  the  carnal  mind ;  and  hence  must  be  brought
down  to  a  lower  level.  There  are  unspiritual  wives  who  thus  strive  to  despiritualize
tlieir  husbands,  and  sometimes,  but  not  so  often,  husbands  strive  to  despiritualize  their
wives.  Through  imfortunate  alliances  many  a  godly  soul  has  to'  experience  this
dreadful  evil.

IV.  The  trtjb  way  of  meeting  this  trial  is  by  combined  meekness  and
FIRMNESS.  The  rasping  tongue  of  Michal  and  ber  base  insinuations  only  provoked  a
gentle  reply  in  a  firm  spirit.  David  would  not  increase  the  trouble  by  bitter,  cutting
words.  Eeferring  to  God's  choice  of  him  and  the  consequent  obligations  to  do  all  he
could  to  raise  the  tone  of  religion,  he  calmly  informed  his  wife  that  his  purpose  was
unchangeable,  and  expressed  the  belief  that  some  at  least  would  see  honour  and  not
disgrace  in  his  conduct.  It  is  a  hard  fight  to  hold  one's  own  in  such  a  contest,  and
many,  it  is  to  be  feared,  gradually  yield  for  the  sake  of  what  is  called  "  peace,"  only  to
sink  down  to  a  formality  in  religion  congenial  to  the  unspiritual  companion  of  the
domestic  hearth.  Those  thus  tried  have  need  to  lift  up  their  hearts  to  God  for  the
wisdom  and  grace  by  which  they  shall  know  how  to  be  true  to  their  God  and  disarm
the  opposition  or  else  neutralize  its  power.  They  have  this  encouragement,  that,  while
the  favour  of  the  world  can  only  tend  to  spiritual  death,  fidelity  to  God  is  sure  to  win
the  respect  of  all  the  good,  command  the  silent  reverence  of  even  the  hostile  mind,  and
gather  up  daily  strength  wherewith  to  bear  the  burden  of  sorrow,  and  at  last  end  one's
course  as  a  "good  and  faithful  servant.*


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2  (1  Chron.  xiii.  1 — 6). — (Jerusalem.)  The  ark  sought  after  long  neglect.
1.  The  ark  was  the  central  point  of  the  religion  of  Israel.  In  this  sacred  chest  were
deposited  the  two  tables  of  the  Law  (the  testimony,  the  great  document  of  the  cove-
nant) ;  on  it  rested  the  covering  (kapporetK)  propitiatory  (LXX.),  expiatory  (Vulgate),
or  mercy-seat  (Authorized  Version),  "  above  it  cherubim  of  glory  overshadowing  the
mercy-seat,"  whereon  the  invisible  King  of  Israel,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  was  enthroned ;  and
there  atonement  was  made,  by  the  sprinkling  of  blood,  for  the  sins  of  the  people  (Bxod.
XXV.  10 — 22).  It  was  a  symbol  of  Jehovah's  presence  and  fellowship,  his  righteousness
and  mercy,  his  protection  and  blessing;  a  type  of  heavenly  things.  2.  Of  the  ark
nothing  is  recorded  since  it  was  placed,  about  seventy  yenrs  previously,  on  its  return
from  the  land  of  the  Philistine,  in  the  house  of  Abinadab,  on  the  hill,  at  Kirjath-
jearim;  and  Eleazar,  hia  son,  was  consecrated  to  keep  it  (1  Sara.  vi.  21,  22).  Durin"
this  long  period  it  continued  there,  separated  from  the  tabernacle  (in  Nob,  1  Sam.  xxh
6 ;  xiii.  13, 19 ;  and  afterwards  in  Gibeon,  1  Chron.  xxi.  29),  unsought  and  neglected
(1  Chron.  xiii.  3]),  "  buried  in  darkness  and  solitude."  The  worship  and  service  of  God
were  necessarily  incomplete — an  effect  and  evidence  of  the  imperfect  relations  subsisting
between  the  nation  and  its  Divine  King,  and  of  its  divided  and  distracted  condition.
3.  Tte  time  h»d  now  CQme  for  tfee  restoration  of  the  vK  to  its  proper  place  at  ti^9


OH.  TE 1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  161

centre  of  national  worship.  The  union  of  all  the  tribes  under  "  the  man  of  God's  choice,"
the  conquest  of  Jerusalem,  the  defeat  of  the  Philistines,  prepared  the  way  for  the  great
enterprise ;  and  to  it  David  was  impelled  by  a  truly  theocratic  spirit,  "  This  act  had
its  root  in  David's  truly  pious  feeling,  was  the  living  expression  of  his  gratitude  to  the
Lord  for  his  favour,  and  aimed  at  the  elevation  and  concentration  of  the  religious  life
of  Israel"  (Brdmann).  4.  The  truths  and  principles  symbolized  by  the  ark  are  fully
embodied  in  Christ  and  Christianity  (Heb.  ix.  11).  It  may,  therefore,  be  regarded,
generally,  as  representing  the  true  religion ;  and  its  restoration  from  "  captivity  "  a
religious  reformation  (see  1  Sam.  vii.  2 — 6).  In  the  going  forth  of  the  king  at  the  head
of  "  all  Israel "  from  Jerusalem  "  to  Baale,  that  is,  to  Kirjath-jearim,  which  belonged  to
Judah  (twelve  miles  distant),  to  bring  up  thence  the  ark  of  God,"  we  observe —

I.  An  exalted  aim.  1.  The  rendering  to  Ood  of  the  honour  which  is  his  due,  by
open  acknowledgment  of  his  supremacy,  proper  reverence  for  his  great  Name,  cheerfiu
obedience  to  his  requirements.  The  religious  life  of  a  people  is  not  only  expressed  in  a
proper  regard  for  the  ordinances  of  public  worship  (1  Sam.  i.  3),  but  idso  greatly  pro-
moted thereby.  When  these  are  neglected,  corrupted,  or  negligently  performed,  there
can  hardly  be  a  higher  aim  than  to  make  them  attractive  and  pure,  and  induce  a  worthy
performance  of  them.  "  0  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness  1 "  (Ps.  xcvi.  9).
2.  The  realization  of  doner  communion  with  Ood,  and  the  reception  of  the  bleslings
that  flow  from  such  communion — mercy  and  grace,  righteousness  and  strength,  safety
and  peace.  "  True  religion  can  never  be  the  affair  of  the  individual  alone.  A  right
religious  relation  to  God  must  include  a  relation  to  our  fellow-men  in  GJod,  and  solitary
acts  of  devotion  can  never  satisfy  the  wants  of  healthy  spiritual  life,  which  calls  for  a
visible  expression  of  the  fact  that  we  worship  God  together  in  the  common  faith  which
binds  us  into  a  religious  community.  The  necessity  for  acts  of  public  and  united
worship  is  instinctively  felt,  wherever  religion  has  a  social  influence,  and  in  Israel  it
was  felt  the  more  strongly  because  Jehovah  was  primarily  the  God  and  King  of  the
nation,  who  had  to  do  with  the  individual  Israelite  only  in  virtue  of  his  place  in  the
commonwealth"  (J.  Robertson  Smith,  'The  Prophets  of  Israel'),  3.  The  fulfilment  of
the  purpose  of  Qod  concerning  his  people — that  they  may  be  holy,  united,  prosperous,
mighty,  and  "  show  forth  his  praise  (Isa.  xliii.  21).  "  0  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  send  now
prosperity"  (Ps,  cxviii.  25).  "The  next  great  step  of  David  (after  the  conquest  of
Jerusalem)  was  the  re-establishment  of  the  national  religion,  the  worship  of  Jehovah,
with  suitable  dignity  and  magnificence.  Had  David  acted  solely  from  political  motives,
this  measure  had  been  the  wisest  he  could  adopt.  The  solemn  assembling  of  the  tribes
would  not  only  cement  the  political  union  of  the  monarchy,  but  also  increase  the
opulence  of  his  capital  and  promote  the  internal  comm'  roe  of  the  country ;  while  it
brought  the  heads  of  the  tribes,  and  indeed  the  whole  people,  under  the  cognizance  and
personal  knowledge  of  the  sovereign,  it  fixed  the  residence  of  the  more  eminent  of  the
priesthood  in  the  metropolis  "  (Milman).

II.  An  bnebgbtio  leader.  The  enterprise  was  initiated,  inspired,  accomplished,  by
David,  whose  anxious  thought  on  the  matter  is  nlluded  to  in  Pd.  cxxxiL  (written
■ubsequently),  'Jehovah's  resting-place.'

"  Eemember,  O  Jehovah,  to  David
All  his  harassing  cares,
Who  swaro  to  JeliOVah,
Vowed  to  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob :
•  I  will  not  come  into  the  tent  of  my  houst,
I  will  not  go  up  to  the  couch  of  my  bed,
I  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine  eyes.
Nor  slumber  to  mine  eyelids.
Until  I  find  a  place  foi  Jehovah,
A  dwelling  for  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacobs'

Lo  I  we  heard  of  it  at  Ephratah,
We  found  it  in  the  fields  of  the  wood.
Let  us  go  into  his  dwelling.
Let  us  bow  ourselves  before  his  footstool.

Arise^  O  Jehovah,  to  thy  rest.
Thou  and  the  ark  of  thy  struugth."

(Ps.  nxxxii.  1—8.)
n>  BAMXTBU  ■


lea  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—23.

"At  Ephratah,  at  Bethlehem,  the  idea  of  making  this  great  transference"  (Acts  vii.  46)
may  have  first  "occurred  to  David's  mind"  (Stanley;  but  see  Commentaries  on  this
psalm).  "  And  David  consulted  with  the  captains  of  thousands,**  etc.  (1  Chron.  xiii,
1 — i);  "gathered  together  all  the  chosen  men  [warriors]  of  Israel;"  and  "arose  and
went."  1.  Eminent  piety  in  the  individual  manifests  itself  in  deep  and  tender  concern
with  respect  to  a  common  neglect  of  Divine  worship,  and  in  wise  and  diligent  effort
to  repair  it.  "  David's  ruling  passion  was  zeal  for  the  house  and  worship  of  God  "  (Ps.
xxvi.  8).  2.  Men  in  authority  should  make  use  of  their  position  for  that  purpose ;
not,  indeed,  in  the  way  of  compulsion,  but  of  example  and  persuasion.  "  Where  shall
we  find  to-day  men  whose  first  concern  is  for  the  honour  of  God;  who  really  believe
that  the  favour  of  the  Highest  is  the  true  palladium  of  their  country's  welfare?"
(Blaikie).  3.  Thus  one  man  sometimes  effects  a  general  and  lasting  reformation.  It
was  so  with  Samuel  and  David,  and  it  has  been  so  with  others.  How  much  may  be
accomplished  by  one  man  who  is  thoroughly  in  earnest  1  4.  In  this  manner  such  a
man  fulfils  the  will  of  God  concerning  him,  and  proves  his  Divine  calling  (see  1  Sam.
xiii.  14).  "  These  things  show  David  to  be  '  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,'  every  way
fitted  for  the  purpose  for  which  he  was  exalted,  a  piince  of  the  largest  capacities  and
noblest  views;  and  the  extensiveness  and  national  utility  of  the  scheme  he  formed,  in
which  the  honour  of  God  and  the  welfare  and  advantage  of  his  people  were  equally
consulted,  demonstrate  the  piety  and  goodness  of  his  heart,  and  clothe  him  with  a
glory  in  which  no  prince  could  ever  rival  or  equal  him  "  (Ohandler,  'Life  of  David,'  pp.
236,  320).

HI.  A  8TMPATHBTI0  PEOPLE.  In  response  to  David's  a]ipeal,  "all  the  congregation
said  that  they  would  do  so,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xiii,  4).  He  "  went  with  all  the  people
that  were  with  him,"  etc.  1.  A  leader  of  men,  however  great,  stands  in  need  of  their
sympathy  and  support,  and  can  do  nothing  without  them.  2.  It  is  by  their  means
that  he  achieves  success.  The  age  contributes  as  much  to  him  as  he  to  it.  3.  The
union  and  co-operation  of  the  people  with  him  are  a  sign  of  the  favour  and  blessing  of
Ood,  and  a  condition  of  further  prosperity.  "The  new  enthusiasm  and  elevation  of
the  community  was  not  the  creation  of  David.  It  met  him  as  his  noblest  incentive ;
but  it  is  the  completeness  with  which  he  suffered  it  to  take  possession  of  him  .  .  .  that
constitutes  the  secret  of  his  peculiar  greatness,  and  the  charm  which  never  failed  to
attach  to  his  struggles  and  triumphs  all  the  strongest  and  purest  spfrits  of  his  age"
(Ewald).

IV.  A  UNITED  AND  ZEALOUS  ENDEAVOUB.  Captains  of  thousands,  every  leader,
brethren  everywhere,  all  Israel  from  Shihor  of  Egypt  even  unto  the  entering  of  Hamath,
priests  aad  Levites,  chosen  warriors,  numbering  thirty  thousand  (seventy  thousand,
LXX.),  went  "  to  find  the  lost  relic  of  the  ancient  religion."  They  felt  the  value  of  the
object  of  their  search ;  were  intent  on  its  possession ;  "  of  one  heart  and  one  soul ; "
rested  not  in  wishes  and  prayers  merely,  but  exhibited  their  concord  in  practical,
appropriate,  persevering  activity.  It  was  a  fresh  starting-point  for  the  nation,  the
commencement  of  a  new  religious  era.  Be  it  ours  now  to  seek  and  strive  after  a  still
more  glorious  time  I

"  Oh,  may  the  hour

Boon  come  when  all  false  gods,  false  creeds,  false  prophetS)

Allowed  in  thy  good  purpose  for  a  time,

Demolished, — the  great  world  shall  be  at  last

The  mercy-seat' of  God,  the  heritage

Of  Christ,  and  the  possession  of  the  Spirit,

The  Comforter,  the  Wisdom  I  shall  all  be

One  land,  one  home,  one  friend,  one  faith,  one  Iaw«

Its  ruler  God.  its  practice  righteousness,

Its  life  peace  I "

(Bailey, 'Pe4n«.*

IX

Vers.  8 — 5  (1  Chron.  xiii.  7,  8). — (Kirjath-jearim.)  2^  ark  brought  out  of  deep
obscurity.    The  enterprise  was  marked  by —

I,  A  GREAT  DiscovEBY.  "  We  found  it  in  the  fields  of  the  wood"  (Ps.  cxxxii.  6).
1,     n  invaluable  treasure,  long  hidden  from  view ;  like  the  "  treasure  hid  in  a  field,"


OH.  TL 1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  163

and  the  "pearl  of  great  price"  (Matt.  xiii.  44 — 46).  2.  A  significant  memorial  of
God's  mercies  in  times  past.  What  ruanifold  and  mighty  events  would  he  hrought  to
rememhrance  by  the  sight  of  the  sacred,  venerable,  and  mysterious  coffer,  when  it  came
forth,  as  from  its  grave,  into  the  light  of  day !  3.  A  sure  pledge  of  the  continued  favour
of  Grod  in  time  to  come.  "  The  ark  was,  as  it  were,  the  palladium  of  Israel,  the  moving
sacrament  of  that  rude  people ;  not  itself  Divine  any  more  than  our  sacramental  bread
is  Christ's  body;  or  our  symbolic  water  God's  grace,  but  the  visible  symbol  of  a  presence
supposed  to  be  local,  or  of  a  power  manifested  in  answer  to  prayer  "  (Rowland  Williams).
Yet  it  was  "  not  a  mere  dead,  idle  shadow  to  look  upon,  but  what  certainly  declared
God's  nearness  to  his  Church  "  (Calvin).

II.  A  JOYFUL  PROCESSION.  "  And  they  set  [carried]  the  ark  of  God  upon  a  new  cart
[waggon] ;  and  Uzzah  and  Ahio,  the  sons  [grandsons]  of  Abinadab,  drave  the  cart ;  and
Ahio  went  before  [Uzzah  going  alongside]  the  ark.  And  David  and  all  Israel  played
[sported]  before  Jehovah  with  all  their  might,  with  songs,  and  with  harps,"  etc.  (1  Sam.
X.  10;  six.  20).  Already  commenced  the  higher  order  of  Divine  service,  to  be  after-
wards more  fully  organized  and  established.  For  this  occasion  (as  some  have  supposed)
David  wrote  Pa.  Ixviii.    '  The  ark  setting  forward  in  victorious  might,'

"  Let  God  arise,  let  his  enemies  be  scattered.
And  let  them  that  hate  him  flee  before  his  face."

Such  language  was  historically  appropriate  (Numb.  x.  35).  The  sacred  procession  served :
1.  To  express  their  gratitude,  gladness,  and  triumph.  2.  To  deepen  their  devotion,
union,  and  joy.  3.  To  produce  a  beneficial  and  lasting  impression  on  the  nation.
4.  To  exalt  the  Name  of  Jehovah  among  surrounding  peoples.  "  No  less  than  eleven
psalms,  either  in  their  traditional  titles,  or  in  the  irresistible  evidence  of  their  contents,
bear  traces  of  this  great  festival.  The  twenty-ninth  psalm  (hy  its  title  in  the  LXX.),
is  said  to  be  on  the  '  going  forth  of  the  tabernacle.'  The  thirtieth  (by  its  title),  the
fifteenth,  and  the  hundred  and  first  (by  their  contents),  express  the  feelings  of  David  on  his
occupation  of  his  new  home.  The  sixty-eighth,  at  least  in  part,  and  the  twenty-fourth,
■eem  to  have  been  actually  composed  for  the  entrance  of  the  ark  into  the  ancient  gates
of  the  heathen  fortress  (Ps.  xovi.,  ov.,  ovi.,  vi.,  xlvi.,  cxxxii.)  "  (Smith's  '  Dictionary').
"The  hymns  of  David  excel  no  less  in  sublimity  and  tenderness  of  expression  than  in
loftiness  and  purity  of  religious  sentiment.  In  comparison  with  them,  the  sacred
poetry  of  all  other  nations  sinks  into  mediocrity.  They  have  embodied  so  exquisitely
the  universal  language  of  religious  emotion,  that  (a  few  fierce  and  vindictive  passages
excepted,  natural  in  the  warrior-poet  of  a  sterner  age)  they  have  entered,  with  unques-
tioned propriety,  into  tlie  ritual  of  the  holier  and  more  perfect  religion  of  Christ  .  .  .
How  many  human  hearts  have  they  softened,  purified,  and  exalted!  Of  how  many
wretched  beings  have  they  been  the  secret  of  consolation!  Ou  how  many  communities
have  they  drawn  down  the  blessings  of  Divine  providence,  by  bringing  the  affections
into  unison  with  their  deep  devotional  fervour !  "  (Milman).

HI.  An  inexcusable  transgression.  "  The  act  of  David  and  of  Israel  was  evidently
Intended  as  a  return  to  the  Lord  and  submission  to  his  revealed  ordinances  ;  but,  if  so,
obedience  must  be  complete  in  every  particular  "  (Edersheim).  It  was  ordained  that
the  ark  should  be-borne  with  staves  on  the  shoulders  of  men,  the  elect  men  of  the
nation  (Numb.  vii.  9),  and,  in  placing  it  on  a  new  cart  drawn  by  oxen,  after  the  manner
of  the  heathen  (1  Sam.  vi.  10, 12),  they  acted  contrary  to  the  Divine  ordinance,  as
David  subsequently  recognized  (1  Chron.  xv.  13).  Were  they  fully  aware  of  the  nature
and  importance  of  that  ordinance?  Perhaps  not;  especially  after  it  had  been  so  long
in  abeyance.  Were  they  altogether  ignorant  of  its  existence  ?  This  could  hardly
have  been  the  case  with  the  priests  and  Levites.  Such  ignorance,  moreover,  would
have  been  highly  culpable.  They  were  doubtless  acquainted  with  it ;  but  they  were
forgetful,  careless,  negligent,  and  adopted  the  method  which  seemed  most  expedient
and  to  have  been  previously  sanctioned.  1.  "All  religious  reformations  which  are
wrought  by  men,  are  blemished  by  human  infirmities"  (Wordsworth).  2.  Long
neglect  of  Divine  ordinances  commonly  renders  the  renewed  performance  of  them
exceedingly  defective.  3.  Fresh  and  fervid  zeal  is  often  inconsiderate,  self-confident,
and  rash.  4.  Example  is  apt  to  mislead;  and  should  be  imitated  only  in  so  far  as  it
accords  with  the  Word  of  God.    6.  The  end  sought  may  be  in  accordance  with  th«


164  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—23.

Divine  will,  whilst  the  means  employed  for  the  attainment  thereof  are  contrary  to  it.

6.  Good  intentions  do  not  justify  forbidden  actions.    "Two  things  make  a  good
Christian — good  actions  and  good  aims.    A  good  aim  maketh  not  a  bad  action  good, .
as  here ;  and  yet  a  bad  aim  maketh  a  good  action  bad,  as  we  see  in  Jehu "  (Trapp).

7.  The  conduct  which  is  blameless  in  some  may  be  sinful  in  others  who  have  received
higher  privileges.  8.  Although  the  transgression  of  God's  Law  may  be  borne  with  for
a  time,  it  is  sure  to  be  followed  by  deserved  chastisement.  9.  If  negligence  and  dis-
obedience in  relation  to  the  material  symbol  were  displeasing  to  God,  much  more  must
they  be  so  in  relation  to  the  spiritual  truth  of  which  it  was  a  shadow  (Heb.  x.  29).  10.
The  noblest  agents  should  be  chosen  for  the  performance  of  the  noblest  services. — D.

Yen.  6—8  (1  Ohron.  xiiL  9 — 11). — (Goebn  Naohon.)  2%e  ark  upheld  with  irre-
verent hatidt.

"Kead  who  the  Church  would  cleanse,  and  mark
How  stem  the  warning  runs :
There  are  two  ways  to  guard  her  ark—
As  patrons  and  as  sons."

('Lyra  ApoBtolica.")

The  fur  prospects  of  a  great  enterprise  are  sometimes  darkened,  as  by  a  thunderstorm,
in  consequence  of  the  improper  manner  in  which  it  is  conducted.  The  forbearance  of
God  toward  those  who  transgress  his  ordinances  is  often  unheeded,  and  becomes  an
occasion  of  further  transgression,  until  the  occurrence  of  a  sigual  disaster  fills  them
with  fear  and  trembling.  The  act  of  one  man,  it  may  be,  gives  definite  expression  to
the  spirit  which  influences  many,  and  on  him  falls  the  lightning-stroke  of  Heaven,
its  a  punishment  for  his  sin  and  a  chastisement  of  all  who  are  associated  with  him ;
a  solemn  call  to  consideration  and  amendment.

"  Give  unto  Jehovah,  O  ye  sons  of  God,
Give  unto  Jehovah  glory  and  strength ;
Give  unto  Jehovah  the  glory  of  his  Name;
Worship  Jehovah  in  holy  attire.
The  voice  of  Jehovah  is  upon  the  waten.
The  God  of  glory  thundereth."

(Ps.  xxix.  1— S.)

L  A  8EBMINO  EXiQBNOT.  The  ark  in  danger  I  "For  [at  the  threshing-floor  of
Naehon,  or  Ohidon]  the  oxen  shook  it  [kicked,  broke  loose,  or  stumbled],"  so  that  the
support  of  Uzzah  was  apparently  needful  to  arrest  its  fall.  In  like  manner  religion —
the  Church,  its  worship,  sacraments,  doctrines — sometimes  appears  in  perilous  need  of
human  help.  But  the  apparent  exi;iency :  1.  Is  commonly  the  result  of  previous
negligence  and  disobedience  on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  its  interests  are  entrusted,
and  the  false  position  in  which  it  is  placed.  If  the  "  due  order "  (1  Chron.  xv.  13)
had  been  observed,  the  danger  would  never  have  arisen.  2.  Serves  the  purpose  of
testing  and  manifesting  the  character  of  men.  Will  it  lead  them  to  consider,  perceive
their  error,  and  amend ;  or  occasion  further  aberrations  ?  3.  Can  never  warrant  an  inter-
ference which  is  expressly  prohibited,  however  great  the  danger  or  sincere  the  desire  to
avert  it.  "You  must  rather  leave  the  ark  to  shake,  if  it  bo  please  God,  than  put
unworthy  bands  to  hold  it  up "  (Bacon).  4.  Is  not  so  great  as  it  appears ;  for  God  is
ablo  to  prevent  its  fall  or  overrule  it  for  good.  "The  special  moral  of  this  warning  is
that  no  one,  on  the  plea  of  zeal  for  the  ark  of  God's  Church,  should  resort  to  doubtful
expedients  and  unlawful  mea as  for  the  attainment  of  his  end  "  (Wordsworth).

n.  A  SERIOUS  ERROR.  "  Uzzah  reached  forth  to  the  ark  of  God,  and  took  hold  of  it."
The  Levites  (of  whom  Uzzah  was  one)  were  to  carry  it  on  staves ;  but  "not  touch  any
holy  thing,  lest  they  die"  (Nnmb.  iv.  15).  His  error  was  practical;  though  in  itself
trivial,  a  direct  breach  of  the  legal  requirement ;  and  (as  is  often  the  case  with  an
apparently  insignificant  act)  indicated  an  unsanctifled  mind.  He  was  "a  type  of  all
who,  with  good  intentions,  humanly  speaking,  yet  with  unsanctifled  minds,  interfere
in  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  God  from  the  notion  that  they  are  in  danger  and  with
the  hojie  of  saving  them  "  (0.  von  Gerlach).  1.  He  acted  "  unnecessarily,  and  from
the  precipitate  impulse  ot  human  nature  "  (Ewald),  unregulated  and  unrestrained  by


CH.VI.  1— 23.]  THE  SECOKD  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  165

proper  thought  and  a  higher  will.  2.  With  rashness,  irreverence,  and  profanity;
begotten  of  long  familiarity  with  the  venerable  relic  (see  1  Sam.  vL  19).  He  loolced
upon  it  as  little  other  than  a  piece  of  sacred  furniture.  3.  In  a  gpirit  of  official  pride
and  presunvption,  as  its  hereditary  guardian  and  immediate  conductor,  "  Perhaps  he
affected  to  show  before  this  great  assembly  how  bold  he  could  make  with  the  ark,
having  been  so  long  acquainted  with  it"  (Matthew  Henry).  Men  of  high  position,  great
possessions,  and  eminent  gifts  in  the  Cnurch,  sometimes  display  a  similar  spirit,  and
even  affect  to  patronize  the  worship  of  God  !  4.  With  improper  anxiety  about  the
means  of  progress  and  success,  and  wan*  of  faith  in  the  Divine  presence  and  might.
"  In  our  own  days  there  are  not  awanting  men  like  Uzzah,  who  act  as  if  it  were  all
over  with  Christianity  if  they  did  not  maintain  it  against  the  power  of  modem
negations."  Their  zeal  is  shown  in  various  ways.  But  "  this  zeal,  notwithstanding  its
good  intention,  is  yet  unholy,  because  it  is  as  faint-hearted  as  it  is  presumptuous.  The
Lord  needs  not  such  helpers  "  (Krummaoher).

IIL  A  STARTLING  JUDGMENT.  "And  the  anger  of  Jehovah  was  kindled,  .  .  .
and  he  died  there  by  the  ark  of  Ghsd."  A  flash  of  lightning,  an  apoplectic  stroke,  or
other  secondary  cause,  was  the  instrument  thereof;  in  the  presence  of  all  Israel,  and
even  before  the  mercy-seat,  he  suffered  the  penalty  of  his  error  ("rashness,"  ver.  7);
and  the  spot  where  he  fell  became  a  monument  of  the  wrath  of  God  and  his  power  to
protect  his  "holy  things"  (Bzek.  xxii.  8).  1.  On  those  who  continue  to  break  the
Divine  Law  "the  flery  inHignation,"  though  long  delayed,  breaks  forth  suddenly  and
"  without  remedy  "  (Heb.  x.  31).  2.  Punishment  is  most  severe  on  those  who  are  most
honoured,  and  who  ought  to  be  a  pattern  to  others  of  reverence  and  obedience  (Numb.
iii.  4;  1  Sam.  v.  6;  vi.  19;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  21;  Acts  v.  5;  xii.  23).  3.  The  conse-^
queuces  of  sin  reveal  the  measure  of  its  sinfulness.  4.  The  judgnnent  inflicted  on  one
affects  many,  and  represents  their  desert.  The  procession  was  stopped,  the  enterprise
hindered,  rejoicing  turned  into  mourning,  "and  great  fear  came  upon  all"  (Acts  v.  11).
"  When  many  have  sinned  God  commonly  punishes  one  or  two  of  the  leaders,  in  order
that  others  may  remember  their  sin  and  beg  forgiveness "  (Osiander).  Judgment  is
mingled  with  mercy.     The  punishment  of  one  is  for  the  good  of  many.

IV.  A  SALUTARY  ADMONITION.  1.  To  Consider  the  awful  holiness  and  majesty  of  the
great  King  (Mai.  i.  11, 14);  "for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire"  (Heb.  xii.  29).  2.  To
learn  the  spiritual  meaning  and  sanctity  of  his  ordinances.  3.  To  cherish  a  spirit  of
profound  humility  and  reverence  in  his  service.  4.  To  exercise  repentance  and  trust,
and  new  and  faithful  obedience  to  his  will  in  all  things.     Then — '

"Jehovah  will  give  strength  to  his  people;
Jehovah  will  bless  his  people  with  peace."

(Pa.  xiix.  IL)

D.

Vers,  9, 10(1  Chron.  xiii.  12, 13). — (Pekez-TJzzah.)  The  arh  regarded  with  a  fearful
heart.  "And  Uavid  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  day"  (ver.  9).  By  none  was  "  the
disaster  of  Uzzah  "  more  keenly  felt  than  by  the  king.  He  was  disappointed,  grieved,
and  displeased  at  the  interraption  of  the  enterprise  on  which  he  had  set  his  heart;  and,
clearly  perceiving  the  primary  offence  that  had  been  committed,  he  was  angry  with  all
who  were  responsilile  for  it,  not  least  with  himself  (2  Cor.  vii.  11).  "The  hurninr;  of
David's  anger  was  not  directed  against  God,  but  referred  to  the  calamity  which  liad
befallen  Uzzah,  or,  speaking  more  correctly,  to  the  cause  of  the  calamity  which  David
attributed  to  himself  or  to  his  undertaking"  (Keil).  His  attitude  of  soul  toward
Jehovah  "  that  day  "  was  not,  indeed,  altogether  what  it  should  have  been.  Conscious
of  sinfulness  and  liability  to  err,  he  was  full  of  apprehension  of  a  similar  judgment
on  himself,  if  he  should  receive  the  ark ;  and  his /ear  (though  springing  up  in  a  devout
heart)  was  an  oppressive,  paralyzing,  superstitious  terror,  like  that  of  the  men  of  Beth-
shemesh  (1  Sam.  vi.  20),  rather  than  an  enlightened,  submissive,  and  becoming
reverence.  "This  was  his  infirmity;  though  some  wiU  have  it  to  be  his  humility"
(Trapp).     We  thus  see  wherein/ear  is —

I.  Needful.  It  is  as  natural  and  proper  a  motive  as  gratitude,  hope,  or  love ;  is
often  enjoined;  and,  in  ihe  sense  of  unbounded  reverence,  it  constitutes  "the  religious
feeling  in  its  luudamental  form "  (Martensen).     To  men  in  their  present  condition  it  ia


1G6  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [en.  vi.  1—28.

«peoially  needful  in  order  to :  1.  Arrest  heedless  footsteps  and  constrain  to  serious  reflec-
tion and  self-examination.  "Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling"
(Ps.  ii.  11 ;  iv.  4).  2.  Convince  of  sin,  restrain  pride  and  presumption,  and  lead  to
godly  sorrow.  3.  Deter  from  disobedience,  and  induce  circumspection  and  diligence
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  7 ;  Prov.  xvi.  6 ;  1  Cor.  x.  12 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  Phil,  ii,  12 ;  1  Pet.  i.  17).
"  Fear  is  a  great  bridle  of  intemperance,  the  modesty  of  the  spirit,  and  the  restraint  ol
gaieties  and  dissolutions;  it  is  the  girdle  to  the  soul  and  the  handmaid  to  repentance  ;
the  mother  of  consideration  and  the  nurse  of  sober  counsels.  But  this  so  excellent
grace  is  soon  abused  in  the  best  and  most  tender  spirits.  When  it  is  inordinate,  it  is
never  a  good  counsellor,  nor  makes  a  good  friend;  and  he  that  fears  God  as  his  enemy
is  the  most  completely  miserable  per  on  in  the  world  "  (Jeremy  Taylor,  '  Of  Godly
Fear').

II.  SiNFDL.  It  is  SO  when  associated  with :  1.  Misinterpretation  and  false  judgments
of  God's  dealings ;  such  false  judgments  being  themselves  due  to  personal  disappoint-
ment or  other  self-blinding  influence.  "In  his  first  excitement  and  dismay  David
may  not  have  perceived  the  real  and  deeper  ground  of  this  Divine  judgment;"  and
thought  that  God  had  dealt  hardly  with  him.  2.  Suspicion,  distrust,  and  "  the  evil
heart  of  unbelief  departing  from  the  living  God;"  from  which  even  the  best  of  men
are  not  exempt,  especially  when  impressed  with  his  severity  and  forgetful  of  his
goodness  (Eom.  xi.  22).  3.  Servile  thoughts  of  the  service  of  God,  as  a  restraint  upon
freedom  and  a  source  of  trouble  and  danger.  "  How  shall  the  ark  of  the  Lord  come  to
me  ?  "  4.  Immoderate  and  morbid  indulgence  of  the  feeling,  instead  of  immediate
return  to  God  at  "  the  throne  of  grace,"  in  penitence,  hope,  and  renewed  devotion  (1
Sam.  xvi.  2 ;  xxviii.  1).

III.  Hurtful.  By  :  1.  Producing  inward  distraction  and  despondency.  2.  Estrang-
ing from  the  fellowship  and  service  of  God,  and  preventing  the  accomplishment  of  holy
purposes.  How  many  excellent  enterprises  are  abandoned  through  unworthy  fears!
3.  Depriving  of  invaluable  blessings.  The  loss  of  David  appears  by  the  gain  of  Obed-
Bdom  (ver.  11),  into  whose  dwelling  the  ark  brought  sunshine  and  prosperity.  But
with  time  and  reflection  his  misjudigments  were  corrected,  his  faith  Revived,  his  fear
was  sanctified  (Ps.  ci.  2)  and  associated  with  holy  and  ardent  aspiration  after  the
presence  of  God  in  his  tabernacle,  and  he  wrote  Ps.  xv.,  'The  character  of  the  true
worshipper  and  friend  of  God.'

"Jehovah,  who  may  sojourn  in  thy  tabernacle?
Who  may  dwell  in  thy  holy  mountain  ?
He  that  walketh  uprightly  and  worketh  righteousness,
And  speaketh  truth  in  his  heart.  .  .  .
He  that  doeth  these  things  shall  never  be  moved."

(Ps.  XV.  1— S.)

D.

Vers.  10, 11  (1  Chron.  xfil.  13, 14). — (The  HOtrsB  of  Obed-Edom.)  The  ark  received
with  a  right  spirit.  By  means  of  the  ark  "the  thoughts  of  many  hearts"  were
"revealed."  Whilst  Uzzah  treated  it  with  irreverence,  and  David  regarded  it  with
dread,  Obed-Edom  the  Gittite  (of  Oath-nwir.jn)  received  it  "  with  reverence  and  godly
fear."  He  was  a  Levite,  and  (like  Samuel)  of  the  sons  of  Korah,  a  branch  of  the
Kohathites,  whose  office  it  was  to  "  bear  upon  their  shoulders  "  (Numb.  vii.  9) ;  and  is
subsequently  mentioned  as  porter  (musician),  and  doorkeeper  of  the  ark  (1  Chron.  xv.
18,  21,  24;  xvi.  5,  38;  perhaps  "the  son  of  Jeduthun").  He  did  not  seek  to  have
the  ark  placed  under  his  care ;  but,  when  requested  by  the  king,  he  was  not  afraid  to
receive  it,  well  knowing  "  that,  although  God  is  a  consuming  fire  to  those  who  treat
him  with  irreverence,  he  is  infinite  in  mercy  to  those  who  obey  him."  "Oh,  the
courage  of  an  honest  and  faithful  heart  I "  (Hall).  The  ark  in  the  house  of  Obed-Edom
may  be  considered  as  representing  religion  in  the  home;  and  wherever  it  truly  dwells
there  ia:  1.  A  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  Ood ;  of  which  the  ark  was  the  divinely
ordained  symbol.  As  often  as  he  and  his  household  looked  upon  the  sacred  vessel
mysteriously  veiled  with  its  blue  covering,  they  would  be  the  more  deeply  impressed
with  the  conviction  of  that  presence.  We  have  no  longer  the  symbol ;  but  we  have
the  spiritual  reality  which  it  signified ;  the  one  is  taken  away  that  the  other  may  be


OH.  Ti.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  167

more  fully  recognized,  and  its  recognition  cannot  but  produce  in  the  home  thoughtful-
ness,  reverence,  and  self-restraint.  2.  Obedience  to  his  commandments;  which  were
deposited  in  the  ark  (2  Chron,  ii.  10).  The  Law  must  be  written  on  the  fleshy  tablets
of  the  heart;  made  the  rule  of  life;  and  diligently  taught  to  the  children  (Dent,  vi
4 — 9).    The  sins  which  it  forbidB  will  thus  be  avoided,  the  virtues  which  it  enjoins

Practised ;  "  righteousness,  goodness,  and  truth,"  the  foundation  on  which  the  home  is
uilt;  and  the  will  of  God  being  recognized  as  supreme;  order  and  harmony  will  prevail.
3.  Confidence  in  his  mercy ;  according  to  the  appointed  method  of  reconciliation  set
forth  by  the  mercy-seat,  and  fulfilled  in  Christ  (Eom.  iii.  25 ;  2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  1  John
ii.  1).  The  fatherly  love  of  God,  being  "known  and  believed,"  becomes  a  perpetual
incentive  to  love  God  and  one  another  (Bph.  iv.  32 ;  Eom.  xiii.  10).  The  pervading
element  of  the  home  should  be  love.  "  Jesus  Christ — Love ;  the  same.""  4.  The  enjoy-
ment of  his  fellowship ;  which  was  assured  at  the  mercy-seat.  "  There  will  I  commune
with  thee  "  (Exod.  xxv.  22).  "  Communion  with  God  is  the  very  innermost  essence  of
all  true  Christian  life ; "  and  it  is  maintained  and  perfected  in  the  home  by  family
prayer  (ver.  20).  5.  Repose  under  his  protection ;  represented  by  the  overshadowing
cherubim.  While  Obed-Edom  guarded  the  ark  of  God,  he  was  himself  guarded  by  the
God  of  the  ark.  "  The  Lord  is  thy  Keeper  "  (Ps.  cxxi.  5).  "  He  shall  give  his  angels
charge  over  thee,"  etc.  (Ps.  xci.  1,  11).  6.  ITie  reception  of  his  blessing.  "And  Jehovah
blessed  Obed-Edom,  and  all  his  household"  (ver.  11),  "aU  that  he  had"  (1  Chron.  xiii.
14) — blessed  him  with  spiritual,  providential,  enduring  benefits  (1  Chron.  xxvi.  4 — 8).
"  It  paid  well  for  its  entertainment.  The  same  hand  that  punished  Uzzah's  proud
presumption  rewarded  Obed-Edom's  humble  boldness,  and  made  the  ark  to  him  'a
savour  of  life  unto  life ' "  (Matthew  Henry).  "  A  good  man  leaveth  an  inheritance  to
his  children's  children  "  (Prov.  xiii.  22  ;  Ps.  cii.  28).  7.  The  promotion  of  his  honour
and  glory.  "And  it  was  told  King  David,"  etc.  Ecligion  in  the  home  "cannot  be
hid ; "  the  fame  thereof  goes  abroad  and  incites  many — perchance  a  whole  nation
— to  render  to  God  the  honour  which  is  his  due,  "  so  that  glory  may  dwell  in  our
land."-  -D.

Vers.  12 — 15  (1  Chron.  iv.). — (jBRtrsALBM.)  The  arh  led  forth  with  devout  enthu-
siasm. A  man's  ruling  passion,  although  repressed  for  a  season,  surely  reappears.  It
was  thus  with  David's  affection  for  the  ark  of  God;  and  his  desire  to  bring  it  up  to
Zion,  where  he  had  prepared  a  new  tent,  tabernacle,  or  pavilion  (Ps,  xivii.  5),  for  its
reception  (ver.  17),  in  or  adjoining  his  own  palace  (1  Chron.  xiv.  1 ;  xv.  1).  His  zeal,
which  had  been  checked  by  fear,  now  revived

"  As  florets,  by  the  frosty  air  of  night
Bent  down  and  closed,  when  day  has  blanched  their  leavea,
Bise  all  unfolded  on  their  spiry  stems."

(Dante.)

'  I.  A  RENEWED  PURPOSE  is  ofttimes :  1.  Incited  by  the  example  of  another,  and  the
manifest  success  attending  his  conduct.  "  And  it  was  told  King  David,"  etc.  (ver.  12) ;
"  And  David  said,  I  will  go  and  bring  back  the  ark  with  blessing  to  my  house "  (Vul-
gate). To  this  also  his  study  of  the  Law,  meditation  and  prayer,  duiing  the  preceding
three  months  contributed.  2.  Accompanied  with  the  conviction  and  confession  of  the
cause  of  previous  failure  (ver.  13 ;  1  Chron.  xv.  2, 13,  15).  "  Pious  men  will  profit  by
their  own  errors,  stand  the  stronger  for  their  falls,  and  not  abate  in  their  zeal  and  affec-
tions, but  learn  to  connect  them  with  humility,  and  to  regulate  them  according  to  the
precepts  of  the  sacred  Scripture  "  (Scott).  3.  Carried  out  with  more  careful  and  diligent
preparation  than  before.     "  David  gathered  all  Israel  together  " — the  priests  (Abiathar,

1  Sam.  XXX.  7;   Zadok,  1  Chron.  xii.  28)  and  the  Levites  (mentioned  only  once  in

2  Samuel,  viz.  ch.  xv.  24);  charged  them  to  sanctify  themselves  to  bring  up  the  ark,  and
directed  the  chiefs  of  the  latter  to  appoint  singers  with  musical  instruments  for  the
procession  (1  Chron.  xv.  12 — 16),  among  whom  ho  seems  to  have  "  found  a  faculty  of
song  and  music  already  in  existence  "  (Hengstenberg).

II.  An  auspicious  commbkcbment.  "  When  they  had  gone  six  paces,  he  sacrificed
oxen  and  fatliugs"  ("seven  bullocks  and  seven  rams,"  1  Chron.  xv.  26) — "a  thank  offering
for  the  happy  beginning,  and  a  petition  for  the  prosjjerous  continuation  of  the  under-


1(58  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [«=.  vi.  1—23.

taking"  (Bottcher).  1.  The  first  steps  of  an  enterprise  are  of  high  importance,  and,
until  they  are  actually  taken,  even  the  best  prepared  are  seldom  without  misgiving.
2.  When  taken  with  the  manifest  approval  of  Heaven,  they  afford  strong  confidence  and
hope  of  a  successful  issue.  3.  The  gladness  (ver.  1'^)  of  successful  effort  is  all  the
greater  because  of  previous  anxiety  and  grief  (Ps,  cxxvi.  6).  The  procession  was  led
by  eight  hundred  and  sixty  .two  Levites  clad  in  white,  in  three  choirs,  playing  respec-
tively on  cymbals,  psalteries,  and  harps;  over  the  first  of  which  were  Heman  (grandson
of  Samuel),  Asaph,  and  Ethan,  or  Jeduthun.  Then  followed  Chenaiah,  "  chief"  or
marshal  "of  the  Levites  for  bearing;"  two  doovkee[jers;  the  ark,  attended  by  seven
priests  blowing  silver  trumpets  (Numb.  z.  1 — 10) ;  and  two  other  doorkeepers  (of  whom
Obed-Edom  was  one).  Last  of  all  came  the  king,  with  the  elders  and  captains  of  thou-
sands, and  the  whole  body  of  the  people.

**  Before  went  the  gingers,  behind  the  players  on  stringed  instruments;
In  the  midst  of  damsels  striking  timbrels.
There  is  Benjamin  the  yonngetit,  their  ruler;
The  prinoes  of  Judah — their  motley  band.
The  princes  of  Zebnlan,  the  princes  of  Naphtali."

(Ps.  Ixviii.  26,  28.)

ni.  A  rESTAL  AND  TRIUMPHAL  PE0OBES8.  "  With  shouting  and  sound  of  trumpet "
(ver.  15).  Again  arose  the  well-known  shout,  "  Let  God  arise,"  etc,  I  (Ps.  Ixviii. ;
cxxxii.  8).  The  king  may  have  composed  the  hymns  sung  by  the  Levites,  and  himself  ,
carried  a  harp  in  his  hand.  His  clothing  "  had  a  priestly  character,  and  not  only  the
ephod  of  white,  but  also  the  meil  of  white  byssos,  distinguished  him  as  the  head  of  a
priestly  people "  (Keil,  on  1  Chron.  xv.  27).  And  David,  having  laid  aside  his  royal
garment,  which  would  impede  his  movements,  "  danced  before  Jehovah  with  all  hia
might "  (ver.  14).

"  The  same  who  sang
The  Holy  Spirit's  song,  and  bare  about
The  ark  from  town  to  town ;  now  doth  he  know
The  merit  of  his  soul-impassioned  strains
By  their  well-fitted  guerdon."

(Dante, '  Par.,'  xx.)

"  Simonides  used  to  say  of  dancing  that  it  was  silent  poetry,  and  of-  poetry  that  it  was
eloquent  dancing  "  (Delany,  from  Plutarch).  There  is  "  a  time  to  dance  "  (Eocles.  iii.  4).
David's  dancing  was  a  religious  act  (ver.  21) ;  customary  among  a  people  of  simple  and
demonstrative  habits,  on  a  return  from  victory  and  in  public  worship  (Exod.  xv.  20 ;
Judg.  xi.  34;  1  Sam.  xviii.  6);  rendered  familiar  to  him  in  the  school  of  the  prophets
(1  Sam.  xix.  24) ;  practised  only  on  an  extraordinary  occasion ;  a  natural  expression  of
personal  gratitude  and  joy  (Ps.  xxx.  11)  in  a  man  of  ardent  temperament ;  a  sign  of
humble,  avowed,  and  unreserved  devotion  to  Jehovah  (Ps.  d.  4) ;  a  means  of  identify-
ing himself  with  the  people,  and  of  infusing  his  own  spirit  into  them.  Those  persons
who  condemn  him  as  deficient  in  modesty  and  dignity  should  remember  these  things :
those  who  commend  dancing  as  a  social  amusement  or  recreation  by  his  example  must
find  other  grounds  for  their  commendation ;  and  those  who  justify  the  unseasonable,
vain,  and  indelicate  manner  in  which  it  is  ordinarily  performed,  by  his  conduct,  either
misunderstand  or  shamelessly  pervert  it  (Job  xxi.  7 — 15).

Of  religious  excitement  it  may  be  said  that :  1.  It  does  not  prevail  to  such  an  extent
as  might  have  been  expected  from  the  glorious  truths  set  forth  in  the  Word  of  Gud.
2.  It  is  of  great  value  in  inducing  the  performance  of  duty,  overcoming  obstacles,  and
leading  to  a  decisive  course  of  action.  Reason  and  conscience  are  often  insufficient  of
themselves  to  influence  the  will  effectually.  3.  It  is  fiaught  with  serious  danger — of
not  being  properly  regulated  by  intelligence,  of  running  into  imprudence  and  excess,
of  being  superficial  and  transient,  and  perverted  to  an  unworthy  and  sinful  end.  4.
It  requires  to  be  controlled  by  an  enlightened  conscience,  transformed  into  fixed  prin-
ciples, and  translated  into  holy  and  useful  deeds.  Unless  it  be  immediately  acted
upon  it  is  injurious  rather  thau  beneficial. — ^D.

Vers.  17 — 19  (1  Chron.  xvi.). — (Zion.)    The  ark  estaiblished  in  tti  chosen  restiitfi-


m.  VI.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  169

place.  The  ascent  of  the  ark  into  "the  city  of  David"  may  be  regarded  as:  1.  A
termination  of  a  state  of  things  that  had  long  prevailed,  in  which  the  relation  of  the
people  of  Israel  to  their  Divine  King  was  interrupted,  his  service  neglected,  their  power
impaired.  Even  the  early  military  successes  of  Saul  were  followed  by  disaster,  dis-
sension, and  civil  sti  ife,  which  had  been  only  recently  healed.  Once  more  there  was
rest  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  25).  2.  An  inauguration  of  a  new  era :  the  more  manifest  and
abiding  presence  of  Jehovah  among  his  people,  the  more  general  recognition  of  his
sovereignty,  the  organization  of  a  worthier  and  more  attractive  form  of  worship,  the
more  complete  union  of  the  tribes  under  the  Lord's  Anointed  (Messiah),  and  the
victorious  expansion  of  his  kingdom.  "  It  was  the  greatest  day  of  David's  life.  .  .  .
It  was  felt  to  be  the  turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  nation.  It  recalled  the  great
epoch  of  the  passage  through  the  wilderness.  David  was  on  that  day  the  founder,  not
of  freedom  only,  not  of  religion  only,  but  of  a  Church,  a  commonwealth  "  (Stanley).
3,  A  representatim  (a  type,  or  at  least  an  emblem)  of  the  coming  of  "  Messiah  the
Prince"  in  his  kingdom;  either,  more  generally,  in  his  whole  mediatorial  course  from
his  first  advent  to  his  final  triumph,  or,  more  specially,  at  his  ascension  "  far  above  all
the  heavens,  that  he  might  fill  all  things  "  (Eph.  iv.  8 — 10).

**  Thon  hast  ascended  up  on  high, .
Thou  hast  led  captives  captive,"  etc

OPb.  IxvUi  18.)

L  A  OLOKiouB  CONSUMMATION,  "  And  they  brought  in  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  and  get
it  in  its  place,"  etc.  "  This  is  my  rest  for  ever,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxxxii.  13, 14).  To  this
occasion  may  be  referred  Ps.  xxiv., '  The  King  of  glory  entering  his  sanctuary.'

"  The  earth  is  Jehovah's,  and  the  fulness  thereof;
Tlie  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein.  .  .  .
Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  Jehovah  f
And  who  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place  7  "

(Ps.  xxiv.  1— e.)

It  is  here  declared  that  the  proper  preparation  for  communion  with  God  is  moral  purity,
not  merely  external  pomp  (vers.  9, 11 ;  Ps.  xv. ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  15, 16).  The  former  part
of  this  grund  choral  hymn  was  probably  sung  on  the  way  to  Zion ;  the  latter  on  entering
the  gatuB  of  the  venerable  fortress  and  city  of  Melchizedek.

"  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates.
And  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  evermsting  doora,
That  the  King  of  glory  may  come  in.
WJio  is,  then,  the  King  of  glory  1
Jehovah  strong  and  mighty,
Jehovah  mighty  in  battle.

"  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates  .  ,

Who  M,  then,  that  King  of  glorpt
Jehovah  of  hosts ;
He  is  the  King  of  glory."

(Ps.  xxlv.  7—10.;

"  Amidst  the  glorious  wave  of  song  and  praise,  the  ark  wrs  placed  in  the  tabernacle."
So  Christ  (in  whom  the  Divine  and  human  king  are  one)  has  entered  the  heavenly
Zion,  dwells  with  men,  and  prepares  those  who  receive  him,  in  faith  and  love,  to  dwell
with  him  for  ever  (Heb.  x.  12,  22).

11.  As  ACCEPTABLE  BACEiFicB.  "  Aud  Davld"  (as  head  and  representative  of  a
priestly  nation,  Exod.  xix.  6)  "offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  before
Jehovah ; "  the  former  expressive  of  self-dedication,  the  latter  of  thanksgiving,  praise,
and  joyous  fellowship  with  God  and  one  another.  At  the  close  of  the  service  of  dedica-
tion he  institutrid  a  regular  "  service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (see  Hengstea-
berg,  'On  the  History  of  the  Psalmodic  Poetry '),  due  in  part  to  the  influence  of  Samuel
and  his  prophet-associates  (1  Sam.  xix.  20),  but  having  him  for  its  real  author,  and
receiving  its  mightiest  impulse  from  his  sublime  compositions.    Ho  was  a  prophet  at


170  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [on.  vi.  1—23.

truly  as  Samuel  or  Moses  (Acts  ii.  30).  "  David,  as  well  as  Moses,  was  made  like  to
Christ  the  Son  of  David  in  this  respect,  that  by  him  God  gave  a  new  ecclesiastical
establishment  and  new  ordinances  of  worship  "  (Jon.  Edwards).  "  On  that  day  then
David  ordered  for  the  first  time  to  thank  the  Lord  by  Asaph  and  his  brethren"
(1  Chron.  zvL  7).

"  Thank  ye  the  Lord,  call  on  his  Name,
Make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people,"  etc.

(1  Chron.  xvi.  8—22;  Pb.  ct.  1—15.)

*  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord,  all  the  earth,
FrocLiim  from  day  to  day  liia  salvation,''  eto.

(1  Chron.  xvi.  23—36;  Ps.  xcvi.  2—13;  cvt  1,  47,  48.)

"  A  day  to  be  remembered  for  all  time  1  Then  '  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel '  first  gave
the  suggestions  of  his  inspiration,  and  the  product  of  his  pen,  to  embody  and  guide  the
praises  of  the  Church.  What  effects  have  followed  that  first  hymn !  What  streams  of
praise  . .  .  what  clouds  of  incense  have  gushed  and  risen  and  are  ever  rising  and  gushing
the  world  over  at  this  moment,  from  the  immortal  impulse  of  that  Divine  act  I "  (Binney).
Yet  it  is  Christ  himself  "  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  "  (Heb.  ii.  12)  who  inspires  its
noblest  praises,  and  by  whom  the  sacrifice  is  rendered  acceptable  to  God  (Heb.  xiii.  15).

III.  A  OBAciocs  BENEDICTION.  "  And  he  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
of  hosts;"  recognizing  him  as  "  the  God  of  omnipotent  power  in  heaven,  who  victoriously
accomplishes  his  work  of  salvation  "  (I  Sam.  i.  3),  and  solemnly  invoking  a  blessing  on
his  people  in  accordance  with  his  Name  and  covenant.  His  act,  although  not  strictly
an  assumption  of  the  office  of  the  Levitical  priesthood,  was  of  &  priestly  character  (even
more  so  than  the  patriarchal  blessing) ;  "  and  thus,  though  but  in  a  passing  and  tempo-
rary manner,  he  prefigured  in  his  own  person  the  union  of  the  kingly  and  priestly
offices"  (Perowne),  alluded  to  in  Ps.  ex.  (written  after  this  event),  'The  victorious
king  and  priest.'

"  Jehovah  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  repent :
Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever
After  the  order  of  Melchizedek."

(Ps.  ex.  4.)

It  was  while  the  Lord  Jesus  "lifted  up  his  hands  and  blessed  them"  that  "he  parted
from  them,  and  was  carried  up  into  heaven  "  (Luke  xxiv.  51) — a  sign  of  his  continual
inteicession  and  benediction.     "  Wherefore  also  he  is  able  to  save,"  etc.  (Heb.  vii.  25).

IV.  A  GENEROUS  BENEFACTION.  "  And  he  distributed  to  all  the  people,  even  to  the
whole  multitude  of  Israel,  as  well  to  the  women  as  to  the  men,  to  every  one  a  cake  of
bread,  and  a  measure  [of  wine],  and  a  raisin-cake,"  that  they  might  feast  together  before
the  Lord  (according  to  custom  in  the  case  of  peace  offerings,  1  Sam.  i.  4;  ix.  13)  as  a
nation,  with  thankfulness,  gladness,  and  charity.  "  It  is  a  good  thing  when  henedicere
and  henefacere  go  together,  and  when  in  a  prince  is  seen,  not  only  piety  toward  God,
but  love  and  liberality  toward  his  people"  (Guild).  How  much  greater  are  the
benefits  bestowed  by  the  exalted  Kedeemer  than  those  conferred  by  any  earthly
monarch  (Mark  xvi.  20 ;  Acts  ii.  33) !  "  Clirist  has  risen  bodily  into  heaven  that  he
may  be  spiritually  present  in  the  earthly  heaven  of  the  Church ;  the  bodily  ascension
and  the  spiritual  indwelling  are  two  aspects  of  the  same  act.  .  .  .  The  mystical  David,
from  his  own  high  home,  dispenses  his  own  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world,  and  that
spiritual  bread  which  he  that  hungers  after  righteousness  shall  eat  of  and  be  satisfied,
and  that  'fruit  of  the  vine'  which  is  even  now  to  be  drunk  in  the  earthly  '  kingdom  of
the  Father'"  (W.  Archer  Butler).— D.

Ver.  17. —  The  ark  and  the  Bible.  The  ark  of  the  covenant  has  been  taken  as
representative  of  religion,  of  Christ,  of  the  Church,  or  of  the  sacraments  and  means  of
grace.  It  may  also  be  compared  with  the  Bible  (or  Scriptures  of  the  old  and  new
covenants),  which  is  of  even  greater  value  to  us  than  the  ark  was  to  Israel.  The
resemblance  appears  in  their:  1.  Supernatural  origin.  The  ark  wns  made  according
to  the  pattern  shown  (in  vision)  by  God  to  Moses  in  the  mount  (Exod.  xiv.  9),  by
Bezaleel,  who  was  "filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God"  (Exod.  xxxi.  3),  and  other  wise-
hearted  men;  wad  the  tables  of  stone  which  it  contained  were  "written  with  the


OH.  Ti.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  171


finger  of  God"  (Exod.  xxxiv.  1).  The  Bible  is  the  product  of  Divine  inspiration
(2  Tim.  liL  16),  though,  like  the  ark,  in  connection  with  the  (literary)  skill  of  man.
"  It  is  a  Divine-human  book."  2.  External,  characteristics,  such  as  choice  and  precious
materialB  (acacia  wood  and  pure  gold),  durability,  painstaking  workmanship  ("  beaten
work"),  simplicity,  compactness,  beauty  ("a  crown  of  gold  round  about"),  practical
utility  (rings  and  staves),  which  are  all  apparent  in  the  Scriptures.  3.  Spiritual
significance — the  presence  of  God,  the  Law  (as  a  testimony  against  sin  and  a  rule
of  life),  atoning  mercy.  Divine  fellowship  and  favour.  "In  the  words  of  God  we
have  the  heart  of  God."  The  ark  was  a  sign  of  these  sublime  realities,  "not  the
very  things  themselves."  With  the  Bible,  wherein  they  are  so  much  more  clearly
and  fully  set  forth,  it  is  the  same.  4.  Wondrous  achievements ;  not,  indeed,  by  their
inherent  virtue,  but  by  the  Divine  might  of  which  they  were  appointed  instruments ;
in  blessing  or  bane  according  to  the  diverse  moral  relationships  of  men.  By  the
ark  the  Israelites  were  led  through  the  wilderness,  their  enemies  scattered,  the  waves
of  the  .Jordan  arrested,  the  walls  of  Jericho  demolished,  the  land  subdued,  Dagon
destroyed,  the  rebellious  punished,  the  irreverent  smitten,  the  obedient  blessed.  Who
shall  describe  the  achievements  of  the  Word  of  God?  What  enemies  it  has  overcome  1
what  reformations  effected  I  what  blessings  conferred !  5.  Varied  fortunes :  after  long
wanderings  finding  rest ;  misunderstood  and  superstitiously  perverted,  lost  for  a  season
to  its  appointed  guardians,  persistently  striven  against,  treated  with  irreverent  curiosity,
buried  in  obscurity  and  neglect,  eagerly  sought  after  and  found,  cherished  in  private
dwellings,  exalted  to  the  highest  honour.  6.  Transcendent  claims  on  human  regard —
attention,  reverence,  faith,  love,  and  obedience.  7.  Preparatory  purpose  and  tein  porary
duration.  At  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Babylonians  the  ark  perished  or  was
lost  beyond  recovery;  in  the  new  dispensation  there  is  no  place  for  it  (Jer.  iii.  16);  but
the  mercy  and  judgment  which  it  symbolized  cannot  lail  (Bev.  xi.  19).  The  Bible  is
necessary  only  in  a  state  where  "  we  see  by  means  of  a  mirror  obscurely  "  (I  Cor.  xiii.
12,  13),  not  where  we  see  "face  to  face."  But,  though  in  its  outward  form  it  vanish
away,  yet  in  the  spiritual  realities  of  which  it  testifies,  the  effects  which  it  produces,
the  fulfilment  of  its  promises  and  threatenings,  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for
ever."— D.

Ver.  20  (1  Chron.  xvi.  43). — (Zioh.)  Family  worship.  "  And  David  returned  to
bless  his  household."  A  benediction  or  blessing  is  essentially  a  prayer  to  God  that  his
blessing  may  be  bestowed  upon  others ;  and,  being  uttered  in  their  presence  by  one  who
(like  the  head  of  a  household)  holds  a  position  of  anthority  in  relation  to  them,  it  is
also,  to  some  extent,  an  assurance  of  the  blessing.     Of  family  worship  notice —

I.  Its  obligation  ;  which  (although  it  is  not  expressly  enjoined)  is  evident  from :
1.  The  relation  of  the  family  to  God :  its  Pounder,  Preserver,  Ruler,  Benefactor,  "  the  God
of  all  the  families  of  the  earth"  (Ps.  Ixviii.  6 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  1 ;  Eph.  iii.  15).  Out  of  this
relation  arises  the  duty  of  honouring  him  (Mai.  i.  6) ;  acknowledging  the  dependence  of
the  family,  confessing  its  sins,  seeking  his  mercy,  and  praising  him  for  his  benefits ;
nor,  without  family  worship,  can  its  spiritual  end  be  fulfilled  (Mai.  ii.  16).  2.  The
responsibility  of  the  head  of  the  household  to  order  it  in  the  fear  of  God  (Gen.  xviii. '
18 ;  Prov.  xxii.  6;  Eph.  vi.  4;  1  Tim.  iii.  4),  which  involves  this  obligation.  3.  Pj«-
cep<8,  promises,  etc.,  with  reference  to  prayer,  which  have  a  manifest  application  to
social  worship  in  the  family  (1  Ohron.  xvi.  11 ;  Jer.  x.  25  ;  Matt.  vi.  9 ;  Rom.  xvi.  5 ;
1  Tim.  ii.  8 ;  iv.  5).  4.  The  conduct  of  good  men,  approved  of  God,  and  therefore
indicative  of  his  will  and  recorded  for  imitation.  Abraham  (Gen.  xii.  7,  8),  Jacob
(Gen.  XXXV.  2,  3),  Job  (i.  5),  Joshua  (xxiv.  15),  David,  Daniel  (vi.  10),  Cornelius
(Acts  X.  1),  and  others.  "  Wherever  I  have  a  tent,  there  God  shall  have  an  altar  "
(John  Howard).

II.  Its  manner.  It  should  be  performed :  1.  With  regularity  and  constancy ;  other
family  duties  being  arranged  with  reference  to  it,  and  public  worship  made,  not  a  sub-
stitute, but  a  preparation  for  it  or  an  adjunct  to  it.  2.  In  such  a  way  as  is  suitable
and  profitable  to  those  who  take  part  in  it.  3.  Always  with  thoughtfulness,  reverence,
and  cheerfulness.  4.  Accompanied  by  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  by  instruction,
discipline,  and  consistent  practice,  and  by  holy  purposes,  such  as  are  expressed  in
Ps.  d.  (writtnn  shortly  before  this  time),  'David's  mirror  of  a  monarch'  (Luther),


172  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—23.

"  Of  mercy  and  judgment  will  I  sing.

Unto  thee,  U  Jehovah,  vill  I  harp^
I  will  give  heed  to  a  perfect  way —

When  wilt  thou  come  unto  me  ?—
I  will  walk  with  a  perfect  heart  within  my  house,"  et&

in.  Its  BENEnTS.  1.  The  sure  approbation  and  rich  blessing  of  God  (Prov.  x,  22),
temporal  and  spiritual.  By  its  means,  perchance,  a  parent  effects  "  the  saving  of  his
house "  (Heb.  xi.  7 ;  Luke  xi:? .  9).  2.  The  worthy  performance  of  all  the  duties  of
Ufa.    3.  Abouuding  affection,  harmony,  peace,  happiness,  and  hope  that

"  When  soon  or  late  they  reach  that  coast
O'er  life's  rough  ocean  driven,
They  may  rejoice,  no  wand'rer  lost,
A  family  jn  heaven  I "

4.  Holy  influences,  not  only  on  all  the  household— parents,  children,  domestics — ^but  also
on  the  neighbourhood  and  society.  What  a  mighty  reformation  would  be  implied  in
the  general  adoption  of  family  worship  I  And  to  what  a  moral  and  spiritual  height
would  it  exalt  our  land  1— -D.

Vers.  20 — 23.— (Zion.)  Unholy  scorn.  The  greatest  day  of  David's  life  did  not  end
without  a  cloud.  His  wife  Michal,  "  Saul's  daughter "  (ver.  16';  ch.  iii.  13 ;  1  Sam.
xix.  11—17),  had  not,  from  whatever  cause,  gone  forth  to  meet  him  with  the  other
women  (ver.  19)  on  his  return  to  Jerusalem  with  the  sacred  ark  j  on  beholding  from
a,  window  of  the  palace,  as  the  procession  swept  past,  the  enthusiasm  which  be  dis-
played, "she  despised  him  in  her  heart;"  and  when,  after  he  had  blessed  the  people,
he  returned  to  bless  his  household,  she  met  him  with  sarcastic  reproaches.  "  When  at
a  distance  she  scorned  him,  when  he  came  home  she  scolded  him  "  (Matthew  Henry).
"  Whereas  David  came  to  bless  his  house,  she,  through  her  foolishness,  turneth  Ma
blessing  into  a  curse  "  (Willet).    Her  scorn  (like  that  of  others)  was^

I.  Indulged  improperly.  1.  Without  adequate  cause;  and  even  on  account  of
what  should  have  had  an  opposite  effect.  Fervent  piety  is  not  understood  by  those
who  do  not  possess  it,  and  is  therefore  wrongly  and  uncharitably  judged  of  by  them
(1  Sam.  i.  13-18),  "  In  Saul's  time  public  worship  was  neglected,  and  the  soul  fur
vital  religion  had  died  out  of  the  family  of  the  king  "  (Keil).  2,  From  want  of  spiritual
sympathy  ;  in  love  to  God  and  joy  in  his  service.  Her  religion  (like  her  father's)  was
marked  by  superstition,  formality,  and  cold  conventional  propriety.  She  "knew
nothing  of  the  impulse  of  Divine  love"  (Theodoret),  "The  life  from  and  in  God
remains  a  mystery  to  every  one  until,  through  the  Spirit  of  God  himself,  it  is  unsealed
tfl  his  experience"  (Krummacher).  3.  With  a  sinful  mind — vain,  proud,  discontented,
unwifely,  irreverent  (Eph.  v.  33),  and  resentful.  "  Probably  she  bitterly  resented  her
violent  sepi^ration  from  the  household  joys  that  had  grown  up  around  him  in  her
second  home.  Probably  the  woman  who  had  teraphim  among  her  furniture  cared
nothing  for  the  ark  of  God.  Probably,  as  she  grew  older,  her  character  had  hardened
in  its  lines,  and  become  like  her  father's  in  its  measureless  pride,  and  in  its  half-dread,
half-hatred,  of  David.  And  all  these  motives  together  pour  their  venom  into  her
sarcasm  "  (Maclaren),    She  had  not  "  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit "  (1  Pet.  iii.  4).

II,  Expressed  offensively.  "How  glorious  the  King  of  Israel  made  himself
to-day,"  etc. I  1.  At  an  unseasonable  time;  when,  full  of  devotional  feeling,  he  was
returning  from  public  worship  "  to  bless  his  household,"  and  when  such  language  was
calculated  to  be  a  cause  of  pain  and  of  stumbling.  But  scoffers  are  inconsiderate,  and
reckless  .of  the  mischief  their  words  may  occasion.  2.  With  exaggerated  statements
and  misrepresentation  of  motives.  David  had  neither  committed  any  impropriety,  nor
been  desirous  of  vain  display  in  the  eyes  of  others,  nor  careless  of  affording  occasion  for
their  contempt.  Mockers  often  ridicule  in  others  what  is  really  the  creation  of  their
own  imagination  or  suspicion,  and  the  reflection  of  the  evil  that  Is  in  their  own  hearts.
8.  With  bitter  irony  and  derision.  How  keenly  it  was  felt  by  the  sensitive  spirit  of
David  may  be  learnt  from  what  he  says  of  an  evil  tongue  (Ps.  Iii.  2;  Ivii.  4;  cxx.  3).
"  Scoffing  at  religion  is  irrational ;  rude  and  uncivil  j  a  mo8t  cruel  and  unhuman  sin ;


OH.  vt  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  173


a  most  hardening  vice ;  its  impiety  ia  the  sight  of  Grod  gnrpasses  all  description;  it  is
a  contagious  and  injurious  vice  "  (J,  A,  James).

III.  Answered  conclusively.  By :  1.  A  sufBoient  explanation  and  defence.  "  It
was  before  Jehovah  "  that  he  had  "  played  ; "  conscious  of  his  presence  and  desirous  of
giving  him  honour.  He  was  not  insensible  to  his  own  royal  dignity;  but  recognized
the  surpassing  greatness  and  goodness  of  Jehovah,  from  whom  it  was  derived,  and  acted
ouly  in  accordance  therewith  by  giving  free  expression  to  his  humble  gratitude  and
abounding  joy.  His  language  was  restrained  (Ps.  xzxix.  1 ;  cxli.  3) ;  though  not  with-
out rebuke  of  the  proud  daughter  of  the  king  in  preference  to  whom,  and  all  his  house,
himself  had  been  chosen.  2.  An  expression  of  his  resolve  to  proceed  still  further  in
his  course  of  self-humiliation  (Ps.  cxxxi.  1).  3.  And  of  his  expectation  of  finding
honour  instead  of  reproach  among  others.  In  the  affectionate  regard  of  those  who
sympathize  with  fervent  piety,  there  is  abundant  compensation  for  the  contempt  of
those  who  despise  it.  "  In  this  incident  we  have  the  clue  to  that  spiritual  conception
of  his  duties  and  position  which  distinguished  David  from  Saul.  It  was,  in  fact,  his
spiritual  conception  of  the  true  Israel,  of  the  high  privileges  and  duties  of  worshippers
in  the  holy  place,  and  above  all  of  the  privileges  and  duties  of  a  king,  as  one  who
should  carry  out  Jehovah's  counsels  upon  earth,  which  distinguished  David's  reign,  not
only  from  that  of  Saul,  but  from  that  of  any  subsequent  Jewish  monarch"  ('The
Psalms  chronologically  arranged,'  by  Four  Friends).

IV.  Punished  dbsebvbdly.  "Michal's  childlessness  is  specially  mentioned  as  a
punishment  of  her  pride.  This  was  the  deepest  humiliation  for  an  Oriental  woman  "
(Erdmann).  The  scorner :  1.  Inflicts  a  self -injury,  by  hardening  the  heart  and  rendering
it  less  capable  of  faith,  love,  hope,  sympathy,  and  joy ;  more  solitary,  discontented,
useless,  and  unhappy.  2.  Becomes  unamiable  and  odious  in  the  sight  of  others.  3.
Incurs  the  displeasure  of  Qod ;  for  "  surely  he  scorneth  the  scorners  "  (Pro v.  iii.  34).
"  Now  therefore  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  your  bands  be  made  strong  "  (Isa.  xxviii.  22).

ExHOBTATiON.  1.  Expect  to  meet  with  opposition  and  contempt  in  your  zeal  for
God.  Even  Christ  himself  was  despised  and  mocked.  2.  Count  it  no  strange  thing,
if  in  your  household,  which  you  desire  to  bless,  there  should  be  those  who  deprive
themselves  of  the  blessing  and  dislike  your  devotion.  3.  Suffer  not  their  scorn  to
quench  your  zeal  for  God  and  your  love  for  their  souls.  4.  Seek  in  Divine  fellowship
consolation  amidst  human  reproach. — ^D.

Vers.  6,  7. — The  death  of  Uzzah.  A  startling  event.  Startling  to  us  to  read  rf.
How  much  more  to  witness,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  pomp  and  joy  with  which  David
was  bringing  the  ark  to  consecrate  his  newly  founded  capital,  to  inaugurate  a  revival
of  religion  amongst  the  people,  and  thus  make  some  fitting  return  to  God  for  all  his
goodness  to  monarch  and  subjects,  and  promote  in  the  best  and  surest  way  the  welfare
of  all  1  It  is  by  sudden,  startling,  and  terrible  events  that  God  very  commonly  calls
attention  to  his  laws,  and  avenges  the  breach  of  them.  By  such  means  the  laws  of
nature  come  to  be  known,  reverenced,  and  obeyed ;  and  are  thus  brought  into  subjection
to  man,  and  made  to  promote  his  well-being.  And  by  similar  means  men  are  made  to
reflect  upon  the  laws  of  God  with  respect  to  religion  and  morals,  and  so  the  spiritual
good  of  men  is  promoted.     With  reference  to  the  sudden  death  of  Uzzah,  we  remark —

I.  It  was  the  punishment  op  his  sin.  "The  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled
against  Uzzah."  Every  sudden  death  is  not  a  judgment,  even  when  the  result  of
disobedience  of  some  law.  Instances:  a  child  killed  while  playing  with  fire  or
deadly  weapons ;  a  man  struck  dead  by  the  electric  fluid  while  experimenting  with  it.
But  the  phrase  we  have  quoted  compels  us  to  regard  Uzzah's  death  as  a  punishment
of  sin.  At  flrst  it  seems  difficult  to  discover  in  wliat  the  sin  consisted.  His  conduct,
in  reaching  out  his  hand  to  the  ark  and  laying  hold  of  it,  seems  to  have  been  at  least
well-meaning :  he  desired  to  preserve  it  from  falling  to  the  ground.  But  well-meaning
acts  may  be  wrong  and  severely  punished.  In  this  case  there  were :  1.  Disoledience  ti
a  plain  law,  with  the  penalty  of  death  attached.  (See  Numb.  iv.  15.)  Indeed,  the
method  of  bearing  the  ark  on  this  occasion  was  altogether  contrary  to  the  Law  (Exod.
XXV.  14 ;  Numb.  vii.  9),  as  David  learned  by  this  event  (see  1  Chron.  xv.  1<^16).
There  appears  to  have  been  at  this  period  a  general  neglect  of  the  Law  of  Moses,  and
ignorance  of  its  requirements.    How,  otherwise,  can  we  account  lor  the  ark  itself


174  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—23.

lying  so  long  neglected  (1  Ohron.  xiii.  3)?  But,  surely,  those  who  had  the  care  of  the
ark  ought  to  have  known  the  law  of  God  respecting  it,  or  searched  it  out  diligently
when  a  new  departure  was  contemplated,  that  they  might  both  act  rightly  themselves
and  prevent  the  king  from  copying  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  vi.  7)  instead  of  obeying
the  Divine  Law.  In  the  swift  punishment  that  followed  IJzzah's  act,  the  memorable
maxim  was  again,  and  most  impressively,  proclaimed,  "To  obey  is  better  than
sacrifice  "  (1  Sam.  xv.  22) — ^better  than  the  most  splendid  pageant  in  honour  of  religion
from  which  obedience  is  absent.  2.  Irreverence.  The  ark  was  one  of  the  most  sacred
things  in  the  religion  of  Israel.  It  was  a  symbol  of  God's  presence,  his  local  dwelling-
place,  "  called  by  the  Name,  even  the  Name  of  the  Lobd  of  hosts,  that  sitteth  upon  the
cherubim"  (ver.  2,  Revised  Version) ;  a  witness,  therefore,  for  him:  an  assurance  that  he
was  with  them  while  they  were  loyal  and  obedient ;  the  central  point  of  worship  and
national  life.  It  was,  therefore,  to  be  treated  with  utmost  reverence.  In  the  services  of
religion  it  was,  as  a  witness  for  the  invisible  God,  to  be  itself  invisible,  concealed  by
the  second  veil ;  it  was  to  be  approached  only  by  the  high  priest,  and  by  him  only  once
a  year,  and  with  incense,  the  smoke  of  which  should  prevent  his  beholding  it  (Lev.  xvi.
13).  But  it  had  long  been  separated  from  its  proper  place  in  the  tabernacle,  and  kept
in  a  private  house,  the  inmates  of  which  had  probably  become  so  familiar  with  it  that
they  ceased  to  cherish  due  reverence  for  it.  Hence  the  rash  act  of  Uzzah.  True,  the
temptation  was  sudden  and  strong.  But  so  are  many  temptations.  All  the  more  need
to  cherish  such  habitual  piety,  self-coutrol,  and  watchfulness,  as  shall  preserve  us  in
the  hour  of  peril.  The  recollection  of  the  circumstances  under  which  the  ark  had  been
brought  into  the  house  of  Abinadab  should  have  been  sufficient  to  arrest  the  impulse
to  lay  hold  of  it  (1  Sam.  vi.  19 — 21).  3.  Presumption.  In  pushing  himself  forward
without  warrant,  and  against  the  law,  to  preserve  the  ark  from  injury.  Better  to  have
left  it  to  the  care  of  him  to  whom  it  belonged,  and  who  had  shown  in  former  days  bis
care  for  it  and  his  power  to  protect  it  (1  Sam.  v.).  It  was  an  instance  of  zeal  without
knowledge  and  faith,  and  in  which  self  was  prominent  rather  than  God.

n.  The  death  of  Uzzah  was  fob  the  instruction  and  warning  of  David  and
HIS  PEOPLE.  David  was  seeking  to  revive  and  re-establish  religion,  and  this  act  of  God
appeared  to  be  a  hindrance  to  his  good  design ;  but  in  fact  it  tended  to  promote  it  more
effectually  than  all  the  measures  of  the  king.  1.  It  was  an  impressive  demonstration
that  Jehovah  their  Ood  was  still  among  them,  the  living  God,  the  Almighty,  the  Holy  One,
observing  and  punishing  sin.  It  showed  that  his  laws  were  still  living  laws,  not
obsolete,  though  forgotten ;  that  the  sacred  things  which  he  bad  appointed  were  still
sacred  in  his  eyes,  however  neglected,  and  were  to  be  so  esteemed  by  the  people ;  that,
in  particular,  the  ark  was  still  the  symbol  and  pledge  of  his  living  presence,  as  a  God
to  be  approached  and  worshipped  with  reverence,  yet  also  with  confidence  in  the
covenant  of  which  it  was  the  sign.  Thus  the  impression  produced  by  the  terrible
event  would  tend  to  the  revival  of  religious  faith  and  feeling,  and  secure  that  David's
endeavours  should  not  end  in  the  establishment  of  a  mere  ritual,  however  orderly  and
stately,  but  in  sincere  worship  and  corresponding  life.  It  was  not  the  first  time,  nor
would  it  be  the  last,  that  the  revival  of  religion  began  with  terrible  judgments.  We
also  need  a  living  faith  in  the  living  God — faith  in  his  relation  to  us  and  presence  with
us ;  faith  in  his  love,  awakening  our  confidence  and  affection ;  faith  also  in  his  majesty,
holiness,  and  justice,  awakening  our  "reverence  and  g"dly  fear."  To  this  end  we
should  meditate  on  the  awe-inspiring  aspects  of  the  Divine  character  and  government,
as  they  appear  in  nature  and  providence  and  in  the  inspired  book.  Otherwise  our
religion  is  likely  to  become  a  weak,  superficial,  and  sentimental  thing,  without  depth
and  power.  2.  It  was  a  warning  that  was  adapted  to  guide  and  restrain  the  religious  zeal
of  the  king.  There  was  danger  that,  in  his  ardent  desire  for  the  re-establishment  of  the
national  worship  with  fitting  circumstances  of  splendour  and  orderliness,  he  should  not
pay  due  attention  to  the  instructions  of  the  Law,  but  should  violate  the  will  of  God  in
the  endeavour  to  pay  to  him  and  secure  for  him  due  honour.  Uzzah's  death  would  -
teach  him  that  the  Divine  will  must  be  first  regarded.  He  learnt  this  lesion  so  far  as
the  mode  of  removing  the  ark  was  concerned.  He  could  scarcely  fail  to  keep  it  in
mind  in  all  his  subsequent  proceedings.  Great  zeal  for  religion  has  ever  a  similar
peril.  Under  its  influence  there  is  danger  of  adopting,  with  the  best  intentions,  means
and  methods  which  are  not  according  to  the  Divine  Word.    The  most  powerful  person*


CH.VI.  1— 23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  175

are  the  most  likely  to  feel  as  if  their  own  will  might  be  their  law.  Thus  carnality  and
worldlinesB  come  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  the  Church,  and  the  Law  of  God  is  violated  in
letter  or  in  spirit.  Hence  the  "  will- worship,  the  volunteered,  self-imposed,  officious,
supererogatory  service  "  (Lightfoot  on  Col.  ii.  23),  which  has  so  extensively  prevailed
in  Christendom,  and  which  has  originated  or  fostered  errors  of  doctrine ;  hence  also  the
terrible  crimes  against  Christian  liberty  and  love  which  have  been  committed  ad
majorem  Dei  gloriam,  and  thought  to  be  sanctified  thereby.  3.  There  remain  the
common  lessons  tavyM  hy  every  death,  especially  hy  sudden  deaths,  and  yet  more
especially  by  sudden  deaths  in  the  midst  of  displays  of  human  power  and  glory.  Tlie
uncertainty  of  life,  the  certainty  of  death,  the  awfulness  of  death  in  sin  (John  viii.  21,
24),  the  vanity  of  earthly  pomp  and  splendour,  the  necessity  of  habitual  preparedness,
the  value  of  sincere  and  spiritual  worship  and  service  ol  God,  the  appropriateness  of  the
admonition,  "Be  ye  also  ready,"  and  of  the  prayer,  "So  teach  us  to  nmnber  our  days,
that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom."—  G.  W.

Ver.  9. —  Dread  of  Ood.  The  death  of  Uzzah  made  David  "afraid  of  the  Lord,"  and
deterred  him  from  fulfilling  his  purpose  to  bear  the  ark  into  the  place  which  he  had
prepared  for  it  in  his  newly  founded  metropolis.  He  seems  for  the  time  to  have  dreaded
lest  it  should  bring  evil  with  it  instead  of  good — a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing.  So  the
vast  assembly  was  disperied,  and  the  day  which  was  to  have  been  so  glorious  and
auspicious  ended  in  disappointment  and  gloom.  David's  feeling  is  an  illustration  of
religious  terror,  or  the  dread  of  God.

I.  Its  natubb.  1.  It  is  to  he  distinguished  from  that  "fear  of  the  Lord"  which  is
so  often  inculcated  in  the  Word  of  Ood,  and  which  is  especially  characteristic  of  the
piety  of  the  Old  Testament.  This  is  reverence  of  God,  of  his  nature,  authority,  and
laws.  It  includes;  indeed,  a  dread  of  ofiendiug  him,  because  of  ttie  certainty  and
terribleness  of  punishment;  but  it  includes  also  veneration,  esteem,  and  love.  The
feeling  which  is  described  in  the  text  is  simply  alarm,  terror.  2.  It  may  he  awakened
hy  various  causes.  (1)  Terrible  acts  of  God :  sudden  deaths,  as  that  of  Uzzah,  those
of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  (Acts  v.  5,  10,  11);  violent  tempests;  earthquakes;  deadly
pestilence.  (2)  Terrible  aspects  of  his  nature.  Holiness  and  hatred  of  sin;  justice,
displeasure  against  sinners  ;  together  with  his  perfect  knowledge  and  unbounded  power.
(3)  His  thieatenings.  (4)  The  consciousness  of  sin.  This  is  the  secret  of  the  dread
which  springs  from  the  thought  of  God.  A  solemn  awe  is  compatible  with  innoceuce,
but  the  holy  would  not  be  "afraid  of  God,"  or  if  for  a  moment,  at  some  startling  and
threatening  event,  only  for  a  moment.

IL  Its  value.  In  itself  and  standing  alone,  it  is  of  no  religious  worth  at  all.  It  is
compatible  with  enmity  to  God,  which  is  the  opposite  of  true  religion.  When  it
springs  into  the  heart  of  a  good  man  it  may  be  associated  with  very  wrong  feeling.
David  was  "displeased"  with  God,  while  "afraid  "  of  him  (ver.  8).  It  tends  to  drive
men  from  God  rather  thun  draw  them  to  him  (corap.  Luke  v.  8 ;  viii.  37).  It  may
drive  them  from  him  while  seeming  to  draw  them  to  him;  for  it  is  apt  to  gen'^rate  a
religion  without  love,  without  even  reverence — an  obedience  which  is  slavish  and
destitute  of  true  virtue.  It  is  favourable  to  superstition,  indeed,  and  njay  stimulate  to
great  liberality;  but,  while  acting  alone,  it  cannot  produce  genuine  godliness  and  true
holiness.  It  is  the  feeling  on  which  priestcraft  in  all  lands  flourishes.  Yet  it  is  good
as  a  first  step  iii  those  that  need  it,  and  a  preparation  for  what  is  better;  and  some
measure  of  it,  blended  with  other  emotions,  is  always  of  value  to  many,  if  not  all.  In
Ps.  cxix.,  where  every  feeling  of  a  pious  soul  finds  expression,  this  is  included  (ver.  120).
And  our  Lord  enjoins  it  as  a  safeguard  against  the  fear  of  man  (Lnke  xii.  4,  5).  This
fear  is  of  great  value :  1.  To  arouse  the  conscience  and  prepare  for.  better  things.
Many  are  so  hardened  that  they  are  incapable  of  being,  in  the  first  instance,  drawn  by
love ;  their  fears  must  be  excited.  2.  To  make  the  gospel  welcome ;  which,  revealing
the  love  of  God  and  the  redemption  which  is  by  Jesus  Christ,  is  fitted  and  intended  to
allay  the  dread  of  God  and  awaken  confidence  and  affection.  3.  To  stimulate  in
obedience  to  God  aud  deter  from  sin.  It  is  true  that  love  is  the  noblest  stimulus,  and
that  perfect  love  casts  out  fear  (1  John  iv.  18);  but  love  is  not  perfect  in  this  world,
and  fear  is  needed  when  temptation  is  strong  and  the  better  feelings  are  for  the  time
dormant, — G.  W.


176  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—23.

Ver.  11.-— GotTs  blessing  abiding  with  the  ark.  Divine  cbastisements  and  Divine
benedictions  have  in  this  world  the  same  end  in  view — the  promotion  of  true  religion.
The  judgmeut  on  Uzzah  and  the  blessing  on  the  house  of  Obed-Edom  were  alike  intended
to  reawaken  a  living  faith  and  piety  in  the  nation,  by  showing  that  Jehovah,  the  living
God,  was  amongst  them,  and  was  still  prepared  to  honour  his  own  institutions  and
bless  those  who  honoured  them,  whilst  those  who  dishonoured  them  would  incur  hia
displeasure.  Obed-Edom  honoured  God  by  receiving  the  ark  into  his  house  and  oaring
for  it ;  and,  in  return,  God's  blessing  rested  on  him  and  all  his.  They  act  a  similar  part
who  receive  into  their  homes  and  honour  there  God's  book,  God's  servants,  God's  poor;
those  also  who  establish  in  theii  houses  the  practice  of  family  worship,  and  keep  alive
in  their  families  a  warm  interest  in  all  that  concerns  the  Church  and  kjiigdora  of  God.
They  and  theirs  enjoy  the  abiding  presence  and  blessing  of  him  who  has  said,  "  Them
that  honour  me  I  will  honour,  and  they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed  "  (1  Sam.
ii.  30).    Notice—

I.  The  intkoduotion  of  the  abk  into  the  house  op  Obed-Edom.  It  was  owing  to
the  panic  occasioned  by  the  death  of  Uzzah.  May  illustrate  the  apparently  accidental
circumstances  which  have  sometimes  introduced  religion  and  the  practice  of  family
worship  into  families.

II.  The  welcome  it  beoeived.  Obed-Edom,  in  this  instance,  excelled  David.  The
alarm  excited  by  Uzzah's  death  did  not  deter  him  from  receiving  the  ark  into  his  house.
Faith  subdued  fear,  fle  may  well  have  felt  that  the  act  would  be  well-pleasing  to
God ;  that  it  would  bring  him  and  his  nearer  to  God ;  that  the  ark  would  sanctify  his
home  and  turn  it  as  into  a  temple ;  and  that  it  could  and  would  occasion  no  harm  to
those  who  honoured  it  for  God's  sake.  So  should  the  things,  persons,  and  practices
that  bring  God  nearer  to  a  household  be  welcomed  ;  and  so  will  they  be  welcomed  by
such  as  have  begun  to  reverence  and  love  him.

III.  The  blessing  which  accompanied  it.  "  The  Lord  blessed  Obed-Edom,  and  all
his  household."  What  form  God's  blessing  took  in  this  case,  so  that  in  the  course  of
three  months  it  could  become  manifest  to  others,  we  are  not  told ;  perhaps  some  marked
increase  of  worldly  prosperity.  And  such  an  indication  of  God's  blessing  is  not
uncommon  in  households  where  piety  rules.  But  there  are  other  blessings  of  God  which
to  his  children  are  more  precious,  and  which  are  to  be  confidently  expeuted  by  families
which  honour  him.  1.  A  pervading  sense  of  GccCs  presence  and  love.  This  would
surely  restilt  from  having  the  ark  in  the  house ;  and  not  less  is  it  the  result  of  having
a  Bible  which  is  really  valued  and  consulted,  and  a  family  altar.  2.  The  enjoyment  ^
the  Divine  Spirit.  The  actual  living  operation  of  the  present  God  on  the  conscience,
heart,  and  life.  He  "  gives  his  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him."  As  the  result  of
these :  3.  A  new  sucredness  given  to  family  life  and  duty.  The  presence  of  the  ark  in
the  house  would  sanctify  everything  there,  making  the  relationships  sacred,  and  turning
common  duties  into  holy  rites.  Hence :  4.  Higher  and  more  steadfast  family  affections.
Love  to  each  other  sanctified  and  elevated  by  common  love  to  the  heavenly  Father
and  Divine  Brother  and  Friend ;  unselfishness ;  unity ;  mutual  helpfulness.  5.  More
cheerful  and  free,  and  therefore  stricter,  obedience  to  the  Divine  laws.  The  will  of  God
as  to  the  duties  of  parents,  children,  and  servants,  and  of  all  towards  those  without,
shining  in  a  diviner  light,  better  understood,  and  better  practised.  Hence  the  virtnes
which  promote  material  and  social  welfare.  6.  Family  happiness.  Springing  naturally,
as  we  say,  but  none  the  less  as  the  result  of  the  Divine  appointment  and  active  bless-
ing, from  such  living.  Happiness  in  and  from  the  daily  round  of  duty  and  affection.
Happiness  in  the  enjoyment  together  of  God's  gifts.  Peace  in  trouble.  Hope  when
one  departs  to  the  better  home ;  a  sense  of  union  still  ("  We  are  seven  "),  and  assurance
of  reunion  in  due  time.  7.  Moral  and  spirittial  fruitfulness.  Such  a  family  dwells  in  an
atmosphere  highly  favourable  for  the  production  and  growth  of  piety  and  all  moral
excellence  in  those  connected  with  it.  It  is  a  nursery  for  the  Church.  From  such  the
best  Christians  and  Christian  workers  go  forth.  Similar  family  life  is  multiplied  and
perpetuated  in  the  subsequent  homes  of  sons  and  daughters.

IV.  The  effect  of  the  blessing  oi{  David.  He  was  reassured,  and  took  measures,
at  once  more  according  to  the  Law  and  more  successful,  for  fulfilling  his  purpose  to
bring  the  ark  to  Zion.  Similarly,  the  aspect  presented  by  families  which  serve  God
and  manifestly  enjoy  his  bletising  is  adapted  to  incite,  and  has  often  incited,  others  to


OH,  VI.  1 -23,;i  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  177

go  and  do  likewise.  Finally,  families  which  regard  not  God  may  have  many  desirable
things,  but  cannot  really  enjoy  the  Divine  blessing.  "  The  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the
house  of  the  wicked,"  while  "  he  blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just "  (Pro  v.  iii.  33). — Q-.  W.

Vers.  12—19. — The  ark  brought  to  Zioti.  A  grand  day  for  Israel,  and  indeed  for  the
world;  the  beginning  of  the  religious  significance  of  "  Zion  "  and  "  Jerusalem,"  and  the
mighty  spiritual  influence  which  has  gone  forth  far  and  wide  from  that  centre.  With
respect  to  the  bringing  of  the  ark  "  into  the  city  of  David,"  we  remark —

I.  It  was  the  accomplishment  of  a  delayed  purpose.  Although  David  was
shocked  and  alarmed  by  the  event  which  compelled  him  to  desist  from  his  first
endeavour,  he  did  not  give  up  his  purpose,  but  evidently  set  himself  to  prepare  for  a
more  imposing  and  appropriate  introduction  of  the  sacred  symbol  into  his  metropolis
than  he  at  first  contemplated.  The  narrative  in  1  Chron.  xv.  and  xvi.  shows  this ;  for
such  elaborate  arrangements  could  not  have  been  made  in  a  short  time.  Delay  tests
the  resolutions  and  purposes  of  men,  reveals  their  quality,  intensifies  those  which  spring
from  true  and  reasonable  zeal,  and  issues  in  their  fuller  execution.

II.  It  was  mabkbd  by  strict  obedience  to  the  I/Aw  of  God.  The  death  of  Uzzah
had  led  to  careful  study  of  the  Divine  directions,  which  were  now  rigidly  obeyed
(1  Chron.  xv.  12 — 15,  with  which  corresponds  ver.  13  of  our  tSxt,  "  they  that  lare  the
ark  of  the  Lord").  It  is  well  when  painful  experience  of  the  penalties  of  disregard  to
God's  laws  leads  to  inquiry  and  improvement.  Unhappily,  multitudes  who  suffer  the
penalties  fail  to  profit  by  tliem.

III.  It  was  accompanied  with  much  woeship.  Sacrifices  were  offered  when  a
successful  start  had  l]een  made.  Others,  in  greater  number,  when  the  ark  had  been
placed  in  the  tent  prepared  for  it.  The  praises  of  God  were  sung  as  the  procession
moved  on ;  and  at  the  close  of  the  ceremonies  David  "  blessed  the  people  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  of  hosts."    The  suitableness  of  all  this  to  the  occasion  is  obvious.

IV.  It  was  a  season  of  gbeat  gladness.  Indicated  by  David's  dance  "  before  the
Lord  with  all  his  might."  Also  by  the  shouting  and  the  noise  of  musical  instruments  ;
and  the  royal  gifts  to  the  people  at  large,  that  all  might  feast.

V.  It  was  a  national  transaction.  All  the  tribes,  by  their  representatives  in
great  numbers,  and  all  classes  of  the  people — the  king,  the  priests  and  Levites,  the
nobles,  the  cfficefs  of  the  army  and  their  forces,  the  rich  and  the  poor — united  in  the
celebration.  It  was  an  act  of  national  homage  to  the  supreme  Sovereign  of  tlie  people —
a  kind  of  enthronement  of  him  in  his  metropolis.  It  was  intended  and  well  adapted  to
make  the  people  realize  afresli  that  they  were  one  nation,  and  to  bind  them  in  a  closer
unity  hereafter,  religious  as  well  as  civil.

VI.  It  was  the  inaugubation  op  a  new  and  better  bba  m  bblwion.  The  ark
was  not  thus  brought  to  Jerusalem  to  remain  solitary  and  neglected,  as  it  had  so  long
been,  but  that  before  it  Divine  worship  might  be  conducted  daily  in  a  manner  becom-
ing the  new  circumstances  of  the  people.  For  this  David  had  made  careful  preparation,
organizing  part  of  the  priests  and  Levites  for  the  purpose,  while  others  were  appointed
to  minister  at  Gibeon,  wliere  the  tabernacle  proper  and  the  altars  were  (1  Chron.  xvi.

4 42).     For  the  national  worship  was  not  even  now  conducted  in  strict  accordance

with  the  Mosaic  Law,  since  that  required  the  ark  and  the  altars,  and  the  priestly  and
Levitical  ministrations,  to  be  all  in  one  place.  On  account  of  circumstances  which  -.re
not  explained,  though  they  may  be  surmised,  the  king  could  not  do  all  that  he  would,
but  he  did  what  he  could ;  and  this  prepared  the  way  for  the  more  exact  obedience  to
the  Law  which  was  rendered  when  the  temple  was  built.

VII.  It  made  manifest  the  chaeactbr  or  the  king.  His  convictions  as  to  the
claims  of  God  over  him  and  his  people ;  his  zeal  for  the  worsliip  of  God,  and  desire  to
infuse  a  similar  spirit  into  the  nation ;  his  humility  in  descending  from  his  elevation  and
fraternizing  with,  whilst  he  led,  the  people.

By  the  whole  narrative  we  are  reminded  of:  1.  The  necessity  and  worth  to  a  nation
of  true  religion.  To  elevate  its  life,  unite  its  various  parts  and  classes,  promote  mutual
justice  and  a  spirit  of  brotherhood,  regulate  its  conduct  towards  other  peoples,  and
withal  secure  the  blessing  of  God.  2.  The  worth  of  godly  rulers.  From  their  position,
rulefs  necessarily  exercise  a  wide  influence,  and  it  is  a  happy  oircumslance  when  their
example  is  in  favour  of  reliyioa  and  virtue,  3.  The  difference  between  national
n.  SAMUiu.  N


178  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1— 2i

religious  pageants  and  ceremonies,  and  true  national  religion.  Many  will  unite  in  the
former  who  have  no  part  in  the  latter.  The  former  are  often  more  brilliant  and
imposing  as  the  latter  decays.  National  Christianity  can  exist  only  as  the  individuals
who  compose  the  nation  are  sincere  Christians.  4.  The  lessons  which  the  proceedings
here  recorded  suggest  to  those  engaged  in  opening  a  new  Christian  sanctuary.  Concern
to  secure  the  abiding  presence  and  blessing  of  God.  Much  praise  and  prayer :  praise
for  all  the  mercies  which  have  led  up  to  the  day,  and  all  the  revelations  and  promises
that  give  hope  to  its  proceedings ;  prayer  for  the  help  of  God  in  all,  his  acceptance  of
the  work  done  in  his  Name,  his  use  of  it  for  the  promotion  of  his  kingdom,  the  good  of
his  Church,  and  the  salvation  of  those  without.  Much  gladness  and  mutual  congratu-
lation on  account  of  the  work  accomplished,  and  the  good  that  may  be  hoped  for  from  it
to  individuals,  families,  the  neighbourhood,  etc.  A  hearty  union  of  all  classes  in  the
services,  introductory  to  permanent  union  in  mutual  love  and  combined  effort. — G.  W.

Ver.  16. — Rdigious  zeal  despised.  "  She  despised  him  in  her  heart."  A  graphic
picture  here.  A  numerous  and  joyous  procession  marching  into  the  city  with  the  ark
of  God,  with  sacjed  music  and  singing  and  dancing ;  the  king  at  the  head  of  all,  more
joyous  and  enthusiastic  than  all  the  crowd  besides ;  and  Michal,  behind  her  window,
cool  and  collected,  without  sympathy  with  the  object  or  spirit  of  the  proceeding,  yea,
looking  on  with  contempt,  especially  for  her  husband,  who  was  so  demonstrative  in  his
display  of  zeal  and  gladness.  She  has  many  imitators.  There  are  many  who  regard
fervid  zeal  in  religion  with  contempt.

I.  Why  feevent  eeligious  zeal  is  despised.  1.  Alleged  reasons ;  as  (1)  that  it
is  fanatical ;  or  (2)  unintelleotual,  a  sign  of  weak  mind ;  a  style  of  religion  fit  only
for  women  and  weak-minded  men ;  or  (3)  hypocritical ;  or  (4)  not  respectable.  The
better  sort  of  people,  it  is  alleged,  keep  their  religion  within  due  bounds;  certainly  will
eschew  forms  of  religious  earnestness  which  associate  closely  the  upper  classes  with
the  common  people.  2.  Secret  causes.  May  be :  (1)  Ignorance.  Wantof  knowledge  of
Christianity.  Acquaintance  with  its  great  facts,  doctrines,  and  precepts,  and  the
exemplification  of  them  in  the  lives  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles,  would  make  it  clear
that  they  demand  and  justify  the  utmost  warmth  of  love  and  zeal;  so  that  for
Christians  to  be  zealous  in  holding,  practising,  and  propagating  their  religion  is  simply
to  be  consistent.  (2)  Irreligion,  with  or  without  knowledge.  Unbelief  or  disbelief.
The  absence  of  religious  faith  and  feeling.  Possibly  a  settled  hatred  of  religion  and
goodness.  Men  of  this  class  cannot  possibly  understand  or  appreciate  the  operations  of
religion  in  the  heart.  The  sincerely  religious  may  disapprove  of  certain  forms  in  which
others  display  their  zeal,  but  they  will  not  indulge  contempt  of  them.  (3)  Formalism
or  superficiality  in  religion.  To  which  ardent  devotion  and  self-consecration  are
unintelligible.  (4)  Pride  of  intellect,  taste,  or  station.  "  Hath  any  of  the  rulers
believed  on  him,  or  of  the  Pharisees  ?  But  this  multitude  which  knoweth  not  the  Law
are  accursed"  (John  vii.  48,  49,  Revised  Version).  (5)  Sometimes  would  be  found
secret  uneasiness.  Zeal  in  others  awakens  conscience,  which  utters  condemnation ;  and
conscience  is  relieved  (or  attempted  to  be)  by  fixing  attention  on  what  is  regarded  as
objectionable  in  the  religious  zeal  of  others,  and  cherishing  contempt  for  them.
(6)  Eeligious  bigotry,  which  has  no  tolerance  for  forms  of  religion,  however  sincere  and
good  those  who  adopt  them  may  be,  that  differ  from  those  of  the  bigot  himself.  The
piety  of  many  good  men  is  sadly  marred  by  this  spirit,  and  its  earnestness  feeds
something  very  like  hatred  of  fellow-Christians.  In  this  case  also  contempt  springs
largely  from  ignorance,  as  well  as  from  a  lack  of  that  principle  of  religion  which  is
supereminent,  viz.  love.

II.  Why  suoh  zeal  ought  not  to  be  despised.  1.  It  is  in  harmony  with  right
reason.  In  view  of  the  nature  and  works  of  Gk>d  and  our  obligations  to  him,  especially
the  redeeming  love  of  God  in  Christ,  the  evils  from  which  we  are  redeemed,  the  bless-
ings which  are  brought  within  our  reach,  the  cost  of  our  redemption.  It  is  not  zeal,  but
indifference  and  coldness,  which  are  irrational.  Nothing  but  the  willing  dovotement  of
heart  and  life  to  Christ  is  suitable  as  a^retiirn  for  his  love.  Devotion  without  warmth,
service  which  is  ever  measured  and  stinted,  are  absurd.  2.  It  it  required  by  Hdy
Scripture.  The  great  duties  of  Christianity,  love  to  God  and  man,  necessarily  include
warmth  and  eamestness.    And  the  terms  in  ^hich  we  are  exhorted  to  seek  our  own


OH.  vt  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  179

salvation  and  the  good  of  others  all  imply  zeal ;  the  production  of  which  is  represented
as  one  great  end  of  the  offering  of  himself  by  Christ  (Titus  ii.  14).  3.  It  is
countenanced  by  the  highest  and  best  society.  By  cherubim  and  seraphim,  an^iels  and
archangels,  apostles,  prophets,  martyrs,  saints  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and  him  who
is  higher  than  them  all,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  whose  burning  zeal  we  owe  every-
thing. The  grandest  intellects  in  the  universe  may  be  appealed  to  by  the  zealous
Christian.  4.  It  is  productive  of  the  greatest  good.  Christianity  has  conferred  and  is
conferring  the  greatest  blessings  on  mankind,  and  is  ever  extending  the  area  of  its
beneficial  influence.  But  it  is  its  zealous,  not  its  cold-hearted,  adherents  to  whom  men
owe  its  extension  and  powerful  operation.  5.  It  secures  the  approbation  of  God,  and
final  acceptance  and  reward.  He  who  zealously  uses  his  talents  is  to  be  received  into
the  joy  of  his  Lord,  while  the  slothful  servant  is  rejected  and  punished.  The  highly
respectable  and  self-complacent  Church  at  Laodicea  is  severely  reproved  and  threatened
on  account  of  its  lukewarmness  (Rev.  iii.  15,  16).  Only  religion  in  earnest  fits  for
heaven.    There  are  no  lukewarm  Christians  there.

Finally :  1.  Let  despisers  of  zealous  Christians  beware  lest  they  be  found  despising
Christ  and  God  (Luke  x.  16).  2.  Let  zealous  Christians  take  heed  of  needlessly
exposing  their  religion  to  contempt.  As  by  associating  it  with  things  unworthy  of  it,
such  as  narrowness  of  mind,  cant,  eccentricity,  worldly  policy,  excessive  ceremonialism,
great  ardour  about  small  matters,  little  ardour  about  great  matters,  uncharitableness.
3.  Some  zeal  in  religion  deserves  to  be  despised.  That,  in  particular,  which  is
dissociated  from  truth,  uprightness,  holiness,  or  love.  True  religious  zeal  includes  zeal
for  these ;  and  no  ardour  of  professed  religion  can  be  a  substitute  for  them. — G.  W.

Ver.  20. — Domestic  religion.  "  Then  David  returned  to  bless  his  household."  An
interesting  contrast  with  what  precedes.  Would  have  been  a  pleasing  close  of  the
narrative  but  for  what  follows.  Presents  David  in  an  attractive  light.  His  piety  did
not  shine  merely  in  public  before  a  crowd ;  it  illuminated  and  blessed  his  home.  He
did  not  regard  his  high  station  and  the  weight  of  the  cares  of  state  as  raising  him
above,  or  releasing  him  from,  his  duties  as  head  of  a  household.  Nor  did  he,  after  that
busy  and  exciting  day,  think  himself  excused  from  family  duty.  He  had  blessed  the
people  in  the  name  of  the  Lord;  he  now  returns  to  bless  his  household,  i.e.  to  invoke
God's  blessing  on  them.

L  How  A  MAN  MAT  BLESS  HIS  HOUSEHOLD.  1.  By  maintaining  and  conducting
famUy  worship.  Praising  God  with  his  family.  Praying  with  and  for  them.  Giving
the  worship  a  family  character  by  the  mention  of  family  blessings,  needs,  sorrows,  joys ;
the  especial  mention  of  special  circumstances  and  events  which  affect  the  family,  as
they  arise.  Doing  this  regularly  and  perseveringly.  2.  By  the  religious  instruction  of
his  family.  Beading  the  Word  of  God  as  part  of  the  daily  worship.  Teaching  the
children  the  truths  and  duties  of  Christianity,  formally  and  informally.  The  latter  as
important,  to  say  the  least,  as  the  former.  Let  the  New  Testament  be  the  recognized
guide  of  the  house,  to  which  everything  is  brought  for  judgment.  Let  its  teaching  be
instilled  insensibly  as  occasions  arise  in  family  life.  3.  By  family  discipline.  "Buling
well  his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  4) ;
encouraging  right,  forbidding  and  suppressing  wrong  conduct;  regulating  the  com-
panionships and  occupations  of  his  children.  Family  government  on  Christian
principles  and  in  a  Christian  spirit  is  itself  a  mode  of  instruction,  and  blesses  a  house-
hold. 4.  By  leading  and  accompanying  his  family  to  the  house  of  God.  5  By  setting
a  good  example.  The  head  of  a  household  cannot  perform  his  duties  aright  without
personal  piety.  He  cannot  teach  what  he  does  not  value  and  practise ;  his  instructions
and  prayers  will  lack  the  reality  which  impresses;  his  character  will  deprive  his  words
of  their  proper  force.  But  a  good  life  is  a  constant  lesson.  Children  will  learn  from
the  spirit  and  conduct  of  a  good  father  how  to  think  of  their  Father  in  heaven,  and
how  they  may  serve  and  please  him.  The  unconscious  influence  of  the  parent's  life
will  be  a  perpetually  operating  power  for  good.

II.  Why  he  should  do  so.  1.  It  is  his  manifeat  duty.  Seen  as  we  contemplate  :
(1)  The  relation  of  the  family  to  God,  as  its  Founder,  the  Originator  of  each  household,
the  Lord  of  family  life,  the  Source  of  all  its  peculiar  affections,  the  Bestower  of  all
its  blessings,  the  Guardian  of  its  weaker  members  (Christ's  "  little  ones  ").    (2)  Th«


180  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vi.  1—23.

relation  to  God  of  the  head  of  a  household.  His  gervant,  hia  representative,  appointed
for  this  very  service.  (3^  The  promptings  of  parental  affection  and  godly  principles,
which  are  from  God.  (4)  The  express  injunctions  of  Holy  Writ.  (5)  The  just  claims
of  society,  which  has  a  right  to  expect  that  in  the  household  good  citizens  should  be
trained  and  good  members  of  the  Church.  The  character  and  welfare  of  a  people
depend  more  on  family  life  than  on  public  law  and  force;  and  most  fathers  can  best
serve  their  country  by  training  well  their  children.  Let  them  render  more  public
services  if  they  are  capable  of  them,  but  ever  let  them  "return  to  bless  their  house-
holds." 2.  H«  will  thus  hest  promote  the  toel/are  and  happiness  o/his  household.  (See
division  IIL  of  homily  on  ver.  11.)  3.  His  own  happiness  in  his  family  wiR  be
greatly  increased.  .If  his  desires  for  their  good  are  granted,  he  will  be  a  necessary
partaker  of  their  happiness,  will  rejoice  that  he  has  so  largely  contributed  to  it,  and
will  receive  a  constant  reward  for  his  endeavours  in  their  love  and  gratitude.  If,
through  untoward  circumstances,  or  counteracting  influences  against  which  he  had  no
power  to  defend  them,  or  through  their  own  perversity,  his  efforts  should  fail,  he  will
at  least  have  the  satisfaction  of  a  good  couscience.

In  conclusion,  what-has  been  said  of  the  duty  of  fathers  applies  equally  to  mothers,
who  have  more  influence  than  fathers  over  the  younger  children,  aud  often  over  the
elder  also,  aud  always  have  most  to  do  with  the  order  and  comfort  and  moral
atmosphere  of  the  home. — G.  W.

Vers.  20 — 22. — A  despiser  rebuked.  The  history  of  Michal  is  rather  an  unhappy
one.  In  early  life  she  became  enamoured  of  David,  to  whom  she  was  reluctantly  given
by  her  father.  Afterwards,  when  Saul  became  the  enemy  of  David,  she  was  given  to
%nother,  from  whom,  after  many  years,  she  was  torn  by  her  first  husband,  more,
probably,  from  policy  than  affection.  It  is  likely  she  had  no  warm  affection  for  him
now.  she  may  have  resented  his  succeeding  to  her  father's  throne.  She  had  no
sympathy  with  his  religious  zeal.  Probably  she  originally  admired  the  hero  rather
than  loved  the  saint ;  and  now  that  his  fervour  in  religion  has  so  strangely  displayed
itself,  she  caa  contain  herself  no  longer.  She  felt  herself — a  king's  daughter — disgraced
by  his  vulgar  conduct ;  and  she  resolves  to  tell  hira  her  mind  about  it ;  and  so,  as  he
returns  to  his  house  in  joyous  religious  excitement,  eager  to  bless  his  family,  as  he  had
just  blessed  the  people,  she  meets  him  with  bitter  reproaches,  to  which  he,  surprised
and  mortified,  returns  a  bitter  answer,  in  which  are,  nevertheless,  good  reasons  for  his
conduct.

L  Heb  befboagh.  It  was  in  substance  that  his  conduct  had  been  undignified  and
indecent.  The  charge  was  plausible,  but  unjust.  Her  anger  and  want  of  sympathy
with  her  husband's  zeal  led  her  to  misrepresentation  of  proceeihngs  which  were
innocent  and  praiseworthy.  Similar  lack  of  sympathy  with  ardent  piety  often  leads
to  similar  unjust  judgment.  Many  are  ready  to  condemn  modes  of  expressing  or
promoting  religion  which  are  foreign  to  their  own  habits.  But  what  would  be
unsuitable  and  unprofitable  to  one  class  of  persons  may  be  the  reverse  to  another ;  and
what  would  not  be  suitable  as  an  ordinary  practice  may  be  allowable  and  commendable
under  special  circumstances.  In  times  of  general  excitement  men  will  do  what  would
be  ridiculous  at  other  times.  Zacchseus  climbed  a  tree  to  get  a  good  view  of  Jesus,
regardless  of  dignity  and  the  possible  ridicule  of  the  crowd;  and  he  was  rewarded  for
it.  David  would  not  liave  displayed  his  zeal  by  leading  the  multitude  in  music  and
singing  and  dancing  under  ordinary  circumstances.  Eiproach  and  condemnation  are
to  be  estimated  partly  according  to  the  persons  who  utter  them.  Many  who  are
ready  to  do  so  are  incapable  of  passing  just  judgment,  ou  nccount  of  a  total  or  partial
want  of  religion.  "  The  natural  man  reoeiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  for
they  are  foolishness  unto  him  :  neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually
discerned "  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  And  some  who  are  not  destitute  of  religion  are  so  con-
tracted in  their  views  aud  feelings  that  they  are  unable  to  chtimate  rightly  the  religion
of  others.  John  the  Baptist  practised  abstinence,  and  was  said  to  have  a  demon.
Jesus  lived  as  ordinary  men,  and  was  condemned  as  a  glutton  and  winebibber.  The
apostles  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  were  said  to  be  "  full  of  new  wine."  Those  who  are
fond  of  orderliness  and  dignity  in  religion  are  prone  to  condemn  all  kinds  of  excitement
and  the  freedom  of  form  aud  expression  which  it  favours.    But  it  is  possible  to  sacrifice


0H.V1. 1— 23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  181

efficiency  to  order.  While  the  lovers  of  order  and  good  taste  are  exclusively  indulging
their  preferences,  multitudes  may  be  left  uncared  for  and  untouched.  When,  therefore,
by  means  which  are  thought  objectionable,  they  are  attracted  and  benefited,  the
objectors  may  properly  be  asked  to  find  and  employ  better  methods  which  ihall  answer
the  eame  end ;  and  meanwhile  to  bear  with,  yea,  thank  God  for,  those  who  are  doing
a  good  work  in  a  manner  which  they  cannot  wholly  approve.  On  the  other  hand,
those  who  love  and  employ  excitement  and  freedom  may  well  be  warned  lest  they
frustrate  their  aim  to  save  men  by  using  means  inconsistent  with  that  reverence  and
thoughtfulness  which  are  essential  to  true  religion,  and  lest  they  unjustly  condemn
their  fellow-Cliristians  who  pursue  their  ends  by  calmer  methods.  There  are  room  and
need  for  variety  of  modes  of  worship  and  activity  with  one  spirit  and  aim.  Let  us  not
condemn  those  who,  in  the  Name  of  Jesus,  are  really  casting  out  evil  spirits,  and
bringing  men  to  a  right  mind,  though  they  do  not  follow  with  us  (Luke  ix.  49,  50).

IL  David's  keplt.  It  was  severe,  and  likely,  as  it  was  doubtless  meant,  to  sting.
Notice :  1.  Ms  defence.  That  what  he  had  done  he~  had  done  for  Jehovah.  (1)  Him
who  in  himself  was  worthy  of  all  possible  honour  and  public  praise  and  confession.
(2)  Him  who  had  choi^en  and  exalted  him,  in  the  place  of  Saul  and  his  house,  to  be
ruler  over  his  people.  Piety  and  gratitude  combined  to  impel  him  to  rejoice  before  the
Lord  on  an  occasion  so  remarkable  and  auspicious.  All  of  us  have  similar  reasons  for
honouring  God  to  the  utmost  of  our  power.  In  view  of  them,  the  most  ardent  zeal
for  the  worship  of  Gtoi  and  the  promotion  of  his  kingdom  is  justified,  and  cold  and
measured  service  stands  condemned.  ,  2.  Eis  determined  resolve.  To  do  as  he  had
done.  Yea,  to  surpass  his  recent  displays  of  zeal  for  the  Lord.  If  this  was  accounted
vile,  he  would  be  viler  still ;  if  this  were  to  lower  himself,  he  would  sink  lower  still.
Similar  should  be  the  effect  upon  us  of  the  reproach  which  fervent  piety  may  subject
us  to.  If,  indeed,  objection  be  made  to  some  of  the  ways  by  which  we  show  it,  we
should  reconsider  them,  especially  when  the  objection  comes  from  Christian  brethren ;
but  undeserved  reproach  should  stimulate  ws  to  greater  devotedness  and  more  resolute
determination.  3.  Sis  assurance  of  honour.  Prom  "the  maidservants"  of  whom
Hichal  had  spoken  so  disparagingly.  He  virtually  appealed  from  her  judgment  to
theirs.  What  just  foundation  is  there  for  satisfaction  in  the  approval  of  the  humbler
classes  ?  (1)  They  may  be  more  capable  of  right  judgment  in  matters  of  religion  than
many  who  are  above  them  in  worldly  condition,  and  even  in  general  education  and
intelligence.  They  may  have  more  spiritual  susceptibility  and  fewer  prejudices.  They
may  feel  more  their  ignorance,  and  be  more  humble  and  teachable.  They  at  least
know  what  does  them  good,  which  is  the  end  of  all  religious  ministrations.  Hence
they  are  often  right  when  their  scorners  are  wrong.  Our  Lord  was  accepted  and
listened  to  gladly  by  many  of  the  common  people,  while  few  of  the  upper  and  the
learned  classes  received  him ;  and  he  rejoiced  and  thanked  his  Father  that,  while  the
truths  he  taught  were  hidden  from  "  the  wise  and  understanding,"  they  were  revealed
unto  "  babes  "  (Luke  x.  21).  And  in  the  early  Churches  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  there
were  "  not  many  wise  after  the  flesh,  or  mighty,  or  noble ; "  but  that  these  were  put  to
shame  by  the  weak  and  despised  (1  Cor.  i.  26 — 28).  (2)  The  good  of  the  humbler
classes  is  to  be  sought.  To  secure  this  end  tliey  must  be  interested,  and  their  approval
won ;  and  he  who  can,  without  unworthy  arts,  succeed  in  winning  them  so  as  to  lead
them  to  Christ,  may  well  rejoice  and  be  thankful.  David's  language  may  be  in
substance  adopted  by  preachers  who  are  despised  because  approved  and  followed  by  the
common  people ;  while  the  ministry  or  Church  which  fails  to  lay  hold  of  them  ought
to  mourn  and  reconsider  its  spirit  and  methods.

To  conclude :  1,  It  is  an  unhappy  thing  when  man  and  wife  differ  radically  in
matters  of  religion.  It  deprives  them  of  the  unspeakable  benefits  of  mutnal  sympathy
and  helpfulness.  It  is  the  occasion  of  dispute  and  unhappiness,  if  not  settled  ^ilienation-
It  hinders  very  seriously  the  religious  and  moral  education  of  the  children.  Let  these
things  be  thought  of  before  the  irrevocable  steps  are  taken  which  bind  two  lives
together.  2.  There  are  worse  faults  in  relation  to  religion  than  vulgarity,  undue
excitement,  or  eccentricity.  These  may  be  in  some  degree  injurious,  bu^  indifference
«r  hostilitjr  b  &taL— Q.  W.


182


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vtt  1—29.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VIL


Ver.  1. — When  the  king  sat  in  his  house.
The  order  is  not  chronological ;  for  the  words,
Jehovah  had  given  him  rest  from  all  his
enemies  round  ahont  (so  the  Kevised  Ver-
sion, rightly),  imply  the  successful  termina-
tion, not  of  all  wars  necessarily,  but  certainly
of  something  more  than  that  with  the
Philistine  invaders  in  the  Eephaim  valley.
A  general  summary  of  all  David's  wars  is
given  in  ch.  viii.,  and  it  was  probably  after
he  had  subdued  the  Philistines  and  Moab,
and  his  throne  was  now  fully  established,
that  in  some  time  of  peace,  possibly  before
Hanun  forced  him  into  wars  which  won
for  him  an  empire,  David  sent  for  Nathan,
and  told  him  his  full  desire.  Its  position
here  immediately  after  the  account  of  the
bringing  of  the  ark  to  Zion  has  a  higher
unity 'than  that  of  chronology.  It  shows
that  David  had  always  a  larger  purpose
than  the  mere  placing  of  the  ark  in  its  tent;
and,  as  soon  as  a  period  of  tranquillity
arrived,  he  confided  his  thoughts  to  the
prophet.  Thus,  with  only  one  step  taken
towards  his  whole  plan,  David  exercised
a  wise  moderation  in  leaving  the  service  at
Gibeon  unmolested.  As  regards  the  word
"  rest,"  we  have  to  distinguish  between  the
first  series  of  wars,  which  established  David
firmly  on  his  throne,  and  the  second  series,
which  gave  him  widespread  dominion.

Ver.  2. — A  house  of  oedar ;  Hebrew,
cedars.  As  these  trees  were  sent  by  Hiram,
and  as  the  house  was  built,  and  David  now
settled  in  it,  some  considerable  time  must
have  elapsed  since  his  accession.  Moreover,
the  leajiue  with  Hiram  would  be  the  result
of  David's  successes  recorded  in  oh.  viii.  1 ;
for  the  bond  of  union  between  the  two  was
their  mutual  fear  of  the  Philistines.  As  we
have  seen  before,  the  alliance  with  Tyre
had  a  very  civilizing  effect  upon  the  He-
brews, who  were  far  inferior  to  the  Tyrians
in  the  mechanical  arts ;  and  David's  house
of  hewn  cedar  logs  was  marvellous  in  the
eyes  of  a  people  who  still  dwelt  chiefly  in
tents.  David  purposed  to  build  even  a  more
sumptuous  palace  for  Jehovah,  and  advised
with  Nathan  as  his  chief  counsellor,  and  the
person  to  whom  subsequently  the  education
of  Solomon  was  confided.  Within  ourtains ;
Hebrew,  the  curtain;  that  is,  the  tent.  The
tabernacle  prepared  by  Moses  for  the  ark
was  formed  of  ten  curtains  (Exod.  xxvi.  1),
but  the  significance  lay,  not  in  their  number,
but  in  the  dwelling  of  Jehovah  still  being
a  mere  temporary  lodging,  though  his  people
had  received  from  him  a  settled  land.

Ver.  8.— 60|  do  all  that  is  in  thine  heart.


Nathan  rashly  approTes.  The  king's  pur-
pose seems  so  pious  that  he  does  not  doubt
its  acceptance  by  God.

Ver.  4. — The  word  of  Jehovah  came  unto
Nathan.  Not  every  word  of  a  prophet  was
inspired,  and  only  a  very  few  of  the  prophets,
and  those  only  upon  great  and  solemn
occasions,  spake  under  the  direct  influence
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  his  usual  relations
with  the  king,  Nathan  was  simply  a  wise,
thoughtful,  and  God-fearing  man.  In  giving
his  approval  he  probably  meant  no  more
than  that  a  permanent  dwelling  for  Jehovah
was  what  all  pious  men  were  hoping  for.
But  from  the  days  of  Samuel  to  those  of
Ezra,  there  was  never  wanting  one  or  even
more  holy  men  who  were,  on  fit  occasions,
commissioned  to  bear  a  message  from  God
to  man ;  and  as  these  generally  belonged  to
the  prophetic  order,  men  too  often  now
confound  prophecy  with  prediction.  So
inveterate  is  this  confusion  that  even  in  the
Bevised  Version  Amos  is  made  to  say,  "I
was  no  prophet,  neither  was  I  a  prophet's
son,"  whereas  the  Hebrew  distinctly  is,  "  I
am  no  prophet,  nor  a  prophet's  son  [that  is,
one  train«i  in  the  prophetic  schools],  but
I  am  a  herdsman"  (Amos  vii.  16).  But
though  not  a  prophet  by  profession,  yet
Amos  was  discharging  a  prophet's  higher
duty  in  testifying  against  wickedness  and
impiety,  and  was  acting  under  a  special
Divine  call.  Still,  he  did  not  belong  to  the
prophetic  order,  nor  wear  the  garment  of
black  camel's  hair,  which  was  their  pro-
fessional dress.  On  the  present  occasion,
Nathan,  in  approving,  had  spoken  as  a  man,
but  now  a  Divine  message  comes  to  him.
How  we  know  not,  but  in  ver.  17  it  is  called
a  "  vision ; "  and  it  is  also  said  that  it  came
"that  night."

Ver.  5. — Shalt  thon,  etc.?  The  question
implies  an  answer  in  the  negative ;  but  there
is  no  disapproval  of  David's  purpose  as  such,
but  only  the  deferring  of  its  full  execution
unto  the  days  of  his  son.  There  is  more
than  this.  The  idea  which  runs  through
the  Divine  message  is  that  the  dwelling  of
Jehovah  in  a  tent  was  a  fitting  symbol  of
Israel's  unquiet  possession  of  the  land.  It
was  David's  mission  to  give  them  tranquil-
lity and  security  in  the  region  which  they
had  conquered  long  ago,  but  wherein  they
had  never  hitherto  been  able  to  maintain
their  liberty  unimpaired.  Then,  upon  the
accomplishmeut  of  David's  special  dut}-,  his
son,  Shelomo,  i.e.  the  peaceful,  was  to  build
the  solid  temple,  as  the  proof  that  Jehovah
had  now  taken  permanent  possession  of
the  land.  We  find  also  a  further  thought,
namely,  that  the  building  of  the  temple


OH.  VII.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


183


signified  "  the  making  for  David  of  a  liouse."
la  itg  full  significance  this  means  that  the
trihe  of  Judah  and  the  lineage  of  David
were  now  oliosen  by  God  as  the  ancestors  of
the  Messiah.

Ver.  6. — I  have  walked  in  a  tent  and  in
a  tabernacle;  literally,  1  have  walked  con-
tinually; that  is,  I  have  ever  been  a  wanderer,
first,  in  the  wilderness,  and  subsequently
at  Oilgal,  Shiloh,  Nob,  and  Gibeoa.  In-
stead of  a  "  tabernacle,"  the  Hebrew  has
a  "  dwelling."  This  may  refer  to  the  houses
of  Abinadab  and  Obed-Edom,  but  the  words
more  probably  signify  "  a  tent  that  was  jay
dwelling."

Ver.  7. — In  all  the  places  wherein  I  have
walked ;  Hebrew,  in  all  wherein  I  continued
walking;  that  is,  in  all  my  walking,  in  all
the  whole  time  wherein  I  have  been  a
wanderer.  Instead  of  tribes,  the  Ohionicler
(1  Chron.  xvii.  6)  reads  "jndges,"  the
words  in  the  Hebrew  being  almost  identical.
"  Judges "  is,  of  course,  the  more  easy  and
natural  reading,  but  "  tribes  "  gives  a  fuller
sense,  and  is  supported  by  all  the  versions.
For  in  the  troubled  anarchy  which  lasted
until  Saul's  reign,  first  one  tribe  and  then
another  was  called  to  the  front,  and  had
a  temporary  ascendancy;  but  neither  did
Jehovah  give  it  any  command  to  provide
a  settled  place  for  his  worship,  nor  did  any
one  of  the  judges  conceive  the  thought  of
making  his  tribe  permanently  the  chief,
"by  providing  a  fixed  abode  for  the  ark  and
for  God's  worship  within  its  borders.  To
feed  my  people  Israel.  The  shepherd,  in
biblical  language,  is  the  ruler,  and  to  feed
is  to  govern,  yet  in  a  kindly  way,  going  in
front  as  the  shepherd  before  his  flock,  to
bear  the  brunt  of  danger,  to  clear  the  road,
and  to  guide  into  the  safe  pastures.  So
tribe  after  tribe  had  been  called  to  bear  the
brunt  of  war,  and,  after  winning  deliverance,
it  became  its  duty  to  guide  and  lead  the
people.  In  1  Kings  viii.  16,  18,  25,  and
still  more  remarkably  in  1  Chron.  xxii.  8,
9,  we  find  large  additions  made  to  the
account  here  given.  It  follows  that  we
have  in  this  place  only  a  brief  summary  of
the  message  brought  by  Nathan,  but  one
containing  all  the  chief  points.

Yer.  8. — ^I  took  thee  from  the  sheepcote.
There  is  in  Nathan's  message  a  marked
advance  upon  the  words  of  all  previous
prophecies.  Hitherto  God's  promises  had
been  general,  and  no  tribe,  and  much  less
any  special  person,  had  been  chosen  as  the
progenitor  of  the  Messiah.  The  nearest
approach  to  the  selection  of  a  tribe  had  been
the  prediction  of  Judah's  supremacy  until
Shiloh  came  (Gen.  xlix.  10);  but  it  was  not
even  there  expressly  declared  that  Shiloh
should  be  of  Judah's  race.  But  now  David
i«  dearly  chosen.    Jehovah  takes  him  from


the  sheepcote ;  Hebrew,  "the meadow"  (see
Ps.  Ixxviii.  70).  It  was  in  the  meadows,
the  Naioth,  round  Bamah,  that  Samuel  had
gathered  the  young  men  of  Israel  to  study
their  ancient  records,  and  raise  their  country
to  a  sense  of  its  high  calling.  In  those
meadows  David  had  been  formed  for  his
high  vocation;  but  he  had  returned  from
them  to  Bethlehem,  to  feed  his  father's
sheep.  And  now,  "  from  following  the
ewes  that  gave  suck,"  Jehovah  takes  him
to  be  "  his  servant,"  a  word  of  high  dignity,
applied  to  but  few  persons  in  the  Old
Testament.  It  signifies  the  prime  minister,
or  vicegerent  of  Jehovah,  as  the  theooratio
king,  and  is  the  special  title  of  Moses
among  God's  people,  and,  among  the  heathen,
of  Nebuchadnezzar,  as  one  summoned  to  do
a  great  work  for  God.  But  it  is  in  the  last
twenty-seven  chapters  of  Isaiah  that  the
title  reaches  its  full  grandeur.  For  there,
first  of  all,  Israel  is  called  Jehovah's  ser-
vant, because  it  was  Israel's  office  to  be  the
witness  for  the  oneness  of  God  amidst  the
debasing  polytheism  of  all  the  nations
round.  And  then,  finally,  the  servant  is
Messiah,  as  being  the  personal  Kepresenta-
tive  of  God  upon  earth.  The  title  is  now
given  to  David  as  the  type  of  Christ's  kingly
office,  and  also  as  the  sweet  singer,  who
added  a  new  service  to  the  worship  of  God,
and  made  it  more  spiritual,  and  more  like
the  service  of  angels  round  God's  throne.

Ver.  9. — I  have  made  thee  a  great  name.
The  widespread  conquests  of  David,  and
his  great  empire,  were  not  for  the  sake  of
mere  earthly  dominion.  It  was,  first  of  all,
a  type  of  Messiah's  reign,  to  wliom  God  has
promised  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance,
and  that  his  gospel  shall  be  carried  to  the
ends  of  the  earth.  But,  secondly,  if  Messiah
was  to  be  "  David's  Son,"  it  was  necessary
that  that  king  should  hold  a  special  place
in  the  hearts  of  all  Israelites.  In  the  fables
and  tales  of  the  Arabs,  it  is  Solomon  who
holds  the  foremost  place.  Just  as  our  fore-
fathers showed  the  native  qualities  of  the
race  by  making  Arthur's  court  the  abode
of  prowess  and  chivalrous  bravery;  so  the
Arabs  made  Solomon's  court  the  repiesenta-
tive  of  that  dazzling  splendour  and  magni-
ficence which  they  so  admired ;  and  invested
him  with  superhuman  knowledge  and
mag'cal  power,  such  as  made  janns  and
ifreets  the  humble  slaves  of  his  will.  In
the  Old  Testament  no  king  ia  "  Jeliovah's
servant "  but  David ;  no  king  is  ever  con-
nected with  Messiah  but  David.  The
religious  fervour  of  the  people  may  gather
round  a  Hezekdah  or  a  Josiah,  and  prophets
may  encourage  them  in  their  work;  but
no  prophet  sees  in  either  of  them  the
ancestor  of  Christ.  It  is,  however,  in  the
Psalms  that  we  learn  the  full  meaning  of


184


THE  SECONl)  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[cH.  *n.  1— 2S.


Nathan's  words.  Here  »  veil  is  partly
drawn  over  them.  But  it  would  be  a  wilful
closing  of  the  eyes  to  read  this  message
and  not  bear  in  mind  the  clear  light  with
which  every  word  ia  illumined  by  the  in-
spired outpouring  of  David's  own  heart.
He  thoroughly  understood  the  fulness  and
blessedness  of  God's  revelatiop,  and  liaa
taught  us  that  it  all  looked  onward  to
Christ.

Vers.  10, 11. — ^Moreover  I  will  appoint . .  .
will  plant.  For  "moreover,"  the  Hebrew
has  "and."  The  tenses  also  continue  the
same :  "  And  I  have  appointed  .  .  .  and
have  planted."  It  is  all  part  of  the  same
act.  As  regards  the  second  verb,  the  past
tense  alone  makes  sense.  Jehovah  was  not
about  to  plant  Israel  ic  a  place  of  their  own,
but  had  just  done  so  completely.  For
David's  kingdom  had  given  them  security,
and  with  it  the  pow  er  of  doing  for  God  that
duty  which  was  Israel's  special  ofSce  in  the
world.  Had  the  anarchy  of  the  times  of
the  judges  continued,  and  the  energies  of  the
nation  been  spent  in  a  hard  struggle  for
existence,  thai  rapid  advance  in  literature
which  followed  upon  the  institution  of
Samuel's  srhools,  and  which  filled  David's
oourl  with  poets  and  chroniclers,  never
could  have  existed,  and  prophecy  would
have  been  impossible.  The  age  of  Hezekiali
was  apparently  the  culminating  period  of
Hebrew  civilization,  after  which  came  the
depressing  influences  of  the  Assyrian  in-
vasions, and  then  long  exile,  followed  by
a  second  weary  struggle  for  existence.  If
writing  was  at  first  a  mystery  and  an  art
known  only  to  priests,  it  became  throughout
the  monarchy  the  possession  especially  of
the  prophets,  who  were  Israel's  learned
men.  At  the  head  of  their  roll  stamls  the
matohli  ss  Isaiah,  and  to  render  it  possible
for  his  genius  to  display  itself,  not  only
Samuel's  schf  ols,  but  the  security  of  David's
era  of  conquest,  and  the  long  peace  and
magiiifi''euco  of  Solomon's  reign,  were  all
necessary.  When  "God  had  given  David
rest  from  his  enemies  round  about,"  hp  had
thtrtiLiy  finally  appointed  a  place  for  Israel
autl  iiad  planted  them  there.  There  is,
perhaps,  some  difSculty  in  the  verb-forms  at
tlie  end  of  ver.  11,  but  none  in  the  meaning.
The  reign  of  David  marks  an  era  in  the
I  ati.nal  life.  Under  him  Israel  obtained
secure  possession  of  the  place  appointed  for
it;  and  now,  having  no  longer  to  waste
its  emrgies  in  perpetual  fighting,  the
national  life  grows  upwards,  and  attains  to
culture,  to  thought,  and  civilization.  C-auaan
is  now  tieir  own,  and  instead  of  being  mere
warriors,  they  develop  national  institutions
and  a  national  chara-er.  What  could  men
do  that  beKougs  to  a  higher  and  nobler  life
who  were  in  daily  fear  of  being  swept  away


by  Oanaanites  and  Midianites,  by  Pliilistineg
and  Ammonites?  This  miserable  period  is
described  as  " beforetime,"  and  as  "since
the  day  that  I  commanded  judges  to  be
over  my  people  lorael."  And  here  a  colon
should  be  placed ;  and  the  Hebrew  will  then
proceed,  "But  now  I  have  caused  thee  to
rest  from  thine  enemies : "  the  anarchy  and
its  attendant  weakness  is  over;  "and  Jeho-
vah telleth  thee  that  Jehovah  will  make
tliee  a  house."  Eest  has  been  given;  the
establishment  of  David's  family  as  the
Messianic  lineage  is  to  follow  (see  on  this
promise,  1  Sam.  ii.  35).

Yer.  12. — Thy  seed  .  ,  .  whioh  shall  pro-
ceed. As  the  son  is  to  be  established  in  the
kingdom  and  to  build  the  house,  he  must  be
Solomon,  who  plainly,  therefore,  was  not  as
yet  born  (see  note  on  ver.  1).

Yer.  13. — I  will  establish  the  throne  pf  his
kingdom  for  ever.  The  temple  which  Solo-
mon was  to  build  was  the  symbol  of  the
new  development  of  Israel,  and  naturally
these  words  suggest  a  meaning  not  unworthy
of  so  great  an  advance  in  the  accomplish-
ment of  the  nation's  mission.  Had  we,
indeed,  only  this  passage,  we  might  be  con-
tent to  take  it  in  a  popular  sense,  as  signitV-
ing  that,  whereas  Saul's  throne  (aud  sub-
sequently that  of  the  many  usurpers  in
Samaria)  had  but  a  brief  existence,  Solo
men's  descendants  should  hold  for  many
centuries  undisputed  possession  of  the  king-
dom of  Jerusalem.  But  in  Ps.  Ixxxix.  29
we  read,  "  His  (David's)  seed  will  I  make
to  endure  for  ever,  and  his  throne  as  the
day  s  of  heaven."  And  again  in  vers.  36, 37  >
continuance  is  assured  to  it  as  lasting  as  that
of  the  sun  and  moon.  We  can  scarcely,  there-
fore, be  wrong  in  the  conviction  that  these
promises  pointed  onwards  to  the  establish-
ment of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  that  the  great
importance  attached  to  the  building  of  the
temple  finds  its  explanation  in  its  relation
to  him.  This  full  establishment  after  so
long  a  delay  of  the  Mosaic  typical  ritual,
the  addition  to  it  of  psalmody,  giving  it  a
spiritual  side,  and  making  the  worship  that
of  the  heart,  tlie  bestowal  of  empire,  and
the  rapid  development  of  the  people  under
David  and  Solomon,  were  all  steps  in  that
wonderful  series  of  special  providences
which  made  the  Jews  fit  to  be  the  pro-
g(  niters  of  the  Messiah,  which  suironnded
him  during  liis  ministry  with  companions
capable  of  understanding  and  recording  his
teaching,  and  provided  for  him,  after  his
death,  missionaries,  not  merely  with  zeal
enough,  but  with  intellectual  gifts  snfSoient
to  enable  them  to  persuade  both  Greece  and
Rome  to  listen  to  tidings  so  wonderful  and
mysterious  as  that  God  for  our  salvation
had  become  man.  Keil  also  well  points  out
thiA  the  temple  was  a  symbol  of  Oirist'i


Oft.  vil.  1— 2&.''


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


185


incarnation;  for  it  meant  the  dwelling  of
God  ou  eiirtli.  "  I  have  anrely,"  says  Solo-
mon, "built  thee  a  house  of  habitation,  a
place  for  ti\ee  to  dwell  in  for  ever"  (1  Kings
viii.  13),  The  same  thought  was  in  St.
John's  mind  when  he  said,  "The  Word
became  flesh,  and  dwelt  as  in  a  tabernacle
among  us  "  (John  i.  14).  For  the  verb  used
by  him,  literally  "tabernacled,"  is  a  com-
parison between  Christ's  life  on  earth,  and
the  dwelling  of  God  in  "the  tent  of  meeting."
Hut  there  is  more  than  this.  Christ  himself
calls  his  body  "the  temple"  (John  ii.  19,
21).  At  the  RcBurrection  he  raised  up  again
the  temple  of  his  body  which  the  Jews  had
destroyed,  and  at  the  Ascension  it  was  re-
moved &om  the  eaitli,  to  be  reserved  in
heaven  until  his  second  advent.  His  reign
now  is  spiritual,  and  his  temple  is  not  a
building  made  with  hands,  but  is  the  heart
of  the  renevyed  believer  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  And
this  indwelling  of  Christ  in  the  heart  will
continue  unto  the  end  of  the  present  dis-
pensation. For  Christ's  indwelling  is  that
also  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (1  Cor.  lii.  16) ;  and
the  gift  of  the  Spirit  continues  unto  the
end  of  the  world.  "  The  Father  shall  give
you  another  Comforter,  that  he  may  abide
with  you  for  ever  "  (John  xiy.  16).

Yer.  14. — ^I  will  be  Ms  Father,  <iiid  he
shall  be  my  son,  JBetween  father  and  sou
thera  is  not  only  love,  but  oneness.  What-
soever the  father  hath,  that  belongs  also  to
the  son  by  natural  right.  But  this  sonship
is  magnified  in  the  Psalms  beyond  the
measure  of  Solomon  or  any  natural  limits.
The  Son  there  is  "the  Firstborn,"  which
Bolomon  was  not,  "higher  than  the  kings
of  the  earth  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27) ;  and  he  must
have  "  the  nations  for  his  inheritance,  and
the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  pos-
session" (Ps.  ii.  8).  Psalms  like  the  second
and  seventy-second  belong,  not  to  Solomon
personally,  but  to  him  as  the  type  of  the
Prince  of  Peace ;  and  they  help  to  show  us
what  is  the  true  meaning  and  fulfilment  of
the  words  here.  The  rod  of  men;  that  is,
such  punishment  as  men  fitly  receive  for
their  faults.  David's  natural  posterity  was
to  be  exempt  neither  from  human  depravity,
nor  from  punishment,  nor  from  the  changes
and  chances  of  mortal  life.  With  them,  as
with  men  generally,  there  would  be  a
tangled  skein,  of  virtue  and  sin,  of  folly  and
wisdom,  of  terrible  fall  and  penitent  recovery.
But  there  was  to  be  no  blotting  out  of
David's  lineage.  Great  earthly  houses,  in
the  long  course  of  events,  one  after  another
become  extinct,  and  even  the  tabernacle  of
David  was  to  fall  (Amos  ix.  11),  but  not
forever.  God  would  "raise  up  its  ruins"
in  Christ,  and  "  build  it  as  in  the  days  of
old."  So  in  Isa.  ix.  1  there  is  the  same
|hou{;ht  of  the  eomplete  down-hewinj;  of


David's  earthly  lineage,  yet  only  to  rise
again  to  nobler  life  and  vigour,  in  the
Branch,  or  Sucker,  that  was  to  spring  from
the  fallen  trunk.

Vers.  15, 16. — Before  thee.  This  does  not
refer  to  time,  but  means  "in  thy  presence,"
or  "  before  thy  face,"  that  is,  "  as  thou  hast
thyself  been  witness."  There  is  a  strong  con-
trast between  the  fate  of  Saul's  house  and
this  eternal  endurance  promised  to  that  of
David.  The  lineage  of  Saul  might  have
made  a  new  start  in  Jonathan,  and  even  when
he  died  at  Gilboa,  he  left  a  son  behind  him.
Still,  no  one  ever  looked  upon  Mephibosheth
as  having  any  title  to  the  throne ;  and  though
Sliimei  (ch.  xvi.  S)  may  have  conceived  the
hope  that,  if  David  were  overthrown,  the
kingdom  might  return  to  Saul's  family,
yet,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  among  the  many
vicissitudes  of  the  teii  tribes,  the  attempt
never  was  made  to  search  for  a  descendant
of  Saul  to  be  Israel's  king.  Saul's  was  a
royalty  for  one  generation ;  David's  throne
was  to  be  established  for  ever.  Not  because
David  was  sinless.  His  character  is  sullied
by  crimes  of  the  darkest  hue.  But  he  never
sank  into  a  mere  tyrant,  such  as  Saul  was
towards  David  and  towards  the  priests  at  Nob.
Nor  did  David  ever  become  an  irreligious
man  (1  Sam.  xxii.  18, 19 ;  zxviii.  15),  though
there  is  in  him  a  strange  and  painful  mix-
ture of  great  good  and  great  evU.  The  salt
that  preserves  his  character  is  his  genuine
sincerity  and  earnestness  both  towards  God
and  man  ;  and  these  qualities  make  him  not
unworthy  of  the  high  place  be  holds  among
God's  people.  Still,  the  promise  wae  not
because  of  David's  deserts,  but  because  &om
him  was  to  come  the  Christ,  who  is  blessed
for  evermore.

Ver.  17. — Vision.  This  word  does  not
imply  that  Nathan  saw  anything  with  the
natural  eye,  but  signifies  that  sort  of  pro-
phecy which  was  vouchsafed  to  a  "seer,"
Thus  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,of  Nabum,  and
of  Obadiah  are  called  "  visions."  Probably
the  word  is  taken  from  the  fixed  gaze,  with
whicli  the  seer  looked  into  the  far-off  world
with  unmoved  eyes,  yet  seeing  not  with  them,
but  with  the  spiritual  sight  within.  It  would
thus  be  an  intellectual  process  accompanied
by  a  rigidity  of  the  natural  organs,  cansed
partly  by  intensity  of  feeling,  but  chiefly  by
mental  preoccupation,  which  left  no  faculty
at  liberty  to  discharge  its  ordinary  function.

Ver.  18. — ^Savid  ...  sat  before  the  Jiord.
The  word  "sat"  is  usually  explained  by
commentators  as  meaning  "tarried."  The
rabbins  give  the  word  its  ordinary  meaning,
and  say  that  it  was  the  privilege  of  kings  to
pray  in  a  sitting  posture.  But  we  cannot
possibly  believe  that  kings  at  this  early
stage  had  established  a  special  etiquette  for
observance  in  prayer,  and  the  dimcnlty  i^


189


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMCEL.


[ca.  vii.  1^29.


merely  imaginary.  Because  the  Jews  prayed
standing,  and  we  modems  pray  kneeling,
we  both  assame  that  to  pray  sitting  was
an  irreverent  act.  It  was  not  so,  nor  are
we  to  think  of  David  as  sitting  at  ease  in
a  ohair.  He  sat  upon  the  ground,  as  was
the  Oriental  custom,  with  his  feet  doubled
under  him,  and  liis  head  bent  forward ;  and
in  this  posture  meditated  upon  Jehovah's
message,  and  then  poured  out  his  thoughts.
As  it  is  expressly  said  that  "he  sat  before
Jehovah,"  the  place  must  have  been  the
outer  court  of  the  tabernacle.  Who  am  I,
0  Iiord  Jehovah  1  In  the  Authorized  Ver-
sion Jehovah  is  rendered  "  God,"  because  it
has  the  vowels  of  the  word  Elohim  ;  usually
it  is  rendered  "Lord,"  because  the  Masso-
rites  attached  to  it  the  vowels  of  Adonai,
"  lord,"  equivalent  to  Domintu.  As  Adonai
here  precedes  Jehovah,  the  Massorites  were
driven  irom  their  usual  practice,  and  were
so  superstitious  as  to  suppose  it  more  rever-
ent to  pronounce  the  name  Elohim  than
that  of  Jehnvah,  to  which  the  Jews  attached
magical  powers.  David's  words  are  not  so
much  a  prayer  as  a  meditation,  full  of
thanksgiving,  and  even  of  wonder  at  the
greatness  of  Ood's  mercies  to  him.  In  it
he  first  acknowledges  his  own  unworthiness
and  the  meanness  of  his  father's  house  com-
pared with  the  high  dignity  which  God  is
bestowing  upon  him.  For  not  only  has  he
raised  him  to  the  kingly  office,  but  promised
him  the  continuance  of  his  house  "  for  a
great  while  to  come."  Whether  David
nnderstood  as  yet  that  he  was  now  placed
in  the  same  position  as  Abraham  of  old,
in  that  "  in  his  seed  all  the  families  of  the
earth .  should  be  blessed,"  is  uncertain,  and
depends  upon  the  Interpretation  put  upon
the  following  words.  This  only  we  may
affirm,  that  what  he  says  in  this  place  of
his  house  remaining  until  a  distant  future
falls  far  short  of  the  meaning  of  the  passages
quoted  above  from  the  Psalms.

Yer.  19. — And  is  this  the  manner  of  man,
0  Lord  God  1  Hebrew,  and  thit  it  the  law
of  man,  0  Lord  Jehovah.  In  the  parallel
passage  (1  Chroir.  ivii.  17)  the  Hebrew  has,
"  And  thou  hast  regarded  me  according  to
the  law  of  a  man  of  high  degree."  The
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version  here,
which,  by  making  the  clause  interroga-
tive, implies  a  negative,  gives  absolutely
no  sense;  but  some  commentators  render,
"And  this  is  the  manner  of  men,  O
Lord  Jehovah,"  understanding  thereby
that  Ood  was  acting  towards  David  in  a
human  manner,  that  is,  as  an  earthly  friend
and  benefactor  would  do.  But  though  the
Ecvised  Version  favours  this  rendering,
the  Hebrew  word  torah  never  has  this
meaning,  and,  unless,  the  attempt  be  made
to  amend  the  text,  for  which  the  versions


give  no  help,  we  must  take  tot<ih  in  its
usual  sense,  and  understand  that  this  con-
tinuance of  David's  house  into  the  distant
future  has  now  become  a  human  law,  that
is,  a  divinely  constituted  ordinance,  which
must  now  take  its  place  among  the  laws
which  govern  human  affairs.  The  words
are  undoubtedly  difficult,  and  we  feel  that
David  was  speaking  in  an  ejaculatory
manner,  in  sentences  but  half  expressed,
breaking  forth  from  him  bit  by  bit,  under
the  pressure  of  deep  excitement  within.
We  notice  too  that,  while  there  is  no  direct
reference  to  the  Messiah  in  David's  words,
yet  that  the  Psalms  indicate  that  he  did
connect  the  duration  of  his  house  with  the
Messiah's  advent ;  and  this  ejaculation  may
have  sprung  forth,  if  not  from  a  fully  formed
conviction,  yet  from  the  feeling  that  the
permanence  of  his  house  was  for  the  purpose
of  a  higher  kingdom  than  that  of  Jeru-
salem ;  and  so  the  promise  was  a  "  law  of
man,"  and  the  promulgation  of  u  decree
which  affected  the  whole  human  race.
This  may  be  the  meaning  of  the  Vulgate,
which  renders  "a  law  of  Adam,"  that  is,
one  embracing  within  its  scope  idl  Adam's
race.

Ver.  20. — ^Thou,  Lord  God,  knowest  thy
servant.  The  Hebrew  throughout  has
Lord  Jehovah,  except  in  vers.  22,  25,  where
it  has  "  Jehovah  God,"  the  title  of  Deity
used  in  Gen.  ii.  The  repeated  use  of  thu
covenant  and  personal  name  of  God  is  very
emphatic ;  and  the  appeal  to  Jehovah's
knowledge  of  his  heart  reminds  us  of  similar
outpourings  of  David's  consciousness  of  his
sincere  devotion  to  his  Maker,  as  for  in-
stance in  Ps.  xvii.  3.

Ver.  21. — For  thy  word's  sake.  In  1
Chron.  xvii.  19  we  read,  "  For  thy  servant's
sake."  The  phrase  seemed,  perhaps,  to  the
Chronicler  difficult,  but  it  does  not  mean
"  because  of  thy  previous  promise,"  for  no
such  promise  had  been  given,  but  "  because
thou  hast  now  said  it."  Nor  does  it  imply
pre-existing  merit  in  David,  but  that  God
had  now  chosin  to  declare  his  will,  and
what  was  according  to  his  own  heart.  It
thus  makes  God's  own  good  will  and  pleasure
the  cause  of  the  great  honours  bestowed
upon  David.  Instead  of  these  great  things,
the  Hebrew  has  this  great  thing ;  that  is,  the
lasting  continuance  of  David's  family.

Ver.  22. — Wherefore  thou  art  great.
God's  goodness  is  to  David  a  proof  of  his
greatness,  and  he  sees  it  displayed,  not  only
in  his  dealings  with  himself,  but  also  in
the  past  history  of  the  Jewish  nation.
There  is  in  this  a  depth  of  evangelic  piety.
An  unconverted  heart  would  see  the  great-
ness of  God  in  the  majesty  of  creation,  or
in  severe  dealings  with  the  impenitent.
David  saw  it  in  acts  of  mercy  and  kindnew.


CH.  tit.  1  — 29.J


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


187


We  look  upon  Elijah  as  the  very  typo  of
sternness,  yet  he  too  recognized  the  presence
of  God  in  "  the  still  small  voice  "  of  gentle-
ness and  loTe  (1  Kings  six.  13).

Ver.  23. — And  what  one  nation,  eto.  ?  The
translation  should  be.  And  who  is  like  thy
people,  Wee  Israel,  the  one  nation  upon  earth
mhiek  God  went  to  redeem  for  himself  to  be
his  people,  and  to  mahe  for  him  a  name,  etc.  ?
Israel  both  was  and  remains  to  this  day  a
nation  unique  in  its  history,  both  in  those
early  dealings  of  God  with  it,  and  also  in
its  later  history  and  its  marvellous  preser-
vation unto  this  day.  It  is  remarkable  that
in  this  place  the  word  for  "  God,"  Elohim,  ia
followed  by  a  verb  plural,  the  almost  in-
variable rule  in  Hebrew  being  that,  though
Elohim  is  itself  plural,  it  takes  »  verb
singular  whenever  it  refers  to  the  true
God.  In  the  corresponding  passage  (1
Chron.  xvii.  21)  the  verb  is  in  the  singular.
No  adequate  reason  has  been  given  for  this
deviation,  but  probably  the  usage  in  these
early  times  was  not  so  strict  as  it  became
subsequently.  It  is  the  influence  of  writing,
and  of  the  eye  becoming  conversant  with
writing,  that  makes  men  correct  in  their
use  of  language  and  in  the  spelling  of
words.  In  the  Syriac  Church,  God  the
Word  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost  were  at
first  spoken  of  in  the  feminine  gender,  be-
cause "  Word  "  and  "  Spirit "  are  both  femi-
nine nouns ;  but  grammar  soon  gave  way  to
soundness  of  thought  and  feeling.  So  prob-
ably in  colloquial  language  Elohim  was
often  used  with  a  verb  plural,  but  correct
thinking  forbade  and  overruled  grammar.
We  may  regard  tbis,  then,  as  one  of  the  few
passages  in  which  the  colloquial  usage  has
escaped  correction,  and  attach  no  further  im-
portance to  it.  For  you.  "You"  is  plural,
and  refers  to  the  people.  The  Vulgate  has
"for  them,"  which  is  in  accordance  with
the  greater  exactness  of  modem  grammar.
But  sudden  changes  of  person  are  very
common  in  Hebrew,  which  follows  the  rules
of  thought  rather  than  of  written  composi-
tion ;  and  so  David  speaks  of  Israel  as  you,
because  they  seemed  to  him  to  be  present.
We  must  note,  however,  that  in  the  words
that  follow,  for  thy  land,  and  thy  people,
the  pronoun  is  singular,  and  refers  to  God.
From  the  nations  and  their  gods.  Both  the
Authorized  Version  and  the  Revised  Version,
by  inserting  "  from,"  which  is  not  in  the
Hebrew,  take  "nations  "  as  in  apposition  with
"  Egypt ;  "  but  a  moment's  consideration
shows  that  this  is  untenable,  as  "  nations  "
is  plural.  But  the  whole  verse  is  so  full
of  grammatical  difficulties  as  to  make  it
extremely  probable  that  the  text  is  corrupt,
and  that  we  ought  to  sapply  the  verb  "  to
drive  out,"  which  is  actually  read  in  1  Chron.
xvii.  21,  w  even  to  substitute  it  in  the  place


of  "  for  thy  land,"  which  is  omitted  in  the
parallel  passage.  The  nations  which  God
drove  out  had  nothing  to  do  with  Egypt,  but
were  the  seven  dominant  tribes  of  Canaan ;
and  the  bestowal  upon  Israel  of  their  terri-
tories was  as  essential  a  part  of  Jehovah's
dealings  with  his  people  as  the  Exodus
itself.  Thus  the  reading  will  be,  To  drive
out  before  thy  people,  whom  thou  purchasedst
for  thee  from  Egypt,  nations  and  their  gods.

Ver.  24. — For  thou  hast  confirmed.  The
word  means  "  thou  hast  firmly  and  securely
established  Israel  to  be  thy  people."  This
plainly  refers  to  the  settlement  in  Canaan,
now  at  last  completed  by  David's  victories,
and  not  to  the  deliverance  from  Egypt.
In  the  words  that  follow  David  recognizes
the  spiritual  importance,  not  only  of  the
permanent  continuance  of  his  house,  but
also  of  the  empire  given  unto  him.  For
Israel  is  now  to  be  a  people  for  ever:  and
thou,  Jehovah,  art  become  their  God.  It  is
very  necessary  to  retain  here  the  personal
name,  Jehovah,  as  it  is  in  the  Hebrew,  and
not  dilute  it  down  to  the  Lord  of  the  Sep-
tuagint.  For  now,  to  David's  mind,  the
covenant  seemed  complete,  and  ratified  for
ever.  Israel  is  to  liave  an  everlasting
existence — a  promise  belonging  to  it  in  its
full  sense  only  spiritually.  For  as  long  as
the  world  lasts,  it  is  against  the  sp:ritual
Israel  that  the  gates  of  hell  shall  never
prevail.  Aqd  next,  first  as  the  theocratic
people,  and  then  as  the  Church,  it  is  to  hold
a  unique  relation  to  Jehovah,  who  is  to  be
its  Gfcd.  For  Israel,  that  is,  the  Jewish  and
the  Christian  Church,  worships,  not  the  God
of  nature,  Elohim,  but  Jehovah,  the  God  of
grace;  and  they  learn  his  attributes,  not
from  philosophy,  nor  by  metaphysical  in-
quiry, but  from  his  own  revealed  will,  in
which  he  teaches  us  what  he  is,  what  we
are,  and  how  we  are  to  become  one  with
him.

Vers.  25,  26.— And  now,  0  lord  God;
Hebrew,  Jehovah  Ood.  Similarly,  in  ver.  26
the  Hebrew  is  "  Let  thy  Name  be  magni-
fied for  ever,  saying,  Jehovah  Sabaoth  is
God  over  Israel."  The  special  relation  of
Jehovah  to  Israel  is  throughout  kept  con-
stantly in  view ;  for  Jehovah  is  the  Name
of  Deity  in  covenant  with  his  people,  and
it  is  in  the  confirmation  and  permanence
of  the  covenant  that  David  sees  the  true
value  of  the  lasting  continuance  of  his  own
house.

Ver.  27. — Then  hast  revealed  to  thy  ser-
vant ;  Hebrew,  Owu  hast  uncovered  the  ear
of  thy  servant,  (see  note  on  1  Sam.  ix.  16).
Hath  thy  servant  found  in  his  heart ;  Hebrew,
hath  found  his  heart.  The  word  "heart"
has  a  wide  meaning  in  Hebrew,  embracing
both  our  intellectual  and  our  moral  powers.
Here  it  simply  means  "courage,"  as   in


168


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  VII.  1 — ^29.


1  Sam.  xvii.  82.  The  Bevised  Veision  puts
this  in  the  margin :  "  Therefore  hath  thy
servant  been  bold  to  pray  this  prayer."

Ver.  28. — And  now,  0  Lord  Sod,  than  art
that  God.  Tlie  pronoun  rendered  "that"
is  really  a  personal  pronoun  used  as  the
copula,  which  the  Authorized  Version  in-
serts in  italics.  As  this  gi-ammatical  usage,
which  is  common  to  all  the  Semitic  lan-
guages, was  not  understood  at  the  time  when
our  version  was  made,  we  find  all  the  parts
of  the  verb  "to  be "  constantly  printed  in
italics,  as  though  absent,  while  really  they
are  expressed  in  the  Oriental  way.  This
has  the  advantage,  however,  of  reminding
the  reader  that  wherever  the  verb  "  to  be  "
is  printed  in  Boman  characters  it  has  a
much  stronger  meaning  than  the  mere
union  of  subject  and  predicate.  Thus  in
Gen.  1.  2  the  first  "  was,"  in  Roman  type,
means  "existed,"  or  possibly  "became;"
the  second  "  was,"  in  italics,  is  simply  the


copula.  Here  the  correct  translation  is,
And  now,  0  Lord  Jehovah,  thou  art  the  God ,
i.e.  the  one  real,  true  God.

Ver.  29. — Let  it  please  thee  to  bless ;  or,
begin  and  bless.  Literally,  the  verb  signifies
to  make  up  the  mind  and  set  about  the
doing  of  the  thing  purposed.  Thus  David
prays  that  the  blessing  may  now  at  once
begin  to  take  effect.  It  is  often  rendered
"  please  "  in  our  version,  because  the  verb  is
one  used  only  of  a  determination  resolved
upon  of  the  free-will  of  the  purposer.  Its
force  is  well  seen  in  Job  vi.  9,  where  what
Job  prays  for  is  that  God  would  deliberate  no
longer,  but  decide  the  matter  and  set  about
destroying  him.  The  Authorized  Version
was  led,  by  the  nee  of  this  verse  "  please,"
to  adopt  the  optative  form.  Really,  it  is  the
language  of  firm  faith,  and  should  be  ren-
dered. And  now  [there  is  no  "  therefore  "  ]
begin  of  thy  own  good  wiU,  and  bless  the
house  of  thy  servant.


H0MILETI08.

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  facts  are :  1.  David,  being  settled  in  his  kingdom  and  furnished
with  a  permanent  place  of  abode,  is  dissatisfied  that  the  ark  of  the  Lord  should  remain
in  a  frail  tont.  2.  He  sends  for  Nathan,  and  intimates  his  desire  to  build  a  fitting  house
for  the  Lord,  and  receives  encouragement  from  the  prophet.  3.  During  a  vision  of  the
night  Nathan  is  directed  to  inform  David  that  bis  desire  cannot  be  realized ;  that  all
along  it  had  been  God's  will  to  move  from  place  to  place  in  a  tent  (ver.  6) ;  that  it  was
never  his  purpose  to  have  any  other  abode  while  Israel  was  unsettled  (ver.  7).  4.  He
is  further  to  inform  David  th^t  the  dwelling  in  a  tent,  and  his  own  call  from  the  sheep-
cote  (ver.  8)  to  he  a  leader  of  Israel,  were  both  parts  of  one  design,  and  that  the  success
vouchsafed  to  him  (ver.  9)  was  evidence  of  this.  6.  Also,  David  is  to  know  that,  in
pursuance  of  the  same  purpose,  God  gave  his  people  a  land  of  their  own,  and  planted
(these  verbs  to  be  taken  as  perfects,  not  as  converted  into  futures)  them  in  a  permanent
abode,  free  from  the  embarrassment  of  such  powerful  assailants  as  annoyed  them  in  the
time  of  the  judges,  and  from  which  they  now  have  rest.  6.  The  good  desire  of  David,
though  not  to  be  now  realized,  is  acknowledged  by  the  assurance  that  God  has  further
purposed  to  establish  his  house  in  IsraeL

Ckmmendahle  hut  unseasonable  zeal.  Every  reader  of  the  narrative  at  once  feels  how
natural  and  beautiful  it  was  in  David  to  desire,  for  the  symbol  of  God's  presence  among
his  people,  an  abode  somewhat  commensurate  with  its  glory  and  suggestive  of  per-
manence. It  was  in  keeping  with  all  the  antecedents  of  his  life,  and  there  was
manifested  an  exquisite  spiritual  sensibility  in  mentioning  first  of  all  so  important  a
subject  as  a  change  in  the  abode  of  the  ark  to  the  prophet  who  represented  the
Divine  source  of  guidance  as  distinguished  from  civil  authority.  What  are  the
elements  which  render  such  zeal  commendable  and  at  the  same  time  unseasonable  ?

I.  There  is  a  personal  ABsoRrTioN  in  the  interests  of  God's  kingdom
AMONa  MEN.  God's  kingdom  among  men  was  the  great  fact  to  be  emphasized  and
illustrated  in  the  life  of  the  chosen  race,  suggestive  of  a  more  developed  kingdom  in
later  times.  This  fact  had  absorbed  the  energies  of  Moses,  but  was  somewhat  obscured
when  the  people,  weary  of  the  existing  form  of  the  theocracy,  asked  for  and  obtained
a  king  in  Saul.  From  the  first  David  had,  in  his  own  life,  restored  the  idea  of  the
Divine  kingdom  to  the  distinctness  of  Mosaic  times,  and  counted  himself  to  have  no
function  in  the  world  apart  from  seeking  to  realize  it  in  the  national  experience.  For
it  he  lived  and  ruled ;  for  it  he  prayed,  and  of  it  he  sang.  This  was  the  fountain-head
of  all  his  ceal,  and  the  ke;^  to  the  communication  made  to  Nathan.    Herein  also  is  th«


OH.  vn.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  18S

secret  of  all  acceptable  Christian  zeal.  We  are  right  in  feeling  and  purpose  only  in  so
far  as  our  entire  life  is  one  with  Christ's.  Human  life  rises  to  its  highest  level  only
when  it  causes  all  its  strength  to  flow  in  with  the  great  stream  of  spiritual  force  which
one  day  is  to  cover  the  earth.  It  is  not  patronage  of  institutions,  study  or  criticism  of
Christian  forms  of  thought  and  action,  friendly  feeling  towards  workers  in  mission
fields,  but  personal  identification  with  the  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom  as  the  most
vital  and  precious  of  all  interests.  This  is  a  practical  illustration  of  the  phrase,  "  Wo
have  the  mind  of  Christ."

II.  There  is  a  wholesome  feab  lest  pbivatb  and  bboulab  pbospbbity  bhould
GENERATE  SELFISHNESS.  David  was  blesscd  with  great  prosperity  in  home  and  in
state.  In  clearer,  more  reflective  moods,  he  saw  that  this  was  connected  with  the
furtherance  of  the  great  purpose  of  God  in  the  world  ;  but  amidst  the  hurry  of  life  and
inevitable  weaknesses  of  the  moral  nature,  it  was  liable  to  produce  a  feeling  of  selfish
content  with  his  own  condition.  The  dangers  of  prosperity  are  proverbial.  His  words
to  Nathan,  contrasting  his  own  permanent  dwelling  with  the  slender  covering  of  the
ark,  revealed  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  a  man  sensible  of  a  grave  spiritual  danger,
and  anxious  not  to  fall  into  it.  It  is  sometimes,  in  the  course  of  doing  God's  work,  or
what  may  be  called  secular  work  in  a  Christly  spirit,  that  Providence  grants  men
secular  prosperity.  Then  comes  the  testing-time  of  the  religious  life.  Many  fall  under
the  spell,  ind  undue  absorption  in  temporal  personal  comfort  robs  the  kingdom  of
Christ  of  much  thought  and  energy  it  otherwise  would  have  received.  The  pleasures
e/  the  "  house  of  cedar  "  shut  out  the  condition  of  the  spiritual  kingdom.  But  where
seal  is  sound,  watchfulness  is  maintained,  and  spiritual  growth  keeps  pace  with  worldly
prosperity,  ihore  will  be  cherished  a  wholesome  dread  lest  the  blessings  which  coma
from  God  should  in  any  measure  wean  the  heart  from  him  and  the  supreme  interests
of  his  kingdom.

III.  There  is  a  perception  of  the  tbmpokabt  chaeaoteb  of  eiistino  beli-
eiCTTS  APPLIAKCES.  Spiritual  instinct  led  David  to  feel  that  the  tent  was  not  suited  as
the  abode  in  perpetuity  of  the  eternal,  unchangeable  God.  There  was  an  incongruity
between  the  nature  of  the  occupant  and  the  frailty  and  transitoriness  of  the  dwelling-
place.  Apart,  then,  from  the  contrast  with  his  own  "  cedar  house,"  he  saw  that  the
arrangement  which  had  received  Divine  sanction  through  many  generations  was  not
to  be  consjdered  as  perfect  and  unalterable.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  faith  he
cherished  that  the  presence  of  God  among  his  people  was  in  pursuance  of  the  great
historic  promise  made  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  17,  18),  and  preparatory  to  some  further
lufolding  of  the  plan  which  embraced  within  its  scope  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  So
far  his  zeal  in  seeking  a  permanent  abode  for  the  ark  was  enlightened.  And  this  is  a
characteristic  of  all  true  zeal.  It  does  not  merely  proceed  from  impulse  and  strong
feeling ;  it  has  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  the  variability
of  its  outward  appliances  according  to  the  stages  of  its  development.  The  visible
forms  and  arrangements  adapted  to  one  state  of  society  may  need  revision  and
change  more  cr  less  radical  to  render  the  deposit  of  truth  more  effective  in  its  influence
on  a  difi^erent  state  of  society.  A  mere  love  of  change  is  not  identical  with  commend-
able zeal ;  a  bare  feeling  that  simple  variation  in  outward  forms  will  strengthen  the
power  of  religion  is  no  sure  guide;  but  a  distinction  between  the  permanent  truth
centring  in  Christ,  and  the  transitoriness  of  the  setting  of  that  truth,  will  lead  to  a
desire,  wheik  occasion  offers,  to  make  such  modifications  in  the  circumstantials  of
religion  as  may  best  accord  with  the  nature  of  the  truth  on  the  one  side  and  ths
developinent  of  human  society  on  the  other.

IV.  The  impebfeotion  of  the  zeal  mat  lie  in  the  ebroe  as  to  beasonablb-
NESB.  In  this  case  all  seemed  right  and  sound,  in  accordance  with  the  purest  love  and
devotion,  both  to  David  and  to  Nathan.  Subsequent  light  from  God  himself  showed
that  here  feeling  was  right  and  thought  also  up  to  a  given  point,  but  that  the  zeal  was
inappropriate  by  reason  of  a  defective  knowledge  of  the  specific  purposes  of  God.  Thera
were  reasons  in  the  Divine  mind  why  David,  at  this  juncture,  should  not  build  a  house
for  the  Lord,  trobably  his  work  of  consolidation  was  not  sufficiently  advanced,  and
either  then  or  later  on  he  was  reminded  that  a  man  of  peace  was  alone  suited  for  such
work  (1  Chron.  xxii.  8 ;  ixviii.  3).  The  defectiveness  of  the  judgment  even  of  good
meo  is  cause  of  much  mistake  ip  altering  the  institutions  and  visible  agencies  of  th9


190  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEIk  [««•  >^  1—29

Church.  There  are  times  when  neither  David  nor  Nathan  may  depend  on  their
present  feelings  and  knowledge,  but  more  light  must  be  sought  from  the  Head  of  the
Church.  However  sound  the  principle  that  forms  and  circumstantials  do  not  possess
the  permanence  belonging  to  the  central  truth  they  cover,  still  a  busy  zeal  eager  to
Introduce  something  new  as  more  suited  to  a  later  development,  even  though  shown  by
the  most  sincere  of  men,  must  be  regarded  with  distrust  unless  Providence,  by  some
means  as  good  to  us  as  was  Nathan's  vision  to  David,  makes  it  quite  clear  that  the
time  has  come  when  the  old  should  give  place  to  the  new.  Holy  desire,  even  when
conjoined  with  knowledge  of  a  limited  experience,  may  not  be  fitly  realized  because
God's  time  is  not  quite  come.

General  lessons.  1.  Where  there  is  sincere  piety  there  will  be  jealousy  lest  the
r^use  of  God  should  not  receive  its  due  consideration.  2.  It  wiU  be  a  mark  of
prosperous  piety  amidst  prosperous  circumstances  when  men  deliberately  study  how
they  may  more  worthily  serve  God  and  give  him  the  honour  due  to  his  Name.
3.  We  should  always  anticipate  that,  as  time  advances,  there  will  be  fresh  opportunities
for  manifesting  our  devotion,  even  though  our  specific  methods  be  not  wisest.  4.  It  is
a  noble  ambition  to  seek  to  render  the  house  of  God  as  perfect  as  human  means  can
make  it,  and  in  this  often  we  see  contrasts  in  character  (vers.  1 — 3 ;  cf.  Hag.  i.  2,  5).
A  good  man's  life's  work  attains  completion  in  so  far  as  he  combines,  with  advancing
secular  prosperity,  regard  for  the  prosperity  of  religion.

The  historic  development  of  God^s  purpose  concerning  man.  In  vers.  4 — ^11  we  have
an  exposition  of  the  grounds  on  which  God  declined  to  accept  David's  proposal  to
build  a  house  for  him.  The  motive  was  good,  and  there  was  a  certain  perception  of
propriety  in  the  design,  but  as  its  unseasonableness  resulted  from  imperfect  knowledge
of  the  Divine  will,  ihat  will  is  here  made  known.

I.  God  has  a  pubposb  conoebnino  man.  This  is  the  basis  of  the  declaration  to
David.  It  may,  indeed,  be  said  that  there  is  a  Divine  purpose  in  the  existence  of  every
atom  and  form  of  force,  since  each  is  what  it  is  by  the  will  of  God,  and  is  related  to  all
the  rest  of  the  universe  in  a  definite  way,  so  as  to  issue  in  a  progressive  order.  Every
change  is  thus  the  working  out  in  the  material  world  of  a  purpose  of  the  eternal
mind.  But  while  this  is  true  of  man  also  considered  as  an  organized  creature  in  the
world,  it  is  further  true  of  him  that  there  is  a  purpose  in  the  eternal  mind  of  which  he
is  the  object,  and  to  work  out  which  all  other  things  are  means  and  agents.  God  has
something  to  effect  for  man  as  well  as  by  man.  The  New  Testament  informs  us  that
it  is  spiritual  in  its  nature,  and  abounding  with  good  to  man  and  glory  to  God.

II.  God's  pubposb  coNCBBNiNa  man  is  jncobfobated  with  human  affaibs.  It
is  pointed  out  to  David  that  the  history  of  his  ancestors  in  Egypt  and  under  the
judges,  and  also  his  own  personal  history,  have  been  the  vehicle  through  which  this
purpose  has  been  gradually  working.  God's  thoughts  for  man  assume  concrete  forms.
They  enter  as  the  golden  thread  into  the  rough  web  of  human  life.  Human  wills  work
in  their  own  free  way,  but  another  will  works  with  them,  and  uses  them  in  their  free
course  for  the  manifestation  of  itself.  Abraham's  domestic  life,  Israel's  sojoora  in
Egypt  and  the  desert,  the  struggle  for  existence  during  the  period  of  the  judges,  and
the  raising  up  and  fall  of  Saul,  and  the  exploits  of  David,  were  occasions  and  forms  by
which  that  redemptive  purpose  revealed  itself  which  later  on  in  Judsa,  in  Pilate's  hall
and  in  the  ages  of  Christendom,  became  more  distinct  and  yet  more  one  with  human
interests.

III.  In  the  outworkino  of  the  pubposb  tempobaet  institutions  abb  obbated.
The  ark  and  the  tabernacle  were  the  creation  of  the  Divine  purpose  working  alcng  the
line  of  human  history.  They  were  the  product  of  two  things — the  purpose  and  the
incidents  of  Israel's  existence.  David  was  right  in  viewing  the  tabernacle  as  essentially
temporary ;  but  he  is  reminded  (ver.  6)  that  it  expressed  the  Divine  will  for  the  time
because  of  the  human  element  through  which  that  will  was  working  onwards.  A
succession  of  temporary  expedients  is  traceable  irom  the  first  to  the  second  Adam.
One  by  one  they  disappeared  before  the  approach  of  the  true  Light.  Many  of  the
modern  expedients  of  the  Church  will  prove  their  temporary  character  in  so  far  as
Christ's  holy  will  works  its  way  into  the  heart  of  the  world,  and  men,  possessing  thii
life,  become  in  the  best  sense  a  law  to  themselves  (1  Cor.  xiii.  8 — 10).


cH.vn.  1— 29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  191

rV.  The  direct  control  of  God  sbcubeb  transition  prom  stage  to  staob.
The  words  to  David  were,  "  I  brought  up  the  children  of  Israel ; "  "  I  have  walked  in
a  tent;"  "I  commanded  to  feed;"  "I  took  thee  from  the  sheepcote;"  "I  have
appointed  a  place."  Thus  meii  were  free,  and  history  was  formed  by  the  free
action  of  man;  but,  still,  in  pursuance  of  the  Divine  purpose,  an  unseen  hand  so
fashioned  the  sum  of  human  free  action  that  captivity  in  Egypt  yielded  to  a  settled
home,  and  a  good  shepherd  appeared  to  care  for  the  flock  in  that  settled  home.  It  was
this  recognition  of  the  actual  control  uf  God  so  as  to  shape  the  items  of  human  history
and  secure  a  succession  of  transitions  towards  a  definite  goal  that  distinguished  the
teaching  of  the  prophets.  It  is  this  which  gave  such  assurance  to  apostles  (Rom.  viii,
22,  28,  31).  The  contending  forces  of  each  age  are  subject  to  him  who  by  his  mighty
working  can  subdue  all  things  unto  himself  (Phil.  iii.  21).

V.  The  value  of  means  in  the  woekino  odt  of  the  purpose  is  relative.
David's  pious  dissatisfaction  with  the  tabernacle  as  an  abode  for  the  ark  was  met  by
the  assurance  (vers.  6,  7)  that  God  was  not  dissatisfied,  but  had  shown  his  approval  of
his  servants  who  were  identified  with  its  maintenance.  The  tabernacle  may  have  been
ina'iequate  to  the  later  stage,  but  it  was  perfect  in  its  adaptation  to  the  early  stage  of
God's  method  of  working.  He  never  complained  of  disrespect  to  his  Name ;  he  even
honoured  his  servants  who  served  him  with  such  humble  means.  This  applies  to  the
methods  by  which,  in  difl'erent  ages,  revelations  came  to  men — agencies  for  diffusing  and
preserving  the  truth,  the  condition  of  the  Churches  by  which  his  will  is  still  done  and
the  individual  efforts  of  Christians  to  bring  on  the  final  triumph  of  Christ.  Those  who
will  not  approve  of  action  and  appliances  and  methods  till  they  meet  with  what  is
absolutely  perfect,  do  not  know  history,  or  else,  knowing  it,  are  unwilling  to  accept  its
lessons.  In  an  imperfect  world  where  perfect  holiness  has  to  be  attained  through
means  inferior,  and  out  of  perfect  relation  to  the  end  in  view,  we  have  to  estimate  each
method  and  agency  by  its  fitness  to  raise  us  to  a  stage  above  the  present,  and  in  which
it  may  be  dispensed  with  for  something  that  will  be  a  stepping-stone  to  a  still
higher  point.

VI.  The  whole  or  the  successive  stages  tend  to  the  permauent  dwellino
OF  God  with  man.  David  was  right  in  his  ambition  and  faith.  To  have  Gkxi
permanently  among  Israel  was  the  perfection  of  holy  desire.  All  hitherto  had  pointed
in  that  direction  ;  and  though  in  the  visible  sense  in  which  David  desired  it  his  wishes
were  not  to  be  granted,  yet  he  was  pointed  on  to  the  reality  of  a  "house"  (ver.  11),
which  we  know  involved  the  raising  up  of  Immanuel.  This  is  the  goal  of  all  Old
Testament  revelations  and  ancient  forms  of  instruction  and  discipline.  And  now  that
God  has  been  visiblj'  manifest  in  the  flesh,  the  process  is  going  on  by  which  spiritually
the  dwelling  of  God  with  man  in  permanent  union  is  to  be  realized  (2  Cor.  iii.  7 — 11 ;
ef.  Eph.  ii.  18—22).

General  lessons.  1.  Life  should  be  conducted  on  the  principle  that  God  is  with
man  and  working  with  and  for  him.  2.  The  comparison  of  events  illustrated  by  the  Bible
teaching  will  enable  us  to  trace  out  the  line  of  God's  working.  3.  Although  occasions
may  arise,  as  during  periods  of  Israel's  history,  when  the  signs  of  God's  working  are
obscnred  (Isa.  xlv.  15),  our  faith  should  rest  on  the  general  revelation.  4.  However
unable  we  may  be  sometimes  to  see  the  unity  of  God's  working,  Providence  will  throw
light  uijoii  it,  and  by  some  explicit  "  I  have  walked,"  "  I  took  thee,"  our  confidence
-"fill  be  confirmed.  5.  All  our  desires  and  efforts  and  methods  should,  in  their  nature,
have  reference  to  the  great  issue — God's  habitation  of  the  Church  through  the
Spirit.

Omisolation  in  disappointment.  Although  vers.  11,  12  of  Ps.  cxxxii.  make  it  clear
that  the  psalm  was  written  after  the  date  of  Nathan's  visit  to  David,  it  is  highly
probable  that  the  sentiments  expressed  in  vers.  3 — 5  of  that  psalm  were  cherished
before  the  king  unbosomed  himself  to  the  prophet.  In  the  fallibility  characteristic  of
prophets  when  not  authorized  to  speak  by  God,  Nathan  piously  encouraged  his  king
in  his  cherished  wishes,  and  it  is  certain  that  that  night  David  went  to  rest  believing
that  now,  with  the  concurrence  of  so  good  a  man,  the  great  ambition  of  his  heart  would
soon  be  realized.  The  authorized  revelation  of  the  prophet  on  the  following  day  must
have  brought  with  it  a  disappointment  corresponding  in  bitterness  to  the  pievioua


192  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vu.  1—29.


elevation  of  feeling.    But  the  gentle,  kindly  way  in  which  it  is  allowed  to  fall  Is
a  beautiful  instance  of  God's  tenderness  toward  his  people.

I.  God  EEC0ON1ZB8  UB  AS  HIS  OWN.  There  was  balm  in  the  words,  "tell  mp
lervant  David."  In  the  beginning  of  his  career  David  knew  that  he  was  called  of  God,
but  many  a  year  had  passed,  and  many  a  sore  spiritual  conflict  with  varied  success  had
been  endured.  It  was  then  refreshing  to  his  spirit  to  be  thus  distinctly  acknowledgea
to  be  the  servant  of  the  Most  High — one  honoured  in  heaven  and  identified  with  tks
carrying  out  of  God's  will  on  earth.  To  be  owned  of  God,  to  have  the  witness  of  his
Spirit  with  ours  that  we  are  his,  to  know  on  good  evidence  that  our  life  is  moving
niong  the  lines  of  his  purpose, — what  more  satisfying  and  comforting  when  sdme
cherished  desire  is  denied  ?  Paul's  thorn  in  the  flesh  and  consequent  disappointment
of  holy  ambition  was  even  welcome  when  the  Lord  sent  a  message  assuring  that  he  was
his  "  servant " — to  do  some  work  in  the  world,  though  not  in  the  form  desired.  It  is
much  in  life  if,  amidst  many  failures  of  character  and  frustration  of  cherished  desires,  a
man  is  permitted  to  know  that  God  is  not  ashamed  of  him,  and  still  honours  him  with
a  place  among  the  great  body  of  co-workers  with  himself.

II.  Pkovidenob  gradually  makeb  cleab,  in  pabt  at  least,  thb  wisdom  op  the
DISAFPOINTUGNT.  The  first  note  of  Nathan's  message  brought  sorrow  and  even  anguish
of  spirit.  Fond  hopes  of  joyous  activity  in  a  blessed  cause  were  crushed.  The  dbream
of  holy  hours  vanished.  Loving  toil  was  rejected.  The  heart  sank.  But  by  degrees,
as  the  message  unfolded  and  the  course  of  Providence  in  reference  to  the  tabernacle  and
settlement  of  Israel  were  unfolded,  and  probably  reference  made  to  wars  yet  impending
(vers.  6 — 10 ;  ct  ch.  viii.  1—8 ;  1  Kings  v.  3,  4 ;  viii.  19),  the  reasons  of  the  Divine
conduct  became  manifest,  and  the  troubled  heart  could  rest  in  an  unerring  wisdom
alone.  A  similar  course  was  taken  with  the  apostles  when  their  Lord  soothed  their
disappointment  at  his  expected  departure  by  partially  expounding  the  reason  of  his
conduct  (John  xiv.  1 — 4).  Sometimes  Christian  workers  who  have,  through  sickness,
failing  opportunities,  temporal  disasters,  and  defective  holiness  of  life,  been  denied  the
privilege  of  accomplishing  all  that  was  in  their  heart  for  Christ,  have  had  to  dwell  in
dense  darkness  for  a  while ;  but  gradually  events  have  occurred  and  light  from  God's
Word  has  come  which  have  shown  how  just  and  even  kind  it  was  that,  under  all  the
circumstances  of  the  case,  the  disappointment  came.  1'he  day  will  come  when  the
bitter  experiences  of  life  will  be  so  seen  in  their  varied  relations  to  ourselves  and  others
as  to  give  occasion  for  thankfulness.

III.  Thebe  is  evidence  that  God  will  use  us  in  other  ways.  "My  servant"
meant  to  David  that  there  was  yet  noble  work  to  do  for  God.  Human  choice  of  the  old
form  of  work  is  not  always  best.  In  the  great  kingdom  that  is  being  established  there
is  scope  for  many  energies  in  manifold  forms ;  and  as  the  kingdom  is  one,  every  worker
is  honourable  and  every  work  essential.  To  keep  the  door  of  the  sanctuary,  to  wash
the  feet  of  Weary  pilgrims,  to  give  a  cup  of  cold  water,  to  feed  the  hungry,  to  place  a
mite  in  the  treasury,  and  visit  the  widow  and  fatherless,  are  services  honoured  as  truly
as  erecting  a  temple  and  as  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth.
The  Apostle  Paul  coiild  not  charm  men  by  unfettered  eloquence,  but  he  could  bless  the
universal  Church  by  his  example  of  loving  acquiescence  in  the  Lord's  will  (2  Cor.  xii
8—10).  Even  the  very  ambitions  that  have  not  been  gratified  maybe  used  up  by  God
as  means  to  inspire  others  with  generous  aims  and  lofty  aspirations.

IV.  Gk)D  BEVEAL8  to  THE  SPIRIT  A  CB0WNIN8  BLESsiNa.  It  was  a  repayment  of
David's  loving  devotion  in  his  own  kind  when  the  prophet  was  instructed  to  reveal  to
him  that  God  would  "  make  him  a  house."  To  an  Oriental  monarch,  especially  after
the  sad  failure  of  Saul,  there  could  not  have  been  a  more  coveted  distinction  than  being
blessed  with  a  posterity  that  should  hold  his  place  in  the  kingdom.  The  blessing  in
this  case,  we  know,  carried  with  it  also  a  spiritual  significance  embodied  in  the
expression  applied  to  Christ,  "  the  Son  of  David."  This  cannot  be  regarded  simply
as  a  reward  for  the  design  to  build  a  house  for  the  Lord — it  was  part  of  a  great  purpose
from  the  beginning ;  but  it  was  clearly  brought  in  here  as  a  matter  revealed  for  the
soothing  of  David's  spirit  in  a  season  of  disappointment.  In  this  way  the  future
blessedness  of  the  faithful  is  revealed  in  order  that  they  may  have  abundant  consolation.
Good  men  do  not  live  and  labour  for  future  rewards,  but  from  love  of  Christ  and  pas-
sionate sympathy  with  the  purposes  of  his  heart ;  nevertheless,  the  pastor,  missionary,


OH.  VII.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  193

and  parent  whose  hopes  sometimes  seem  blighted,  rejoice  to  he  ahle  to  think  of  an
issue  of  their  life  which,  in  spite  of  all  appearances,  redounds  to  the  glory  of  God.
"  Here  am  I,  and  the  souls  thou  hast  given  me,"  is  to  he  true  of  multitudes.  God  will
give  a  godly  seed,  "a  house"  better  and  more  enduring  than  any  we  could  build  for
him  (Ps.  cxxvi.  6,  6 ;  Matt.  six.  29).

Vers.  12 — ^29. — ^The  facts  are:  1.  The  prophet  declares  to  David  (1)  that  he  shall
have  a  seed  who  shall  build  a  house  for  the  Lord ;  (2)  that  this  successor  shall  be
regarded  as  a  son,  and,  while  the  subject  of  discipline,  if  needed,  shall  not  bo  cast
off  as  was  Saul;  and  (3)  that  the  house  and  kingdom  thus  established  shall  endure
for  ever.  2.  David,  in  response  to  the  message,  acknowledges  the  condescension  and
bounty  of  God  in  what  he  had  done  and  promised.  8.  He  confesses  that  all  is  of  the
free  unmerited  loving-kindness  of  God,  and  regards  this  wonderful  superhuman  good-
ness as  being  an  illustration  of  the  existence  of  a  love  transcending  all  that  is  known  to
man.  4.  He  recognizes  the  blessedness  of  Israel  in  being  under  the  care  and  guidance
of  One  so  supremely  good,  and  in  being  honoured  to  be  distinctively  his  people.  5.  He
prays  that  the  good  and  glorious  things  said  of  his  house  and  of  Israel  may  come  to
pass,  and  so  bring  out  into  public  view  and  for  ever  the  glory  of  God.  6.  He  con-
cludes with  a  prayer,  based  on  the  faithfulness  and  goodness  of  God,  that  grace  may  bo
bestowed  on  the  house  of  David,  so  that  it  may  fulfil  the  purpose  so  graciously  formed
and  now  more  explicitly  revealed.

The  testing  period,  and  its  rewards.  We  have  here  brought  out  a  contrast  between
Saul  and  David.  Both  were  accepted  of  God  (1  Sam.  ix.  15 — 17 ;  xvi.  7 — 12, 13).  A
period  of  testing  was  assigned  to  each  of  tliem,  and  Saul  failed  in  his  (1  Sam.  xiii.  13, 14),
while  David  succeeded  (ch.  vii.  8 — 12, 15).  The  whole  facts  show  that  for  each  of
them,  in  his  official  capacity,  there  was  a  probation  or  testing-time,  which  was  not
coextensive  with  the  duration  of  life,  but  sufficient  to  prove  fitness  for  being  the  instru-
ment for  the  furtherance  of  the  Divine  purpose  of  redemption  through  the  Messiah.
David  was  found  fit  for  Divine  use,  and  hence,  in  the  prime  of  his  days,  he  was  assured
of  the  completion  of  his  life's  work  and  of  issues  most  glorious.

L  The  eablt  stages  op  a  oabeeb_  determine  its  issttb.  From  his  call  and
anointing  up  to  his  desire  to  build  a  house  for  the  Lord,  David  had  been  taking  the  first
steps  of  his- public  life;  on  the  whole,  he  had  been  wise,  devout,  loyal  to  God,  zealous
for  the  Divine  kingdom  among  men.  The  great  work  of  his  entire  life  was  thereby
virtually  ensured.  All  future  successes  were  now  germinal.  Saul's  future  was  blasted
because  the  early  testing  years  were  unimproved;  David's  future  was  made  sure
because  his  trial  had  proved  his  sterling  qualities.  The  years  of  early  manhood  carry
in  them  the  future  of  the  man.  A  Christian  "found  faithful"  enters  on  a  wider
ministry  (1  Tim.  i.  12).  The  Church  that  has  kept  true  in  trial  is  safe  in  view  of  future
perils  (Eev.  iii.  10 — 12).  The  proper  use  of  five  talents  carries  with  it  the  promise  of
use  of  ten  talents.  According  to  the  development  of  Christian  character  in  the  early
stages  of  religious  life  will  be  its  power  and  victories  unto  the  very  end.  The  beginnings
of  things  are  the  ends  of  things  in  miniature.  Character  is  a  prophecy.  Ultimate
successes  lie  hidden  in  first  adjustments.

II.  The  blesskd  issues  ov  a  fbobation  abe  in  the  obdeb  of  natube.  The
bestowment  of  the  honour  of  being  founder  of  a  great  line  of  kings  on  David  tvas  an  act
of  Divine  favour,  marking  approval  of  his  fidelity  during  the  testing-time  of  life ;  but  it
was  not  a  mere  artificial,  arbitrary  arrangement.  It  was  the  announcement  of  the  foot
that  God  had  so  ordered  things  that  he,  by  faithfulness,  thus  far  had  acquired  the
qualities  which  a  holy  God  could  and  would  use  up  in  bringing  to  pass  his  great
purposes.  Saul  was  proved  naturally  unfit  to  inaugurate  a  permanent  line;  David  was
proved  naturally  suited  for  that  end.  This  runs  through  all  things.  A  sapling  that
has,  in  spite  of  storms,  passed  well  through  the  ordeals  of  ( arly  life  contains  within
itself  the  vital  qualities  which  will  develop  into  a  perfect  tree.  It  is  by  force  of  the
virtues  and  acquirements  of  the  testing-time  of  early  manhood  that  subsequent  achieve-
ments are  won.  The  spiiitual  characteristics  of  the  man  "counted  worthy"  of  a
ministry  explain  the  triumph  of  his  life's  work ;  for,  though  the  blessing  of  God  ig
essential,  yet  it  is  the  order  of  nature  in  the  religious  sphere  that  the  blessing  comes

U.  SAMUEL.  o


104  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vn.  1-29,

where  those  characteristics  find  exercise.  The  future  blessedness  of  the  saints  is  the
outgrowth  of  the  indiyidual  character  acquired  during  the  earthly  period  of  trial
Continuity,  order,  and,  in  proper  sense  of  the  term,  nature,  characterize  the  succession
of  events  iu  individual  and  Church  experience  from  first  to  last.

III.  The  assubahce  of  final  success  helps  a  teue  man  to  its  bbalizatiok.
The  promise  of  a  "house"  and  a  permanent  "kingdom"  would  not  excite  vanity  and
presumption  in  David,  because  he  was  a  true  man  of  God.  There  is  an  adaptation  in  the
assurance  given  to  the  tested  character  of  the  man.  It  was  to  David  as  the  warm  sun
and  gentle  dew  to  the  good  seed  hidden  in  good  ground.  A  true  heart  responds  to  God's
love  and  bounteous  gifts  by  increased  devotion.  Thus  the  assurance  has  a  natural
tendency  in  a  true  heart  to  fulfil  itself.  Wherever  other  tendencies  appear,  it  is
evidence  that  the  heart  is  not  right,  and  that  the  assurance  is  not  intended  for  the
individual.  The  free  grace  of  God  and  abounding  assurances  that  he  will  keep  his
people  from  falling  are  never  abused  except  by  those  who  are  not  children  of  God
(Eom.  vi.  U,  15-,  2  Cor.  v.  14, 15).

The  blending  of  the  temporal  and  the  eternal.  The  prophecy  in  vers.  13 — 16  is  not
to  be  regarded  as  a  sudden  and  isolated  revelation  of  the  purpose  of  God,  which  burst
upon  the  mind  of  one  who  had  no  previous  conceptions  of  a  great  purpose  being  wrought
out  in  the  line  of  human  history.  All  along  David  was  aware  of  his  being  used  for
more  than  ordinary  Issues  in  relation  to  the  great  promise  made  to  Abraham.  The
Aurora  Borealis  seems,  to  ignorant  men,  a  disconnected  unaccountable  phenomenon,  but
others  know  it  to  be  a  natural  occurrence  iu  a  beautiful  order  of  things  correlated  to  all
else  iu  the  material  world.  In  like  manner,  we  now  know  that  this  prophecy  is  part
of  an  order  of  revelation,  coming  in  at  just  the  right  time,  and  interpretable  on  principles
well  ascertained.    The  temporal  and  eternal  are  blended —

I.  In  tee  matebial  obdek.  The  results  of  research  into  the  constitution  and  order
of  material  things  show  that  the  visible,  changeable  forms  of  matter  coexist  with  a
permanent  something  which  works  in  and  through  them.  They  vary ;  it  abides.  They
prepare  the  way  for  others  of  kindred  nature  and  form ;  it  uses  up  the  old  and  the
new  and  marks  out  its  eternal  course  by  means  of  them.  Men  call  it  force.  Possibly,
probably,  there  is  a  persistent  something  answering  to  that  name — the  correlative  of  our
exertion  ol  will-power — but  it,  at  all  events,  is  only  the  mode  in  which  the  Divine
purpose  works  itself  out  into  visible  forms  and  changes.  The  temporal  and  eternal  are
ever  blended.

II.  In  the  constitution  of  man.  The  changeful  form,  the  visible  appearance,  is
ever  associated  with  the  permanent  invisible  spirit;  the  one  exists  for  the  other,  and  is
used  by  the  other  for  expressing  its  thoughts  and  purposes.  "Mortal  and  immortal"
may  be  written  of  man.  He  comes  forth  and  passes  away:  he  abideth  for  ever.
Paradox  is  true,  because  the  perishable  and  imperishable  coexist  and  work  one  through
the  other.

III.  In  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ.  Our  Saviour  was  frail,  subject  to  death ;  and
yet  the  strong,  unchangeable,  deathless  Son  of  God.  The  temporal  and  eternal  were
most  mysteriously  united  in  him,  and  the  visible  and  perishable  were  the  vehicle  through
which  the  unsfeen  and  eternal  worked  out  our  redemption.  There  is  language  by  which
men,  if  they  will,  can  prove  his  simple  humanity,  and  other  language  by  which  they
can  prove  his  true  Divinity.  It  is  the  ignoring  of  this  blending  of  the  temporal  and
eternal  which  accounts  for  certain  heresies  and  perversities  of  thought.

IV.  In  the  progress  of  revelation.  The  revelation  which  God  is  pleased  to  give
of  his  will  concerning  our  redemption  is  intended  for  the  entire  race,  and  adapted  in
matter  and  form  to  the  progressive  character  of  the  race.  It  was  not  ^ven  once  for  all
in  concise  abstract  form ;  nor  was  its  matter  and  form  given  to  suit  the  later  ages  of
the  world  only ;  it  ran  along  the  line  of  history  from  the  very  first,  and  was  suited  as
time  went  on  to  men  of  diverse  ideas  and  conditions.  But  from  fii-st  to  last  the  Divine
imperishable  truth  was  blended  with  the  temporal  history  of  men.  The  natural  develop-
ment of  families  and  nations  was  the  vehicle  through  or  along  which,  as  occasion
required,  the  one  unchangeable  purpose  gradually  marked  itself  out  into  the  clear  light
that  shone  in  the  face  of  Christ.

Y.  Ik  thb  rBOFBXTic  references  to  the  Messiah.    The  duality  of  temporal  and


OH.  VII.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  195

eternal  thus  seen  to  run  through  all  things,  hecomes,  therefoie,  a  priori  natural  in  any
predictions  concerning  him  whose  throne  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  That  in
vers.  12 — 16  we  have  reference  to  a  mortal  Solomon,  who  should  build  a  perishable
temple,  sit  on  a  visible  throne,  and  hand  down  to  a  terminable  though  long  succession
of  kings  an  earthly  kingdom,  is  the  interpretation  required  by  subsequent  facts.  That
the  "  seeil  "  refers  also  to  Christ  the  "  Son  of  David,  the  house  to  a  spiritual  temple,
the  "  throne"  and  "  kingdom "  to  the  absolutely  everlasting  dominion  of  Christ  over
the  redeemed  people  of  God,  is  the  sense  put  on  this  and  kindred  passages  by  the  New
Testament  (Ps.  Ixxii.  17  ;  Ixxxix.  35—37 ;  of.  Luke  i.  31—33, 68—79 ;  Heb.  i.  5—13).
That  the  two  references  should  be  couched  in  one  form  of  expression  is  natural  when
we  consider  (1)  that  the  temporal  and  eternal  are  blended,  as  just  seen,  in  one  form  of
nature,  in  one  hviman  being,  in  the  one  Christ  Jesus,  and  in  the  one  historic  revelation ;
^2)  that  this  harmonizes  with  the  twofold  sense  of  the  prediction  made  to  Abraham
(Gen.  xxi.  12 ;  xxii.  17 — 19 ;  cf.  Eom.  ix.  7 — 9 ;  Acts  iii.  25 ;  Gal.  iii.  26),  and  with
the  twofold  meaning  of  our  Lord's  words  in  reference  to  "  the  end"  (Matt.  xxiv.  9 — 14,
29 — 14).  The  human  relationship,  the  human  throne,  the  possible  human  frailty,  and
the  human  relative  permanence,  are  the  lower  earthly  vehicle  by  which  the  Divine  and
absolutely  enduring  are  set  forth  and  inaugurated.

GensbaIi  liESBONS.  1.  God  secures  to  all  his  truly  faithful  ones  the  raalization  of
their  highest  and  holiest  ambitions,  as  surely  as  he  secured  to  David  the  realization  of
his  desire  for  a  seed,  and  the  completion  of  his.  life's  work  in  the  establishment  of  his
throne;  for  he  makes  life  here  to  issue  in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  2.  It
behoves  us  to  remember  that  there  is  an  eternal  element  interwoven  with  common  life,
and  to  subordinate  everything  temporal  to  its  action.  3.  The  fact  that  chosen  instru-
ments are  used  in  working  out  eternal  purposes  does  not  exempt  them  from  the  frailties
of  their  nature  and  the  corrections  necessary  to  their  preservation  for  the  service  of  God
(ver.  14).  4.  The  chastisement  due  to  the  literal  son  of  David  for  sins  of  his  own  fore-
shadows dimly  the  spiritual  fact  that  the  great  Son  of  David  took  upon  himself  the
iniquities  of  us  all,  and  experienced  the  "  chastisement  of  our  peace."  5.  The  strong  and
repeated  assurances  of  the  universality  and  permanence  of  Christ's  reian  should  inspire
us  with  calm  confidence  and  untiring  zeal.  5.  Human  fidelity  in  God's  service  is  a
condition  of  the  progressive  bringing  into  clearer  view  and  nearer  realization  the
glorious  end  for  which  all  things  consist.

2%e  edttcational  influence  of  OodCt  great  love.  In  vers.  18 — 29  we  have  described,
in  broken  sentences^  the  effect  on  the  spirit  of  David  of  the  marvellous  loving-kindness
of  God  in  having  guaranteed  unto  him  such  a  glorious  completion  of  life's  work,  and
the  unspeakable  honour  of  being  associated  in  name  and  work  with  the  Redeemer  of
the  world.  The  real  nature  of  a  man  is  tested  in  seasons  of  great  prosperity  as  well  as
in  adversity.  David  bears  the  strain.  Never  in  the  past  history  of  the  world  had  God
spoken  so  distinctly  and  emphatically  to  any  of  his  people  of  the  personal  honour  he
would  confer.  In  the  effect  of  this  on  David  we  may  see  an  illustration  of  the  general
educational  influence  of  God's  love  on  his  people.

I.  It  insdoes  inbxfbbsbible  wondeb.  When  David  had  heard  the  strange  words
he  at  once  went  and  "sat"  before  the  Lordl  The  first  impulse  was  to  get  near  to  the
visible  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  simply  sit  still  in  amazement.  That  silence
held  his  tongue  for  a  while  seems  indicated  in  the  embarrassment  (ver.  20).  What  eoiUd
a  devout  man  do  but  muse  and  wonder  at  the  largeness  of  the  grace  ?  There  was  a
marvel  in  what  God  had  done  in  the  past  (ver.  18),  in  what  was  to  be  in  the  future,  and
in  the  ordination  or  law,  nn'm,  in  respect  of  the  man,  or  otherwise  in  the  superhuman
bearing  towards  one  so  unworthy  (cf.  Isa.  Iv.  8).  This  is  the  general  effect  of  a  recog-
nition of  God's  love  to  us,  whether  seen  in  the  unspeakable  gift  of  Christ,  in  the  great-
ness of  his  long-suffering,  in  the  tenderness  of  his  pity,  in  the  provision  for  our  temporal
and  eternal  good,  in  the  use  he  makes  of  us  in  his  service,  or  in  the  blessed  inheritance
promised  in  the  future.  There  is  a  devotion  of  feeling  which  consists  in  a  permanent
silent  wonder  that  God  should  have  dealt  so  with  us.  This  tones  our  spirit  into  quiet
gentleness,  and  we  can  in  some  measure  understand  why  seraphim  and  cherubim  shouU
be  absorbed  in  wonder  at  his  ways.

XL  It  induces  deep  huullitt.    It  was  not  because  of  any  good  in  himself  that  all


198  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vii.  1— 2ft.

these  things  were  done  to  David,  but  because  God  was  pleased  out  of  his  own  heart  so  to
deal  with  him  (ver.  21).  Nothing  tends  more  to  develop  humility  than  a  survey  ot
the  wonderful  love  of  God.  The  contrast  of  our  deserts  with  his  grace  bows  the  spirit
down,  not  to  abjectness  and  loss  of  heart,  but  to  the  tender  feeling  of  self-depieciation
and  self-abnegation  which  ever  becomes  a  sinful  creature  in  the  presence  of  the  EtemaU
Great  grace  bestowed  is  an  educator  in  what  most  befits  one  who  was  lost  but  is  now
found  (Ps.  CIV.  1 ;  Rom.  iii.  27 ;  1  Oor.  xv.  10;  1  John  iii.  1).

III.  It  feeds  the  spirit  of  adoration.  The  word  "  wherefore "  (ver.  22)  seems
to  complete  the  silent  reasoning  which  must  have  gone  on  in  the  mind  of  David
for  many  a  year.  The  general  care  of  man  (Ps.  vHL),  the  heavens  (Ps.  xix.),  and
the  terrible  works  of  God  among  the  nations  (Ps.  xlviii.  4 — 7,  10,  11),  had  ever  fur-
nished occasion  for  adoration ;  but  all  this  is  surpassed  by  the  great  love  wherewith
he  has  now  loved  his  servant,  and  in  this  lies  the  moral  greatness  which  most  of  all
wins  the  adoring  love  of  the  soul.  It  is  a  well-known  psychological  truth  that  th«
feelings  are  not  under  the  direct  control  of  the  will,  and  especially  not  obedient  to  a  bar*
command.  Nor  are  they  developed  in  noblest  form  by  mere  externals.  It  is  when  the
actual  love  of  God,  as  seen  in  deeds  done  for  us  and  blessings  freely  showered  on  us,  is
manifest  to  the  eye  of  the  soul,  that  true  worship  arises.  The  greatness  of  love  draws
forth  the  homage  of  the  redeemed  (Rev.  i.  5,  6 ;  v.  9,  10).

IV.  It  strengthens  intbrest  in  otbers.  Some  who  do  not  know  what  personal
piety  is  imagine  that  it  consists  in  selfish  delight  in  one's  own  favoured  condition—
a  continuous  self-congratulation  that  we  are  snatched  as  brands  from  the  burning.
David's  deep  interest  in  others,  as  seen  in  vers.  23,  24,  establishes  the  reverse.  The
love  we  share  in  is  a  love  embracing  others,  and  it  awakens  and  nourishes  a  joy  in  them
and  their  happy  lot.  It  is  an  unspeakable  delight  to  a  true  Christian  that  a  multitude
that  no  man  can  number  are  the  people  of  God,  "  redeemed  "  by  the  wondrous  grace
which  amazes  while  it  blesses  himself.

V.  It  leads  to  evbe-inceeasino  consecration.  Such  is  the  meaning  of  David  in
vers.  24 — 27.  He  surrenders  his  heart  and  life  afresh  to  the  one  great  purpose  which
has  been  graciously  revealed.  It  is  not  mere  acquiescence  that  so  it  should  be,  but
intense  desire,  self-identification  afresh  with  the  work  and  ways  of  God.  He  wants  to
be  used  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  great  design.  This  was  the  secret  of  the  Apostle
Paul's  ever-deepening  consecration.  The  love  of  God  to  him  and  others  was  a  constant
subject  of  thought,  and  hence  he  was  daily  "constrained"  to  live  for  him  who  had  died
to  make  him  what  he  was  (2  Cor.  v.  14 — 16).  The  love  of  God  contemplated  and  felt
renders  every  yoke  welcome  and  easy.

VI.  It  draws  out  a  spirit  of  trustful  dependence.  To  be  the  instrument  of
this  working  in  the  line  of  the  great  purpose  required  distinguished  qualities,  and  a
revelation  of  it  (ver.  27)  very  naturally  made  David  sensible  of  the  insufficiency  of
himself  anil  successors,  and  called  forth  the  prayer  for  a  blessing  on  his  house  (vers.
28,  29).  The  blessing  of  God  is  necessary  to  man's  successful  working-oat  of  the
Divine  will;  and  the  heart  that  appreciates  the  honour  of  being  so  employed  will
earnestly  plead  the  promises  in  seeking  the  grace  required.

Additional  notes  and  observations.  1.  It  is  one  of  the  sweetest  joys  of  life
granted  by  God  when,  in  his  providence,  he  gives  intimation  to  parents  that  their
immediate  posterity  are  likely  to  take  up  the  religious  work  they  love,  and  carry  it
on  towards  the  completion  of  God's  will  on  earth  (ver.  12).  2.  What  parents  need  is
that  God  would  "  set  up,"  in  positions  of  righteousness  and  true  honour,  their  offspring,
and  "establish"  whatever  work  or  interest  they  may  have  in  hand  (ver.  12).  3.  To
"  build  a  house"  for  God  is  an  unspeakable  privilege  (ver.  13).  It  may  be  done  variously :
(1)  by  roaring  up  a  personal  character  of  our  own  on  the  One  Foundation  (1  Pet.  ii.  6),
so  that  it  may  be  a  fit  habitation  of  God  through  the  Holy  Spirit  (1  Oor.  iii.  16;  vi.
19) ;  (2)  by  teaching  the  cardinal  truths  of  the  gospel  among  men,  so  that  on  the  (hie
Foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  9 — 11)  there  may  be  reared  a  Christian  Church,  as  is  still  often
done  by  missionaries  in  heathen  lands ;  (3)  by  devoting  money  to  the  erection  of  a
sanctuary  where  needed  (Luke  vii.  5).  A  more  noble  use  of  wealth  can  scarcely  be
conceived.  4.  God's  purposes  are  unfolded  and  wrought  out  in  human  history  with
full  prevision  of  the  imperfections  and  sins  of  his  people,  and  with  providential
provision  for  iheir  correction  (ver.  14).    Not  one  of  the  distinguished  men  who  prepared


OH.  vn.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  197

the  way  for  Christ  was  perfect.  The  Antitype  alone  ia  free  from  sin.  It  was  in  the
occupying  of  a  throne,  not  in  the  details  of  private  conduct,  that  Solomon  the  son  of
David  prefigured  the  true  Son  of  David.  6.  There  are  fundamental  errors  and  failures
in  the  lives  of  some  men  which  disqualify  them  utterly  from  sharing  in  the  highest  and
noblest  work.  Saul's  obstinacy,  self-will,  and  inability  to  vise  to  tlie  conception  of  the
purpose  and  scope  of  the  theocracy,  rendered  it  unfit  that  he  should  found  the  line  by
which  the  Christ  should  come  (ver.  15).  Solomon's  imperfections  were  those  of  another
character,  springing  more  from  unvvatchfulness  against  certain  snares  of  his  position.
These  imperfect  workers  sufier  loss  and  shame,  but  the  substantial  part  of  their  work
abides  (1  Cor.  iii.  12 — 15).  6.  It  is  a  great  consolation  to  a  Christian  that  God  knows
him  (ver.  20).  He  knows  our  unexpressed  thoughts  and  feelings,  our  depth  of  love  and
gratitude,  our  sorrow  over  sin,  our  most  secret  motives,  and  the  path  we  take.  Our
ease  of  mind  in  remembrance  of  this  is  one  of  the  marks  of  true  sonship  and  service.
7.  A  review  of  the  gradual  revelation  of  Gk)d's  purposes  will  surely  induce  a  profound
conviction  of  his  greatness  and  glory  (ver.  22).  Men  who  study  only  the  physical
aspects  of  nature  lose  much.  The  moral  universe  is  the  grandest  arena  on  which  the
power  and  blessedness  of  the  Eternal  shines  forth.  8.  It  was  ancient  Israel's  being
chosen  and  used  as  the  people  of  God  (ver.  23)  which  conferred  on  them  the  most
enduring  distinction.  As  a  fact,  Israel  has  done  more  than  either  Egypt,  Greece,  or
Home  for  the  true  elevation  of  mankind;  for  Israel  was  the  means  of  bringing  into
universal  operation  the  mighty  renovating  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  alone
can  secure  the  permanence  of  civilization,  and  also  educate  the  higher  nature  of  man  for
time  and  eternity.  "Blessed  is  that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lordl"  9.  The  whole
question  of  the  final  triumph  of  Christ  rests  on  the  word  of  God,  "  Thou,  0  Lord  God,
hast  spoken  it "  (ver.  29).  Modern  speculations  are  beside  the  mark.  The  first  question
covers  alL  Have  we  historically  the  declaration  of  God  ?  Then,  if  he  has  said  a  thing,
it  must  be  so.  Difficulties  are  relative  to  man's  ignorance  and  weakness,  and  have  no
'phice  with  the  Eternal.  Faith  in  Otoi.  is  a  rational  exercise  of  the  human  min4;  it
is  not  blind  superstition.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES.

Vers.  1, 2  (1  Chron.  xvii.  1). — (The  king's  palace  in  Zion.)  David's  purpose  tohwild
a  how-efor  the  Lord.  {References :  1  Kings  v.  3 ;  vi.  12 ;  viii.  17 — 19 ;  1  Chron.  xxii.
7 — 10;  XX viii.  2 — 7;  xxix.  1—3;  2  Chnm.  vi.  7 — 9.)  The  king's  palace  of  cedar  on
Mount  Zion  had  been  completed.  In  the  adjacent  tabernacle  or  dwelling-place  of
Jehovah  (ver.  6)  the  ark  had  found  rest,  and  a  regular  order  of  public  worship  had  been
instituted.  Surrounding  enemies  had  been  subdued,  and  there  was  at  least  a  temporary
cessation  from  war.  Jerusalem  was  the  civil,  military,  and  ecclesiastical  centre  of  the
kingdom.  And  now  another  step  in  advance  was  taken.  Whilst  contemplating  the
lowly  abode  of  the  ark  of  the  Lord  in  comparison  with  his  own  palace,  the  thought
arose  in  David's  mind  of  building  a  splendid  and  durable  temple  "  for  the  Name  of  the
Lord  God  of  Israel "  (1  Kings  viii.  17),  "  a  house  of  rest  for  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of
the  Lord,  and  for  the  footstool  of  our  God"  (1  Chron.  xxviii.2),  "exceeding  magnifical
of  fame  and  of  glory  throughout  all  countries"  (1  Chron.  xxii.  5);  and  "when  the
king  sat  in  his  house"  he  intimated  his  wish  (for  it  scarcely  amounted  to  a  distinct  and
definite  resolution)  to  Nathan  the  prophet,  doubtless  in  order  to  obtain  Ms  advice
concerning  its  propriety  and  accomplishment.  What  followed  was  of  the  highest
importance  in  relation  to  the  permanence  of  his  dynasty,  the  prosperity  of  bis  people,
the  worship  of  God,  and  the  development  of  Messianic  purposes.  "  The  word  of  the
Prophet  Nathan  and  the  thanksgiving  of  David  mark  the  culmination  of  David'i
hutory"  (Baumgarteii).  This  chapter  affords  a  glimpse  into  his  innermost' heart,  and
reveals  the  devotional  feelings,  patriotic  desires,  and  lofty  aspirations  and  hopes  that
dwelt  therein.    In  him  we  here  see  an  example  of —

L  Devout  ocotpation  in  the  eetiebmbnt  of  home.  Such  retirement,  necessary
for  all,  is  not  always  spent  wisely  and  well ;  but  often  in  sensuous  indulgence,  frivoloua
amusement,  self-adulation  (Dan.  iv.  29,  30),  envious  discontent  (1  Kings  xxi.  4),  or
meditating  seoi^ar  and  selfish  schemes  (Luke  xi.  17, 18).    The  godly  man  not  only


198  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vii.  1— 29.

"  returns  to  bless  his  household,"  but  also :  1.  Meditates  on  the  best  things:  the  Name
of  the  Lord,  his  greatness  and  goodness,  his  works,  his  ways,  his  Word,  bis  worship,  and
the  welfare  of  men.  He  considers  "  the  days  of  old,"  and  "  communes  with  his  own
heart"  (Ps.  Ixzvii.  6,  6)  of  his  benefits,  obligations, condition,  and  prospects  (Ps.  Iv.  17  ;
Matt.  vi.  5 ;  John  i.  48).  2.  Talks  of  these  things  in  a  right  momner.  3.  Oultivates
social  intercomrse  with  good  men, "  the  excellent,  in- whom  is  all  his  delight "  (Ps.  xvi.  3 ;
cxix.  63).  He  prefers  their  society  to  any  other,  befriends  them,  and  makes  them  his
friends  (Luke  xvi.  9).  Nor  is  there  any  greater  treasure  on  earth  than  a  faithful  friend,
such  as  David  had  in  Nathan.  The  manner  in  which  men  spend  their  leisure  hours  is
a. sure  indication  of  their  real  character.

II.  Abdent  gkatitude  to  God  fob  success  in  his  undertakings,  labours,  conflicts
(ver.  1),  and  whatever  rest  and  prosperity  he  enjoys.  1.  These  he  ascribes,  not  to  his
own  skill  or  po-*er  (Deut.  vii.  17),  but  to  the  Divine  hand ;  and,  in  considering  what
God  "  hath  done  for  his  soul"  (Ps.  Ixvi.  16) :  2.  He  is  deeply  affected  by  his  exceeding
kindness,  so  condescending,  undeserved,  and  inexpressible  (vers.  8,  9,  20) !  While  he
muses  the  fire  burns  (Ps.  xxxix.  3).  3.  And  he  is  constrained  to  testify  his  thankful-
ness in  word  and  deed.  "Those  who  stretch  themselves  upon  beds  of  ivory  (Amos
vi.  4 — 6),  and  were  not  grieved  for  the  afSiction  of  Joseph,  though  they  had  David's
music  had  not  David's  spirit"  (Matthew  Henry).  " Though  the  Prophet  David  was
guilty  of  many  of  the  most  deadly  sins,  yet  he  was  said  to  be  a  man  after  God's  own
heart,  because  he  abounded  more  with  thankfulness  than  any  other  that  is  mentioned
in  Holy  Scripture"  (Isaac  Walton).

III.  Tenoeb  conceen  foe  the  Divine  honoub.  "  See  now  I  dwell  in  a  house  .of
cedar,"  etc.  The  devout  and  grateful  heart  feels :  1.  That  with  the  honour  of  G«d  the
house  of  Ood  is  intimately  connected.  No  material  fabric,  however  stately,  can  now
possess  the  same  significance  or  relative  importance  as  the  tabernacle  or  temple
(1  Sam.  i.  3,  9).  But  wherever  God's  children  meet  for  Divine  worship  and  spiritual
fellowship  (thus  constituting  the  true  temple  and  Church),  the  place  is  "  hallowed
ground."  Standing  amidst  other  dwellings,  the  house  of  God  is  a  constant  witness  for
him  ;  and,  by  its  sacred  associations,  religious  exercises,  and  the  holy  influences  therein
received  and  thence  diffused,  it  greatly  conduces  to  his  glory,  as  well  as  to  the  good  of
men.  2.  That  it  ought  to  correspond  with  its  declared  purpose,  and  the  circumstances
and  abilities  of  those  by  whom  it  is  erected  and  attended.  All  "  temples  made  with
hands  "  fall  infinitely  beneath  the  dignity  of  the  Eternal  (1  Kings  viii.  27 ;  Acts  xvii.
24) ;  yet  it  is  becoming  that  "  strength  and  beauty  should  be  in  his  sanctuary,"  that
men  should  offer  their  best  in  his  service  (cb.  xxiv.  24),  and  that,  while  they  dwell  in
"  ceiled  houses,"  his  house  should  not  "  lie'  waste  "  (Hag.  i.  4).  3.  That  it  is  a  duty  and
a  privilege  to  employ  the  gifts  bestowed  by  God  for  the  improvement  of  his  house  and
the  promotion  of  his  honour.  When  he  has  done  much  for  us  we  should  do  much  for
him.  "  Four  great  means  for  administering  the  religion  of  Christ  have  been  divinely
appointed :  the  Book  of  Gkxi,  the  day  of  God,  the  worship  of  God,  and  the  house  of
God.  This  last  is  for  the  sake  of  the  former  three.  Without  it  they  cannot  be  upheld.
In  the  house  of  Ood  the  truth  of  God  is  proclaimed,  the  day  of  God  is  hallowed,  and
the  worship  of  God  is  solemnizod.  All  good  gathers  into  and  aroimd  God's  house.  '  I
will  make,  saith  he, '  the  places  round  about  my  hill  a  blessing.'  There  gather  pious
families.  There  arise  schools  for  neglected  children.  There  benevolent  activities
prevaiL  There  spring  up  fountains  of  missionary  liberality.  And  from  humble
sanctuaries  in  England,  gospel  light  streams  forth  to  distant  regions  of  the  earth — ^the
wilds  of  Southern  Africa,  or  the  populous  hives  of  Chinese  idolatry"  (Algernon  Wells).

IV.  HiOH  ESTIMATION  OP  FBiENDLT  COUNSEL.  Unlike  some  successful  and  powerful
inen,  who  take  counsel  of  their  own  hearts  and  despise  the  advice  of  others,  David
valued,  sought,  and  received  the  advice  of  Nathan  as  the  counsel  of  God  himself.
"  The  first  great  ofBce  of  a  friend  is  (1)  to  try  our  thoughts  by  the  measure  of  his  judg-
ment, and  to  taste  the  wholesomeness  of  our  designs  and  purposes  by  the  feelings  of  his
heart.  As  this  office  of  a  good  friend  is  to  guard  us  against  the  imperfections  of  our
own  nature,  and  protect  the  world  from  the  effects  and  ourselves  from  the  responsi-
bility of  our  folly,  the  next  office  of  a  friend  is  (2)  to  protect  as  from  the  selfish  and
wilful  and  malicious  part  of  our  nature.  A  third  great  office  of  friendship  is  (3)  to
jwaktn  «M  and  l^t  lu  up,  and  set  us  on  nobler  deeds.    The  fourth  good  office  of  a  friend


OH.  vn.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  ISO

is  (4)  to  rally  us  when  we  are  defeated  or  overtaken  with  adversity.  And  so  muoh.ii
the  world  alive  to  this  ofBce  as  to  have  chosen  it  out  as  the  true  test ;  it  being  one  oi
our  best  proverbs  that '  a  friend  in  need  is  a  friend  indeed ' "  (B.  Irving).— D.

Ver.  S.—The  Prophet  Nathan.  (Ee/erenees :  ch.  xii.  1, 25 ;  1  Kings  L  10,  22 ;  iv.  5 ;
1  Cbron.  xvii.  1;  xxis.  29;  2  Obron.  ix.  29;  xxix.  25;  Zech.  xii.  12.)  This  is  the
first  mention  of  his  name.  He  may  have  been  trained  by  Samuel  at  Naioth,  and
become  acquainted  with  David  there ;  was  now  the  confidential  friend  and  spiritual
adviser  of  the  king;  subsequently  reproved  him  for  his  sin;  gave  him  counsel  concern-
ing the  accession  of  Solomon  ;  aided  him  in  the  reorganization  of  public  worship ;  and
wrote  annals  of  his  reign.  It  was  his  vocation  to  interpret  and  announce  the  Divine
mind  to  others  (see  1  Sam.  iv.  1).  "  The  calling  of  a  prophet  was  that  of  a  preacher  or
pastor  with  reference  to  the  congregation  as  a  whole  and  its  individual  members ;  but
was  distinct  from  our  modern  ideas  with  reference  to  the  calling  as  thus  explained  in
his  drawing  directly  from  Divine  revelation.  The  prophets  have  been  rightly  called
'  the  conscience  of  the  Israelitish  state.' .  .  .  They  held  intercourse  with  Grod  by  means
of  prayer.  They  questioned  God  (Hab.  ii.  1),  and  he  answered ;  but  they  did  not
receive  Divine  disclosures  until  they  had  first  occupied  an  attitude  of  waiting  and
praying  "  (Delitzsch ;  Oehler, '  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament ; '  Riehm).  1.  All  men,
and  especially  those  who  are  in  authority,  have  need  of  wise  Wad  faithful  counsel.  The
king  himself  is  only  a  man ;  his  position  is  apt  to  blind  his  judgment  and  corrupt  bis
heart ;  whilst  his  responsibilities  and  the  consequences  of  his  actions  are  very  great.

2.  Even  the  wisest  of  counsellors  are  liable  to  err  in  judgraent.  (Job  xx  xii.  9.)  "All  that
is  in  thine  heart  go,  do."  But  herein  Kathan  spoke  "  out  of  his  own  mind,  and  not  by
Divine  revelation"  (J.  H.  Michaelis).  The  prophet,  like  the  king,  was  only  a  man
(Acts  X.  26),  imperfect  and  fallible,  and  often  mistaken,  when  giving  counsel  accord-
ing to  his  natural  judgment  and  first  impressions,  without  seeking  and  obtaining  the
counsel  of  God.  It  is  not  said  that  he  spoke  by  "  the  word  of  the  Lord,"  as  he  did
afterwards  (ver.  4).  "Ofttitt.es  our  thoughts,  although  springing  from  motives  of  real
religion,  are  not  God's  thoughts ;  and  the  lesson  here  conveyed  is  most  important — ^not
taking  our  own  impressions,  however  earnestly  and  piously  derived,  as  necessarily  in
accordance  with  the  will  of  Gk)d,  but  testing  them  by  his  revealed  Word"  (Edersheim).

3.  The  errors  of  human  judgment  are  rectified  hy  Divine  communications.  Such  com-
munications have  been  actually  made ;  and  they  are  unspeakably  precious.  The  prophet
clearly  distinguished  them  from  his  own  thoughts,  and  had  an  inward  assurance  and
overpowering  conviction  that  he  was  the  organ  of  God.  It  is  the  privilege'  of  all
Christians  to  be  "taught  of  God,"  and  "  led  by  the  Spirit;"  but  unless  their  convic-
tions and  impulses  accord  with  the  revealed  Word,  they  must  be  rejected.  4.  The  Word
of  Divine  revelation  admits  of  no  questioning  or  contradiction;  but  should  be  received
"  with  meekness,"  uttered  with  simplicity  and  fidelity  (Ueut.  xii.  32),  and  obeyed
humbly,  cheerfully,  and  fully.  The  prophet  hesitated  not  to  acknowledge  his  mistake,
nor  the  king  to  lay  aside  his  purpose  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  Lord  (vers.  17,
18).— D.

Ver.  3. — "  The  Lord  is  with  ihee"  This  brief  and  significant  language  has  often
been  addressed  to  good  men.  And  what  can  be  more  encouraginc; !  1.  It  describes  an
invaluable  privilege.  "  Jehovah,"  the  Eternal,  the  Unchangeable,  the  Faithful,  the
Covenant-God  of  Israel,  "  is  with  thee ; "  not  simply  in  his  special  presence,  but  also
in  hjs  effectual  grace,  approving,  directing,  protecting,  qualif>  ing,  helping,  prospering
thee.  "I  am  with  thee  "  (Gen.  xxvi.  24 ;  Bxod.  xx.  24).  2.  It  expresses  a  personal
assurance.  "  With  thee."  Such  assurance  is  given  by  the  word  of  the  prophet,  the
covenant  of  God,  the  argument  of  experience  (ver.  9 ;  1  Sam.  xviii,  32 — 37),  and  the
conviction  of  the  heart  in  the  way  of  faith  and  obedience.  3.  It  furnishes  a  powerful
incit&neni  to  thanksgiving,  prayer,  conflict,  labour,  perseverance,  hope  (Hag.  ii.  4 ;
1  Cor.  xv.'58).  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always."  The  spiritual  presence  and  iellowship
of  Christ  are  the  secret  of  all  spiritual  strength  and  success. — D.

Vers.  4—11  (1  Chron.  xvii..  3 — 10).— (Zion.)  A  forbidden  purpose.  "  Shalt  thou
build  me  a  house  for  me  to  dwell  in  ?  "    On  reflection,  the  prophet,  perhaps,  felt  some  mis-


200  THE  SECONB  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vn.  1—29.

giving  as  to  the  wisdom  of  the  counsel  he  had  given  to  the  king  ;  and  (in  prayer)  the
Bame  night  (before  any  steps  could  be  taken  to  carry  it  into  effect)  he  received  a
Divine  communication  which  he  faithfully  announced.  The  chief  significance  of  this
communication  lies  in  the  promise  it  contained  with  respect  to  "  the  house  of  David."
But  it  was  pvimarily  and  directly  a  prohibition  of  the  king's  resolve.  "  Thus  saith
the  Lord,  Thou  shalt  not  build  me  a  house  to  dwell  in  "  (1  Chron.  xvii.  4).  The
purpose  of  a  good  man  is  often  "  broken  off"  (Job  xvii.  11 ;  xxix.  18);  not  always,
however,  because  of  the  clearer  knowledge  of  the  mind  of  God  vouchsafed  to  him,  but
more  commonly  because  of  the  difficulty  and  opposition  he  meets  with  in  seeking  its
accomplishment,  and  his  inability  to  overcome  them.  Of  the  purpose  of  David  (as
illustrative  of  that  of  others)  observe  that. —

L  Although  forbidden,  it  was  not  altogether  disapproved.  "  Thou  didst  well
that  it  was  in  thine  heart  "  (1  Kings  viii.  18) ;  spoken  of:  1.  The  spirit  in  which  his
Ijurpoae  was  formed — grateful  devotion  and  sincere  desire  of  honouiing  God  and  bene-
fiting men.  This  is  always  the  chief  thing  "  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  searches  the
htai  t."  2.  And  the  object  b^ward  which  it  was  directed.  It  was  not  in  itself  displeas-
ing to  God,  but  received  his  sanction  (Deut.  xii.  10, 11 ;  ver.  13).  Yet :  3.  How  seldom
is  a  human  purpose,  though  in  the  main  good,  entirely  untningled  with  human  imper-
fection 1  The  language  in  which  the  purpose  of  David  was  forbidden  seems  to  indicate
that  "his generous  impulse  was  outrunning  God's  commandment,  and  that  his  ardour
to  serve  was  in  some  danger  of  forgetting  his  entire  dependence  on  God,  and  of  fancy-
ing that  God  would  be  the  better  fur  him  "  (A.  Maolaren).

IL  It  was  not  forbiddbk  without  suifFiciENT  REASON  (vers.  7,  8),  viz. ;  1.  The
dealingB  of  God  with  his  people  in  past  time ;  showing  that  it  was  his  pleasure  that  his
dwelling-place  should  be  adapted  to  their  unsettled  condition ;  and  that  "  a  house  of
cedar"  was  not  indispensable  to  his  presence  and  blessing.  He  was  satisfied  to  share
their  wanderings.  2.  The  absence  of  a  Divine  direction  to  build  a  permanent  house.
"  It  was  not  because  of  any  negligence  on  the  part  of  the  former  leaders  of  the  people
that  they  had  not  thought  of  erecting  a  temple  "  (Keil).  Until  the  "  word"  should  be
spoken,  no  one  might  enter  upon  such  an  undertaking.  3.  The  unsuitableness  of  the
present  time — the  still  disturbed  and  warlike  slate  of  the  kingdom  (ver.  11).  "Inas-
much as  these  wars  were  necessary  and  inevitable,  they  were  practical  proofs  that
David's  kingdom  and  government  were  not  yet  established;  and  therefore  that  the
time  for  the  building  of  the  tem|ile  had  not  yet  come,  and  the  rest  of  peace  was  not  yet
secured."  4. '  The  incongruity  of  his  career  with  the  nature  and  design  of  the  building.
An  abode  of  peace  should  be  erected  by  a  man  of  peace.  "  Thou  hast  shed  blood
abundantly,  and  hast  made  great  wars ;  thou  shalt  not  build  a  house  to  my  Name,"  etc.
(1  Chron.  xxii.  8;  xxviii.  3;  1  Kings  v.  3).  "From  whence  could  so  sublime  a
precejit  descend,  amidst  a  people  constituted  as  the  Jews  were,  unless  from  the  Father  of
love  and  mercy  ?  "  (Milman).  "  War,  however  necessary  it  may  be  in  certain  circum-
stances for  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  only  something  accidental,  the  result  of  human
corruption.  The  true  nature  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  peace "  (Hengstenberg).  Stil)
other  reasons  appear  in  what  was  promised  to  David  (vers.  11,  12),  without  which  tho
accomplishment  of  what  he  purposed  in  his  heart  was  impossible.

III.  It  WAS   FOEBIDDBN  IN  THE  MOST  GRACIOUS   MANNER.     (Vers.  8 11.)     Por  God  :

1.  Assured  him  of  the  regard  in  which  he  was  held  by  him.  "  David  is  here  called
God's  servant,  who  is  King  of  kings — the  fairest  flower  in  any  king's  crown,  and  highest
title  he  can  claim"  (Guild).  2.  Reminded  him  of  the  great  things  which  he  had
already  done  for  him ;  and  which  were  an  earnest  of  "  still  greater  things  than  these"
(Ps.  Ixxviii.  70 — 72).  3.  Informed  him  of  the  safety  and  stability,  the  peace  and
prosperity,  which  (in  continuance  of  his  former  mercies)  he  was  about  to  grant  to  his
people  under  his  rule.  4.  Promised  to  him  rest  from  all  his  enemies,  and  an  enduring
dynasty  (ch.  i.  1,  2).  "  Jehovah  telleth  thee  that  Jehovah  will  make  thee  a  house "
(Ps.  cxxxii.  11).  Wliat  an  abundant  compensation  was  thus  afforded  for  any  dis-
appointment that  might  be  at  first  experienced  1  "  Our  own  plans,  though  well
intended,  are  often  fit  for  nothing  but  to  be  laid  aside  to  make  way  tor  the  Lord's
purposes  respecting  us,  of  which  perhaps  we  had  no  conception"  (Scott).

IV.  It   was    forbidden   only    that    it   MMHT  be    MOBE   EFFECTUALLY  FULFILLED,

(Vers,  12, 13.)    " '  Thou  shalt  not  build  a  house  for  me '  (vers.  5—7) ;  but  I,  whe  ha  re


OH.  vn.  1—29.]  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  201

from  tlie  beginning  till  now  glorified  myself  in  thee  and  my  people  (vers.  8 — 11),  will
build  a  house  for  thee  (ver.  11);  and  then  thy  son  shall  erect  a  house  for  me"  (Thenius).
I.  The  purpose  of  man  depends  for  its  fulfilment  upon  the  purpose  of  God.  2.  The
purpose  which  one  man  is  unable  to  accomplish  is  often  wrought  out  by  another,  who
comes  after  him,  under  more  favourable  circumstances.  3.  Although  the  former  is  not
permitted  to  see  the  execution  of  his  purpose,  he  may  contribute  greatly  towards  iti
and  does  not  go  unrewarded,  i.  Many  a  seeming  failure  is  a  real  and  glorious  success ;
and  "  heaven  is  made  for  those  who  fail  in  this  world." — D.

Ver.  9. — (Jerusalem.)  A  great  name.  Among  the  great  things  which  God  did  for
David,  he  gave  him  a  great. name,  like  that  of  others,  statesmen,  warriors,  kings,  who,
on  account  of  their  abilities,  successes,  power,  and  influence,  were  renowned  "  in  the
earth."  "  The  fame  of  David  went  out  into  all  lands  "  (1  Chron.  xiv.  17).  "  Glory-
consists  in  the  honourable  and  widespread  reputation  of  numerous  and  important
services  rendered  to  one's  friends,  his  country,  or  the  whole  human  race  "  (Cicero).  It
ie:  1.  A  desired  possession.  The  love  of  human  esteem,  praise,  and  honour  is  natural,
universal,  beneficial,  though  often  perverted  to  unworthy  ends,  and  not  subordinated
to  the  voice  of  conscience  and  of  God.  "  That  characteristic  of  man  which  is  at  once
the  most  unworthy  and  the  most  exalted  is  his  desire  of  glory.  It  is  the  last  passion
that  becomes  extinct  in  the  heart  of  man.  There  is  such  a  charm  in  glory  that,  what-
ever we  connect  with  it,  even  death  itself,  we  love  it  still  "  (Pascal).  "Desire  of  glory
is  the  last  garment  that  even  wise  men  lay  aside"  (0.  Felltham).  2.  A  Divine  gift.
"And  in  thine  hand  it  is  to  malse  great"  (1  Chron.  xxix.  12).  Although  it  necessitates,
in  most  instances,  strenuous  human  endeavour,  it  is  never  attained  apart  from  or  in
opposition  to  the  working  of  Divine  providence;  which  in  this,  as  in  other  things,  is
frequently  myslerious,  but  always  wise  and  just  and  good.  How  many  strive  aftwr
itinvaial

"  Some  sink  outright ;

O'er  them,  and  o'er  their  names,  the  billows  close}

To-morrow  knows  not  they  were  ever  bom.

Others  a  short  memorial  leave  behind,

Like  a  flag  floating  when  the  bark's  engulfd—

It  floats  a  moment,  and  is  seen  no  more :

Cue  Oiesar  lives,  a  thousand  are  forgot."

(Young,  'Night  Thoughts,'  viii.)

S.  A  weighty  responsibility.  As  it  is  given  by  God,  so  it  should  be  ascribed  to  him
and  used  for  him,  according  to  his  will,  not  for  selfish  but  beneficent  ends  (ch.  v.  12).
Even  when  righteously  gained,  it  is  not  always  righteously  maintained.  Some  of  "  the
great  men  that  are  on  the  earth  "  have,  by  its  abuse,  fallen  from  their  nest  among  the
stars  (Obad.  4),  like  "  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning"  (Isa.  xiv.  12).  4.  An  unsatisfying
portion.  In  the  midst  of  its  enjoyment  the  soul  craves  something  higher,  and  can  find
rest  only  in  the  approbation  and  fellowship  of  God  (Ps.  iv.  6 ;  Ixxiii.  25 ;  cxix.  57).  It
cannot  impart  inward  peace;  it  endures  but  for  a  season,  and  then  passes  away.  "Where
are  those  rulers  of  the  earth  gone,  with  their  guards,  armies,  and  carriages,  of  whose
departure  the  earth  stands  a  witness  unto  the  present  day  ?  "  ('  The  Hitopadesa').

"The  noise
Of  worldly  fame  is  but  a  Wast  of  wind,
That  blows  from  diverse  points,  and  shifts  its  name-
Shifting  the  point  it  blows  from.    Shalt  tliou  more
Live  in  the  mouths  of  mankind,  if  thy  flesh
Part  shrivei'd  from  thee,  than  if  thou  hadst  died
Before  the  coral  and  the  pap  were  left;
Or  ere  some  thousand  years  have  past?  and  that
Is,  to  eternity  compared,  a  space
Briefer  than  is  the  twinkling  of  an  eye
To  the  heaven's  slowest  orb."

(Dante,  'Purg.')

fiemarh.    (1)  A  great  name  is  not  always  a  good  name.    (2)  A  good  name  may  bi


202  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  \n.  1—24

possessed,  though  a  great  name  may  be  unattainable.  (3)  To  some  men  (like  David)  it
is  given  to  possess  both.  (4)  True  greatness  consists  in  Christ-like  goodness  (Matt.
XX.  25 — 28),  and  tme  glory  in  "  the  honour  which  cometh  from  God  only  "  (John  v.
44).— D.

Ver.  12. — (Jerusalem.)  The  prospect  of  death.  The  view  of  earthly  glory  is  apt
to  suggest,  by  contrast,  the  thought  of  its  transitory  duration,  and  no  one  can  look
forward  to  the  days  to  come  without  having  "  the  shadow  of  death  "  presented  before
his  miud.  Of  its  unavoidable  approach,  the  message  which  David  received,  telling  of
his  present  prosperity  and  future  prospects,  reminded  him.  It  is :  1.  An  event  of
inevitaMe  occurrence.  "  What  man  is  he  that  liveth,  and  shall  not  see  death  ?  "  (Ps.
Ixxxix.  48).  "  The  small  and  great  are  there"  (Job  iii.  19).  "  The  path  of  glory  leads
but  to  the  grave."

''Death  oomes  with  iirespective  feet.
And  beats  upon  the  door
That  shuts  the  palace  of  the  great.
The  cabin  of  the  poor."

(Hoiaee.)

2.  An  end  of  allotted  time,  "When  thy  days  be  fulfilled."  There  is  "an  appointed
time  to  man  upon  earth  "  (Job  viL  1 ;  xiv.  5 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  15),  in  which  to  pass  his  proba-
tion, form  his  character,  and  perform  his  work.  Unknown  to  him,  it  is  determined  by
God,  and,  however  brief,  it  is  suCBcient  for  that  purpose.  Happy  is  he  who  therein
"serves  his  own  generation  by  the  will  of  God  "(Acts  xiii.  36).  3.  An  exit  from
earthly  cares,  labours,  conflicts,  and  sorrows.  "  Thou  shalt  sleep,"  and  be  at  rest
(Job  iii.  17 ;  John  xi.  11 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  14) ;  not  necessarily  in  absolute  unconsciousness
and  inactivity.  Death  is  a  "decease"  (2  Pet.  i.  15),  departure,  exodus  of  the  spirit
from  "  this  tabernacle "  to  an  eternal  home  (2  Cor.  v.  1,  8).  4.  An  entrance  into
heavenly  fellowship.  "  With  thy  fathers ; "  in  the  possession  of  conscious,  personal,
immortal  life,  of  a  common  heritage  in  God,  and  happy  communion  with  each  other
(ch.  xii.  23 ;  Ps.  xvi.  11 ;  xvii.  15).  David's  hope  of  this,  indeed,  was  dim,  in  com-
parison with  the  Christian  hope,  as  the  morning  twilight  compared  with  the  perfect
day  (2  Tim.  i.  10 ;  Matt.  viii.  ll).  5.  An  enlargement  of  beneficent  influence.  "  I  will
set  up  thy  seed  after  thee,"  etc.  He  lives  in  his  children ;  his  words ;  his  works ;  the
manifold  influences  which  he  exerted  on  others,  and  which  continue  operating  after  his
decease,  and  contribute  to  the  building  up  of  the  temple  and  kingdom  of  God.  His
departure  is  even  expedient  and  necessary  in  order  to  the  activities  of  others  j  and,
instead  of  becoming  extinct,  his  power  for  good  is  thereby  extended  and  exalted.  His
name  "liveth  for  evermore"  (Ecclus.  xliv.  14).  6.  An  object  of  profitable  contemplation.
By  meditating  on  it,  especially  in  its  moral  and  spiritual  aspects,  he  learns  to  moderate
earthly  attachments,  sanctify  earthly  relationships,  to  be  humble  in  prosperity,  patient
in  trial,  and  diligent  in  duty.  "  Thou  must  shortly  die  I  0  man,  set  thy  house  in
order.  There  is  a  house  of  thy  conscience,  a  house  of  thy  body,  a  house  of  thy  family,
a  house  of  eternity.  All  these  must  be  set  in  order"  (Christopher  Sutton,  'Disce  Mori ').
Learn  to  die.    Learn  to  live.     Learn  to  pray. — D.

Vers.  12 — 16  (1  Chron.  xvii.  11 — 15). — (Jerusalem.)  The  promise  of  an  everlasting
kingdom,

"  And  thy  house  and  thy  kingdom  shall  be  permanent ;
Thy  throne  shall  be  established  for  ever."

(Ver.  16.)

1.  The  position  of  David  was  a  very  exalted  one.  He  was  the  chosen  earthly  head  of
the  theocracy,  or  kingdom  of  God ;  and  on  him  rested  the  hope  of  its  glorious  con-
summation. He  was  the  Lord's  messiah — "the  mediator  through  whom  Jehovah
dispensed  help,  safety,  and  blessing  "  (Eiehm).  2.  But  was  the  hope  of  Israel  to  be
completely  realized  in  him  ?  And  were  his  dynasty  and  kingdom  to  be  permanent,  or
to  pass  away,  like  others?  3.  To  these  questions  the  promise  now  given  furnished  an
adequate  answer.  David  would  be  succeeded  in  the  theocratic  throne  by  his  posterity,
and  nis  dynasty  and  kingdom  would  endure  for  ever.    4.  This  promise,  the  great  diarter


CH,  vn.  1^-29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  203

of  the  house  of  David,  was  "  the  foundation  of  all  Messianic  prophecies  and  hopes  in  the
prophets  concerning  the  completion  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  its  revelations  of  grace  and
its  blessings  of  salvation"  (Erdmann).     It  was —

I.  An  expebssion  op  abotjndino  qbacb.  The  free,  condescending,  unspeakable
favour  of  God  toward  David,  this  it  was  which  so  deeply  affected  him  (vers.  19 — 21).
The  good  pleasure  of  the  Lord  had  been  shown  in  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Samuel,"
in  David's  exaltation  to  the  throne  after  long  Bufiering  and  trial  (ver.  8),  and  in  his
subsequent  prosperity  (ver.  9)  ;  and  it  was  further  manifested  in  this  great  promise  of
continued  grace  to  his  house,  "  for  a  great  while  to  come; "  whereby  his  noblest  aspira-
tions would  be  fulfilled  (ch.  xxiii.  5),  and  through  him  and  for  his  sake  blessings  would
abound  unto  many.  In  like  manner  "the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace"  are  apparent
in  all  the  promises  pertaining  to  eternal  life  and  salvation,  and  the  whole  history  of  the
progress  of  the  kingdom  of  God  from  its  commencement"  to  its  consummation.  "  The
progress  of  God's  kingdom,  or  of  true  religion,  should  be  the  progress  of  David's  line.
This  point  constituted  the  Messianic  element  in  the  prophecy.  It  limited  the  hopes  of
the  world's  redemption  to  David's  line,  as  Jacob's  prophecy  had  long  ago  limited  it  to
the  tribe  of  Judah  "  (P.  Thomson).

II.  An  assubancb  op  exteaordinabt  good.  To  the  view  of  David  the  future  was,
by  means  of  the  promise,  lighted  up  with  glory.  He  beheld :  1.  The  existence  of  the
royal  house,  of  which  he  was  the  founder,  made  sure  by  the  Divine  oath.  "  Jehovah
telleth  thee  that  Jehovah  will  build  thee  a  house  "  (ver.  H ;  Ps.  cxxxii.  11 ;  Ixxxix.  3, 4).
This  was  the  general  substance  of  the  promise.  "  The  royal  office  was  elevated  to  the
position  of  being  the  controlling  and  centralizing  point  of  all  the  theocratic  main
elements  of  the  national  life."  2.  The  elevation  of  his  posterity,  and  especially  of  one
of  his  sons,  to  the  royal  dignity.  "  I  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  thee  "  (ver.  12 ;  1  Chron.
xvii.  11).  "  Behold,  a  son  shall  be  born  to  thee  .  .  .  Solomon,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xxii.  9  ;
xxxviii.  10 ;  1  Kings  v.  5 ;  viii.  19).  3.  The  estabUshment  of  the  hingdom  in  security,
peace,  and  happiness,  all  eneiriies  being  subdued ;  "  and  I  will  establish  his  kingdom ;  "
which  was  necessary  to  the  fulfilment  of  David's  purpose.  4.  The  erection  of  tl^  temple
and  the  dwelling  of  the  Divine  King  in  the  midst  of  his  people.  "  He  shall  build  a
house  for  my  Name,  and  I  will  stablish  the  throne  of  his  kingdom  for  ever  "  (ver.  13).
"  The  building  of  the  house  here  goes  hand-in-hand  with- the  eternity  of  the  kingdom.
.  .  .  The  essence  of  the  temple  consists  in  its  being  a  symbol — an  outward  represen-
tation of  the  kingdom  of  God  under  IsraeL  The  real  import  of  our  passage,  then,  is
that  henceforth  the  kingdom  of  David  and  the  kingdom  of  God  should  be  closely  and
inseparably  linked  together"  (Hengstenberg, ' Christology ').  "The  idea  of  a  number
of  descendants  following  one  another  (a  line  of  kings)  is  evidently  contained  in  the
promise  "  (Keil) ;  and  in  this  sense  David  must  have  understood  it.  "  The  collective
he  (vers.  13,  14)  includes  in  itself  (like  Gen.  iii.  15)  the  Son  of  David  in  the  highest
sense,  and  the  Founder  of  the  true  temple  of  God,  which  is  his  Church."  5.  The  relation
of  Father  and  son  subsisting  between  God  and  the  theocratic  king.  "  I  will  be  to  him
a  Father,  and  he  shall  be  to  me  a  son."  Such  was  the  relationship  between  Jehovah
and  Israel  (Exod.  iv.  22 ;  Deut.  xiv.  1 ;  xxxii.  6 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  10 ;  Isa.  Ixiv.  8 ;  Jer.
xxxi.  9 ;  Hos.  xi.  1),  and  it  would  be  made  specially  manifest  in  the  head  and  repre-
sentative of  the  chosen  people.  A  son  (1)  derives  his  being  from  his  father,  bears  a
close  resemblance  to  him,  stands  near  him,  represents  him,  and  shares  his  possessions;
(2)  is  an  object  of  his  tender  affection,  under  his  protecting  care,  and  subject  to  his  mercifiil
discipline ;  and  (3)  is  bound  to  reciprocate  his  affection,  to  honour  him,  and  obey  his
commandments.  The  fatherly  love  of  Ood  is  here  more  particularly  presented  to  view ;
and  "whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth"  (Heb.  xii.  6).  "If  he  commit  iniquity,
I  will  chasten  him,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  6.  The  unchanging  mercy  of  Ood,  founded  on  this
relation.  "But  my  niercy  shall  not  depart  away  from  him,  as  I  took  it  from  Saul,"  etc.
(ver.  15).  If,  indeed,  the  individual  king  should  forsake  the  Lord,  he  would  be  "  cast
oflf  for  ever"  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  "The  contrast  is  that  between  the  ptmishment  of
sin  in  individuals  and  the  favour  that  remains  permanently  with  the  family,  whereby,
the  promise  becomes  an  unconditional  one  "  ('  Christology').  The  kingdom  of  God  is  a
kingdom  of  righteousness.  7.  The  eternal  duration  of  his  dynasty  and  kingdom  once
more  assured,  with  all  the  advantages  of  a  government  faithfully  exercised  according
to  the  will  of  God.    This  was  "  tb )  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and


204  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  m.  1—29.


sure  J "  and  these  were  the  "sure  mercies  of  David  "  (Isa.  It.  3).  "This  revelation  was
an  epoch-making  one  for  his  inner  life.  It  brought  an  entirely  new  element  into  his  con-
sciousness, which,  as  his  psalms  show,  moved  him  powerfully.  He  received  the  promise
of  the  perpetual  ascendency  of  his  tribe,  of  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom  amid  the
changing  of  all  earthly  things"  ('  History  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  under  the  Old  Testa-
ment '),  "  This  promise,  like  that  made  to  Abraham,  has  a  twofold  aspect.  One  points
to  David's  natural  posterity  and  temporal  kingdom  ;  the  other  to  the  Messiah  and  the
kingdom  of  Jehovah,  which  respected  the  former  only  as  types  and  pledges  of  the  lattwr."

III.  A  FOUNDATION  OP  iMPBBisHABLE  HOPE.  The  promise  was  one  of  an  eternal
monarchy  rather  than  directly  uf  an  eternal  Monarch,  "  the  King  Messiah ; "  but  it
could  only  be  completely  fulfilled  in  such  a  Person,  "  since  the  eternity  of  a  purely
human  kingdom  is  inconceivable ; "  and  it  became  the  basis  of  a  hope  of  "  his  power
and  coming,"  which,  notwithstanding  repeated  failure  and  disappointment,  was  to  be
renewed  with  undying  strength.  David  was  himself  the  centre  of  the  Messianic  idea
and  hope.  "He  regarded  himself  as  the  messiah  of  God;  although,  through  his
experience  and  words,  he  was  only  a  means  for  representing  the  future  One  before  his
coming"  (Delitzsoh,  'Messianic  Prophecies').  And,  amidst  the  glorious  prospect  which
the  promise  presented  before  him,  he  perceived  (all  the  more  clearly  because  of  his  own
conscious  infirmities)  the  ideal  theocratic  monarch  ;  "a  kingly  image,  in  which  all  that
the  present  manifests  is  far  surpassed,  and  the  kingship  of  David  and  Solomon  seen  in
typical  perfection  "  (Oehler, '  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament.'  See  ch.  xxiii.  4 ;  Ps.  ii. ;
ex.;  Ixxii. ;  xlv.).  The  promise  "refers  neither  only  to  Solomon  nor  only  to  Christ;
nor  has  it  a  twofold  application;  but  it  is  a  covenant  promise,  which,  extending  along
the  whole  line  (of  David's  posterity),  culminates  in  the  Son  of  David,  and  in  all  its
ftilness  applies  only  to  him  "  (Edersheim).  "  Of  the  increase  of  his  government  and
peace  there  shall  be  no  enH,"  etc.  (Isa.  ix.  6;  Luke  i.  32,  33;  Acts  ii.  25— SS).

Observe  that :  1.  Men's  views  of  the  glory  of  the  futwre  age  are  naturally  and
necessarily  formed  according  to  the  facts  and  ideas  with  which  they  are  already
familiar.  2,  The  Word  of  God,  in  promise  and  prophecy  (being  the  gradual  unfolding
of  his  eternal  purpose),  had  a  larger  signification  than  was  understood  by  those  to  whom
it  at  first  came  (1  Pet.  i.  11).  "Divine  prophecies  are  of  the  nature  of  their  Author,  with
whom  a  thousand  years  are  but  as  one  day;  and  therefore  are  not  fulfilled  punctually
at  once,  but  have  a  springing  and  germinant  accomplishment  throughout  many  ages,
though  the  height  or  fulness  of  them  may  refer  to  one  age"  (Bacon,  'Advancement  of
Learning*).  3.  The  promises  of  Ocd  are  faithful  and  true;  his  covenant  is  a  sure
foundation  of  hope  amidst  human  failures  and  earthly  changes  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  1 — 37 ;
2  Cor.  i.  20 ;  Heb.  vi.  18).  4.  The  hope  of  humanity  is  in  "  the  Root  and  the  Offspring
of  David,  and  the  Bright  and  Morning  Star  I"  (Rev.  xxiL  16). — ^D.

Ver.  16. — Olimpses  of  the  King  Messiah.  Looked  at  in  the  light  of  the  develop-
ment of  the  Divine  purpose,  rather  than  of  the  conscious  knowledge  of  the  time,  (1)
the  royal  office  of  David  and  Solomon  (in  its  typical  significance),  and  (2)  the  promises
and  prophecies  uttered  more  or  less  directly  in  connection  therewith,  especially  as
recorded  in  the  last  words  of  David  (ch.  xxiii.)  and  in  the  Psalms,  clearly  pointed  to
the  coming  of  an  extraordinary,  theocratic,  Divine  King.  They  indicate  that  he  would
be:  1.  The  Anointed  (^Jehovah.  His  Servant,  chosen  and  beloved  (ver.  8;  ch.  v.  3;
Acts  iv.  27 ;  x.  28).    Ps.  Ixxxix., '  The  faithfulness  of  the  Lord.'

**  Onoe  thou  spakest  in  vision  to  thy  beloved  and  saidstt
I  have  laid  help  upon  a  mighty  one,
I  have  exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the  people,
I  have  found  David  my  servant,
With  my  holy  oil  have  I  anointed  him."

(Pa.  Ixxxix.  19,  20.)

i.  TheBmqf  David  "  according  to  the  flesh  "  (ver.  12 ;  Acts  ii.  29—31 ;  xiiL  22—23).

"Jehovah  hath  sworn  onto  David
In  truth  that  which  he  will  not  recall:
Of  the  fruit  of  thy  body
Po  I  appoint  a  possegaor  of  thy  throne."

(Ps.  oxxxU.  11.)


OH.  VII.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  205

3.  Tha  Son  of  God.  (Ver.  14;  Ps.  xvi.  10;  Luke  L  35  ;  Acts  iv.  25—27}  Eom.  L  4.)
Ps.  ii., '  The  triumph  of  the  Lord's  Anointed.'

"Jehovah  saith  unto  me:  Thou  art  my  Son:
I  have  this  day  begotten  thee."

(Ps.  iL  7.)

"  He  shall  ory  unto  me :  My  Father  art  i  hou,
My  God,  and  the  Book  of  my  salvation  I
Also  I  vrill  make  him  my  Firstborn,
Highest  of  the  kings  of  the  earth."

(Ps.  Ixxxix.  26,  27.)

"In  the  Old  Testament  the  relation  between  father  and  son  denotes  the  deepest
intimacy  of  love;  and  love  is  perfected  in  unity  of  nature,  in  the  communication  to
the  son  of  all  that  the  father  bath.  '  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given  all
things  into  his  hand'  (John  iii.  35).  Sonship,  therefore,  includes  the  government  of
the  world"  (Keil).  4.  The  King  of  righteousness  and  peace  ;  Prophet  and  Priest ;  the
Conqueror  of  all  opposing  powers  (through  conflict  and  suffering) ;  the  Saviour  and  Bpne-
factor  of  those  who  trust  in  him;  the  supreme  Lord  (ver.  13;  Ps.  xxii. ;  xl.  6;  Matt.
uii.  45  i  Heb.  i.  8).

*'  The  oracle  of  Jehovah  unto  my  Lord;
Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand
Until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool."

(Pe.  ex.  1.)
"Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever;
A  sceptre  of  uprightness  is  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom."

(Ps.  xlv.  G.)

5.  The  Builder  of  the  temple.  (Ver.  13;  Zech.  vi.  12,  13;  John  i.  14;  ii.  19;  xiv.  23;
1  Cor.  vi.  19;  Eph.  i,  20—23;  ii.  20—22;  1  Pet.  ii.  5;  Rev.  xxi.  1—3.)

"Thou  hast  received  gifts  among  men.
Yea,  even  the  rebellious,  that  the  Lord  Jehovah  might  dwell  among  them.*

(Ps.  Ixviii.  18.)

6.  The  Possessor  of  universal  dominion.    (1  Sam.  ii.  10 ;  ch.  xxii.  44;  Ps.  xxii.  27.)

"He  shall  have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea,
And  from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth."

(Ps.  Ixxii.  8.)

7.  The  King  who  should  reign  for  ever.     (Ver.  16 ;  Ps.  Ixi.  6,  7 ;  Ixxxix.  36,  37.)

"His  Name  shall  endure  for  ever;
His  Name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as  the  sun."

(Ps.  Ixxil.  17.)

"  An  allegory  may  serve  to  illustrate  the  way  in  which  the  Old  Testament  proclamation
of  salvation  unfolds  itself.  The  Old  Testament  in  relation  to  the  day  of  the  New
Testament  is  night.  In  this  night  there  rise  in  opposite  directions  two  stars  of  promise.
The  one  describes  its  fall  from  above  downwards ;  it  is  the  promise  of  Jehovah  who  is
about  to  come'  [Ps.  xcvi.  13;  xcviii.  9].  The  other  describes  its  path  from  below
upwards;  it  is  tlie  hope  which  rests  on  the  seed  of  David,  the  prophecy  of  the  Son
of  David,  which  at  the  outset  assumes  a  thoroughly  human  and  merely  earthly  character.
These  two  stars  meet  at  last,  they  blend  together  in  one  star ;  the  night  vanishes,  and
it  is  day.  This  one  star  is  Jesus  Christ,  Jehovah  and  the  Son  of  David  in  one  Person ;
the  King  of  Israel  and  at  the  same  time  the  Redeemer  of  the  world;  in  one  word,  the
God-Man  "  (Delitzsch,  in  Ps.  Ixxii.).— D.

Vers.  18-24  (1  Chron.  xvii.  16-^22). — (The  tabernacle  on  Zion.)  Shanks'
giving  and  praise.  The  duty  of  rendering  thanksgiving  and  praise  to  God  in  seldom
disputed,  though  its  performance  is  often  neglected.  It  is  beneficial  to  the  offerer
himself,  as  well  as  to  others.     The  conduct  and  language  of  David,  on  receiving  the


206  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vn.  1— 29.

Divine  communication  here  recorded,  furnish  sn  admirable  example  of  the  yairit  in
which  "  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  "  should  be  presented.

I.  Deep  humility  before  the  presence  of  Q-od.  "Then  went  King  David  in"  from
his  palace  of  cedar  to  the  lowly  tent  (the  palace  of  the  Divine  King  of  Israel), "  and  sat "
on  the  ground  in  a  lowly  posture,  according  to  Eastern  custom  (expressive  of  his  lowly
state  of  mind), "  before  Jehovah,"  the  symbol  of  whose  presence  stood  veiled  before  hira.
"  And  (after  devout  thought  on  the  communication)  he  said,  Who  am  I,  O  Lord  God  1 "
etc.  (ver.  18).  Although  in  comparison  with  other  men  he  "might  have  whereof  to
glory,"  yet  in  the  conscious  presence  of  God  he  had  a  profound  sense  of  his  weakness,
insignificance,  dependence,  and  unworthiness  (Gen.  xxxii.  10 ;  Job  xlii.  5,  6 ;  Isa.  Ivii.
15;  Bph.  iii.  8;  1  Pet.  v.  5,  6).  The  proud  heart  is  never  a  thankful  heart.  The
poorer  we  are  in  our  own  estimation  the  more  disposed  we  are  to  "  prtuse  the  Lord  for
his  goodness."  Humility  is  the  first  step  of  a  ladder  whose  top  reaches  heaven
(Matt.  V.  3).

II.  Calm  kbflbction  on  his  benefits.  "  And  this  was  yet  a  small  thing  in  thy
sight,  0  Lord  God,"  etc.  "  And  this  [which  thou  hast  graciously  promised  concerning
my  house]  is  the  law  [established  order  or  decree]  of  [or  pertaining  to  a  mortal]  man,
0  Lord  God !  "  (ver.  19).  "  Is  this  the  law  of  one  who  is  a  mere  man  created  from  the
dust  as  I  am,  that  I  should  be  elevated  to  such  a  glorious  altitude  as  this  ? "  (Words-
worth), "  Thou  hast  regarded  me  according  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  high  degree"
(1  Chron.  xvii.  17).  An  expression  of  humble  astonishment.  The  more  he  pondered
it  in  his  heart,  the  more  he  was  humbled,  surprised,  and  filled  with  thankfulness.  We
have  not  less  cause  for  gratitude  (Ps.  viii.  4,  5;  1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10).  "Forget  not  all  his
>>«>nefits,"  past,  present,  or  to  come.  We  are  apt  to  forget  them,  and  therefore  should
contemplate  them  frequently,  enumerate  them  one  by  one,  and  endeavour  to  estimate
their  exceeding  worth.  Meditation  is  like  a  lens,  by  which  the  rays  of  the  sun  are
collected  into  a  focus  and  produce  so  intense  a  heat  that  coals  of  fire  are  kindled  by  it
(Ps.  xxxix.  3  ;  xlviii.  9 ;  Ixxvii.  11,  12 ;  Luke  ii.  19).

III.  Intense  conviction  of  his  claims.  "And  what  can  David  say  more  unto
thee  ?  for  thou  knowest  thy  servant,  O  Lord  God  ! "  (ver.  20).  The  great  things  which
bad  been  promised,  the  obligations  under  which  they  laid  him,  and  his  conviction  and
impression  thereof,  were  all  indescribable.  Words  failed  him ;  and  he  could  only  appeal
to  Omniscience  to  witness  the  sincerity  and  depth  of  his  grateful  feeling  (John  xxi.  17).
Every  additional  benefit  conferred  upon  us  increases  the  claims  of  our  Divine  Bene-
factor on  our  love  and  devotion.  His  mercies  are  "new  every  morning"  (Lam.  iii.  23);
and  the  debt  we  owe  is  ever  accumulating.

"  How  can  I  repay  to  Jehovah
All  hia  benefits  toward  me?"

(Ps.  cxri  12.)

IV.  Pebvent  GRATiTiTDB  for  his  grace.  "  For  thy  Word's  sake ;"  in  fulfilment  of  thj
purpose  and  promise  formerly  expressed,  "and  according  to  thine  own  heart,"  of  thy
spontaneous,  sovereign,  unmerited  favour,  "  hast  thou  done  all  these  great  things  to
make  thy  servant  know  them,"  for  his  consolation  and  encouragement  (ver.  21).  It  is
the  disinterested  love  and  abounding  grace  of  God,  displayed  in  his  gifts,  that  more
than  anything  else  touches  the  heart  and  constrains  it  to  fervent  gratitude.  "  To  my
eye  the  workings  of  a  heart  oppressed  and  overflowing  with  gratitude  are  painted
stronger  in  this  prayer  than  I  ever  observed  them  in  any  other  instance.  It  is  easy
to  see  that  his  heart  was  wholly  possessed  with  a  subject  which  he  did  not  know  how
to  quit,  because  he  did  not  know  how  to  do  justice  to  the  inestimable  blessings  poured
down  upon  himself  and  promised  to  his  posterity ;  much  less  to  the  infinite  bounty  of
his  Benefactor  "  (Uelany).

V.  LowLT  ADOBATioN  of  his  perfections.  "  Wherefore  thou  art  great,  0  Lord  God,"
etc.  (ver.  22).  The  greatness  of  Jehovah,  the  incomparable  One,  the  only  God,  was
manifested  in  his  dealings  with  his  servant,  as  in  the  whole  history  of  Israel,  "  according
to  all  that  we  have  heard  with  our  ears."  David  had  the  most  exalted  views  of  his
character  as  the  All-wise  and  All-powerful,  the  Condescending,  Faithful,  Gracious,
Merciful,  and  Just  (1  Sam.  ii.  2 ;  Ps.  cxiii.  6) ;  and  he  delighted  in  the  contemplation
and  praise  of  his  infinite  excellence.    God  himself  is  greater  than  anything  he  has  dona


OH.  VII.  1—29,]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  207

or  pronused  to  do;  bnt  by  means  of  his  doings  and  revelations  we  are  enabled  to  know
him  and  draw  nigb  to  him  in  worship  and  adoration,  wherein  the  soul  finds  its  noblest
activity,  rest,  and  joy.

YI.  Generous  stmpatht  with  his  people.  "  And  what  one  nation  in  the  earth  is
like  thy  people,"  etc.  (vers.  23,24)?  An  incomparable  people  I  1.  Redeemed  by  mighty
acts.  2.  Designed  for  a  special  purpose — to  be  his  possession  or  property,  and  to
"show  forth  his  praise."  3.  Established  in  covenant  relationship  for  ever  (ver.  16;
Bev.  xxi.  3,  7).  David  "glcrifled  God"  in  them;  and  in  doing  so  he  showed  his  love
for  them,  his  sympathy  and  identity  with  them  (oh.  v.  12).  His  thanksgiving  and
praise  were  large-hearted  and  disinterested.  The  selfish  heart  (like  the  proud  heart)  is
never  a  thankful  heart.  The  more  we  esteem  others  the  more  numerous  the  occasions
we  find  for  gratitude  to  God,  and  the  more  we  abound  therein.

VII.  Entibb  oonsbcbation  to  his  service  and  glory.  He  avowed  himself  the  servant
of  God  (ver.  21),  freely  and  gladly  surrendered  his  will  to  him,  sought  what  he  promised,
and  desired  that  his  Name  might  be  "magnified  for  ever"  (ver.  26).  This  is  the
essence  of  the  sacrifice  of  praise.    "  Father,  glorify  |hy  Name  "  (John  xii.  28 ;  PML  i.  20).

« As  of  their  will,  the  angels  unto  thee
Tender  meet  sacrifice,  circling  thy  throne
With  loud  hosannas ;  so  of  theirs  be  done
By  saintly  men  on  earth."

(Dante, 'Purg..'il.)

D.

Vers.  2B — 29  (1  Chron.  xvii.  23 — 27). — (ZioN.)  Promise  and  prayer.  "Do  as
thou  hast  said"  (ver.  25).  1.  God  has  spoken  to  men.  "His  greatness  is  unsearch-
able "  (ver.  22 ;  Ps.  cxlv.  3) ;  nevertheless,  he  has  surely  spoken  to  them  in  his  Word
(ver.  4;  Heb.  i.  1).  2.  He  has  spoken  in  the  way  of  promise  (ver.  28).  A  large
portion  of  Divine  revelation  consists  of  promises,  "exceeding  great  and  precious"
(2  Pet.  i.  4),  pertaining  to  the  life  that  now  is,  and  that  which  is  to  come.  3.  And  as
God  has  spoken  to  men  in  the  way  of  promise,  so  they  should  speak  to  him  in  the  way
oi  prayer  (1  Sam.  i.  9;  viii.  6;  xiv.  16,  36).

"A  breath  that  fleets  beyond  this  iron  world.
And  touches  him  who  made  it."

(Tennyson.)

L  Promise  strpERSBDBS  not  the  necessity  of  peatbb  ;  inasmuch  as  the  latter  is
commonly  the  expressed  or  implied  condition  of  its  fulfilment.  As  a  bank-note  must
be  presented  that  we  may  obtain  the  gold  which  it  represents,  so  the  Divine  promise
must  be  sought  in  prayer  that  we  may  receive  the  good  of  which  it  gives  assurance.
A  child  does  not  refrain  fi:om  asking  his  father  for  what  he  wants  because  it  has  been
promised,  but  rather  asks  him  all  the  more.  David  prayed  for  what  he  had  been
promised.  "  I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired  of,"  etc.  (Bzek.  xxxvi.  37).  "Ask,  and  it
shall  be  given  you"  (Matt  viL  7;  Ps.  L  15;  Zech.  x.  1).  "The  prayer  that  prevails
is  a  reflected  promise."

IL  Promise  confirms  the  dutt  of  prayer;  by  indicating  the  will  of  God  con-
cerning us.  To  neglect  the  condition  of  receiving  the  blessing,  or  to  refuse  to  comply
with  it,  is  to  despise  the  blessing  itself.  Why  such  a  condition  ?  1.  To  give  to  God
the  honour  which  is  his  due.  2.  To  teach  a  spirit  of  dependence.  3.  To  promote
personal  and  direct  intercourse  with  God.  4.  To  call  into  exercise  the  noblest  principles
of  our  nature.  5.  To  incite  co-operation  towards  the  attainment  of  what  is  promised.
6.  To  make  its  bestowment  more  beneficial  to  the  recipient.  Some  things  may  be
beneficial  in  connection  with  prayer  that  would  not  be  so  without  it.

IIL  Promise  authorizes  the  privileqb  of  prater.  What  greater  privilege  can
there  be  than  that  of  "  making  known  our  requests  unto  God  "  ?  But  who,  without  his
promise,  could  venture  to  believe  that  these  requests  would  be  heard ;  especially  when
made  for  the  "great  things"  contained  in  it?  Even  now,  how  doubtful  and  timid  are
we  in  claiming  the  privilege !  The  promise  gives  encouragement  and  confidence ;  and
should,  therefore,  be  pondered  in  the  heart,  as  it  was  by  David;  who  was  thereby


203  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cii.  vn.  1—29.

emboldened  (Authorized  Version,  "  found  in  his  heart")  "to  pray  this  prayer "  (ver,
27).  "  Thy  words  are  truth  "  (ver.  28).  "  When  tliou  saidst,  Seek  ye  my  face ;  my
heart  said  unto  thee.  Thy  face,  0  Lord,  will  I  seek"  (Ps.  xxvii.  8j  cxix.  49;  Gen.
zxxii.  12).

IV.  Pbomibe  teaches  the  mattbe  op  prater.  "  We  know  not  vihat  we  should
pray  for  as  we  ought,"  and  are  apt,  in  this  respect,  to  "ask  amiss."  But  the  promises
coiift'.tute  an  invaluable  "  directory  of  prayer,"  teaching  us :  1.  The  things  for  which
we  ought  to  ask,  both  temporal  and  spiritual  2.  Their  relative  importance.  3.  Their
application  to  others  as  well  as  to  ourselves  (vers.  25,  29).  4.  Their  chief  design  (ver.
26).  "  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  ray  words  abide  in  yon,"  etc.  (John  xv.  7 ;  Eev.  xxii.  20).
"  Pause  over  each  promise,  and  let  your  faith  in  it  blossom  into  a  prayer  for  it.  This
will  be  the  true,  responsive  reading  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  wherein  there  shall  be  not
■imply  the  answering  of  voice  to  voice  as  among  men,  but  the  responding  of  your  heart
to  God.  Happy  are  they  in  whose  souls  there  is  thus  a  continual  recurring  '  Amen '  to
the  benedictions  of  the  Lord  '  (W.  M.  Taylor).

V.  Promise  ikoites  the  spirit  op  prater.  1.  A  reverent  regard  for  God.  2.  A
lowly, estimate  of  ourselves.  3.  Fervent  desire  for  tlio  blessing  of  Gcd.  4.  Childlike
confidence  in  his  Word.  5.  Unreserved  submission  to  his  will.  6.  Patience  and  perse-
verance. "  Wait  on  the  Lord,"etc.  (Ps.  xxviL14;  Lukexi.  1 — 13;  xviii.  1).  "Prayer
is  nothing  else  but  the  languaje  of  faith,  love,  and  hope:  oi faith,  a  believing  of  God's
being  and  bounty,  that  he  is  willing  and  able  to  succour  us;  oilove,  which  directeth
us  to  the  prime  Fountain  of  all  the  gooil  we  have  and  would  have,  and  to  the  en'l  and
glory  of  God,  and  regulateth  all  our  choices  by  it,  and  to  those  means  which  conduce
to  the  enjoying;  of  God  ;  and  of  hope,  which  is  a  desirous  exijectation  of  the  promised
blessing  "  (T.  Manton, '  Works,'  xviii.  72).

VI.  Promise  ensures  the  answer  op  prayer  ;  not  always  in  the  immediate  and
conscious  experience  of  the  petitioner,  but  always  at  the  proper  time  (Dan.  x.  12),  the
delay  being  needful  and  beneficial ;  not  always  in  the  literal  terms  of  the  promise,  but
often  in  a  more  spiritual  and  glorious  manner ;  and  never  wholly  withheld  (1  John  v.
14,  15).  "He  is  faithful  that  promised"  (Heb.  x.  23).  "  The  promises  of  God  are  the
free  expressions  of  his  goodness  and  beneficence;  but  then  their  meaning  has  in  it
something  of  tliat  Divine  attribute.  Notliing  that  he  says  can  be  in  the  mere  narrow
proportions  of  man.  The  words  are  necessarily  those  used  by  man,  but  the  meaning  is
that  of  God;  and  we  may  be  confident  that  what  will  he  given  in  fiilfilment  of  them
will  be  according  to  the  magnitude  of  the  Divine  goodness ;  as  far,  at  least,  as  the
faculties  of  the  recipients  will  admit,  and  these  can  be  enlarged.  The  Divine  goodness
being  transcendently  above  all  other  goodness,  the  gifts  of  it  will  be  according  to  its
own  manner,  and  not  limited  to  the  human  import  of  the  words,  as  if  merely  preserving
the  bare  truth  of  the  words.  So  that  he  will  surprise  his  servants,  as  they  find  the
earthly  terms  of  his  promises  translated  as  it  were  into  celestial  language,  when  they
arrive  in  his  presence  and  have  those  promises  acknowledged"  (John  Foster,  'Literary
Bemains'). — D.

Ver.  27. — (Zion.)  A  prayer  found  in  the  heart.  When  a  prayer  such  as  David's  is
found  in  the  heart,  it  is :  1.  Found  in  the  right  place.  If  only  on  the  tongue  it  is  not
really  found  at  all.  Its  proper  abode  is  the  heart ;  yet  it  is  not  always  found  there,
even  when  renewed,  as  the  heart  must  be  for  its  dwelling.  2.  Possessed  of  priceless
worth;  in  contrast  with  other  things  that  are  often  found  in  the  heart  (Matt.  xv.  19).
A  rare  flower  among  weeds,  a  fountain  in  the  desert,  a  treasure  in  poverty,  a  friend  in
need  1  "  I  have  no  earthly  friend,"  said  one;  "  but  I  have  a  praying  heart."  3.  Derived
from  a  Divine  source.  It  is  not  indigenous.  Its  origin  is  in  "  the  Father  of  lights,"
from  whom  comes  "every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  boon;"  its  production  is  due  to
the  teaching  of  his  Word  and  the  operation  of  his  Spirit  (Zeoh.  xiL  10).  4.  Designed
for  a  pi'oper  use.  Not  to  be  neglected,  repressed,  or  restrained  (Job  xv.  4) ;  but
appreciated,  guwded,  cherished,  freely  and  fully  "  pom-ed  out "  at  the  feet  of  the  Giver,
that  he  may  be  glorified. — ^D.

Vers.  1,  2.— David's  desire  to  build  a  temple.  After  the  conquest  of  Jehus  by  David
*nd  his  appointment  of  the  spot  to  be  the  capital  of  the  united  kingdom  of  which  he


CH.  vu.  1— 29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  01"  SAMUEL.  209

was  now  the  ruler,  it  soon  became  his  earnest  purpose  to  bring  thither  the  long-
neglected  ark  of  the  covenant,  that  the  city  might  be  the  sacred  as  well  as  the  civil
metropolis.  This  purpose  was  at  length  fulfilled.  The  ark  was  settled  on  Zion  iu
a  tent  prepared  for  it,  and  a  daily  service  established  in  connection  with  it.  But  the
king  was  not  long  satisfied  with  what  he  had  done.  Larger  and  more  generous  thoughts
took  possession  of  his  mind,  and  stirred  within  him  eager  desire.

I.  What  was  thb  kino's  desiub  ?  To  erect  a  solid,  permanent  building,  of  suitable
magnificence — a  temple— in  which  the  ark  should  be  placed,  and  where  the  services  of
worship  should  be  constantly  maintained.  Must  likely  he  contemplated  what  was
afterwards  effeoted,  the  reunion  on  one  spot  of  the  avk  and  the  altars ;  and  the  presen-
tation of  the  daily  and  other  sacrifices  and  ofPrings  at  their  proper  place  before  the
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence— the  revival,  in  fact,  of  the  Mosaic  ritual  under  circum-
stances and  with  accompaniments  adapted  to  the  existing  condition  of  the  nation.  The
purpose  was  good  and  tended  to  good.  It  was  time  that  the  irregularity  and  negligence
which  had  prevailed  should  come  to  an  end,  and  the  requirements  of  the  Law  should  be
obeyed.  It  was  fitting  that  the  unity  of  the  people  should  be  fully  symbolized,
expressed,  and  promoted  by  such  a  united  woiship  as  the  Law  enjoined.  It  was  also
suitable  to  the  more  settled  state  which,  under  D.ivid,  the  people  hnd  reached,  that
a  solid  fixed  building  should  supersede  the  tent  which  was  adapted  to  the  time  of
wandering  and  unsettlement ;  and,  as  the  nation's  resources  had  increased,  it  was  right
that  the  building  to  be  reared  should  be  proportionately  costly.

IL  How  IT  OBiGiNATED.  1.  A  time  of  peace  favoured  it.  (Ver.  1.)  Giving  the  king
leisure  for  thought  as  to  how  he  could  further  promote  the  nation's  welfare ;  awakening
gratitude ;  affording  means  and  opportunity.  Times  of  war  are  greatly  unfavourable
to  such  enterpriser,  forcing  minds  and  hearts  into  other  channel?,  and  swallowing  up
the  resources  which  might  otherwise  be  expended  on  them,  2.  The  solidity,  heauty,
and  comforts  of  David's  own  house  suggested  it.  "I  dwell  in  a  house  of  cedar,  but
the  ark  of  G-od  dwelleth  within  curtains."  David  had  known  for  years  what  it  was  to
have  no  settled  abode,  but  to  wander  about  the  land,  taking  refuge  in  woods  and  caves ;
and  afterwards  he  was  much  away  from  home,  engaged  in  wars.  Lately  he  had  built
himself  a  handsome  palace,  and  now  for  a  time  he  was  able  to  sit  quietly  in  it  and
meditate;  arid  as  he  did  so,  it  one  day  s'ruck  him  that  his  abode  was  superior  to  that
of  the  ark  of  God,  and  the  desire  was  kindled  to  put  an  end  to  the  incongruity.  Not
every  one  would  have  been  thus  moved.  How  differently  the  rich  man  of  whom  our
Lord  speaks  in  Luke  xii.  16,  et  seq.,  "  thought  within  himself"  I  And  how  many
prosperous  people  therei  are,  professing  to  have  given  themselves  to  God,  who,  as  they
increase  in  wealth  and  enjoy  comfort  and  luxury,  never  turn  a  thought  towards  God's
house  or  cause,  or  inquire  what  they  can  do  for  them  !  They  reflect  much,  it  may  be,
on  the  question  how  best  to  invest  their  increasing  gains ;  but  it  never  seems  to  occur
to  them  that  the  most  suitable  and  profitable  investment  might  be  in  the  cause  of
religion  or  charity.  A  more  fervent  piety  would  suggest  such  thoughts.  Gratitude  for
the  abundance  bestowed  on  them ;  the  contrast  presented  (see  Hag.  i.  4)  between
their  residences  and  their  churches,  between  what  they  spend  on  their  establishments
and  what  they  spend  in  the  promotion  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  the  witness  which
their  mansions  and  surroundings  bear  to  the  ample  means  with  which  God  has
endowed  them — the  large  trust  he  has  committed  to  them ; — all  would  be  fruitful  ol
thoughts  and  ernotions  to  which  they  are  now  strangei's,  and  of  a  style  of  giving  which
they  have  never  allowed  themselves.  It  was  David's  piety  more  than  the  surrounding
circnmstances  that  originated  his  generous  puipose.

HI.  How  IT  WAS  TESTED.  As  to  its  propriety  and  probable  acceptance  with  God.
He  consulted  bis  friend  and  adviser,  Nathan  the  prophet.  The  more  important  this
steps  we  contemplate,  the  more  needful  is  it,  before  we  are  openly  and  irrevocably
committed  to  them,  that  we  should  aaoeriain  how  they  appear  to  others,  especially  to
the  wisest  and  best  whom  we  know.  Peeling  is  not  a  sufficient  guide,  not  even  pious
feeling ;  and  our  own  judgment  may  not  be  of  the  soundest.  Another  may  put  the
matter  in  a  new  light,  which  shall  convince  ourselves  that,  however  good  our  motives,
our  purpose  is  not  wise  or  not  practicable.-  We  cannot  directly  consult  a  prophet,  but
we  may  find  good  and  enlighiened  and  trustworthy  pien  who  will  be  glad-  to  aid  us  to
a  right  conclusion.     And  what  joy  it  gives  to  Christian  ministers  to  be  consulted  by

n.  SAMUKIj.  o


210  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vii.  1—29.

Buch  as  come  Baying,  "God  has  prospered  me,  I  have  done  well  for  myself  and  my
family,  and  I  should  like  to  do  something  proportionate  for  my  God  and  Saviour:,
advise  me  as  to  how  I  may  best  fulfil  my  desire  "  I  Such  applicants  are  few  and  far
between ;  such  a  style  of  thought  and  purpose  is  rare.  But  it  ought  not  to  be.  It  w
a  sin  and  shame  that  God's  work  should  be  hindered  for  want  of  money  in  a  thriving
community  which  can  spend  freely  in  all  other  directions.

IV.  How  IT  WAS  REGARDED  BY  NATHAN.  He  approved  and  encouraged  the  desire,
assuring  David  of  the  Divine  approval  and  co-operation  (ver.  3).  He  spoke  on  the
impulse  of  the  moment,  with  the  feeling  natural  to  a  pious  Israelite  and  prophet,
thankful  that  his  king  should  cherish  such  a  design.  He  did  well,  but  had  he  paused
and  proposed  to  "  sleep  upon  "  the  matter,  he  would  have  done  better,  as  appeared  next
day.  We  should  ever  be  ready  to  encourage  others  in  good  thoughts  and  purposes,  yet
in  important  matters  it  is  well  to  take  time  to  consider  before  we  advise  as  to  definite
proposals.

V.  How  IT  WAS  HEGAKDED  BT  GoD.  The  proposal  was  approved,  commended,
rewarded,  and — rejected.  The  refusal  was  softened  by  the  terms  in  which  it  was  con-
veyed, and  the  representations  and  promises  by  which  it  was  accompanied  (vers.  4 — 17 ;
2  Chron.  vi.  8) ;  declaring  that  it  was  well  that  it  was  in  his  heart  to  build  a  house  for
God's  Name,  although  it  was  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  Most  High  what  sort  of
dwelling-places  men  provided  for  him ;  reminding  David  of  what  he  had  done  for  him ;
assuring  him  that  he  would  continue  to  favour  the  nation,  that  he  would  build  a  house
for  him  as  he  had  sought  to  build  one  for  himself,  and  that  his  son  should  fulfil  the
father's  desire,  and  the  throne  should  continue  in  his  family  for  ever.  This  was  the
greatest  promise  David  had  received,  greater  than  he  himself  could  then  understand,
for  it  looked  forward  to  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.
But  though  his  knowledge  of  its  purport  was  imperfect,  his  pain  at  the  rejection  of  his
proposal  was  more  than  soothed ;  his  lieart  was  filled  with  adoring  gratitude  and  joy.

VI.  How  ITS  siKOERiTY  WAS  PROVED.  If  he  might  not  do  aU  he  desired,  he  would
do  all  he  might  and  could.  He,  therefore,  prepared  plans  for  the  building,  accumulated
materials  for  its  erection,  and  urged  the  work  on  his  son  Solomon  and  the  chief  men  of
the  nation.  An  example  for  us  if,  setting  our  hearts  on  some  particular  work  for  God,
our  purpose  is  frustrated.  Let  the  diverted  energies  be  employed  all  the  more  in  such
services  as  are  within  our  reach.  A  contrast  to  the  conduct  of  many  who,  disappointed
in  reference  to  some  cherished  desire  (e.g.  to  become  clergymen  or  missionaries),  allow
their  zeal  to  decline  to  the  common  level,  if  it  do  not  pass  away  altogether.

In  conclusion :  1.  Christian  piety  vnll  kindle  earnest  desires  to  do  the  greatest  possible
work  for  Ood.  Such  desires  should  be  cherished  in  subordination  to  the  Divine  will.
For  though  approved  of  God,  they  may  be  denied  (Prov.  x.  24  notwithstanding).  If
denied,  we  should  be  content,  assured  of  the  perfect  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the
purpose  of  God  which  has  frustrated  ours,  and  that  for  us  and  others  he  has  some
better  thing  in  store  than  we  had  thought  of.  '  Though  denied,  our  desire  may  be
fulfilled  (as  David's  by  Solomon).  Whether  denied  or'  gratified,  good  desires  (such  as
are  really  good,  and  not  mere  idle  wishes)  are  always  valuable,  for  what  they  indicate
in  ourselves,  for  the  Divine  approval  they  elicit,  for  their  influence  on  ourselves,  and
their  influence  on  others  (as  David's  on  his  successor  and  on  the  chiefs  of  the  nation).
2.  The  desire  to  huild  or  aid  in  building  a  house  for  the  worship  of  Ood  is  good.  3.  We
may  all  assist  in  the  erection  and  adornment  of  a  nobler  temple  than  that  which  David
sought  to  build.  "  The  house  of  God  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  15),
and  all  who  labour  for  the  conversion  and  spiritual  improvement  of  men  are  helping  in
the  glorious  work  of  building  and  adorning  this  spiritual  house.  Let  all  Christian
workers  realize  the  dignity  and  glory  of  their  work.  Let  us  all  ask  ourselves  whether
we  have  any  heart  for  it,  are  doing  anything  towards  it ;  whether  we  are  capable  of
doing  anything  in  it  that  shall  be  acceptable  to  God,  having  first  given  our  own  selves
to  him,  and  received  his  Spirit. — G.  W.

Vers.  12 — 16. — David^s  everlasting  kingdom.  These  words  relate,  first,  to  Solomon ;
then  to  successive  generations  of  David's  posterity ;  and,  finally,  to  the  Christ.  They
promise  that  David's  son  should  be  God's  son,  and  should  build  the  house  for  God
which  Davjd  had  desired  to  build.    They  promise  also  that  the  ri^le  over  Israel  sl^ould


OH.  vn.  1—29.]  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  211

continue  in  the  .ine  of  David's  posterity,  and  that  his  house  and  kingdom  should  be
established  for  ever.  They  were  partly  fulfilled  in  the  long  continuance  of  the  reign  of
David's  descendants.  They  receive  their  most  ample  and  splendid  fulfilment  in  the
eternal  kingdom  of  the  greatest  Son  of  David,  our  Lord  and  Saviour— a  fulfilment
beyond  all  that  David  could  ask  or  think.

I.  The  geeat  Kino.  1.  Is  David's  son.  He  is  much  more  than  this;  but  he  m
this.  A  man  is  at  the  head  of  God's  kingdom  1  2.  Is  God's  Son.  (Ver.  14;  comp.
Heb.  L  5  and  Rom.  i.  3,  4.)  Both  as  to  his  human  and  his  Divine  natures,  Jesus
Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  as  none  other — "  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  This  shows
his  greatness,  and  accounts  for  his  triumphs.  The  Eternal  and  Almighty  Father
recognizes  and  proclaims  him  as  his  Son ;  declares  by  the  miracles  accompanying  the
personal  mission  of  Jesus,  by  his  Word,  Spirit,  providence,  through  the  ages,  "  This  is
my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased :  hear  ye  him."  3.  And  this  illustrious
person  is  King.  King  over  God's  people,  his  true  Israel ;  King  of  men ;  "  King  of
kings,  Lord  of  lords ; "  King  of  angels.  King  over  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth.  The
kingdom  of  David  has  expanded  till  it  extends  over  the  universe.

II.  The  PBBPET0ITY  OP  HIS  KBiGN.  It  shall  be  literally  etemaL  "  He  shall  reign
for  ever  and  ever "  (Kev.  xi.  15).  It  is  surely  more  than  a  coincidence  that  a  system  of
dominion  over  men,  originating  in  a  Man  who  had  sprung  from  the  reduced  family  of
David,  and  was  accepted  by  many  of  his  fellow-Jews  as  the  Son  of  David,  the  Messiah
foretold  by  the  I'rophets — a  system  proclaimed  at  the  first  as  the  kingdom  of  God — ■
should  have  taken  root  in  the  world,  have  spread  so  widely  and  lasted  so  long ;  that  it
should  have  proved  to  be  the  system  in  and  through  which  especially  the  best
influences  of  Heaven  operate,  and  the  divinest  principles  rule  the  hearts  and  lives  of  those
who  receive  it ;  and  that  it  should  to-day  be  more  extensively  prevalent  than  ever,  and
that  amongst  the  most  enlightened  and  powerful  nations  (to  whose  enlightenment  and
power  it  has  so  largely  contributed),  and  giving  promise  of  becoming  the  ruling  power
everywhere.  It  is  a  veritable  kingdom,  uniting  all  who  belong  to  it  as  one  "  holy
nation  "  which  acknowledges  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  its  King,  and  submits  to  his  rule.
It  has  continued  nearly  nineteen  centuries,  and  gives  no  sign  of  decay.  In  all  this  the
Christian  recognizes  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  made  to  David  and  repeated  so
frequently  afterwards  by  the  prophets ;  and  through  his  faith  in  that  promise  he
anticipates  the  everlasting  duration  of  the  reign  of  Christ,  the  eternity  of  the  King,  and
the  eternity  of  his  reign.  We  are  sure  that  he  must  reign  for  ever ;  and  our  assurance
rests  on :  1.  The  promises  of  God.  The  "  God  who  cannot  lie,"  and  who  has  power  to
fulfil  all  his  Word,  and  subdue  all  that  opposes.  2.  ITie  nature  of  the  kingdom.  "  A
kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved "  (Heb.  xii  28).  It  is  spiritual,  and  cannot  be  put
down  by  the  material  forces  which  destroy  other  reigns.  It  is  the  reign  of  Divine
truth,  righteousness,  and  love ;  and  we  cannot  doubt  but  that  these  will  triumph  and
be  perpetuated.  3.  2Vie  nature  of  the  King.  "  The  First,  and  the  Last,  and  the  Living
One,"  who,  though  he  "was  deari,"  is  "alive  for  everrnore"  (Eev.  i.  17,  18,  Revised
Version).  This  King  literally  "  lives  for  ever."  He  is  Divine  as  well  as  human.  His
reign  is  the  reign -of  the  Almighty  God,  which  cannot  be  destroyed.  4.  Past  expe-
rience. The  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ  has  survived  in  spite  of  all  opposition.  All
possible  hostile  powers  have  done  their  utmost,  and  have  failed.  Christianity  has
outlived  many  kingdoms,  which  to  human  appearance  promised  to  survive  it.  It  has
been  assailed  by  brute  force  in  a  variety  of  forms,  and  by  the  forces'  of  intellectual
subtlety,  of  political  power,  nnd  of  spiritual  error,  and  it  has  conquered.  It  has  seemed
to  be  seriously  endangered  by  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  its  professed  friends,  but  still
it  survives  and  flourishes.  In  a  word,  the  prince  of  this  world  has  used  all  arts  and
energies  at  his  command  to  crush  the  power  of  Christ,  but  in  vain.  "  He  that  sitteth
in  the  heavens  laughs"  at  all  that  opposes  his  Son,  saying,  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  King
on  my  holy  hill  of  Zion  "  (Ps.  ii.  4,  6).  And  in  the  everlasting  future  this  kingdom
will  continue.  A  great  change  is,  indeed,  predicted  in  1  Cor.  xv.  24.  But  as  the
kingdom  of  the  Son  is  the  kingdom  of  the  Father,  so  the  kingdom  of  the  Father  will
still  be  that  of  the  Son.  Let,  then,  all  the  loyal  subjects  of  Christ  cast  away  fear  for  his
kingdom,  whatever  forms  opposition  to  it  may  take,  and  however  formidable  they  may
appear.    And  let  all  be  concerned  to  le  his  loyal  subjects.

m.  The  QBjsAT  wopK  BE  wopLD  EFFPCT.    "  He  shs^ll  build  s  bouse  fpc  my  Nanw  "


212  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vn.  1—29.

(ver.  13).  The  words  may  be  taken  as  applicable  DOt  only  to  the  temple  which
Solomon  built,  but  to  the  nobler  structure  which  our  Lord  is  rearing,  of  which  he  is
the  chief  Corner-stone  (1  Pet.  ii.  4 — 6) — "  the  temple  of  the  living  G(3  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  16),
built  of  "living  stones"  quickened  and  consecrated  by  the  Holy  Spirit — "  the  habita-
tion of  God  through  the  Spirit"  (Bph.  ii.  20 — 22).  Prom  age  to  age  the  work  of
erecting  this  spiritual  terriple  gOes  on  in  the  conversion  of  men  to  Christ,  and  their
addition  to  his  Church ;  and,  when  completed,  the  building  will  be  for  the  everlasting
honour  of  the  Builder.    May  we  all  liave  a  place  in  it  1 — G.  W.

Ver.  18. — Meditation  lefore  the  Lord.  David,  with  a  heart  filled  with  wonder  and
gratitude  by  the  message  from  heaven  commmunicated  to  him  by  Nathan,  "went  in
and  sat  before  the  Lord,"  and  poured  forth  his  thoughts  and  feelings  in  the  words  which
follow.  He  probably  went  into  tlie  tent  in  which  he  had  placed  the  ark,  and  there  medi-
tated and  prayed.  But  the  phrase,  "  before  the  Lord,"  is  very  frequently  employed  with-
out any  reference  to  the  ark,  the  tabernacle,  or  the  temple.  God  is  everywhere,  and  every-
where we  may  place  ourselves  as  in  his  special  presence,  and  with  acceptance  and  profit
offer  him  our  thoughts  and  worship ;  and  we  do  well  often  to  imitate  David  in  this  respect.

I.  The  conditions  rAVOUKABLB,  AND  INDEED  ESSENTIAL,  TO  EIGHT  THOUGHT  AND
W  riRSHIP   WHICH   ARE   FOUND   IN   THE   FELT  PBESENCE   OF   GoD.      1.    The  exclusion  of  the

world  and  its  infiiiences.  "Before  the  Lord,"  the  world,  with  its  gains,  pleasures,
opinions,  applause,  or  disapproval,  vanishes  from  view,  or  appears  as  nothing ;  and  thus
we  are  deliveied  from  its  blinding  and  perverting  iniluence.  2.  Intense  consciousness  of
Qod.  He  is  for  the  time  our  All.  His  character,  works,  relation  to  us,  dealings  with
us,  claims  upon  us,  judgment  respecting  us,  stand  forth  glorious  and  impressive.  3.
Intense  consciousness  of  ourselves,  our  real  nature,  relationships,  responsibilities  to  Qod
and  man.  In  the  light  of  the  Divine  presence  these  things  appear  quite  otherwise  than
when  we  regard  only  the  material  and  the  human.  4.  Greater  susceptibility  to  Divine
influences,  and  receptivity  of  Divine  gifts'.  Our  hearts  are  prepared  to  receive  more  of
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  we  do  receive  more.

IL  The  spiritual  profit  thus  secured.  1.  Fuller  and  truer  knowledge.  "  In
thy  light  shall  we  see  light"  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9),  which  includes  knowledge  and  much
besides.  "  Until  I  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God  ;  then  understood  I  their  end  "  (Ps.
Ixxiii.  17).  In  the  presence  of  God  we  obtain  deeper  insight  into  his  nature  and
character,  understand  better  his  plans  and  methods.  Our  thoughts  of  him  are  enlarged
and  quickened.  And  in  knowing  liim  we  come  to  know  ourselves ;  his  greatness
reveals  our  littleness ;  his  holiness,  our  sinfulness  j  and  his  fatherly  love  and  redeeming
grace,  the  true  worth  and  dignity  of  our  souls.  Coming  to  him,  as  the  disciples  to  Christ,
to  tell  him  what  we  have  been  doing  and  teaching,  the  poverty  and  imperfections  of  our
lives  become  manifest  to  us.  In  his  presence,  too,  we  learn  the  relative  values  of  holiness
and  sin,  time  and  eternity,  this  world  and  the  next.  2.  Richer  and  deeper  emotions  and
affections.  Penitence  and  humility,  gratitude  and  love,  confidence  and  hope,  peace  and
joy,  are  all  nourished  best  in  the  presence  of  God.  Coming  to  him  to  confess  our  sins
and  failures,  we  shall,  as  we  look  into  his  face,  be  inspired  with  new  and  more  hopeful
resolve.  Bringing  our  cares  and  fears  to  him,  as  Hezekiah  the  letter  of  Sennacherib
(Isa.  xxxvii.  14),  we  shall  be  relieved  of  them,  and  gain  new  courage  and  patience.  3.
Ever-better  worship.  Which  will  naturally  spring  from  an  enriched  and  spiritual  life.
Worship  which  is  not  offered  "  before  the  Lord"  is  not  worship  at  all;  and  the  more
his  presence  is  felt  the  worthier  will  our  worship  be.  4.  Ever-growing  power  to  live
according  to  our  convictions  and  resolutions.  "  Before  the  Lord,"  his  children  grow  brave
and  strong  to  do  and  endure.  His  eye  felt  to  be  upon  them,  they  act  nobly;  his  love
realized  by  them,  their  hearts  are  filled  with  a  love  mighty  to  serve  him  and  their  brethren,
and  to  conquer  the  evil  powers.  Finally !  The  measure  of  our  disposition  to  go  before
Ood  for  converse  with  him,  instruction,  stimulus,  consolation,  etc.,  is  the  measure  of  our
actual  piety.  We  lose  much  of  the  highest  happiness  and  profit  throu!j,h  negligence  in
ihis  respect.  All  that  occupies  our  minds  and  moves  our  hearts  becomes  sanctified  and
elevated  as  we  go  aside  and  bring  it  "  before  the  Lord."  On  the  other  hand,  the  greatest
attention  to  religious  observances  which  are  not,  through  faith  and  love,  done  in  the
presence  of  God,  is  worthless,  dishonouring  to  God,  and  useless,  yea,  worse  than  useless^
to  the  worshipper. — Q.  W.


ctt.  vn.  1— 29.]  'ME  SECOKD  BOOK  Of  SAMUfiL.  213

Vers.  18, 19. — Effects  of  Qod't  goodness  on  the  heart.  (Suitable  for  a  birthday  or  the
new  year.)  David,  having  retired  into  the  presence  of  God,  pours  out  before  him  the
feelii^gs  of  his  heart,  in  view  of  what  Ood  had  done  for  him,  and  what  he  had  jaat
promised  to  do.

I.  The  MER0IB8  CONTEMPLATED.  1.  Past  leading.  "Thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto."
How  mucli  this  included  in  David's  case!  How  much  in  the  case  of  every  one  of  us!
Bach  should  recall  in  God's  presence  the  particulars  of  his  own  life.  Life  itself,  reason,
health,  preservation,  supply  of  wants,  home  surroundings  and  comforts,  the  love  of
parents,  etc.,  education,  advancement  in  life,  deliverances  from  perils  and  sicknesses,
honours,  the  advantages  of  living  in  a  country  civilized,  free.  Christian ;  the  Word  and
ordinances  of  God,  connection  with  his  Church  and  ministers,  and  all  that  has  flowed
therefrom — the  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  pardon,  peace,  hope,  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  lova
to  God  and  men,  access  to  God,  the  communion  of  saints,  growth  in  grace,  victory  over
temptations,  opportunity  and  will  to  do  good,  success  in  Christian  labours,  support  in
trouliles  and  benefit  fiom  them.  Also  the  blessings  of  one's  "house" — ^wife,  children,
good  children  especially,  and  their  happiness.  It  is  an  endless  task  to  remember  and
recoimt  all  the  mercies  of  God ;  but  the  attempt  is  always  salutary.  2.  Promises  as  to
the  future,  "  This  was  yet  a  small  thing  in  thy  sight,  but  thou  hast  spoken  also  of  thy
servant's  house  for  a  great  while  to  come."  Astonished  and  grateful  ai  David  was  in
view  of  his  past  experience  of  God's  goodness,  the  promises  he  had  now  received  respect-
ing the  perpetuation  of  his  kingdom  into  the  distant  future  still  more  affected  him.  We
also  have  "  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,"  stretching  onward
into  the  eternal  future.  The  kindness  of  God  in  the  past  is  but  "a  small  thing."
Even  his  spiritual  gifts,  great  as  they  aie,  and  the  necessary  preparation  for  the  eternal,
are  but  a  slight  foretaste  and  pledge  of  the  exaltation,  perfection,  glory,  and  bliss  which
he  will  bestow  upon  his  children  in  increasing  abundance  for  ever  and  ever.

II.  Thbib  Giver.  The  contemplation  of  our  history  and  prospects  vrill  have  a
beneficial  or  injurious  effect  as  we  do  or  do  not  recognize  God  as  the  Giver  of  all.  Some
men  regard  themselves  as  the  architects  of  their  own  fortunes,  and  are  correspondingly
filled  with  self-satisfaction.  David  ascribed  all  to  God ;  and  we  ought  to  be  Uke  him
in  this.  For  if  we  have  done  much  for  ourselves,  the  power,  opportunity,  and  will  to  do
so  came  f  om  him;  if  friends  have  greatly  aided  us,  these  also  were  God's  gifts.  In
spiritual  I     igs  it  is  especially  obvious  that  "  by  the  grace  of  God  "  we  are  what  we  are.

HL  Theib  recbiveb.  "  Who  am  I,"  etc.  ?  The  thought  of  David's  insignificance  and
that  of  his  family  rendered  the  Divine  goodness  to  him  more  conspicuous  and  impressive.
So  we  shall  more  duly  estimate  the  goodness  of  God  to  us,  if  we  think  rightly  of  our-
selves; and  a  due  impression  of  the  greatness  of  his  goodness  will  lead  us  to  a  just
estimate  of  ourselves.  At  every  step  of  our  review  of  the  past  and  anticipation  of  the
future  shall  we  be  reminded  of  the  many  exhibitions  of  our  own  unworthiness.  "  Who
am  I?" — a  frail  and  insignificant  creature,  a  sinner,  a  great  and  persit>tent  sinner ;  at
best,  a  very  imperfect  Christian ;  proved  to  be  such  by  innumerable  instances — that  I
should  bf  so  favoured  now,  and  should  have  such  hopes  of  everlasting  blessing  set
before  me  ?

IV.  The  emotions  awakened  bt  them.  1.  Astonishmemt.  At  the  Divine  good-
ness, sovereign,  free,  unbonnijed,  condescending.  At  the  return  made,  which  would
appear  incredible  were  it  not  for  the  sure  testimony  of  memory  and  consciousness.
2.  Oratitude  and  love.  Expressed  in  praise  and  self-consecration  (Rom.  xii.  1).  3.
Humility.  The  mercies  of  God  revealing  the  more  our  unworthiness.  The  perception
of  his  hand  in  our  lives  making  our  own  part  in  the  good  they  have  contained  seem
insignificant.  "  Not  unto  us,"  etc.  (Ps.  oxv.  1).  "  Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from
another  ?  and  what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  ?  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  7).  4.  Benevo-
lence. His  loving-kindness  producing  loving-kindness  in  our  hearts,  as  we  contemplate
it ;  and  prompting  to  a  return  of  benefits,  which,  as  they  cannot  be  conferred  on  GJod
himself,  wo  bestow  on  his  representatives.  "Be  imitators  of  God,  as  beloved  children;
and  walk  in  love  "  (Eph.  v.  1,  2,  Bevised  Version).  "  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we
ought  also  to  love  one  another  "  (1  John  iv.  11). — G.  W.

Ver.  W.— 'Unutterable  thoughts  amdfeAings  Jmovm  to  God.  God's  knowledge  of  the
heart,  which  is  a  tertoi  to  evil  men  who  think  upon  it,  is  often  a  joy  to  his  servants^.


214  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMtEL.  [oa.  vn.  1— 2J.

"Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee"  (John  xxi.  17).  So
David,  with  his  heart  too  full  for  adequate  utterance,  finds  satisfaction  in  the  thought
that  God  knew  what  his  thoughts  and  feelings  were.

I.  The  felt  inadequacy  of  language  to  expbbss  the  deepest  thoughts  and
FEELINGS.  OF  THE  GODLY  SOUL.  In  our  Ordinary  condition  we  feel  not  this  difficulty.
Our  expressions  are  more  likely  to  go  heyond  our  thoughts  and  feelings,  especially
when  we  use  forms  of  devotion  prepared  by  others.  But  when  the  soul  is  deeply  stirred,
as  David's  at  this  time,  we  struggle  in  vain  to  express  fully  what  is  within.  It  is  thus
with  1.  Our  sense  of  the  value  of  Ood's  gifts.  Christ,  God's  "  unspeakable  Gift "  (2  Cor.
ix.  15).  Salvation.  Everlasting  life.  Gifts  of  God  associated  ■with  these  which  are
from  time  to  time  bestowed — special  help  in  temptation,  comfort  in  trouble,  guidance
in  perplexities  as  to  truth  or  duty,  etc.  2.  Our  sense  of  the  love  which  bestows  them.
We  can  only  say, "  How  great  is  thy  goodness ! "  "  How  excellent  is  thy  loving-kindness ! "
"  God  so  loved  the  world ; "  "  The  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge  "  (Ps.  xxxi.
19 ;  xxxvi.  7 ;  John  iii.  16 ;  Bph.  iii.  19).  Or,  as  David  (ver.  22),  "  Thou  art  great,
0  Lord  God  ;  for  there  is  none  like  unto  thee."  3.  The  emotions  excited  by  them.  Our
gratitude,  affection,  penitence,  humility,  confidence,  joy  ("  unspeakable,"  1  Pet.  i.  8),
longing  for  fuller  expeiienoe  of  them  ("groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,"  Rom.
viii.  26),  anticipations  of  their  perfect  enjoyment  (2  Cor.  v.  2 — i).  In  our  times  of
intense  devotion  we  feel  how  utterly  impossible  it  is  fully  to  express  what  is  in  our
hearts.

II.  The  satisfaction  ■which  arises  peom  God's  perfect  knowledge  op  us.
"  What  can  David  say  more  unto  thee  ?"  I  cannot  express  what  I  feel ;  and  I  need  not
labour  to  do  so,  "  For  thou,  Lord  God,  knowest  thy  servant."  It  is  the  same  thought
which  St.  Paul  expresses,  when,  speaking  of  the  unutterable  groanings  with  which  the
Holy  Spirit  intercedes  in  the  Christian  soul,  he  says,  "  He  that  searcheth  the  heart
knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit "  (Rom.  viii.  27).  God  knows  much  more  about
us  than  our  words  express ;  is  not  dependent  for  his  knowledge  of  us  on  our  own  account
of  ourselves.  As  we  cannot  by  any  words  conceal  from  him  the  evil  which  is  in  us,
so  our  deficiencies  of  expression  will  not  hinder  his  discernment  of  the  good.  Even
earthly  parents  see  the  meaning  which  their  children  try  to  express  in  stammering
words  and  broken  sentences ;  how  much  more  does  the  heavenly  Father,  who  is  not  at
all  dependent  for  his  knowledge  of  us  on  our  words,  see  beyond  the  poor  utterances
of  his  children,  into  their  hearts  1  This  is  (1)  a  comfort  under  the  consciousness  of
imperfect  and  unworthy  utterance  in  our  addresses  to  God ;  and  (2)  a  reason  for  not
labouring  too  much  to  express  ourselves  fully  and  worthily.  But  it  is  not  a  reason  for
either  (1)  declining  to  speak  to  God  at  all, — ^David  did  not  actually  sink  into  silence
because  he  felt  that  he  could  not  adequately  express  himself,  and  that  God  knew  him
(see  what  follows);  or  (2)  accustoming  ourselves  to  careless  expression  before  him.
Since  (1)  the  endeavour  to  speak  aright  aids  right  thought  and  feeling,  these  grow  in
the  endeavour  to  utter  them ;  (2)  in  family  and  social  worship  our  language  aids  or
hinders  others;  and  (3)  vie  should  ever  offer  to  God  our  best,  poor  as  we  may  feel  it  to
be.  And  we  may  indefinitely  improve  both  in  thought  and  expression  by  the  careful
employment  of  the  helps  presented  in  Holy  Scripture  and  uninspired  devotional  books.
Christian  poets,  too,  may  much  assist  us  to  find  suitable,  though  it  may  be  still
inadequate,  utterance  for  our  deepest  thoughts  and  emotions.

Finally :  1.  David's  emotions  on  this  occasion  are  at  once  an  example  and  a  reproach
to  us.  For  the  gifts  and  promises  of  God  to  us,  if  not  greater  than  those  to  him,  are
greater  than  his  understanding  of  them  could  be.  They  stand  out  to  us  in  the  light
which  streams  from  Jesus  Christ,  unfolding  into  all  the  precious  revelations  and
assurances  of  the  gospel,  and  all  the  happy  experiences  which  the  Holy  Spirit  produces.
Yet  how  seldom  are  we  so  affected  as  to  feel  language  too  poor  for  the  expression  of  the
wonder,  love,  and  gratitude  which  we  feel !  2.  How  sad  to  be  utterly  insensible  to  the
goodness  of  Ood  and  the  greatness  of  his  gifts  to  usl — G.  W.

Ver.  21. — God's  works  and  God's  heart  and  words.  David  looks  on  those  great
things  which  God  had  promised  him  as  if  already  accomplished,  so  great  confidence  had
he  in  the  power  an<l  faithfulness  of  the  Promisor ;  and,  conscious  that  they  were  due  to
no  worthiness  or  power  of  his  own,  he  acknowledges  that  all  originated  in  the  hear^


oa.  vn.  1— 29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  215

of  God  and  were  simply  in  fulfilment  of  his  word,  by  which  they  had  become  known  to
himself.     For  the  wUl  and  the  work  and  the  word  he  praises  God.

I.  God  does  sbeat  thinos  on  behaIaF  of  his  people.  The  works  of  creation  are
great  and  according  to  his  own  heart,  originating  in  himself,  and  on  a  scale  propor-
tionate to  his  own  greatness.  So  with  the  works  of  his  providence.  But  we  will
apply  the  words  to  redemption.  The  works  included  in  this  are  indeed  great.  They
are  on  a  scale  of  grandeur  worthy  of  God.  1.  The  methods  employed  are  great.  The
Incarnation — the  union  of  God  and  man  in  one  Person.  The  display  of  the  glory  of  God
in  the  earthly  life  of  Christ,  and  at  his  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension.  His  exalta-
tion to  be  "  Lord  of  all."  The  descent  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  Tite  work
effected  on  behalf  of  man  is  great.  The  atonement  especially,  and  all  involved  in  it.  The
conquest  over  sin  and  Satan  and  death.  The  opening  of  the  way  to  God  and  heaven.
3.  The  work  wrought  in  and  towards  men  is  great.  (1)  In  respect  to  each  believer.
Illumination,  regeneration,  pardon,  peace,  holiness,  perfection,  glory  everlasting,  together
with  the  special  giiidanoo  and  government  of  God's  providence  tending  to  and  issuing
in  these  great  results.  (2)  In  respect  to  the  multitude  redeemed  and  saved.  (3)  In
respect  to  the  final  deliverance  and  exaltation  with  the  Church  of  the  whole  creation
(Eom.  viii.  19—22  ;  Eph.  i.  10).

II.  QOD    DOBS     THESE    GBEAT    THINGS    "  AOCORDINa  TO  HIS  OWN    HEART."       1.    They

spring  from  his  heart.  They  are  done  spontaneously,  of  his  own  free  grace  and  will —
"  his  own  good  pleasure."  Not  at  the  prompting  of  others,  for  none  other  could  have
conceived  them.  Not  under  a  sense  of  obligation,  for  we  had  no  claim  upon  him,
except  that  our  sin  and  misery  appealed  to  Ms  compassion.  They  originated  in  the
Divine  mind,  sprang  from  the  Divine  love.  2.  They  befit  his  heart.  They  bear  the
stamp  of  the  Divine  nature ;  are  worthy  of  his  infinite  wisdom,  righteousness,  benevo-
lence, and  power ;  are  the  grandest  display  of  them.     "  It  became  him,"  etc.  (Heb.  iu  10).

"  All  thy  ways
Are  worthy  of  thyself— Divine ;
But  the  bright  glories  of  thy  grace
Beyond  thine  other  wonders  shine."

.IIL  God  does  these  great  things  in  pulpilment  or  his  own  Word.  "  For
thy  Word's  sake."  1.  He  announces  them  by  his  Word,  "  To  make  thy  servant  know
them."  The  things  which  God  has  done  and  will  do  he  makes  known.  It  is  thus
they  become  available  to  each  and  all  to  whom  the  Word  is  communicated.  For  the
knowledge  is  the  chief  part  of  the  means  by  which  salvation  is  wrought.  "  The  gospel
...  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth  "  (Bom.  i.  16 ;  sue
also  Eom.  x.  13, 14 ;  1  Cor.  i.  17, 18,  23 ;  Jas.  i.  18 ;  1  Pet.  i.  22,  23).  Thus  also  we
are  assured  of  the  completion  of  the  work  of  redemption.  For  by  the  promises  our
God  lays  himself  under  obligation  to  perfect  the  salvation  of  all  believers.  It  is,  there-
fore, a  great  privilege  to  knoiv  these  great  things  which  God  works.  2.  He  accomplishes
them. according  to  his  Word.  He  cannot  do  otherwise.  He  "cannot  lie"  (Titus  i.  2).
"  He  abideth  faithful ;  he  cannot  deny  himself"  (2  Tim.  ii.  13).  Moreover,  "  what  he
hath  promised,  he  is  able  also  to  perform  "  (Rom.  iv.  21).  Now  that  he  has  given  his
Word,  "for  his  Word's  sake,"  if  there  were  no  other  reason,  he  will  do  "all  these  great
things."

Then ;  1.  Let  us,  like  David,  adore  and  praise  our  God  for  his  wondrous  works,
and  for  making  them  known  to  us.  How  glorious  he  appears  in  these  works !  Let
us  ascribe  glory  to  him.  2.  Let  believers  rest  assured  of  the  complete  accomplishment
of  the  work  of  their  own  redemption.  They  have  the  Word  and  the  heart  of  God,  and
his  actual  works  for  them  and  in  them,  to  give  them  assurance.  3.  Let  us  fear,  lest  we
should  fail,  through  negligence  and  unbdief,  to  appropriate  the  redemption  so  wondrously
wrought  for  us,  notwithstanding  our  kmowledge  of  it.    (See  Heb.  ii.  1 — i.) — G.  W.

Ver.  22. — Ood  surpassingly  great  and  ever  the  same.  "Wherefore,"  because  thou
doest  these  great  things,  extending  on  through  the  ages,  and  because  thou  canst  and
dost  foresee  and  predict  them,  "  thou  art "  manifestly  "  great "  thyself,  surpassing  aU
others ;  the  very  God  Our  fathers  worshipped  and  have  told  us  of.  David's  knowledge
of  God  becomes  to  a  greater  degree  pergonal  insight  and  conviction  through  the  new


216  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vu.  1—29,

revelation  with  which  he  is  favoured.    It  is  well  when  living  conviction  as  to  God  ii
wrought  through  experience  of  his  kindness  rather  than  his  severity.

I.  The  sukpassino  gebatnebs  of  God.  1.  Ood  is  great.  (1)  In  his  nature.
Infinite  in  all  his  perfections.  Great,  no(;  only  in  power  and  knowledge,  but  in  right-
eousness and  love.  " His  greatness  is  unsearchable"  (Ps.  cxlv.  3).  (2)  In  his  opera-
tions. In  these  his  greatness  is  exercised  and  displayed.  In  his  works  of  creatlDn,
preservation,  redemption,  and  government,  we  see  how  great  be  i-i.  David  saw  it  in
his  dealings  towards  himself  and  his  posterity.  In  the  nature  of  his  pUns  and  purposes ;
in  his  ability  to  rule  a  free  world  through  successive  ages,  so  as  to  effect  their  accom-
plishment ;  and  in  the  power  to  predict  and  promise  tlie  result  with  certainty,  God
appears  unspeakably  great.  Thus  prophecy  as  well  as  creative  energy  manifests  the
greatness  of  God,  both  in  the  Divine  plan  itself — a  grand  scheme  of  justice  and  love
stretching  fiom  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  time,  and  on  throughout  eternity— and  in
the  revelation  of  it  to  man.  2.  Ood  is  great  beyond  all  others. '  "  There  is  none  liko
unto  thee,  neither  is  there  any  God  beside  thee."  He  has  no  equal,  none  that  approaches
l\im  in  majesty.  (1)  No  creature.  All  are  at  an  infinite  distance  beneath  him.  He
has  made  some  creatures  to  resemble  him  in  a  measure  in  their  intelligence,  goodness,
and  position  over  other  creatures ;  but  their  resemblance  is  like  that  of  the  image  of
the  sun  in  a  clewdrop  to  the  sun  itself.  Whatever  his  creatures  may  be,  they  and
their  capacities  are  derived  and  dependent ;  he  is  underivcd  and  independent  ("  from
everlasting  ") ;  their  powers  are  very  limited,  his  unbounded ;  none  of  them  can  create
or  give  life ;  he  is  the  "  Fountain  of  life  "  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9) ;  they  are  mutable,  he  immu-
table ;  they  mortal,  he  "  only  hath  immortality "  (1  Tim.  vL  16).  (2)  No  god.
David  would  tliink  of  the  divinities  worshipped  by  the  peoples  around ;  we  may  think
of  all  the  obj(  cts  of  worship  in  idolatrous  nations,  ancient  and  modern.  Begarding  thorn
B8  they  exist  in  the  minds  of  men,  producing  certain  effects  upon  them,  how  utterly
uulike  our  God !  We  feel  it  almost  profane  to  compare  them  with  him.  But  in  reality
they  are  nonentities,  "  vanities,"  as  they  are  so  frequently  called  in  Holy  Scripture.
There  is  no  God  beside  our  God.

II.  His  IDENTITY  WITH  THE  GoD  MADE  KNOWN  TO  US  FROM  FORMER  TIMES.  "Accord-
ing to  all  that  we  have  heard  with  out  ears"  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  3,  4).  David  recog-
nizes that  the  God  who  was  so  wi  ndrously  and  graciously  revealing  himself  to  h;m
was  the  same  God  whom  he  had  been  taught  to  revere  and  trust  on  account  of  the
great  things  he  had  done  for  Israel  in  former  days.  The  form  of  manifestation  was
different;  the  things  done  were  different;  but  there  were  the  same  Divine  perfections
apparent,  the  same  care  for  the  people  whom  he  had  chosen.  It  was  a  joy  to  the  king
to  discern  that  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  fathers,  was  communicating  with  him ;  and
that  what  he  was  doing  and  promising  corresponded  with  what  he  had  heard  of  him.
The  revelation  which  God  has  given  of  himself  in  Christ  differs  in  many  respects  from
the  old  revelations ;  the  operations  of  Gfld  under  the  new  covenant  differ  Irom  those
under  the  old.  But  as  we  come  into  living  communion  with  God  in  Christ,  and  become
ourselves  the  subjects  of  his  grace ;  as  also  we  learn  the  great  things  which  God  has
done  and  is  doing  under  the  gospel,  and  the  promises  he  makes  to  those  who  receive  it ;
— ^we  too  shall  rejoice  to  discern  that  our  God  is  the  same  as  was  worshipped  by  the
faithful  of  old,  and  all  through  the  ages — Jehovah,  the  living  God,  still  righteous  and
merciful  and  almighty;  still  doing  wonders  of  power  and  grace  ;  and  doing  them  on  a
vastly  wider  scale,  no  longer  chiefly  in  Israel,  hut  amongst  all  nations.  One  God
unites  all  generations,  iato  unite  all  peoples.  The  God  of  our  fathers  is  our  God,  and
our  experience  of  him  corresponds  with  theirs.  Thus  the  records  of  his  revelations  and
proceedings  in  all  the  past  become  available  for  instruction,  and  the  encouragement  of
faith  and  hope,  in  the  present  and  the  future.

From  the  whole  subject  let  us  learn  :  1.  To  rejoice  in  and  praise  &od.  It  is  matter
for  juBt  thankfulness  that  we  have  a  Cod  so  great  and  glorious  to  worship  and  confide
m,  One  who  lives  and  works  evermore,  and  is  throughout  all  ages  the  same  God.  2.  To
expect  great  things  from  One  so  great,  for  ourselves  and  the  whole  Chwch.  He  "  is  able
to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,  according  to  the  power
which  worketh  in  us"  (Eph.  iii.  20);  and  which  has  ever  wrought  amovg  and  on
behalf  of  his  people  "according  to  all  that  we  have  heard  with  our  ears."  3.  To  realist
tonscious  commtmion  with  the  saints  </  all  ages.    And  bo  with  all  saiiits  iu  earth  and


OH.  VII.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  217


eat


heaven.     4.  To  aly'ure  the  folly,  sin,  and  peril  of  declining  the  friendship  qf  thit  gr
Being,  and  living  in  enmity  with  him. — G.  W.

Verg.  23,  24. — The  Wessedness  qf  Ood's  people.  The  thought  of  the  greatness  of  God,
in  contrast  with  other  objects  of  worship,  naturally  leads  to  that  of  the  happiness  of
the  people  to  whom  he  has  revealed  himself,  and  on  whose  behalf  he  has  shown  his
greatness  by  his  works.  Israel  was  thus  blessed  above  all  other  nations;  Christians
inherit  the  same  blessedness  with  large  increase.  The  people  of  God  are  distinguished
above  all  others  by—

I.  Theik  redemption.  (Ver.  23.)  1.  The  natwre  of  it.  Israel  was  redeemed  from
bondage  in  Egypt,  and  afterwards  from  the  Canaanite  "  nations  and  their  gods."  A
wonderful  and  happy  deliverance.  Christians  are  the  subjects  of  a  higher  rMemptioQ.
Thi^y  are  delivered  from  sin,  from  a  bondage  more  cruel  and  degrading  than  that  of
Egypt.  They  are  redeemed  "  from  all  iniquity  "  (Titus  ii.  14),  "  from  this  present  evil
world  "  (Gal.  i.  4)  ;  "  from  their  vain  manner  of  life  handed  down  bom  their  fathers  "
(1  Pet.  i.  18,  Revised  Version).  They  are  redeemed  from  the  consequences  of  sin.
They  have  "redemption,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins"  (Col.  i.  14);  they  are  redeemed
"  from  the  curse  of  the  Law  "  (Gal.  iii.  13) ;  from  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  so  from
the  power  and  the  dread  of  death  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15) ;  they  await  "  the  redemption  of
their  body  "  (Rom.  viii.  23) ;  they  are  delivered  "  from  the  wrath  to  come  "  (1  Thess.  L
■  10).  Such  are  some  of  the  statements  of  Scripture  respecting  the  "  redemption  that  is
in  Christ  Jesus"  (Rom.  iii.  24).  2.  The  manner  of  it.  The  deliverance  from  Egypt
was  effected  by  marvels  of  Divine  power.  God  "  went "  forth  to  their  rescue,  doing
"great  things  and  terrible,"  in  which  the  people  themselves  had  and  could  have  no
part.  In  the  destruction  of  the  Canaanitish  peoples  they  did  take  part,  but  their
deliverances  were  by  the  power  of  God  as  really  as  their  redemption  from  Egypt.  For
the  spiritual  and  eternal  redemption  God  has  interposed  in  ways  yet  more  marvellous.
By  wonders  of  love  and  righteousness  and  power  combined,  he  delivers  men  from  sin
and  death  and  hell.  "  He  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins"  (1  John  iv.
10).  "  We  have  redemption  through  his  blood  "  (Eph.  i.  7) ;  and  so  the  saints  on  earth
and  those  in  heaven  unite  in  praise  of  him  who,  by  his  blood,  washed  them  from  their
sins,  and  redeemed  them  to  God;  (Rev.  i.  5 ;  v.  9).  Mere  power  could  not  effect  this
redemption.  (1)  God  must,  in  redeeming  men,  "declare  his  righteousness  . . .  that  he
might  be  just,  as  well  as  "  the  Justifier  "  (Rom.  iii.  26) ;  and  this  is  effected  by  the
death  of  Jesus,  "  the  Just  for  the  unjust "  (1  Pet.  iii.  18).  (2)  Men  are  to  be  delivered
from  sin  by  moral  suasion ;  and  this  also  is  effected  by  the  manifestation  at  once  of  the
evil  of  sin,  and  the  greatness  of  the  Divine  love,  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Thus  the
great  redemptive  act  is  the  sacrificial  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  this  is  rendered
effectual  in  the  experience  of  men  by  (3)  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  revealing  to
the  heart  the  gospel  of  redemption,  which  then  becomes  "the  power  of  God  unto
salvation"  (Rom.  i.  16).  To  have  thus  realized  redemption  is  the  greatest  blessedness
and  honour,  and  those  who  have  this  experience  are  the  true  "  Israel  of  God  "  (Gal.
vi.  16).  3.  The  glory  which  this  Redemption  brings  to  the  Medeemer.  "  God  went  to
redeem, .  .  .  and  to  m'ihe  him  a  Name."  This  aspect  of  the  deliverance  of  Israel  is  not
unfreqiiently  presented  in  Holy  Writ  (see  Exod,  iz.  16 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  12, 14).  Similarly,
the  Christian  redemption  is  said  to  be  "to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace"  (Eph.  i.
6, 12 ;  ii.  7  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  15).  It  is  not  that,  like  some  ambitious  human  hero,  he  cares
for  a  great  ;iame  for  his  own  sake ;  but  by  his  Name  he  is  known,  and  men  are  drawn
to  him  and  saved  (see  John  xvii.  26).  In  like  manner,  our  Lord  ia  said  to  have
acquired  through  his  humiliation  and  obedience  unto  death  "  a  Name  which  is  above
eveiy  name,"  even  "  the  Name  of  Jesus,"  and  this  also  "  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father"
(Phil.  ii.  9—11).

TT.  The  kelation  established  between  them  and  God.  (Ver.  24.)  This  also
distinguishes  them  above  all  others.  They  are  constituted  the  people  of  God;  he
becomes  their  God.  It  is  for  this  purpose  they  are  redeemed.  This  representation  of
the  relation  between  God  and  his  people  appears  first  in  a  promise  made  to  Abraham
(Gen.  xvii.  7,  8),  is  repeated  in  promises  given  through  Moses  (Exod.  ri.  7,  etc.),  is
adopted  by  David  here,  reappears  in  the  prophets  (e.y.  Jer.  xxxi.  38),  is  applied  in
the  New  Testament  to  Christians  (2  Cor.  vi.  16,  etc.),  and  is  finally  used  is  %  d«Krip*


218  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMtJEL.  [cu.  vii.  1-29.

tion  of  the  perfect  blessedness  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  Jerusalem  (Eev.  xxi.  3).
It  comprehends  all  that  the  most  enlightened  and  holy  can  desire.  1.  They  are  con-
gtituted  the  people  of  God.  Thus  to  Israel  it  is  said  by  Moses,  "  Thou  art  an  holy
people  unto  the  Lord  thy  dod,  and  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  peculiar  people
unto  himself,  above  all  the  nations  that  are  upon  the  earth  "  (Deut.  liv.  2 ;  see  also  xxvi.
18).  St.  Peter  employs  similar  language  to  describe  the  position  of  Christians  (1  Pet.
ii.  9) ;  and  St.  Paul  says  (Titus  ii.  14)  that  our  Lord  "  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he
might  .  .  .  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  ['  a  people  for  his  own  possession,'
Revised  Version]."  The  representation  includes :  (1)  Ownership.  They  are  his  by  right
of  creation  and  of  purchase.  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom  "  (tsa.  xliii.  3) ;  "  Ye  are
not  your  own ;  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20).  (2)  Appropriation.
God  takes  possession  of  the  people  who  are  his ;  in  the  case  of  Christians,  by  his  Spirit.
(3)  Self-consecration.  (4)  Homage,  including  trust,  love,  worship  (while  other  peoples
worship  other  gods,  the  people  of  God  worship  him),  and  obedience.  (5)  Glorification.
They  "  show  forth  his  praise  "  (Isa.  xliii.  21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9).  They  promote  his  kingdom.
2.  He  is  their  God.  All  that  men  expect  from  their  God  he  is  to  his  people,  and  far
more.  He  is  theirs  by  covenant  and  promise.  He  gives  himself  to  them.  He  exercises
authority  over  tliem..  They  enjoy  his  love,  his  presence,  the  employment  of  his  power
to  teach  and  guide,  to  purify,  to  comfort,  to  chastise,  to  protect,  to  employ,  to  perfect,
to  honour,  to  save.  3.  The  relation  is  eternal.  "  For  ever."  This  is  true  in  a  sense  of
the  relation  between  Israel  and  God.  Although  no  longer  a  nation,  they  still  are  used
to  witness  for  him  as  no  other  people;  and  by  their  inspired  men,  and  especially  by
him  who  is  of  them  "  according  to  the  flesh,"  they  have  become  the  chief  religious
teachers  and  benefactors  of  mankind.  And  the  day  is  coming  when  they  will  accept
their  Messiah,  and,  "  with  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles,"  form  one  people  of  God.  The
real,  spiritual  Israel  of  all  ages  and  lands  are  God's,  and  he  Is  theirs  for  ever  and
over.

Then :  1.  Happy  art  the  people  thus  favoured  by  the  Most  High  I  He  confers  on  them
greater  honovir  and  blessing  than  on  any  others.  This  is  true  of  Israel ;  of  any  nation
■who  have  the  Word  and  ordinances  of  God  amongst  them ;  of  the  visible  Church  of
Christ;  and  emphatically  of  the  true  spiritual  Church.  The  distinction  and  glory
become  more  marked  as  the  reality  of  what  is  included  in  the  title,  "  people  of  God,"
increases.  To  have  a  Divine  revelation  is  a  great  privilege ;  but  greater  to  receive  and
be  renewed  by  it,  and  thus  be  heirs  of  all  its  promises.  2.  He  concerned  to  ie  one  of
the  true  people  of  God,  who  have  Jehovah  for  their  God  for  ever.  3.  Take  heed  to  live
in  a  manner  becoming  your  relation  to  him,  whom  you  acknowledge  as  your  God.  (See
Lev.  xix.,  passim.)  The  people  of  a  God  of  holiness  and  love  should  be  distinguished
by  these  qualities.  Only  thus  can  they  prove  themselves  to  be  his.  Only  such  people
are  his  in  any  lastingly  happy  sense.  Would  that  it  were  possible  to  point  to  every
Christian  Church,  and  challenge  the  world  to  produce  any  communities  equal  to  them
in  all  that  is  pure,  righteous,  and  benevolent  1 — G.  W.

Ver.  25.-^God'»  promises  and  our  prayers.  "  Do  as  thtfu  hast  said."  The  words  are
used  by  David  of  the  promises  given  to  him  respecting  himself  and  his  house.  They
are  applicable  to  all  the  promises.

I.  Thet  FaBNiSH  A  GUIDE  TO  OUR  PRAYERS.  What  God  has  Bald  shows  us  what
we  should  ask.  His  promises  indicate :  1.  Tlie  kind  of  blessings  which  we  should  most
earnestly  seek.  The  promises  of  God — those  given  us  in  Christ  especially-^assure  us  c  f
temporal  good  so  far  as  is  needful ;  but  relate  chiefly  to  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings.
The  "good  things"  of  Matt.  vii.  11  are  interpreted  for  us  by  Luke  xi.  13  to  be  mainly
"  the  Holy  Spirit,"  which  comprehends  aU  good  for  our  spirits,  all  the  best  things  for
time  and  eternity.  While,  therefore,  we  may  pray  for  things  temporal  with  moderated
and  submissive  desire,  we  should  most  earnestly  and  constantly  pray  for  things  spiritual.
In  praying  according  to  what  God  "  has  said,"  we  are  guided  by  infinite  wisdom  and
love;  we  are  asking  "according  to  his  will"  (1  John  v.  14).  To  permit  ourselves  to
be  prompted  in  prayer  by  our  own  worldly,  carnal  inclinations,  is  to  turn  our  worship
into  sin,  and  to  ask  for  evil  instead  of  good.  2.  The  degree  of  these  blessings  which  we
should  seek.  The  promises  of  God  encourage  us  to  open  our  mouths  wide  for  him  to
fill  (Fs.  Ixxxi.  10).    They  are  without  limit  in  extent  and  duration  of  blessing.    Let


cfi.  VII.  1—29.3  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.      '  212

us  not  limit  ourselves  in  our  desires,  nor  limit  in  our  thoughts  the  bounty  or  power  of
God  (Ps.  Ixzviii.  41).  What  he  "  has  said  "  includes  all  we  can  need,  but  no  more
than  we  need  for  our  highest  blessedness ;  let  us  not  be  content  with  less.  Let  us
study  the  promises,  stretch  our  minds  to  i^asp  them,  and  then  turn  them  into  prayer;
and,  certun  that  our  thoughts  have  not  attained  to  the  full  extent  of  their  meaning,
let  us  yield  ourselves  to  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  he  may  intercede  within
and  "  lor  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,"  but  which  "  he  that  searcheth
the  hearts  "  can  interpret  and  respond  to  (Eom.  viii.  26,  27).

II.  They  fuknish  an  all-powerful  plea  in  oue  praters.  "Do  as  thou  hast
said"  is  an  appeal  to  the  faithfulness  and  kindness  of  him  to  whom  we  pray.  "  Thou
canst  not  -break  thy  word  ('  Thy  words  be  true,'  ver.  28) ;  thou  art  too  kind  to  trifle
with  those  who  confide  in  it.     For  thy  Name's  sake,  therefore,  fulfil  thy  promises."

III.  Thet  assure  us  of  a  favourable  answer  to  cue  peatebs.  When  our
prayers  are  according  to  the  Divine  promises,  we  should  be  absolutely  certain  of  their
success.  For :  1.  God  is  able  to  do  as  he  has  said.  2.  He  is  most  willing.  His  promises
spring  from  his  love  to  us,  and  express  wliat  he  is  most  desirous  of  conferring  upon  us,
and  which  only  our  indifi'erence,  unwillingness,  unbelief,  and  consequent  unfitness  pre-
vent our  receiving.  3.  His  word  binds  him.  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie ;
neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent :  bath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?  or
hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  i  ot  make  it  good  ?"  (Numb,  xxiii.  19).  4.  He  has  given
confirmations  of  his  promis<  s  and  pledges  for  their  fulfilment,  especially  in  the  gift  of
his  Son  (2  Cor.  i.  20 ;  Eom.  viii.  32).  Therefore  "  let  us  ask  in  faith,  nothing  doubting  "
(Jas.  i.  b,  Eevised  Version).  Were  it  not  for  what  he  has  said,  we  might  reasonably
hesitate  to  ask  for  such  great  things  as  we  are  taught  to  pray  for;  but,  having  his  word,
there  is  no  room  for  hesitation  (ver.  27).  However  conscious  of  sinfulness  and  unworthi-
nesB,  we  may  and  should . "  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace  "  (Heb.  iv.  16 ;  also
X.  19,  22).

Let  us,  then:  1.  Familiarize  ourselves  with  the  promises  of  God,  that  we  may  pray
with  vnderstanding  and  largeness  of  heart,  and  with  confidence,  importunity,  and  perse-
verance. 2.  Use  the  promises  when  we  pray,  whether  for  ourselves,  our  families,  our
country,  the  Church,  or  the  world,  3.  Abandon  whatever  would  turn  the  words,  "  Do  as
thou  hast  said,"  into  a  fearful  imprecation.  For  think  of  what  God  has  said  as  to  what
he  will  do  with  the  impenitent,  the  unbelieving,  the  disobedient,  the  unforgiving,  etc.,
even  if  they  offer  prayers  to  him  (see  e.g.  Matt.  vi.  12,  14,  15). — G.  W.

Ver.  26. — Oo^s  Name  magnified  in  his  people.  Any  name  of  God  is  magnified  when
it  is  made  to  appear  great  in  the  eyes  of  his  intelligent  creatures,  and  they  esteem  and
declare  it  great.  This  is  done  when  he  himself  adds  to  the  significance  of  the  name  by
yet  more  glorious  works  or  revelations;  and  when  they  come  to  larger  conceptions  of  its
significance,  and  consequently  use  the  name  with  greater  fulness  of  meaning.  Thus  as
"  the  sons  of  God  "  watched  the  various  stages  of  creation,  the  name  of  "  Creator  "  would
acquire  greater  significance  and  glory.  The  name  "Jehovah  of  hosts"  would  become
more  glorious  as  the  hosts  themselves  in  the  heavens  and  on  earth  grew  more  numerous.
But  David  here  assumes  that  additional  glory  to  this  great  name  of  God  might  and
would  arise  from  his  relation  to  Israel ;  that  to  say,  "  Jehovah  of  hosts  is  the  God  over
Israel,"  would  he  to  add  lustre  to  the  name.  And  rightly,  for  his  Name  has  been  mag-
nified by  what  he  did  amongst  and  for  that  people,  by  the  revelations  of  himself  which
he  gave  them,  and  by  the  results  in  their  national  history,  in  the  character  and  deeds  of
many  of  them,  and  in  the  history  of  the  world.  He  made  through  them  such  manifes-
tations of  his  greatness  and  goodness,  righteousness  and  mercy,  as  befitted  himself;  and
for  which  vast  multitudes  have  magnified  and  do  magnify  him  in  their  thoughts  and
thanksgivings.  Until  the  Chiist  same,  no  name  of  God  was  more  illustrious  than  this,
"Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel."  In  fact,  the  coming  of  Christ  and  all  that  has
grown  out  of  it  was  Included  in  that  name.  Hence  another  name  of  God  greater  still,
"  the  God  and  Father  "of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  "  the  God  and  Father  of  Christ's
people."  Yea,  the  whole  Name  of  God,  his  whole  character,  all  the  terms  and  declara-
tions by  which  he  is  made  known,  is  magnified  by  what  he  has  said  and  done  in  Christ.
The  great  threefold  name,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  is  as  never  before  declared  and
glorified  in  the  work  of  salvation.


S20  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  BAMUESL.  Ice.  vn.  1—29.


I.  How  GtOD'B  KaM£  18  MAomvrBD  ts  akd  by  hib  feoplb.     TbU  is  effected  by:

1.  The  work  wrought  for  them,

"'Twas  great  to  ipeak  a  world  from  nought;
Twas  greater  to  redeem."

2.  The  revelation*  made  to  them.  In  the  Person,  teaching,  miracles,  death,  resurrection,
and  asoension  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the
evangelists  and  apostles.  In  these  God  is  manifested  more  fully  and  clearly  than  by  all
his  works  besides.  Never  before  did  his  Name  appear  so  great  and  glorious.  3.  The
work  wrought  in  them.  The  regeneration  and  sanctification  of  souls  is  a  more  interesting
and  illustrious  display  of  Diviae  power  than  the  crc  ation  of  suns  and  stars,  and  reveals
more  of  the  Divine  iialure.  The  spiritual  beauty  and  glory  thus  produced  surpass  all
the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  natural  world,  and  in  them  more  of  Gfod  appears.  In  "  the
fruit  of  the  Spirit "  (Gal.  v.  22)  God  is  magnified  more  than  in  all  other  products  of  his
pownr.  4.  The  works  done  by  them.  The  witness  they  bear  for  God  by  their  worship
and  teaching,  and  sometimes  their  sufferings  as  confessors  and  martyrs ;  their  godly  and
loving  endeavours  for  the  good  of  others ;  the  courage  and  self-aacriflce,  feith  and
patience,  with  which  many  of  them  labour  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel ;  and  the  good
thus  effected  ;->-all  magnify  the  Name  of  God,  from  whom  all  proceed,  and  to  tlie  fulfil-
ment of  whose  gracious  purposes  all  conduce.  The  changes  wrought  by  the  labours  of
Christians— the  whole  influence  and  results  of  Christianity,  notwithstanding  all  draw-
backs (serious  as  these  are),  are  of  such  a  nature  and  magnitude  as  to  exalt  the  Name
of  God  more  than  anything  else  in  the  world.  5.  The  condition  they  at  length  attain.
Their  ultimate  moral  and  spiritual  perfection,  their  perfect  happiness,  their  vast  num-
ber. "  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that
believe"  (2  These,  i.  10).  6.  Tlie  praises  which  are  gtven  to  him  on  tlieir  account.
From  themselves,  from  the  angelic  hosts;  on  earth,  in  heaven;  for  ever.  In  these
ways  God  appears  great  and  ever  greater  because  of  his  relation  to  Christ  and  the
Church.

II.  The  prayer  of  good  men  eespectino  it.  "  Let  thy  Name  be  magnified ; "  let
it  become  greater  and  greater  in  the  sight  of  the  inteUigent  universe,  and  become  more
and  more  admired  and  praised,  through  what  is  done  in  and  for  and  by  thy  peoph'.
1.  Such  a  prayer  is  natural  to  good  men.  Because  they  love  God,  because  they  have
received  so  much  from  him,  and  because  they  desire  the  welfare  of  others,  which  la
involved  in  the  magnifying  of  the  Name  of  God.  2.  There  is  much  to  intens^y  such  a
prayer.  (1)  The  condition  of  the  Church.  In  which  there  is  so  much  that  does  not
glorify  the  Name  of  God,  so  little  comparatively  that  does.  To  say  that  the  Lord  of
hosts  is  God  of  such  a  people  doi's  not  tend  to  honour  him  so  greatly  as  his  eealous
servants  desire.  The  prayer  from  their  hearts  and  lips  will  mean,  "  Let  Christ's  people
become  so  Christ-like  as  to  make  it  manifest  that  their  religion  is  from  Ck)d,  that  they
themselves  are  specially  his,  and  that  he  is  indeed  a  Being  glorious  in  holiness  and  loving-
kindness."  (2)  The  condition  of  the  world.  In  which  God  is  so  little  thought  of,  his
Name  so  little  esteemed ;  in  which  idols  and  all  manner  of  vain  and  even  wicked  things
•re  magnified  more  than  God ;  in  which  men  give  to  themselves  and  their  fellow-men
the  honour  which  should  be  his ;  and  whose  salvation  and  whole  well-being  would  be
ensured  by  those  changes  which  would  magnify  the  Name  of  God.  (3)  The  slow  pro-
gress of  the  kinadom  of  God.  The  apparent  weakness  of  the  Church  in  reference  to  her
great  work,  and  her  real  insufficiency  for  it,  should  lead  all  Christians  to  pray  that  God
would  so  "arise"  and  "let  his  work  appear"  in  the  spread  and  establishment  of  his
kingdom  that  his  Name  may  be  magnified  in  the  earth  as  it  has  never  yet  been.  3.  Let
the  prayer  be  accompanied  by  practice.  Let  each  of  us  who  pray,  "  Hallowed  be  thy
Name,"  so  live  as  to  aid  in  fulfilling  our  prayer ;  first,  in  our  general  character  and  con-
duct, and  thfn  by  faithful  endeavours  to  promote  the  honour  of  GSod  amongst  professing
Christians  and  throughout  the  world.  Also  by  hearty  praise  to  God  for  all  he  has  dona
in  connection  with  Christ  and  Christianity  to  make  his  Name  great  and  glorious.

Observe,  finally,  that  the  Name  of  God  is  magnified  in  the  punishment  of  his  enemies.
Let  us  beware  lest  we  be  made  in  this  manner  to  glorify  him.  Let  us  rather  honour
his  Name  as  it  appears  in  Jesus  Christ  by  our  faith  and  obedience;  then  he  Will  honoui
it  ia  our  sftlvation. — G,  W.


OH.  vn.  1—29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  22X

WcT.  27. ~-Fraytr  induced  and  encouraged  by  promise.  David  gives  the  promise  of
God  to  him  ns  a  reason  for  praying  that  his  house  might  be  established  for  ever.  He
intimates  that  otherwise  ho  would  not  have  Found  it  in  his  heart  to  do  so.  In  like
manner,  the  promises  of  God  to  Christians  incite  and  encourage  them  to  pray  for  bestow-
meuts  that  they  would  not  have  otherwise  ventured  to  ask  for.

I.  The  greatness  of  God's  promises.  They  set  before  us  blessings  so  precious,
vast,  and  enduring,  that,  apart  from  the  declarations  of  God,  we  should  never  have
dar^  to  think  of  them  as  possible  for  us,  or  to  pray  for  them.  From  the  goodness  and
power  of  God  in  general  we  might  have  ventured  to  hope  and  pray  for  some  blessings,  ,
but  not  such  as  are  now  the  common  subjects  of  Chriatian  prayer.  Look  in  this  view
at  some  of  the  Divine  promises,  or  declarations  which  are  equivalent  to  promises.  1.  A$
to  the  heliever  himself.  Promises  as  to :  (1)  Pardon  of  great  and  numerous  sins,  long
practised.  Repeated  pardons.  (2)  Eenewal  of  nature  and  character.  Deliverance  from
slavery  to  sins  the  tnost  natural,  the  most  habitual.  "  A  new  heart,"  etc.  (3)  Adoption
into  the  family  of  Gkid.  The  Spirit  of  adoption.  Participation  of  the  Divine  nature.
Free  access  to  God.  Fellowship  with  him.  (4)  Victory  over  the  mightiest  enemies.
(5)  "Grace  sufficient "  for  all  circumstances,  and  highest  good  from  them.  (6)  Ful-
ness of  spiritual  life,  of  knowledge,  holiness,  strength,  joy.  "Filled  unto  the  fulness  of
God ; "  "  Filled  with  the  Spirit."  The  indwelling  in  the  heart  of  Christ,  of  God,  by
the  Holy  Spirit.  Truly  there  are  heights  of  godliness,  goodness,  and  blessedness
attainable  in  this  life,  to  which  most  of  us  are  strangers.  (7)  Heaven.  Seeing  God
face  to  face ;  being  with  Christ,  being  like  him  in  body,  soul,  condition  j  reigning  with
him  as  kings;  experiencing  "fulness  of  joy,  pleasures  for  evermore.''  Let  any  one
examine  the  statements  of  Holy  Scripture  on  these  subjects,  and  consider  what  they
mean ;  and  he  must  perouive  that  they  set  forth  blessings  which,  apart  from  the  assur-
ances thus  given,  men  could  not  have  conceived  of,  much  less  imagined  that  they  could
ever  be  their  own.  2.  As  to  the  future  of  the  kingdom  of  Qod  on  earth.  The  attraction
of  all  men  to  Christ;  the  universal  spread  of  the  knowledge,  worship,  and  service  of
Gud ;  and  consequently  of  peace,  union,  and  brotherhood ;  obedience  on  earth  to  God"s
will  as  it  is  obeyed  in  heaven.  In  opposition  to  such  a  prospect  is  the  whole  history
and  experience  of  the  world,  with  the  exception  of  a  small  fraction ;  the  depravity  of
mankind,  the  power  of  error,  supers'itinn,  idolatry,  priestcraft,  old  habits  of  wicked-
ness, etc.  Such  a  vision  could  never  have  appeared  to  men ;  or,  if  it  had  occurred  to  an
active  imagination,  could  never  have  been  regarded  as  a  matter  for  serious  prayer  and
endeavour,  if  God  had  not  given  it  by  his  prophets  and  by  his  Son.

IL  The  effect  which  thkse  pbomisks  should  have  on  odh  peaters.  They
should :  1.  Impel  us  to  pray.  Not  lead  us  to  neglect  prayer,  as  if  the  Divine  purpose
and  promise  superseded  all  need  for  prayer.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God :  I  will  yet  for
this  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them  "  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  37).  The
blessings  promised  are  for  those  who  seek  them.  2.  Enrich  and  enlarge  our  prayers.
The  measure  in  which  we  receive  is  according  to  the  measure  in  which  we  desire  and
ask  (Luke  xi.  5 — 13 ;  2  Kings  xiii.  18,  19).  3.  Oreatly  encourage  them.  Leading  us
to  pray  with  conSdenee  and  importunity.  Petitions  that  would  have  been  presumptuous
without  the  promises  are  now  sober  and  reasonable.  We  need  not  and  ought  not  to  be
deterred  either  by :  (1)  Our  sinfulness  and  God's  holiness  and  threatenings.  (2)  Our
insignificance  and  God's  majesty.  (3)  The  greatness  of  the  blessings  promised,  and  our
incapacity  to  receive  them ;  or  (4)  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  fulfilment  of  the
promises.  Sufficient  that  they  are  the  promises  of  God,  and  he  (1)  "  Jehovah  of
hosts,"  having  all  things  under  his  control,  unchanging  and  eternal  and ;  (2)  "  God  of
Israel,"  our  God,  our  covenant  God,  who  has  taken  us  to  be  his,  and  given  himself  to  be
ours  in  Christ  Jesus.  All  that  h?  has  promised  appears  only  to  befit  such  a  sublime
relationship.     (See  further  in  homily  on  ver.  25.)^'^.  W.

Ver.  W.-^Truth  of  Oo(fs  words.  "  Thou  art  Qod,  and  thy  words  are  truth  "  (Revised
Version).  Pavid  may  be  thinking  only  of  the  promises  of  God,  and  expressing  his  own
confidence  in  their  fulfilment  to  himself  and  his  family.  But  his  assertion  applies  to  all
the  words  of  God,  declarations  and  threatenings  as  well  as  promises ;  and,  as  his  lan-
guage is  general,  his  thought  may  be  general  also ;  ami  his  faith  in  the  truth  of  all  the
words  of  God  might  then  be  regarded  as  the  ground  of  his  faith  in  the  promise  made  to


222  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vii.  1—29.

himself.  The  words,  "  Thou  art  God,"  give  the  reason  of  his  confidence  in  the  Divine
words.     "  Because  thou  art  God,  we  know  that '  thy  words  are  truth,'  and  only  truth."

I.  The  gkottnds  op  cub  assurance  op  the  tedth  op  God's  words.  "  Thou  art
God."  1.  Bis  nature  and  character.  (1)  His  universal  knowledge.  He  cannot,  like
men,  he  mistaken,  and  honestly  assert  that  for  truth  which  is  imtrue.  (2)  His  essential
truthfulness.  Because  he  is  God  we  are  intuitively  sure  of  this.  As  he  cannot  be  mis-
taken, so  he  "  cannot  lie."  (3)  His  goodness.  Which  of  itself  would  prevent  him  from
misleading  and  deceiving  his  dependent  creatures.  (4)  His  unbounded  power.  Men
who  are  not  untrue  to  their  promises  may  be  unable  to  fulfil  them.  Not  so  God.
(5)  His  unchangeableness.  As  well  in  faithfulness  as  in  goodness  and  power.  He  can
never  become  either  unable  or  unwilling  to  fulfil  his  Word.  2.  His  doings.  The  actual
fulfilment  of  his  words.  (1)  In  the  history  of  the  world;  especially  the  promises
respecting  the  Christ,  the  blessings  he  would  bestow,  and  the  changes  he  would  effect.
The  faithfulness  of  God  to  his  Word,  as  shown  in  the  previous  history  of  Israel,  would
assure  David  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  to  himself.  (2)  Within  the  range  of  our
own  obseivation  and  experience.  The  words  of  God  as  to  the  results  of  faith  and  unbe-
lief, of  holiness  and  sin,  of  prayerfulness  and  prayerlessness,  are  continually  being
accomplished.  Our  personal  experience  testifies  to  their  truth,  and  we  can  witness  their
fulfilment  in  others.

n.  The  words  respecting  which  wb  have  this  assubanck.  All  declarations  that
can  be  traced  to  God,  whether  ascertained  by  unaided  reason  (as  we  say,  though  the
living  God  through  the  eternal  Word  is  ever  working  in  the  human  reason)  or  by  the
inspired  Book.  God  speaks  in  nature  as  well  as  in  the  Bible.  Scientific  truth,  and
moral  truth  known  by  the  conscience,  are  from  him  as  well  as  religious.  But  as  Christians
we  have  to  do  with  the  words  of  God  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  es|;ecially  with  the  "  truth
which  is  in  Jesus."  As  he  declared  in  language  almost  identical  with  David's,  "  Thy
Word  is  truth  "  (John  xvii.  17),  so  he  said  of  himself,  "  I  am  the  Truth  "  (John  xiv.  6).
And  it  is  of  unspeakable  importance  to  be  assured  that  he  is  and  gives  the  revelation
of  God;  that  all  that  he  is  and  says  is  the  truth.  And  as  he  declares  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment that  "  the  Scripture  cannot  be  broken  "  (John  x.  35),  we  have  his  warrant  for  full
confidence  also  in  the  more  ancient  revelation.  God's  words  as  thus  ascertained  relate
to:  1.  Existences.  God  himself,  his  Son,  his  Spirit.  Inhabitants  of  the  invisible  world —
angels,  Satan,  demons.  Mankind — the  nature  of  man,  purposes  of  his  creation,  the  rela-
tions he  sustains,  his  fallen  condition,  etc.  For  our  knowledge  of  the  invisible  beings  and
things  we  depend  on  the  Word  of  God,  mainly  the  Scriptures ;  and  the  knowledge  thus
acquired  is,  we  may  be  sure,  truth.  2.  Moral  laws.  Known  partly  by  reason,  partly
by  Scripture.  However  ascertained,  we  know  them  to  be  truth.  3.  Spiritual  truths
and  laws.  The  redeeming  love  and  works  of  God  and  our  Saviour ;  the  way  in  which
they  become  effectual  for  ourselves ;  the  duties  thence  arising.  4.  The  resulia  of  our
conduct  in  respect  to  these  truths  and  laws.  That  is,  the  promises  and  the  threatenings
of  God,  as  to  both  the  present  life  and  the  eternal  future.

Observe,  that  it  is  the  words  of  God  about  these  things  which  are  the  truth ;  not
necessarily  the  assertions  of  men — individuals  or  Churches — respecting  them.  It  is  for
human  teachers,  not  to  require  of  their  brethren  unquestioning  faith  in  their  statements,
but  to  lead  them  up  to  where  they  may  hear  the  utterances  of  God  himself.  And  this
is  to  be  done,  nut  merely  by  proving  their  assertions  by  the  letter  of  Scripture,  but  by
cherishing  themselves,  and  fostering  in  others,  the  spirit  which  enables  communion  with
"  the  Father  of  spirits  "  (Heb.  xii.  9).  If  God's  words  be  truth :  1.  We  should  seelcfvAl
knoivledge  of  them.  2.  We  should  exercise  undoubting  faith  in  them.  (1)  The  faith
which  realizes  the  invisible  and  eternal ;  apprehends  and  feels  them  to  be  as  God  says.
(2)  The  faith  which  is  full  confidence  in  the  Divine  promises  and  threatenings,  assur-
ance that  our  own  future  and  that  of  others  will  be  according  to  them.  We  have
such  a  faith  only  when  our  belief  sways  and  rules  our  hearts  and  lives.  3.  We  should
imitate  Qod  as  to  our  truthfulness  and  the  actual  truth  of  our  words.  Being  true  and
sincere  in  onr  character  and  utterances,  and  taking  care  that  what  we  truly  say  shall
be  truth.— G.  W.

Ver.  29. — A  good  man's  prayer  for  MsfamUy.  David's  prayer  has  especial  reference
to  the  promise  given  him  that  his  family  should  eoptiftue  for  ever  to  yiile  ls.xa,p\^    Wa


OH,  vni.  1 — 18.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


223


may  take  the  prayer  as  suitable  to  be  used  by  any  godly  father  for  his  children  and
children's  children.

I.  The  prayeb.  That  God  wopld  bless  the  family.  A  Christian  father  offering  this
prayer  would  have  regard  to :  1.  Temporal  hiessings.  Prolonged  life,  good  health  of
body  and  mind,  success  in  worldly  pursuits,  competence.  Asking  for  these  as  a  bless-
ing from  God  implies  the  desire  that  they  should  be  granted  only  so  far  as  they  will  be
blessings ;  that  they  should  come  as  the  result  of  God's  blessing  on  upright  means  (not
from  fraud,  injustice,  or  violence ;  see  Prov.  x.  22) ;  and  that  they  should  be  accom-
panied with  God's  blessing,  so  that  they  may  not  ensnare  and  injure  the  soul,  but
Iiromote  its  prosperity  and  highest  happiness.  Thus  regarded,  such  a  prayer  is  not
unbecoming  the  heart  and  lips  of  any  good  man.  2.  Spiritual  blessings.  That  the
family  may  be  worthy  the  name  of  a  Christian  household,  all  being  truly  the  children
of  God,  worshipping  and  serving  him  faithfully  and  to  the  end.  A  Christian  parent  will
be  more  desirous  that  his  house  should  be  good  than  great — "rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of
the  kingdom  "  (Jas.  ii.  5)  rather  than  possessed  of  material  wealth.  For  such  blessings
he  need  not  restrain  his  desires,  as  they  are  good  in  and  for  themselves,  good  always
and  for  ever.  The  poorest  may  seek  these  for  his  children,  who  may  enjoy  them  equally
with  the  wealthiest,:  they  are  open  to  all.  3.  Eternal  blessings.  That  he  and  his  may
"  continue  for  ever  before  God  "  (comp.  Gen.  xvii.  18),  and  "  be  blessed  for  ever  " —
numbered  with  the  saints  in  the  glory  everlasting.  The  words  translated,  "let  it  please
thee  to  bless,"  may  be  more  literally  rendered  "  begin  and  bless "  (Eevised  Version,
margin).  As  if  David's  thoughts  reverted  from  the  distant  future  to  the  present ;  and
he  became  acutely  alive  to  the  fact  that,  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise  in  the
future,  it  was  necessary  that  God  should  be  with  him  and  his  at  once  and  all  along.
In  the  heart  of  a  Christian  the  meaning  may  well  be,  "  Let  thy  blessing  come  at  once,
without  any  delay,  on  my  house,  to  correct  what  is  wrong,  to  increase  what  is  right,  to
produce  those  conditions  which  are  most  favourable  to  all  good,  as  they  most  fully
ensure  thy  constant  favour."

II.  Whence  it  aeises.  1.  Oodliness.  Sense  of  the  value  of  God's  blessing ;  pre-
ference of  it  over  all  else ;  confidence  in  God's  fatherly  love  and  sympathy  with  the
love  of  earthly  parents  for  their  children;  and  faith  in  his  promises.  2.  Parental  feel-
ing. Love  for  his  family ;  longing  for  their  true  and  lasting  happiness  and  well-being.
3.  Eega/rdfor  his  own  happiness.  Which  is  necessarily  bound  up  with  the  goodness  and
happiness  of  his  children.

Finally :  1.  Sibch  prayer,  when  real,  will  be  accompanied  by  Christian  instruction  and
training.  (Eph.  vL4.)  2.  Let  children  thank  Ood  for  praying  parents.  Let  them
keep  before  them  the  image  of  their  fathers  and  mothers  daily  kneeling  before  God,
and  imploring  his  blessing  on  them.  Let  them,  however,  not  trust  to  their  prayers
as  sufficient  to  ensure  their  salvation ;  but  pray  for  themselves.  (See  more  on  ch.  vi.
20.)— G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEE  Vm


Ver.  1. — David  smote  the  Philistines.  In
the  previous  chapter  we  have  seen  that  the
empire  of  David  not  only  marked  an  era  in
the  development  of  Israel  nationally,  but
was  also  the  reaching  of  a  new  stage  in  the
preparation  for  the  advent  of  the  Messiah ;
and  we  saw  that  without  this  the  develop-
ment of  prophecy  would  have  been  impossible,
and  the  people  have  remained  unfit  for  the
high  mission  to  which  they  were  called  as
the  witnesses  to  the  unity  of  God.  We  have
in  this  chapter  a  brief  summary  of  the  wars
which  raised  Israel  from  the  position  of  a
struggling  and  oppressed  race  to  the  pos-
«essio^  of  widespread  empire.    With  thig


narrative  .the  first  history  of  David  endi,
and  in  the  subsequent  narratives  many  of  the
events  referred  to  here  are  more  fully  de-
tailed, and  given  with  additional  incidents.
David  took  Metheg-ammah  out  of  the  hand
of  the  Philistines.  Metheg-ammah  means
"  the  bridle  of  the  mother-city."  We  learo
from  the  parallel  place  (1  Chron.  xviii.  1)
that  the  city  of  Gath  is  meant  by  this  phrase
Gath  was  at  this  time  the  metropolis  of
Philistia,  and  had  reduced  the  other  foul
chief  towns  to  a  state  of  vassalage.  Thus
by  taking  Gath,  his  old  city  of  refuge  (1
Sam.  xxvii.  2),  David  acquired  ■  also  th«
supremacy  which  she  had  previously  ex-
ercised over  the  whole  country,  and  by
placing  a  strong  gwrjson  there,  as  prevjoflsly


224


THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[oh.  vm.  1 — 18.


the  Philistines  had  done  in  the  towns  of
Israel,  he  kept  that  martial  race  in  awe.  It
denotes  great  progress  In  the  arts  of  war
that  David  could  besiege  and  capture  a  town
so  strong  aa  Gath.

Veri  2. — Se  smote  Moab.  In  the  previong
history  we  find  David  and  Moab  on  snoh
friendly  terms  that  he  entrusted  his  father
and  mother  into  their  king's  keeping  (1  Sam.
xxii.  3,  4).  Now  he  not  only  subjugates
them,  but  puts  two-thirds  or,  according  to  the
aneient  versions,  half  of  the  captured  combat-
ants to  death.  Compared  with  the  custom
of  the  Bomans,  and  with  the  attempt  to
destroy  all  the  males  in  Edom,  this  was
mild  treatment :  for  we  find  Ossaar  in  his
Gallic  wars  putting  all  his  prisoners  to  death,
and  using  for  their  execution  the  mere  phiase,
"  he  counted  them  in  the  number  of  enem  ies,
as  if  the  killing  of  enemies  was  a  matter  of
course.  The  customs  of  (he  Israolites  in  war
were  not  so  c  ruel,  and  this  treatment  of  the
Moabites  seems  to  be  mentioned  as  showing
that  they  received  exceptionally  severe  treat-
ment. The  justification  of  this  is  found  by
Jewish  eommeotators,  on  the  authority  of  the
Midiash,  in  the  supposed  fact  that  the  King
of  Moab  had  put  David's  father  and  mother
to  death.  But  aa  Philippson  ndds,  even  so
it  was  an  instance  of  the  extreme  barbarity
of  ancient  warfare.  Casting  them  down  to
the  gronnd;  Hebrew,  making  them  to  lie
dawn  an  the  ground ;  and  so  the  Revised
Version.  It  is  plain  that  those  who  were
made  to  lie  on  the  ground  were  combatants
who  had  been  made  prisoners,  and  the
Hebrew  seems  to  mean  that,  while  they
were  thus  prostrate,  they  were  measured  off
into  three  divisions,  whereof  two  were  put  to
the  sword,  and  one  permitted  to  live.  All
tlie  versions,  however,  understand  that  only
half  were  put  to  death,  making  the  sense  to
be  that  he  mc^asured  them  with  two  cords,
one  to  kill,  and  one  full  cord — one,  that  ii,
of  larger  size,  to  save  alive.  We  get  no
help  from  1  Chron.  xviii.  2,  where  this
treatment  of  the  Moabites  is  omitted.  It  is
probable  that  it  was  in  this  war  that  Benaiah
slew  "two lion-like  men  of  Moab  "  (1  Chron.
xi.  22),  who  were  its  champions  and  perhaps
members  of  the  royal  house.  They  brought
gifts  means  that  they  paid  an  annual  tribute ;
but  the  phrase  shows  that,  though  now  tliey
were  David's  servants,  that  is,  subjecte,  yet
that  they  were  left  in  possession  of  their
independence,  and  tb»t  their  internal  afiairs
were  managed  by  native  authorities.

Yer.  3,— Hadadezar.  The  name  is  spelt
Hadarezer  in  cb.  x.  16  and  in  1  Chron.
xviii.  3,  and  such  is  the  reading  of  the  ver-
sions here  and  of  many  Hebrew  manuscripts.
The  other  reading  has  been  defended  on  the
ground  that  Hndad  is  the  name  of  the
Syrian  ran-god,  but  the  cuneiform  inscrip-


tions show  that  his  real  name  was  Hadar.
The  King  of  Syria,  mentioned  in  1  King:8
XX.  1,  is  called  in  Assyrian  Ben-Hidri.
Zohah.  Ewald  iilentifies  Zobah  with  the
"  Sabo  "  mentioned  by  Ptolemy.  This  is  un-
certain, but  evidently  Zobah  lay  north-east
of  Damascus  and  south  of  Hamath,  in  the
region  between  the  rivers  Orontes  and
Euphrates.  In  1  Bam-  xiv.  47  it  appears
as  a  powerless  country  governed  by  a  mul-
titude of  petty  kings ;  but  evidently  now
Hadarezer  had  made  himself  supreme,  and
become  a  powerful  monarch  whose  authority
extended  even  across  the  river  into  Mesopo-
tamia (ch.  X.  16).  Having  crushed  his
rivals  at  home,  he  had  next  endeavoured  i.u
extend  his  dominion  abroad.  As  he  went  to
recover  his  border  at  the  river  Euphrates,
The  word  "Euphrates"  is  inserted  in  the
Authorized  Version,  because  the  margin
says/'  Euplirates  read  but  not  written."  In
the  Bevised  Version  it  is  omitted,  because
the  unauthoritative  nature  of  these  directionr
to  read  bomething  not  in  the  text  has  been
demonstrated.  Technically  these  readings
are  called  K'ri,  and  the  written  text  iCftb.
In  1  Chron.  xviii.  3  the  reading  is,  "  as  he
went  to  stablish  his  dominion  by  the  river  "
— a  change  which  involves  the  alteration  of
only  one  letter,  as  the  word  rendered  here
"his  border,"  and  in  1  Chron.  xviii.  3
"  his  dominion,"  is  the  same,  signifying
literally,  "  his  hand."  For  this  reason  tlie
Revised  Version  renders  it  correctly  in  both
places  "his  dominion.  Now,  David  never
had  possessed  up  to  this  time  any  dominion
upon  the  Euphrates,  but  in  the  fuller  narra-
tive in  oh.  X.  we  learn  that  these  Syrians  of
Zobah  bad  sent  powerful  reinforcements  to
the  Ammonites  in  their  war  with  David;  and
he  might  reasonably,  therefore,  determine  to
follow  up  his  victory  over  them  by  extending
his  power  up  to  the  river,  so  as  to  guard  the
fords,  anil  prevent  all  future  invasiuns.  And
this  Hadarezer  would  reseut.  As  an  able
and  enterprising  man,  he  had  succeeded  in
making  Zobah  a  powerful  realm,  and  was
not  likely  to  submit  to  havin-;  a  bridle  put
upon  his  adventurous  spirit  by  the  posting
of  an  Israelitish  garrison  on  the  borders.
We  learn  from  oh-  x.  19  that  David's  object
was  to  prevent  aid  coming  to  Ammon  from
Zobah,  and  that  he  succeeded  in  putting  a
barrier  in  Hadarezer's  way.  We  can  scarcely
doubt,  therefore,  that  the  reading  in  the
Chronicles  is  to  be  preferred.  In  1  Sam.  xiv.
47  we  road  that  Saul  had  waged  war  with
Zobah,  and  as  David  had  probably  served  in
it,  he  would  liave  thereby  acquired  both  a
knowledge  of  the  country,  very  useful  in
this  present  more  serious  expedition,  and
also  have  learned  tl^e  necessity  of  guarding
his  dominions  against  perpetual  invasionp
from  that  quarter.


OH.  vm.  1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


225


Yer.  4. — TieMA  took  fiom  him  a  thousand
chariots,  and  seven  hundred  horsemen,  and
twenty  thousand  footmen.  The  word
"  chariots "  is  inserted  in  the  Authorized
Version  after  "  thousand,"  from  the  parallel
place  in  1  Chron.  xviii.  4,  where  also  it  is
said  that  David  captured  psven  thousand
horsemen.  The  numbers  of  the  Chronicler
are  more  in  proportion  to  one  another  than
those  mentioned  here,  provided  we  assume
that  the  word  "  chariots  "  ought  to  be  sup-
plied, which,  as  it  is  not  the  only  difference,
b  uncertain.  Until  the  Arabs  invented
our  present  system  of  notation,  the  ancient
methods  of  representing  numbers  were  so
liable  to  error  that  little  dependence  can
be  placed  upon  them.  The  Hebrews  used
their  letters  for  numerals,  but  after  400  their
system  breaks  down.  Any  number  higher
than  400  can  be  represented  only  by  long
sums  in  arithmetic,  or  by  an  intricate  system
of  points  above  and  below,  which  were  sure
to  get  into  confusion.  David  houghed  all
the  chariot  horses.  There  is  good  reason  for
concluding  that  tlie  word  used  here,  recheb,
is  a  collective,  and  signifies  animals  used
either  for  riding  or  driving.  What  David
reserved  was  not  a  hundred  chariots,  but  a
hundred  riding-horses,  which  would  be  use-
ful to  him  for  rapid  communication,  and
could  scarcely  be  regarded  as  a  violatio7i  of
the  command  in  Deut.  xvii.  16.  Both  the
Authorized  and  Eevised  Versions  are  wrong,
but  the  Authorized  Version  at  least  makes
the  word  recheb  have  the  same  meaning  in
both  clauses,  whereas  the  Kevised  Version
makes  it  signify  chariot-horses  in  the  first
clause,  and  the  chariots  themselves  in  the
second.  The  defeat  by  David,  with  infantry
only,  of  an  army  provided  with  so  powerful
a  force  of  cavalry  and  chariots,  proves  his
great  military  skill,  and  their  capture  bears
even  more  emphatic  testimony  to  his  general-
■hip.  In  the  Psalms  we  find  horses  often
referred  to  as  objects  regarded  with  terror,
and  which  gave  a  great  advantage  to  their
enemies  (Ps.  xx.  7;  xxxiii.  17;  Ixxvi.  6;
cxlvii.  10),  but  over  which  they  had
triumphed  by  Jehovah's  aid.  This  method,
however,  of  rendering  them  useless,  though
practised  by  Joshua  (Josh.  xi.  6),  was  most
cruel;  as  the  poor  things,  unable  to  move
about  with  the  sinews  of  their  hind  legs
■evered,  would  perish  of  hunger.

Ver.  5. — ^The  Syrians  of  Damascus ;  Hebrew,
Aram-Dammesek  i  that  is,  Aram-Damascus.
The  inhabitants  of  these  regions  and  of
Mesopotamia  were  descended  from  Aram,  the
son  of  Shem  (Gen.  x.  22),  and  bore  his  name.
Thus  Zobah  is  called  Aram-Zobah  in  the  title
of  Ps.  Ix.  As  members  of  a  kindred  race,  and
speaking  the  same  language,  all  the  clans  of
the  Aramean  family  would  naturally  com-
bine to  check  the  growing  power  of  Israel

H.  8AHU8Ik


Ver.  6. — Garrisons.  This  is  the  word
used  in  1  Sam.  x.  5  and  xiii.  3.  The  Ara-
means  were  left  free  to  manage  their  internal
affairs  themselves,  but  they  had  to  pay
tribute  (see  on  ver.  2) ;  and  to  prevent  the
assembling  of  troops  to  contest  David's
authority  and  shake  off  his  yoke,  garrisons
were  stationed  in  such  places  as  commanded
the  country.  The  Philistines  had  done  the
same  in  Israel  when  they  were  masters  there.

Ver.  7, — Shields  of  gold.  Probably  they
were  plated  with  gold,  and  were  borne  by
Hadarezer's  body-guard.  But  it  is  very
uncertain  whether  shields  are  really  meant.
The  word  in  Syriao  means  "quivers."
Jerome  evidently  could  not  at  first  find  out
what  it  signified,  as  he  in  this  place  trans-
lates in  the  Vulgate  "arms,"  but  subse-
quently he  became  better  informed.  The
LXX.  renders  "bracelets,"  and  adds  that
they  were  carried  away  from  Jerusalem  by
Shishak  in  the  days  of  Rehoboam.  Th'  re
is  no  contradiction  in  this  with  what  is  said
in  1  Kings  xiv.  26,  as  what  Solomon  made
were  undoubtedly  shields,  such  being  the
certain  meaning  of  the  word  in  the  Hebrew,
and  its  rendering  in  all  the  versions.  No
version  renders  the  word  used  here  "  shield."
In  the  parallel  place  (1  Chron.  xviii.  7)  the
Syriao  and  Vulgate  render  it  "quivers,"
the  IjXX.  "  collars,"  and  the  Arabic  "  plates
of  gold  hung  on  the  trappings  of  the
horses."  As  they  were  captured  from  a
Syrian  king,  they  probably  retained  their
Syriac  name,  and  if  so  they  were  "quivers."

Ver.  8. — Betah  .  .  .  Berothai.  Of  these
cities  nothing  certain  is  known,  and  in  1
Chron.  xviii.  8  the  names  are  changed  to
Tibhath  and  Glmn.  An  interesting  addition
is  made  there,  inserted  also  by  the  LXX.  in
this  place,  that  it  was  from  this  braes  (that
is,  copper)  that  Solomon  made  the  groat
laver,  the  pillars,  and  many  other  vessels
for  the  temple  service.

Ver.  9. — Toi,  called  in  Chronicles  Tnu,
King  of  Hamath.  This  was  a  famous  city
upon  the  river  Orontes,  afterwards  called
by  the  Greeks  Epiphania,  and  was  situated
upon  the  northernmost  boundary  of
Palestine.  Its  interest  in  the  present  day
lies  in  its  having  been  the  capital  of  the
Hittites — a  race  whose  very  existence  was
doubted  a  few  years  ago,  in  spite  of  the
testimony  of  Holy  Scripture;  but  whose
marvellous  empire  has  been  lately  proved
to  be  historical  by  Egyptian  records  on  the
one  side,  and  cuneiform  inscriptions  on  the
other.  Unfortunately,  inscriptions  which
they  have  themselves  left  behind  have  not
yet  found  any  one  capable  of  decipher!  g
them.  In  the  twelfth  century  B.C.  thny
were  the  paramount  power  from  th»
Euphrates  to  the  Lebanon.  For  many  cen-
turies they  contended  with  the  Pharaohs


226


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  nn.  1—18


for  the  possession  of  Egypt,  and  while
Kameses  II.  had  to  make  an  inglorious  peace
with  the  Eheta,  as  they  are  called,  and
marry  the  king's  daughter,  Barneses  III.
won  a  great  victory  over  them,  and  saved
Egypt  from  thraldom.  In  the  cuneiform
insoriptions  we  find  the  record  of  a  struggle
between  Assyria  and  the  Hittites,  lasting
for  four  hundred  years,  during  which  Shal-
maneser  made  thirty  campaigns  against
them,  but  they  were  not  finally  conquered
until  B.C.  717,  during  the  reign  of  Sargon.
Fuller  details  will  he  found  in  Dr.  Wright's
'Empire  of  the  Hittites,'  published  by
Messrs.  Nisbet.

Ver.  10. — Joram.  In  1  Ohron.  iviii.  10
he  is  called  Hadoram,  and  this  was  appa-
rently his  real  name,  Joram  being  merely  the
substitution  of  the  nearest  Hebrew  word  for
something  foreign  and  therefore  unintel-
ligible. So  among  the  descendants  of  the
French  refugees  settled  in  England  similar
changes  are  common.  Thus  Fillons  becomes
Pillow ;  Chevallier,  Shoveller ;  St.  Amour,
Stammers.  As  Hamath  bordered  upon
Zobah,  and  apparently  had  waged  unsuc-
cessful war  with  the  vigorous  Hadarezer,
Toi  was  grateful  to  David'  for  smiting  his
rival,  and  sent  this  embassy  of  congratula-
tion for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  the  con-
queror's friendship.  For  this  end  he  also
sent  rich  presents ;  and  as  a  present  is  called
in  the  Hebrew  a  hlessing  (1  Sam.  xxv.  27 ;  xxx.
26,  margin),  the  phrase  used  here,  to  bless
him,  contains  tlie  idea,  not  only  of  congratu-
lation, but  of  offerings.  There  is  something
admirable  in  this  high  Oriental  courtesy.
The  material  value  of  the  gifts  is  left  in  the
background.  Their  worth  lies  in  their  being
the  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  favour
resting  upon  David,  and  in  the  prayer  that
that  favour  may  continue.  In  Ps.  xviii.  43,
44  we  have  proof  of  the  great  pleasure
which  this  embassy  from  so  great  a  nation
gave  to  David.

Ver.  11. — Which  also  King  David  did
dedicate.  The  blessing  became  more  blessed
by  this  use  of  it,  and  it  shows  how  strong
were  David's  feelings,  that  he  thus  gave  to
God's  house,  not  only  the  spoils  of  war,  but
also  gifts  of  friendship.  It  was  in  this  way
that  he  accumulated  those  large  stores  of  the
precious  metals  enumerated  in  1  Chron.
xxix.,  and  employed  in  making  the  sacred
vessels  of  the  temple.  Theii  vast  amount
is  the  more  remarkable  because  Palestine
previously  was  almost  destitute  of  them.
Wherever  the  armies  of  Israel  went,  they
made  diligent  search  after  everything  that
would  serve  towards  the  building  of  their
siinctuary.

Ver.  12.— Of  Syria;  Hebrew,  Aram.  The
reading  in  1  Chron.  xviii.  11  is  Edom,  which
differs  from  Aram  in  only  one  letter.    The


two  words  are  constantly  confused  in  manu-
scripts, and  "Edom"  is  probably  right  here,
first,  because  it  is  coupled  with  Moab  and
Ammon,  which  were  its  neighbours;  but
chiefly  because  the  spoil  of  Hadarezer,
mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  verse,  is  the
spoil  of  Aram.  It  would  not  be  enumerated
twice.

Ver.  13. — From  smiting  of  the  Syrians;
Hebrew,  of  Aram.  Here  "Edom"  is  certainly
right  (see  1  Chron.  xviii.  12),  unless  we
accept  Keil's  conjecture,  and  suppose  that
"  he  smote  Edom  "  has  dropped  out  of  the
text,  and  must  be  inserted.  In  the  super-
scription of  Ps.  Ix.  we  find  the  wars  vrith
Aram-Naharaim  (Mesopotaiuia)  and  Aram-
Zobah  coupleil  with  this  smiting  of  Edom
in  the  valley  of  salt,  which  lay  to  the  south
of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  was  a  fatal  place  to
the  Edomites  in  their  war  subsequently
with  Amaziah  (2  Kings  xiv.  7).  Such  a
double  victory  over  the  Arameans  first,  and
immediately  afterwards  over  Edom,  would
account  for  the  "  name,"  that  is,  the  reputa-
tion, which  David  gained.  The  course
of  events  seems  to  have  been  as  follows.
The  Edomites,  believing  that  David  was
engaged  in  a  struggle  beyond  his  powers
with  the  Syrians,  took  the  opportunity  to
invade  Israel.  But  the  campaign  in  Aram
was  quickly  decided,  and  David  was  able
to  send  Abishai  with  a  detachment  of  his
forces  to  repel  the  Edomites.  On  hearing
of  his  approach,  they  retired  before  him,
and,  making  a  stand  in  their  owa  territories,
were  defeated  in  the  valley  of  salt,  with  the
loss  of  eighteen  thousand  men  (1  Chron.
xviii.  12).  In  this  place  tbe  victory  is
ascribed  to  David,  because  it  was  won  by  his
geneial  acting  under  his  orders.  For  some
unexplained  reason,  the  feelings  of  the
Israelites  against  Edom  were  very  vindic-
tive, and  Joab  followed  with  larger  forces,
and  not  only  slew  twelve  thousand  in  a
second  battle  (Ps.  Ix.,  title),  but  remained
six  months  in  the  country,  ruthlessly  putting
every  male  to  death  (1  Kings  xi.  15,  16).
From  this  time  the  Edomites  and  Isra,elite3
were  implacable  foes,  and  in  later  Jewish
literature  the  Jews  gave  vent  to  their  in-
tense hatred  of  the  Roman  empire  by  giving
it  the  name  of  Edom,

Ver.  14. — Throughout  all  Edom  put  he
garrisons.  In  a  country  naturally  so  strong
as  Edom,  and  with  neighbouring  stales
ready  to  give  shelter  to  their  fugitives,
Joab's  attempt  would  cause  great  misery,
but  only  a  moderate  loss  of  life.  And  as
soon  as  he  withdrew,  the  exiles  would  return
to  their  old  homes.  To  keep  them,  there-
fore, in  entire  subjection,  the  country  was
held  by  strong  garrisons,  and  the  Edomites
became  David's  servants,  being  apparently
deprived  for  the  present  of  any  form  of  in-


OH.  VUL  1 — 18.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


227


dependent  government.  We  have,  then.  In
this  chapter,  a  brief  summary  of  David's
wars,  whereby  he  established  his  supremacy
over  the  extensive  region  from  Hamath  on
the  north  to  the  salt  plains  on  the  south  of
the  Dead  Sea,  and  from  the  Mediterranean
to  the  Euphrates.

Yer.  15. — Sayid  ezeonted  judgment  and
justice.  There  was  very  little  real  truth  in
Absalom's  fault-finding  with  the  adminis-
tration of  justice  (ch.  XT,  3,  4),  unless  we
suppose — what  is  only  too  probable — ^that
David,  after  his  terrible  crimes  of  murder
and  adultery,  became  lax  in  the  discharge
cf  his  judicial  duties.  Here,  at  this  period
of  his  life,  he  was  a  zealous  judge  at  home,
as  well  as  a  brave  and  skilful  general.  He
was  one  of  those  many-sided  characters  who
are  great  in  a  multitude  of  ways.  Like
Julius  Osesar  and  our  own  Alfred,  he  was  as
distinguished  in  the  arts  of  peace  as  in  those
of  war.  And  thus,  while  his  first  care  was
for  the  establishment  of  religion,  and  while
even  the  singing  in  the  sanctuary  was  not
beneath  his  notice,  he  also,  even  in  the
midst  of  dangerous  wars,  gave  careful  atten-
tion to  the  orderly  government  of  his  king-
dom and  the  maintenance  of  right  and  law.
We  have  already  seen  with  what  consummate
skill  he  selected  a  capital  immediately  that
he  was  made  king  of  all  Israel.  Saul  had
done  much  in  war.  Though  finally  defeated
at  Gilboa,  he  liad  taught  the  Israelites  their
streugth,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  David's
empire;  but  he  had  done  nothing  to  con-
solidate the  tribes,  or  provide  tribunals  for
the  settlement  of  disputed  legal  rights  or
the  punishment  of  crimes.  Israel  was  as
loose  an  aggregate  of  discordant  atoms  at
his  death  as  it  was  at  his  appointment ;  and
the  maintenance  of  order  was  left  to  the
caprice  of  local  sheiks.  Samuel  had  done
far  more  for  the  internal  development  and
consolidation  of  the  people  than  Saul ;  but
it  was  David  who  made  them  into  a  nation.
The  continuance  of  his  work  was  frustrated
by  the  extravagance  of  Solomon,  the  folly
of  Behoboam,  and  the  ambition  of  the  rest-
less tribe  of  Ephraim;  but  the  two  parts
into  which  his  realm  was  broken  at  least
held  together,  and  there  never  again  was
danger  of  such  anarchy  and  threatened  dis-
integration as  existed  in  the  times  of  the
judges.

Ver.  16. — Joab. . .  was  over  the  host.  Twice
in  this  book  we  have  lists  of  David's  chief
officers — ^here  and  at  the  end  of  eh.  xx.  The
present  list  belongs  to  the  period  of  David's
greatest  prosperity,  when  all  went  well  with
him  in  peace  and  war,  and  when  Jehovah
had  elevated  him  to  the  unique  rank  of  Mes-
sianic king — a  distinction  which  belonged
to  him  personally,  and  was  inherited  by  none
of  his  successors.   Between  it  and  the  seconi


list  there  lies  a  tragio  tale  of  sin  and
shame,  of  crime  and  merited  punishment,  of
the  realm  rising  in  rebellion  against  the
adulterous  king,  and  of  his  own  family
breaking  away  from  the  bonds  of  godly  dis-
cipline, and  giving  way  to  licentiousness,  to
bloodshed,  and  to  parricidal  ambition.  But
probably  David's  character  had  then  gained
in  spirituality  and  singleness  of  heart;
whereas  now  prosperity  must  already  have
begun  its  work  of  sapping  the  foundations
of  his  moral  nature.  Joab,  who  had  been
stripped  of  his  command  for  the  murder  of
Abner,  had  regained  it  by  his  bravery  at
the  capture  of  Jerusalem,  We  have  seen
also  that  David  entrusted  to  him  the  build-
ing of  Jerusalem,  and  apparently  he  was
prime  minister  in  all  matters  except  pro-
bably the  king's  judicial  functions.  Jeho-
shaphat  .  .  .  was  recorder ;  literally,
Temembrancer.  It  was  his  office  to  reduce
the  king's  decrees  to  writing,  and  also  to  see
that  they  were  carried  into  execution.  Pro-
"bably  after  they  had  been  committed  to
writing,  they  were  laid  before  the  king  for
his  approval,  and,  when  confirmed  by  his
hand  or  seal,  were  entered  in  the  book  of
remembrance.

Ver.  17. — ^Zadok  .  .  .  and  Ahimelech  .  .  .
were  the  priests.  We  have  already  seen  that
this  was  contrary  to  the  letter  of  the  Mosaic
Law,  and  yet  that  there  was  no  schism,  and
that  by  patience  matters  came  back  to  the
right  groove.  Zadok,  of  the  elder  line  of
Eleazar  (1  Chron.  vi.  4 — 8,  50—53),  was
high  priest  at  Gibeou,  and  Ahimelech,  of  the
junior  line  of  Ithamar,  was  the  high  priest
at  Jerusalem.  Instead  of  Ahimelech  the  son
of  Abiathar,  the  Syriac  transposes  the  names,
and  reads, "  Abiathar  the  son  of  Ahimelech."
This  agrees  with  the  list  In  ch.  xx.  25,  and
it  is  certain  that  Abiathar  outlived  David
(1  Kings  ii.  26),  and  that  he  was  David's
high  priest  throughout  his  reign,  though
Zadok  is  not  only  constantly  assouiated
with  him,  but  is  placed  first,  as  the  man  of
higher  rank  (ch.  xv.  24—35;  xvii.  15;  xii.
11 ;  XX.  25).  It  is  also  remarkable  that  our
Lord  makes  Abiathar  the  person  who  gave
David  the  shewbread  (Mark  ii.  26),  whereas
in  1  Sam.  xxL  he  is  repeatedly  called
Ahimelech.  As  both  the  LXX.  and  the  Vul-
gate support  the  Hebrew  against  the  Syriac,
and  as  the  reading  "  Ahimeleuh"  is  confirmed
by  1  Chron.  xviii.  16  and  xxiv.  3,  6,  31,  we
must  reject  the  emendation  of  the  Syriac,  and
conclude  that  there  was  a  double  tradition
respecting  these  names,  some  manuscripts
making  Abiathar  the  father,  and  others
giving  the  seniority  to  Ahimelech.  Our  Lord
made  Abiathar  the  father,  but  the  scribes,
in  their  editing  of  the  Hebrew  text,  gave
that  place  to  Ahimelech,  yet  did  not  carry
out  their  restoration  so  thoroughly  as  not  to


228


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[cH.  vm.  1 — 18.


leave  pr  jof  that  the  names  probably  ought
to  be  reversed.  Seraiah  was  scribe.  His
office  was  similar  to  that  of  a  secretary  of
state  witli  us.  For  Seraiah  we  have  Shavsha
in  1  Chron.  xviii.  16,  Shisha  in  1  Kings
iv.  3,  and  Sheva  in  ch.  xx.  25.  This  illus-
trates what  has  just  been  said  as  to  the
uncertainty  about  proper  names.  They  are
always  most  difSoult  to  read,  as  the  sense
gives  no  aid,  and  these  various  forms  of  a
name  that  does  not  ooeur  elsewhere  really
bear  witness  to  the  high  antiquity  of  the
manuscripts  used  by  the  sciibcs  in  settling
the  text  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  also  to
their  self-restraint  in  not  making  them  all
forcibly  agree.

Ver.  18.— The  CheretMtes  and  the  Pele-
thites.  As  we  have  already  seen  (1  Sam.
XXX.  14),  the  Clierethim  were  an  insig-
nificant tribe  inhabiting  the  southern  part
of  the  country  of  the  Philistiues.  Nor  is
that  place  the  only  proof  of  this  fact;  for
they  are  connected  with  the  Philistines  also
in  Ezek.  xxv.  16  and  Zeph.  ii.  5.  David
made  their  acquaintance  when  at  ZUtlag ;
and  probably  the  Pelethim  dwelt  in  the
same  neighbourhood,  and  were  a  still  more
unimportant  clan  or  family.  Much  in-
genuity has  been  expended  in  finding  for
their  names  a  Hebrew  derivation,  and
Gesenius  explains  them  as  meaning  "  cutters
and  runners,"  though  for  the  latter  signi-
fication he  has  to  go  to  the  Arabic,  where
he  finds  a  \eih  falata,  "to  run  away,"  "flee."
But  this  craze  of  explaining  the  names  of
aboriginal  tribes  and  their  towns  by.  Hebrew
words  is  not  only  absurd  in  itself,  but  bars
the  way  to  sounder  knowledge.  For  it  is
possible  that,  by  the  study  of  names  not
belonging  to  the  Hebrew  language,  we
might  arrive  at  some  correct  ideas  about  the
races  who  had  previously  occupied  Palestine.
Instead  of  this,  the  whole  system  of  de-
rivation is  corrupted,  and  philology  made
ridiculous.  What  can  be  more  ludicrous
than  to  explain  these  Pelethim  as  "  runners
away,"  unless  it  be  the  notion  that  the
Kephaim  took  their  name  from  the  Hebrew
word  for  "a  ghost"?  In  his  "mighties"
David  had  a  powerful  body-guard  of  native
Israelites,  and  Saul  previously  had  formed
a  similar  force  of  three  thousand  men,  not
merely  for  the  protection  of  his  own  person,
but  to  guard  the  land  from  marauding
incursions  of  Amalekites  and  other  free-
booting  tribes.  Such  a  body  of  men  was  of
primary  importance  for  police  purposes  and
the  safety  of  the  frontiers.  How  useful
such  a  force  would  be  we  can  well  under-
stand from  the  history  of  the  marches  be-
tween England  and  Scotland  (see  also  note
on  oh.  iii.  22);  but  I  imagine  that  the
Chercthites  and  Pelethiles  were  used  for
humbler  pmposei.     While  "the  mighties"


guarded  the  frontiers,  and  kept  the  peace
of  the  kingdom,  these  men  would  be  used
about  the  court  and  in  Jerusalem,  to  execute
the  commands  of  the  king  and  his  great
officers.  Native  Israelites  would  refuse
such  servile  work,  and  the  conquered
Oanaanites  might  become  dangerous  if
trained  and  armed ;  while  these  foreigners,
like  the  Swiss  Guard  in  France,  would  be
trustworthy  and  efficient.  As  for  the  true-
born  Israelites,  they  probably  did  not  form
the  mass  of  the  population,  but,  like  the
Franks  in  Franise,  were  the  privileged  and
dominant  race.  We  read  that  even  from
Egypt,  besides  their  own  dependents,  there
went  up  with  Israel  "•  great  mixture"'(Bxod.
lii.  38,  margin).  In  Numb.  xi.  4  these  are
even  contemptuously  designated  by  a  word
which  answers  to  our  "  omnium  gatherum ; "
yet  even  they,  after  the  conquest  of  Pales-
tine, would  be  higher  in  rank  than  the
subjugated  Oanaanites,  from  whom,  together
with  another  "  mixed  multitude  "  spoken  of
in  Neh.  xiii.  3,  are  descended  the  felahin  of
the  present  day.  David's  armies  would  be
drawn  from  the  Israelites,  among  whom  were
now  reckoned  the  mixed  multitude  which
went  up  from  Egypt,  and  which  was  ennobled
by  taking  part  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan.
In  the  army  "the  mighties"  would  hold  the
chief  place ;  while  the  mercenaries,  recruited
from  Ziklag  and  its  neighbourhood,  which
continued  to  be  David's  private  property
(1  Sam.  xxvii.  6),  would  be  most  useful  in
the  discharge  of  all  kinds  of  administrative
duty,  and  would  also  guard  the  king's
person.  In  ch.  xx.  23  for  Cherethi  we
find  Chert,  which  word  also  occurs  in  2
Kings  xi.  4,  19.  In  the  former  passage  the
spelling  is  a  mistake,  the  letter  t  having
dropped  out,  and  it  is  so  regarded  by  the
Jews,  who  read  "  Cherethi."  The  versions
also  translate  there  just  as  they  do  here,
namely  the  Vulgate  and  LXX.,  "  Cherethi
and  Pelethi ; "  and  the  Syriao  by  two  nouns
of  Somewhat  similar  sound  to  the  Hebrew,
and  which  signify  "freemen  and  soldiers."
In  the  latter  place  in  Kings  it  is  probable
that  some  other  tribe  supplied  the  body-
guard in  Queen  Athaliah's  time.  David's
sons  were  chief  rulers ;  Hebrew  and  Eevised
Version,  priests.  Similarly,  in  oh.  xx.  26,
"  Ira  the  Jairite  was  David's  priest,"  Hebrew,
oohen ;  and  in  1  Kings  iv.  5,  "  Zabud  was
Solomon's  priest."  Gesenius  and  others
suppose  that  they  were  domestic  chaplains,
not  ministering  according  to  the  Levitical
law,  but  invested  with  a  sort  of  sacerdotal
sacredness  in  honour  of  their  bu'th.  But'if
we  look  again  at  1  Kings  iv.  5  we  find
"  Zabud  was  priest,  the  king's  friend ;  "  and
the  latter  words  seem  to  be  an  explanation
of  the  title  cohen,  added  because  the  word  in
this  sense   vas  already  becoming  obsolete


on.  vm.  1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


229


III  1  Chron.  xviii.  17  the  language  is  com-
pletely olianged,  and  we  read,  "  and  David's
sons  were  chief  at  the  king's  hand."  We
may  feel  sure  that  the  Chronicler  knew
what  was  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  in  the
Eooks  of  Samuel,  and  that  he  was  also  aware
that  it  had  gone  out  of  use,  and  therefore
gave  instead  the  right  sense.  Evidently  the
word  cohen  bad  at  first  a  wider  significance,
and  meant  a  "  ministi  r  and  confidant."  He
was  the  oflicer  who  stood  next  to  his  master,
and  knew  his  purpose  and  saw  to  its  execu-
tion. And  this  was  the  meaning  of  the
term    when    applied   to   the    eonfldential


minister  of  Jehovah,  whose  duty  it  was  to
execute  his  will  according  to  the  commands
given  in  the  Law;  but  when  so  used  it
gradunlly  became  too  sacred  for  ordinary
employment.  Still,  there  is  a  divinijy  about
a  king,  and  so  his  confidants  and  the
officers  nearest  to  his  person  were  still
called  cohens ;  and  we  find  the  phrase  linger-
ing on  for  another  century  and  a  half.  For
Jehu  puts  to  death,  not  only  Ahab's  great
men  and  kinsfolk,  but  also  "  his  cohens,"
the  men  who  had  been  his  intimate  friends
(2  Kings  z.  11).


HOMILETigS.

Vers.  1 — 18. — The  historic  mirror.  The  narrative  relates  a  succession  of  victoiies
and  conquests  over  the  Philistines,  the  Moabites,  the'  Zobaliites,  the  Syrians,  the
Ammonites,  the  Amalekites,  and  the  Edomites ;  the  placing  of  garrisons  in  Syria  and
Edom ;  the  voluntary  recognition  of  David's  supremacy  by  the  King  of  Hamath ;  the
military,  ecclesiastical,  and  civil  appointments  of  the  kingdom ;  the  dedication  of
treasure  won  in  conquest  and  diplomacy  to  the  service  of  God ;  the  maintenance  of  a
righteous  administration  throughout  Israel ;  and  the  safe  keeping  of  David  in  all  his
undertakings.  History  is  a  record  of  human  acts.  Sacred  history  is  a  record  of  human
acts  in  some  special  relation  to  the  working  out  of  the  spiritual  issues  of  the  kingdom
of  God.  In  all  history  we  see  mirrored  human  thought  and  feeling.  It  gives  us  a
glimpse  of  an  invisible  world  of  energy,  that  is  ever  seeking  to  find  full  expression  for
itself.  In  this  portion  of  sacred  history  we  see  mirrored  not  only  the  strivings  of  the
inner  nature  of  men,  but  also  outlines  of  truth  pertaining  to  the  invisible  kingdom
which  is  ever  being  extended  over  men.  The  early  and  lower  developments  in  Davidio
times  indicate  permanent  truths  for  all  Christian  times.

I.  Thbee  are  grades  of  sbbviob  in  the  kinodom  of  God.  The  conquest  of  these
alien  peoples,  the  rough  and  thorough  crippling  of  their  powers  (vers.  2,  4,  8,  14),  and
the  distribution  of  ofiice  among  competent  men  (vers.  16 — 18),  was  a  form  of  service
far  below,  in  the  feelings  involved,  in  the  tone  running- through  it,  the  other  service
rendered  by  David  in  the  form  of  a  holy,  just  life  amidst  his  people,  and  a  contribution
by  speech  and  song  to  the  spiritual  education  of  Israel.  Yet  this  lower  form  of  service
was  necessary,  and  had  its  proper  place  in  the  great  scheme  of  government  whereby
God  was  preparing  the  world  for  the  Prince  of  Peace.  The  actual  state  of  mankind,
and  not  some  hypothetical  state  of  perfection,  conditioned  the  means  by  which  gradually
the  final  blessing  should  come.  God  is  not  responsible  for  the  imperfect  feelings  with
which  David  and  others  may  h.ave  done  certain  work.  He  allows  men  in  his  service  to
apply  themselves  to  the  actual  circumstances  of  their  position  according  to  the  light
they  have,  and  then  makes  their  general  course  of  action  subservient  to  the  develop-
ment of  his  own  gracious  purposes.  The  same  is  true  now.  In  the  Church  there  are
higher  and  lower  forms  of  service.  In  consequence  of  the  imperfection  of  some  of  the
workers  and  of  their  surroundings,  the  service  draws  out,  not  the  highest  feelings  of
which  man  is  capable.  There  are  rough  men  for  rough  work.  Superior  men  may  do
such  work,  but  they  are  not  so  much  at  ease  in  it  as  wheii  engaged  in  purely  spiritual
efibrts.  It  was  more  congenial  to  David  to  write  psalms  than  to  hough  horses.  The
actual  state  of  the  world  required  both  just  then.

II.  The  subjugation  or  external  evils  should  go  along  with  internal
RENOVATION.  The  first  aim  of  David  was,  as  we  have  seen,  to  restore  unity,  justice,
peace,  and  religion  to  Israel.  He  worked  on  the  central  spring  of  national  life.  But
the  heathen  and  restless  foes  around  were  an  incessant  trouble  as  long  as  the  politiical
and  military  strength  of  Israel  under  the  new  rdgime  were  untested.  Their  subjugation
was  therefore  tie  necessary  complement  of  the  internal  consolidation.  Taking  the
Davidic  kingdom  as  rcfresenting  in  general  features  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  we  sea


230  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  viu.  1—18.

the  same  truth.  Its  settlement  among  men  means  internal  change,  reformation,  and
consolidation  of  all  that  is  good;  but  it  is  bound,  for  its  own  peace  and  extension,  to
make  war  on  all  that  is  alien  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  Hence  his  Church  is  militant.  He
is  our  Captain.  We  are  soldiers  sworn  to  preserve  our  heritage  and  extend  his  domain
by  actual  destruction  of  the  forces  of  evil  that  lie  around.  The  same  applies  to  our
own  life  viewed  as  a  domain  over  which  Christ  rules.  Internal  harmony  should  be
accompanied  by  an  effort  to  overcome  everything  in  our  daily  circumstances  which,  if
not  overcome,  may  mar  om-  peace,  and  possibly  gain  an  unhallowed  influence  over  us.

HI.  The  dbdioatjon  of  material  wealth  to  the  service  op  God  is  an  evidence
OF  GODLT  WISDOM.  The  prohibition  to  apply  the  spoils  of  war  to  private  uses  (Josh,
vi.  19 ;  cf.  1  Sam.  xv.  23)  was  a  wholesome  restraint  on  a  low  class  of  human  feelings.
There  was  a  strong  temptation  for  David  to  enrich  himself  by  conquest,  and,  reasoning
as  an  ordinary  man,  he  could  have  made  out  a  good  case  for  himself.  But  he  was  a  man
of  God ;  he  saw  things,  as  it  were,  with  the  eyes  of  God,  and  therefore,  apart  from
specific  injunction  for  each  case,  acted  in  harmony  with  the  mind  of  God.  It  was
godly  wisdom  thus  to  devote  to  the  service  of  God  what  had  been  acquired  by  his  own
strong  arm ;  for  very  great  wealth  brings  very  great  spiritual  dangers  (Matt.  xix.  23,
24).  The  blessed  temporal  condition  does  not  lie  in  abundance  (Prov.  xxx.  8,  9 ;  Luke
xii.  15).  The  possession  of  great  wealth,  combined  with  slender  gifts  to  the  cause  of
Christ,  reveals  a  lack  of  spiritual  perception  and  of  sympathy  with  the  heart  and  purpose
of  Christ.  The  devotion  of  wealth  to  Christ  is  the  safest  investment,  for  it  brings  bless-
ings on  the  donor  and  on  others  through  all  ages.  The  spiritual  results  of  material
wealth,  well  employed,  are  beyond  calculation.  It  is  said  of  the  true  King  in  Zion,
"  To  him  shall  be  given  of  the  gold  of  Sheba"  (Ps.  Ixii.  15).  He  also  is  "worthy  to
receive  riches  "  (Rev.  v.  12).  There  are  thousands  of  ways  in  which  wealth  may  now
be  dedicated  to  God.  The  earnest  heart  will  find  out  the  right  channel  for  its  devotion.
The  demand  for  sanctuaries,  labourers,  and  the  claims  of  Christ's  poor,  are  ever  before
the  rich  (of.  Hag.  i.  4—6;  Matt.  ix.  36,  37;  Rom.  x.  14, 15;  Matt.  xxv.  35—40).  In
so  far  as  Christians  enter  into  the  spirit  of  their  Lord  will  they  rejoice  in  consecrating
wealth  to  him  (2  Cor.  viii.  9 ;  cf.  v.  13 — 15).

IV.  The  blessing  of  God  in  oitr  endeavours  is  the  spiRiruAL  condition  op
SUCCESS.  It  is  said  twice  (vers.  6,  14)  that  God  "  preserved  David  whithersoever  he
went."  It  is  obvious  that  these  various  enterprises  were  full  of  danger  to  a  man  like
David — danger  to  his  life,  his  spirituality  of  mind,  his  moral  conduct,  his  political
reputation.  His  natural  qualities  of  courage,  thoroughness,  and  his  laudable  ambition
as  a  monarch,  mi>j;ht  urge  him  on  to  positions  of  extreme  peril;  and  the  incidents  of
warfare  are  proverbially  prejudicial  to  piety.  The  secret  of  his  success  lay  in  his  being
kept  of  God.  The  servant  of  God,  doing  rough,  dangerous  work,  not  for  self-aggrandize-
ment, but  for  God  and  his  people,  is  surrounded  by  an  unseen  shield  which  no  dart
can  penetrate.  Here  we  see  a  truth  ever  being  realized  in  private  and  public  life — a
true  man  of  God,  a  man  of  undivided  heart,  setting  himself  to  necessary  but  undesirable
work,  pressing  on  every  day  amidst  dangers  to  life  and  religion,  keeping  the  one  thought
of  pleasing  God  clear  before  him,  and  ever  everywhere  guarded  by  him  whom  he  serves.
Till  ovir  work  is  done  no  "  arrow  that  flieth  by  day  "  can  touch  us.  It  is  a  fact  which
should  be  much  insisted  on,  that  God  does  preserve  his  saints  (Ps.  xxxvii.  23,  24,  28).
No  outward  sign  was  visible,  yet  God  was  with  David.  The  absence  of  visible  signs
with  us  is  no  evidence  that  God  is  not  our  Shield  and  Helper.  The  chief  thing  for  us
is  to  see  that  we  are  his,  that  we  do  his  will  and  not  our  own,  and  that  we  have  a
holy  method  in  our  enterprises,  be  they  strictly  spiritual  or  related  to  ordinary  affairs.

v.  The  oloet  op  an  active  man  lies  in  his  being  true  to  his  calling.  David
was  a  king,  bound  by  virtue  of  his  position  to  rule  in  equity  and  r^hteousness.  A
greater  distinction  could  not  have  been  awarded  to  him  in  that  ofiBce  than  that  .con-
veyed in  the  declaration  that  "he  executed  judgment  and  justice  unto  all  his  people"
(ver.  15).  He  was  true  to  his  vocation.  No  man  can  rise  higher  than  that.  The  glory
of  a  man  does  not  lie  in  being  or  doing  as  others  have  been  and  done,  for  talents,  oppor-
tunities, and  occupations  differ  j  but  in  performing  the  part  to  which  Providence  has
called  him  thoroughly  well.  Every  star  is  perfect  in  its  own  full  lustre.  Every  man
is  noble  when  his  whole  nature  is  developed  in  harmony  with  the  purpose  of  liis  Maker.
"  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,"  is  said  of  the  lowliest  of  Christ's  servants  who


OH.  VIII.  1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  231

has  been  faithful  in  "  a  fe  w  things  "  (Matt,  xxv  22, 23).  A  monarch,  a  bishop,  a  pastor,
a  Sunday  school  teacher,  a  pious  domestic  servant,  and  a  day-labourer,  may  each  be
distinguished  by  faithfulness  to  the  work  in  hand.  True  spiritual  honour  lies  more  in
the  spirit  of  loyalty  to  our  divinely  appointed  calling  than  in  the  specific  deeds  trans-
acted. Hence  the  moral  prospects  of  all  Christ's  servants.  It  is  extremely  important
to  impress  this  on  the  young,  and  on  those  who  are  prone  to  be  discouraged  by  reason
of  the  lowliness  of  their  position  in  society  and  in  Christian  endeavour.

Genebal  lessons.  1.  The  disorganization  produced  in  the  world  by  the  action  of
sin  renders  it  inevitable  that  much  human  suffering,  much  collision  of  man  against
man,  be  endured  even  in  the  historical  processes  of  Providence,  by  which  the  blessings
of  redemption  are  finally  brought  into  full  operation.  The  woes  of  the  Moabites  (ver.
2)  and  of  others  were  humanly  necessitated  incidents  in  the  ages,  giving  birth  to  the
promised  Christ ;  and  much  suffering  will  yet  be  endured  ere  the  full  triumph  of  good
over  evil  is  achieved  (Eom.  viii.  18 — 22).  2.  The  most  certain  of  the  promises  of  God
should  be  embraced  in  full  confidence,  ar.d  yet  the  most  strenuous  exertion  on  our  part
to  bring  about  their  fulfilment  is  reasonable.  David's  kingdom  had  been  assured  (ch.
vii.  27).  But,  nevertheless,  he  set  garrisons  in  defence  of  his  heritage,  and  took  pains
to  organize  his  administration  on  a  judicious  basis  (vers.  16 — 18).  Fatalism  or  pre-
sumption is  irreligious  as  truly  as  is  unbelief.  3.  llesources  obtained  from  men  not
religious  may  be  used  in  the  service  of  God  (vers.  9 — 11).  The  deference  paid  by  Toi
to  l)avid  is  similar  to  that  paid  by  many  men  destitute  of  vital  godliness  to  Christians,
and  their  gifts,  though  not  in  the  most  enlightened  spirit,  may  be  employed  for  the
holiest  of  purposes.  4.  There  is  a  prophetic  truth- in  the  turning  of  the  golden  shields
and  other  instruments  of  the  heathen  into  the  peaceful  uses  of  the  sanctuary  (vers.  7,
9,  10).  As  a  fact,  the  weapons  and  splendour  of  kings  will  some  day  be  turned  into
uses  subservient  to  the  reign  of  Christ,  the  Prince  of  Peace  (Isa.  ii.  2 — 5;  Ix.  5 — 11).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 14  (1  Chron.  xviii.  1 — 13). — (Jerusalem.)  Daviess  wars  and  victories.
Summary :  (1)  The  Philistines  (ver.  1).  (2)  The  Moabites  (ver.  2 ;  Numb.  xiiv.  17).
(3)  The  Ammonites  (ver.  12 ;  ch.  x.).  (4)  The  Syrians  of  Zobah,  under  Hadadezer
(ver.  3;  ch.  x.  15,  16).  The  point  here  touched  (ver.  4)  in  the  struggle  appears  to
have  been  after  the  Ammonites  had  commenced  hostilities,  aided  by  Hadadezer,  (5)
the  Syrians  of  Beth-Rehob,  (6)  the  King  of  Maachah,  and  (7)  the  men  of  Tob ;  and
had  been  defeated  (in  a,  first  campaign)  by  Joah  and  Abishai  at  Medeba  (ch.  x.  1 — 14).
Hadadezer  now  recruited  his  forces  in  Mesopotamia,  and  made  immense  preparations;
but  he  was  defeated  by  David,  who  took  the  field  in  person  (in  a  second  campaign),  at
Helam;  his  general,  Shobnoh,  being  slain  (ch.  x.  15 — 19).  (8)  The  Syrians  of  Damascus
(vers.  5,  6).  "(9)  Toi,  King  of  Hamath  (vers.  9, 10).  "  Thus  the  Aramean  supremacy,
which  had  in  previous  centuries  become  so  formidable  to  the  Hebrews,  and  even  to  the
Ammonites,  was  now  broken  once  more  by  the  heroic  arm  of  David  "  (Ewald).  (10)
The  Edomites,  in  league  with  (11)  the  Amalekites  (ver.  12)  and  others,  threatening  to
render  previous  victories  fruitless,  overcome  (in  a  third  campaign)  by  Abishai  and  by
•  Joab  (vers.  13,  14;  1  Chron.  xviii.  12;  1  Kings  xi.  15;  Ps.  Ix.,  inscription).  "David
himself  came  at  the  close  of  the  campaign  to  arrange  the  conquered  territory"  (Stanley).
(12)  The  siege  of  Eabbah,  the  capital  of  the  Ammonites,  which  still  held  out,  by  Joab
(in  2i  fourth  campaign),  while  the  king  remained  at  Jerusalem  (ch.  xi.  1);  and  its
capture  by  David  (ch.  xii.  26—31;  1  Chron.  xx.  1 — 3).  These  wars  of  Israel  with
surrounding  nations  were  not  ordinary  wars  (ch.  ii.  24 — 29).  They  were  a  special
embodiment  of  the  great  conflict  which  was  ordained  from  the  beginning  (Gen.  iii.  15),
and  of  which  the  sacred  history  is  a  record.  They  involved  principles  and  issues  of
vast  importance;  and  they  must  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the  peculiar  position  of
the  people  of  Israel,  the  measure  of  Divine  revelation  vouchsafed  to  them,  and  the
"  ruliog  ideas  in  early  ages,"  in  order  that  they  may  be  judged  of  correctly,  and  just
inferences  drawn  from  them  in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  Christian  nations.  They  were
waged—

L  With  powerful  adversaries.   Numerous,  varied,  confederated,  selfish,  proud,  and
•'delighting  in  war"(Ps.  liviii.  30).^   The  Ammonites  (1  Sam.  xi.  1 — 15)  first  attacked


232  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  viii.  l—lS.

Israel  (as  the  Philistines  and  others  had  preriously  done),  assisted  by  the  Syrians,  "  for
reward."  "The  first  recorded  example  of  mercenary  warfare"  (Kitto).  I'h'-y  "succeeded
in  girdling  the  whole  eastern  frontier  with  steel."  They  were  idolaters, "fought  against
Jehovah,  sought  to  exterminate  his  people,  and  would  have  been  satisfied  with  nothing
short  of  their  entire  subjugation.  Never  had  their  peril  been  more  imminent.  It  was
such  as  is  described  by  the  psalmist —

"  Why  do  the  nations  rage.
And  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing?
Kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves  up.
And  rulers  take  counsel  together
Against  Jehovah,  and  against  his  anointed :
Let  us  burst  their  bonds  asunder.
And  cast  away  their  coids  from  us  I "

(Ps.  ii.  1—8.)

II.  On  justipiablb  grounds.  For:  1.  The  defence  of  person  and  property,  and  the
preservation  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah  (ch.  x.  12).  The  right  of  self-defence  is  a  law
of  nature,  exteiding  to  the  relations  of  states  and  kingdoms,  as  well  as  of  individuals.
Without  its  exercise  the  destruction  of  Israel  by  their  fierce  and  powerful  enemies
could  have  been  averted  only  by  a  continuous  miracle.  2.  The  punishment  of  evil-
doers, and  the  execution  of  a  Divine  judgment  upon  the  heathen  and  their  gods.  Of
this  David  deemed  himself  an  appointed  agent,  fulfilling  a  Divine  commission,  like  that
given  to  Saul  concerning  Amalelj,  and  the  command  under  which  Joshua  acted  in  the
conquest  of  the  land.  3.  The  attainment  of  the  destination  of  the  chosen  people  to  rule
over  the  nations  according  to  former  promises  and  predictions.  "  The  chief  aim  of  the
writer  is  to  show  the  growth  of  God's  kingdom"  (see  the  martial  Psalms,  ix.,  x.,  xviii.,
XX.,  xxi.,  xliv.,  Ix.,  Ixviii.,  ex.).    Ps.  ix.,  'The  righteous  Judge  of  the  heathen' —

"I  will  praise  thee,  O  Jehovah,  with  my  whole  heart;
I  will  recount  all  thy  wonderful  works.
Arise,  O  Jehovah,  let  not  mortal  man  be  defiant ;
Let  the  heathen  be  judged  in  thy  sight.
Put  them  in  fear,  O  Jehovah ;
Let  the  heathen  know  that  they  are  hut  mortal  men  I "

(Ps.  ix.  1, 19,  20.)

III.  In  a  devout  spirit.  Faith  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  reverence  for  his
righteous  laws,  dependence  upon  his  mighty  arm,  zeal  for  his  universal  honour;  prayer-
fulness,  confidence,  thankfulness.  "  The  whole  nation  was  at  once  a  nation  of  soldiers
and  a  nation  of  priests.  They  were  the  soldiers  of  God,  pledged  to  a  crusade — a  holy
war  ;  pledged  to  the  extermination  of  all  idolatry  and  all  wickedness  wherever  existing  "
(Perowue,  in  Ps.  ex.).     Ps.  xx.,  '  Going  forth  to  battle' —

*'  Jehovah  answer  thee  in  the  day  of  distress ;
The  Name  of  tlie  God  of  Jacob  set  thee  up  on  high.
We  will  shout  for  joy  because  of  thy  salvation,
And  in  the  Name  of  our  God  will  we  raise  our  banners,
O  Jehovah,  save  the  king  I
May  he  hear  us  in  the  day  we  call."

(Ps.  IX.  1,  5,  9.)

In  a  reverse,  such  as  may  have  taken  place  just  before  the  overthrow  of  the  Edomltes,
they  turned  to  God  in  supplication,  and  girded  themselves  afresh  for  the  conflict.  Ps.
Ix., '  Confidence  in  disaster ' — "  the  most  martial  of  all  the  Psalms"— partially  repeated
in  P&,  cviii.  7 — 14.

O  God,  thou  hast  cast  us  off,  thou  hast  broken  us ;

Thou  hast  been  angry,  restore  us  again.

Thou  hast  given  to  them  that  fear  thee  a  banner,

That  they  may  muster  (around  it)  from  before  the  bow.

Who  will  conduct  me  into  the  fortified  city  ?

Who  will  bring  me  into  Edom?

Through  God  shall  we  do  valiantly ;

And  he  will  tread  down  our  adrersariei."

(Ps.  Ix.  1, 4,  9, 12.)


OH.  vin.  1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  2S3

IV.  With  bxtraordinabt  btjocess;  In  which  the  hand  of  God  was  manifestea,
especially  in  the  preservation  of  David  "  whithersoever  he  went "  (vers.  6,  14),  and  was
recognized  in  the  dedication  to  Jehovah  of  the  spoils  of  war  (vers.  7, 10 — 12)  amidst
general  thanksgiving  and  praise.  One  victory  rapidly  succeeded  another  until  the
whole  region  from  the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates  (Qen.  xv.  18)  was  suhdued,  peace  was
established,  and  Israel  occupied  a  position  of  unrivalled  power  and  glory.  "  David
erected,  on  Joab's  return  (ver.  13),  a  monument  of  thanksgiving  for  his  victory ;  and  we
may  imagine  how  brilliant  was  the  triumphant  procession  in  Jerusalem  when  wo
recollect  the  hundred  war-chariots  with  their  horses  which  were  spared  when  Hadai  ezer
was  conquered  "  (Ewald).    Ps.  xii., '  Beturning  in  triumph ' —

«0  Jehovah,  in  thy  strength  shall  the  king  be  glad.
And  in  thy  saving  help  bow  greatly  shall  he  exult  I
Be  thou  exalted,  O  Jehovah,  in  thy  strength ;
Bo  will  we  celebrate  with  voice  and  harp  thy  might."

(Ps.  xxi.  1,  13  )

V.  Not  wrrnoDT  deplorable  consequences.  Even  when  waged  on  juatiSable
grounds  and  from  religious  motives,  war  is  associated  with  manifold  evils.  It  was  not
the  loss  of  life  that  occurred,  nor  the  cruel  severities  that  were  practised  (ver.  2 ;  ch.  xii.
31),  characteristic  of  the  age,  in  the  wars  of  David,  which  wroujiht  the  mischief,  so
much  as  the  fierce  passions,  the  pride,  ambition,  luxury,  and  vice  they  engendered,  the
heavy  burdens  they  imposed,  and  the  neglect  of  the  humbler  pursuits  and  more  orderly
virtues  they  involved.  •'  The  one  blot  upon  the  time  is  David's  lust  of  war,  bringing
men  like  Joab  to  the  front,  and  debasing  David's  own  character.  .  ..If  ever  God  wrote
his  verdict  plainly  upon  ambition  and  aggressive  war,  he  wrote  it  upon  the  wars  of
David.  They  brought  the  stain  of  two  i'oul  crimes  on  David  himself;  ruined  his  own
domestic  peace  and  happiness;  ruined,  by  the  possession  of  too-gveat  power,  the  one  of
his  sons  who  started  so  wisely  and  well ;  and  ruined  the  kingdom,  which  broke  asunder
of  its  own  weight"  ('Prophecy  a  Preparation  for  Christ,'  p.  216).  Yet  these  effects
have  not  always  been  considered  in  later  times ;  while  the  record  of  his  successes  has
sometimes  been  regarded  as  affording  a  sanction  and  an  incentive  to  the  martial  spirit
under  different  circumstances  and  a  better  dispensation.  "  It  was  among  the  Teutonic
race  that  the  Church  first  manifested  warlike  propensities.  They  were  emphatically
men  of  blood.  The  chief  difBculty  of  the  Church  was  to  teach  them  to  love  peace.
According  to  a  well-known  story,  the  Gothic  bishop,  Ulphilas,  showed  his  special  sense
of  the  special  weakness  of  his  Teuton  converts  by  refraining  from  translating  the  Books
of  Samuel  and  Kings  into  their  language,  as  he  did  the  rest  of  the  Scripture.  His
reason,  we  are  told,  was  that  they  contained  'the  history  of  wars;'  and  the  nation  was
already  very  fond  of  war,  and  needed  the  bit  rather  than  the  spur  so  far  as  fighting
was  concerned "  (British  Quarterly  Review,  January,  1881).  Nevertheless,  the  wars
and  victories  of  David  (allowed  for  "  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts  "  until  "  the  times  of
reformation  ") —

VI.  PoKESHADOWBD  NOBLBB  CONFLICTS  AND  TEiTJMPHB  by  One  greater  than  David —
the  Prince  of  Peace,  and  his  faithful  followers  (1  Sam.  xiii.  1—7  ;  xvii.  47) ;  in  which
the  elements  of  good  that  existed  therein  are  retained  and  perfected,  and  those  of  evil
set  aside ;  "  the  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  of  the  flesh,  but "  spiritual  (truth,
righteousness,  love)  and  "mighty  before  God  to  the  casting  down  of  strongholds"  of
error  and  imrighteousness  (2  Cor.  x.  4 ;  Luke  ix.  56 ;  John  xviii.  36) ;  and  the  effects,
enduring  peace,  security,  and  happiness  (Isa.  ix.  5,  6).  "  Since  the  time  that  Jesus
Christ  said,  •  Put  up  thy  sword  into  its  scabbard,'  Christians  ought  not  to  go  to  war,
unless  it  be  in  that  most  honoiurable  warfare  with  the  vilest  enemies  of  the  Church — the
inordinate  love  of  money,  anger,  and  ambition.  These  are  our  Philistines,  these  our
Nebvichadnezzars,  these  our  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  with  whom  we  ought  never  to
make  a  truce ;  with  these  we  must  engage  without  intermission  till,  the  enemy  being
utterly  extirpated,  peace  may  be  firmly  established.  Unless  we  subdue  such  enemies
as  these,  we  can  neither  have  peace  with  ourselves  nor  peace  with  any  one  else.  Thi»
ii  the  only  war  which  tends  to  produce  a  real  and  lasting  peace  "  (Erasmus). — ^D.

Ver.  11. — (Jerusalem.)    Dedication  of  property  to  Ood.    According  to  the  cnstom


234  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vni.  1— 18.


of  the  time,  the  most  valuable  of  the  spoils  of  war  became  the  property  of  David ;  and
these,  along  with  the  presents  brought  to  him,  he  devoted  to  a  saored  use — in  prepara-
tion for  the  building  of  the  temple  (1  Chron.  xviii.  8).  The  spirit  which  he  displayed
had  been  shown  at  the  erection  of  the  tabernacle  (Bxod.  xxxv.  29) ;  and  it  was  partici-
pated in  by  many  (1  Chron.  xxvi.  26 — 28;  xxix.  6 — 9).  Other  instances  occurred  at
a  much  earlier  period  (Gen.  xi v.  30 ;  xxviii.  22).  David's  act  was:  1.  Unselfish.  The
evil  of  selfishness  specially  appears  in  undue  attachment  to  earthly  possessions ;
"  which  is  idolatry,"  and  "  a  root  of  all  evil."  It  ofttimes  increases  with  the  increase
of  worldly  good,  "  like  the  Indian  fig  tree  connecting  itself  vitally  at  a  hundred  spots,
with  the  soil  over  which  it  spreads."  Hence  the  injunction,  "If  riches  increase,"  etc.
(Ps.  Ixii.  10).  A  good  man  receives  that  he  may  give,  and  feels  that  "it  is  more
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  2.  Orateful.  David  recognized  the  hand  of  God  in
his  victories;  and  herein  testified  his  thankfulness  to  his  Divine  Helper  and  Benefactor.
Wealth  is  his  gift;  so  is  the  power  to  acquire  it  (Deut.  viii.  17,  18).  But  how  often
are  its  possessors  forgetful  of  this,  proud,  and  unthankful  I  "  All  things  come  of  thee,
and  of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee"  (I  Chron.  xxix.  14).  3.  Faithful.  Earthly
good  is  not  an  absolute  gift,  but  a  trust;  it  is  put  into'  our  power  only  for  a  brief
season ;  its  possession  involves  the  responsibility  of  its  emploympnt  according  to  the
will  of  the  Owner ;  and  its  faithful  use  is  conducive  to  the  possession  of  "  the  true
riches"  (Luke  xvi.  9 — 12).  Whilst  it  should  be  altogether  employed  according  to  his
will,  a  due  proportion  of  it  should  be  set  apart  as  sacred  to  the  claims  of  the  needy,  the
support  of  Divine  worship,  and  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  It  would  appear  that  every
Jewish  family  in  ancient  times  devoted  as  much  as  a  fourth  part  of  its  income  to
religious  and  charitable  purposes.  But  inasmuch  as  no  definite  rule  is  now  enjoined,
every  man  must  determine  the  proportion  for  himself  by  earnest  thought  and  prayer,
without  reference  to  what  others  may  do,  and  with  a  view  to  giving,  not  as  little,  but
as  much  as  possible.  It  has  been  stated  that  more  wealth  has  been  made  in  England
during  the  last  fifty  years  than  during  the  preceding  eighteen  centuries.  But  notwith-
standing numerous  examples  of  noble  beneficence,  how  small  a  part  of  it  comparatively
has  been  devoted  to  the  highest  ends  (Deut.  xvi.  17;  Prov.  iii.  9,  10;  Luke  xix.  13;
1  Cor.  iv.  2 ;  xvL  1 ;  2  Cor.  viii.,  ix. ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17 — 19) !  4.  Devotional.  David's
offering  was  religious ;  in  it  he  offered  himself  to  God ;  and  sought  to  fulfil  his  purposes
concerning  the  welfare  of  his  people  and  the  promotion  of  his  honour  and  glory  in  the
earth.  This  is  the  highest  motive;  and  those  who  are  actuated  by  it  obtain  »n
unspeakable  blessing  both  here  and  hereafter  (Mai.  iii.  10 ;  Matt.  xxv.  21).

"  Largely  thou  givest,  gracious  Lord,
Largely  thy  gifts  should  be  restored ;
Freely  thou  givest,  and  thy  word

Is, '  Freely  give.'
He  only,  who  forgets  to  hoard.
Has  learnt  to  live."

(Keble.)

D.

Ver.  14. — Go^s  preserving  care.  "  And  the  Lord  preserved  David  whithersoever
he  went "  (ver.  6 ;  1  Chron.  xviii.  6,  13).  The  providence  of  God  (his  preservation  and
government  of  all  things),  which  embraces  the  creation  in  general  (Ps.  xxxvi.  6 ;  Neh.
ix.  6)  and  man  in  particular  (Ps.  viii.  4,  5  ;  Luke  xii.  7),  is  exercised  with  specud
regard  to  the  good  of  those  that  love  him  (Matt.  vi.  32 ;  x.  29,  30).  This  is  evident
from  his  relation  and  love  to  them  (Deut.  xxxii.  9 ;  Luke  xii.  32),  the  promises  and
declarations  of  his  Word  (Ps.  xxxvii.  28 ;  cxxi.  8),  and  the  facts  of  observation  and
experience  (Gen.  xlv.  5  ;  Esth.  vi.  1).  The  life  of  David  is  fuU  of  illustrations  thereof
(1  Sam.  xix.  10;  xxiii.  28).     "The  Lord  preserveth  the  faithful"  (Ps.  xxxi.  23)—

L  In  loyal  obedience  to  his  will,  such  as  David  exhibited.

"  For  he  will  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,
To  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways."

(Pb.  xci.  11.)

I.e.  the  ways  of  duty;  not  of  presumption,  like  those  which  the  tempter  (omitting


CH.  vin.  1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  235


these  words  in  his  quotation)  sought  to  induce  the  Son  of  man  to  pursue  (Matt.  iv.  6).
"  He  that  walketh  uprightly  walketh  surely  "  (Prov.  x.  9),  and  "  shall  he  saved ;  but
h«  that  is  perverse  in  his  ways  shall  fall  at  once  "  (Prov.  xxviii.  18).  We  must  keep
the  commandments  of  God  if  we  would  be  "  kept  by  thje  power  of  God."  "  Who  is  he
that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  tliat  which  is  good  ?  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  13 ;  iv.  19).

II.  Amidst  imminent  peril,  arising  from  attacks  of  numerous  foes ;  which  must
often  be  met  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  cannot  be  avoided  without  sin  (ch.  iv.  9 — 11).
"  And,  indeed,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  reason  why  we  should  respect  him  that,  with  aa
untainted  valour,  has  grown  old  in  arras  and  hearing  the  drum  beat.  When  every
minute  death  seems  to  pass  by  and  shun  him,  he  is  one  that  the  supreme  God  cared
for,  and,  by  a  particular  guard,  defended  in  the  hail  of  death  "  (0.  Pelltham).  There  is
a  holy  strife  (Phil.  i.  27  ;  Jude  3 ;  Eph.  vi.  12),  and  in  it  we  may  sometimes  be
exposed  to  as  great  danger  as  David  was  (ch.  xxi.  16) ;  but  the  eye  of  God  sees  it  and
his  hand  wards  it  off.    "  No  weapon,"  etc.  (Isa.  liv.  17).

"  O  Jehovah  Lord,  thou  Strength  of  my  salvation.
Thou  halt  covered  m;  head  in  the  day  of  battle."

(Pb.  cxl.  7.)

III.  By  manifold  means.  Not  without  prudence  and  effort  on  the  part  of  men ;
not  by  direct,  extraordinary  and  miraculous  interposition;  but  by:  1.  The  salutary
influence  of  a  devout  spirit  on  conditions  favourable  to  safety.  2.  Special  impressions
on  the  minds  both  of  the  good  and  of  the  bad,  conducive  to  the  preservation  of  the
former.  3.  A  peculiar  concurrence  of  circumstances  having  the  same  effect ;  and
other  ways,  still  more  wonderful,  and  not  less  effectual  (Prov.  xxi.  31).  Nothing  is
more  mysterious  to  our  partial  comprehension  of  them  than  the  methods  of  providence
by  which  God  accomplishes  his  designs.     "  A  mighty  maze !  but  not  without  a  plan."

IV.  Fob  beneficent  ends.  Not  only  "  the  good  of  his  chosen  "  (Ps.  cvi.  5),  whom
he  preserves ;  but  also  the  good  which  they  may  effect  on  behalf  of  others,  the  mani-
festation of  his  great  Name,  the  complete  establishment  of  his  kingdom.  "  We  know
that  all  things  work  together  for  good,"  etc.  (Eom.  viiL  28).  "  This  is  the  sun  in  the
heaven  of  all  the  promises." — D.

Vers.  15 — 18  (1  Chron.  xviii.  14 — 17). — (Jebusalem.)  DavicTs  administration.
From  the  wars  and  victories  of  David  we  turn  to  contemplate  his  administration  of  the
internal  aHairs  of  the  kingdom.  By  his  skill  and  energy,  united  with  the  services  of
many  eminent  men,  and  aided  by  the  favour  of  Heaven,  he  raised  the  nation,  in  an
incredibly  short  period,  to  a  position  of  extraordinary  power  and  glory.  "  More  than
Charlemagne  did  for  Europe,  or  Alfred  for  England,  David  accomplished  for  the  tribes
of  Israel "  (W.  M.  Taylor).  What  is  here  recorded  (taken  along  with  what  is  else-
where stated)  affords  an  illustration  of —

I.  A  JUST  EEicjN.  "  And  David  executed  judgment  and  justice  unto  all  the  people  "
(1  Sam.  vii.  15 — 17 ;  x.  24).  It  was  as  important  a  part  of  his  office  to  judge  them  as
to  lead  them  forth  to  battle  (oh.  xv.  2 — 4) ;  and,  in  its  fulfilment,  he  acted :  1.  Accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  Jehovah,  the  supreme  King  and  Judge,  whose  servant  he  was.  2.
With  proper  discernment,  strict  equity  and  impartiality,  and  great  diligence.  3.  So
that,  either  by  his  own  decisions  or  those  of  judges  appointed  and  superintended  by
him,  right  was  done  to  all  his  subjects,  wrongs  redressed,  and  wrong-doers  punished.
He  was  a  king  who

"  In  the  loyal  palace  gave

Example  to  the  meanest  of  the  fear

Of  God  and  all  integrity  of  life

And  manners ;  who,  august  yet  lowly ;  who.

Severe  yet  gracious ;  in  his  very  heart

Detesting  all  oppression,  all  intent

Of  private  aggrandizement ;  and,  the  first

In  every  public  duty,  held  the  scales

Of  justice,  and,  as  the  law  which  reigned  in  him

Commanded,  gave  rewards ;  or  with  the  edge

Vindictive  smote  now  light,  now  heavily,

According  to  the  stature  of  the  crime."

(PoUok, '  The  Course  of  Timc'^^


236  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vni.  1—18.


II.  A  SKILFUL  ORGANIZATION,  indicated  by  the  mention  of  the  chief  officers  of
state,  who  formed  the  king's  council  and  acted  as  his  confidential  advisers,  along  with
his  sons  (ver.  18),  the  prophets,  and  others  (see  for  later  enumeration,  ch.  xx.  13 — 26;
1  Chron.  xxvii.  82—34).  1.  Military.  (1)  The  host  (1  Chron.  xxvji.  1—15),  or
national  militia  (under  Joab),  consisting  of  all  the  males  capable  of  bearing  arms,  and
arranged  in  twelve  bodies  of  twenty-four  thousand  each,  whose  turn  of  service  came
every  month.  (2)  The  body-guard  (under  Benaiah),  Krethi  and  Plethi  (lictors  and
couriers ;  Cretans  or  Oarians,  and  Philistines),  "  formed  at  Ziklag,  and  afterwards
recruited  from  foreigners  (ch.  xv.  18;  xx.  23),  having  their  quarters  in  Jerusalem,  not
far  from  the  royal  castle"  (Ewald).  (3)  The  heroes  (G-ibborim),  mighty  men  or
veterans  (under  Abishai) ;  the  old  guard,  who  had  gathered  to  David  in  his  wanderings,
constitnting  "the  first  standing  army  of  which  we  have  any  special  knowledge,"  the
number  six  hundred  being  maintained,  "divided  into  three  large  bands  of  two  hundred
each,  and  small  bands  of  twenty  each  ;  the  small  bands  commanded  by  thirty  ofiicers,
one  for  each  band,  who  together  formed  '  the  thirty,'  and  the  three  large  bands  by  three
officers,  who  together  formed  'the  three'"  (Stanley).  2.  Civil:  pertaining  to  the
registering  and  publication  of  the  royal  edicts,  the  regulation  of  judicial,  financial,  and
other  matters,  the  management  of  the  royal  demesnes,  etc,  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  25 — 31),
from  which  the  revenue  was  largely  derived.  "Bach  tribe  had  still  Ha  prince  or  ruler,
and  continued  under  a  general  superintendence  from  the  king  to  conduct  its  local
affairs  (1  Chron.  xxvii,  16 — 22).  The  supreme  council  of  the  nation  continued  to
assemble  on  occasions  of  great  national  importance ;  and,  though  its  influence  could  not
have  been  so  great  as  it  was  before  the  institution  of  royalty,  it  remained  an  integral
part  of  the  constitution.  Without  superseding  the  tribal  governments,  David  greatly
strengthened  them  by  a  systematic  distribution  through  the  country  of  a  large  number
of  Levites  (six  thousand)  as  officers  and  judges  (1  Chron.  xxvi.  20 — 32).  It  is
extremely  probable  that  this  large  and  able  body  of  Levites  were  not  limited  to  strictly
judicial  duties,  but  that  they  performed  important  functions  also  in  the  education,  the
healing,  and  tbs  general  elevation  of  the  people"  (Blaikie).  3.  Ecclesiastical;  the
Levites  (1  Chron.  xxiii.);  the  priests,  in  twenty-four  classes,  and  their  attendants
(1  Chron.  xxiv.)  ;  the  choristers,  in  twenty-four  courses  (1  Chron.  xxv.) ;  the  porters
•nd  officers  (1  Chron.  xxvi.).  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law."  It  is  an  essential  con-
dition of  peace,  safety,  and  power.  "  The  solemn  transfer  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
at  which  almost  all  the  people  were  present,  had  made  a  deep  impression  on  their  minds,
and  had  awakened  them  to  a  sincere  adoration  of  Jehovah.  These  favourable  disposi-
tions David  wished  to  strengthen  by  suitable  regulations  in  the  service  of  the  priests
and  Levites,  especially  by  the  instructive  and  animating  psalms,  which  were  composed
partly  by  himself,  and  partly  by  other  poets  and  prophets.  By  such  instructive  means,
David,  without  using  any  coercive  measures,  brought  the  whole  nation  to  forget  their
idols,  and  to  worship  Jehovah  alone  "  (Jahn, '  Heb.  Com.'),

III.  An  able  executive.  The  best  organization  avails  little  unless  there  be  men
of  ability  to  carry  it  into  practical  effect.  David's  reim  was  singularly  rich  in  such
men.  1.  Warriors  like  Joab,  Abiahai,  Benaiah,  and  other  "  heroes  who  had  vied  with
him  in  valour  and  self-sacrifice  for  the  community  of  Israel  and  the  religion  of
Jehovah,"  and  "whose  names  lived  on,  linked  for  ever  with  his  memory"  (ch,  xxiii.
8 — 39).  2.  Ministers  like  Jehoshaphat,  Sheva,  Adoram,  Ira  the  Jairite;  counsellors
like  Ahithophel  and  Hushai.  3.  Priests  like  Zadok  and  Abiathar ;  *'  masters  of  the
song  "  like  Asaph,  Heman,  Jeduthun ;  prophets  like  Nathan  and  Gad.  "  All  is  now  in
full  movement  and  almost  in  its  original  life,  while  around  the  chief  hero  a  crowd  of
other  figures  are  woven  into  the  mighty  drama,  and  even  these  are  illumined  by  the
bright  rays  of  his  sun;  nay,  even  what  would  be  insignificant  elsewhere  acquires
importance  here  from  the  conspicuous  eminence  of  Israel's  greatest  king"  (Bwald).
A  wise  ruler  discerns  the  ablest  men,  attaches  them  to  him,  and  profits  by  their  wisdom,
appoints  them  to  offices  in  which  they  can  most  effectually  promote  the  common  good,
and  upholds  and  encourages  them  in  their  faithful  endeavours  to  that  end.  It  has
been  said  that  "a  ruler  who  appoints  any  man  to  an  office  when  there  is  in  his
dominions  another  man  better  qualified  for  it,  sins  against  God  and  against  the  state  "
(Koran).

IV.  A  HiOHTT  katioh;  united,  prosperous,  powerful,  imbued  with  lofty  principle!


OH.  Tin.  1—18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  237


and  aims,  "as  an  eagle  muing  her  mighty  youth  and  kindling  her  imdazzi  eyes  at
the  full  midday  beam"  (Milton).  To  this  many  influences  contributed,  one  of  which
was  a  just,  wise,  and  strong  administration  (Ps.  IzziL).  "  David's  own  moral  exalta-
tion, and  still  more  the  spirit  of  fearless  justice  in  which  he  ruled,  had  its  effect  on  the
nation  at  largo.  The  theocracy  became  real  to  them  in  a  sense  in  which  it  had  never
been  before.  They  saw  that  an  organized  system,  which  was  based  upon  religion  and
built  up  of  justice,  was  more  truly  the  embodiment  of  the  Divine  government  than  the
fitful  inspiration  of  the  judges.  Thus  they  won  the  might  that  comes  from  right :
they  felt  that  a  war  in  defence  of  this  new  organization  was  most  trulj'  a  holy  war,
and  that  if  Duvid  was  at  the  head  of  it,  he  was  not  only  the  king  but  the  high  priest
ot  the  people.  Animated  by  this  feeling,  they  forgot  all  the  old  '  divisions  and
searchings  of  heart,'  and  flocked  around  the  standard  of  their  king  in  such  numbers
and  with  such  a  spirit  that  they  crushed  the  greatest  coalition  that  ever  thieateiied  to
destroy  their  religion  and  their  nation"  ('The  Psalms  chronologically  arranged').
"The  enlargement  of  territory,  the  amplification  of  power  and  state,  leads  to  a  corre-
sponding enlargement  of  ideas,  of  imagery,  of  sympathies ;  and  thus  (humanly  speaking)
the  magnificent  forebodings  of  a  wider  dispensation  in  the  prophetic  writings  first
became  possible  through  the  court  and  empire  of  David  "  (Stanley). — D.

Ver.  6. — Divine  preservation.  The  Revised  Version  translates,  "  The  Lord  gave
victory  to  David ; ''  but  in  the  margin,  "  saved  David,"  which  is  equivalent  to  the  traus-
lation  in  the  Authorized  Version,  and  is  the  more  literal  meaning  of  the  original,  from
which  there  is  no  necessity  to  depart.  In  the  Psalms,  in  which  David  praises  God  for
his  help  against  his  enemies,  he  speaks  as  much  of  the  protection  he  experienced  as  of
the  victories  he  won.  His  preservation  in  so  many  perils  of  war  was  worthy  of  special
mention.  The  record  is  one  that  might  be  made  in  an  account  of  the  lives  of  most  of
us ;  in  some  respects,  of  all.

I.  Thb  peesekvation  expbbibncbd.  1.  Physical.  That  of  bodily  life  and  health
and  of  the  senses.  Protection  in  perils  by  land  or  water.  Preservation  from  serious
illnesses,  or  deliverance  from  them.  The  uniformity  of  good  health  and  wholeness  of
limbs  is  a  greater  blessing  than  restoration  from  sickness  or  repair  of  fractures,
although  it  does  not  usually  excite  so  much  notice  or  call  forth  so  much  gratitude.

2.  Mental.  That  of  the  soundness  of  the  mind,  of  perception,  memory,  reason.  It
might  be  salutary  for  each  of  us  to  pay  one  visit  to  a  lunatic  asylum.  Such  impressions
of  the  value  of  our  reason  may  be  obtained  there  as  can  be  obtained  nowhere  else.

3.  Moral  and  spiritual.  That  of  faith  and  a  good  conscience,  of  principles  and  habits
of  religion  and  virtue.  Protection  from  specially  powerful  temptations  which,  yielded
to,  would  have  been  our  ruin.  4.  0/  reputation.  From  slander  or  misunderstanding.
A  good  name  is  conducive,  not  only  to  our  comfort,  but  to  our  success  in  life,  and  to  our
usefulness.  To  some,  owing  to  peculiar  circumstances,  its  continuance  is  marvellous.
5.  Prolonged.  In  many  cases  for.  very  many  years,  in  which  dangers  numerous,
various,  repeated,  and  imminent,  have  been  met  with.  The  greater  the  perils  and  the
longer  the  period,  so  much  the  more  noteworthy  the  preservation.

II.  To  WHOM  IT  IS  TO  BE  ASCRIBED.  "The  Lord."  Divid  owed  much  to  faithful
friends  and  brave  soldiers,  who  regarded  his  life  as  their  special  care,  and  defended  it  at
the  peril  of  their  own  (see  ch.  xxi.  15 — 17) ;  but  the  historian  ascribes  all  to  God ;  and
David,  when  he  reviews  his  life,  or  any  part  of  it,  does  the  same.  In  like  manner,  as
we  look  back,  we  may  remember  many  who  have  in  various  ways  ministered  to  our
preservation,  and  towards  whom  we  rightly  cherish  gratitude ;  but  these,  and  all  else
that  has  contributed  to  our  well-being,  we  rightly  ascribe  to  God  (comp.  2  Tim.iii.  11 ;
iv.  16,  17).

III.  The  emotions  it  should  awaken.  1.  Gratitude.  Expressed  in  praise  and
renewed  self-dedication.

"  My  life,  which  thou  hast  made  thy  care,
Lord,  I  devote  to  thee."

Also  in  zealous  endeavours  to  preserve  others  from  evil,  especially  the  young  and  inex-
perienced (see  Ps.  oxvi.,  oxvii.)  2.  Confidence  and  hope.  As  to  future  physical  and
mental  preservation,  so  &r  as  seems  good  to  the  infinite  wisdom  and  goodiiess ;  bufc


233  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vm.  1—18.

especially  as  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  (see  Ps.  zcL  and  cxzL ;  2  Coi.  L  9,  10 ;  2
Tim.  iv.  18).

"We'll  praise  bim  for  all  that  is  past.
And  trust  him  fur  all  that's  to  come."

G.  W.

Ver.  11. — Dedication  of  treasure  to  God.  The  dedication  in  this  instance  doubtless
consisted  in  placiag  the  spoils  of  war  and  other  valuables  named  in  the  sacred  treasury,
whether  for  present  use,  or,  as  is  probable,  with  a  view  to  theii:  employment  in  the
erection  or  services  of  the  future  temple.  The  king  presents  in  this  act  of  piety  an
example  which  aU  should  follow.

I.  What  we  should  dedicate  to  God.  1.  Ourselves.  We  must  begin  with  this.
All  true  godliness  does  begin  with  the  surrender  of  self,  with  all  its  powers  of  soul  and
body,  to  God,  to  be  saved  and  sanctified  by  him,  and  devoted  to  his  service.  No  other
gift  can  be  truly  presented  while  this  is  wiihheld;  none  can  be  a  substitute  for  itj
none  acceptable  without  it.    True  offerings  to  God  are  the  offerings  of  his  true  servants.

.  2.  Our  material  treasures.  Gold  and  silver,  houses  and  lands.  All  are  to  be  dedicated
to  God.  What  we  have  inherited,  what  we  have  gained  by  industry  and  enterprise,
and  what  may  have  been  given  to  us,  as  the  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  and  brass  which
the  King  of  Hamath  sent  to  David.  But  if  we  have  gained  aught  by  fraud,  injustice
or  other  iniquity,  we  may  not  present  this  to  God,  but  return  it  to  its  rightful  owners
(see  Luke  xix.  8).  3.  Our  mental  gifts  and  acquisitions.  Spoils  won  from  the
heathen,  it  may  be,  by  victorious  study.  All  our  abilities  and  culture ;  all  our  know-
ledge. 4.  Our  spiritual  acquirements.  AIL  we  have  of  spiritual  life  and  power;  all
the  grace  given  to  us.  These  are  bestowed,  not  to  be  merely  enjoyed,  but  used  for
God  and  the  good  of  our  brethren.  5.  Our  influence.  Whether  obtained  through  our
abilities,  or  wealth,  or  station,  or  character,  all  is  to  be  exercised  for  God.  In  a
word,  whatever  we  are,  and  whatever  we  have,  are  to  be  devoted  to  God.  Nothing  can
be  rightly  withheld.

II.  In  what  manner.  1.  In  our  ordinary  life.  By  employing  our  powers  and
possessions  according  to  God's  will,  in  uprightness  and  kindness.  By  enjoying  God's
gifts  with  thankfulness  and  temperance.  By  "  setting  the  Lord  always  before  us,"  and
doing  and  enjoying  all  as  his  children  and  servants.  Thus  the  whole  of  life  becomes
religion,  and  common  actions  are  as  acceptable  to  God  as  prayers.  "Holiness  unto
THE  LoKD  "  is  written  upon  everything  (see  Zech.  xiv.  20,  21).  But  no  greater  mistake
can  be  made  than  to  think  that,  in  giving  a  portion  of  our  substance  and  time  to
religion,  we  are  set  free  to  use  the  rest  as  we  please.  2.  By  devoting  a  due  portion  of
mir  powers  and  possessions  to  religious  and  charitable  uses.  First,  to  the  support  of  the
worship  of  God  in  the  congregation  to  which  we  belong ;  then  to  the  relief  of  the  poor
with  whom  we  are  personally  acquainted,  and  the  education  of  the  young  in  our  own
locality ;  and  then  to  such  religious  and  charitableinstitutions  as  commend  themselves
to  our  judgment,  and  appear  to  have  a  just  claim  upon  our  liberality.  What  propor-
tion of  our  income  should  be  given  away  must  be  left  to  each  person's  conscience  as  in
the  sight  of  God.  Only  we  must  let  conscience  decide,  not  mere  inclination.  Certainly
we  ought  not  to  give  what  belongs  to  creditors,  or  the  reasonable  wants  of  our  families.
Our  aim  should  be  to  ascertain  the  will  of  God ;  and  this  will  vary  according  to  th«
various  circumstances  of  individuals,  and  of  the  same  individual  at  different  times.
•'  As  he  may  prosper "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2,  Revised  Version)  is  the  general  rule ;  and  any
special  increase  of  prosperity  (as  with  David  at  the  time  spoken  of  in  the  text)  justly
calls  for  special  liberality.  In  general,  our  danger  does  not  lie  in  the  direction  of
excessive  generosity.  Pew  give  away  as  much  as  they  ought,  on  any  just  interpre-
tation of  our  Lord's  precepts.  "The  liberal,"  who  "deviseth  liberal  things"  (Isa.
xxxii.  8),  is  an  exceptional  person,  although  there  are,  thank  God,  many  such.

III.  Motives  to  such  dedication.  1.  The  claims  of  Ood.  As  our  Proprietor  and
the  Proprietor  of  all  we  possess;  by  right  of  creation  and  redemption.  "Ye  are  not
your  own  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  "  All  things  come  of  thee,  and  of  thine  own  have  we  given
thee"  (1  Chron.  xxix.  14).  As  our  liberal  Benefactor,  who  gave  us  his  Son,  and  is
ever  bestowing  good  upon  us  (2  Cor.  ix.  15).  As  our  supreme  Ruler,  who  by  innumer-
able commandmeuts  enjoins  upon  us  devotement  to  his  service  and  kindness  to  oui


OH.  vin.  1— 18.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  239

brethren,  and  to  wliom  we  must  give  account  of  our  use  of  what  he  has  entrusted
to  us.  As  our  Father,  who  desires  that  we  should  resemble  him,  and  thus  at  once
prove  our  sonsbip  and  do  honour  to  his  Name  (Eph.  v.  1,  2).  2.  The  love  of  Jesus
Christ  to  MS,  and  the  example  he  has  given  us.  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15  ;  viii.  9.)  3.  Our
professions  of  self-devotement.  4.  The  good  of  others.  5.  Ovr  own  good.  A  life  of
self-dedication  is  the  true,  the  noblest,  the  happiest  life.  We  grow  in  all  that  is  good
by  the  practice  of  good.  Our  being  is  enriched,  our  happiness  increased.  "It  is  more
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  "  (Acts  xx.  85).  We  have  now  the  testimony  of  a  good
conscience,  which  is  the  witness  of  God's  approval.  We  shall  hereafter  be  acknow-
ledged and  rewarded  by  him.  In  devoting  ourselves  and  our  substance  to  him,  wo  are
laying  up  treasures  in  heaven  (Matt.  vi.  20),  which  will  reappear  transfigured,  for  our
everlasting  enrichment.  Good  done  to  others  as  unto  the  Lord  will  be  reckoned  and
rewarded  as  done  to  himself;  good  withheld  from  them,  as  withheld  from  him  (Matt.
XXV.  34 — 45).  Faithful  service  now  will  issue  in  larger  and  higher  service  hereafter
(Luke  xix.  17,  19).  Those  to  whom  we  have  ministered  on  earth  will  welcome  us  into
heaven  (Luke  xvi.  9),  and  our  eternal  glory  and  joy  will  be  increased  by  knowing  how
much  we  have  contributed  to  theirs  (1  Thess.  ii.  19). — G.  W.

Ver.  13. — Oetting  a  name.  "  David  gat  hira  a  name."  There  appears  to  have  been
something  special  in  the  campaign  against  the  Syrians  (or  rather  Edomites,  1  Chron.
xviii.  12),  and  in  David's  part  therein,  which  rendered  his  victory  peculiarly  signal  and
memorable.  Hence  he  obtained  an  honourable  "  name ; "  his  reputation  and  fame  were
greatly  increased.  A  large  proportion  of  the  names  that  men  have  won  have  been
gained  in  war.  But  others  more  honourable  have  been  obtained  by  the  arts  and
victories  of  peace.  Most  to  be  valued  are  those  acquired  by  eminence  in  goodness  and
usefulness.

I.  Names  wobth  getting.  1.  A  good  na/me — a  reputation  for  what  is  good.  Better
than  a  merely  great  name.  Some  names,  widely  known  and  for  centuries,  are  so  much
infamy.  Better  be  totally  unknown  than  have  a  name  for  ill-doing.  All  may  have
some  reputation,  though  in  a  small  circle  and  for  a  brief  period,  for  sincere  piety  and
Christian  excellence ;  for  nnselfishness,  benevolence,  activity  in  doing  good,  liberality,
self-denial  in  helping  others,  meekness,  humility,  long-suffering,  patience,  and  the  like.
And  such  a  name  is  mure  to  be  desired  than  riches  (Prov.  xxii.  1),  infinitely  more  than
a  great  name  which  has  been  obtained  by  unscrupulous  ambition.  2.  A  good  name
which  arises  from  and  represents  reality.  A  mere  name  conferred  through  ignorance
or  flattery,  or  assumed  and  pushed  into  notice  to  gratify  vanity  or  secure  gain,  is
utterly  worthless,  and  worse  than  worthless.  So  it  is  with  a  mere  name  for  wisdom,  or
learning,  or  liberality  (Isa.  xxxii.  5),  or  public  spirit,  or  philanthropy  ;  worst  of  all  the
name  which  a  hypocrite  sometimes  gets  for  sanctity.  How  withering  the  reproach
addressed  to  the  Chtirch  at  Sardis,  "  Thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead  "
(Rev.  iii.  1) !

II.  The  value  of  a  good  name.  1.  It  is  a  just  source  of  satisfaction  to  ourselve%
when  our  own  consciousness  testifies  to  its  substantial  truth.  The  good  opinion  of  others,
especially  of  the  good  and  discerning,  is  part  of  the  reward  of  goodness.  It  is  one  of
the  ways  by  which  God  expresses  his  favourable  judgment  of  us.  2.  It  sustains  and
stimulates  in  the  course  of  conduct  from  which  it  has  arisen.  We  are  influenced  by
it  to  strive  more  and  more  to  be  worthy  of  it.  3.  It  is  adaptad  to  do  good  to  others.
It  attracts  attention  to  the  excellence  it  designates,  and  may  lead  to  imitation.  It
awakens  confidence  in  those  who  have  won  it,  which  gives  force  to  their  instructions
or  admonitions,  and  it  gives  them  in  other  ways  greater  influence  for  good.  On  all
these  accounts  it  is  a  heinous  sin  to  injure  or  destroy  another's  deserved  good  name  by
slander.

III.  How  IT  SHOULD  BE  SOUGHT.  It  should  Scarcely  be  sought  at  all.  The  way  to
obtain  it  is,  not  to  seek  it,  but  to  practise  the  virtues  from  which  it  arises.  To  seek  it
is  to  set  our  hearts  im  the  approval  of  men,  which  is  perilous.  Let  us  labour  to  ba
accepted  of  God,  and  he  will  take  care  of  our  reputation  among  men,  so  far  as  it  is  good
for  us  and  adapted  to  honour  him  and  benefit  our  fellow-men.  "  It  is  a  very  small  thing
to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment.  ...  He  that  judgeth  us  is  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  3,  4).
At  the  same  time,  for  the  reasons  given  under  division  II.,  we  should  not  needlessly  defy


240


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[CH.  IX.  1—13,


or  sacrifice  the  good  opinion  of  others,  though  we  should  willingly  do  bo  when  fidelity
to  truth  and  God  requires  the  sacrifice.

In  conclusion.  The  grandest  instance  of  getting  a  name  is  that  of  our  Lord  and
Saviour.  By  his  self-humiliation  and  self-sacrifice,  in  love  to  us  and  obedience  "  unto
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,"  he  obtained  "  a  Name  which  is  above  every  name,"
as  well  in  its  significance  as  in  its  power  with  God  and  men  (Phil.  ii.  5  -11).^G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IX.


Ver.  1. — Is  there  yet  any  that  is  left  of
the  honse  of  Sanlf  As  Mephibosheth  was
five  years  old  at  his  father's  death  (oh.  iv.
4),  but  now  had  a  son  (ver.  12),  a  sufficient
time  must  have  elapsed  for  him  to  grow  up
and  marry ;  so  that  probably  the  events  of
this  chapter  occurred  seventeen  or  eighteen
years  after  the  battle  of  Gilboa.  As  David
was  king  at  Hebron  for  seven  years  and
a  half,  he  had  been  king  now  of  all  Israel
for  about  nine  years.  But  during  this  long
period  he  had  been  engaged  in  a  weary
struggle,  which  had  left  him  little  repose,
and  during  which  it  might  have  beea
dangerous  to  draw  the  house  of  Saul  out  of
obscurity.  But  he  was  at  last  firmly  estab-
lished on  the  throne,  and  had  peace  all
around ;  and  the  time  was  come  to  act  upon
the  promise  made  to  Jonathan  (1  Sam.  zx.
14,  15),  and  which  we  may  be  sure  David
had  never  forgotten.

Ver.  2. — A  servant  whose  name  was  Ziba.
It  is  evident  bom  this  that  David  was  not
certain  that  Jonathan  had  left  behind  him  a
son ;  but  not  because  of  the  change  of  name
from  Meribbaal  (1  Chron.  viii.  34)  ;  for  Baal
retained  its  innocent  meaning  of  "lord"
until  the  time  of  Jezebel.  It  then  became
the  title  of  the  Phoenician  sim-god;  and
Jezebel's  shameless  worship  of  this  deity,  and
her  cruelty  to  Jehovah's  prophets,  made  the
people  henceforth  chango  the  name  Baal  into
Bosheth,  "  the  shameful  thing  "  (see  note  on
oh.  ii.  8).  Mephibosheth  had  not  changed
his  name,  but  had  lived  in  obscurity  in  the
wild  region  beyond  Mahanaim.  Meanwhile
Ziba  bad  probably  taken  care  of  Saul's
property  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  There
is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  he  had  been
steward  there  for  Saul,  and  after  his  master's
death  had  continued  in  possession  of  the
estate.  David,  we  may  feel  sure,  would
not  interfere  with  it,  and  Ziba  would  hold
it  for  Saul's  heirs,  who  could  not  themselves
take  possession.  To  him  David  now  sends,
not  because  he  expected  to  hear  of  a  son  of
his  dear  friend  Jonathan,  but  because  he
was  ready  to  show  kindness  to  any  repre-
sentative of  the  fallen  monarch.

Ver.  8.— The  kindness  of  God.  That  is,
extraordinary  kindness.    The  devout  mind


of  the  Orientals  saw  in  everything  that  was
more  than  common  a  manifestation  of  God,
and  thus  the  epithet  "  of  God  "  came  to  be
applied  to  anything  that  was  very  great
(comp.  Gen.  xxx.  8,  margin ;  xxxv.  5 ;
Ps.  Ixv.  9;  Jonah  iii.  3,  margin).  David
would  show  Saul's  seed  kindness  as  wonder-
ful as  are  God's  dealings  with  man.

Ver.  4. — Machir,  the  son  of  Ammiel,  in
Lo-dehar.  Of  Lo-debar  nothing  is  known,
but  it  must  have  been  east  of  the  Jordan,
near  Mahanaim.  Of  Ammiel  we  read  again
in  ch.  xvii.  27,  where  we  find  that  he  was
a  man  of  wealth,  who  helped  to  supply  the
wants  of  David  and  his  men  during  the
rebellion  of  Absalom.  Possibly  this  kind-
ness of  David  towards  one  for  whom  he  had
feelings  of  loyalty,  as  representing  a  royal
house  to  which  he  had  remained  faithful,
won  his  heart.  There  was  a  magnanimity
about  it  which  would  commend  it  to  a  man
who  was  himself  generous  and  true.

Ver.  6. — He  fell  on  his  face.  Mephi-
bosheth probably  expected  the  fate  which
in  the  East  usually  befalls  the  members
of  a  dethroned  dynasty.  Subsequently  in
Israel  each  new  line  of  usurpers  put  to
death  every  male  relative  of  its  predecessor,
and  it  was  with  difficulty  in  Judah  that
one  babe  was  rescued  from  the  hnnds  of
its  own  grandmother,  Athaliah,  when  she
usurped  the  tlirone.  Looked  at,  then,  in  the
light  of  Oriental  policy,  David's  conduct
was  most  generous.

Ver.  7.— All  the  land  of  Saul  thy  father.
David  probably  restored  to  Mephibosheth
not  only  the  lands  at  Gibeah,  which  Zilia
had  managed  to  hold,  but  Saul's  estates
generally.  There  seems,  nevertheless,  to
have  been  on  Ziba's  part  a  grudge  against
Mephibosheth  for  thus  getting  back  from
the  king  what  he  had  hoped  to  keep  as  his
own.  The  privilege  of  being  the  king's
friend,  and  eating  at  his  table,  was  an
honour  that  would  be  more  highly  prized
than  even  the  possession  of  the  estates.

Ver.  8. — A  dead  dog.  At  first  sight  this
extreme  self-humiliation  makes  us  look  on
Mephibosheth  as  a  poor  creature,  whom
early  misfortune  and  personal  deformity  had
combined  to  depress.  But  retilly  this  is  to
impose  on  an  Oriental  hyperbole  a  Western
exactness  of  meaning.    When  in  the  East


^H.  IX.  1—13.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


241


your  entertainer  aBsnres  yon  that  everything
he  has  to  his  last  dirhem  is  yours,  he
nevertheless  expects  yon  to  pay  twice  the
value  for  everything  you  consume ;  but  he
makes  his  exaction  pleasant  by  his  extreme
conrtlineBs.  So  Ephron  offered  his  cave  at
Machpelah  to  Abraham  as  a  free  gift,  but  he
took  care  to  obtain  for  it  an  exorbitant
price  (Gen.  zxiii.  11,  15).  Mephibosheth
described  himself  in  terms  similar  to  those
osed  by  David  of  himself  to  Saul  (1  Sam.
zxiv.  14);  but  he  meant  no  more  than  to
express  great  gratitude,  and  also  to  acknow-
ledge the  disparity  of  rank  between  him
and  the  king.

Ver.  9. — Xhy  master's  son.  Strictly  Me-
phibosheth was  Saul's  grandson,  but  words
of  relationship  are  used  in  a  very  general
way  in  Hebrew.

Yer.  10. — That  thy  maiter's  son  may  have
food  to  eat.  Instead  of  "son,"  Hebrew
ben,  some  commentators  prefer  the  reading
of  a  few  Greek  versions,  namely,  "  house,"
Hebrew,  beth.  But  the  difficulty  which
they  seek  to  avoid  arises  only  from  extreme
literalnesB  of  interpretation.  Though  Me-
phibosheth ate  at  the  king's  table,  he  would
have  a  household  to  maintain — for  he  had
a  wife  and  son — and  other  expenses;  and
his  having  "food  to  eat"  includes  every-
thing necessary,  as  does  our  prayer  for
"  daUy  bread."  He  would  live  at  Jerusalem
aa  a  nobleman,  and  Ziba  would  cultivate


his  estates,  paying,  as  is  usual  in  the  East,
a  fixed  proportion  of  the  value  of  the  pro-
duce to  his  master.  Ziba  had  fifteen  sous
and  twenty  servants  (slaves).  He  had
evidently  thriven ;  for,  beginning  as  a  slave
in  Siiul's  household,  he  had  now  several
wives  and  many  slaves  of  his  own,  and  had
become  a  person  of  considerable  importance.
He  would  still  remain  so,  though  somewhat
shorn  both  of  wealth  and  dignity  in  becom-
ing only  Mephibosheth's  farmer.

Ver.  11. — ^As  for  Mephibosheth,  said  the
king,  he,  etc.  These  words  are  difficult,
because  they  make  David  say  the  same
thing  thrice.  The  text  is  probably  corrupt,
as  it  requires  the  insertion  of  some  such
phrase  as  the  "said  the  king"  of  the
Authorized  Version  to  make  it  intelligible.
Of  the  many  emendations  proposed,  the  most
probable  is  that  of  the  LXX..  and  Syriac,
which  make  this  clause  an  observation  of
the  historian  pointing  out  the  high  honour
done  to  Mephibosheth  in  placing  him  on  an
equality  with  David's  own  sons.  It  would
then  run  as  follows :  So  Mephibosheth  ate
at  the  JctTig't  table  as  one  of  the  kirig's  sons.

Ver.  12. — Mioha.  This  son  of  Mephibo-
sheth became  the  representative  of  the
house  of  Saul,  and  had  a  numerous  off-
spring, who  were  leading  men  in  the  tribe  of
Benjamin  until  the  Captivity  (see  1  Chron.
Tiii  35-40;  ix.  40—44).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — IS. — ^The  facts  are ;  1.  David,  remembering  his  love  for  Jonathan,  inquires
whether  there  were  any  survivors  of  the  house  of  Saul;  and  being  informed  of  the
proximity  of  Ziba,  an  old  servant,  he  sends  for  him.  2.  He  is  told  that  a  son  of
Jonathan,  lame  of  foot,  is  a  sojourner  in  the  house  of  Machir.  3.  Being  sent  for,
Mephibosheth,  on  appearing  before  the  king,  falls  on  his  face  and  pays  reverence,  but  is
spoken  to  kindly.  4.  Being  assured  by  David  that  there  was  no  need  for  fear,  that
kindness  for  his  father's  sake  was  in  store,  and  that  all  his  grandfather's  property  should
be  restored,  he  expresses  by  deed  and  word  his  sense  of  unworthiness.  5.  David
informs  Ziba  of  his  decision  as  to  the  property,  and  orders  him  to  act  as  steward  for
the  benefit  of  Mephibosheth,  who  was  to  be  henceforth  t  guest  at  the  royal  table.  6.
The  arrangements  are  carried  out,  and  fw  is  explained  the  fact  of  Mephibosheth's
residence  in  Jerusalem.

The  power  of  hallowed  assoeiattona.  Scripture,  in  common  with  all  history,  usually
gives  us  the  outward  facts  of  life,  leaving  to  be  inferred  the  private  mental  and  moral
processes  which  must  have  lain  in  their  rear.  There  is  an  abruptness  in  the  transition
of  the  historian  from  an  account  of  David's  victories  and  general  administration  to  this
record  of  an  act  of  personal  kindness.  But  if  the  laws  of  the  human  mind  were  the
same  then  as  now,  we  may  be  sure  there  was  no  such  disconnection  in  the  inner  course
of  David's  experience.  During  the  few  years  of  public  activity  in  seeking  the  consoli-
dation of  his  power,  covered  by  the  preceding  chapters,  there  had  often  risen  up  in  his
mind  memories  of  former  days  of  trial,  and  of  names  of  friends  and  foes  now  no  longer
among  the  living;  and  if  thought  breeds  emotion,  he  would,  on  these  occasions,
experience  feelings  corresponding  to  the  subject-matter  of  his  thoughts.  Among  these
thoughts,  with  their  corresponding  feelings,  were  doubtless  those  relating  to  his  Gloved
n.  SAiiuEi.  s


243  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  ix.  1—13.

Jonathan;  and  what  the  historian  here  places  before  uii  {n  the  narrative  concerning
Mephibosheth  is  simply  the  ultimate  welling  up,  from  the  depths  of  the  memory,  of
the  old  associations  clustering  aroimd  the  name  of  Jonathan  in  such  strength  as  to
issue  in  the  deeds  here  recorded.

L  Hallowed  associations  abx  a  obeat  foweb  in  life.  Human  life  is  not
determined  in  its  condition  or  conduct  at  any  particular  hour  by  what  is  purely  new  in
thought,  in  feeling,  or  in  circumstance.  The  past  furnishes  the  seed  on  which  the
present  acts  as  new  environment,  and  the  nature  of  that  past  is  a  more  potent  element
in  determining  the  conduct  than  is  the  new  environment.  The  chief  clue  to  David's
later  character  is  to  be  sought  in  his  earlier  experiences.  The  mightiest  inner  forces
that  thus  influence  life  are  those  which  centre  in  strong  and  sacred  associations.  The
memory  of  Jonathan's  love  worked  unconsciously  as  a  spell  throughout  David's  career.
Every  man  is  subject  to  this  law  of  life.  As  a  rule,  the  early  mental  associations  of
our  life  give  tone  and  colour  to  all  that  comes  after.  The  power  lying  in  the  memory
of  a  mother's  love  over  even  the  vagaries  of  later  years  is  proverbial.  The  mention  of
a  name  may  sufBce  to  flood  the  eyes  with  tears  and  break  down  the  stoutest  heart.
David  never  knew  how  much  of  restraint,  of  tenderness,  of  noble  aspiration,  and  of
fidelity  to  truth  and  honour  he  owed  to  the  associations  carried  in  his  memory  with
the  name  of  his  friend  Jonathan.  So  to  us  the  "  Name  that  is  above  every  name  "  is
the  centre  of  associations  as  powerful  as  they  are  blessed ;  and  the  more  we  can  enrich
our  nature  with  kindred  associations,  the  richer  and  more  Christlike  will  our  lives
become.

II.  ThEBE  ABE  OOOABIONS  WHEN  HALLOWED   ASSOOIATTONB   CAN  EZEBT  THEIB   FBOPEB

DTFLDENCE.  During  the  first  few  years  of  his  reign  David  seems  to  have  been  utterly
absorbed  with  the  woik  of  restoring  the  civil  and  religious  order  of  bis  kingdom,  and  of
securing  it  against  the  pressiue  of  surrounding  foes.  A  consideration  of  the  actiml
state  of  things  consequent  on  the  misgovemment  of  Saul,  and  of  the  enormous  labours
involved  in  an  absolute  monarchy  when  its  obligations  are  faithfully  carried  out,  will
account  for  the  apparent  neglect  of  Jonathan's  house  till  the  present  date.  It  is  only
reasonable  to  suppose  that  David  had  sometimes  thought  of  this  matter,  and  the  manner
in  which  it  is  introduced  in  ver.  1  suggests  that  now  was  the  time  to  give  effect  to
his  own  previously  cherished  desires.  It  might  have  been  politically  imwise,  and  to
Saul's  descendants  personally  injurious  by  placing  them  in  the  way  of  temptation  to
conspiracies,  had  he  sought  to  reinstate  any  of  them  during  the  rebellion  of  Ishbosheth
and  immediately  on  his  decease.  The  safe  and  full  establishment  of  his  authority  was
evidently  the  occasion  for  the  old  and  piously  cherished  associations  with  the  name  of
Jonathan  to  put  forth  their  strength.  We  all  have  within  us  a  reserve  power  in  the
hallowed  associations  we  cherish.  They  are  never  without  an  unconscious  influence ;
but  there  may  come  seasons  when  we  may  do  well  to  open  the  doors  and  let  them  come
forth  in  full  force  to  sway  ouf  conduct.  Thus  at  Easter  and  Christmas  do  Christiana
give  free  scope  to  blessed  memories.  Thus  our  family  birthdays,  and  days  sacred  to  the
memory  of  those  now  more  blessed  than  ourselves,  are  times  when  our  nature  becomes
enriched  with  holy  feelings,  and  our  vows  become  more  influential  Sometimes,  apart
fiom  our  will  and  special  seasons,  by  the  spontaneous  force  of  mental  laws,  sacred
memories  pour  forth  into  our  barren  experience  streams  of  blessing ;  and  if  by  pressure
of  secular  business  the  channels  of  thought  and  emotion  are  clogged,  it  is  well  now  and
then  to  pause,  and,  by  an  effort  in  quiet  solitude,  to  open  some  sacred  spring  within  our
nature,  so  that  it  shall  send  forth  its  blessed  streams  to  quicken  and  beautify  our
spiritual  life.

III.  A  TBDE    HEABT   WILL  SEIZE  OCCASION  FOB  BEVIVING  THE  FOWEB  OF  HALLOWED

A3SOOLATION8.  The  occasiou  arose  in  the  course  of  David's  public  life,  and  because  his
heart  was  still  true  to  God  and  man,  t\t  bcized  it.  The  cares  of  official  life  and  the
attractions  of  exalted  position  had  not  yet  done  him  spiritual  damage.  The  David
that  swore  love  and  fldelity  to  his  friend  (1  Sam.  xx.  13 — 17,  42)  was  still  alive.  The
man  was  not  lost  in  the  king.  There  are  sad  instances  of  the  reverse.  Old  friends,
former  vows,  are  forgotten  in  the  satiety  of  wealth  or  power,  or,  if  not  entirely  for-
gotten, no  occasion  is  sought  to  let  the  love  of  former  days  assert  itself.  Much  of  our
power  over  our  future  lies  in  the  use  we  are  disposed  to  make  of  the  fountains  of  holy
thought  and  feeling  which  have  been  formed  within  by  the  experiences  of  former  days.


OH.  EL  1—13.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  243

The  pressure  of  business  may  cause  them  to  lie  unnoticed  for  months  and  years ;  but
now  and  then  opportunities  will  occur  which  an  uncorrupted  heart  will  gladly  use  for
bringing  them  into  the  current  of  daily  life.  There  may  be  an  abuse  of  "  days  and
seasons ; "  but  a  well-regvdated  life  wiE  not,  on  that  account,  he  hindered  from  taking
pains  to  sweeten  and  subdue  the  present,  and  prepare  for  a  better  future,  by  a  distinct
and  deliberate  revival  of  the  most  sacred  and  tender  experiences  of  the  past.

IV.  This  deobeeatb  use  of  hallowed  associations  secures  a  contdtoitt  of
GOODNESS.  -  There  was  a  native  force  in  David's  generous  sentiments  toward  Jonathan
in  early  days  which  would  tend  to  their  continuous  assertion.  The  main  elements  of
a  man's  moral  life  will  abide  in  spite  of  counteracting  evils.  Yet  as  limbs  maintain
their  muscular  power  by  exertion,  so  the  special  qualities  of  David's  character,  as  seen
in  his  early  friendship  for  Jonathan,  would  form  a  continuous  feature  of  his  life  only
in' so  far  as  he  availed  himself  of  passing  opportunities  for  reviving  the  sentiments
associated  with  the  name  of  his  departed  friend.    To  this  habit  of  allowing  the  feelings

{)eculiar  to  such  associations  to  act  again  and  again,  as  occasion  permitted,  upon  his
ife,  in  combination,  of  course,  with  other  forms  and  methods  of  spiritual  culture,  we
may  ascribe  the  freshness  and  force  of  the  kindly,  generous  sentiments  which  were
a  distinctive  feature  of  his  character  to  the  very  end.  The  characters  of  gome  men  are
disjointed.  The  main  qualities  of  one  part  of  their  life  are  not  conspicuous  later  on.
The  good  has  been  overlaid,  crushed  down,  by  an  enormous  pressure  of  thought  and
sentiment  of  an  adverse  kind,  and  no  care  has  been  taken  to  give  new  force  to  latent
memories.  Their  later  good  qualities  are  not  of  the  same  order  as  their  earlier.  This
is  not  true  growth.  The  true  continuity  of  goodness  is  that  seen  in  David's  case,  and
is  promoted  by  the  same  careful  use  of  the  power  that  lies  in  the  best  associations  of
our  earlier  life.

GrBNEBAL  LESSONS.  1.  Let  US  sec  to  the  storing  of  the  mind  in  early  years  with
facts  and  experiences  that  will  be  as  fountains  of  blessing  to  freshen  life  amidst  the
carking  cares  of  a  busy  life.  2.  We  should  be  careful  to  cast  out  low  thoughts,  lest
they  occupy,  in  the  mental  and  moral  area,  ground  on  which  holy  and  generous  feelings
may  take  root  and  flourish.  3.  It  is  desirable  to  make  seasons  when  the  best  memories
of  the  past  are  allowed  to  exercise  their  full  power  over  us.  This  seems  to  be  one
reason,  at  least,  for  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  4.  It  is  by  cultivating  the
memories  of  departed  friends,  and  cherishing  the  sentiments  associated  with  their  name,
that  the  communion  of  the  saints  on  earth  and  in  heaven  is  promoted.  5.  It  is  by  the
deliberate  cultivation  of  sacred  memories  that  we  shall  be  able  to  conserve  the  more
gentle  virtues  of  life,  and  so  give  tone  and  purity  to  the  otherwise  hard  and  unsympa-
thetic life  of  the  world.  6.  It  behoves  us  to  consider  well  what  sacred  vows  of  our
earlier  years  are  yet  waiting  to  be  redeemed.  7.  In  the  remembrance  of  former  friend-
ships we  may  do  well  to  inquire  whether  there  are  any  in  trouble  and  need  on  whom
the  spirit  of  the  old  Mendship  may  exercise  itself.

A  spiritual  paralld.  Great  mischief  may  arise  from  the  endeavour  to  trace
spiritual  analogies  in  the  ordinary  historical  narratives  of  Scripture,  in  consequence  of
the  licence  of  an  over-active  imagination.  It  is  not  a  safe  canon  of  interpretation  to
say  that  sacred  history  is  throughout  an  allegory.  That  an  apostle  saw  an  allegory  in
one  or  two  cases  is  not  proof  of  a  general  rule  (GaL  iv.  24).  But,  under  limitations,  we
are  warranted  in  tracing  parallels  between  the  temporal  and  spiritual,  the  earthly  and
the  heavenly :  the  one  may  exhibit  features  which  serve  to  illustrate  ^e  other.  Much
i)f  our  Saviour's  teaching  partook  of  this  character.  In  this  lies  the  essence  of  parable,
[n  this  light  we  may  regard  the  story  of  David's  conduct  toward  Mephibosheth :  it
serves  to  illustrate  the  bearing  and  action  of  the  true  King  of  Zion  toward  the  weak
and  lowly.  Naaman's  cleansing  and  Mephibosheth's  elevation  are  historic  facts
iihedding  light  on  spiritual  realities.    Note —

I.  A  PLEDGE  TO  BE  KEPT.  The  events  here  recorded  have  their  root  in  the  free
pledge  given  by  David  many  years  before  that  he  would  care  for  the  seed  of  Jonathan
(1  Sam.  XX.  15).  He  had  undertaken  to  bless  when  need  should  arise.  In  a  deeper
sense  the  whole  merciful  transactions  recorded  in  New  Testament  history  are  the  out-
come of  a  "covenant  ordered  iu  all  things."  Christ's  interposition  on  behalf  of  the
fallen  was  not  a  casual  act  called  forth  by  a  passing  incident  in  human  history.


244  THE  SEOOITD  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.ix.1— la

Before  the  mountains  were  set  fast  his  "  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men."  The
purpose  and,  speaking  in  human  phrase,  the  plan  of  redemption  were  in  the  original
order ;  and  hence  Christ's  coming  was,  as  it  were,  to  redeem  his  own  pledge,  to  keep  his
own  TOW,  to  fulfil  the  covenant.  "  Lo,  I  come ;  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written
of  me."  Virtually  he  was  "  slain  before  the  foundation  of  the  world ; "  for  all  that
happened  was  consequent  on  "  the  eternal  purpose "  (Eph.  ^iii.  11),  though  not  in
violation  of  human  freedom  (Acts  ii.  23).

II.  A  DEFERRED  FiTLFiLMENT.  We  have  Seen  that  some  years  elapsed,  not  only
after  the  vow,  before  any  ostensible  steps  were  taken  to  fulfil  it,  but  also  after  David
came  to  the  kingdom.  In  this  there  is  no  cause  for  reflection  on  his  sincerity.  Provi-
dence has  many  things  to  bring  about  in  a  monarch's  wise  policy,  and  be  may  hare  to
wait  till  events  are  ripe  for  certain  lines  of  action.  Here,  on  a  small  scale,  we  have  an
illustration  of  the  apparently  deferred  fulfilment  of  the  merciful  undertaking  of  our
Saviour.  Generations  passed  ere  the  set  time  had  come  when  he  could,  consistently
with  the  working  out  of  other  issues,  subordinate  or  co-ordinate,  come  to  "  perfonn  the
mercy  promised  "  in  the  past  (Luke  ii.  72).  Now  that  we  have  the  complete  history
of  David,  we  can  see  the  propriety  of  his  not  taking  measures  for  the  elevation  of  the
seed  of  Jonathan  while  his  work  of  consolidation  was  incomplete ;  and  so  now  that  we
have  the  full  record  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  we  can  see  the  wisdom  of  the
manifestation  of  the  covenanted  grace  being  deferred  till  the  "fulness  of  time"  (GaL
iv.  4).  Many  threads  were  being  woven  by  the  hand  of  Providence  to  meet  in  the
revelation  of  Christ

III.  A  8EABCH  FOB  THE  FAiiLGN.  David  inquired  after  the  seed  of  Jonathan  and
Saul.  The  sons  of  the  distinguished  were  in  obscurity  and,  in  a  social  and  political
point  of  view,  lost.  As  compared  with  the  position  once  held  by  their  father  and
grandfather,  they  were  indeed  degraded  and  outcast.  Their  splendid  inheritance  had
vanished.  They  had  to  be  sought  out.  How  truly  their  relative  social  condition
represents  our  spiritual  condition  is  obvious.  We  have  fallen  far  below  the  original
state  of  our  great  ancestor.  The  effect  of  sin  on  man,  in  so  far  as  it  touches  his  relative
social  position  in  the  enduring  spiritual  world,  is  to  lower  him,  to  render  him  inferior
to  the  holy  beings  who  constitute  the  members  of  the  eternal  kingdom  of  God.  "  Thou
hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity"  (Hos.  xiv.  1).  The  mission  of  Christ,  in  one  aspect  of
it,  is  said  to  be  a  search  for  that  which  is  lost — an  effort  to  find  and  rescue  from  degra-
dation and  shame  those  who  are  living  below  their  proper  position  in  the  spiritual  life
(Luke  XV.  3 — 10,  32 ;  xix.  10).  This  is  true  of  the  race ;  and  his  work  considered  as
"  finished  "  on  Calvary  is  an  effort  to  find  out  and  save  mankind.  It  is  also  true  of  us
as  individuals  that  Christ  does,  like  the  good  shepherd  (John  x.  16 ;  cf.  Luke  xv.  4),
search  for  us.  He  follows  us  in  our  wanderings,  comes  near  to  our  loneliness,  and  calls
us  by  his  Word,  his  providence,  and  his  Spirit.

IV.  A  TEAENINO  COMPASSION.  "  Is  there  not  yet  any  of  the  house  of  Saul,  that
I  may  show  the  kindness  of  God  unto  him  ?  "  (ver.  3).  How  this  reveals  the  deep
longings  of  the  ^heart !  David  is  not  satisfied  with  the  desire  to  show  ordinary
attentions  to  the  fallen  house ;  he  must  show  such  kindness  as  God  would  show.  The
thought  of  Jonathan  evidently  brought  up  again  the  old  love ;  and  it  must,  if  possible,
pour  itself  forth  in  some  unwonted  form.  There  can  be  no  question  that,  in  the  regal
and  better  qualities  of  his  life,  David  illustrates  the  more  perfect  King  who  comes  to
reign  in  righteousness  and  save  the  poor  and  needy.  This  strong  yearning  compassion
was  conspicuous  in  our  Lord  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  when  he  was  seeking  a  lost  race.
In  this  he  is  unapproachable.  It  appears  in  his  deeply  pathetic  tone  whenever  referring
to  sin  and  sorrow,  in  his  patient  unwearying  toil,  in  his  pleadings  with  the  weary  and
heavy  laden,  in  his  looking  with  compassion  on  the  people  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd,
in  his  tears  over  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  sweet  and  gentle  submission  with  which  he
drank  the  cup  in  Gethsemane,  and  poured  out  his  life  on  the  cross.  Overflowing  love !
And  he  is  the  same  now  (Heb.  xiiL  8),  His  life,  sufferings,  and  death  were  the
revelation  of  a  permanent  character,  and  therefore  of  an  ever-yearning  compassion  for
the  fallen.

V.  A  OBAOiors  BBABINO.  Mephlbosheth  trembled  in  the  presence  of  David,  and
was  overcome  by  the  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness  (vers.  6---8).  No  doubt  he  was
surprised  at  such  wondrous  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  king  as  to  send  for  him.    But


oa.  IX.  1—13.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  245

the  king  iu  a  tone  which  no  written  words  can  indicate,  said,  "  Mephibosheth  1 "  We
all  know  what  volumes  of  meaning  mdy  be  conveyed  by  addressing  an  individual  by
his  name  in  a  certain  tone.  And,  lest  this  should  not  suffi.ce,  there  came  the  words,
"  Fear  not  1 "  As  a  brother  and  friend,  on  the  same  level,  he  speaks  to  the  heart  of  the
weak  and  troubled  one.  Foreshadow  Is  this  of  him  who  was  "  meek  and  lowly  in
heart ; "  who  would  not  "  break  the  bruised  reed  or  quench  the  smoking  flax ;  *  who
touched  the  outcast  leper  and  inspired  the  fallen  one  with  hope.  No  reproach,  no
coldness  of  heart,  no  imposition  of  impossible  burdens,  but  the  gentleness  and  grace
that  banish  fear  and  cause  the  poor  outcast  to  feel  that  in  him  there  is  a  tender,  loving
Friend  1

YL  An  elktation  to  honotib.  David  would  be  content  with  nothing  less  than
that  Mephibosheth  should  be  a  free  and  constant  guest  at  his  table.  He  was  to  be
raised  from  social  degradation  and  obscurity  to  a  position  of  greatest  distinction.  No
mere  pension,  no  formal  expression  of  personal  interest,  no  delegation  to  others  of
attention  to  be  paid  to  him,  would  suit  the  largeness  of  the  king's  heart.  His  idea  of
"  the  kindness  of  God  "  (ver.  3)  far  transcended  the  best  human  conceptions  of  gene-
rosity, and  this  unwonted  elevation  to  honour  was  but  the  index  of  it.  What  a
marvellous  change  in  the  condition  of  this  poor,  feeble  outcast  1  How  contrary  to  all
the  usages  of  monarchs,  to  the  offspring  of  the  fallen,  was  this  overflow  of  "  the  kindness
of  God  "  I  Than  this  there  is  not  in  the  Bible  a  more  apt  illustration  of  the  exceeding
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  condescends  to  our  low  estate,  seeks  us  out,  bows
us  down  in  wondering  submission  by  his  matchless  gentleness,  and  then  raises  us  to
the  honour  of  being  members  of  his  household,  of  free  access  to  his  Person  and  closest
fellowship  with  himself  and  those  most  dear  to  him.  "  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee  "
(John  viii.  11 ;  cf.  Bom.  viii.  1).  He  gives  "  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God  "  (John
i.  12,  16 J  1  John  iii.  1,  2).  The  "far-off"  are  made  "nigh"  (Eph.  iL  13),  and  are
called  "  friends "  (John  xv^  16),  blessed  with  constant  fellowship  (1  John  i.  3),  and
even  made  heirs  of  "  the  glory  "  given  to  himself  (John  xvii.  22 — ^24).  It  is  in  the
Antitype  alone  that  we  find  the  full  and  true  expression  of  "the  kindness  of  God"
(ver.  3).  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of
man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).

VIL  A  PERSONAL  OUABANTEE.  A  personal  guarantee,  involving  the  king's  honour,
and  backed  by  all  the  resources  at  his  command,  was  given  that  Mephibosheth  should
henceforth  be  regarded  "  as  one  of  the  king's  sons  "  (ver.  11),  and  that  ample  provision
should  be  made  for  all  his  wants  (ver.  10).  Whatever  demands  came  on  him  for  the
sustenance  of  his  dependents,  they  were  met  by  the  arrangement,  under  royal  warrant,
with  Ziba.  Thus  all  his  interests,  present  and  future,  personal  and  relative,  social  and
material,  were  provided  for.  The  king  guaranteed  all.  Now,  this  is  beautifully  illus-
trative of  what  Christ  does  for  those  whom  he  raises  from  degradation  to  be  his  friends.
He  cares  for  all  their  interests.  He  so  orders  providence  that  they  shall  "  want  no
good  thing."  It  is  said  of  them,  "  All  things  are  yours  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  22) ;  and,  to  scatter
all  fear  and  afford  abundant,  consolation,  the  King  has  said,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall
live  also"  (John  xiv.  19).  Mephibosheth  rested  under  the  care  of  a  faithful  David.
All  the  power  and  all  the  high  moral  qualities  of  David  were  pledged  to  secure  to  him
all  his  life  long  the  blessings  now  enjoyed;  so  all  the  power  and  all  the  ineffable
qualities  of  Christ  are  pledged  to  secure  to  us  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  gloriou.s
heritage  as  Christians  as  long  as  we  live,  i.e.  for  ever.

General  lessons,  1.  It  becomes  us  to  follow  the  example  of  David  and  of  Christ,
and  seek  out  those  who  may  be  in  need  of  blessing,  and  who  may  have  a  special  claim
on  our  sympathy.  2.  We  should  make  the  Divine  character  and  conduct  the  model
of  our  bearing  towards  those  in  trouble.  "The  kindness  of  CkMl"  is  the  ideal  to  be
converted  into  the  realities  of  our  life.  3.  The  lowly  and  despised  may  take  encourage-
ment from  all  that  is  recorded  of  Christ's  gracious  bearing  and  deeds  of  kindness.  4.
We  may  trace,  in  every  instance  of  Christ's  mercy  to  the  fallen,  the  permanently
elevating  tendency  of  Christianity.  It  is  the  one  element  which  alone  lastingly
raises  mankind  in  material  and  social  good.  6.  The  resources  of  Christ  for  securing
the  fulfilment  of  his  promises  are  so  vast  as  to  remove  all  fear.  He  is  more  to  the
universe  at  large  than  David  was  to  his  kingdom.  6.  We  see  the  dignity  of  bearing
that  becomes  thoae  who  are  honoured  with  the  royal  friendship  of  OhruU


m  tSE  SECOND  BOOK  Ot*  SAMUEL.  foH- ix.  1— 13.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — (Jerusalem.)  For  Jonathan's  sake.  David  had  sworn  to  his  friend
Jonathan  that  he  would  "not  cut  off  his  kindness  from  his  house  for  ever"  (1  Bam.
XX.  15).  He  had  been  probably  unaware  of  his  leaving  a  son  behind  him  (for
Mephibosheth  was  born  while  he  was  in  exile,  five  years  before  the  battle  of  Gilboa)  ;
or,  if  acquainted  with  the  fact,  supposed  that  he  perished  in  the  destruction  of  the  house
of  Saul.  But  surmising,  perhaps,  from  something  he  heard,  that  a  son  of  his  friend
survived,  he  made  the  inquiry,  "  Is  there  yet  any  that  is  left,"  etc.  ?  It  was  a  practice
only  too  common  in  the  East,  on  a  change  of  dynasty,  for  the  reigning  monarch  to  put
to  death  the  surviving  members  of  the  family  of  his  predecessor,  in  order  to  make  his
own  position  more  secure.  And  the  conduct  of  David,  in  contrast  therewith,  evinced
his  gratitude,  fidelity,  piety,  and  noble  generosity.  "  Neither  the  splendour  of  victories,
nor  the  pleasures  of  prosperity,  nor  the  lustre  of  his  crown,  could  make  him  unmindful
of  his  covenant  and  oath  to  his  former  friend.  A  suspicious,  faithless  tyrant  would  eA
least  have  kept  the  family  that  imagined  they  had  a  right  to  his  kingdom  low  enough
to  have  prevented  the  possibility  of  their  ever  disputing  it  with  him ;  or  at  least  have
shut  up  the  heir  of  it  in  close  imprisonment,  or  got  rid  of  his  fears  upon  his  account
by  totally  destroying  him ;  thinking  he  might  reasonably  dispense  with  his  oath  to
his  deceased  friend  through  the  necessity  of  self-preservation,  and  securing  to  his  own
family  the  peaceable  succession  to  his  crown  "  (Chandler).    The  words  "  for  Jonathan's


I.  ExPEKss  A  PEIKCIPLE  OP  HUMAN  CONDUCT.  It  is  not  uuusual  for  one  person  to
show  kindness  to  another  for  the  sake  of  some  one  eke,  for  whom,  whether  living  or
dead,  he  entertains  a  high  regard,  on  account  of  his  excellent  character  or  eminent
services;  with  whom  the  object  of  his  kindness  is  closely  connected,  and  without
whom  he  would  not  have  shown  it.  How  often  has  a  king  exercised  his  prerogative
of  mercy  toward  an  offender,  or  bestowed  riches  and  honour  on  a  subject,  for  the  sake
of  the  faithful  service  of  his  father  1  "  The  fruit  of  well-doing  lives  longer  than  him-
self  who  is  the  doer,  and  thereby  he  leaves  a  blessing  and  good  treasure  behind  him
to  his  posterity  "  (Guild).  "  There  are  thousands  of  young  men  and  women  who  are
daily  receiving  kindness  for  their  fathers'  and  mothers'  sakes.  And  this  is,  in  fact,  one
of  the  incidental  blessings  connected  with  having  parents  who,  though  now  dead,  were,
when  living,  persons  of  worthy  and  estimable  life.  Their  children  inherit  the  advan-
tages which  the  love  of  otliers  for  their  memory  can  bestow,  and  many  an  applicant
for  some  office  of  trust  and  emolument  would  be  turned  away  from  the  door  were  it
not  that  his  face  bears  the  lineaments  of  a  departed  and  cherished  friend,  or  his  tones
call  back  to  memory  the  voice  which  will  speak  no  more  "  (E.  Mellor).

II.  Illustrate  a  method  of  Divine  dealings.  God  deals  with  men,  not  merely
in  their  separate  individuality,  but  also  in  their  relationship  to  one  another;  spares
and  blesses  them,  not  only  directly  and  immediately,  but  also  indirectly  and  mediately,
through  and  on  account  of  each  other ;  and  shows  kindness  to  many  for  the  sake  of
one.  Tills :  1.  Occurs  in  various  ways.  By  means  of  the  hereditary  influence  of  a  good
man  on  his  descendants,  and  the  moral  influence  on  others  of  his  example,  utterances,
labotns,  and  sufferings ;  and  (with  more  special  reference  to  the  case  under  considera-
tion) by  granting  his  intercessory  requests,  f  ulflUing  the  promises  made  to  him  on  their
behalf,  and  doing  them  good  out  of  regard  to  him,  or  because  of  something  he  has  done
which  was  necessary  to  that  end.  2.  Appears  in  numerous  instances.  With  respect
to  individuals,  "  The  Locd  hath  blessed  me  for  thy  sake  "  (Gen.  xxx.  27 ;  xix.  29 ;  1
Kings  xi  12) ;  families  (Gen.  xxxix.  5 ;  Ps.  Ixix.  26 ;'  Prov.  xiii.  22) ;  Churches,  cities,
and  nations  (Gen.  xviii.  26 ;  Exod.  xxxii.  14 ;  1  Kings  viii.  19) ;  "  beloved  for  the
fathers'  sakes  "  (Rom.  xi.  28) ;  "  As  the  new  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster,"  etc.  (Isa.  Ixv.
8 ;  i.  9).  So  God  testifies  his  love  of  righteousness,  teaches  the  worth  of  a  good  man
in  relation  to  the  unworthy,  and  causes  his  sovereign  mercy  to  abound  toward  them.
3.  Eas  its  highest  application  in  Christ,  "the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,"
(1)  who  is  very  dear  to  God  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;  Eph.  i.  6) ;  (2)  who  is  closely  allied  to
men  (Heb.  ii.  16) ;  (3)  who  has  laboured,  interceded,  and  suffered  for  us  (1  Pet.  iiL  18) ;
and  (4)  to  whom  many  promises  have  been  made  on  behalf  of  those  who  are  in  him


OH.  rs.  1—13.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK   OF  SAMUEL.  247

(Gal.  iii.  20;  2  Cor.  i.  20).  The  nature,  grounds,  and  extent  of  his  mediation  cannot
be  fully  explained;  but  the  fact  is  certain,  that  it  is  "for  Christ's  sake "  (Eph.  iv.  32),
"in  Christ"  (Revised  Version),  and  "for  his  Name's  sake"  (1  John  ii.  13),  we  are
forgiven,  have  access  to  the  Father,  and  are  "  blessed  with  every  spiritual  blessing ''  (Eph.
i.  3).  "He  comprises  in  his  own  Person  all  and  everything  that  is  most  desirable"
(Gregory  Nazianzen).

III.  Suggest  a  ground  of  devout  contidkncb.  When  Mephibosheth  appeared
before  the  king,  "he  doubtless  was  in  fear  for  his  life  (vers.  6,  7).  Such  generosity  to
a  fallen  rival  as  David  showed  in  restoring  him  to  his  paternal  property,  seemed  to  him
scarcely  credible"  ('Speaker's  Commentary').  But  the  assurance  that  it  was  "for
Jonathan's  sake  "  must  have  inspired  him  with  confidence.  And  similarly,  "  for  Jesus'
sake"  affords  a  (1)  needful,  (2)  effectual,  and  (8)  abiding  ground  of  hope,  and

"  Provides  for'those  who  come  to  God
An  all-prevailing  plea."

"Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  Name,  he  will  give  it  you"  (John  xvi.  33;
xiv.  13).

rV.  Indicate  a  motive  to  practical  benevolence,  after  the  example  of  David
and  from  love  to  our  Divine  Friend  (ch.  i.  26);  in:  1.  Forgiving  each  other  (Eph.  iv.
33).  3.  Kind  and  comforting  speech.  "Fear  not"  (ver.  7).  3.  Generous  gifts..  4.
Self-denial.  5.  Suffering  (Matt.  v.  11 ;  Phil.  i.  39).  6.  Prayers  (Rom.  xv.  30).  7.
Personal,  diligent,  and  constant  service  on  behalf  of  "the  Church  which  is  his  body,"
and  of  all  "for  whom  Christ  died"  (2  Cor.  iv.  5;  3  John  7).  "For  his  Name's  sake;"
"  For  my  sake."  This  is  the  Christian's  peculiar,  highest,  and  mightiest  motive;
implying  not  only  supreme  affection  toward  him  who  "alone  is  worthy,"  but  also
sincere  sympathy  with  his  spirit  and  purposes;  and  producing  most  beneficent
effects.— D.

Ver.  3. — (Jerusalem.)  Showing  the  kindness  of  God.  David  remembered  the
request  of  Jonathan  to  show  him  "the  kindness  of  Jehovah"  (1  Sam.  xx.  14,  15);
felt  the  obligation  of  his  former  promises  and  covenants  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  31,  22;  xxiii.
18);  and  now  purposed,  in  accordance  therewith,  to  "show  the  kindness  of  God,"  i.e.
"love  from  religious  motives,  or  as  God  shows  it "  (Thenius) ;  "in  God  and  for  his  sake "
(Keil);  "in  the  Lord's  sight,  and  according  to  the  Lord's  example,  pure,  perpetual  love,
and  not  such  love  as  arises  from  mere  human  respects  and  is  shown  in  the  eye  of  man '
(Wordsworth);  and  not  simply  "great  and  eminent  kindness "  (Poole,  Patrick).  There
are  benevolent  affections  in  our  nature;  but  they  must  be  imbued  with  religious
motives  and  principles  in  order  that  their  exercise  may  be  of  the  highest  kind.  "The
kindness  of  God"  is  such  as  is  shown:  1.  Out  of  reverence  for  his  Name.  Holy,  just,
and  true;  merciful  and  gracious;  delighting  in  loving-kindness.  "God  is  love;"  and
the  eternal  Fountain  of  love  in  his  creatures.  3.  In  obedience  to  Ms  will,  as  expressed
in  numerous  injunctions  to  the  faithful  performance  of  what  has  been  promised;  in
"the  royal  law"  (Jas.  ii.  8);  and  in  manifold  exhortations  to  compassionate  love.
3.  From  gratitude  for  his  benefits.  These  had  been  bestowed  on  David  in  abundant
measure  (ch.  vii.  18;  viii.  6).  The  acts  of  kindness  which  God  performs  toward  men
both  enable  and  incite  them  to  perform  acts  of  kindness  toward  their  fellow-men.
"  What  goodness  the  Lord  shall  do  unto  us,  the  same  will  we  do  unto  thee"  (Numb.  x.
83).  "Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give."  4.  In  imitation  of  his  example;  of
faithfulness,  goodness,  unsought,  abounding,  unfailing,  and  everlasting  love.  David
was  specially  called,  as  king,  to  exhibit  in  his  character  and  conduct  an  image  of  the
moral  excellences  of  the  Divine  King  of  Israel;  and  to  this  Christians  are  likewise
called.  "Be  ye  therefore  perfect,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  43—48),  "merciful"  (Luke  vi.  86),
"imitators  of  God  as  beloved  children,"  etc.  (Eph.  v.  1).  5.  Under  the  inspiration  of
his  grace,  his  love,  his  Spirit;  and,  indeed,  "  it  is  the  merciful  love  of  God  himself  that
dwells  in  the  heart  of  the  truly  pious,  and  works  therefrom;  for  he  that  lives  in  fellow-
ship with  God  receives  into  his  heart,  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  love  that  is  in  God,
and  lives  and  moves  in  that  love"  (Erdmann).  He  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth
in  God,  and  God  in  him"  (1  John  iv.  16).  He  not  only  reflects  the  Divine  love  on
others,  but  is  also  the  medium  of  its  communication  to  them.  6.  With  the  desire  of
his  approval,  of  pleasing  him  rather  than  men,  and  of  partaking  more  fully  of  his


248  THE  SECOND   BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  [oh.  ix.  1—13.

loTing-kindness,  wMch  "  is  better  than  life."  7.  For  the  promotion  of  Ms  glory  ;  "  that
they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." — D.

Ver.  4. — (GiLEAD.)  The  kindness  of  Machir  Ben-Ammiel.  One  of  the  obscure
characters  of  Scripture.  He  dwelt  at  Lo-debar,  among  the  mountains  of  Gilead,  "  a
favourite  asylum  for  refugees ; "  was,  probably,  a  descendant  of  Machir  the  son  of
Manasseh;  and  "the  principal  man  of  Gilead"  (Josephus).  Of  his  generosity  two
notable  instances  are  recorded  (ch.  iv.  4 ;  xvii.  27).  From  these  it  may  be  inferred  that
he  was  rich  in  earthly  possessions,  and  (what  is  of  much  greater  importance)  in :  1.
Orate/ul  memories.  Like  the  men  of  Jabesh-GUead,  he  remembered  the  heroio  enter-
prise ef  Saul  en  behalf  of  his  people  (1  Sam.  xi.  9 ;  zxxi.  11 ;  ch.  u.  4 — 7).

"  But,  O  Saul,  do  not  fail  us..

Saul.  '  Fail  ye?

Let  the  mom  fail  to  break ;  I  will  not  break
Hy  word.    Haste,  or  I'm  there  before  you.

FaUr
Let  the  morn  fail  in  the  east ;  FU  not  fail  yon ;
But  swift  and  silent  aa  the  streaming  wind.
Unseen  approach,  then  gathering  up  my  force
At  dawning,  sweep  on  Anmon,  as  night's  blast
Sweeps  down  from  Gannel  on  the  dusky  sea."

(C.  Hbavysege, '  Saul:  a  Drama.*)

Hence  he  afforded  ready  shelter  and  hospitality  to  his  grandson,  and  may  have
assisted  the  revival  of  his  house  at  Mahanaim  (ch.  ii.  8) ;  and  when,  subsequently,
David  was  in  exile  at  the  same  place,  remembering  his  kindness  to  Mephibosheth,
rendered  him  generous  aid.  2.  Tender  compassion  toward  the  orphan,  unfortunate  and
friendless.  The  sight  of  human  distress  drew  forth  his  sympathy ;  and  (like  the  good
Saniaritan)  he  suffered  no  other  considerations  to  hinder  its  practical  expression.
3.  Constant  friendship.  During  many  years  (ver.  12),  with  all  their  changes,  he  pro-
vided, apparently  "  without  fee  or  reward,"  a  peaceful  home  for  the  crippled  prince,  and
continued  his  steadfast  protector.  4.  Active  lenevolence.  He  was  "  rich  in  good  works  "
(2  Tim.  vi.  18).  "  Sensibility,  as  the  word  is  generally  used,  is  a  mere  animal  instinct,
useless  when  it  does  not  immediately  lead  to  active  benevolence ;  and  in  such  cases  not
only  useless,  but  pernicious,  because  it  has  a  tendency  to  produce  a  resting;  satisfied
with  the  emotion  and  a  neglect  of  the  action"  (W.  Cooke  Taylor).  5.  Beneficent
influence.  His  conduct  could  not  but  produce  a  good  effect  on  the  rude,  warlike  tribe
of  which  he  was  chief;  and  possibly  incited  others  (Shobi  and  Barzillai)  to  the  like.

"  Great  deeds  cannot  die :
They  with  the  sun  and  moon  renew  their  light
For  ever,  blessing  those  that  look  on  them."

(Tennyson.)

6.  NobU  recompense.     "  The  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish  "  (Job  zxix.  13),

the  approval  of  his  own  conscience,  the  enduring  memorial  of  a  good  name.  Although
(like  that  of  Abou  Ben-Adhem)  his  name  has  not  been  written  in  the  sacred  record
among  "  the  names  of  those  who  love  the  Lord,"  but  only  "  as  one  that  loves  his
fellow-men,"  it  could  not  fail  of  being  divinely  honoured.

"  The  angel  wrote,  and  vanished.    The  next  night  ■
It  came  again,  with  a  great  wakening  light.
And  show'd  the  names  whom  love  of  G(^  had  bless'd.
And  lo  I    Ben-Adhem's  name  led  all  the  rest"

(Leigh  Hunt)

n

Vers.  5 — 13. — (The  kinq's  palaob.)  Mephibosheth  l^ore  the  king.  We  have  here
a  picture  of —

L  ExTBAORDiNAET  VICISSITUDES  IN  LIFE.  A  prluce  by  birth,  deprived  of  his  father,
crippled  by  a  heedless  footstep,  carried  into  exile  and  poverty,  recently  a  helpless


OH.  nt.  1—13.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  249

dependent  in  a  remote  district,  is  conducted  into  the  presence  of  one  who  was  once  a
shepherd-boy,  afterwards  a  wandering  outlaw,  and  now  the  greatest  monarch  on  earth  I
Such  changes :  1.  May  be  largely,  though  not  entirely,  traced  to  moral  causes,  per-
sonal character,  hereditary  relationships.  2.  Are  wrought  by  Divine  providence
(1  Sam.  iL  7,  8  ;  Ps.  cxiii,  7,  8).  8.  Are  designed  for  human  welfare ;  being  not  only
corrective,  but  also  tentative  and  disciplinary  (Ps.  Iv,  19;  Job  zziiL  10;  Heb.  lii.  6).
4.  And  should  be  regarded  in  an  appropriate  spirit  (Jas.  i.  9,  10).

n.  The  depeessing  influence  op  misfobtunb.  "He  fell  on  his  face,  and  did
reverence  "  (ver.  6) ;  "  And  he  bowed  himself,  and  said.  What  is  thy  servant,  that  thou
shouldest  look  upon  such  a  dead  dog  as  I  am?"  (ver.  8).  His  physical  infirmity,  com-
bined with  long-continued  dependence,  made  him  not  merely  humble,  but  timid,
anxious,  abject,  and  self-depreciatory.  Hence  his  language  (due  in  part  to  Oriental
exaggeration)  is  excusable,  though  scarcely  to  be  commended  (Kitto, '  Daily  Bible  lUua.').
The  natural  tendency  of  heavy  afSiction  to  enfeeble  and  crush  the  spirit  is  effectually
overcome  only  by  the  aid  of  Divine  grace.

III.  As  ADMIBABLE  EXHIBITION  OF  KINDNESS ;  Spontaneous,  faithful,  considerate,
magnanimous,  practical,  enduring,  Divine.  1.  In  gracious  and  encouraging  words.
"  Mephibosheth  1 "  (ver.  6).  "  Pear  not  I "  etc.  (ver.  7).  To  David  himself,  in  a  time
of  dejection,  Jonathan  had  said, "  Fear  not  1 "  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  17) ;  and  hoyf  often  has  the
Lord  spoken  the  same  comforting  word  to  his  servants  (Gen.  xv.  1 ;  Luke  xii.  32 ;
Eev.  L  17)  1  2.  In  becoming  and  beneficent  acts  ;  fulfilling  what  had  been  promised
(vers.  9 — 11),  restoring  an  alienated  inheritance,  and  making  a  sure,  permanent,  and
abundant  provision  (ver.  12).  3.  In  honoiu-ed,  intimate,  and  abiding  friendship.
"  Mephibosheth,  thy  master's  son,  shall  eat  bread  alway  at  my  table  "  (vers.  10, 11, 13).
Such  kindness,  like  sunshine  after  rain,  and  as  a  visit  of  "  the  angel  of  Ood  "  (ch.  xix.
27,  28),  dispersed  his  fear,  alleviated  his  misfortune,  and  filled  him  with  grateftil  devo-
tion ;  whilst  his  presence  at  the  royal  table  would  daily  remind  the  king  of  his  deceased
friend,  and  incite  him  to  renewed  generosity.  •

IV.  The  ibbemediablb  defects  of  the  most  favodbed  eaethlt  condition.  "  And
he  was  lame  on  both  his  feet "  (ver.  13).  His  deformity  was  incurable ;  his  infirmity
became  an  occasion  of  complaint  and  slander  (ch.  xvi.  2 — 4) ;  and  his  dejection  and
distress  returned  "  as  the  clouds  after  the  rain  "  (ch.  xix.  24—30).  The  king  himself
often  longed  to  flee  away  and  be  at  rest  (Ps.  Iv.  6).  And  it  is  vain  to  expect  perfec-
tion in  character  or  condition  except  in  the  heavenly  mansions.

**  There  is  a  spot  in  every  flower,
A  sigh  in  every  gale,
A  shadow  in  the  brightest  homr,
Thorns  in  the  smoothest  vale.

*  To  smile  and  weep,  and  weep  and  smfli^
To  man  alternate  given ;
To  cling  to  earth  permitted  while
We  learn  to  long  for  heaven."

A

Ver.  13. — Lost  and  found :  a  sermon  to  yoimg  people.  The  story  of  Mephibosheth
may  be  used  as  a  little  parable  of  the  spiritual  history  of  every  one  who  is  restored  to
God.  He  was :  1.  A  prince.  To  you  belongs  a  more  than  princely  dignity ;  for  you
are  all  "  the  offspring  of  God,"  and  bear  on  you  traces  of  "  the  image  and  glory  "  of
"  the  Father  of  spirits."  2.  Lost.  You  belong  to  a  sinful  and  fallen  race ;  and  your
condition  is  one  of  deprivation,  helplessness,  obscurity,  and  misery.  "  A  true  religion
ought  to  instruct  man  both  in  his  greatness  and  his  misery  "  (Pascal).  8.  Sought.
Infinite  piety  has  sought  and  is  still  seeking  every  one  of  you,  and  employs  many
means  to  find  and  save  yon  (Matt.  xviiL  10 — 14 ;  Luke  xv.).  4.  Found ;  unexpectedly
to  himself  and  to  the  joy  of  the  seeker.  So  is  it  when  the  gracious  message  of  the
gospel  comes  to  you,  "  not  in  word  only,  but  in  power."  6.  Self-abased ;  in  the  presence
of  the  king.  When  you  see  the  height  of  Divine  greatness  and  goodness,  you  also  see
the  depth  of  your  own  unworthiness  and  shame.  6.  Comforted.  "  Pear  not ;  only
believe."  7.  Exalted  ;  endowed  with  more  than  had  been  lost ;  and  adopted  as  "  one
of  the  king's  sons  "  (ver.  11).    The  gifts  of  God  are  worthy  of  himselL    When  one,  to


«0  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ix.  1— IS.

whom  Alexander  gave  a  city,  declined  to  accept  it,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  unsuitable
to  his  condition,  he  said,  "  1  do  not  ask  what  is  becoming  in  you  to  leceive,  but  what  ii
becoming  in  me  to  give  "  (Seneca, '  De  Beneficiis '). — D.

Ver.  3. — "  The  kindness  of  God."  David,  settled  on  the  throne  and  in  his  new  metro-
polis, recalls  to  mind  the  fallen  house  of  Saul,  not  to  destroy  them,  as  was  usual  with
Eastern  monarchs,  but  to  show  them  kindness  for  Jonathan's  sake.  In  his  inquiry
after  them  he  uses  substantially  the  same  phrase  which  Jonathan  had  used  (1  Sam.
XX.  14)  when  he  took  an  oath  of  him  that  he  would  be  kind  to  himself  and  his  family.
"  The  kindness  of  the  Lord,"  or  "  the  kindness  of  God,"  is  an  expression  descriptive  of
the  highest  and  best  kindness  possible  to  man  or  angel.    It  is  kindness  which—

I.  FiiOWB  FROM  GrOD.  This  is  true  of  all  the  kindness  which  exists  amongst  men.
"  Love  is  of  God."  All  the  love  of  men  towards  each  other  streams  forth  from  the
fountain  of  Divine  love,  and  should  be  thus  regarded  by  those  who  are  the  objects  of
it,  he  being  praised  for  aU.  But  this  is  emphatically  true  of  Christian  kindness.  It
originates  in,  and  is  a  manifestation  of,  the  love  of  God  in  Christ.  It  is  produced  by
the  Holy  Spirit  as  given  to  the  disciples  of  Christ,  and  by  means  of  the  truth  respect-
ing him  (1  Pet.  i.  22, 23).  It  is  a  product  of  regeneration.  It  is  God's  love  dwelling
in  human  hearts  and  revealing  itself  in  human  lives.  It  is  an  element  of  "  the  Divine
nature  "  of  which  Christians  are  "  partakers  "  (2  Pet.  i.  4).

II.  Is  EXEKCiSED  FROM  REGARD  TO  GoD.  1.  It  has  its  root,  like  all  Christian  graces,
in  faith  towards  God  (Gfal.  v.  6).  2.  It  springs  from  gratitude  and  love  to  him  for  all
his  goodness,  especially  for  his  redeeming  love  (1  John  iv.  11).  3.  It  is  practised  in
obedience  to  his  commandments  (1  John  iv.  21).  4.  It  aims  at  his  approval  6.  It
imitates  him  (Luke  vi.  36 ;  Bph.  iv.  32).     Hence  it —

III.  Is  GoD-LiKE.  As  it  is:  1.  Disinterested.  "Seeketh  not  her  own"  (1  Cor.
xiii.  5).  Kindness  which  is  exercised  with  a  view  to  personal  advantage  is  not  kind-
ness but  policy  and  commercial  subtlety.  2.  Expansive,  Eeady  to  help  all  who  need,
as  far  as  power  permits.  Not  restricting  itself  to  the  good  and  worthy,  but  "  kind
unto  the  unthankful  and  the  evil "  (Luke  vi.  35) ;  nor  yet  to  friends,  but  extending  to
enemies  (Matt.  v.  44,  45,  48) ;  nor  to  one's  own  sect  in  religion,  but  regarding  with
love  all  Christian  brethren  (1  John  v.  1 ;  Eph.  vi.  24).  Yet  it  is :  3.  Discriminating.
The  Divine  love  is  united  with  righteousness,  and  seeks  righteous  ends.  Hence  it
eannot  be  the  same  thing,  and  displayed  in  the  same  manner,  towards  the  righteous  and
the  unrighteous,  the  obedient  and  the  disobedient ;  and  it  mainly  seeks  to  promote
righteousness  and  salvation  in  all,  and  varies  its  methods  accordingly.  Christian  love
and  kiniiness  will  be  exercised  with  similar  discrimination  as  far  as  is  possible  to  men  ;
and  wUl  seek  supremely  the  moral  and  spiritual  benefit  of  its  objects.  Indiscriminate
benevolence  does  more  harm  than  good.  4.  Unsparing,  "  He  spared  not  his  own
Son  "  (Eom.  viii.  32),  and  in  him  the  love  of  God  appears  as  self-sacrificing  (1  John
iii.  16)  and  bountiful  (Eph.  i.  3).  Christian  love  possesses  the  same  qualities  of  bounti-
fulness  (2  Cor.  viii.  2, 3, 9 — 11),  self-denial,  and  self-sacrifice.  It  "  endureth  all  things  "
(1  Cor.  xiii.  7).  5.  Constant.  The  love  of  God  is  long-suffering,  persistent,  and
eternal  (Ps.  ciii.  17 ;  cxxxvi.,  passim).  His  children  are  like  him  in  this  respect  also
(1  Cor.  xiii.  4,  8,  13).

IV.  Is  NOURISHED  BY  CONVERSE  WITH  GoD.  The  acts  and  habits  of  devotion — read-
ing, meditation,  prayer,  praise — bring  us  into  closer  communion  with  God,  secure  us
more  of  his  Spirit,  open  our  hearts  to  receive  the  impress  of  his  character,  promote  in
us  all  those  sentiments  and  principles  towards  him  which  issue  in  hearty  love  and
kindness  towards  our  brethren.  Let  iis  draw  nigh  continually  to  him  whose  name  ia
Love,  and  we  shall  find  it  ever  more  easy  to  be  loving. — G.  W.

Ver.  13. — Eating  at  the  king's  table.  David,  out  of  regard  to  the  memory  of  his  dear
friend  Jonathan,  and  mindful  of  his  oath  to  him,  not  only  restores  to  his  son  Mephi-
bosheth  the  forfeited  property  of  Saui,  and  arranges  for  its  cultivation  by  Ziba  and  his
sons,  but  exalts  Mephibosheth  to  the  position  of  a  constant  guest  at  his  own  table,  "as
one  of  the  king's  sons."  So  Mephibosheth  "  did  eat  continually  at  the  king's  table.*'
The  circumstance  may  serve  to  remind  us  of  the  greater  honour  which  good  men  enjoy  j
it  is  theirs  to  eat  continually  at  tne  table  of  the  King  of  kings.


bk.  IX 1—13.;]  IfiE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  251

I.  This  re  tbub  as  kespbotb  theib  paktioipation  of  the  giftb  or  God's  provi-
dence. All  creatures  depend  upon  him,  and  he  supplies  their  wants  (Ps.  civ.  27,  28 ;
cxlv!  15, 16).  But  the  lower  creatures  partake  of  his  bounty  unconscious  of  the  hand
which  feeds  them.  They  are,  in  relation  to  God,  rather  like  the  horses  in  the  stable,  or
the  cattle  and  sheep  in  the  fields,  than  the  children  at  the  table.  And  what  these  are
through  incapacity,  ungodly  people  are  through  unbelief  and  forgetfulness.  They  live
on  the  bounty  of  God,  unmindful  of  him  and  unthankful.  His  children,  however,
even  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  daily  food,  "  sit  at  his  table."  As  he  provides,  so  they
recognize  his  care  and  bounty,  and  give  him  thanks.  As  he  is  present,  so  they  are  con-
scious of  his  presence.  They  regard  him  as  presiding  at  their  meals,  and  are  glad  to
discern  him  so  near.  They  ask  for  his  blessing,  and  receive  it.  They  "  eat  to  the  Lord,
and  give  God  thanks"  (Eom.  xiv.  6).  They  satisfy  their  appetites  and  gratify  their
tastes  as  in  his  sight.  They  aim  "  to  eat  and  drink  ...  to  the  glory  of  God  "  (1  Cor.
X.  31).  They  not  only  enjoy  his  gifts,  but  commune  with  himself.  They  talk  with
him,  and  he  with  them.  Common  meals  thus  enjoyed  become  as  sacraments  and
means  of  grace.     Let  it  be  our  endeavour  to  enjoy  them  thus  more  than  we  have  done.

IL  The  wokds  are  more  emphaticallt  applicable  to  the  Christian's  enjot-
MBNT  OF  SPIRITUAL  BLESSINGS.  In  this  sense,  "  he  eats  continually  at  the  king's  table."
The  image  reminds  us  of:  1.  Eis  exaltation.  Once,  like  Mephibosheth,  living  far  away
from  the  king,  now  brought  near,  and  associated  with,  yea,  made  really  one  of,  his
children.  Still  "lame"  and  otherwise  defective,  and  tiaflt  perhaps  for  much  service,
yet  admitted  to  favour  and  honour.  2.  The  abundance  of  the  iest  provisions  he  enjoys.
At  the  King's  table  is  plenty,  and  of  the  best.  At  the  table  of  the  heavenly  King,
spread  under  the  gospel,  are  provisions  the  choicest  and  rarest,  to  be  found  nowhere
else ;  and  which  nourish,  not  for  this  short  earthly  life,  but  for  life  eternal.  The  best
intellectual  food  is  here ;  but  especially  that  food  which  quickens  and  nourishes  the
soul,  in  faith,  and  love,  and  hope,  and  holiness.  Divine  truth  and  whatever  it  reveals
and  presents — the  pardoning  mercy  and  fatherly  love  of  Qod,  the  love  and  sacrifice  of
Christ,  his  body  and  his  blood,  which  are  the  real  food  and  drink  of  men.  Of  these
the  believing  and  loving  soul  may  partake  at  will,  anywhere  and  everywhere.  The
King's  table  is  not  confined  to  place ;  but  especially  in  the  house  of  God  and  at  the
Lord's  Supper,  the  table  is  spread,  and  Christians  gather  together  to  feed  and  feast.
3.  At  the  King's  table  is  the  best  society.  At  the  table  of  the  Divine  King  we  associate
with  the  Father  and  the  Sun,  by  the  Spirit ;  and  by  him  also  with  saints  and  angels,
"  the  excellent  of  the  earth  "  and  the  excellent  of  heaven.  The  Lord  fulfils  his  pro-
mise, "  I  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me  "  (Eev.  iii.  20).  4.  At  the  Kin^t  table  is
gladness.  The  honour,  the  provision,  the  company,  all  tend  to  give  pleasure.  6.  There
also  is  safety.  The  palace  of  a  king  is  commonly  the  securest  spot  in  the  land.  Far
more  assured  is  the  safety  of  those  who  sit  at  the  table  of  the  heavenly  King.  Angels
guard  them;  God  himself  is  their  Dwelling-place  and  Defence.  6.  Hie  privilege  of  eat-
ing at  the  table  of  our  King  is  perpetual.  'As  in  the  case  of  Mephibosheth.  If  it  is  not
continually  enjoyed,  it  is  our  own  fault.  The  privilege  enjoyed  by  Mephibosheth  would
be  a  constant  solace  to  him  in  his  helplessness ;  and  the  spiritual  counterpart  is  to
Christians  a  constant  source  of  comfort  and  support  under  their  troubles.

III.  The  words  are  perfectly  fulfilled  in  the  heavbnlt  world.  The  future
blessedness  of  God's  people  is  often  compared  to  a  feast  (see  Matt.  viii.  11 ;  Bev.  ii.  7  ;
xix.  9).  It  is,  in  fact,  the  continuance  and  the  perfecting  of  the  blessedness  now  enjoyed.
The  King  himself  is  perfectly  "  manifested."  "  They  shall  see  his  face  "  (Rev.  xxii.  4) ;
"  We  shall  see  him  as  he  is  "  (1  John  iii.  2).  His  love  and  favour  are  so  displayed  as
not  to  admit  of  a  doubt.  The  provisions  at  his  table  are  the  same  as  on  earth ;  but  the
guests  are  better  able  to  enjoy  them,  their  spiritual  appetite  and  tastes  being  freed  from
all  that  lessens  their  fitness  to  do  so.  The  society  is  the  same,  but  those  imperfect  on
earth  are  perfected  in  spirit  and  in  body  (Heb.  xii.  23  ;  Phil.  iii.  21).  The  security  is
absolute ;  the  joy  unmingled  with  sorrow ;  the  feast  is  perpetual  and  without  end.
"Blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  God"  (Luke  xiv,  15).  Who
ihall  partake  of  that  bliss  ?  All  are  invited  by  the  gospel ;  and  none  will  be  excluded
but  such  as  exclude  themselves  by  refusing  to  accept  the  invitation,  and  obtain  the
necessary  preparation  for  the  feast,  which  consists  in  reconciliation  to  the  King  through
J«siu  Christ,  constant  loyalty  ana  obedience  to  him,  and  joyful  partaking  now  of  his


252


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,


[oh.  X.  1 — 19,


spiritual  gifts.  To  «  eat  continually  at  the  King's  table  "  here  Is  the  necessary  con-
dition of  our  doing  so  hereafter,  as  it  is  also  the  preparation  for  that  happiness  and  the
evidence  that  we  shall  enjoy  it.^>.  W.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  X.


Ver.  1. — The  Mug  of  the  ohildren  of
Ammon  died.  This  war  ia  very  briefly  re-
ferred to  in  ch.  viii.  12 ;  but  we  have  now
entered  upon  a  narrative,  the  interest  of
which  is  altogether  unlike  all  that  has  gone
before.  There  we  saw  David  crowned  with
earthly  glory,  and  made  the  monarch  of  a
vast  empire ;  he  is  also  a  propliet,  and,  as
such,  not  only  restores,  but  enriches  and
enlarges,  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary;  and,
as  prophet  and  king,  he  becomes  not  only
the  type,  but  the  ancestor  of  the  Messiah.
In  this  narrative  he  is  a  sinner,  punished
with  terrible,  though  merited,  severity,  and
must  henceforth  walk  humbly  and  sorrow-
fully as  a  penitent  before  God.  From  1
Chron.  xix.  1  we  learn  that  the  king's  name
was  Nabash ;  but  whether  he  was  the  same  as
the  Kahash  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xi.  1  is  un-
certain. There  was  an  interval  of  more  than
forty  years  between,  but  Kahash  was  pro-
bably a  young  man,  just  seated  on  the
throne,  when  he  attacked  Jabesh-Grilead ;
and  Saul,  who  repelled  him,  might  have
been  still  alive  but  for  the  battle  of  Gilboa.
The  name  means  a  "  serpent,"  and  is  used
in  Job  xxvi.  13  of  the  constellation  Draco.
It  may  thus  have  been  a  name  assumed  by
several  Ammonite  kings,  the  dragon  re-
presenting majesty  and  power,  and  being
the  symbol  on  their  seal,  just  as  it  is  the
Chinese  imperial  emblem  now.  The  phrase,
"  It  came  to  pass  after  this,"  has  no  chro-
nological significance  either  here  or  in  ch.
viii.  1.  It  is  simply  a  form  of  transition
&om  one  subject  to  another.

Ver.  2. — His  father  showed  kindness  unto
me.  This  makes  it  probable  that  it  was  the
same  Nahash  as  Saul's  enemy.  The  smart
of  the  defeat  caused  by  Saul's  energy  would
make  him  regard  with  friendship  any  one
who  was  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  the  man  who
had  so  unexpectedly  stopped  him  in  his
career,  and  hence  his  kindness  to  David.

Ver.  3. — Thinkest  thou  that  David  doth
honour  thy  father  ?  This  insinuation  arose
probably  from  ill  will,  stirred  up  by  David's
success  in  war;  and,  with  that  distrust  with
which  neighbouring  nations  too  often  regard
one  another,  they  see  in  his  embassy  only
a  purpose  of  spying  into  their  defences  with
a  view  to  future  attack.  Eabbah,  their  city,
was  a  place  Strong  both  naturally  and  by
reason  of  its  fortifications.

Ver.  4. — Hannn  .  .  .  shaved  off  tha  on*


half  of  their  beards.  To  an  Oriental  tbe
beard  was  the  mark  of  his  being  a  ftee  man,
and  to  out  it  off  on  one  side  was  not  merely
an  insult  to  David's  ambassadors,  but  the
treating  them  like  slaves.  Moreover,  as
only  the  priests  wore  underclothing,  and
as  the  ordinary  dress  of  men  consisted  of
a  tunic  and  a  loose  flowing  robe  thrown
over  it,  the  cutting  of  this  robe  short  up  to
the  hip  was  a  vile  and  abominable  affront.
Of  course,  Hanun  intended  this  as  a  chal-
lenge to  war,  whereas  David  had  meant
peace  and  friendship.

Ver.  6. — That  they  stank  (see  notes  on
1  Sam.  xiii.  4;  xxvii.  12).  As  the  Hebrew
literally  means,  had  made  themselves  stink,
the  Revised  Version  rightly  translates,
"had  made  themselves  odious."  The  chil-
dren of  Ammon  sent  and  hii'ed  the  Syrians.
From  1  Ghron.  xix.  6  we  learn  that  bis
mercenaries  from  Aram  cost  Hanun  a
thousand  talents  of  silver,  or  nearly  five
hundred  thousand  pounds  —  a  vast  sum,
especially  considering  the  great  relative
value  of  silver  in  those  days.  The  mer-
cenaries, moreover,  were  gathered  out  of
numerous  districts  of  Aram — from  Rehob,
Zoba,  Beth-Maacah,  and  Tob ;  the  margin
being  right  in  rendering  "  the  men  of  Tob,"
instead  of  "  Ish-tob."  So,  too,  the  Revised
Version,  "  The  men  of  Tob  twelve  thousand
men."  It  was  to  this  land  that  Jephthab
fled  (Judg.  xi.  3).  The  whole  number  of  the
allies  was  thirty-three  thousand,  with  which
total  the  parallel  place  agrees,  as  they  are
described  there  as  "thirty-two  thousand,
and  the  King  of  Maaoah  and  his  people,"
who  are  here  said  to  have  been  a  thousand
strong.  The  text,  however,  there  must  be
corrupt,  as  it  describes  them  all  as  horse-
men (Authorized  Version,  "  chariots ;  "
1  Chron.  xix.  7);  here  footmen  only  are
mentioned,  with  which  the  narrative  agrees
(see  note  on  ver.  18).

Ver.  7. — And  all  the  host  of  the  mighty
men.  The  Hebrew  is,  and  all  the  host,  even
mighty  men.  By  this  is  meant,  not  "  the
mighties,"  but  that  the  Israelites  had  now
become  practised  in  war,  and  veterans.

Ver.  8. — The  Syrians  .  .  .  were  by  them-
selves in  the  field.  We  learn  from  1  Chron.
xix.  7  that  the  rendezvous  of  the  Arameans
was  at  Medeba,  a  small  town  situated  upon
a  hill  in  the  Mishor,  or  treeless  prairie-laud,
called  "the  plain"  in  Josh.  xiii.  16.  As  it  was
four  miles  south-east  of  Heshbon,  and  more
than  twenty  miles  distant  from  Babbah,  it


OH.  X.  1—19.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


2S3


is  plain  that  they  were  maiohing  northward,
and  that  Joab  was  only  just  in  time  to  pre-
vent a  junction  of  the  two  armies.  The
Ammonites,  who  were  expecting  their  allies,
and  knew  of  their  approach,  had  come  ont-
gide  of  Babbah,  but  had  only  posted  them-
selves in  fighting  order  "  at  the  entering  in
of  the  gate."

Ver.  9.— The  front  of  the  battle.  The
object  of  Joab  was  to  prevent  at  all  hazards
tlie  junction  of  the  Syrians  with  the  Am-
monites, and  he  was  only  just  in  time  to
throw  himself  between  them.  This  was
resolute  but  dangerous  policy,  as,  in  case  of
defeat,  he  would  have  a  powerful  enemy  in
his  rear.  Apparently,  however,  he  was
aware  that  his  real  work  lay  with  the
Syrian  mercenaries,  who  were  dangerous
enough  by  themselves,  and  would  become
more  than  a  match  for  him  if  they  were
reinfoiced  by  the  men  of  Kabbah.  He
>  therefore  leaves  Abishai  with  such  troops
as  he  could  spare  to  watch  the  Ammonites,
feeling  sure  that  they  would  not  hazard  an
attack  unless  they  saw  matters  going  ill
with  him;  and,  taking  with  him  all  his
bravest  men,  "  the  choice  men  of  Israel,"  he
prepares  with  them  to  give  battle  to  the
Syrians.

Ver.  11. — ^And  he  said,  etc.  Thenius  re-
marks, "  We  have  here  the  briefest  of  war-
like exhortations,  but  one  most  full  of  point
and  meaning."  Joab  recognized  the  full
danger  of  their  situation;  for  should  he
meet  with  any  check  in  his  attack  on  this
vast  host  of  mercenaries,  he  was  well  aware
that  the  Ammonites,  watching  the  battle
with  eager  interest,  would,  on  the  first  news
of  victory,  rush  upon  Abishai  with  exulting
fury;  and  the  men  with  him,  being  only
ordinary  troops,  would  be  disheartened  by
Joab's  failure,  sti  that  without  extraordinary
bravery  on  thelt  leader's  part,  they  would
give  way,  and  all  would  be  lost.

Ver.  12. — Be  of  good  courage,  and  let  us
play  the  men.  The  Hebrew  employs  two
conjugations  of  the  same  verb,  literally,  be
strong,  and  let  ua  show  ourselves  strong.  And
need  there  was  for  bravery ;  for  the  welfare,
as  he  went  on  to  show,  of  all  Israel,  and  the
honour  of  Israel's  God,  were  in  jeopardy.
Finally  he  adds,  The  Lord  do  that  which
seemeth  him  good.  They  are  the  words  not
so  much  of  confidence  as  of  determined  re-
solution. Come  good  or  ill,  he  and  Abishai
would  do  their  utmost.

Ver.  14.— So  Joab  returned.  It  seems
strange  to  us  that  Joab  should  have  made
no  attempt  to  follow  up  his  victory.  But
as  the  Ammonites  were  posted  close  to  the
giite  of  their  city,  they  iwould  withdraw  into
it  without  loss  as  soun  as  they  learned  that
their  allies  were  defeated.  There  was  thus
the  certainty  of  a  long  siege  before  Babbah


could  be  taken.  We  gather  &om  oh.  xL  1
that  it  was  late  in  the  year  when  Joab  won
this  victory,  and  it  was  part  of  the  weaknesi
of  ancient  warfare  that  a  long  campaign  was
beyond  the  power  of  either  side.

Ver.  16. — Hadarezer  (see  note  on  ch.  viii.
3).  Hadarezer  probably  had  been  well
content  to  let  his  subjects  receive  the  pay
of  the  Ammonites,  and  extend  hia  empire
at  their  cost.  But  as  paramount  king  in
Aram,  the  defeat  of  the  mercenaries  obliged
him  to  make  the  war  a  national  afTair,  and
undertake  the  management  of  it  himself.
He  therefore  summons  troops  from  all  the
Aramean  states  on  both  sides  of  the
Euphrates,  and  places  hia  own  general,
Shobach,  in  command,  and  makes  Helam
the  place  of  gathering.  Eelam.  No  such
place  is  known,  and  the  word  might  mean
"  their  army,"  in  which  case  the  translation
would  be,  "and  they  came  in  full  force."
The  Vulgate  takes  it  in  this  way,  but  makes
the  verb  the  causative  singular,  and  trans-
lates, "and  he  brought  their  army."  On
the  other  hand,  the  LXX.,  the  Syriac,  and
the  Chaldee  make  it  a  proper  name  here,  as
even  the  Vulgate  necessarily  does  in  ver.  17,
where  there  can  be  no  doubt.  In  the  pa-
rallel place  (1  Chron.  xix.  16, 17)  it  is  omitted
in  the  first  place,  and  in  the  second  we  find
in  its  stead,  "  upon  them."  Either,  there-
fore, the  chronicler  did  not  know  of  such  a
plac6,  or  the  text  is  corrupt.  Bwald  and
others  suppose  that  Helam  may  be  identified
with  Alamata ;  but  we  leam  from  1  Chron,
iviii.  3  that  the  battle  wag  fought  near
Hamath,  and  Alamata  is  on  the  Euphrates,
too  far  away  for  David  to  have  made  his
attack  there.

Ver.  17. — ^David  .  .  .  gathered  all  Israel
together.  Some  commentators  see  in  this
an  indication  of  dissatisfaction  with  Joab.
Eeally  it  was  a  matter  of  course  that  in  so
great  a  war  the  king  should  place  himself
at  the  head  of  his  levies.  For  not  only  was
he  possessed  of  great  military  genius,  but
his  personal  presence  would  make  the  men
of  Israel,  a  race  of  sturdy  free  men,  assemble
in  greater  numbers,  and  would  give  them
confidence.  If  David  himself  weat  there
would  be  no  shirking  the  war  and  finding
excuses  to  stay  at  home,  and  in  the  camp
there  would  be  prompt  alacrity  and  zeal.

Ver.  18. — David  slew,  etc.  (see  note  on
ch.  viii.  4).  We  have  seen  there  that  the
word  translated  "chariots"  means  any
vehicle  or  animal  for  riding.  The  numbers
here  are  seven  hundred  chariots  with  their
charioteers,  and  forty  thousand  horsemen ;
in  ch.  viii.  4  we  have  seventeen  hundred
horsemen  and  twenty  thousand  footmen;
finally,  in  1  Chron.  xix.  18  we  find  seven
thousand  chariots  and  charioteen,  and  forty
thousand  footmen.    It  is  impossible  to  re-


2C4


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  X.  1—19.


concile  these  oonflioting  nnmberB,  but  ai
David  had  no  cavalry,  the  numbeis  in  ch.
viii.  4  are  the  more  probable,  namely,
seventeen  hundred  cavalry  and  chariots,
and  twenty  thousand  infantry.  The  Syriao
Version  givts  us  here  very  reasonable  num-
bers, namely,  "seven  hundred  chariots,
four  thousand  cavalry,  and  much  people."

Ver.  19. — The  kings  .  .  .  served  them.  It
is  evident  from  this  that  the  petty  kings  of
Behob,  Tob,  and  Maacah  had  been  subject


to  Hadarezer;  they  now  acknowledged  the
supremacy  of  David,  and  paid  to  him  the
tribute  which  they  had  previously  paid  to
Zobah,  and  would  be  bound  to  supply  him
with  a  contingent  of  men  in  case  of  a  war
in  their  neighbourhood.  The  wars  with
Damascus  and  Edom,  mentioned  in  ch.  viii.
5,  13,  probably  followed  immediutely  upon
Hadarezer's  defeat,  but  are  not  referred  to
here,  as  the  iuteiegt  now  centres  in  David's
personal  conduct


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Refected  friendliness.  The  facts  are :  1.  On  the  death  of  the  King  of
Ammon,  David  resolves  to  send  a  kindly  message  to  Hanun,  in  remembrance  of  favours
received  from  his  father  Nahash.  2.  On  the  arrival  of  David's  servants,  the  chief  men
of  Ammon  suggest  to  the  new  king  that  their  message  of  condolence  is  a  piece  of
trickery  on  the  part  of  David  for  political  ends.  3.  Listeoing  to  these  insiDuations,
Hanun  shows  his  contempt  for  David  by  cutting  off  one  side  of  the  beard  of  his
ambassadors,  and  exposing  the  lower  part  of  their  person.  4.  On  hearing  of  this  humi- '
liation,  David  sends  a  message  to  them  on  thtir  way  home,  directing  them  to  remain  at
Jericho  till  their  beards  were  grown  again.  The  question  as  to  the  chronological  order
of  the  events  mentioned  in  this  chapter  as  compared  with  ch.  viii.  does  not  affect  the
character  of  the  facts  or  the  lessons  conveyed.  The  supposition  that  David  deserved
the  insult  he  met  with  at  the  hand  of  Hanun,  in  consequence  of  showing  friendliness  to
one  of  Israel's  traditional  foes,  is  not  justified,  because  of  the  explicit  reference  to  David's
remembrance  of  acts  of  kindness.  As  in  the  case  of  Mephibosheth  remembrance  of
Jonathan's  kindness,  is  referred  to  by  way  of  explaining  the  conduct  described,  so  here
it  is  evidently  regarded  as  a  corresponding  excellence  in  David  that  he  was  mindful  also
of  the  kindness  of  aliens.  The  object  of  the  historian  is  obviously  to  bring  out  into
view  the  king's  broad  generosity.  In  this  light,  then,  we  may  regard  the  narrative  aa
showing —

I.  The  kxistbncb  in  human  intebcoukse  of  unrequited  and  uneecobded  acts  of
ciNDNBSS.  Had  not  this  ver.  2  been  written  we  might  never  have  known  that  the
pagan  Nahash  had  showed  kindness  to  the  Lord's  anointed.  Possibly  few  in  Israel
knew  of  the  actual  service  rendered  by  Nahash  to  David  at  some  period  of  his  exile.
No  record  of  it  existed  save  in  the  king's  memory ;  and  Nahash  died  before  his  con-
sideration for  one  in  trouble  was  acknowledged  in  regal  form.  Possibly  he  may  have
felt  it  strange  that  no  notice  was  taken  of  the  past  when  David  came  into  power.  The
fact  that  we  have  this  incidental  reference  to  the  kindness  suggests  what  we  often
observe  to  be  true,  that  many  kindly  deeds  are  done  of  which  history  takes  no  note,
and  which  in  the  hurry  and  strife  of  life  are  lost  to  sight  and  mind.  There  is  more
good  in  the  world  than  is  tabulated.  Thousands  of  considerate  friendly  deeds,  revealing
the  true  brotherhood  of  man  and  the  latent  worth  of  human  nature,  are  being  daily
performed,  but  of  which  the  mass  of  mankind  will  know  nothing,  and  which,  perhaps,
will  lie  for  a  long  time,  through  unavoidable  circumstances,  unrequited.  We  ought  to
bear  this  in  mind  when  we  strive  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  state  of  the  world,  and  it
should  set  us  at  ease  if  our  own  generous  acts  do  not  figure  in  the  annals  of  our  time,
aad  are  to  all  appearance  disregarded  and  unproductive  of  reciprocal  conduct  It  is
I  he  course  of  life ;  and  yet  nothing  is  lost,  nothing  is  in  vain.

n.  The  generosity  of  a  true  heart  passes  beyond  conventional  bounds.  To
some  it  would  seem  strange  that  the  King  of  Israel  should  cherish  kindly  sentiments
towards  an  alien  monarch,  and  even  go  out  of  the  ordinary  course  to  express  those
sentiments.  Bigotry  and  a  narrow  interpretation  of  fidelity  to  the  theocrttic  principle
on  which  David's  government  was  based  would  restrict  generous  feelings  to  one's  own
nationality.  But  David  saw  that  man  was  before  citizen,  and  the  law  of  love  before  political
expediency ;  and,  as  the  Saviour  later  on  saw  a  man  and  brother  in  the  Samaritin  and
in  every  human  creature,  so  now  David  saw  in  a  kindly  Nahash  a  kinship  prior  to  anc


OH.  X.  1-^19.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,  255

more  radical  than  even  the  bonds  which  held  him  to  his  own  nation.  It  is  in  these
goings  out  of  the  best  hearts  of  ancient  times  in  kindliness  towards  the  politically  alien
that  we  see  a  prefigurement  of  the  broad  evangelical  charity  which  would  embrace  in
its  consideration  every  child  of  Adam.  It  is  the  delight  of  the  good  to  recognize  good
in  all  men.  The  restrictive  influences  of  sect  and  party,  of  nationality  and  race,  are
to  be  guarded  against.  The  conventional  is  transitory ;  nature  is  permanent.  The
sentiments  proper  to  nature  must,-  if  possible,  rise  above  the  accidental  sentiments
springing  from  the  casual  and  fleeting  forms  of  life.

III.  It  is   sometimes    the    MISFOfiTU«B    OP    THE    BEST    CONDUCT    TO    BE    MISJUDGED.

David's  conduct  was  pure  in  motive,  correct  in  form,  and  beneficial  in  tendency ;  yet  it
was  regarded  by  astute  men  with  suspicion,  and  repaid  by  the  most  malicious  insult.
This  was  no  new  thing  in  his  experience.  We  have  seen  how  again  and  again,  during
his  early  trials,  he  was  misunderstood  by  Saul,  and  his  very  deeds  of  kindness  returned
by  more  bitter  persecution.  This  is  the  portion  of  not  a  few  in  all  ages.  The  world
is  dark,  and  men  cannot  or  will  not  see  the  colours  of  good.  It  is  one  of  the  sad  forms
of  confusion  brought  about  by  sin.  The  merciful  Eedeemer  blessed  men,  but  he  was
despised  and  rejected  of  them.  The  most  lovely  character  that  ever  adorned  the  earth
was  clothed  by  the  foul  imagination  of  men  with  the  horrible  attributes  of  Satan  (Luke
xi.  15 — 18).  The  same  treatment  in  a  milder  form  was  to  be  expected  by  his  disciples
(Matt.  V.  11 ;  X.  17, 18).  We  may  be  comforted,  when  the  like  experience  happens  to
UB,  that  itjis  all  foreseen  and  provided  for.  The  clouds  that  pass  over  the  sky  are  not
endued  with  permanence.    They  are  incident  to  a  changeful  atmosphere.

IV.  The  soukob  op  the  misjudgment  is  intellectual  and  mobal.  The  men
who  persuaded  Hanun  to  scorn  David's  friendliness  did  not  know  David.  It  was
ignorance  of  the  actual  intentions  and  the  inner  character  of  the  king  that  gave  scope
for  the  base  moral  element  to  come  in  and  impute  to  him  vile  motives  (ver.  3).  They
really  supposed  him  to  be  a  man  like  unto  themselves,  and,  cherishing  ill  will,  they
found  no  difiBculty  in  tracing  his  conduct  to  such  considerations  as  would  have  influenced
themselves  had  they  been  in  his  position.  There  is  in  all  men  affected  by  what  is
called  the  spirit  of  the  world,  a  primary  suspicion  and  distrust  of  others.  It  is  a  sort
of  first  principle  in  business,  in  diplomacy,  in  casual  intercourse.  In  the  absence  of
perfect  knowledge  of  the  heart,  the  imagination  is  set  to  work  to  find  out  the  possible
motives  at  work.  The  existence  of  the  slightest  dislike  will  assuredly  cause  the
imagination  to  see  something  evil,  and  hence  the  deeds  most  worthy  in  origin  and
design  may  be  treated  as  base  and  deceitful.  Ignorance  and  dislike  combined  to  slay
the  Lord  of  glory  (John  viii.  37 — 45;  1  Cor.  ii.  8).  If  such  things  happened  to  the
Master,  the  servants  may  be  patient  and  trustful  should  they  also  happen  to  them.

V.  Wickedness  and  folly,  by  theib  misjudgment,  turn  an  act  op  fbiendli-
NEB8  INTO  AN  OCCASION  OP  DESTEUOTloN.  The  conceit  and  ill  will  of  these  Ammonites,
acting  on  Hanun,  first  misjudged  David's  conduct,  and  then,  by  a  natural  process  of  evil,
gave  rise  to  a  deed  which  proved  the  occasion  of  turning  the  friendliness  of  David  into
retributive  anger  which  issued  in  their  ruin.  The  men  capable  of  reasoning  and  feeling
as  these  did  were  certainly  capable  of  the  deed  of  shameful  insult  to  David  in  the  persons
of  his  ambassadors  (ver.  4).  When  men  allow  an  ill-informed  mind  to  be  swayed  by
a  malicious  spirit,  there  is  no  telling  to  what  lengths  they  may  go  in  sin.  Evil  deeds
are  blind  deedsL  Their  folly  is  parallel  with  their  depravity.  The  most  conspicuous
instance  of  this  is  in  the  case  of  the  people  who  misjudged  Christ  and  rejected  his
fi  iendliness.  That  which  was  to  have  been  a  rock  on  which  they  could  build  a  great
and  blessed  future  became  a  stone  to  grind  them  to  powder  (Matt.  xxi.  40 — 44 ;  xxiii.
37 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  7,  8).  It  is  also  the  wanton  rejection  of  Christ's  kindness  which  will
prove  the  occasion  of  the  bitterest  woe  to  individuals  (Matt.  x.  14, 15 ;  xi.  20 — 24 ;  cf.
Prov.  L  24 — 27).  All  rejections  of  friendliness  involve  ultimate  loss ;  rejectior  of  Christ's
friendliness  involves  loss  proportionate  to  his  greatness  and  glory.

Vers.  6 — ^19. — International  quarrels.  The  facts  are :  1.  The  Ammonites,  discovering
the  displeasure  of  David,  hire  mercenaries  of  the  neighbouring  peoples.  2.  As  a  cotmter-
movement,  David  sends  out  a  strong  force  under  Joab.  3.  The  opposing  forces  coming
into  contact,  Joab  arranges  that  he  shoiild  confront  the  Syrians,  while  Abishai  deals
mth  the  Ammouitea.    i.  Joab,  exhorting  Abishai  to  courage,  in  dependence  on  God,


256  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  x.  1— Ifl.

arranges  also  for  mutual  support,  in  case  of  need,  in  their  respective  attacks.  5.  On
the  Syrians  yielding  to  the  assault  of  Joab,  tlie  Ammonites  also  flee  from  before  Abishai,
whereupon  Joab  returns  to  Jerusalem.  6.  Another  effort  of  the  Syrians  under  Hada-
rezer,  aided  by  others  from  beyond  the  Euphrates,  draws  out  David  at  the  head  ol
a  large  army  to  the  eastern  side  of  Jordan.  7.  A  great  battle,  issuing  in  the  complete
defeat  of  the  Syrians;  the  tributary  kings  under  Hadarezer  make  peace  with  Israel  and
serve  them.  We  have  here  a  record  of  quarrels  and  entanglements,  which  to  the  eye
of  a  sacred  historian  have  a  bearing  on  the  development  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and
consequently  on  the  ultimate  advent  of  the  "  Prince  of  the  kin^s  of  the  earth."  In
that  respect  the  events  form  a  section  of  the  intricate  movements  of  Providence  for  the
furtherance  of  spiritual  interests,  and  they  have  their  natural  place  in  the  Divine  moral
order,  allowing  for  human  freedom,  as  truly  as  the  formation  of  the  igneous  and  sedi-
mentary rocks  have  in  the  physical  order.  The  narrative  may  thus  be  taken  as  typical
of  a  class.  But  we  may  regard  the  record  as  suggesting,  or  illustrating,  truths  which,
while  prominent  in  international  quarrels,  have  also  a  wider  application  to  human  life
in  general.    These  chiefly  are  as  follows.

I.  The  maintenancb  op  honour  is  a  duty.  It  was  right  for  David  to  resent  the
indignity  and  insult.  Meekness  and  gentleness  are  qualities  consistent  with  assertion
of  what  is  due  to  self  as  a  man,  as  a  ruler,  as  a  representative  of  a  people  and  of  a  Divine
institution.  A  king's  honour  is  his  strength,  because  of  the  trust  of  his  people,  the
sentiment  of  loyalty,  the  force  of  his  decrees,  his  silent  restraint  of  the  turbulent,  and,
in  David's  case,  also  because  of  the  Divine  institution  of  his  government.  How  kings
and  individuals  may  best  maintain  their  honour  is  a  question  to  be  decided  by  the
circumstances  of  the  case ;  in  some  way  the  holiest  and  kindest  may  do  it  and  ought  to
do  it.

II.  TeCE    BBPROACH    and   DISPLEASUBE    of   the    just    IB    rrSBLP   THE    BEGINNINa    OF

PUNISHMENT.  That  the  Ammonites  "  stank  before  David  " — a  monarch  so  wise,  just,
md  generous — was  a  brand  on  them  of  demerit,  and  the  natural  forerunner  of  chastise-
ment to  come.  Whoever  by  his  deeds  falls  righteously  under  the  displeasure  of  a  just
man,  is  ipso  facto  branded  as  base,  is  classed  by  his  own  conscience  and  all  honourable
observers  as  a  criminal.  This  changing  of  the  face  of  the  just  towards  the  wicked  is
the  primary  social  punishment  of  sin  ordained  by  God,  and,  as  the  gathering  clouds
precede  the  storm,  it  is  the  token  of  further  providential  chastisements.  The  course  ol'
nature  in  the  long  run  follows  in  the  course  of  moral  rifiht.

HI.  Sinful  folly  is  bube  to  brinq  on  perplexities  and  perils.  No  doubt
there  was  great  mirth  in  the  court  of  Hanun  when  the  Hebrew  ambassadors  were  half
shorn  of  their  beards  and  apparel.  But  the  mirth  was  as  "  the  crackling  of  thorns
under  a  pot "  (Eccles.  vii.  6).  It  was  soon  found  that  this  cheap  mirth  was,  in  fact,
dearly  bought;  for  the  displeasure  of  so  mighty  a  king  as  David  was  soon  discovered  to
mean  for  them  great  perplexity  and  peril.  So  is  it  with  all  sin,  which  is  a  sort  of  moral
madness.  It  may  give  passing  gratification,  and  all  may  seem  secure,  but  it  leads  to
perplexities  and  perils  from  which  there  is  no  escape  as  long  as  a  Righteous  One  sits  on
his  throne.     The  irony  of  the  preacher  is  painfully  true  (Eccles.  xi.  9).

IV.  Onb  evil  deed  requires  other  devices  to  sustain  it.  The  sinful  folly  of
the  Ammonites  necessitated  the  device  of  hiring  mercenary  troops  to  ward  off  the  blow
that  was  impending  as  a  consequence  of  their  sin.  It  is  quite  true  that  in  any  progres-
sive life  action  must  be  sustained  by  action,  but  in  the  case  of  evil-doing  the  device  is
to  stave  off  something  which  ought  not  to  come,  and  which  would  not  be  feared  but  for
the  previous  wrong.  Sin  cannot  remain  sole.  If  there  is  not  immediate  repentance
there  will  be  an  effort  to  get  out  of  the  self-caused  diflSculties  by  other  questionable
means.  The  liar  has  to  'take  ceaseless  precautions  because  of  his  lie.  The  man  who
rejects  Christ  is  conscious  of  much  uneasiness,  and  has  to  exercise  ingenuity  to  escape
this  consequence.     Troops  of  mercenaries  are  hired.

V.  Well-stored  resources  admit  of  prompt  action  in  bmeboenoieb.  David
had  during  the  five  years  of  his  reign  paid  great  attention  to  the  administration  of  the
affairs  of  his  kingdom,  and,  as  a  consequence,  he  was  now  able  at  once  to  avail  himsell
of  the  resources  that  had  been  treasured  up.  He  sent  "  Joab,  an<i  all  the  host  of
mighty  men  "  (ver.  7).  The  fruits  of  prescience  and  care  were  now  available  without
confusion  or  delay.    In  kingdomi,  as  in  lomes  and  in  business,  proviaeuc«  and  orderly


<M.x.l— 19.]  THE  SECX)ND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  267

amngement  give  great  advantages  for  action  when  unexpected  and  trying  events
transpire.  The  same  is  true  of  early  education  and  culture,  of  Church  organization,  of
the  personal  spiritual  life.  The  world  is  evil ;  events  at  cross-purposes  with  our  plans
and  adverse  to  our  peace  will  arise;  it  is  "impossible  but  that  offences  come."  The
moral  is,  lay  up  in  store  continuously,  and  so  be  ready  for  action,  and  therefore  ready
for  victory.

VL   SoUint  FBINOIFLEB  PGBTAININa  TO  CONDUCT  AVFOBD  UOBAL  BtTPFOBT  TS   TIMES

OF  GBEAT  BTBESB  AND  DANOEB.  Joab  showcd  the  better  side  of  his  nattire  when  he
exhorted  Abishai,  in  face  of  the  foe,  to  act  as  a  man  for  the  honour  and  safety  of  his
people  and  cities,  leaving  the  consequences  in  the  hands  of  God  (ver.  12).  Not  for
military  display,  not  for  aggrandizement,  not  for  personal  gain,  but  to  vindicate  a  people
whose  head  had  been  insisted, — this  was  the  principle  on  wluch  the  battle  should  be
fought.  In  this  was  duty;  consequences  were  with  God,  who  cares  for  the  just.  History
reveals  instances  in  which  men  have  been  made  strong  by  the  just  principle  fw  which
they  contended.  A  righteous  cause  is  itself  equivalent  to  an  armed  force,  both  in  the
moral  tone  it  gives  to  those  engaged  in  it,  and  in  the  secret  depression  of  those  on  the
other  side.  It  would  be  interesting  to  trace  out  the  physical  bearings  of  moral  influences.
Let  us  see  to  it  that  our  great  efforts  are  under  the  guidance  of  clear  morel  principles.

Vn.   Im  the  conflicts  of  life  an  A8BUBAN0E  OF  UUTUAL  HELPFULNESS  IS  A  HELP

A0AIN8T  DIBASTEB.  The  arrangement  for  mutual  help  in  case  of  pressure  (ver.  11)
was  helpful,  in  that  it  antidpated  a  possible  evil,  and  it  inspired  each  with  the  courage
that  comes  of  sympathy  and  support.  In  human  aifairs,  secular  and  religious,  the
possibility  of  disaster  must  be  taken  into  account,  because  of  personal  imperfection  and
of  the  unascertained  forces  against  us.  We  do  not  possess  the  knowledge  by  which  we
can  always  dispose  of  our  strength  in  the  right  quarter,  and,  even  when  we  do  possess
it,  there  may  be  sudden  moral  paralysis.  None  of  us  contend  alone,  or  for  self  only.
Hence  we  can  be  mutually  helpful,  as  were  Joab  and  AbishaL  More  of  this  in  things
sacred  and  secular  would  save  from  many  a  disaster.

VIII.  Unwise  alliances  lead  on  to  serious  bntanglbmentb.  The  Syrians  lent
themselves  for  gain  (ver.  6)  to  an  alliance  with  the  Ammonites.  This  compact,  desti-
tute of  sound  principle,  involved  the  Syrians  in  what  appeared  to  them  to  be  the
necessity  of  maintaining  their  reputation  in  spite  of  defeat ;  and  hence  further  arrange-
ments were  made  with  Syrians  "  beyond  the  river."  A  Syrian  war,  with  the  whole  of
Israel's  army  under  the  leadership  of  the  invincible  David,  was  the  consequence.  Such
difficulties  arise  when  men  make  unholy  alliances  against  a  just  cause.  If  men  cannot
unite  without  evil  it  is  better  to  stand  aloof.  Nature  has  formed  certain  elements  to
combine,  and  others  to  keep  apart.  Whoever  tries  to  put  together  what  is  contrary  to
nature  will  get  into  difficulty.  Whoever  forms  an  unholy  alliance  in  human  affairs,
national  or  personal,  is  seeking  to  bring  about  advantages  which  it  is  in  the  course  of
moral  order  to  prevent;  and  sooner  or  later  greater  embarrassments  will  arise.  In
moral  matters  simplicity  and  direct  submission  to  the  moral  order  are  true  wisdom.

IX.  AdVEBBE  BEQINNINaS  HAT,  FOB    THE    JUST,  ISSUE   IN   GOOD   ENDINGS.      It   is  a

pain  and  annoyance  to  David  to  have  his  friendliness  so  wantonly  rejected  (ver.  4),  but
the  event  issued  in  the  extension  of  his  power  and  the  surer  peace  of  his  people  (ven.
1 8, 19).  Man  has  the  beginnings  of  things  in  his  hand,  but  a  Mightier  One  works
them  up  towards  issues  of  his  own.  The  persecution  of  the  early  Church  resulted  in  the
wider  diffusion  of  the  gospel.  The  rejection  of  Christ  by  the  Jewish  nation  is  to  issue
in  a  greater  glory,  l^ny  things  in  our  personal  experience  may  pain  and  injure  us,
but  by  stirring  up  our  strength,  by  awakening  more  trust  in  God  and  leading  to  greater
caution  and  courage,  we  may  in  the  end  achieve  conquests  once  never  thought  of.


HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHORS.

Verg.  1 — 4  (1  Chron.  xix.  1 — 4). — (Babbah.)  Beguitmg  evU  for  good.  The
Ammonites  appear  to  have  remained  quiet  since  their  defeat  by  Saul,  nearly  half  »
century  before  (1  Sam.  xi.).  Nahash  their  king  (perhaps  a  son  of  the  former  Nahash)
had  rendered  friendly  service  to  David.  But  on  the  accession  of  Hanun,  his  son,  the
old  hostility  of  the  children  of  Ammon  revived,  and  showed  itself  in  a  way  that  made

ILBAKraU  S


258  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  loh.  x.  1— 19.

conflict  inevitable.  To  this  the  growing  power  of  David  and  his  recent  subjugation
of  their  kindred,  the  Moabites  (ch.  viii.  2),  doubtless  contributed.  Their  deliberate,
wanton,  and  shameless  treatment  of  his  messengers  was  the  occasion  of  "  the  fiercest
struggle,  and,  so  far  as  the  Israelitish  kingdom  of  Grod  was  concerned,  the  most
dangerous,  that  it  ever  had  to  sustain  during  the  reign  of  David."    In  it  we  see —

I.  A  PEBSONAL  CONTBAST.  David  requited  the  kindness  of  Nahash  with  kindness
to  his  son ;  condolence  on  his  bereavement,  congratulatioa  on  his  accession  (ver.  2) ;
but  Hanun  requited  the  kindness  of  David  with  insult  and  injury  to  his  servants  (ver.
4 ;  Isa.  XX.  4).  The  conduct  of  the  one  displayed  gratitude,  sympathy,  confidence,  and
benevolence ;  that  of  the  other  ingratitude,  contempt,  distrust,  and  malignity.  1.  How
different  in  eharcKter  the  men  who  hold  similar  positions  1  David  and  Hanun  were
both  kings,  their  heads  were  pressed  by  the  same  "  crown  of  pure  gold "  (ch.  xii.  30 ;
Ps.  xxi.  3) ;  but  in  spirit  they  were  wholly  unlike.  2.  How  different  the  construction
put  on  similar  actions  I  Such  actions  are  regarded  by  men  as  good  or  evil,  according  to
their  ruling  disposition ;  just  as  the  same  objects  appear  of  different  hue  according  to
the  colour  of  the  medium  through  which  they  are  viewed.  Hence  what  is  well  meant
is  often  ill  interpreted.  3.  How  different  the  consequences  that  flow  from  similar
influences  I  Kindness  is  like  sunshine,  that  melts  the  ice  and  hardens  the  clay ;  causes
pleasure  to  the  healthy  and  torture  to  the  diseased  eye.  It  tests,  manifests,  and
intensifies  the  good  or  evil  in  the  heart,  and  leads  to  opposite  courses  of  conduct.  Its
proper  tendency  is  to  produce  its  like;  but  its  actual  effect  is  often  the  contrary  (John
xiii.  27).  Even  the  kindness  of  God  is  perverted  by  hardness  of  heart  to  more  abound-
ing wickedness  (Isa.  xxvi.  10 ;  Bom.  ii.  4,  5).  If  it  be  sinful  to  "  recompense  evil  for
evil "  (Rom.  xii.  17),  how  much  more  to  recompense  evil  for  good  (1  Sam.  xxv.  21)  I

II.  A  PUBLIC  DI8H0N0UB.  It  was  not  a  private  and  personal  indignity  put  on
these  ambassadors,  but  an  open  and  national  insult  offered  to  their  king  and  people,
by  Hanun  and  his  court  (ver.  3),  who  probably  expressed  therein  the  prevalent
suspicion  and  hatred  of  the  children  of  Ammon.  1.  How  prejudicial  the  indulgence
of  jealousy  and  suspicion  to  the  maintenance  of  peace  and  goodwill  among  nations  I
2.  How  pernicious  the  influence  of  evil  counsel  and  calumny  on  the  political  piinciples
and  policy  of  ruliia '  "  We  see  in  tliis  the  bitter  fruits  which  evil  counsel  to  princes,
especially  to  th>sf,  who  are  young  and  inexperienced,  produces"  (Guild).  "The
slanderer  inflicts  a  threefold  wound  at  one  stroke.  He  wounds  himself  by  his  breach
of  charity ;  he  wounds  his  victim  by  injuring  his  good  name ;  he  wounds  his  hearers
by  poisoning  their  minds  against  the  accused"  (St.  Bernard).  3.  How  provocative  the
exhibition  of  ingratitude,  injustice,  and  contempt  to  resentment  and  retaliation  (ver.  6)  I
It  turns  kindness  into  wrath,  seems  to  justify  the  drawing  of  the  sword,  and  inspires
the  hope  of  victory  (ver.  12).  "  Thou  knowest  not  what  may  show  itself  when  thy
contempt  awakes  the  lion  of  a  sleeping  mind."

III.  A  PBBSUMPTOous  AND  FATAL  DBPIANCB.  It  was  a  challenge  by  the  worshippers
of  Moloch,  confident  in  their  strength  and  success,  to  the  people  of  Jehovah  ;  the  first
step  of  a  renewed  attack  "against  Jehovah  and  against  his  Anointed"  (Ps.  ii.).  The
opposition  of  the  ungodly  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  though  it  slumber  for  a  season,  ever
breaks  forth  afresh.  1.  How  infatuated  their  hostility  1  They  are  heedless  of  the
warnings  afforded  by  the  past.  2.  How  groundless  their  confidence  1  "  They  trust  in
vanity."    3.  How  certain  their  overthrow  1

"He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  laughs.
The  Lord  hath  them  in  derision,"  etc.

(Ps.  iL  4—9.)

The  evil  which  they  do  returns  on  their  own  heads  (ver.  14);  and  "their  end  ia
destruction "  (ch.  xii.  31).  "  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,"  etc.  (Rev.  xvii.
14).

CoNOHTSlON.  1.  We  should  not  be  deterred  from  doing  good  by  the  fear  that  it  may
be  requited  with  evil.  2.  Although  others  may  render  evil  for  good,  we  should  render
good  for  evil  (1  Sam.  xi.  12,  13).  3.  The  noblest  victories  are  those  which  are  gained
by  patience,  forbearance,  and  all-conquering  love  (Rom.  xii.  21). — D.

Ten.  4,  6  (1  Chron.  xiz.  4,  6).— (Jbbioho.)    BidicuU.    "  Tarry  at  Jeiicho  until


OH.  X.  1—19.]  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  25ft

rour  beards  be  grown,  and  then  return  "  (ver.  5).  It  has  been  the  endeavour  of  men
in  all  ages  to  make  the  objects  of  their  aversion  appear  contemptible  and  ridiculous.
Few  things  are  more  painful  and  humiliating  than  exposure  to  popular  derision.  The
fear  of  it,  no  doubt,  sometimes  exerts  a  salutary  influence  in  restraining  from  what  is
unseemly  and  wrong ;  but  it  also  frequently  exercises  an  opposite  influence  in  deterring
from  what  is  becoming  and  right.  Of  ridicule,  together  with  the  sense  of  dishonour
(ver.  5,  former  part)  which  it  naturally  produces,  observe  that  it  is  often —

I.  Inoubrbd  by  fidelity.  Like  the  servants  of  David,  the  servants  of  Christ  are
made  the  object  of  scornful  raillery  (a  common  and  effective  instrument  of  persecution):
I.  In  tiie  faithful  performance  of  duty,  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  their  Lord;  convey-
ing his  message  of  kindness,  acting  as  his  representatives.  "  For  righteousness'  sake ;  *
"For  my  sake"  (Matt.  v.  10, 11;  x.  22),  It  is  not  the  suffering,  but  the  cause,  that
makes  the  martyr  (1  Pet.  ii.  20;  iv.  !15).  2.  By  those  who  hate  and  misrepreseni
them  and  him  whom  they  serve,  and  whose  hostility  is  due  to  their  diverse  character
and  principles.  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world,"  etc.  (John  xv.  19).  3.  After  the  esMmpla
of  the  faithful  in  past  time.  "Others  had  trial  of  mockings"  (Heb.  xi.  36).  "  Herod
with  his  soldiers  set  him  at  nought,  and  mocked  him,"  etc.  (Luke  "xxiii.  11,  35,  36).

II.  MoDEBATED  BY  SYMPATHY.  "  And  they  told  it  unto  David,  and  he  sent  to  meet
them,"  etc.  Those  who,  in  the  way  of  duty,  suffer  the  reproach  of  the  bad,  enjoy  the
sympathy  of  the  good ;  and  especially  of  the  Master  himself :  1.  Whose  sympathy  is
inexpressibly  precious.  2.  Who  has  suffered  the  same,  and  is  therefore  able  to/«e2  with
thvm  and  for  them  (ch.  vi.  20).  3.  Who  also  expressei  it  in  the  most  appropriate  and
effectual  manner.  He  regards  what  is  done  to  them  as  done  to  himself,  afibrds  them
wise  and  friendly  counsel,  takes  them  under  his  protection,  and  stands  ready  to  defend
and  avenge  them.  "  They  departed,  .  .  .  rejoicing  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to
suffer  dishonour  for  the  Name  "  (Acts  v.  41 ;  xvi.  2o ;  1  Thess.  ii.  2).

IIL  Remedied  by  patience.  "  Tarry,"  etc.  They  were  probably  disposed  to  go
up  at  once  to  Jerusalem,  and  proclaim  their  wrongs ;  but  David,  out  of  consideration
for  their  position  in  public  estimation,  bade  them  remain  in  obscurity,  and  "  bide  their
time " — a  piece  «f  advice  sometimes  given  (though  not  always  in  a  like  spirit)  to
persons  who  are  a!(out  to  attempt  something  for  which  they  are  unfit,  on  account  of
their  immaturity'  &  want  of  due  preparation ;  or  in  which  they  have  already  failed.
I.  Those  who  would  attain  success  and  honour  in  any  position  or  enterprise  should
consider  well  their  ability  to  accomplish  what  is  necessary  for  their  piupose  (Luke
siv.  28).  2.  Inconsiderate  and  rash  endeavours  are  likely  to  issue  in  a  lesult  which
those  who  make  them  neither  expect  nor  desire.  3.  The  lapse  of  time  soothes  many
a  smart ;  and  the  wise  and  patient  employment  of  it  qualifies  for  and  ensures  honour-
able achievements.  "Ye  have  need  of  patience"  (Heb.  x.  36).  "Let  us  learn  not  to
lay  too  much  to  heart  unjust  reproaches;  after  a  while  they  will  wear  off  of  themselves,
and  turn  only  to  the  shame  of  their  authors ;  while  the  injured  reputation  in  a  little
time  grows  again,  as  these  beards  did  "  (Matthew  Henry).

IV.  SnccBBDED  BY  HONOUE.  "And  then  return"  to  the  holy  city,  where  they
would  be  honoured  (instead  of  being  despised)  with :  1.  The  public  commendation  of
the  king.  2.  The  general  admiration  of  the  people.  3.  All  the  more  because  of  the
indignity  and  ridicule  which  they  had  previously  endured,  "  If  ye  are  reproached  for
the  Name  of  Christ,  blessed  are  ye,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  iv,  14) ;  "  great  is  your  reward  in
heaven"  (Matt.  v.  12).— D.

Vers.  6 — ^11  (1  Chron,  xix.  6 — 12). — (Medbba.)  An  agreement  of  mutual  help.  "  If
the  Syrians  be  too  strong  for  me,  then  thou  shalt  help  me:  but  if  the  children  of
Ammon  be  too  strong  for  thee,  then  I  will  come  and  help  thee "  (ver.  11),  1.  On
perceiving  the  effect  of  their  treatment  of  David's  ambassadors  (ver.  6;  "That  they  had
made  themselves  odious,"  1  Chron.  xix.  6),  the  Ammonites  obtained,  for  "  a  thousand
talents  of  silver,"  the  aid  of  the  Syrians  of  Beth-rehob  and  of  Zobah  (under  Hadarezer,
the  most  powerful  of  David's  adversaries),  the  King  of  Maacah  and  the  men  of  Tob;
"  who  came  and  pitched  before  Medeba"  (1  Chron.  xix,  7),  twenty  miles  south-west  of
Rabbah,  with  their  infantry,  cavalry,  and  war-chariots,  "  And  the  children  of  Ammon
gathered  themselves  together  from  their  cities"  to  the  capital  (Eiib')ah),  and  put
themselves  io  battle  array  before  the  gate.    2.  Hearing  of  their  warlike  preparationc,


260  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  x.  1—19.

David  had  sent  forth  "  all  the  host,  the  mighty  men,"  under  Jodb  (ch.  iiL  22 — 30),
who  now  found  himself  hetween  the  two  hostile  forces ;  and,  selecting  a  portion  of  the
army,  placed  himself  opposite  to  the  Syrians,  whilst  he  left  the  rest,  under  Abishai,  to
cover  his  rear  and  hold  the  Ammonites  in  check.  He  doubtless  hoped  to  defeat  the
enemy  in  successive  engagements.  3.  But  fearing  a  simultaneous  attack,  he  made  an
agreement  with  his  brother,  that  if  either  of  them  were  worsted,  the  other  should  hasten
to  his  relief.  Such  an  agreement  is  prudent,  needful,  and  beneficial  among  those  also
who  are  engaged  in  spiritual  warfare  against  the  enemies  of  the  kingdom  of  God.    It—

I.  CoNFiBMS  AN  OBVIOUS  DUTY.  For  it  is  plainly  the  duty  of  brethren :  1.  To
consider  each  other's  condition,  to  sympathize  with  each  other's  weakness  and  distress,
and  not  to  be  concerned  about  themselves  alone.  "Not  looking  each  of  you  to  his
own  things,"  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  x.  24).  2.  To  make  use  of  their  power,  to
"  strengthen  their  hrethren,"  especially  when  taking  part  in  the  same  conflict  as  them-
selves. The  strong  should  hdp  the  weak.  3.  To  afford  them  Jielp,  opportunely,
promptly,  with  all  their  might,  and  even  at  much  sacrifice  and  hazard  to  themselves.
If  the  ungodly  "  helped  every  one  his  neighbour ;  and  every  one  said  to  his  brother.
Be  of  good  courage"  (Isa.  xli.  6),  much  more  ought  the  godly  to  do  the  same.
"  But  if  ye  will  not  do  so,  behold  ye  have  sinned  against  the  Lord :  and  be  sure  your
sin  will  find  you  out"  (Numb,  xxxii.  23).  And  the  agreement  to  render  mutual  help
in  time  of  need  makes  the  obligation  to  do  so  more  distinct,  impressive,  and  effective.

n.  Contemplates  a  possible  eeveksb.  "  If  the  Syrians  be  too  strong  for  me,"
etc.;  indicating  a  conviction  of:  1.  The  great  power  of  the  enemy  and  the  serious
nature  of  the  struggle  (1  Sam.  xiii.  1 — 7).  It  would  be  madness  to  despise  them.  2.
The  possibility  oi  failure  in  the  wisest  plans  and  disappointment  in  the  most  sanguine
expectations.  "We  do  not  hinder  our  successes  by  preparing  for  disappointment."
Although  those  who  "contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  for  all  delivered  to  the
saints"  cannot  be  generally  and  permanently  defeated,  yet  particular  organizations,
methods,  and  hopes  may  be  overthrown.  None,  however  strong,  can  be  certain  of
never  needing  help;  whilst  the  promise  of  help  furnishes  the  weak  with  a  special  claim
to  it.  3.  The  necessity  of  taking  every  precavMon  for  repairing  defect  in  the  weakest
part,  lest  it  should  issue  in  disaster  to  the  whole.  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,
and  so  fulfil  the  Law  of  Christ "  (Gal.  vi.  2).

III.  Conduces  to  signal  success.  By:  1.  Giving  them  to  feel  their  mutual
dependence,  and  bringing  them  into  closer  union  in  the  spirit  of  a  common  enterprise.
2.  Affording  assurance  of  the  advantages  arising  from  co-operation  toward  a  common
end.  These  advantages  are  inestimable.  "  Two  are  better  than  one  .  .  .  And  if  one
prevail  against  him,  two  shall  withstand  him ;  and  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly
broken"  (Eccles.  iy.  9 — 12).  3.  Inspiring  them  with  increased  confidence  arising
therefrom ;  and  inciting  them  to  greater  individual  effort  than  they  might  otherwise
have  put  forth  on  behalf  of  each  other  and  their  common  safety,  welfare,  and  honour.
Both  the  Syrians  and  Ammonites  were  routed  (vers.  13,  14).  "  It  was,  perhaps,  the
first  time  in  his  life  that  Hadarezer  suffered  defeat"  (Ewald);  and  this  defeat  was
followed  ere  long  by  another  (by  David  at  Helam)  still  more  overwhelming ;  so  that
"  all  the  kings  that  were  servants  to  Hadarezer  made  peace  with  Israel,  and  served
them,"  etc.  (vers.  15^19;  ch.  viii.  3,  4). — ^D.

Ver.  12  (1  Chron.  xix.  13).— (Medeba.)  Martial  courage.  "Be  of  good  courage,"
ete.  Human  life  is  a  warfare,  unavoidable,  arduous,  enduring ;  and  spiritual  life,  more
especially,  is  a  warfare  of  a  similar  kind.  In  this  conflict  nothing  is  more  needful  than
manly  or  martial  courage  ("  virtue,"  1  Pet.  i.  6).  It  is  that  quality  of  mind  which
meets  diflBculty,  danger,  pain,  or  death,  calmly  and  fearlessly.  It  has  been  reckoned  by
moralists  among  the  four  cardinal  virtues  (prudence,  temperance,  fortitude,  justice),
and,  in  its  highest  form,  it  is  often  enjoined  in  the  Scriptures.  "As  it  is  necessarily
requisite  to  the  susception  of  all  other  vu-tues,  so  it  is  their  main  support,  guardian,
and  establishment.  Without  this,  every  other  virtue  is  precarious,  and  lies  at  the
mercy  of  every  cross  accident "  (J.  Norris).  "  All  the  noble  deeds  that  have  beat  their
marches  through  succeeding  ages  have  proceeded  from  men  of  courage  "  (0.  Felltham).
This  brief  and  »ignificant  warlike  exhortation  of  Joab  was  pitched  in  a  higher  key
than  we  might  have  expected;  but  the  devout  feeling  which  it  expressed,  though


OS.  X.  1—19.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAM  DEL.  261

genuine,  was  probably  superficial  and  transient,  passing  away  with  the  critical  occasion
which  called  it  forth.  We  have  now  to  consider,  not  the  character  of  the  speaker,  but
the  import  of  his  words.  They  indicate  the  nature,  motive,  and  pervading  principle  of
godly  martial  eowage  ;  that  it  should  be  displayed —

L  In  btbbnuous  opposition  to  the  enemies  of  the  kinodom  of  God.  "Be
strong"  (in  spirit),  "and  show  yourselves  strong"  (in  action)  in  your  struggle  with
numerous  and  powerful  foes ;  not  private,  but  public  enemies ;  not  men  as  such,  but  as
imbued  with  principles  and  devoted  to  practices  which  are  antagonistic  to  the  righteous
and  beneficent  purposes  of  God ;  "  principalities  and  powers,"  etc.  (Eph.  vi.  12).
"  Who  will  rise  up  for  me  against  the  evil-doers  ?  "  etc.  (Ps.  xcvi,  16).  There  must  be ;
1.  Firm  resistance  to  their  attack.  "  Whom  resist  steadfast  in  the  faith  "  (1  Pet.  v.
9).  2.  Patient  endwrcmce  of  the  sufferings  which  such  resistance  involves.  "  Here  is
the  patience  of  the  saints."  3.  Active  endeavour  for  their  defeat  and  subjection.
"  The  people  that  do  know  their  God  shall  be  strong,  and  do  exploits  "  (Dan.  xi.  32).
"  Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like  men,  be  strong  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13).
The  chief  instrument  of  this  opposition  is  "  the  sword  of  the  Spirit."  "  A  humble
Christian  battling  against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  is  a  greater  hero  than
Alexander  the  Great."

11.  Peom  sincebe  desibe  fob  the  wblfabb  of  the  people  of  God.  Not  for
pay  and  plunder  (like  the  mercenary  Syrians),  nor  for  glory,  nor  even  for  personal
safety  or  life ;  but  "  for  our  people  "  (to  whom  we  are  bound  by  the  closest  ties),  "  and
for  the  cities  of  our  God"  (his  chosen  property  and  possession,  the  many  separate
centres  where  his  people  dwell  and  his  worslup  is  maintained),  imperilled  by  the
attack  of  his  enemies  and  ours.  Pro  aris  etfoeia,  "  Thrice  is  he  armed  that  hath  his
quarrel  just."  This,  however,  is  an  appeal,  not  merely  to  a  sense  of  Justice,  but  also
and  chiefly  to  patriotism  and  piety,  which,  in  the  men  of  Israel,  were  inseparably
blended.  There  is  a  place  for  patriotism  in  the  heart  of  a  Christian  (1  Sam.  xxiiL
1 — 6).  But  his  love  for  his  country  must  be  held  in  harmony  with  and  subordina-
tion to  his  love  for  the  Christian  brotherhood,  united  in  spiritual  fellowship  and
confined  to  no  nation ;  "  the  people  of  God  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  9, 10),  "  his  inheritance  "  (Eph.
1. 18),  "the  Church  which  is  his  body"  (Eph.  i.  22;  v.  25;  Acts  xx.  28),  the  light
of  the  world,  and  the  salt  of  the  earth.  "I  endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sakes"
(2  Tim.  iL  10;  Col.  i.  24).  1.  The  preservation  of  their  faith  and  holiness,  their  unity
and  peace,  from  corrupting  and  destructive  influences.  2.  The  maintenance  of  their
privileges  and  services,  their  freedom  and  independence.  3.  The  promotion  of  their
prosperity  and  progress,  4.  The  fulfilment  of  their  purposes,  aims,  and  hopes.  "  They  -
shall  prosper  that  love  thee  "  (Ps.  cxxii.  4 — 9 ;  cxxxvii.  7).

in.  With  stbono  confidence  in  the  eboeption  of  the  help  of  God.  "  And
the  Lord  do  that  wliich  seemeth  him  good  "  (Authorized  Version) ;  expressive  of  humble
submission  to  the  Divine  will.  "  It  may  be  understood  as  the  language  of :  (1)  Un-
certainty and  modesty.  (2)  A  firm  persuasion  that  the  event  of  war  entirely  depends
upon  the  providence  of  God.  (3)  A  humble  submission  to  the  disposal  of  Providence,
let  the  event  turn  out  as  it  would.  (4)  And  it  may  intimate  that,  let  the  event  be
what  it  will,  it  will  afford  us  satisfaction  to  think  that  we  have  done  the  best  we
could"  (Samuel  Davies).  But  the  proper  reading  is,  "And  Jehovah  will  do  that
which  is  good  in  his  sight,"  really  good  for  his  people.  The  root  of  Christian  courage,
as  of  every  Christian  excellence,  is  faith  in  God.  1.  In  his  readiness  to  co-operate
with  us,  when  we  strive  against  the  enemies  of  his  kingdom  and  for  the  welfare  of  his
people.  "The  Lord  is  on  my  side,  I  will  not  fear."  2.  In  the  sufficiency  of  his
might  to  strengthen  the  weakest  and  overthrow  the  strongest.  "  Fear  not ;  for  they
that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them"  (2  Kings  vi.  16;  1  Sam.  xiv.
1 — 15).  3.  In  the  certainty  of  his  affording  to  his  faithful  servants  aU  the  help  they
need.  Even  though  he  should  permit  a  temporary  reverse,  he  will  surely  give  them
the  Tictory  over  all  their  adversaries.  Such  confidence  is  warranted  by  his  relation  to
them,  his  regard  for  them,  his  express  promises,  and  his  past  achievements.  "  The
battle  ia  the  Lord's."    "  If  God  is  for  us,  who  is  against  us  ?  "  (Bom.  ix.  31— 39).— D.

Tan.  2  -L  JHtufaew  misinterpreted  and  Glnqftited,  "  I  am  for  peace ;  but  when
I  qwiJl  th^  aia  for  war"  (Fa.  cxz.  7).    It  is  not  probable  that  these  worda  wei«


^62  THE  SECOND  fiOOK  OB"  SAMtJBL.  [oh.  x.  1—19.

written  by  David,  but  they  might  have  been  with  truth.  It  does  not  appear  that  he
desired  war  with  the  neighbouring  peoples ;  but  for  a  time  he  was  continually  at  war
with  one  or  other  of  them.  Jealous  of  the  growing  greatness  and  power  of  Israel  under
his  rule,  they  sought  to  humble  them,  but  only  to  their  own  discomfiture  and  subju-
gation. And  as  the  kingdom  extendei,  more  distant  nations  feared  for  themselves,  and
were  ready  to  combine  against  what  seemeil  the  common  foe.  This  is  probably  tho
real  explanation  of  the  transactions  recorded  in  this  chapter,  including  the  most  serious
struggle  which  the  rising  kingdom  had  had  to  maintain.  Nahash,  "the  king  of  the
children  of  Ammoh,"  Ijaving  died,  David,  to  whom  Nahash  had  in  some  way  shown
kindness,  sent  ambassadors  to  Hanun,  his  son  and  successor,  with  a  message  of  condo-
lence. But  the  young  king,  induced  by  the  princes  to  regard  the  ambassadors  as  spies,
who  had  been  sent  to  obtain  such  knowledge  of  the  city  as  might  facilitate  its  over-
throw, treated  them  with  the  grossest  contumely  and  indecency,  and  so  dismissed  them.
Hence  sprang  a  deadly  war,  in  which  the  Ammonites  were  aided  by  other  and  more
powerful  peoples — a  war  which  taxed  to  the  utmost  the  strength  of  Israel,  and  issued
in  the  complete  overthrow  of  their  enemies.  The  first  step  in  all  this  commotion  and
destruction  was  the  false  interpretation  put  upon  the  kind  act  of  David ;  and,  regarding
it  as  an  illustration  of  a  too-common  evil,  we  take  occasion  to  remark  upon  the  evil
itself — misinterpretation  of  good  deeds.

L  The  caubbs  of  it.  1.  Knowledge  of  the  world.  There  is  so  much  evil  in  it,
so  much  evil  which  conceals  itself  under  the  pretence  of  good;  the  actions  which  si
first  appear  good  are  so  often,  on  closer  acquaintance,  discovered  to  be  evil ;  that
experience  of  the  world  tends  to  produce  a  suspicious  spirit,  which  is  slow  to  believe  in
the  reality  of  goodness  in  any  particular  instance,  quick  to  think  the  worst  of  the
conduct  of  others,  especially  of  strangers.  2.  Jivil  in  on^s  self.  Which  may  be
conscious  or  unconscious.  We  are  indisposed  to  believe  others  to  be  better  than  we
know  ourselves  to  be ;  and  prone  to  suspect  others  of  motives  we  are  conscious  of
indulging  ourselves.  And,  without  distinct  consciousness,  we  are  influenced  in  our
judgments  of  others  by  our  own  character ;  and  may  be  so  far  under  the  influence  of
evil  as  to  be  blind  to  the  good  in  others.  The  cold,  selfish,  illiberal,  cannot  credit
others  with  the  opposite  virtues;  but  suspect  the  appearance  of  them  to  be  only
a  semblance  adopted  for  some  unworthy  purpose.  3.  Enmity.  If  on  any  account  we
cherish  ill  will  towards  another,  we  are  ever  ready  to  think  evil  rather  than  good  of
him ;  and  specially  slow  to  think  he  can  intend  good  to  us.  If  another  has  failed  to
show  as  high  an  esteem  for  ourselves  as  we  thiuk  we  deserve,  our  mortified  pride  is
apt  to  vent  itself  in  depreciation  of  him.  Prejuilice  is  one  kind  of  enmity,  more  or  less
virulent.  It  commonly  exists  in  those  of  one  party  in  religion  or  politics  towards
those  of  the  opposite  party,  and  predisposes  them  to  misinterpret  whatever  they  do.

4.  Fear.     Which  was  one  of  the  motives  that  prompted  Hanun  and  his  advisers.

5.  Conceit  of  sagacity.  A  cheap  and  easy  way  of  appearing  very  wise,  and  of  obtain-
ing from  some  a  reputation  for  wisdom,  is  to  affect  to  discover  unworthy  motives  in
good  actions.  6.  Bad  advisers.  Such  as  those  of  Hanun.  Those  who  might  be
otherwise  disposed  to  a  just  estimate  of  good  deeds  will  seldom  want  advisers  to  poison
their  minds,  if  they  will  listen  to  them.

II.  The  evil  of  it.  1.  In  itself.  It  is  inherently  base.  It  is  contrary  to:  (1)
Charity,  which  "  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7),  whenever  it  is
not  manifestly -impossible.  (2)  Justice.  Judgments  which  seem  to  be  only  charitable
will  often  be  simply  just.  (3)  Gratitude,  in  the  case  of  actions  kind  to  ourselves.
Better  to  waste  a  little  gratitude  than  indulge  needless  suspicion.  (4)  The  plain  com-
mands of  our  Lord.  Such  as  "  Judge  not ; "  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should
do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them  "  (Matt.  vii.  1,  12).  It  involves,  further,  an  assump-
tion of  knowledge  such  as  men  do  not  possess,  and  a  usurpation  of  the  office  of  hira
who  alone  searches  the  heart  (1  Cor.  iv.  5).  We  are  not,  however,  required  to  cherish
a  blind  credulity,  nor  to  trust  men  with  important  interests  without  positive  knowledge
of  their  moral  worth,  still  less  against  plain  evidence  of  the  contrary.  Prudence  is
a  virtue  as  well  as  charity.  The  Ammonites  might  have  rightly  exercised  such  caution
towards  David's  messengers  as  would  have  prevented  their  obtaining  so  much  know-
ledge of  the  city  as  would  facilitate  hostile  measures  agai&st  it,  if  these  were  really
•ontomplated.    They  did  wrong  in  conoluding  that  th«  seeming  ki&dneH  was  eovert


CH.X.1— 19.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  263

hostility.  To  have  returned  civility  for  civility  could  have  done  them  no  harm,  and
would  have  prevented  the  severe  retribution  for  their  barbarity  which  followed.  2.  In
its  effects.  (1)  On  those  who  are  guilty  of  it.  It  deprives  them  of  the  happiness  and
other  good  which  they  would  gain  from  kindness  exercised  towards  them,  were  it  duly
appreciated  and  acknowledged ;  and  of  the  benefit  which  it  would  impart  in  the  way  of
example  and  influence.  It  strengthens  the  bad  dispositions  and  habits  from  which
it  springs.  It  prompts  to  conduct  (as  in  this  case)  which  may  work  incalculable
mischief.  (2)  On  those  towards  whom  it  is  indulged.  Inflicting  pain,  producing
resentment,  and  perhaps  active  revenge,  and  discouraging  them  in  the  practice  of
virtues  which  are  liable  to  be  so  maligned.  (3)  On  others.  Infecting  with  unjust
suspicions  some  who  would  not  otherwise  cherish  them ;  encouraging  disbelief  in  genuine
goodness,  ^nd  thus  loosening  the  bonds  of  mutual  confidence  by  which  society  is  held
together ;  disinclining  also  from  good  deeds,  and  so  lessening  the  amount  of  goodness  in
the  world.

in.  How  rr  should  affect  us.  1.  It  should  not  surprise  us.  Consideiing  what
men  are,  we  should  regard  it  as  quite  possible  that  any  good  we  may  do  will  be  mis-
represented, or  at  least  fail  to  be  duly  appreciated  and  acknowledged  even  by  those
whose  benefit  we  seek.  2.  It  should  not  deter  us  from  doing  good.  The  great  motives
for  good  deeds  abide  the  same.  They  are  quite  independent  of  human  appreciation.
They  should  be  our  chief  motives,  the  hope  of  approval  or  suitable  return  from  men
occupying  a  very  subordinate  position.  Let  us  study  and  labour  to  be  accepted  of
Qod  (2  Cor.  v.  9),  and  be  content  with  his  approval,  let  men  think  what  they  may.
3.  If  men  misrepresent  our  conduct,  let  us  exercise  charity  towards  them,  hoping,  if  we
cannot  confidently  believe,  that  they  have  sinned  through  ignorance  or  inconsideration
rather  than  ill  will.  If  compelled  to  vindicate  ourselves,  let  us  do  it  with  meekness.
We  should  also  refiect  whether  we  have  given  any  occasion  in  the  manner  of  our
conduct  for  misunderstanding  of  its  real  quality ;  and  avoid  the  error  in  future.  And,
if  we  are  really  reproached  for  that  which  is  good,  without  just  occasion,  let  us  be
mindful  that  we  are  fellow-sufi'erers  with  our  Lord  and  many  of  the  best  men  of  all
ages.  4.  Let  us  ie  watchful  against  every  temptation  to  depreciate  and  misrepresent
the  good  which  is  practised  by  others. — G.  W.

Vers.  11,  I2.^0o-operation,,  courage,  and  resignation.  Joab  here  appears  at  his
best.  A  great  occasion,  involving  great  peril  for  the  army  and  the  kingdom,  calls
forth,  not  only  his  eminent  military  qualities,  but  seutiments  of  piety  and  religious
patriotism  worthy  of  David  himself.  He  presents  an  example  worthy  of  imitation  by
commanders  of  armies ;  but  we  take  his  words  as  adapted  to  guide  and  animate  the
soldiers  of  Christ  in  their  warfare  against  error  and  sin.  They  call  attention  to  three
duties  incumbent  upon  individual  Christians,  the  several  bands  of  each  division  of  the
Christian  army,  and  the  several  divisions  themselves.

I.  Mutual  help.  (Ver.  11.)  The  servants  of  Christ  are  engaged  in  the  endearour
to  conquer  the  world  for  him,  and,  in  pursuing  it,  have  to  fight  against  enemies  of
various  kinds.  In  this  warfare  they  ought  to  cheerfully  co-operate,  and,  as  opportunity
may  arise,  help  each  other.  Much  mutual  assistance  they  cannot  but  render,  however
any  might  desire  to  confine  the  benefits  of  their  activity  to  their  own  party.  Every
hymn-book  testifies  to  this.  No  individual  or  section  can  do  good  work  without
helping  others.  But  there  should  be  more  of  conscious  and  hearty  co-operation.  1.
Why  it  should  be  so.  (1)  The  cause  is  one — the  cause  of  Christ  our  King,  the
defence  and  extension  of  his  kingdom,  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  and  himian
salvation.  (2)  Christians  are  comrades  in  the  same  army.  1'hey  should  cherish  the
feeling  of  brotherhood,  realize  that  they  are  fighting  against  common  foes,  and  be  glad
to  encourage  and  help  each  other.  The  success  of  any  is  the  success  of  all,  and  should
be  so  regarded;  the  failure  of  any  should  be  a  trouble  to  all ;  and,  if  any  can  aid  their
brethren  to  turn  threatening  defeat  into  victory,  their  aid  should  be  cheerfully  afforded
and  joyfully  accepted.  (3)  The  need  is  urgent.  The  spiritual  necessities  of  men,  the
special  needs  in  particular  cases.  The  field  is  extensive;  the  opposing  forces  numerous,
powerful,  and  incessantly  vigilant  and  active.  The  utmost  exertions  of  all  are  required.
To  hold  back,  to  refuse  co-operation  with  fellow-soldiers  because  they  belong  not  to  our
regiment  or  division  of  the  »rmy,  to  observe  with  pleasure  the  failure  of  any  of  them,


264  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cH.  x.  1—19.


or  to  waste  energies  and  resources  in  fierce  conflicts  with  one  another,  is  to  be  disloyal
to  their  Sovereign,  unbrotherly  to  each  other,  and  unfaithful  to  the  sonls  of  men.  2.
Why  it  often  is  not  so.  (1)  Deficiency  of  spiritual  insight.  Incapacity,  voluntary  or
involuntary,  to  discern :  (a)  The  real  nature  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  That  it  is
essentially  spiritual,  consisting  in  "righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy
Ghost;"  that  "he  that  in  these  things  serveth  Christ  is  acceptable  to  God,  and  approved
of  men"  (Eom.  xiv.  17,  18);  and  that  in  Christ  Jesus  nothing  avails  but  "a  new
creature,"  "  faith  which  worketh  by  love,"  and  "  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of
God "  (Gal.  vi.  15 ;  v.  6 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  19).  (6)  The  essential  qualities  of  Christ's
soldiers,  which  are  not  the  dress  they  wear,  nor  the  particular  drill  to  which  they  are
accustomed,  but  love  and  loyalty  to  Christ.  (2)  Deficiency  of  spiritual  affections.
Want  of  supreme  and  ardent  love  for  Christ  and  his  kingdom,  and  for  his  servants  as
such.  These  deficiencies  of  mind  and  heart  act  and  react  on  each  other,  and  they  open
the  way  for  all  kinds  of  blundering  and  perversity.  Fellow-soldiers  are  mistaken  for
enemies,  and  treated  as  such.  The  great  cause  is  made  practically  subordinate  to
matters  infinitely  small  in  comparison.  Sectarian  rivalry  takes  the  place  of  Christian
co-operation;  or  a  worse  thing  happens — ^petty  personal  ambition  and  selfishness,  or
likings  and  dislikings,  dominate,  separating  those  who  should  be  acting  together,  and
introducing  low,  worldly  principles  into  a  region  where  the  spiritual  should  alone  reign.
Pride,  jealousy,  envy,  nncharitableness,  perhaps  the  merest  avarice,  reduce  to  a  fraction,
if  they  do  not  altogether  extinguish,  those  noble  Christian  feelings  which  Christianity
inspires,  and  which  would  impel  brothers  to  own  brothers,  cordially  to  render  or  receive
help  in  the  common  work,  to  rejoice  in  each  other's  successes,  and  sorrow  for  each
other's  reverses.  3.  Who  should  take  the  lead  in  effecting  co-operation  t  Joab
addresses  Ahishai  his  fellow-commander ;  and  it  is  just  the  leaders  and  commanders  in
Christ's  army  who  should  be  foremost  in  promoting  a  good  understanding  between  its
various  bands,  and  inducing  them  to  work  together.  But,  alas  1  they  are  often  foremost
in  promoting  alienation  and  separation.  The  people  are  frequently  more  disposed  to  be
friendly  towards  each  other  than  the  clergy.

II.  CouRAOB.  (Ver.  12.)  In  war  this  is  essential  to  success.  In  the  Christian
warfare  it  is  not  so  obviously  or  universally  required.  It  is,  however,  still  required  in
many  cases.  When  unpopular  truth  has  to  be  proclaimed,  when  strongholds  of  sin
or  superstition  have  to  be  assailed,  when  the  evangelization  of  barbarous  tribes  is
attempted,  or  perilous  climates  have  to  be  encountered,  the  Christian  soldier  must  be
prepared  to  endure  hardship,  suffering,  or  death.  Even  the  ridicule  which  not  unfre-
quently  assails  the  earnest  Christian  calls  for  a  good  deal  of  courage.  Joab  sought  to
inspire  his  brother,  and  through  him  the  soldiers  under  his  command,  with  courage,  by
reminding  him  that  it  was  "for  our  people,  and  for  the  cities  of  our  God,"  that  they
were  about  to  fight.  In  like  manner  Christians  may  be  exhorted  to  "be  of  good
courage "  and  "  play  the  men "  for  the  Church  of  God,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  world
which  they  aim  to  conquer  for  Christ.  Joab  might  have  added,  "  for  our  king ; "  and
the  strongest  and  most  animating  consideration  for  us  is  that  we  are  witnessing  and
working  and  fighting  for  our  great  King,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  He  is  worth  living
for,  suffering  for,  dying  for.  He  has  gone  before  us  in  the  labour  and  the  suffering.
He  is  present  with  us.  His  eye  is  upon  each  of  us.  He  will  overlook  no  true-hearted
soldier  of  his  when  he  distributes  the  rewards  of  victory.  "  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  idso
reign  with  him"  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).

III.  Besionation.  Those  who  engage  in  war,  though  they  may  hope  for  victory,
must  be  prepared  for  defeat.  "The  battle"  is  not  always  "to  the  strong"  (Eccles
ix.  11)  or  the  brave.  Nor  in  the  better  warfare  can  we  "command  success"  in  this  oi
that  particular  encounter,  however  faithful  or  brave  or  zealous  we  may  be.  We  are  tc
recognize,  like  Joab,  that  "  the  Lord  "  is  over  all,  and  be  content  that  he  should  "  do
that  which  seemeth  bim  good."  Not  that  we  are  required  to  be  resigned  to  nltimatt
bilure,  for  we  are  assured  of  final  and  complete  victory.

**  The  saints  in  all  this  glorious  war
Shall  conquer,  though  they're  slain."

Nor  are  th«  courage  and  devotedneaa  of  any  aingle  soldier  lost.    AU  th*  ialthfiil  <xm-


OH.  XL  1—27.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OS"  SAMUEL.


265


tribute  to  the  final  triumph,  and  all  shall  unite  in  the  song  of  victory,  "  The  kingdoms
of  this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ."  "  Alleluia :  for
the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reignethl"  "  And  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever"  (Bev.  xi.
16;  xix.6).— G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XL


Ver.  1. — After  the  year  was  expired;
Hebrew  and  Beyised  Version,  at  the  re-
titm  of  the  year ;  that  is,  as  Josephus  para-
phrases it,  "  the  next  spring."  It  seems
quite  certain  that  the  war  with  Hadarezer
did  not  take  place  in  the  same  year  as  the
defeat  of  the  Syrians  at  Medeba.  For  the
gathering  of  his  mercenaries  by  Nahash
would  occupy  a  long  time,  and  it  was  done
so  leisurely,  that  not  only  did  news  of  it
reach  Jerusalem,  but  Dayid  was  able  to  col-
lect his  forces,  and  instead  of  awaiting  the
invasion,  could  deliver  his  attack  on  the
enemy's  ground.  The  battle  at  Meduba  took
place  in  the  autumn,  and,  as  it  was  impos-
sible to  keep  the  field  with  winter  so  near,
Joab  marched  back  to  Jerusalem,  intending
in  the  spring  to  return  to  the  siege  of  Babbah.
But  David  quickly  had  .information  that  a
more  serious  war  was  impending,  and,  instead
of  sending  Joab,  he  now  gathers  "  all  Israel,"
and,  after  gaining  a  victory,  it  is  plain  that
he  marched  into  the  Syrian  territories,  and
compelled  by  his  presence  the  allies  of
Hadarezer  to  transfer  their  allegiance  to
him.  Simultaneously  with  this  war  he  bad
to  meet  the  attack  of  the  Edomites,  for  which
purpose  he  detached  Abishai  with  a  por-
tion of  his  army ;  and  it  was  necessary  also
to  post  garrisons  in  their  country,  and  in
Aram  of  Damascus.  It  was  while  he  was
thus  occupied  in  the  Aramean  states  that
he  gathered  the  "  much  brass  "  spoken  of  in
ch.  viii  8.  The  Ammonites  would  neces-
sarily be  left  to  themselves  while  these  great
events  were  going  on,  but  now,  after  a  respite
of  a  year  and  a  half,  David  sent  Joab,  and
his  servants,  that  is,  his  officers — ^the  word
"servant"  in  Oriental  courts  being  con-
stantly used  to  designate  those  high  in  rank
near  the  king's  person — and  all  Israel ;  that
is,  an  army  gathered  from  all  the  tribes.
In  accordance  with  the  cruel  customs  of
Ancient  warfare,  they  began  by  laying  the
whole  country  waste,  and  putting  all  whom
they  found  to  the  sword,  and  thus  destroyed
the  children  of  Ammon  before  laying  siege
to  the  capital,  into  which  all  the  people  by
these  harsh  measures  had  been  forced  to  go
for  refuge.  In  the  Hebrew  there  is  a  curious
■pelling,  the  word  "kings"  being  written
meldkim,  with  an  aleph  to  represent  the
long  4.  It  ia  •  mistake  to  suppose  that  a
different  word,  maldkim,  "angels"  or  "am-
bftwadon,"  is  meant,  m  it  is  nothing  wan


than  an  archaic  method  of  spelling,  instances
of  which  have  been  made  rare  by  the  extreme
fastidiousness  of  Hebrew  scribes.  There  is,
however,  another  example  not  far  off,  where
the  Hebrew  word  for  "  poor  "  is  also  written
with  an  inserted  aleph.

Yer.  2. — ^David  arose  from  off  his  bed.  It
was  usual  in  Palestine,  and  remains  so  in  all
hot  countries,  to  take  a  siesta  in  the  heat  of
the  day  (ch.  iv.  5) ;  and,  on  awaking,  David
walked  backward  and  forward  on  the  flat
roof  of  his  house  (1  Sam.  ix.  25),  to  enjoy  the
cool  breezes  of  the  evening.  In  so  doing  he
was  probably  following  his  usual  habits ;  but
temptation  came  upon  him,  as  so  often  is  the
case,  unexpectedly.  We  are  told  that  it  ia
regarded  in  the  East  as  improper  for  one
neighbour  to  look  over  the  battlement  of  his
house  into  the  inner  court  of  the  next  dwell-
ing (Philippson).  Considering  the  jealousy
witli  which  Orientals  guard  the  female  mem-
bers of  their  family  from  intrusion,  it  was  a
wrong  act  on  the  king's  part  to  spy  into  what
was  going  on  in  the  recesses  of  the  adjoin-
ing house.  But  he  did  so,  and  suffered  for  it
years  of  iisgraoe  and  misery.  For  he  saw  a
beautiful  woman,  the  wife  of  one  of  his  high
ofBcers,  bathing,  probably  to  purify  herself
from  some  legal  uncleanness,  such  as  those
mentioned  in  Lev.  xv.  No  blame,  so  far,
must  be  attached  to  her.  The  place  was  re-
garded as  perfectly  secluded,  and  probably
neither  she  nor  Uriah  had  ever  suspected
that  what  went  on  there  could  be  observed
from  the  roof  of  the  king's  palace.

Yer.  3. — Bathsheba,  the  daughter  of  Eliam.
In  ch.  xxiii.  34  Eliam  is  said  to  be  the  son
of  Ahithophel,  and  thus  Bathsheba  would
be  his  granddaughter,  Mr.  Blunt,  in  his
'  Undesigned  Coincidences,'  p,  143,  et  teq.,
sees  in  this  the  explanation  of  the  adherence
to  the  side  of  Absalom  of  a  man  so  high  in
King  David's  service.  It  was  the  result  of
his  mdignation  at  David's  profligate  treat-
ment of  so  near  a  relative.  In  1  Chion.  iii.
5  she  is  called  "  Bathshua,  the  daughter  of
Ammiel."  The  latter  is  a  transposition  of
Eliam,  both  names  being  compounded  of  .^nt,
people,  and  El,  God.  Uriah  the  Eittite.  We
read  in  ch.  xxiii  39  that  he  was  one  of
David's  "mighties,"  and  it  is  remarkable
that  we  should  thus  find  high  in  rank  in
David's  army  a  member  of  that  grand  race
who  had  disputed  with  Egypt  and  Assyria
the  empire  of  the  East.  Theiz  head  now
was  Toi,  King  of  Hamath.

Ywt  4.— David  Mat  menengert,  and  taok


266


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  XI.  1  —27.


her.  David's  fall  eeems  as  sudden  as  it  was
complete ;  but  we  may  feel  sure  that  there
had  been  gradual  preparation  for  it  during
the  previous  period  of  great  prosperity.
David  had  always  been  a  man  of  strong
passions,  and  the  large  harem  he  had  set  up
at  Jerusalem,  so  far  from  satisfying  him,
Oiily  intensified  his  lust.  And  now  he  who
had  previously  shown  himself  so  chivalrous
tnd  noble  stoops  to  robbing  one  of  his  own
officers  of  his  honour.  And  stem  and  ter-
rible was  the  punishment.  When  he  sent
those  messengers,  who  were  some  of  the  vile
people  who  hang  about  great  personages,
ready  to  minister  to  their  sins,  he  was  pre-
paring the  way  for  his  daughter's  disgrace,
for  the  murder  of  Amnon,  for  Absalom's
rebellion  and  death,  and  for  the  death  of
Adonijah.  From  that  day  his  own  house
was  the  scene  of  horrible  crimes,  feuds,
scandals,  and  miseries  of  every  kind;  and
the  long  interval  after  his  repentance,  be-
tween the  birth  of  Solomon  and  David's
death,  is  passed  over  in  gloomy  silence.  No
act  of  the  penitent  king  after  his  restoration
to  the  throne  is  deemed  worthy  of  record.
He  was  pardoned,  but  his  place  henoeforward
was  not  in  the  light  of  God's  favour,  but  in
shadow  and  retirement.  Men  who  fall  so
grievously  must  be  content  to  be  removed
into  the  outer  court.  Of  Bathsheba  it  must
be  said  that  she  remained  a  faithful  wife,
and  bare  David  four  sons  besides  the  one
who  was  the  fruit  of  tlieir  adultery,  and
thiit  she  retained  her  influence  over  him
to  the  last  (1  Chron.  iii.  5;  1  Kings  i.  15 —
31).  For  she  was  purified  from  her  unclean-
ness;  Hebrew,  and  she  purified  herself  from
her  uncleanness;  that  is,  having  committed
an  act  of  gross  immorality,  she  nevertheless
carefully  observed  the  ceremonial  enactment
commanded  in  Lev.  xv.  18.  She  went  home
unrepentant,  and  with  her  conscience  defiled,
but  was  all  the  more  scrupulous  in  perform-
ing the  rite  that  purified  her  outwardly.

Ver.  5. — The  woman  .  .  .  told  David.
Her  crime  was  one  that  made  her  liable  to
the  penalty  of  death  (Lev.  ix.  10),  and
Uriah  was  a  man  likely  to  exact  it;  conse-
quently she  was  in  great  alarm,  and  the  king
shared  her  anxiety.  Already  was  the  pun-
ishment beginning  to  be  required  from  both
the  guilty  sharers  in  the  wickedness.

Ver.  8. — A  mess  (of  meat) ;  really,  o  royal
present  (see  Esth.  ii.  18 ;  Jer.  xl.  5 ;  Amos  v.
11,  where  it  is  translated  hurdens  ofwheat,hiit
really  means  presents  of  wheat,  forced  from
the  poor) ;  though  originally  a  portion  of  food
sent  to  a  guest  from  the  table  of  the  giver  of
a  feast  (Gen.  xliii.  34).  Uriah,  as  one  of
David's  thirty-seven  heroes,  would  hold  a
high  rank  in  the  army,  though  the  state-
ment given  by  Josephus,  that  he  was  Joab's
armour-bearer,  i«  probably  a  mere  conjecture,


made  with  the  view  of  explaining  what
seemed  to  bim  strange,  that  a  foreigner
should  hold  so  distinguished  a  place  among
the  captains  of  Israel.  David  sends  for  him,
on  the  pretext  that  he  wanted  full  information
of  Joab's  plans,  and  the  state  of  the  army,
and  the  progress  of  the  siege  of  Babbah.
And  BO  prompt  is  Uriah,  that  he  goes  to  the
king  still  soiled  with  travel,  and  without
calling  at  his  house.  And  David  makes  hia
inquiries,  listens  with  apparent  interest  to
the  narrative  of  the  war,  and,  after  receiving
»  full  report,  bids  Uriah  go  home  and  rest
and  refresh  himself  after  the  journey.  He
sends  him,  moreover,  a  present,  such  probably
as  was  usual  after  special  service,  but  large
and  liberal,  so  as  to  put  Uriah  in  good  humour.
But  the  old  soldier  cared  for  war  more  than
for  pleasure,  and,  instead  of  going  to  hia
house,  spent  the  night  in  the  guard-room
with  the  soldiers  and  others  who  were  in
attendance  upon  the  king  (see  1  Kings  xiv.
27,  28).  All  would  be  eager  for  news  of
friends  and  relatives,  and  it  was  a  far  greater
delight  to  Uriah  to  chat  with  his  old  com-
rades than  to  be  resting  luxuriously  in  his
own  home,

Yer.  11. — The  ark,  and  Israel,  and  Jndah,
abide  in  tents.  The  presence  of  the  ark
with  the  army  in  the  field  is  puzzling,  and
shows  us  how  little  we  know  of  the  religious
practices  of  the  Jews,  as,  hut  for  this  chance
mention  of  it,  we  should  have  affirmed  that
it  was  never  taken  out  of  its  place  in  Zion,
and  that  in  previous  times  the  conduct  of
Eli's  sons  in  carrying  it  out  of  the  sanctuary
to  war  was  an  irregular  act.  The  Jews
themselves  feel  the  difficulty,  and  some  of
their  rabbins  affirm  that  this  was  not  the
ark  of  the  covenant,  but  a  chest  containing
the  ephod  whereby  inquiries  were  made  ol
Jehovah.  Certainly  in  1  Sam.  iv.  3,  4  it
is  expressly  called  "the  ark  of  the  cove-
nant ; "  and  in  ch.  vi.  2  "  the  ark  of  God."
The  use  in  our  version  of  the  special  word
"ark"  obliges  us  to  think  of  the  ark  of  the
covenant,  whereas  really  it  is  »  general
word,  rendered  "  chest "  in  2  Kings  xii.  9, 10.
It  is  said,  too,  that  the  war  with  Ammon
was  not  a  holy  war,  nor  was  it  of  such
importance  as  to  call  for  David's  presence
at  the  head  of  his  troops.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  if  it  was  not  the  ark  of  God,
why  did  Uriah  lay  so  great  stress  upon  its
presence  in  the  field?  Moreover,  we  find
the  ark  with  Saul  in  his  war  with  the
Philistines  (1  Sam.  xiv.  18),  where  it  is
expressly  called  "  the  ark  of  God,"  and  is
used  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring  the  will
of  Jehovah.  On  comparing  1  Sam.  vii.  2
with  ch.  vi.  3,  we  should  have  imagined
that  the  ark  abode  uncared  for  at  the  house
of  Abinadab  at  Kirjath-jearim,  did  we  not
plainly  find  it  in  attendance  upon  Saul.   W»


Ck.  XL  1 — 2?.]


THE  SECOND  SOOK  OE*  SAMUlIL.


26?


are  thn8  compelled  to  conclude  that  David
sent  it,  with  its  attendant  priests,  with
Joab,  that  he  might  consult  the  Deity
by  its  means.  In  the  Talmud  ('  Shek.
Jems.,'  9.  2)  the  idea  of  there  being  an
Inferior  or  second  ark  used  for  this  purpose
is  condemned.  David,  in  his  remonstrance
with  Uriah,  shows  signs  of  displeasure,  and
the  conduct  of  the  latter  suggests  the  idea
that  his  suspicions  had  been  aroused.  The
war  was  going  on  prosperously ;  he  had
been  summoned  home  on  an  honourable
pretext  to  give  the  king  a  report  of  it ;  and
it  is,  to  say  the  least,  strange  that  he  should
have  cared  so  little  for  a  wife,  to  whom
apparently  he  had  not  long  been  married,
and  for  his  domestic  affairs,  as  not  even  to
go  to  his  house,  which  was  close  by.  The
tone,  too,  of  Uriah's  answer  is  excited,  and
his  military  ardour  too  warm.  David  had
assumed  that,  as  a  matter  of  course,  he  would
hasten  to  visit  his  wife,  and  Uriah's  im-
expected  refusal  upsets  his  devices,  and
leaves  him  with  all  his  difficulties  increased
rather  than  done  away  with.  Very  probably,
in  the  conversation  in  the  guard-room,  Uriah
had  received  hints  that  his  wife  was  too
high  in  the  royal  favour.  For  "  tents  "  the
Hebrew  has  "  booths,"  and  so  the  Bevised
Version ;  and  for  "  fields "  the  singular,
"  field."  The  Israelites  still  lived  mostly  in
tents,  and  in  war  were  content  with  very
slight  and  temporary  shelter,  and  if  there
were  any  parks,  or  enclosures,  they  were
called  Kaioth,  while  "  the  field  "  was  the
open  unenclosed  land,  which  formed  the
mass  of  the  country.  The  separate  mention
of  "  Israel  and  Judah  "  is  no  indication  of
the  book  having  been  wfitten  after  the
disruption  of  the  kingdom.  Uriah  had  been
in  David's  service  when  he  was  king  only
at  Hebron,  and  had  taken  part  in  the  long
war  between  Judah  and  the  house  of  Saul.

Ver.  13. — He  made  Mm  dnmk.  David
thus  adds  sin  to  sin,  and,  in  order  to  accom-
plish his  vile  end,  he  degrades  the  brave
soldier  whom  already  he  had  dishonoured.
But  even  when  intoxicated  Uriah  kept  to
his  determination ;  and  though  on  this  second
night  there  would  not  be  the  same  pleasure
in  chatting  with  old  comrades  seen  again
after  long  absence,  he  still  sleeps  in  the
guard-room.  And  thus  there  were  witnesses
that  he  had  not  gone  to  his  house.

Ver.  14. — ^David  wrote  a  letter.  David
now  uses  the  knowledge  he  had  acquired  in
the  schools  of  the  prophets  for  vicious
purposes.  For  it  to  be  a  blessing,  knowledge
must  be  sanctified  to  holy  use.  The  letter
would  conceal  from  Joab  the  truth,  and
only  let  him  know  that  Uriah,  during  his
visit  to  Jerusalem,  had  incurred  the  king's
■erious  displeasure;  and  we  may  be  quite
tore  that  Joab  would  be  very  indignant


when  he  learned,  as  he  certainly  soon  woulil,
that  David  had  made  him  his  tool,  and
caused  him  to  murder  one  of  "  the  mighties  "
in  order  to  cover  the  shame  of  his  adultery.
The  only  fair  side  of  the  picture  is  that  it
shows  the  high  state  of  morality  among  the
people.  The  crimes  of  kings  and  great  men
are  usually  lightly  pardoned,  and  especially
that  of  adultery.  Even  in  our  own  and
other  Christian  countries  this  is  the  case ;
but  David  has  to  resort  to  extreme  measures
rather  than  face  the  indignation  of  his
subjects.  Unfortunately,  the  shedding  of
blood  was  not  looked  upon  with  equal  horror.
Possibly  the  leaving  it  to  the  relatives  to
requite  it  made  the  suppression  of  murder
the  business,  not  of  the  state,  but  of  "the
avenger  of  blood."  At  all  events,  Joab
without  much  compunction  carries  out
David's  orders,  caring  to  know  no  more  than
that  Uriah  was  out  of  favour.  And  what  is
more  extraordinary,  David  remains  utterly
callous  for  a  whole  twelvemonth  (see  ch.  xii.
15),  and  his  conscience  does  not  even  smite
him  for  the  additional  meanness  of  sending
the  order  for  Uriah's  murder  by  the  hand  of
the  injured  man  himself.

Ver.  16. — ^When  Joab  observed  the  city ;
Revised  Version,  kept  watch  upon  the  city.
This  does  not  mean,  as  some  suppose,  that
Joab  sent  a  body  of  men  to  examine  the
fortifications  with  a  view  to  an  assault,  and
BO  provoked  a  sally.  The  verb  simply  refers
to  the  ordinary  operations  of  a  siege,  which
usually  resolved  itself  into  a  long  blockade,
continued  until  starvation  compelled  a
surrender ;  and  to  hasten  this  the  people  of
the  villages  were  forced  into  the  town,  by
the  rule  that  all  left  outside  were  put  to  the
sword.  To  maintain  the  blockade,  men  were
posted  at  all  fit  points  round  the  city,  and
these  were  constantly  assailed  by  the
besieged.  Joab  then  placed  Uriah  at  a  post
which  was  especially  the  object  of  attack ;
and  when  the  usual  sally  took  place  and
was  repulsed,  Joab  seems  to  have  ordered
Uriah  to  pursue  them  up  to  the  very  gate,
where  they  would  be  exposed  to  a  shoner
of  arrows  from  the  walls.  OtherB  fell
besides  Uriah,  and  that  the  loss  was  con-
siderable, and  the  result  of  bad  generalship,
though  designedly  such,  seems  probable
from  the  deprecation  of  the  king's  anger  in
ver.  20.

Ver.  18. — Then  Joab  sent.  Joab  now  per-
forms another  act  in  this  iniquitous  drama,
and  goes  through  the  form  of  sending  the
king  a  report  of  the  disaster  which  had
followed  upon  his  approaching  too  near  the
walls.  With  well-feigned  hypocrisy,  ha
makes  the  messenger  believe  that  David
will  be  displeased  at  the  loss  of  life,  and  will
blame  him  for  his  want  of  caution.  But  it
is  curious  that  the  messengei  i*  histracted


268


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[CH.  XI.  1—2*.


to  mention  the  death  of  Uriah  only  after
the  king  has  given  utterance  to  his  anger.
Possibly  the  meaning  of  this  is  that  the
loss  of  one  so  high  in  rank,  and  the  king's
near  neighbour,  is  so  serious  a  matter  that
it  must  be  gradually  broken  to  him,  lest  his
indignation  at  Joab  should  be  too  violent.
Probably  there  was  also  the  suggestion  that
Uriah  had  been  himself  too  rash,  and  had
incurred  his  fate  by  his  own  fault.  The
reference  to  the  fate  of  Abimelech  (Judg.
is.  53)  proves  that  the  history  of  the  times
of  the  judges  was  generally  known.  Very
probably  not  only  records  of  the  several
events  existed,  but  the  Book  of  Judges  was
already  written.  In  Samuel's  schools  the
youth  of  Israel  were  instructed  in  the  annals
of  their  country,  and  men  like  Nathan  and
Gad,  and  others  who  aided  Samuel  in  his
work,  would  be  sure  quickly  to  turn  their
attention  to  the  orderly  arrangement  and
digest  of  the  records  in  their  possession.

Ver.  21. — Jerubbesheth ;  in  Judg.  vi
32  called  Jerubbaal,  that  is,  Gideon.  (On
the  substitution  of  Besheth,  or  more  cor-
rectly Bosheth,  for  Baal,  see  notes  on  oh.
11  8;  iz.  6.)  It  is  remarkable  that  the
LXX.,  Vulgate,  and  Syriao  all  read  here
Jerubbaal,  though,  like  the  Hebrew,  they
have  Ishbosheth  and  Mephibosheth.  Pro-
bably the  change,  which  was  not  made  until
after  the  days  of  Jezebel,  was  only  gradually
carried  out  by  the  scribes.

Ver.  23. — ^The  men  prevailed  against  ns.
The  real  meaning  is  "  the  men  made  a  sortie
against  ns  in  force,  and  came  even  to  the
open  field;  but  we  were  upon  them  (and
drove  them  back)  unto  the  entry  of  the
gate,  and  the  archers  from  off  the  wall  shot
at  thy  servants,"  etc.

Ver.  25. — Let  not  this  thing  displease
thee.  David  professes  to  be  satisfied  with
Joab's  apology,  and  bids  him,  if  the  war  is
in  the  main  going  on  prosperously,  not  to  be
too  much  distressed  at  a  temporary  reverse.
As  for  Uriah's  death,  of  course  it  is  to  be
regretted,  but  such  is  the  fortune  of  war,
and  the  sword  devours  now  one  and  now
another.  The  last  words,  encourage  thou
him,  have  provoked  comment,  as  though  the
messenger  was  to  aid  and  abet  Joab.  They
simply  mean  "  Give  him  a  message  of  en-
couragement from  me,"  the  exact  form  of
which  is  left  to  the  messenger,  but  of  which
his  report  would  be  that  the  king  wished
Joab  to  take  courage.

Ver.  26. — And  when  the  wife  of  Uriah
heard  that  Uriah  her  hnsband  was  dead,  she
mourned  for  her  husband.  There  is  some-
thing pathetic  in  this  repetition  of  the  name
of  the  miudered  man,  and  his  dose  relation*


ship  with  Bathsheba  is  dwelt  upon  by  his
being  twice  called  "  her  husband"  and  she
"  Uriah's  wife."  Having  been  the  cause  of
his  murder,  she  is  careful  to  make  for  him  the
customary  mourning.  How  long  it  lasted  is
uncertain.  The  mourning  for  Aaron  (Numb,
xz.  29)  and  that  for  Moses  (Deut.  xzxir.
8)  were  each  for  thirty  days ;  while  that  for
Jacob  at  Atad  (Gen.  1.  10)  and  that  of  the
men  of  Jabesh-Gilead  for  Saul  (1  Sam.
xxxi.  13)  lasted  only  for  seven  days.  Both
these,  however,  were  under  such  exceptional
circumstances  as  made  them  no  rule;  but
in  Ecolug.  zxii  12  we  read,  "  Seven  days  do
men  mourn  for  him  that  is  dead,"  and  the
national  lamentation  for  Judith  lasted  the
same  time  (Judith  xvi.  24).  Probably,  how-
ever, the  monmuig  of  a  widow  for  her
husband  would  last  a  month.

Ver.  27. — She  .  .  .  bare  him  a  son.  This
would  be  the  child  whose  death  is  recorded
in  the  next  chapter.  Afterwards  she  bare
David  four  sons  (1  Chron.  iii.  5),  of  whom
one  was  Solomon,  and  another  Nathan,  the
ancestor  of  our  Lord.  The  thing  .  .  ,  dis-
pleased the  Lord.  It  was  probably  during  the
.time  of  David's  victories  that  success  began
to  work  in  him  its  usual  results.  Too  com-
monly men  who  have  conquered  kingdoms
have  been  vanquished  by  their  own  strong
passions;  and  David  had  always  evinced
a  keen  appetite  for  sensuous  pleasures.
Even  at  Hebron  he  had  multiplied  unto
himself  wives,  and  now,  raised  by  repeated
victory  to  be  the  lord  of  a  vast  empire,  he
ceased  to  be  "  base  in  his  own  sight "  (ch.
vi.  22),  and  lost  his  self-control.  And,  as
was  to  be  expected  in  a  man  of  such  strong
qualities,  his  fall  was  terrible.  But  this
declaration  of  the  inspired  narrator  is  not
made  solely  for  ethic^  reasons,  but  is  the
key  to  all  that  follows  up  to  the  end  of  ch.
XX.  In  this  chapter  we  have  had  the  history
of  David's  sin ;  a  year's  respite  succeeds,  as
if  God  would  wait  and  see  whether  the
sinner's  own  conscience  would  waken  up,
and  bring  him  to  repentance ;  but  it  slum-
bers on.  Then  comes  the  message  of  reproof
followed  by  earnest  penitence,  and  severe
punishment.  It  was,  perhaps,  during  this
year  of  hardened  persistence  in  crime  that
Amnon  and  his  cousin  Jonadab  also  gave
the  reins  to  their  passions,  and  prepared  the
way  for  the  first  of  the  series  of  crimes  that
polluted  David's  home.  An  early  repentance
might  have  saved  the  son ;  but  the  absence
of  paternal  discipline,  the  loss  of  respect  for
his  father,  and  the  evil  influence  of  that
father's  bad  example,  all  nrged  on  the  son
to  the  commission  of  his  abominable  wima


OH.  XI.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  269


HOMILETIOa

Vers.  1 — ^17.— The  fiicts  are ;  1.  During  the  prosecution  of  the  war  against  Ammon
in  the  spring,  David  remains  in  Jerusalem.  2.  Walking  one  evening  on  his  house-top,
he  sees  a  woman  washing  herself,  and  observes  her  beauty.  3.  Curiosity  being
awakened,  he  sends  to  inquire  after  her,  and  learns  that  she  is  the  wife  of  Uriah.
4.  Sending  a  loyal  message  to  her,  she,  as  a  loyal  subject,  waits  upon  him,  whereupon
he  commits  adultery.  6.  Discovering  in  the  course  of  a  little  time  that  the  fact  would
come  to  light,  he  sends  for  Uriah  from  the  war,  under  pretext  of  gleaning  information
concerning  it,  but  really  that,  by  Uriah's  sojourn  with  his  wife,  the  fact  may  be  con-
cealed. 6.  Uriah,  possibly  suspicious  of  wrong,  excuses  himself  from  doing  as  David
desires,  on  the  plea  that  military  duty  and  patriotism  required  of  him  absolute  absten-
tion from  domestic  pleasures.  7.  Failing  in  the  first  attempt,  David  makes  him  drunk,
in  hopes  that,  when  stupid,  he  would  go  to  his  home ;  but  in  this  also  he  tails.  8.  Subse-
quently he  sends  him  back  to  Joab,  with  a  secret  instruction  that  he  would  set  him  in
such  a  position  as  to  ensure  his  death,  which  instruction  Joab  faithfully  carries  out.

The  hegitminga  of  great  tins.  By  universal  consent  the  deed  of  David  here  recorded
is  regarded  as  a  great  sin — a  very  great  sin,  because  it  was  a  breach  of  the  command-
ment which  guards  the  purity  of  human  life,  and  because  committed  by  one  blessed
with  more  than  ordinary  privileges,  and  in  an  abuse  of  regal  authority  over  a  probably
unsuspicious  subject.  The  deed  is  ever  base  and  criminal,  but  that  such  a  man  should
commit  the  crime  when  God  was  prospering  him  in  all  his  affairs,  when  his  people  were
bravely  risking  their  lives  in  defence  of  their  country,  and  after  he  had  spent  so  long
and  blessed  a  life  in  fellowship  with  God,  is  one  of  the  marvels  and  mysteries  of  human
nature.  In  the  narrative  we  have  set  forth  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  sin,  so  far  as
relates  to  its  ostensible  character.  Scripture  gives  us  outward  facts  in  their  natural
order.  But  we  know  that  in  one  outward  fact  of  human  life  there  are  involved  many
mental  and  moral  movements,  and  these  are  connected  in  the  continuity  of  life  with
antecedents  which,  in  part  at  least,  account  for  their  occurrence.  It  is  not  difficult,  by
bringing  our  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  mental  and  moral  movement  to  bear  on  the
facts  here  recorded,  to  get  a  clue  to  the  real  beginnings  of  this  great  sin,  and  of  great
sins  in  general.

L  Intense  absobftion  in  fbosfeboub  affaibs  diuinishes  the  enebot  that
OTHEBWISE  wouiJ>  oo  TO  BFiBiTnAL  OULTUBE.  Man,  Considered  physiologically  and
physically,  is  a  store  of  energy,  and  he  can  give  out  only  what  he  possesses.  The
totality  of  his  thoughts  and  acts  is  the  outcome,  and  generally  speaking  the  measure,
of  his  store.  What  portion  of  it  is  spent  in  excess  in  one  direction  is  just  so  much
taken  from  another  direction.  The  usual  law  of  forces  here  applies.  For  some  time
David  had  been  intensely  absorbed  in  consolidating  his  power.  The  amount  of  work
involved  in  all  the  changes  he  initiated  and  brought  to  completion  must  have  been  far
in  excess  of  what  falls  to  an  ordinary  monarch,  and  this  in  proportion  to  the  utter  dis-
organization of  affairs  under  Saul  and  Ishbosheth.  Such  an  absorption  most  probably
trenched  upon  the  nervous  and  moral  energy  he  had  at  one  time  concentrated  directly
on  the  culture  of  the  spiritual  life.  Some  few  men  seem  gifted  with  the  faculty  of
sudden  transitions  of  energy,  so  that,  while  intensely  absorbed  in  business  or  secular
studies  at  one  moment,  they  can,  by  an  act  of  will,  become  equally  absorbed  at  once
in  religious  pursuits.  Possibly  David  was  one  of  these ;  but  even  in  their  case  they
cannot  escape  the  weakening  effect  on  the  finer  sensibilities  of  a  protracted  absorption
in  purely  temporal  affairs,  especially  if  they  are  very  prosperous.  We  see  many
instances  of  this  in  the  lives  of  professedly  religious  men.

II.  Habits  or  life  hat  unconsciously  be  fobmed  which  oenebate  a  class
OF  FEELIN08  FBOYOOATivE  OF  TEMPTATION.  Hablts  grow  IB  sUeoce  and  too  slowly  to
be  noted,  and  every  unconsciously  formed  habit  brings  with  it  it«  corresponding  class
of  feelings,  which  also,  rising  gradually,  are  apt  to  obtain  an  unobserved  permanence  in
life.  The  usages  of  Eastern  courts  in  reference  to  polygamy  acted  in  a  subtle  way  on
David's  life,  so  that  he  gradually  formed  the  habits  peculiar  to  that  abnormal  form  of
domestic  life,  and  we  need  no  Divine  revelation  to  inform  us  of  the  class  of  inferior
feelings  that  would  thereby  be  surely  though  slowly  engendered.    The  man  in  modern


270  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  XL  1—27.

times  who,  by  reason  of  his  aflSuence,  combined  with  a  certain  habit  of  body,  fares
Bumptuously  every  day,  does  not,  while  he  is  getting  into  the  practice  of  so  doing,
reflect  on  the  possible  effect  of  all  this,  in  days  not  far  distant,  upon  his  animal  ten-
dencies in  a  certain  direction,  and  his  corresponding  moral  safeguards.  There  can  be
no  question  that  the  physical,  mental,  and  moral  habits  of  life  of  a  polygamous  house-
hold are  such  as  would  furnish  good  soil  for  a  sensual  temptation,  which,  in  the  case  of
a  man  unduly  absorbed  and  preoccupied  in  mere  secularities,  would  be  still  more  perilous.
Many  a  religious  man  is  weak  from  sources  similar  to  this.  Our  Lord  even  warned  his
apostles,  after  they  had  had  the  benefit  of  his  teaching  for  two  years,  to  take  heed  lest
at  any  time  their  hearts  be  "  overcharged  with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  and  the  cares
of  this  life"  (Luke  xii.  34).

III.  Leisure  sopervenino  on  great  activity  brings  the  weaker  sidb  or
NATURE  XKTO  PROMINENCE.  The  protracted  exeriions  of  years  had  now  issued  in  a
compact  kingdom  and  internal  order.  Saul's  family  was  cared  for.  Administration  was
organized  and  labour  divided  (ch.  viii.  14 — 18).  The  war  against  the  Syrians  was  in
the  hands  of  a  powerful  force,  under  a  skilful  general.  David,  in  Jerusalem,  had  leisure
unknown  in  former  years.  Now  it  is  a  fact  in  the  history  of  human  nature  that,  when
great  energies  cease  to  be  in  demand,  and  the  force  of  life  no  longer  goes  out  in  its
wonted  volume  in  its  ordinary  course,  then  the  feelings  and  tendencies  which,  mean-
while, have  been  unconnciously  geuerated  by  slowly  formed  habits  of  social  life,  are  apt
to  take  more  prominence,  and  find  less  resistance,  in  consequence  of  the  probably  impaired
power  of  the  spiritual  element  (see  division  I).  It  is  well  known  among  young  men
that  more  moral  falls  occur  during  seasons  of  leisure  than  at  any  other  time.  Leisure
following  on  great  prosperity  requires  for  its  safe  use  more  than  ordinary  wisdom  and
spiritual  health.  Adversity,  though  taxing  energy  to  the  utmost,  tends  to  draw  th«
heart  nearer  to  God,  so  that  when  there  is  leisure  from  it  the  soul  is  in  a  better  condition
to  guard  against  the  evils  incident  to  such  a  season.

IV.  An  DNC0N8CI0D8  DECLINE  OF  REALITY  IN  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD  MAT  SET  IS
ON    A     man's    OHTAININO    A    RECOGNIZED    POSITION    IN    THE     RELIGIOUS    WORLD.      The

Bubtilty  with  which  spiritual  declension  sets  in  is  admitted  by  all  who  know  anything
of  religious  experience.  The  best  of  men  are  the  objects  of  assault  from  the  powers  of
darkness,  clothed,  it  may  be,  as  angels  of  light  (2  Cor.  li.  14).  Once  let  a  man,  by  some
subtle  insinuation,  begin  to  think  that  now,  having  served  God  so  many  years  and
written  such  useful  and  sincere  utterances  of  his  experience,  he  has  a  distinctly  recognized
position, — then,  in  that  very  thought,  there  is  an  eletnent  of  danger.  From  that  hour
watchfulness  may  be  less  keen,  routine  may  set  in,  and  grey  hairs  may  come  "  here  and
there  upon  him  "  while  he  "  knoweth  it  not "  (Hos.  vii.  9).  Undoubtedly  David  had
attained  such  a  recognized  position  in  the  religious  world.  His  people  would  accord
it;  and,  in  the  cessation  of  strain  in  civil  and  political  exertions,  he  might,  in  an
unguarded  hour,  especially  if  the  lower  feelings  (see  division  II.)  began  to  put  forth  their
force,  indulge  in  self-complacence.  Communion  with  God  might  continue  in  full  form,
but  its  original  intense  reality  would  have  passed  away.  Herein,  perhaps,  is  the  secret
of  the  decline  of  religion  in  many  a  quondam  professor.  There  are  in  the  Church  not
a  few  who  have  left  to  them  only  "  the  form  of  godliness."

V.  UnDEB    THB    conditions    THUS    FAB    CONSIDERED    DISTINCT    SUGGESTIONS   COMB

THROUGH  THE  SENSES  WITH  DOUBLE  FORCE.  There  are  Conditions  under  which
suggestions  through  the  eye,  ear,  or  animal  passions  fall  as  powerless  as  snow  on  the
solid  rock.  The  real  power  of  a  temptation  through  the  senses  lies  in  the  state  of  mind
which  we  are  in  at  the  time.  David  had  probably  seen  beautiful  women  many  a  time
during  his  exile,  and  while  king  in  Jerusalem;  but  the  healthy,  well-guarded  spirit  was
unhurt  by  the  sight.  Beauty  anywhere  is,  to  a  healthy  spiritual  nature,  an  object  of
pure  admiration  as  a  work  of  God.  It  was  because  David  was  not  his  old  self  that
this  sight  was  as  fuel  to  a  smouldering  flame.  It  takes  but  little  to  create  radical
changes  and  commotions,  as  seen  in  chemistry,  when  the  primary  elements  of  things
are  brought  into  contact ;  and  so  is  it  when  certain  elemental  conditions  of  the  moral
man  and  his  surroundings  are  concerned.  Joseph  was  pure  and  spiritually  healthy
when  the  suggestion  of  evil  came  upon  him,  and  it  only  produced  a  recoil  (Gen.  xxxix.
8,  9).  Great  stress  is  laid  on  this  in  the  Bible.  "  To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure."
"  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence ;  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."


OH.  XX.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  271

VI.  THBBB  18  A  DISTtTRBINa  FORCE  IN  OEBTAIN  PASSIONS  BY  WHICH  EBA80N,  THE
WILL,    AND   BFIBITUAL  INSTINCTS   ABE   WEAKENED.      It   IS  a   psychological   fact  that  all

emotion  affects  the  exercise  of  the  pure  reason  for  the  worse.  It  is  in  the  experience
of  men  that  such  passions  as  were  aroused  in  David  by  the  sight  he  witnessed  from
the  roof  of  his  house,  more  than  any — except,  perhaps,  those  involved  in  drunl^enness
— disturb  or  cripple  the  action  of  reason  and  of  the  will.  Of  course,  they  weaken  the
8|)iritual  instincts  in  proportion  as  they  fiod  scope.  Thus  the  powers  which  may  be
considered  as  the  guardians  of  purity,  the  foes  of  evil,  are  not  in  their  normal  condition,
and  consequently  the  chances  are,  unless  something  happens  to  prevent  such  an  issue,
that  the  unhallowed  feelings  will  gain  further  ascendency.  In  this  we  see  that  the
perfect  man  is  attainable  only  in  Christ.  The  triumph  of  spiritual  religion  in  our
nature  is  coincident  with  the  most  perfect  development  of  that  nature.  Hence,  also,
spiritual  power  among  men  is  dependent  on  inner  purity.

VII.  When  onob  the  rein  is  given  to  such  passions,  the  fall  has  taken  place
IN  ESSENCE.  When  David  saw  aad  looked  on  her,  with  a  certain  thought  in  his  mind
and  feeling  in  his  heart,  he  had  virtually  done  the  deed  of  which  we  have  a  record.
In  the  spiritual  sphere,  thought  and  desire  are  tantamount  to  deed.  The  one  is  but
the  fuller  form  of  the  other.  Sin  lies  in  intent  and  purpose,  whether  it  be  actualized
in  outward  fact  or  not.  Hence  our  Lord's  strong  words  (Matt.  v.  27,  28).  The
mystery  of  David's  sin  really  lies  in  the  creation  within  himself  of  the  base  feeling
indicated  in  the  terms  of  ver.  2.  All  that  followed  was  a  development  of  this  (Jas.  i.
14,  15).  It  is  a  question  whether  Christian  people  have,  as  a  rule,  recognized  the
solemn  truth  taught  by  Christ  and  seen  in  David's  case.  The  seventh  commandment
has  a  bearing  on  the  daily  mental  life.

VIIL  An  inward  fall  beings  on  spiritual  darkness,  loss  of  selp-eespect,
WITH  fuether  enfeebled  REASON  AND  wiLL-PowBB.  Such  an  inward  fall  as  David's
on  the  roof  of  his  house  at  once  brought  a  cloud  between  him  and  his  &od,  caused  him
to  feel  that  he  wag  a  degraded  man,  and  placed  him,  in  that  abandoned  mood,  under
weaker  safeguards  against  the  growth  of  the  evil  passion.  Unless  a  sudden  and  sharp
repentance — a  shocked  cry  to  God  for  special  help — came  forth,  there  was  no  hope  of
his  being  the  same  man  as  formerly.  Every  hour  during  which  the  intrusive  evil
passion  retained  ascendency  only  hastened  his  final  overthrow.  Men  so  circumstanced
become  blind  and  stupid;  they  know  their  degradation,  but  are  under  a  spell  by  which
it  becomes  greater;  consequences  suggested  in  feeble  or  strong  tones  by  the  reason
are  not  considered ;  the  will,  lately  crippled  for  good,  now  ^oes  over  in  full  strength  to
the  side  of  evil.  FacUis  descensus  Averni.  The  particular  passion  may  vary  in  the
different  deeds  of  evil  which  occasionally  shock  the  religious  world,  but  in  every  case
there  is  a  gradual  decline,  and  it  is  only  the  last  few  stages  of  it  which  form  the  subject
of  surprise  among  men.  Not  murder  as  seen  in  Shakespeare's  '  Macbeth,'  nor  fraud  as
seen  in  occasional  modern  revelations,  nor  youthful  excesses  as  when  the  parent's  heart
is  broken,  are  sudden  in  origin.  A  series  of  mental  and  moral  changes  precede  that
which  attracts  the  notice  of  men  and  forms  the  occasion  of  a  social  condemnation.

General  lessons.  1.  The  fidelity  of  Scripture  writers  may  be  referred  to  as  evidence
of  Divine  inspiration.  The  cool  impartiality  with  which  the  best  king  of  Israel  is
represented  as  having  fallen  into  the  vilest  of  sins,  and  this  without  note  or  comment,  is
certainly  not  of  man.  2.  Moral  causes  are  deepest  and  most  wide-reaching  in  the  sphere
of  human  life ;  the  change  here  indicated  in  David's  moral  condition  was  of  pernicious
influence  ever  after  on  his  rule,  his  court,  his  private  life,  and  the  general  prosperity
of  the  kingdom.  3.  The  season  of  great  prosperity  in  temporal  affairs,  and  of  elevation
in  religious  privilege,  should,  on  account  of  the  peril  it  brings,  be  a  season  of  keenest
and  most  earnest  watchfulness.  4.  So  powerful  are  the  inferior  propensities  of  human
nature,  even  in  the  case  of  most  favoured  men,  that  it  is  possible  for  them  to  sweep
away  in  their  outburst  the  reputation  built  up  on  the  best  purposes  and  actions ;  and
hence  the  importance  of  a  most  jealous  guard  against  everything  in  appetite,  sight,  and
sound,  that  may  develop  their  power.  5.  Seeing  the  extraordinary  extremes  of  human
experience  in  the  life  of  David,  we  may  note  and  weigh  well  the  undeveloped  possi-
bilities for  good  or  evil,  for  joy  or  pain,  for  usefulness  or  harm,  that  lie  within  the  scope
of  every  human  being  in  the  future  state,  even  more  than  in  this.  6.  Feminine
obtrusiTeness,  even  when  no  danger  is  actually  perceived  in  it,  may  all  the  time  be


272  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xi.  1—17,

operating  on  some  one  for  evil ;  and  hence  the  duty  of  the  most  guarded  modegtjr  of
manner  and  personal  appearance.  We  do  not  fully  estimate  the  harm  done  to  human
thought  and  feeling  hy  the  ocular  impressiong  produced  by  certain  forms  of  dress  and
bearing.  7.  It  is  good  to  have  leisure  from  toil,  but  much  grace  is  needed  to  use
leisure  so  that  in  it  the  tempter  may  not  gain  power  over  us.  8.  The  dangers  of
eventide  leisure  are  conspicuous,  especially  to  the  young  and  to  the  ardent.  9.  It
adds  to  the  guilt  of  »  man  if,  being  in  a  position  of  authority  or  influence,  he  exercises
his  official  influence  to  gain  power  over  others  for  purposes  of  eviL

The  crooked  vmt/s  of  sin.  We  hare  in  vers.  6 — 13  an  accoimt  of  the  devices  by
which  David  sought  to  escape  the  human  discovery  of  his  guilt.  The  perhaps  sleep-
less nights  spent  in  painful  thought  as  to  what  could  be  safely  done  are  not  alluded
to— only  the  product  of  his  thinking.  After  what  was  said  in  ver.  6,  it  was  certain
that  exposure  in  the  most  palpable  form  would  ensue  if  the  woman's  husband  remained
away  at  the  war.  To  bring  him  home,  and  get  him  in  an  apparently  natural  way
to  spend  a  little  time  with  his  wife,  at  once  seemed  most  feasible.  The  failiure  of  thu
scheme,  either  through  the  patriotism  or  the  awakened  suspicions  of  Uriah,  caused
another  night  of  thought  and  scheming,  and,  as  the  case  was  lurgent,  he  was  made
drunk,  in  hope  thereby  his  patriotism  or  suspicions  would  yield  to  natural  propensi-
ties. Once  more  the  force  of  events  is  against  the  scheme ;  and,  as  a  last  resort,  seeing
that  Uriah  could  not  be  made  out  to  be  the  father  of  the  coming  child,  he  must,  with
as  good  an  appearance  as  possible,  be  put  out  of  the  way  so  that  the  king,  in  accordance
with  the  rights  of  Eastern  monarchs,  mi°;ht  take  his  wife,  and  the  expected  one  thus
appear  to  be  prematurely  bom  in  wedlock.  Concerning  these  crooked  ways  of  sin
observe —

I.  The  fibbt  step  of  the  iufenitbkt  bdhieb  ib  to  ciiIns  to  his  sin.  When  snch
a  sin  as  David's  is  committed,  God  is  ofiended,  conscience  outraged,  self-respect  dis-
regarded, and  human  condemnation  rendered  imminent.  The  whole  of  this  disruption
and  confusion  in  the  moral  sphere  is  recognized  at  once  as  being  a  consequence  of  the
deed  done.  Now,  it  is  obvious  that  these  consequences  are  not  only  to  be  dreaded,  and,
if  possible,  to  be  avoided,  but  also  that  the  &:st  act  of  a  sound  mind  would  be  to
abominate  and  seek  to  get  dissociated,  in  every  sense  of  the  term,  from  the  sin  which
entailed  them.  The  sin,  and  not  the  consequences,  is  the  evil  thing — the  most  terrible
and  hurtful  thing.  And  the  first  step  of  a  truly  penitent  mind  would  be  to  shrink
from  it,  to  loathe  it,  to  seek  to  cut  it  oflf  if  possible  from  self  as  the  accursed  thing.
But  note  here  that  David  shows  no  sign  of  this.  The  evU  nature  adopts  the  deed,
identifies  itself  with  it,  seeks  to  live  on  in  association  of  thought,  feeling,  and  interest
with  it.  God,  purity,  conscience,  self-respect, — all  may  go ;  the  soul  will  have  its  sin,
and,  by  cherishing  this  sentiment  towards  it,  virtually  persists  in  its  repetition.  So  did
Adam,  Achan,  and  Ananias ;  and  so  do  all  the  poor  debased  souls  that  sink  into  iniquity
without  the  grace  of  true  repentance.

n.  The  second  step  ib  to  kecognize  the  possibilitt  of  exposube  befobb  men.
The  guilty  man  knows  that  God  is  aware  of  his  crime.  His  action  in  this  respect  is  a
very  singular  phenomenon.  There  may  be  secret  dread  of  God's  coming  judgment ;  the
certainty  of  God's  knowledge  and  power  to  punish  may  be  so  strong  as  even  to  render
life  inwardly  wretched,  and  to  produce  the  passivity  and  helplessness  proper  to  an
unavoidable  fate.  Possibly  this  sort  of  desperation  urges  to  a  warding  off  of  such
consequences  as  would  come  did  men  but  know  as  much  of  the  sin  as  God.  At  any
rate,  what  the  narrative  sets  before  us  is  not  an  endeavour  to  escape  from  God  and  his
anger;  it  shows  us  rather  that,  as  soon  as  the  mind  can  collect  itself  after  the
indulgence  in  sin,  it  recognizes  the  possibility  of  men  becoming  acquainted  with  the
deed  done.  That  was  the  thought  which  lay  at  the  basis  of  Achan's  coverino'  up
his  spoils ;  that  is  the  thought  which  starts  in  the  mind  of  the  thief,  the  liaff  the
adulterer,  the  false  professor.  The  fear  of  man  is  a  very  potent  influence.  The  fear  of
God  is  real,  but  it  carries  with  it  a  hopelessness  of  effort.  This  induces  gloomy  despera-
tion, but  not  thought  and  action  to  prevent  discovery.

IIL  The  next  step  is  to  conbidbb  the  possible  means  of  eboapb  from  human
BXPOSDBE.  A  guilty  man  pays  unconscious  homage  to  holiness  in  that  he  begins  to
think  how  be  can  prevent  men  knowing  what  he  has  done.    David  the  hwo^  who


OH.  XI.  1— 27J  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL  273

trembled  not  before  Goliath,  now  spends  hours  in  thinking  how  he  may  escape  the
consequences  of  bis  own  people  knowing  what  be  has  done  in  private.  Is  it  simply
fear  of  civil  and  social  loss?  Is  it  merely  dread  of  physical  pain?  No;  even  the
guilty  testify  that  sin  is  abominable ;  that  sin  is  deepest  personal  disgrace;  that  sin  is
too  black  and  ugly  to  bear  even  the  gaze  of  imperfect  men.  No  doubt  David  saw
that  be  would  suffer  loss  of  respect  among  the  best  of  the  land ;  that  the  force  of  law
would  be  weakened ;  that  turbulence  might  arise  in  his  kingdom  by  reason  of  others
following  his  example ;  and  that  he  would  no  longer  be  able  to  figure  before  the  nation
as  the  illustrious  reformer  of  religion.  The  tbousauds  who  daily  live  in  dread  of,  and
consider  how  they  may  escape,  human  exposure  1  What  restless  nights  I  what  deep-
laid  plans  1  what  feverish  concern ! — all  to  cover  up  sin  from  feeble  man !  And  yet
God  knows  all,  and  will  bring  to  judgment.  Truly  sin  renders  the  operation  of  the
mind  very  perverse.  God  knows  all  and  judges  all,  and  yet  all  effort  is  to  keep  man
from  knowing  1  Nothing  is  done  God  ward,  except  to  harden  the  heart  against  him,  and
go  on  in  sullen  desperation.    'I'his  is  sin  1 — this  the  accursed  evil  of  the  universe  I

IV.  In  BEBEma  to  escape  BVUm  EXFOBUBE,  the  FIBST  CONTBIVAirOE  IS  TO  SIMU-
LATE THE  OBDEB  OF  PBOVIDENCB ;  •'.«.  to  Create,  by  innocent  natural  means,  an  order  of
events  that  shall  have  in  them  and  their  results  an  appearance  of  providential  succes-
sion. David  does  not  commit  another  positive  sin  to  cover  up  the  first.  The  sin-
stained  soul  again,  notwithstanding  its  degradation,  pays  homage  to  righteousness,  in
its  deliberate  effort  to  hide  its  past  deed  by  deeds  that  are  within  the  province  of  right ;
for  David  had  a  right  to  send  for  any  ofBcer  to  give  him  imformation  as  to  the  progress
of  the  war  fyers.  6,  7),  and  it  was  only  generous  to  allow  him  to  go  and  rest  at  home
(ver.  8).  Lord  Bacon  hfis  taught  us  that,  by  carefully  studying  the  processes  of
Nature  to  see  how  she  works,  we,  on  submitting  to  her  ways,  become  her  conquerors,
by  being  able  to  set  her  at  work  in  oircumstaoces  of  our  own  creation.  The  scheme  of
an  impenitent  sinner,  when  wishing  to  hide  his  sin  from  the  knowledge  of  man,  is  very
much  of  that  kind.  He  knows  the  order  of  providential  events,  and  he  tries  to  create
circumstances  by  which,  in  the  judgment  of  men.  Providence  shall  be  credited  with  the
deed  he  himself  has  done.  Uriah,  not  David,  shall  be  made  to  appear  as  the  father  of  .
the  child.  How  this  perverse  ingenuity  works  still  is  familiar  to  all  who  know  only  a
little  of  mankind.  The  cleverness  with  which  trains  of  events  are  set  in  motion  so  as
to  assuredly  direct  attention  from  the  doer  of  evil,  is  amazing.  The  devil  was  always
a  great  schemer,  and  his  dupes  catch  his  spirit.

V.  The  failube  op  schemes  involving  no  positive  bin  in  the  details  is  boon
FOLLOWED  Br  DEEDS  DISTINCTLY  EVIL.  If  Providcnce  Cannot  be  simulated,  because  of
the  uncontrollable  nature  of  its  agents  (vers.  9 — 11),  then  homage  to  righteousness  must
cease,  and  positive  evil  must  be  done  (vers.  13 — 15).  The  one  desired  end — escape  from
human  exposure — ^must,  by  good  or  evil  means,  be  secured.  The  knowledge  that  God
knows  and  is  angry  counts  for  nothing.  The  despair  of  escaping  God,  combined  with
a  mad  identification  of  one's  interests  with  the  evil  committed  and  still  cherished  in
the  heart,  seems  to  operate  on  the  mind  in  such  a  way  as  practically  to  banish  him
from  thought  or  care.  All  thought  is  on  man,  and  at  any  cost  man  must  be  kept  in
ignorance.  It  is  against  even  the  conscience,  stained  and  hardened  as  it  is,  to  do  definite
evil,  if  possible — so  mighty  io  the  moral  law  in  the  worst  of  men — but  preservation  of
self  from  exposure  is  now  the  first  law,  to  which  right,  generosity,  every  true  and  holy
sentiment  and  obligation,  must  bow.

VI.  In  HAVING  liECOnBSE  TO  DESFEBATE   HEASUBES  OF  EVIL,  THEBE  IS  SOME  BEOARD

TO  APFEABANCES.  It  is  Only  the  very  uttermost  moral  degradation — that,  perhaps,  of
fiends  in  hell — that  can  perpetrate  fresh  evils  with  utter  freedom,  and  without  any
reserve  of  decency  or  tacit  recognition  of  the  majesty  of  law.  Every  hour  spent  by
David  in  elaborating  his  scheme  brought  him  more  within  the  coil  of  iniquity,  and
gradually  reduced  his  moral  sensibilities  towards  zero ;  but  even  when  in  his  despair  he
meditated  the  death  of  the  man  whose  life  might  lead  to  exposure  of  his  sin,  he  could
not  slay  him  with  his  own  hand,  he  could  not  say  even  to  Joab,  "  Slay  him."  Appear-
ances must  be  saved,  and  some  homage  paid,  by  the  lingering  sense  of  right,  to  the  Law
of  God,  by  a  contest  being  created  in  the  interests  of  the  kingdom,  so  that  in  fighting
for  his  country  the  doomed  man  might  die  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  Of  course,  David
did  not  kill  him  1    Of  course,  it  was  an  incident  in  the  natural  order  of  warlike  events]

n.  BAUDEIi.  T


274  THE  SECOND  BOOK   OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xi.  1—27.


It  WM  not  the  King  of  Israel  that  raised  the  arm  to  slay,  but  the  wicked  Ammonites  I
Such  ia  the  crooked  logic  of  sin.  Our  Saviour  has  described  Satan  as  a  liar  as  well  ai
a  murderer  (John  viii.  44).  It  is  evidently  very  diflScult  to  crush  out  all  light  from  the
conscience.  There  is  a  continuous  protest  in  the  performance  of  guilty  deeds ;  but  so
obstinate  and  desperate  in  alliance  with  sin  is  the  heart  of  an  impenitent  man,  that
this  protest,  this  remnant  of  light,  is  only  used  to  grace  the  performance  of  positive  evil
with  a  semblance  of  naturalness  and  innocence.  The  crooked  ways  of  sin  are  traversed
by  all  men  who  in  any  measure  hug  their  iniquities,  and  try  to  avoid  the  consequences
which  it  is  feared  would  come  were  the  deeds  of  darkness  exposed  to  view.  There
are  many  acting  in  this  way  every  day.

Gbnebal  lessons.  1.  Men  in  positions  of  power  have  many  means  at  hand  for
hiding  their  sins  from  public  view  (ver.  6);  but  they  should  be  warned  of  their  corre-
sponding peril  and  increased  guilt  if  they  use  those  means.  2.  Eeal  hypocrisy  lies  in
doing  things  with  the  appearance  of  right  and  to  give  an  impression  of  right  conduct,
when  the  real  aim  is  evU,  and  the  present  motive  is  subordinate  to  that  aim  (vers.
6 — 11);  consequently,  just  pains  should  be  taken  in  exposing  to  men  the  horrible
wickedness  of  their  course,  and  in  getting  them  to  recognize  more  distinctly,  as  a  govern-
ing power  in  life,  the  perfect  knowledge  of  God.  3.  There  are  always  forces  working
unconsciously  against  the  designs  of  hypocritical  men,  rendering,  as  the  action  of  Uriah
did  (vers.  11 — 13),  the  way  of  transgressors  hard.  It  is  vain  to  fight  against  God.  4.
The  man  who,  in  the  day  of  success  and  real  goodness,  scorns  the  unprincipled  and  hard-
hearted (ch.  iii.  29 — 39),  may  so  fall  as  to  be  glad  of  such  men  to  carry  out  his  evil  designs
(ver.  15) — a  warning  this  to  him  "  who  thinketh  that  he  standeth."  5.  He  who  makes
use  of  another  as  his  instrument  of  evil  henceforth  becomes  weak  in  all  his  relations  to
him.  Masters  who  employ  their  servants  to  carry  on  evil  transactions  lose  influence
over  them,  and  virtually  place  themselves  in  their  power.

Ters.  18 — 27. — Complicity  in,  evil.  The  facts  are:  1.  Joab,  having  executed  the
wicked  commission,  sends  word  to  David  as  to  the  progress  of  the  war.  2.  He  furnishes
the  messenger  with  a  means  of  appeasing  the  probable  wrath  of  David  on  his  learning
that  the  conflict  was  more  serious  than  either  he  or  Joab  looked  for,  namely,  an
anncuncement  of  Uriah's  death.  3.  The  messenger  carefully  describes  the  scriousDesa
of  the  engagement  with  the  enemy,  and  concludes  by  referring  to  the  death  of  Uriah.
4.  David  sends  back  an  encouraging  message  to  Joab,  and  professes  to  acknowledge
the  inevitable  losses  and  chances  of  war.  5.  On  suitable  sorrow  being  shown  by  the
widow  for  the  loss  of  her  husband,  David  takes  her  to  himself  as  a  wife.  6.  The  deed
of  David  is  displeasing  to  God.  The  narrative  here  gives  us  the  maturing  of  David's
scheme,  and  the  general  character  of  the  secret  negotiations  carried  on  with  Joab  in
order  to  bring  his  purpose  to  pass.  We  have,  then,  an  instance  of  accomplices  in  crime,
revealing  to  us  truth,  and  illustrating  facts  in  connection  with  himian  life  in  all  ages.

I.  Men  intent  on  a  gbbat  evil  are  forced  to  bring  others  into  their  wicked
BEOKETS.  Providence  kindly  frustrated  David's  attempt  to  cover  his  sin  by  means  of
Uriah's  free  action ;  and  it  therefore  became  necessary,  in  his  desperate  wickedness,  to
seek  the  end  in  view  by  means  of  Uriah's  death.  But  unless  David  committed  murder
with  his  own  hand,  which  his  consoence  would  not  allow,  he  must  find  some  one  whose
ingenuity,  with  his  own,  would  bring  it  to  pass,  and  save  appearances.  Such  is  the
logic  of  evil.  God  in  his  mercy  has  filled  the  world  with  obstacles  to  the  committal
of  sin  and  to  persistence  in  it  when  once  committed ;  but  such  is  the  baseness  of  the
human  heart  that  this,  instead  of  being  regarded  as  a  help  in  the  warfare  with  evil
propensity,  is  turned  into  a  reason  for  seeking  the  aid  of  another's  wits  and  agency.
It  is  a  further  fall  in  evil  when  men  are  thus  impelled  to  drag  others  into  the  meshes  of
their  sin.  So  hardened  does  the  heart  become  by  dalliance  with  sin  and  indulgence  in  it,
that  even  the  character  and  souls  of  others  are  to  be  ruined  in  order  to  gratify  self  and
hide  iniquity  for  a  few  years  from  human  view.

II.  There  are  genbrallt  men  to  be  found  react  to  oabbt  out  the  evil
FCBP08BB  OF  THBIB  SUPERIORS.  Even  in  the  chosen  nation  a  Joab  was  to  be  found,
cruel,  hard  of  heart,  habituated  to  acts  of  severity,  and  glad  to  have  the  opportunity  of
retorting  in  spirit,  if  not  in  words,  the  former  reproaches  of  his  master  (ch.  iii.  29, 39).  It
is  a  sign  of  the  marvellous  change  that  had  come  over  David,  that  he,  who  had  so  bitterly


OH.XI.  1— 27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  276

reproached  this  man  for  cruelty  and  hard-heartedness,  now  turns  to  him  for  the  pirp«s«
of  using  those  yery  qualities  for  accomplishing  his  own  cruel  design.  The  presence  of
such  a  man  in  Israel  for  doing  the  evil  work  of  his  superior  is  typical  of  a  universal
fact.  There  is  a  vast  amount  of  reserve  evil  in  the  world,  waiting  only  for  some
Influential  will  to  draw  it  out  into  activity.  The  power  of  superiors  over  subordinates
sometimes  extends  to  the  moral  sphere.  In  strict  fact,  a  king  has  only  power,  in  virtue
of  his  office,  over  the  legal  actions  of  his  subjects,  and  a  master  over  the  legal  actions  of
his  servants ;  but  when  a  king  or  a  roaster,  in  excess  of  his  right,  extends  his  authority
into  the  moral  sphere,  it  too  often  happens  that  the  subordinate  whose  conscience  is
not  sensitive  allows  the  authority  due  to  the  legal  position  to  pass  over  to  the  moral
sphere  and  break  down  the  defences  of  conscience.  This  is  an  abuse  of  influence  on
the  one  side,  and  an  abandonment  of  most  sacred  duties  on  the  other.  The  wicked
heart  is  apt  to  find  excuses  in  the  fact  that  a  superior  leads  the  way,  and  that,  if  guilt
lies  anywhere,  it  is  on  him.

III.  MkN  bent  on  an  evil  design   will    even  bisk  the  BUIN  07  THE  INNOCENT

IN  OABBTINO  otTT  THEIB  SCHEMES.  David  knew  Very  well  that  Joab  could  not  carry
out  his  instructions  without,  not  only  exposing  Uriah  to  the  certain  risk  of  death,  but
also  placing  other  men,  not  concerned  in  this  domestic  trouble,  in  positions  of  peril ;  for
the  meaning  of  the  instructions  was  plainly  to  create  a  position  of  extreme  peril,  which
in  war  can  only  be  done  by  engaging  a  troop.  What  if  several  innocent  men  fell  in
this  "  hottest  battle"  1  Uriah,  at  all  events,  would  be  amongst  them  I  The  more  the
progressive  conduct  of  the  king  is  scrutinized,  the  more  base  and  abominable  does  it
appear.  This  dreadful  sin  is  not  confined  to  David.  Monarchs  and  diplomatists,  who
from  motives  of  vanity  or  mere  love  of  power  bring  on  war,  really  cause  the  death  of
innocent  men  and  the  wailings  of  widows  in  carrying  out  their  designs.  What  if
thousands  of  men  fall  I  Some  regal  or  other  obstacle  to  ambition  or  pride  will  at  least
be  got  rid  of  1  That  is  the  moral  side  of  too  many  wars.  The  same  in  a  measure
applies  to  men  who  will  be  rich,  though  it  cost  the  health,  the  poverty,  and  often  lives
of  workmen.  What  of  all  that?  Wealth  must  be  secured  I  Other  instances  are  to  be
found  in  modern  life.

IV.  Men  IN  OASRTINO  otrr  nefabious  designs  abe  oabeful  to  oontobm  to  the
DECENCIES  of  outwabd  LIFE.  Bad  men  understand  one  another.  There  is  a  fi-ee-
masonry  in  evil.  Joab  knew  what  he  was  about  when  he  anticipated  that  David
would  manifest  signs  of  wrath  ou  hearing  of  his  fruitless  attack  on  the  city.  Eacii
evil-doer  played  his  part  with  skilL  The  messenger  was  to  remind  David  of  historic
parallels  (ver.  21),  and  to  tell  him  that  the  rash  man  Uriah,  who  led  the  bootless
assault,  had  been  punished  for  his  rashuess  by  death.  No  court-martial  would  be
necessary,  lamentable  as  the  affair  certainly  was !  Heart  answers  to  heart.  The  anger
ceases ;  maxims  concerning  the  chances  of  war  come  to  one's  aid  (ver.  25) ;  the  lessons
of  failure  must  be  laid  to  heart ;  the  general  at  the  head  of  the  army  must  not  be
discouraged.  All  this  was  very  proper — in  harmony  with  the  proprieties  of  life.  Men
doing  evil  are  inwardly  ashamed  of  it,  and  are  compelled  to  keep  up  the  appearance  of
doing  and  being  good.  It  is  the  outward  conformity  with  the  decencies  of  life  that
enables  wicked  men  to  go  on  in  their  evil  ways  for  years.  They  follow  the  teaching
and  example  of  their  chief,  who  is  a  liar  in  deed  and  word,  and  who,  to  perfect  his
schemes,  assumes,  if  necessary,  the  form  of  an  "  angel  of  light."

V.  Evil  men  bbino  thgib  devices  to  a  sdcoessful  issue  with  one  notable
EXCEPTION.  The  success  of  David  was  complete.  Uriah  was  safely  put  away  :
Bathsheba  was  the  king's  wife  within  a  date  to  prevent  convincing  exposure ;  the  army
and  the  people  were  kept  in  ignorance  of  actual  facts ;  the  future  was  hopeful ;  but  there
was  one  fact  on  which  the  infatuated  king  did  not  reflect — the  Lord  was  displeased.
The  brethren  of  Joseph  seemed  to  succeed  in  getting  rid  of  a  troublesome  brother,  but
God  saw  their  wickedness,  and  this  counted  for  more  than  they  then  imagined.  The
wicked  husbandmen  succeeded  in  freeing  themselves  from  annoyance  when  they  killed
the  heir  (Matt.  xxi.  38) ;  but  there  was  One  to  reckon  with  of  whom  they  did  not  think.
The  conspiring  scribes  and  Pharisees  doubtless  congratulated  themselves  that  their
plans  for  getting  rid  of  the  "  babbler  "  who  caused  them  so  much  trouble  were  won-
derfully successful;  but  there  was  One  whose  "power"  was  not  secured  to  their  side
(Acts  ii.  23,  24).     Kings  and  diplomatists  and  exactors  of  unjust  labour,  and  secret


276  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  h.  1—27.

defrauders,  and  evil  livers  may  succeed  in  keeping  up  appearances,  in  passing  as  honour-
able men,  and  in  securing  their  heart's  desire ;  but  there  will  always  be  one  factor  In
the  case  with  which  they  some  day  will  have  to  reckon — the  displeasure  of  the  Lord,

Genebal  IjGbbons.  1.  It  is  a  disgrace  to  a  master  to  be  in  league  with  a  servant,
aod  it  puts  the  master  within  the  servant's  power.  Many  a  subordinate  is  in  possession
of  secrets  which,  if  used,  would  blast  character  and  ruin  earthly  prospects.  The  coils  of
iniquity  1  2.  Every  new  device  to  hide  sin,  and  every  effort  to  keep  up  appearances,
ouly  blinds  the  mind  the  more  to  the  actual  state  of  the  soul  in  its  relation  to  God.  3.
In  all  our  affairs,  and  especially  when  tempted  to  persist  in  courses  of  sin,  we  should
endeavour  to  remember  that  we  shall  have  to  reckon  with  One  who  knows  all  and
is  already  displeased.  4.  That  a  man  professing  religion  can  go  on  in  a  secret  course  of
sin  without  giving  due  heed  to  the  knowledge, which  he  must  possess  of  God's  know-
ledge of  himself  and  deeds,  is  a  striking  sign  of  the  utter  deterioration  of  Ms  spiritual
sensibilities  and  his  being  nigh  uuto  perdition.


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOBS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — (The  kino's  falaoe.)  David^B  fall  into  sin.  "  But  David  tarried  still
at  Jerusalem  "  (ver.  1 ;  1  Chron.  xx.  1).  1.  He  was  about  fifty  years  of  age ;  had  been
reigning  in  Jerusalem  upwards  of  twelve  years ;  dwelt  in  a  stately  palace  on  Mount
Zion ;  and  possessed  numerous  sons  and  daughters,  a  splendid  court  and  a  powerful
army.  He  had  been  "  preserved  whithersoever  he  went,"  subdued  his  enemies,  and
returned  in  triumph.  His  natural  gifts  and  fervent  piety  (Ps.  xxiv.  4;  ci.  7)  were
even  more  extraordinary  than  his  material  prosperity ;  and  he  now  stood  on  the  pinnacle
of  human  greatness  and  glory.  2.  "  We  might  well  wish,  in  our  human  fashion,  that,
aa  he  stood  at  this  elevation,  he  had  closed  a  life  hitherto  (as  far  as  was  possible  before
Christianity)  almost  entirely  spotless,  and  bequeathed  to  posterity  a  wholly  unclouded
memory,  and  the  purest  type  of  true  royalty.  But  the  ascent  of  the  dizzy  height  is
always  attended  by  the  possibility  of  a  slip  and  then  of  a  headlong  fall "  (Ewald).  3.
"  Eising  from  the  couch  where  he  had  indulged  in  his  noonday  siesta  to  an  undue
length,  David  forthwith  ascended  to  the  roof  of  his  house.  So  ambition  commoidy
foUuws  excess ;  nor  do  they  whom  the  contagion  of  luxury  once  corrupts  readily  seek
after  moderate  and  lowly  ways.  But  that  ascent  of  David,  alas  I  was  a  prelude  to  his
deplorable  downfall.  For  he  ascended  only  that  he  might  fall,  beholding  thence,  as
from  a  watch-tower,  Bathsheba  the  wife  of  Uriah,  and  immediately  becoming  passion-
ately enamoured  of  her  "  (J.  Doughty,  '  Analecta  S^iora: '  1658).  4.  It  was  the  turning-
point  of  his  career,  which  was  henceforth  marked  by  a  long  series  of  calamities.  And
"  it  is  sad  to  think  that  the  cup  of  life,  after  being  filled  for  him  by  God  and  niaile  pure
and  sweet  by  previous  suffering  and  self-restraint,  should  have  been  recklessly  poisoned
by  his  own  hand  "  (Binney).

**  His  steps  were  tum'd  into  deceitful  ways.
Following  false  images  of  good,  that  make
No  promise  perfect."

(Dante.)

His  fall  occurred  (serving  as  an  instructive  warning  to  others) —

I.  At  a  season  of  SLOTHPtrL  relaxation.  In  the  spring  of  the  year,  "when
kings  go  forth  to  war,"  instead  of  going  forth  with  his  army  to  complete  the  subjugation
of  Ammon,  "  David  sent  Joab,"  etc.,  and  abode  in  Jerusalem.  Formerly,  when  "  the
Lord  had  given  him  rest "  (oh.  vii.  1),  he  spent  his  leisure  in  a  worthy  manner,  and
displayed  an  ardent  and  even  excessive  zeal ;  but  now,  in  choosing  rest  for  himself,  he
showed  a  lack  of  zeal,  and  his  unhappy  choice  was  followed  by  disastrous  consequences.
"  His  actual  fall  into  sin  seems  to  have  begun  by  the  abdication  of  his  functions  as
captain  of  Israel "  (Maclaren) ;  which  was  itself  the  effect  of  "  previous  relaxation  of  the
girded  loins  and  negligence  of  the  untrimuied  lamp."  Inactivity  (voluntarily  chosen,
without  adequate  reason,  and  regardless  of  opportunities  of  useful  service)  is  commonly :
1.  Induced  hy  a  course  of  successful  enterprise,  and  the  attainment  of  great  prosperity.
If  adversity  has  slain  its  thousands,  prosperity  has  slain  its  tens  of  thousands.     "  When


CH.  XI.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  277

hiB  pir.ow  wa«  the  rock  and  his  curtain  the  cave ;  when  his  sword,  mder  Providenoe,
procured  him  his  daily  bread  from  the  foes  of  his  country,  and  the  means  of  existence
formed  the  object  and  pursuit  of  life, — he  was  pious  and  immorable;  he  must  have  been
active  or  he  must  have  resigned  his  life.  But  now  the  case  was  widely  different.  He
had  not  only  all  the  necessaries,  but  all  the  luxuries  which  the  most  refined  voluptuous-
ness could  devise,  attending  in  rich  profusion  around  him.  He  had  certainly  the  duty
of  his  charge  to  impress  its  importance  on  liis  mind ;  but  then  he  had  the  opportunity
of  neglecting  it,  and  even  David,  it  appears,  was  not  proof  against  the  solicitations  of
this  opportunity  "  (Thompson, '  Davidica ').  2.  Indicative  of  a  state  of  tpirittied  declen-
sion. (1)  Of  a  gradual  decay  of  faith  and  neglect  of  watchfulness  and  prayer,  and  so
leaving  hi*  hold  of  God ;  (2)  of  a  defective  sense  of  responsibility  to  God ;  (3)  of  pride
and  security,  "mortal's  chief  enemy,"  so  that  the  self-denying  labours  and  hardships  of
the  battle-field  seemed  no  longer  necessary ;  and  (4)  of  undue  love  of  ease  and  sensuous
pleasure,  fostered  in  David's  case  by  polygamy.  "  The  sense  of  delicacy  and  chastity,
which  has  such  a  purifying  and  preserving  influence  on  the  life,  could  not  flourish  side
by  side  with  the  polygamy  in  which  he  permitted  himself"  (W.  M.  Taylor).  The-
majestio  forest  tree  falling  suddenly  beneath  the  blast  excites  our  siuprise ;  but,  on
examination,  it  will  be  found  to  have  been  undergoing  at  heart  a  gradual  process  of
decay,  which  at  lenp;th  brought  the  giant  to  the  ground.  3.  Conducive  to  the  indulgence
of  sinful  propensities;  exposing  to  the  peril  of  falling  into  "the  snare  of  the  devil."
Want  of  proper  occupation  tends  to  develop  the  hidden  evil  of  the  heart.  "  Standing
waters  gather  filth  "  (Matthew  Henry).  "  Idle  hours  bring  forth  idle  thoughts,  and  idle
thoughts  are  nothing  but  dry  kindling  wood  that  waits  only  for  a  spark  to  be  suddenly
ablaze"  (Disselhofi).  "The  industrious  man  hath  no  leisure  to  sin;  the  idle  hath  no
leisure  or  power  to  avoid  sin"  (Hall).  David  "may  have  been  quite  unconscious  of
bad  habits  of  mind ;  but  they  must  have  been  there  growing  in  secret.  The  tyrannous
self-ufill,  which  is  too  often  developed  by  long  successes  and  command;  the  unscrupu-
lous craft,  which  is  too  often  devek^ped  by  long  adversity  and  the  necessity  of  sustain-
ing one's  self  in  a  difficult  position ; — these  must  have  been  there.  But  even  they  could
not  have  led  David  to  do  the  deed  he  did  had  there  not  been  in  him  likewise  that  fear-
ful moral  weakness  which  comes  from  long  indulgence  of  the  passions — a  weakness
which  is  reckless  of  conscience,  of  public  opinion,  and  of  danger  either  to  earthly  welfare
or  everlasting  salvation"  (C.  Kingsley).  "This  single  act  can  only  be  regarded  as  the
expression  of  his  whole  disposition  of  mind"  (Hengstenberg).

II.  Ukdbr  the  iNPiiUBNCB  OF  STRONG  TEMPTATION ;  or  the  desire  of  self-gratifica-
tion. For  "  each  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  by  his  own  lust  [desire],
and  enticed,"  etc.  (Jas.  i.  13 — 15).  "  Lust  is  egoistic  desire  under  the  incitement  of
impulse.  But  the  action  is  not  yet  performed ;  it  still  lies  with  the  man  to  comlmt
the  lust,  or  by  the  free  choice  of  his  will  to  yield  himself  to  it "  (Martensen, '  Christian
Ethics ').  It :  1,  Arises  in  most  cases  from  impressions  made  upon  the  senses  by  external
objects.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  in  an  eventide,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  The  eye  is  the  most
common  inlet  of  temptation.  "  And  when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good  for
food,"  etc.  (Q«n.  iii.  6).  Achan  first  saw,  then  coveted  and  took  (Josh.  vii.  21).  "  David
at  this  time  had  forgotten  the  prayer, '  Turn  away  mine  eyei  from  beholding  vanity.'
We  see,  therefore,  how  dangerous  a  thing  it  is  to  suffer  the  eyes  to  wander.  Job  made
a  covenant  with  his  eyes "  (Willet).  "  They  who  abuse  the  eye  deserve  to  have  the
inward  eye  darkened  "  (Gregory).  2.  Derives  its  force  from  various  circumstances ;  such
as  (1)  the  unexpected,  sudden,  and  deceitful  manner  of  its  occurrence ;  (2)  the  power
and  opportunity  of  its  gratification  ;  (3)  the  temperament,  predisposition,  and  besetting
sins  of  its  subject ;  (4)  the  entertainment  of  it  in  the  faucy,  which  forms  false  images
of  good,  and  invests  them  with  a  perilous  fascination ;  and  (5)  the  delay  of  endeavour
to  overcome  it,  wherein  there  always  lies  peculiar  and  most  imminent  danger  (Gen.
xxxix.  9).  3.  Becomes  hy  such  means  an  absorbing  passion  (Matt.  vi.  28, 29);  blinding
the  mental  vision,  perverting  the  moral  judgment,  and  influencing  (though  not  abso-
lutely compelling)  the  choice  of  the  personal  will,  by  which  sin  comes  into  actual
existence.  "  There  is  a  black  spot,  though  it  be  no  bigger  than  a  bean's  eye,  in  every
soul,  which,  if  once  set  a-working,  will  overcloud  the  whole  man  in  darkness,  and
something  very  like  madness,  and  will  hurry  him  into  the  night  of  destruction"
(Arabic  sayinj^    To  eaoape  this  fatal  issue  there  is  need,  not  merely  of  resQiute  resist-


m  *fifi  SfiCONb  fiCOfe  Of  SAMtJEti.  [ca.  xi.  1-2?.


ance  and  fervent  prayer,  but  also  of  instant  flight.  "  The  temptation  of  the  flesh  is
overcome  and  impure  passion  mortified  by  flight,  and  not  by  fighting  face  to  face.  He
then  who  flies  fastest  and  furthest  is  most  sure  of  victory.  Ooce  more  I  say  to  thee,
Fly  1  for  thou  art  as  stubble.  Therefore  fly,  fly,  if  indeed  thou  wouldest  not  be  over-
taken, led  captive,  and  slain  1 "  (Scupoli).

III.  Against  the  resteaints  of  recoonized  obligation.  "  And  David  sent  and
inquired  after  the  woman.  And  one  said.  Is  not  this  Bathsheba,"  etc.?  (ver.  3).  Whilst
he  knew  not  who  she  was,  there  might  be  at  least  some  excuse  (considering  the  position
of  an  Oriental  monarch,  and  the  common  practices  of  the  age)  for  his  passion  (ch.  iii.
1 — 5) ;  but  now  that  he  was  informed  that  she  was  "  the  wife  of  Uriah,"  the  claims  of
a  higher  law  than  his  own  inclination  must  have  risen  up  distinctly  before  him ;  and
he  had  to  choose  between  renouncing  his  evil  desire  or  breaking  through  the  numerous
restraints  placed  in  his  path.  These  restraints  are :  1.  Set  up  by  the  express  command-
ments of  the  Divine  Law,  which  says,  "Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife;"
"Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery;"  "Thou  shalt  not  steal"  (ch.  xii.  4—6).  2.
Strengthened  by  the  special  responsibilities  of  peculiar  position  and  relationship ;  such
as  David  held,  as  King  of  Israel,  under  Jehovah,  with  respect  to  his  subjects,  and  more
particularly  his  faithful  servant  Uriah.  3.  Enforced  by  the  terrible  consequences
threatened  against  transgressors  (Lev.  zx.  10;  Deut.  xxviiL  15).  It  is  nevertheless
possible  to  burst  through  all  such  restraints.  And  in  the  exercise  of  his  freedom  and
the  abuse  of  his  power,  David  set  them  at  nought,  and  "  despised  the  commandment  of
the  Lord"  (oh.  xii.  9).  "When  lust  has  conceived,  every  restraint  generally  increases
its  vehemence,  the  thoughts  of  future  consequences  and  the  consideration  of  the
presence,  purity,  and  justice  of  God  are  excluded;  his  Law  and  authority  are  disregarded;
faith  and  fear  and  love  are  out  of  exercise ;  and  the  enhanced  imagination  of  the  satis-
faction to  be  found  in  indulgence  possesses  and  engrosses  the  soul "  (Scott).

IV.  With  the  persistency  of  wtlfot.  presumption.  "  And  David  sent  messengers,
and  took  her,"  etc.  (vers.  4,  5).  Regarding  himself  as  a  special  favourite  of  Heaven,  he
perhaps  imagined  (as  others  have  done)  that  he  might  leave  the  ways  of  lowly  obedience
and  self-denial,  and  go  whithersoever  he  pleased,  and  yet  be  preserved  from  harm  (Deut.
xxix.  19 ;  Ps.  xix.  13 ;  Matt.  iv.  6) ;  and  under  this  delusion  he  persisted  in  his
purpose,  and  fell  from  his  moral  elevation  into  the  depths  of  sin  and  to  the  verge  of
destruction.  "  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  1 "  By  such  persistency :  1.  The  sinful
purpose  of  the  heart  is  confirmed  and  completed  in  outward  action.  2.  The  guilt
incurred  is  aggravated.  3.  The  natural  consequences  of  sin  become  more  serious  and
extensive ;  and,  in  some  respects,  they  cannot  possibly  be  averted  (ch.  xii.  11 — 14).

Observations.  1.  No  man,  however  holy,  is  exempt  from  the  .liability  of  falling
into  sin.  "  Be  not  highminded,  but  fear ; "  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,"  etc.
"  If  such  a  strong  and  tall  cedar  as  David  fall,  how  ought  weaker  Christians  to  fear  and
to  pray  tl.at  G-od  wovdd  deliver  them  from  temptation!  "(Guild).  2.  Material  prosperity
and  outward  show  are  frequently  associated  with  moral  failure  and  secret  iniquity.
Whilst  the  conquest  of  Kabbah  went  forward,  David  became  the  victim  of  his  own
unfaithfulness.  3.  The  fall  of  men  into  sin  is  to  be  attributed  to  themselves — ^their
voluntary  choice  of  evil ;  and  not  to  their  circumstances,  or  constitution,  or  the  with-
holding from  them  of  the  help  of  God.  "  Let  no  man  say  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am
tempted  of  God,"  etc.  4.  It  is  of  unspeakable  importance  to  maintain  the  exercise  of
the  spiritual  life  in  full  vigour,  and  to  watch  against  the  first  approach  of  evil.  "  The
narrow  way  has  precipices  on  both  sides ;  let  us  walk  it  awake  and  vratchful,  for  we  are
not  more  exact  than  David,  who  by  a  moment's  neglect  was  precipitated  into  the  very
gulf  of  sin  "  (Chiysostom).  6.  By  the  record  of  the  sins  of  good  men  (1  Sam.  xxi.  2),
the  truth  and  worth  of  the  Word  of  God  are  plainly  shown.  "  If  such  a  story  does  not
give  one  a  view  of  the  unfathomable  depths  of  sin  and  of  its  power,  he  will  never  learn
what  sin  is"  ^Schmid).  6.  In  the  whole  course  of  history  One  alone  hag  appeared
"  without  sin ; "  he  was  tempted  and  overcame,  and  he  is  the  Succourer  of  them  that
are  tempted. — D.

Ver.  4. — Bathsheba.  The  Books  of  Samuel  furnish  abundant  materials  for  insti-uc-
tive  studies  of  female  character,  in  (1)  the  praying  Hannah,  (2)  the  provoking  Peninnah,
(3)  the  broken-hearted  wife  of  Phineas,  (4)  the  proud  Michal,  (5)  the  persuasive  Abigail,


m.  11. 1— 27.J  f HE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtTEL.  279

(6)  the  beautiful  Batbsheba,  (7)  the  unfortunate  Tamar,  (8)  the  wily  woman  of  Tekoah,
(9)  the  devoted  Bizpah,  (10)  the  peaceable  wuman  of  Abel,  and  (in  a  minor  degree)
Q.1)  the  terrified  nurse  of  Mephibosheth  (ch.  iv.  3),  (12)  the  faithful  maidservant  at
En-rogel,  (13)  the  sympathizing  woman  of  Bahurim  (ch.  xvii.  17, 18).  Bathsheba  was
the  daughter  of  Eliam  (Ammiel,  1  Chron.  iii.  6),  the  granddaughter  of  Ahithophel  the
king's  counsellor  (ch.  xxiiL  34),  and  well  known  (ver.  3)  as  the  wife  of  Uriah  the
Hittite.  "Eliam  and  Uriah  must  have  been  thrown  much  together,  being  both  of
the  same  rank,  and  being  each  one  of  the  thirty-seven  officers  of  the  king's  guard  "
(Blunt, '  Undesigned  Coincidences  *).  She  was :  1.  Endowed  with  periUms  gi/ls — extra-
ordiaary  beauty  (ver.  2),  ardent  temperament,  quick  perceptions,  ambitious  aims.
Something  of  her  natural  character  may  be  inferred  from  1  Kings  i,  15 — 21  and  1  Kings
ii.  13 — 21,  "a  woman  ignorant  of  ruling,  but  skilled  in  love-matters."  2.  Destitute  of
adequate  safeguards,  such  as  would  have  been  afforded  by  the  presence  of  her  husband,
who  was  away  at  the  siege  of  Kabbah ;  careful  moral  training ;  and  firm  religious  prin-
ciples (Prov.  xi.  22).  3.  Overcome  hy  a  great  temptation.  "  And  David  sent  messengers,
and  took  her ;  and  she  came,"  etc.  "  There  is  no  intimation  whatever  "  (as  Delany
endeavours  to  show)  "  that  David  brought  Bathsheba  into  the  palace  through  craft  or
violence ;  but  rather  that  she  came  at  his  request,  without  any  hesitation,  and  offered
no  resistance  to  his  desirei.  Consequently,  she  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  free  from
blame"  (Keil).  "  One  is  even  disposed  to  suspect  that  she  was  a  designing,  ambitious
woman,  who  laid  a  snare  for  the  king.  Nothing  is  told  us  concerning  her  in  order
that  the  iniquity  of  David  might  not  be  relieved"  (R.  Tuck,  '  The  First  Three  Kings  of
Israel ').  She,  like  others,  admired  the  king,  felt  flattered  by  his  attentions,  and  had  not
sufficient  moral  strength  to  resist  his  wishes  or  control  her  own  inordinate  vanity.
"Had  she  been  mindful  of  her  matrimonial  fidelity,  perhaps  David  had  been  soon
checked  in  his  inordinate  desire"  (Hall).  Yet  she  was  a  woman  "more  sinned  against
than  sinning  "  (ver.  27 ;  ch.  lii.  4).  4.  Observant  of  customary  ceremonies.  "  And  she
was  purified,"  etc.  "  More  scrupulous  about  the  ceremonial  law  than  the  moral"  (Lev.
jtv.  18).  "  She  also  mourned  for  her  husband  when  she  heard  of  his  death  (ver.  26),
but  not  for  her  sin  which  caused  it"  (Guild);  being  chiefly  concerned  about  appear-
ances ;  for  her  sin  had  been  kept,  as  far  as  possible,  a  profound  secret.  5.  Visited  hy
deserved  chastisement.  Beset  by  tormenting  anxieties  and  terrible  fears,  knowing  the
penalty  due  to  her  transgression;  and,  subsequently,  overwhelmed  with  grief  on
account  of  the  affliction  and  death  of  her  child ;  nor  was  this  the  only  retribution  she
experienced.  6.  Treated  with  merciful  consideration.  (Ver.  27.)  As  David  himself,  the
supreme  administrator  on  earth  of  the  Divine  Law,  did  not  sufior  death,  "and  it  is  easy
to  perceive  that,  to  leave  this  single  act  of  criminality  unpunished  in  a  great  king,  was
for  the  advantage  of  the  people"  (Michaelis, '  Laws  of  Moses,'  i.  37),  as  he  was  expressly
exempted  from  it  by  the  word  of  the  prophet  (ch.  xii.  13) ;  so,  in  the  exercise  of  his
royal  prerogative,  he  very  properly  dispensed  with  the  penalty  in  the  case  of  the  partner
of  his  guilt.  Like  him,  also,  she  probably  repented  of  her  sin ;  and  "  mercy  glorieth
against  judgment"  (Jas.  ii.  13).  Evil  was  even  overruled  for  good  (oh.  xii.  24;  1
Chron.  iii.  5 ;  Matt.  i.  6 ;  Luke  iii.  31).  It  has  been  thought  (though  without  sufficient
reason)  that  the  counsels  contained  in  Frov.  xxxi.  were  given  by  her  to  her  son
Solomon.  "  Favour  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is  vain :  but  a  woman  that  feareth  the
Lord,  she  shall  be  praised." — ^D.

Vers.  5 — 16. — (.Terubalem,  Babbah.)  Entanglements  of  sin.  He  who  once  leaves
the  right  path  little  knows  how  far  he  may  go  astray  or  how  great  will  be  his  per-
plexities and  perils.  Possibly  he  may  never  returii ;  certainly  he  will  not  return
without  overcoming  immense  difficulties,  and  finding  (tut  by  bitter  experience  his  folly
and  perversity.

*  The  gates  of  hell  are  open  night  and  day ;
Smooth  the  descent,  and  easy  is  the  way ;
Bnt  to  return  and  view  the  cheerful  skies.
In  this  the  task  and  mighty  labour  lies."

(Dryden's '  Virgil.*)

Sin  Li  commonly  attended  (as  in  the  case  of  David)  by —


280  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OB"  SAMUEL.  foH.  xi.  1— 2?.


I.  GuiLTT  FKABB.  After  his  sudden  fall  he  probably  felt  some  measure  of  compunc-
tion ;  but  repressed  the  reproaches  of  conscience,  and  continued,  in  the  view  of  men,  the
same  as  he  had  ever  been.  It  is  evident  that,  when  the  message  (ver.  5)  <»me  to  him,
he  was  not  truly  penitent.  1.  It  awakened  his  fears  concerning  the  possible  exposwe
of  his  sin.  Would  not  the  wife  of  Uriah,  on  the  return  of  her  husband,  be  constrained
to  declare  the  author  of  her  shime?  2.  His  fears  were  intensified  by  the  probable
consequences  of  such  exposure.  Even  if  he  should  be  able  to  save  Bathsheba,  and  himself
escape  legal  punishment,  by  virtue  of  his  high  position  as  the  Lord's  anointed,  how
could  he  avert  the  private  venj:eance  of  Uriah,  or  maintain  the  confidence,  affection,  and
allegiance  of  his  army  and  people?  What  other  Eastern  monarchs  didwithimpunity,
could  not  be  done  by  him  in  Israel  without  incurring  the  moral  indignation  of  the
people,  and  causing  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme.  3.  He  was  impelled  by  his
fears  to  use  bis  utmost  efforts  with  a  view  to  the  concealment  of  his  sin.  "  And  David
sent  to  Joab,  saying.  Send  me  Uriah  the  Hittite"  (ver.  6).  His  endeavour  to  hide  his
transgression  "  as  Adam  "  (Job  xxxi.  33)  was  itself  a  tacit  acknowledgment  of  itf
disrer>utable  character.  And  "  he  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper,"  etc.  (Proy.
xxviiL  13).  Would  that  men,  after  their  first  wron;^  step,  immediately  confessed  theii
error,  made  reparation,  and  returned  to  the  way  of  truth  and  righteousness  1

n.  Peustratbd  devices.  1.  In  their  attempts  at  concealment  men  are  wont  to
employ  extranrdinary  ingenuity  (1  Sam.  xviii  17—30),  and  to  hide  their  base  designs
under  the  cover  ol  kindness  (vers.  7—9).  2.  Their  crafty  purposes  are  often  defeated
by  simplicity  and  sincerity,  beyond  their  calculation.  "  The  ark,"  etc.  (vers.  9 — 12).
"This  answer  expressed  the  feelings  and  the  consciousness  of  duty  which  ought  to
animate  one  who  was  fighting  for  the  cause  of  God,  in  such  plain  and  unmistakable
tei-ms,  that  it  was  well  adapted  to  prick  the  king  to  the  heart.  But  David's  soul  was
so  beclouded  by  the  wish  to  keep  clear  of  the  consequences  of  bis  sin  in  the  eyes  of  the
world,  that  he  did  not  feel  the  sting,  but  simply  made  a  stiU  further  attempt  to  attain
his  purpose  with  Uriah"  (Keil).  3.  Although  defeated,  their  attempts  are  usually
repeated  (ver,  13),  but  only  to  issue  in  greater  disappointment,  perplexity,  and  anxiety.
The  devices  of  sin  are  like  a  labyrinth,  in  which  the  sinner  becomes  more  and  more
inextricably  involved.  They  are  like  the  meshes  of  a  net,  in  which  he  becomes  more
and  more  hopelessly  entangled.

III.  luoBEASiNO  CBiMiNALiTT.  (Vcrs.  14,  15.)  "He  sent  back  the  unsuspiciouB
warrior  to  Babbah,  to  Joab,  with  a  letter,  which,  under  the  name  of  'Uriah's  letter,'
has  become  notorious  throughout  the  world.  It  was  written  with  the  same  pen  with
which  the  sweet  psalmist  had  wiitten  his  psalms"  (Krummacher).  1.  The  course  of
sin  is  downward  into  ever  deeper  moral  abasement.  "  It  is  the  nature  of  sin  to
multiply  itself,  and  to  draw  the  wretched  sinner  on  to  greater  and  greater  enormities."
Adultery  was  followed  by  (1)  deception,  (2)  ingratitude,  (3)  injustice,  (4)  meannesi,
(5)  temptation  (ver.  13 ;  Hab.  ii.  15),  (6)  treachery,  (7)  murder.

"  One  sin  another  doth  provoke  ;
Murder's  as  near  to  lust,  as  flame  to  smoke."

2.  It  is  so  because  of  its  blinding,  hardening,  and  enslaving  power  (2  Pet.  H.  19  ;  Prov.
vi.  22),  its  delusive  promises  of  good,  its  specious  pleas  of  necessity,  its  urgent
impulses  to  desperate  expedients.  "Such  are  the  accursed  entanglements  of  sin  ;  such
the  worldngs  and  gradations  of  it  in  the  distracted,  bewildered  breast  that  admits  it.
Millions  have  been  lost  in  these  labyrinths  of  guilt;  but  noTie,  sure,  in  any  more
intricate  and  perplexing  than  this!"  (Delany).  3.  Although  it  may  be  followed  by
apparent  and  temporary  success,  it  cannot  ultimately  prosper.  "  The  Lord  shall
reward,"  etc.  (ch.  iii.  39 ;  Prov.  xi.  21 ;  Isa.  v.  18).  "  The  means  which  David  took  to
extricate  himself  from  the  complications  in  which  his  adultery  involved  him  appeared
well  chosen ;  but  there  was  one  thing  he  had  not  taken  into  consideration — that  ha
could  not  here,  as  in  former  embarassments,  confidently  expect  the  assistance  of  Gbd.
It  was  God's  design  that  David's  sin  should  be  fully  manifested,  for  only  in  this  way
was  perfect  cure  possible,  and  therefore  he  suffered  the  means  to  fail "  (Hengstenberg).
— D.

Ver.  6. — Uriah  the  Hittite.    Like  Ahimelech  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  6),  he  belonged  tq


OB.  ii.  1-2?.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OE  SAMUEL.  281

a  riotalle  people  (Gen.  xxiii.  3;  Ezek.  xvi.  3;  1  Kings  x.  29;  2  Kings  viL  6),  had
adopted  the  faith  of  Israel,  and  joined  David  in  exile ;  he  was  one  of  the  famous
"  thirty  "  (1  Chron.  xi.  41 ;  ch.  xxiii.  39),  married  Bathsheba  (the  young  and  beautiful
daughter  of  a  brother  officer),  to  whom  he  was  fondly  attached  (ch.  xiL  3),  and  had
a  house  overlooked  by  the  king's  palace.  The  story  of  this  man,  "  immortal  by  his
wrongs,"  constitutes  a  little  tragedy.  He  was :  1.  Qreatly  distinguished  for  hit  heroic
courage.  For  more  than  twenty  years  he  had  taken  part  in  the  conflicts  of  David,  and
contributed  to  his  victories ;  and,  by  the  valour  which  he  displayed,  gained  and  kept
an  honourable  position.  2.  Grievously  wronged  by  his  royal  master.  Having  been
secretly  dishonoured"  by  the  king,  he  was  specially  sent  for,  treated  with  guile,  and
tempted  to  become  an  nnconscious  agent  in  concealing  the  crime.  "  Were  honour
driven  out  of  the  world.  It  should  find  a  refuge  in  the  breast  of  kings."  3.  A  noble
example  of  patriotic  devotion.  "The  ark,  and  Israel,  and  Judah,  abide  in  tents,"  etc.
(ver.  11).  He  "  may  be  regarded  from  a  moral  standpoint  as  a  type  of  the  marvell6ua
power  and  self-control  for  which  those  troops,  then  in  their  prime,  must  have  been
distinguished  "  (Ewald).  In  contrast  with  the  indulgent  habit  (ver.  1)  of  the  king,
he  exhibited  sympathy,  self-denial,  zeal,  and  determination-:  "  I  will  not  do  this  thing."

«  The  ark  of  God  is  in  the  field,
Like  clouds  around  the  alien  armies  sweep;

Each  by  his  spear,  beneath  his  shield,
In  cold  and  dew  the  anointed  warriors  sleep.

"  And  can  it  be  ?  thou  Rest  awake,
Bwom  watchman,  tossing  on  thy  couch  of  down ;

And  doth  thy  recreant  heart  not  ache
To  hear  the  sentries  round  the  leaguered  town  ?

"  Ob,  dream  no  more  of  quiet  life ;
Care  finds  the  careless  out ;  more  wise  to  vow

Thine  heart  entire  to  faith's  pure  strife ;
8o  peace  will  come,  thou  knowest  not  when  or  how."

('  Lyra  Apostolica. )

4.  A  pitiable  instance  of  a  common  failing.  (Ver.  13.)  He  was  susceptible  to  the
power  of  temptation,  even  as  others.  Though  proof  a:;ainst  indulgence  in  one  form,
he  was  overcome  by  it  in  another.  But  he  did  not  entirely  lose  his  self-oontroL  Ani
the  guilt  of  the  tempted  is  far  surpassed  by  that  of  the  tempter.  Intoxication  weakens
the  sense  of  duty,  strengthens  the  force  of  the  passions,  is  often  used  as  an  incitement
to  vice,  and  is  a  fruitful  source  of  incalculable  moral,  and  physical  evil  in  the  indi-
vidual, the  family,  and  society  (1  Sam.  xxv.  37,  38;  ch.  xiii.  38).  5.  The  unsuspecting
bearer  of  his  own  death-warrant.  "  And  David  wrote  a  letter  to  Joab,"  etc. — the  first
letter  mentioned  in  the  Bible — telling  him  "that  he  had  offended  him,"  etc.
(Josephus).  And  without  suspecting  its  contents,  he  delivered  the  treacherous  missive.
6.  The  hapless  victim  of  his  unswerving  fiddity.  "He  assigned  Uriah  a  place  where
he  knew  that  valiant  men  were"  (ver.  16).  "Honour  is  pretended  to  poor  Uriah;
death  is  meant.  He  was  not  the  first  or  last  that  perished  by  his  friends "  (Hall).
"He  fell  unconscious  of  his  wife's  dishonour"  (Stanley).  "Thus  fell  this  brave  man,
a  sacrifice  to  his  own  heroic  virtue  and  his  prince's  guilt.  He  fell,  but  not  alone ;  some
of  his  brave  companions  in  arms  stood  by  him  to  the  last,  nor  deserted  him  in  death  "
(Delarij).  The  report  of  his  fate  was  received  by  the  king  with  the  cold  and  common-
place reflection,  "The  sword  devoureth  one  as  well  as  another"  (ver.  25).  "That  the
sin  of  David  was  fulfilling  some  righteous  judgment  of  God  against  Uriah  and  his
house,  I  doubt  not — for  God  often  makes  his  enemies  his  instruments  and,  without
sanctifying  the  means,  strikes  out  of  them  good.  Still,  a  sin  it  was,  great  and  grievous
and  offensive  to  that  God  to  whom  the  blood  of  Uriah  cried  from  the  ground"
(Blunt).— D.

Vers.  16 — 21. — (Kabbah.)  Complicity  in  tin.  Here  are  three  men ;  David,  a  great
but  sinful  king,  bent  on  the  destruction  of  a  faithful  servant ;  Uriah,  a  brave  but
injured  soldier,  sent  unconsciously  to  his  doom;  and  Joab,  an  able  but  unscrupuloua
general  (ch.  iii,  22 — 30),  become  a  willing  a^eut  and  ready  accomplice  in  his  execution


m  tttte  SECOirt)  BOOK  of  SAMtJEL.  foa- ^i- 1— 2?.

"  with  the  swoid  of  the  children  of  Ammon  "  (oh,  xii.  9).  1.  There  is  seldom  wanting
a  suitable  accomplice  in  effecting  a  sinful  purpose,  however  iDiquitoug  it  may  be.
The  character  of  Joab  was  well  known  to  David.  "  It  was  his  very  wickedness  that
commended  him  to  the  king  as  the  most  fitting  instrument  for  carrying  out  his
infamous  design."  He  had  formerly  deprecated  his  wickedness  (ch.  iiL  29,  39) ;  but
now  that  he  had  himself  fallen  into  sin,  he  associated  himself  with  it,  and  made  use  of
it  for  his  own  ends,  although,  as  he  afterwards  found,  to  his  own  cost.  "  How  Joab
must  have  rejoiced  when  David  sank  down  to  his  own  level!"  2.  In  serving  another,
such  an  accomplice  is  chiefly  concerned  about  serving  himself.  He  seeks  supremely  his
own  advantage.  Joab  acted  not  from  loyalty,  but  self-love.  "  To  make  himself  great,
powerful,  indispensable,  was  the  object  of  his  life  "  (Plumptre).  "  Possibly  he  had  some
information  that  Bathsheba  had  been  with  David  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary '}.  Anyhow,
perceiving  the  design  of  the  king  against  Uriah,  he  served  him,  in  order  that  he  might
gain  complete  power  over  him ;  and  in  this  he  succeeded.  "  When  David  made  him  a
partner  and  secret  agent  of  his  guilty  purpose  touching  Uriah,  he  sold  himself  into  his
hands,  and  in  that  fatal  letter  he  sealed  away  his  liberty  and  surrendered  himself  up  to
this  his  unscrupxilous  accomplice  "  (Blunt).  "  All  fellowship  in  sin  begets  despotism."
Henceforth  Joab  did  with  the  king  very  much  as  he  pleased.  3.  No  authority  of  man
can  justify  the  violation  of  the  Law  of  Ood.  How  often  have  men  imagined  that  the
command  or  sanction  of  one  in  authority  has  been  a  sufficient  warrant  for  doing  what
their  own  consciences  condemned,  and  laid  the  blame  of  their  conduct  on  the  instigator
thereof  rather  than  on  themselves!  Joab  probably  needed  little  self-excuse;  but  if
ever  he  should  want  a  defence,  he  might  plead  the  king's  letter.  He  was  reckless  of
human  life ;  to  effect  his  purpose  made  a  greater  sacrifice  of  it  than  the  king  intended
(yer.  17),  and  became  more  hardened  than  ever  in  wickedness.  "  We  ought  to  obey
God  rather  than  men."  4.  There  may  be  exemption  from  punishment  when  there  is
no  exoneration  from  blame.  "How  must  this  example  needs  harden  Joab  against  the
conscience  of  Abner's  blood !  while  he  cannot  but  think, '  David  cannot  avenge  that  in
me  which  he  acteth  himself"  (Hall).  Nevertheless,  his  guilt,  in  the  sight  of  God,
remains ;  and  judgment  comes  at  last  (Eccles.  xii.  14). — D.

Ver.  21. — (Jebusalbm,  Babbab.)  Warnings  frmn,  history.  "Who  smote  Abime-
lech,"  etc.  ?  "  History  is  philosophy  teaching  by  example."  It  is  full  of  doctrines,
principles,  examples,  warnings  (1  Sam.  xii.  8 — 12).  This  event,  which  had  taken
place  -two  hundred  and  thirty  years  before,  was  familiar  to  Joab  and  others ;  and,
viewed  as  •  warning,  likely  to  be  recalled  by  the  king  to  point  his  reproof  (Judg.  ix.
53).    Of  such  warnings  observe  that  they —

I.  Abb  of  immbnsb  sebvicb;  in  making  general  lessons  concerning  danger  and
duty :  1.  More  distinct  2.  More  impressive.  3.  More  beneficial.  They  are  beacon-
lights,  danger-signals,  startling  voices ;  and  teach  that  in  the  way  of  inconsideration,
rashness,  and  presumption,  there  is  imminent  peril;  that  destruction  may  come
unexpectedly,  suddenly,  and  by  a  feeble  hand — ^"a  woman  slew  him;"  and  that
(although  neither  Joab  nor  David  laid  it  to  heart)  every  violation  of  God's  Law  is
surely  followed  by  retribution  (Judg.  ix.  56,  57).  They  are  "  written  for  our  admoni-
tion" (1  Cor.  x.  11).

II.  Should  be  duly  heeded.  1.  Intelligently  studied.  2.  Constantly  remem-
bered. 3.  Practically  observed.  They  are  "  written  for  our  learning  "  (Bom.  xv.  4).
"  The  world  exists  for  the  education  of  each  man.  There  is  no  age  or  state  of  society
or  mode  of  action  in  history  to  which  there  is  not  something  corresponding  in  his  life.
Everything  tends  in  a  most  wonderful  manner  to  abbreviate  itself  and  yield  its  whole
nature  to  him  "  (Emerson).

III.  May  be  delibebately  blighted.  1.  For  some  immediato  personal  advantage.
2.  From  the  persuasion  of  immunity,  though  others  perish  (ver.  17).  3.  With  a
plausible  excuse,  when  remonstrated  with.  "  Thy  servant  Uriah  the  Hittite  is  dead
also."     "  Joab  quoted  God's  Word,  but  was  not  careful  to  keep  it"  (Wordsworth).

IV.  Will  be  assuredly  vindicated.  1.  By  the  occurrence  of  similar  events
(1  Kings  ii.  34).  "  The  history  of  the  past  is  a  prophecy  of  the  future."  2.  In  tfaa
bitter  experience  of  the  obdurate.  3.  With  ever-inci  easing  clearness  and  force  to
•uccessive  geneiations.    "  Eemember  the  days  of  old,"  etc.  (Deut.  TTTJi.  7).— D,


SI.  it  1-2?.]  mn  SfiCONC  BOOK  of  SAMtJEL.  m

Vers.  22 — 27. — (Jerusalem,  Kabbah.)  Concealment  of  sin.  Order  of  events;
1.  Keport  of  Uriah's  death  (vers.  22—25).  2.  Batlisheba  mourns  (seven  days,  1  Sam.
xzzi.  13)  for  her  husband  (ver.  26),  being  probably  unacquainted  with  the  manner  in
which  it  was  brought  about.  3.  David  makes  her  his  wife.  4.  Joab  takes  Kabbah,
except  the  citadel  (oh.  xii,  26).  5.  David,  on  receiving  Joab's  message,  goes  to  Kabbah
and  conquers  the  city  (ch.  xii.  27 — 31).  6.  David  and  all  the  people  return  to
Jerusalem.    7.  Bathsheba  bears  a  son  (ver.  27).

"When  I  kept  silence  my  bones  waxed  old
Whibt  I  continually  groaned;
For  day  and  night  thy  band  was  heavy  upon  me :
My  moisture  was  turned  into  the  drought  of  summer."

(Pb.  xxxii  3,  4.)

The  life  of  David  has  an  outward  and  an  inward  aspect :  the  one  described  in  the
history,  the  other  by  himself  in  his  psalms;  each  the  necessary  complement  of  the
other.  They  are,  in  general,  closely  connected  and  correspond,  the  outward  being
the  expression  of  the  inward,  and  explained  by  it.  But  sometimes  they  appear  at
variance,  and  in  some  respects  present  a  melancholy  contrast ;  as  in  the  period  that
followed  his  transgression.  He  had  succeeded  in  hiding  it  from  public  view ;  but  he  could
not  hide  it  altogether  from  himself.    Consider  concealment  of  sin  in  relation  to —

L  The  oxttwaud  life.  Many  a  man  carries  in  his  breast  a  guilty  secret,  unsus-
pected by  others.  He  may  be  the  object  of  their  admiration  and  envy,  and  distin-
guished (as  David  was)  by  :  1.  Apparent  sincerity  in  public  and  in  private  Ufe.  He
judges  offenders  in  the  gate,  or  receives  news  (from  the  battle-field)  with  words  of
resignation  or  encouragement  (ver.  25).  "  Alas  1  how  often  do  men  hide  baseness  and
satisfaction  at  successful  plotting  under  the  commonplace  of  resignation  to  the
inevitable,  of  submission  to  the  conditions  of  existence  1 "  He  goes  to  the  house  of  God
(ch.  vii.  8),  "  returns  to  bless  his  household  "  (ch.  vL  20),  and  maintains  the  form  of
private  devotion.  Yet  he  is  inwardly  "  like  the  troubled  sea  when  it  cannot  rest,"  etc.
(Isa.  Ivii.  20).  2,  Restless  activity  (ch.  xii.  29),  which,  though  it  appear  to  be  a  dis-
play of  admirable  energy,  is  really  pursued  as  a  welcome  diversion  from  disquieting
thoughts.  "The  enterprise  promised  an  opportunity  of  escaping  from  himself;  and  he
probably  went  thither  in  the  maddest  of  all  attempts,  that,  namely,  of  outrunning
a  guilty  conscience "  (W.  M.  Taylor).  3.  Earthly  prosperity.  "  And  he  took  the
king's  crown,"  etc.  (ch.  xii.  30).  In  this  there  was,  probably,  something  of  vain-glory
(1  John  ii.  16).  It  was  the  culmination  of  his  victories  over  the  heathen.  But  the
honour  of  wearing  the  crown  of  "  their  king  "  (or  Milcom,  Moloch)  was  a  poor  compen-
sation for  the  dishonour  he  had  done  to  his  own,  and  the  loss  of  uprightness  of  heart ;
his  triumph  over  idolatry  a  miserable  set-off  against  his  overthrow  by  Satan.  4.
Unusual  severity.    (Ch.  xii.  31.)    The  effect  of  sin  is  to  harden  the  heart.

"  I  waive  the  quantum  o'  the  sin,

The  hazard  of  concealiDg ;

But  och !  it  hardens  a'  within.

And  petrifies  the  feeling ! "

(Bums.)

It  also  perverts  the  judgment.  He  who  is  wanting  in  a  due  sense  of  his  own  sinfulness
is  apt  to  be  a  severe  judge  of  others  (ch.  xii.  5 ;  Matt,  xviii.  28 ;  xxi.  41 ;  Bom.  ii.  21).
A  conscience  ill  at  ease  makes  the  temper  sullen  and  irritable;  and  a  repressed  feeling
of  justice  in  relation  to  a  man  himself  sometimes  finds  relief  in  the  infliction  of  cruel
vengeance  on  other  men.  "  An  evil  conscience  is  the  concealed  root  of  bitterness  from
which  spring  a  thousand  poisonous  plants,  to  shed  their  baleful  influence  upon  the
possessor  and  upon  society  at  large  "  (McCosh).

II.  The  inward  life.  The  experience  of  David  was  marked  by :  1.  Ohstinate
silence.  (Ps.  xxxii.  3.)  He  not  only  sought  to  conceal  his  transgression  from  men,  but
also  sullenly  refused  to  admit  "  the  iniquity  of  his  sin  "  to  himself,  or  acknowledge  it
before  God.  The  impulse  to  confession  in  such  a  man  must  have  been  strong ;  but  he
struggled  azainst  it  with  all  his  might  (Ps.  xxxii.  9),  as  others  have  done.  2.  Self-
deceiving  guHe,    "  The  deceit  of  the  impenitent  heart  consists  in  its  seeking  to  excuse .


284  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xi.  1—27,

and  justify  itself  despite  the  condemnation  of  conscience,  while  it  obtains  no  relief  from
the  feeling  of  guilt,  but  rather  brings  about  a  sharper  reaction  of  conscience,  and  increases
the  pains  that  come  from  the  conflict  of  mutually  accusing  and  excusing  thoughts  "
(Erdmann).  "  The  roots  of  this  deceit,  which  makes  its  appearance  immediately  after
a  fall  into  ein,  are  pririe,  lack  of  trust  in  God,  and  love  of  sin  "  (Hengstenberg).  3.
Spiritual  deprivation.  For  during  these  long,  weary  months  of  silence  the  light  of
Gfod's  countenance  was  hidden,  the  juy  of  his  salvation  lost  (Ps.  li.  8, 12).  "  His  harp
was  out  of  Ume,  and  his  soul  like  a  tree  in  winter,  with  the  life  in  the  root  only"
(Matthew  Henry).  "  We  are  not  to  conceive  of  him  as  one  who  had  quite  fallen,  nor  as
one  spiritually  dead,  but  as  sick  unto  death.  It  is  certain  that  he  had  not  quite  lost  all
desire  after  God,  that  he  had  not  entirely  given  up  prayer;  doubtless  there  were  still
many  fruits  of  faith  perceptible  in  him ;  but  his  soul  was  checked  in  its  flight  toward
God,  a  curse  rested  upon  him,  which  made  solitary  communion  with  the  Divine  Being
for  any  length  of  time  intolerable,  and  moved  him  to  seek  distractions  in  order  to  escape
the  torment  of  conscience  and  keep  it  from  attaining  to  full  life."  4.  Inexpressible
misery ;  consisting  of  "  the  burden  of  the  heart  weighing  on  itself,  the  burden  of
a  secret,  the  sense  of  hypocrisy,  th^Jjnowledge  of  inward  depravity,  while  all  without
looks  pure  as  snow  to  men  "  (F.  W.  Robertson) ;  the  remembrance  of  sin  that  cannot  be
forgotten  (Ps.  IL  3),  the  remorse  of  conscience  that  cannot  be  quieted,  the  sense  of
Divine  displeasure,  the  dread  of  approaching  woes  (Ps.  li.  11);  continuing  without
cessation;  consvmiino;  the  vital  energies,  and  exhausting  the  physical  strength  (Ps.
xxxviii.  6).  "Whithersoever  the  sinner  may  turn  himself,  or  however  he  may  be
mentally  aSected,  his  malady  is  in  no  degree  lightened  nor  his  welfare  in  any  degree
promoted  until  he  is  restored  to  God"  (Calvin,  in  Ps.  xxxii.).  "I  will  reprove  thee"
etc.  (Ps.  1.  21).  Although  for  a  season  concealed,  it  will  be  in  due  time  revealed  (Matt.
X.  26).  "  Not  only  was  the  fruit  of  the  sin  to  be  first  of  all  brought  to  light  (ver.  27),
and  the  hardened  sinner  to  be  deprived  of  the  possibility  of  either  denying  or  conceal-
ing his  crimes ;  God  would  first  of  all  break  his  unbroken  heart  by  the  torture  of  his
own  conscience,  and  prepare  it  to  feel  the  reproaches  of  the  prophet.  .  .  .  Nathan's
reproof  could  not  possibly  have  borne  its  saving  fruit  if  David  had  been  still  living  in
utter  blindness  as  to  the  character  of  his  sin  at  the  time  the  prophet  went  to  him"
(Keil).  "  No  language  ever  described  so  vividly  the  sense  of  a  weight  at  the  heart —
a  weight  that  cannot  be  uplifted ;  and  it  was  the  weight  of  God's  own  presence,  of  that
presence  which  he  had  once  spoken  of  as  the  fulness  of  joy.  With  this  oppression,  like
that  of  the  air  before  the  thunderstorm,  came  the  drying  up  of  all  the  moisture  and
freshness  of  life,  the  parching  heat  of  fever.  Did  the  Prophet  Nathan  bring  all  this  to
his  consciousness?  No,  surely.  The  Prophet  Nathan  came  at  the  appointed  time
to  tell  him  in  clear  words,  by  a  living  instance,  that  which  he  bad  been  hearing  in
muttered  accents  within  his  heart  for  months  before.  He  came  to  tell  him  that  the
God  of  righteousness  and  mercy,  who  cared  for  Uriah,  the  poor  man  with  the  single  ewe
lamb,  was  calling  him,  the  king,  to  account  for  an  act  of  unrighteousness  and
unmercifulness.  Nathan  brought  him  to  face  steadily  the  light  at  which  he  had  been
winking,  and  to  own  that  the  light  was  good,  that  it  was  the  darkness  which  was
horrible  and  hateful,  so  that  he  might  turn  to  the  light  and  crave  that  it  should  once
more  penetrate  into  the  depths,  of  his  being,  and  take  possession  of  him  "  (Maurice).

Ver.  27. — (Jerusalem.)  God's  displeasure  at  sin.  "  And  the  thing  that  David  had
done  displeased  Jehovah '*^(1  Chron.  xxi.  7).  This  is  the  only  remark  which  the  sacred
historian  makes  on  the  conduct  of  David.  It  reveals  its  true  nature  as  with  a  sun-
beam ;  "  contains  the  moral  decision  from  a  theocratic  point  of  view,  and  is,  as  it  were,
a  superscription  of  the  following  history  of  the  Divine  judgments  on  David  and  his
house  on  account  of  this  sin  "  (Erdmann).  The  Divine  displeasure  (indignation,  anger,
wrath)  is —

L  Beal.  Jehovah  is  the  living,  personal,  supreme  Buler  of  men,  and  to  him  each
inan  is  responsible  for  his  actions.  As  he  is  capable  of  being  pleased,  so  he  Is  of  being
displeased.  His  wrath  is  no  less  real  than  his  love,  wisdom,  or  power;  like,  yel
nnlike,  that  of  man,  being  above  all  human  imperfection,.  The  Scriptures  declare  that
be  is  displeased  with  men  when  they  do  ovil  (Ps.  ii.  6;  vi.  Ij  vii.  11;  Mark  iii.  5).


on.  XI.  1—27.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  285

"  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed/'  etc.  (Bom.  ii.  18).    This  is  confirmed  by  conscience,
m  which  his  displeasure  is  reflected  as  a  clouded  sky  in  the  surface  of  a  lake.

XL  Desebted.  Sin  ii  rebellion  against  his  authority,  disobedience  to  his  Law,  opposi-
tion to  his  holiness,  ingratitude  toward  his  goodnebS ;  a  transgression  of  the  covenant,
"  a  coming  short  of  the  mark,"  iniquity  (Ps.  xsxii.  1).  Every  wrong  done  to  man
is  a  dishonouring  of  Crod  (Ps.  Ii.  4).  In  the  sin  of  David  there  were  elements  of  peculiar
and  aggravated  guilt  (ch.  zii,  7 — ^9).  But  in  every  case  it  is  "exceeding  sinful,"  "the
abominable  thing  which  he  hates"  (Jer.  xliv.  i).    It  is  the  one  real  evil  in  man.

**  Bin  alone  is  that
'Which  doth  disfranchise  him,  and  make  anliln
To  the  cMef  good  i  for  that  its  light  in  him
Ii  darken'd."

(Dante.)

m.  Imfabtial.  The  Holy  One  of  Israel  is  unaffected  by  any  of  those  influences
that  make  human  displeasure  at  wrong-doing  partial  and  defective.  He  is  neither
blind  nor  indifferent  to  the  sins  of  his  children  (ch.  vii.  14).  They  have  not,  any  more
than  others,  a  licence  to  sin.  David,  "  his  chosen,"  is  not  above  the  Law,  nor  exempt
frum  due  punishment.  "  For  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God "  (Bom.  ii.  11).
"  Without  respect  of  persons,  the  Father  judgeth  according  to  every  man  s  work,"  etc.
(1  Pet.  i.  17;  Amos  iii.  2);  estimating  it  according  to  its  exact  moral  "weight"
(1  Sam.  ii.  3).

IV.  Unavoidable.  However  men  may  conceal  it  from  others,  or  endeavour  to
hide  it  from  themselves,  they  cannot  hide  it  from  God  (Job  xxii.  13).  What  pleases
men  may  displease  him  (1  Thess.  ii.  4).  His  knowledge  is  infinite ;  his  righteousness
and  justice  essential,  unchangeable,  and  eternal.  Wherever  and  whenever  sin  exists,
tlie  holy  energy  of  his  wrath  must  burn  against  it ;  "  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire,"
an  "almighty  foe' to  ill."  Although  delayed,  it  is  not  extinct.  "A  year  had  passed
since  his  fall.  The  child  of  his  sin  had  been  born.  And  all  this  time  God  was  silent.
Yet  like  a  dark  cloud  on  a  summer's  day  hung  this  sentence  over  him, '  But  the  thing
that  David  did,'  etc.     Soon  it  would  burst  in  a  storm  of  judgment."

V.  Bffioent  and  dbbadpul.  As  "in  the  king's  favour  there  is  life,"  so  in  his
displeasure  there  is  death.  It  is  manifested  in  the  punishment  of  the  sinner,  both
inwardly  and  outwardly;  as  in  the  case  of  David  (ch.  xii.  10,  11).  Every  future
moment  must  answer  for  the  present.  The  penalties  of  transgression  in  this  life  are
numerous  and  terrible.  And  who  shall  tell  what  will  foUow  herealter,  when  the  wind
becomes  a  whirlwind  ?

VI.  MiNQLED  vriTH  HEBOT.  God  is  displeased  with  sin  rather  than  with  the  rinner
(except  in  so  far  as  he  voluntarily  identifies  himseli'  with  it) ;  whom,  in  his  essential
nature,  he  loves ;  who  possesses  the  capacity  of  restoration ;  whose  salvation  he  seeks  ;
and  to  whom,  on  his  repentance,  punishment  becomes  chastisement,  a  means  of  purifi-
cation and  blessing  (ch.  vii.  15).  "  There  is  no  more  terrible,  there  is  no  more  instruc-
tive, portion  of  the  Word  of  God  tlian  this  whole  record.  The  long  death-sleep  of  that
once  living  soul;  its  awakening  under  the  prophet's  voice;  its  deep  repentance;  its
free  forgiveness ;  its  long,  heavy,  repeated,  almost  incessant  chastisement ; — speak  to
every  ear  which  is  not  altogether  deaf  lessons  of  the  holiness  and  truth,  of  the  severity
and  love,  of  the  justice  and  mercy,  of  the  Lord  our  God,  which  is  borne  perhaps  with
equal  force  in  no  other  record  of  his  ways  with  man  "  ('  Heroes  of  Hebrew  History ').
"  0  God,  thou  hadst  never  suffered  so  dear  a  favourite  of  thine  to  fall  so  fearfully,  if
thou  hadst  not  meant  to  make  him  a  universal  example  to  mankind,  of  not  presuming,
of  not  despairing.  How  can  we  presume  of  not  sinning,  or  despair  for  sinning,  when
we  find  so  great  a  saint  thus  fallen,  thus  risen  ?  "  (Hall).— D.

Ver.  27. — David's  fall.  "But  the  thing  that  David  had  done  displeased  the  Lord."
One  guarantee,  even  to  the  most  unlettered,  of  the  truthfulness  of  sacred  history  is  the
impartiality  of  its  accounts  of  its  greatest  heroes,  whose  sins  and  follies  are  faithfuUy
recorded  as  well  as  their  virtues.  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  Peter,  are  cases  in  point.
David  is  another  instance,  whose  fearful  sins  are  recorded  in  tlus  most  distressing
ch.iptcr,  ending  with  the  significant  words  of  our  text,  "But  the  thing  that  David  had
done  displeased  the  Lord."


286  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xi.  1— 27.

L  The  wickedness  which  displeased  God.  Many  things  done  by  good  men  of
old  times  which  appear  to  us  very  culpable,  were  in  them  innocent  or  excusable,  on
account  of  the  different  standard  by  which  their  conduct  was  regulated,  and  the
different  public  opinion  of  their  days.  But  the  sins  of  David  recorded  in  this  chapter
were  not  of  such  a  description.  The  law  of  nature  everywhere  and  in  all  times,  as  well
as  the  laws  of  the  revelation  known  to  David,  are  clear  and  emphatic  in  condemning
them.  1.  The  sins  themselves.  (1)  Adultery ;  and,  growing  out  of  this,  (2)  deceit.
Pretences  to  Uriah  of  concern  about  the  war,  and  about  Uriah's  comfort  while  in
Jerusalem  (vers.  7 — 10) ;  and  to  Joab's  messenger,  of  regarding  the  deaths-of  Uriah
and  other  brave  soldiers  whose  lives  had  been  sacrificed  through  his  directions,  as
being  ordinary  casualties  of  war  (ver.  25).  (3)  Murder  of  Uriah  and  the  soldiers  who
fell  with  him.  (4)  Leading  others  into  crime:  Uriah  into  drunkenness,  Joab  into
murder.  2.  Their  aggravations.  (1)  His  age,  position,  knowledge,  experiences,  and
reputation.  He  was  between  fifty  and  sixty  years  old.  As  king,  he  was  the  highest
guardian  of  justice  and  protector  of  innocence.  He  knew  well  the  wickedness  of  his
conduct.  He  had  been  marvellously  guided,  advanced,  and  blessed  by  God,  with  whom
he  bad  been  accustomed  to  maintain  the  closest  converse.  He  was  well  knovm  as
a  devout  man,  professing  himself  a  devoted  servant  of  God.  He  had  thus  a  reputation
to  sustain.  (2)  The  difficulties  in  his  way.  The  necessity  of  sending  messengers
(ver.  4)  to  Bathsheba.  Think  of  his  stooping  to  that  I  DifiBculties,  necessitating
some  consideration  and  calling  for  determined  resolution  to  conquer  them,  increase  the
guilt  of  sin.  (3)  Bis  abundant  harem,  as  contrasted  with  Uriah's  one  wife ;  hinted  at
in  ch.  xii.  2,  3.  (4)  Uiiah's  position  and  conduct.  His  relation  to  David,  as  one  of
his  chief  military  officers,  and  distinguished  for  his  valour  (ch.  xxiii.  39  ;  1  Cbron.  xi.
41).  He  was  at  the  time  with  the  army  in  the  field,  and  might  justly  look  to  the  king
to  be  the  protector  (if  necessary)  of  his  wife  from  evil.  He  cherished  noble  sentiments
(ver.  11)  of  duty  and  honour  as  a  soldier.  (Did  he,  however,  know  or  suspect  how
matters  stood;  and  frame  his  language  to  the  king  as  a  subterfuge?)  (5)  The
deliberateness  of  the  later  crimes.  (6)  The  time  consumed,  giving  ample  opportunity
for  reflection.  When  these  things  are  considered,  the  wickedness  of  David  assumes
proportions  which  are  appalling.  3.  How  they  were  possible.  (1)  There  must  have
been  secret  and  very  serious  declension  in  piety.  Had  he  been  in  the  state  of  mind
and  heart  which  is  revealed  in  ch.  vii.,  it  is  impossible  that  he  could  have  so  sinned.
The  height  of  prosperity  and  power  which  he  had  reached  had  corrupted  him.  (2)
There  is  much  in  what  Dean  Stanley  says  of  "  that  abyss  which  yawns  by  the  side
of  lofty  genius  and  strong  passions,"  which  "  opened  and  closed  over  him."  (3)  His
position  as  an  Eastern  monarch,  accustomed  to  polygamy,  accustomed  also  to  act  in
many  things  according  to  his  own  wilL  (4)  Some  think  that  his  being  in  the  way
of  temptation  arose  from  a  self-indulgent  neglect  of  duty  in  remaining  at  Jerusalem
instead  of  leading  his  army  in  the  field.  (5)  He  found  in  Bathsheba  a  ready  consent
to  his  will.  (6)  The  later  sin8_  and  crimes  seemed  necessary,  after  the  first  step,  to
save  himself  and  his  companion  in  guilt  from  utter  disgrace  and  ruin.  Snch  considera-
tions may  help  to  explain,  but  cannot  be  accepted  as  excusing,  his  wickedness.

IL  How  THE  DisPLEAsuEE  OF  GoD  WAS  MANIFESTED.  1.  The  fntttoge  Jy  Nathan
(ch.  xii.  1—12) ;  who  boldly  reproved  David  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  announced
the  punishments  which  would  fall  upon  him.  2.  The  death  of  the  child.  3.  Family
scandals,  sins,  and  sorrows.  4.  Absalom^s  rebellion,  and  all  the  humiliations  and
troubles  it  involved.  5.  Joab's  increased  ascendency.  "There  was  a  guilty  secret
between  the  two  "  (Trench).  The  worst  part  of  his  punishment  sprang  from  sins  like
his  own,  and  was  probably  occasioned  by  them,  at  least  in  part.

Lessons.  1.  Do  nothing,  however  pleasant,  or  gainful,  or  common  among  men,  or
seemingly  safe,  to  the  account  of  which  may  be  appended  the  terrible  words,  "  The
thing  .  .  .  displeased  the  Lord."  2.  Let  none  presume  on  their  secuHty  against  even
disgraceful  sin.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall "  (1  Cor.
X.  12) ;  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temjitation "  (Matt.  xxvi.  41)!
3.  Guard  against  the  beginnings  ofevU.  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence;  for  out
of  it  are  the  issues  of  life "  (Prov.  iv.  23).  David  had  already  committed  aduUery
when  he  gazed  lustfully  on  Bathsheba  (comp.  Matt.  v.  28).  Pray,  as  David  did  after-
wards, "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart "  (Ps.  li.  10).    The  beginning  of  sin  is,  like  that


OH.  xn.  1 — 31.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


287


of  strife,  "as  when  one  letteth  out  water"  (Prov.  xvii.  14).  The  trickling  of  water
through  a  small  orevice  in  an  embankment  may  seem  inconsiderable ;  but,  unlesi
stopped,  it  may  issue  in  widespread  devastation  and  misery.  One  sin  leads  to  another
and  another,  and  all  to  pain  and  sorrow.  G-ehazi's  covetousnesa  led  him  to  falsehood
and  robbery,  and  then  to  lifelong  leprosy,  transmitted  to  his  children's  children
(2  Kings  V.  20 — 27).  Peter's  self-confidence  prepared  the  way  for  cowardice,  falsehood,
and  profanity,  followed  by  bitter  anguish.  The  pilferings  of  Judas  from  "the  bag"
issued  in  the  betrayal  of  his  Lord  ;  and  then  remorse  and  suicide.  4.  How  vain  are
all  attempts  fe  conceal  sin  and  prevent  punishment  1  God  is  looking  on  all  the  time
the  sinner  is  cunningly  endeavouring  to  hide  his  sin  (see  Job  x&xiv.  21,  22).  "  Be
sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out "  (Numb,  xxxii.  23). — G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  XIL


Yer.  1. — Jehovah  sent  Nathan  nnto  David.
Though  David  had  remained  unrepentant
for  nearly  a  year,  for  we  read  in  ver.  14
that  the  child  was  born,  yet  we  are  not  to
suppose  that  there  had  been  no  compunc-
tions of  conscience.  A  man  could  scarcely
pass  from  utter  callousness  to  a  state  of
mind  so  tender  as  that  depicted  in  Ps.  li.
without  some  preparation.  Assuredly  David
had  suffered  much  mental  distress,  but  he
had  given  no  outward  sign  of  contrition,  and
possibly,  but  for  Nathan's  message,  he  might
have  overpowered  his  conscience,  and  his
self-reproaches  have  become  less  frequent
and  agitating.  More  probably  he  was  slowly
ripening  for  repentance,  and  Nathan's  words
let  loose  the  agonizing  feelings  which  had
more  and  more  struggled  within  him  against
his  baser  lusts.  And  tiie  prophet's  apologue
was  exactly  suited  to  rouse  up  that  strong
sense  of  justice  which  was  so  noble  an
element  in  David's  character.  Doubtless  it
was  framed  for  tliis  purpose,  and  Nathan
knew  what  was  the  right  chord  to  touch.
But  we  must  not,  because  he  was  wise  and
skilful,  refuse  Nathan  our  fullest  admiration
for  his  manly  courage.  It  is  a  very  dangerous
thing  to  tell  princes  of  their  sins,  and
especially  when  that  prince  is  an  absolute
monarch,  and  his  sins  adultery  and  murder.
But  the  position  which  Nathan  held  in
David's  court  made  it  his  duty  so  to  do,  and
there  is  no  stronger  testimony  to  the  power
of  religion  and  of  God's  grace  than  that  it
makes  men  so  brave  in  doing  their  duty.
We  may  feel  sure  that  Nathan  had  long
grieved  over  David's  fall,  and  reflected  upon
the  steps  which  ought  to  be  taken  for
his  admonition.  And  now,  in  answer  to
prayer,  the  command  came  from  Jehovah
bidding  him  go  and  bear  his  testimony.  Na-
than's parable  is  admirably  adapted  for  its
purpose..  While  making  no  direct  reference
to  adultery  or  murder,  it  puts  very  strongly
the  injustice  and  heartlessness  of  the  oppres-
sion of  the  weak  bj  the  strong,  as  exempli-


fied in  the  deed  of  the  rich  man.  On  many
occasions  David  had  shown  a  warm  and
generous  indignation  at  injustice,  and  a
righteous  pity  for  those  wronged.  Would
such  a  feeling  be  called  out  now  ?  David's
conduct  was  bad  enough,  and  if  there  was
no  outburst  of  anger  at  the  base  deed  re-
ported to  him,  and  no  welling-up  of  pity
for  the  poor  man  robbed  of  his  one  joy,  then
was  his  case  hopeless,  and  Natlian  must
withdraw  in  despair,  and  leave  David  to  his
fate.  But  his  better  feelings  were  not  de-
stroyed, and  when  Nathan  saw  them  deeply
stirred,  he  broke  in  with  the  stern  applica-
tion to  the  king's  own  sin,  "  Thou  art  the
man  I "  The  courage  and  the  skill  of  the
ptopliet  are  alike  admirable.

Ver.  3. — Was  unto  him  as  a  danghter.
The  Orientals  are  excessively  fond  of  pet
animals,  and,  as  the  dog  is  with  them  \m-
clean,  its  place  is  taken  by  fawns,  kids,  or
lambs.  ^The  description,  tlierefore,  is  not
overcharged,  for  in  many  an  English  home
the  dog  or  cat  takes  its  place  as  one  of  the
family.  The  Kevised  Version  preserves  the
tenderness  of  the  original  in  translating  *'  it
did  eat  of  his  own  morsel."

Ver.  4. — A.  traveller,  .  .  .  wayfaring
man,  .  .  .  man  that  was  come  to  him.
Natlian  probably  used  these  three  terms
chiefly  to  diversify  his  language,  but  it  has
served  as  a  handle  for  much  allegorizing.
Thus  Bashi  explains  it  of  covetousness,
which  comes  at  first  as  a  mere  "  passer-by,"
tlie  literal  meaning  of  the  word  rendered
"  traveller."  But,  if  admitted,  it  grows  into
"  a  wayfaring  man,"  who  comes  and  goes  on
business,  and  stays  a  longer  time.  Finally
it  changes  into  "  one  who  has  come  to  him,"
and  remains  permanently.  Such  alle£;orical
interpretations  are  common  in  the  Fathers,
and  thus  Augustine  compares  the  three
stages  of  sin  to  our  Lord's  three  miracles
of  raising  the  dead.  The  sinner  is  at  iirst
like  Jairus's  daughter,  just  dead,  and  repent-
ance can  restore  him  immediately  to  life;
but,  if  sin  be  persisted  in,  he  becomes  lilte
the  son  of  the  widow  of  Nain,  carried  away


?,88


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[CH.  XII.  1 31.


to  burial ;  and  finally  like  Lazarue,  given
over  to  corruption.

Yer.  5. — Shall  sorely  die.  It  is  strange
language  to  declare  that  a  man  shall  be  put
to  deaui  and  then  fined  four  lambs.  But
Cavid  laya  nothinf;  of  the  sort,  but  that  the
man  is  "  a  son  of  death,"  that  ii,  a  wretch
who  deserves  to  die.  The  Eevised  Version
correctly  renders,  "  is  worthy  to  die."  The
sentence  actually  passed,  of  fourfold  restitn-
tion,  is  exactly  in  accordance  with  the
Mosaic  Law  (Exod.  xxii.  1),  but  the  moral
turpitude  of  the  offence  was  far  greater  thun
could  be  atoned  for  by  the  legal  penalty.
Rightly,  therefore,  David  expressed  his  in-
dignation, and  regretted  that  the  sentence
was  so  light ;  but  a  judge  must  not  strain
the  law,  which  necessarily  has  regard  chiefly
to  the  outward  offence.

Ver.  7. — Thou  art  the  man !  Abruptly  and
with  sudden  vehemence  comes  the  applica-
tion to  David  himself.  So  skilfully  had  the
paraljle  been  contrived,  that  up  to  this  point
David  had  had  no  suspicion  that  he  was  the
rich  man  who  had  acted  so  meanly  by  liis
poorer  neighbour  Uriah.  And  now  he  stood
self-condemned.  Yet  even  so  self-love  might
have  made  hisindignation  break  forth  agaiust
Nathan ;  but  probably  tlie  reproof  only  com-
pleted a  work  that  had  long  been  secretly
in  progress,  and  brushed  away  the  last
obs^cles  to  repentance.  I  anointed  thee.
The  solemn  anointing  made  David  the  re-
presentative of  Jehovah,  and  thus  his  sin
was  aggravated  by  the  degradation  in  the
eyes  of  the  people,  both  of  the  kingly  office
and  also  of  Jehovah  himself.  Bank  and
authority  are  given  to  men  that  they  may
lead  others  to  do  right ;  it  is  a  fearful  mis-
use of  them  when  they  give  prestige  to  sin.

Ver.  8. — I  gave  .  .  .  thy  master's  wives
into  thy  bosom.  These  words  probably  mean
that,  as  the  whole  possessions  of  his  prede-
cessor belonged,  by  Oriental  custom,  to  the
next  occupant  of  the  throne,  David  might
have  claimed  the  entire  household  and  the
wives  both  of  Saul  and  Ishbosheth  as  his
own,  though  apparently  he  had  not  done
so.  As  far  as  we  know,  Sanl  had  but  one
wife  (1  Sam.  xiv.  50)  and  one  concuhine,
Sizpah  (oh.  iii.  7).  Of  Ishbosheth'g  family
arrangements  we  know  little,  but  his  harem,
it  he  had  one,  would  become  the  property  of
David.  But  independently  of  this,  the  per-
mission of  polygamy  had  made  it  possible
for  him  to  take  any  of  the  daughters  of
Israel  and  JudaU  to  wife,  and  he  had  freely
availed  himself  of  this  licence.  Yet,  not
content,  he  had  lusted  after  a  married
woman,  and  had  got  rid  of  her  husband  by
murder,  meanly  using  tiie  sword  of  the
Ammonites  to  accomplish  his  own  criminal
purpose.  The  word  used  in  tliis  clause,  and
rendered  "thou  hast  slain  him,"  ia  a  very


strong  one,  and  literally  means  "thou  hast
mui  dered  him,"  though  the  sword  was  that
of  the  enemy.

Ver.  10. — The  sword  shall  never  depart
from  thine  house ;  that  is,  thy  crime  shall  not
be  expiated  by  one  slaughter,  but  by  many,
so  that  thy  punishment  shall  cease  only  at
thine  own  death.  This  sentenee  was  fulfilled
in  Amnou's  murder  (ch.  xiii.  28),  who  had
been  encouraged  in  his  crime  by  his  father's
example.  Upon  this  followed  Absalom's
rebellion  and  death  (ch.  xvlii.  14) ;  and
finally,  when  in  his  last  hours  David  made
Solomon  his  successor,  he  knew  that  he  was
virtually  passing  sentence  on  Adonijah,  the
eldest  of  his  surviving  sons.  But  what  a
fearful  choice  I  for  had  he  not  done  so,
then  Bathsheba  and  her  fonr  sons  would
doubtless  have  been  slain,  whereas  there
was  some  hope  that  Solomon  might  spare
his  brother.  That  Adonijah  was  unworthy
we  gather  from  the  fact  that  he  had  ceased
to  be  cohen,  and  that  this  ofBce  was  con-
ferred, after  Absalom's  rebellion,  on  Ira  the
Jairite  (ch.  xx.  26),  Solomon  being  then
too  yonng'to  hold  such  a  position.  Until
he  committed  this  crime,  David's  family
had  probably  dwelt  in  concord,  and  it  was
his  own  wickedness  which  broke  up  their
unity,  and  introduced  among  them  strife,
mutual  hatred,  and  the  shedding  of  blood.

Ver.  11. — He  shall  lie  with  thy  wives.
Fulfilled  for  political  purposes  by  Absalom,
under  the  advice  of  Bathsheba's  grandfather
(ch.  xvi.  22).  The  punishment  was  thus
complete.  For  the  murdered  Uriah  there
was  fnurfold  restitution,  according  to  David's
own  stutenoe.  First  there  was  Bathsheba's
child  lately  born,  then  Amnon,  thirdly
Absalom,  and  lastly  Adonijah.  For  the
adultery  there  was  open  disgrace  wrought
upon  his  royal  dignity  "before  the  sun,"
in  open  daylight.  As  he  had  brought
shame  and  dishonour  upon  the  family  re-
lations of  his  neighbour,  so  were  his  own
family  rights  violated  by  his  rebellious  son.
And,  as  is  often  the  case,  the  sins  which
followed  were  worse  than  those  which  pre-
pared the  way.  Vice  begins  as  a  small
stream  trickling  through  the  opposing  dam,
but  it  quickly  breaks  down  all  moral  re-
straints, and  rushes  along  like  a  destroying
flood.

Ver.  13. — I  have  sinned  against  Jehovah.
Saul  had  used  the  same  words,  and  had
meant  very  little  by  them;  nor  had  he
added  "against  Jehovah,"  because  his  pur-
pose was  to  appease  S.imuel,  and  prevail  upon
him  not  to  disgrace  him  before  the  people.
David's  confession  came  from  the  heart.
There  is  no  excuse-making,  no  attempt  at
lessening  his  fault,  no  desire  to  evade
punishment.  Ps.  li.  is  the  lasting  testimoay,
not  only  to  the  reality,  but  to  the  tenderues*


CH.  xn.  1 — 31.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


289


of  hia  repentance,  and  we  may  even  feel
here  that  confession  was  to  him  a  relief.
The  deep  internal  wound  was  at  length
disclosed,  and  healing  had  become  possible.
Up  to  this  time  he  had  shut  God  away
from  bis  heart,  and  so  there  had  been  no
remedy  for  a  soul  diseased.  It  was  because
his  sorrow  was  genuine  that  comfort  was
not  delayed.  Jehovah  also  hath  pnt  away
thy  sin;  thou  shalt  not  die.  Now,  death
was  the  legal  penalty  for  adultery  (Lev.  xx.
10),  and  though  it  might  not  be  easy  to
exact  it  of  a  king,  yet,  until  it  was  remitted,
David  would  be  in  the  eyes  of  all  "  a  son  of
death "  (see  on  ver.  5) ;  and  how  could  he
administer  justice  to  others  while  the  death-
sentence  for  a  capital  crime  was  hanging
over  himself?  Had  not  the  prophet  been
authorized  to  use  his  dispensing  power  as
the  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah,  David  could  not
have  remained  king.  And  we  can  see  no
reason  for  supposing,  with  Ewald  and  others,
that  a  substantial  interval  of  time  elapsed
between  David's  confession  and  Nathan's
absolution.  The  sole  conceivable  reason  for
such  a  view  would  be  the  supposition  that
David's  repentance  began  and  was  com-
pleted with  the  one  stab  of  shame  which
pierced  through  him  when  he  heard  Nathan's
sudden  reproach.  Such  a  mere  thrill,  follow-
ing upon  such  persistent  callousness,  would
have  merited  little  attention.  But  if  months
of  brooding  sorrow  and  secret  shnme  had
been  humbling  David,  then  his  open  con-
fession was  the  proof  that  the  Spirit's  work
had  reached  the  goal,  and  was  now  complete.
And  we  gather  from  Fs.  11.  3  that  such
was  the  case.  "  My  sin,"  he  says,  "  is  ever
before  me."  It  had  long  haunted  him ;  had
long  occupied  his  thoughts  by  day,  and
broken  his  rest  at  night.  Like  a  flood,  his
iniquities  had  gone  over  his  head,  and
threatened  to  drown  him;  like  a  heavy
burden,  they  had  pressed  upon  him  so  as  to
break  him  dowa  (Ps.  xxxviii.  4).  Both
these  psalms  tell  of  long-coutinued  sorrow
of  heart;  but  with  confession  had  come  relief.
He  had  offered  to  Grod  the  sacrifice  of  a
broken  spirit,  and  knew  that  it  had  not
been  despised.  We  shall  see  subsequently
that  his  time  and  attention  had  been  much
occupied  with  the  Ammonite  war,  and  this
had  probably  helped  him  in  evading  the
secret  pleadings  of  his  own  conscience.

Ver.  14. — Thou  hast  given  great  oooasion
to  the  enemies  of  Jehovah  to  blaspheme;
Hebrew,  thou  hast  made  the  enemies  of
Jehovah  to  despise;  that  is,  to  despise  Je-
hovah's government,  the  theocracy,  of  which
David  was  the  visible  head  and  earthly  re-
presentative. Jehovah's  enemies  are  not  the
heathen,  but  Israelitish  unbelievers,  who
would  8co£f  at  all  religion  when  one  in
David's  position  fell  into  terrible  open  sin.

U.  SAMUEL.


But  the  death  of  the  adulterous  offspring
of  David  and  Bathsheba  would  prove  to
these  irreligious  men  that  Jehovah's
righteous  rule  could  reach  and  punish  the
king  himself,  and  would  thus  vindicate  his
justice  from  their  reproach.

Ver.  16. — ^David . . .  went  in.  He  went,  not
into  the  sanctuary,  which  he  did  not  enter
until  after  the  child's  death,  but  into  some
private  room  in  his  own  house.  There  he
remained,  passing  his  nights  stretched  on
the  ground,  and  fasting  until  the  seventh
day.  His  fasting  does  not  imply  that  he
took  no  food  during  this  long  interval,  but
that  he  abstained  from  the  royal  table,  and
ate  so  much  only  as  was  necessary  to  main-
tain life.  Now,  what  was  the  meaning  of
this  privacy  and  abstinence  I  Evidently  it
was  David's  acknowledgment,  before  all  his
subjects,  of  his  iniquity,  and  of  his  sorrow
for  it.  The  sickness  of  the  child  followed
immediately  upon  Nathan's  visit,  and  we
may  feel  sure  that  news  of  his  rebuke,  and
of  all  that  passed  between  him  and  the
king,  ran  quickly  throughout  Jerusalem.
And  David  at  once  takes  the  position  of  a
condemned  criminal,  and  humbles  himself
with  that  thoroughness  which  forms  so
noble  a  part  of  his  character.  Grieved  as
he  was  at  the  child's  sickness,  and  at  the
mother's  sorrow,  yet  his  grief  was  mainly
for  his  sin;  and  he  wa%  willing  that  all
should  know  how  intense  was  his  shame
and  self-reproach.  And  even  when  the
most  honourable  of  the  rulers  of  his  house-
hold (Gen.  xxiv.  2),  or,  as  Ewald  thinks,
his  uncles  and  elder  brethren,  came  to
comfort  him,  he  persists  in  maintaining  an
attitude  of  heart-stricken  penitence.

Ver.  20. — Then  David  arose  from  the
•arth.  If  David's  grief  had  been  occasioned
by  love  for  the  child,  then  its  death  and
the  consciousness  that,  while  his  guilt  had
caused  its  sickness,  his  prayers  had  not
availed  to  save  it,  would  have  aggravated
his  anguish.  There  was  much  personal
regard  for  the  child,  which  had  been  made
the  more  precious  by  these  very  events.
But  David's  sorrow  was,  as  we  have  seen,
that  of  penitence,  and  not  that  of  natural
affection.  When,  therefore,  the  threatened
penalty  had  been  paid  by  the  death  of  the
child,  David  felt  it  to  be  his  duty  to  show
his  resignation,  and  therefore  he  went  into
the  sanctuary  and  worshipped,  in  proof  that
he  acknowledged  the  justice  of  God's  deal-
ings, and  was  content  to  bear  the  punish-
ment as  his  righteous  desert.

Ver.  22. — God ;  Hebrew,  Jehovah,  usually
rendered  "  Lord."  Similarly  in  Gen.  vi.  5
in  the  Authorized  Version  we  find  Ood  in
capital  letters,  as  here,  for  the  Hebrew
Jehovah.

Ver.  23.— I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall


290


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  foH.  xn.  1— 3L


not  letnm  to  me.  These  words  indicate,
fliat  of  all,  much  personal  feeling  for  the
child.  Hence  some  have  supposed  that,  as
Solomon  is  placed  last  of  Bathsheba's  four
aoni  in  ch.  v.  14  and  1  Ghron.  iii.  5,  three
other  sons  had  already  been  borne  by  her,
and  that  consequently  this  child,  the  fruit  of
their  udultery,  would  now  have  been  seven  or
•ight  years  of  age.  It  is  certainly  remarkable
that  in  ver.  16  David  calls  him  "  the  lad  "
(so  the  Hebrew),  though  in  every  other  place
he  is  styled  "  the  child,"  On  the  other  hand,
we  gather  from  ver.  M  that  probably  he  was
as  yet  the  only  child,  and  this  is  the  more
reasonable  Tiew,  even  if  Solomon  was  the
youngest  son  (but  see  note  on  ver.  24).
But  secondly,  the  words  indicate  a  belief
in  the  continued  existence  of  the  child,  and
even  that  David  would  recognize  and  know
him  in  the  future  world.  Less  than  this
would  have  given  no  comfort  to  the  father
for  his  loss.  Now,  it  is  true  that  we  can
find  no  clear  dogmatic  teaching  in  the  early
Scriptures  upon  the  immortality  of  the  soul.
Job  could  give  expression  to  no  such  hope
in  vii.  6 — 10,  and  the  belief  in  a  world  to
oome  would  have  solved  the  difiSculties  of
himself  and  his  friends,  which  really  are  left
unsolved.  Even  in  the  Psalms  tiiere  are
words  that  border  on  despair  (see  vi.  5;
ixx.  9;  Izxxviii.  11;  cxv.  17);  nor  had
Hezekiah  any  such  belief  in  continued  ex-
istence as  could  solace  him  in  the  expecta-
tion of  an  early  death  (Isa.  xxxviii.  18, 19).
This  hopelessness  was  not  unnatural  at  a
time  when  the  doctrine  had  not  been  as  yet
clearly  taught.  On  the  other  hand,  in  Ps.
xvii.  15  and  xvi.  9 — 11  we  find  proof  that
David  did  believe  in  his  own  immortality.
For  though  the  latter  words  have  a  second
and  higher  meaning,  yet  the  primary  sense
of  Fs.  xvi.  10  is  that  David's  own  soul  (or
self)  would  not  always  remain  in  Sheol,  the
abode  of  the  departed,  nor  would  he,  Jeho-
vah's anointed  one,  see  such  corruption  as
would  end  in  annihilation.

Ver.  24. — He  called  his  name  Solomon.
It  is  rashly  assumed  that  Solomon's  birth
followed  next  in  order  after  that  of  the
deceased  child.  More  probably  there  was
n  long  interval  of  time,  and  son  after  son
was  bom,  with  little  increase  of  happiness
to  the  family  polluted  by  Amnon's  sin  and
troubled  by  its  miserable  consequences.
While  we  must  not  lay  too  great  stress
upon  Solomon  calling  himself  "a  little
efaild "  (1  Kings  iii.  7)  after  his  accession,
yet  it  forbids  our  believing  that  he  was
more  than  just  grown  up.  It  was  the  re-
markable ability  of  Solomon,  his  goodness
and  precocious  talent,  which  made  him  so
great  a  comfort  to  his  parents,  and  which
received  Jehovah's  seal  of  approval  in  the
name  Jedidiah.    This  name  would  scarcely


be  given  him  until  his  good  and  great
qualities  were  developing;  and  as  it  was  a
sort  of  indication  that  he  was  the  chosen
and  elect  son  of  David,  and  therefore  the
next  king,  we  shall  probably  be  right  in
believing  that  this  second  mission  of  Nathan,
and  this  mark  of  Divine  favour  to  David's
youngest  child,  did  not  take  place  until  after
Absalom's  death,  possibly  not  until  Solomon
was  ten  or  twelve  years  of  age.  The  name
iSioZomon  .means  "the  peaceful,"  and  answers
to  the  German  Friedrieh.  It  was  given
to  the  child  in  recognition  that  David's
wars  were  now  over,  and  that  the  era  of
quiet  had  begun,  which  was  to  be  conse-
crated to  the  building  of  Jehovah's  temple.
It  was  the  name  given  to  the  infant  at  liis
birth,  and  was  a  name  of  hope.  Alas  I  this
peace  was  to  be  rudely  broken  by  the  re-
bellion of  the  son  whom  David,  in  vain
expectation  and  with  all  a  father's  pride,
had  named  Absahm,  "his  father's  peace."

Ver.  25.— He  sent.  Some  commentators
make  David  the  subject  of  the  sentence,  and
translate,  "And  he,  David,  sent  in  the  hand
of  Nathan,  and  called,"  etc.  They  suppose
that  this  means  that  Nathan  was  entrusted
with  Solomon's  education;  but  "in  the
hand"  is  the  ordinary  Hebrew  preposition,
meaning  "by,"  and  the  sense  plainly  is
that  God  sent  a  message  by  Nathan.  David
had  already  called  the  child  Solomon,  and
now  Jehovah,  some  years  afterwards,  gives
him  an  indication  of  his  special  favour  by
naming  him  Yedidyah.  The  word  is  formed
from  the  same  root  as  David,  that  is,  "lovely,"
with  the  addition  of  the  Divine  name.  As  we
have  already  pointed  out,  this  was  no  slight
matter;  but  the  virtual  selection  of  Solomon
to  be  David's  successor,  and  probably,  there-
fore, was  delayed  untU  he  had  given  indica-
of  his  great  intellectual  gifts.  His  elder
brothers  would  not  be  passed  over  without
valid  reasons.

Yer.  26. — Joab  .  .  .  took  the  royal  city.
As  the  siege  of  Babbah  would  be  conducted
by  the  slow  process  of  blockade,  it  might
easily  be  prolonged  into  the  second  year,
and  so  give  ample  space  for  David's  sin
and  its  punishment  by  the  death  of  the
child.  But  more  probably  the  narrator,
having  commenced  the  history  of  David's
sin,  completes  the  story  before  returning  to
his  account  of  the  war.  Thus  the  capture
of  Babbah  would  occupy  some  of  the  in-
terval between  David's  adultery  and
Nathan's  visit  of  rebuke,  and  would  lessen
the  difSculty,  which  we  cannot  help  feeling,
of  David  remaining  for  nine  or  ten  months
with  the  guilt  of  adultery  and  miuder  rest-
ing upon  him,  and  no  open  act  of  repentance.
Some  short  time,  then,  after  Uriah's  death,
Joab  captured  "  the  «nty  of  waters."  This
is  not  a  poetical  name  for  Babbah,  but  means


OH.  xn.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


291


the  "wat«r-oity,"  that  is,  the  town  upon  the
Jabbok,  whence  the  supply  of  water  was
obtained.  The  citadel,  which  occupied  a
high  rock  on  the  noTth-westem  side,  must,
therefore,  soon  be  starved  into  submission,
and  the  whole  of  "  the  royal  oity,"  that  is,
of  the  metropolis  of  the  Ammonites,  be  in
Joab's  power.  He  tliercfore  urges  David  to
come  in  person,  both  that  the  honour  of  the
conquest  may  be  his,  and  also  because  pro-
bably the  blockading  force  had  been  reduced
to  as  small  a  body  of  men  as  was  safe,  and
the  presence  of  a  large  army  was  necessary
for  completing  the  subjugation  of  the
country,  which  would  follow  upon  the
capture  of  the  capital.

Ver.  30. — Their  king;  Hebrew,  Maleam.
This  is  another  mode  of  spelling  Milcom,
the  god  of  the  Ammonites,  and  is  found  also
in  Zeph.  i.  5,  and  probably  in  Jer.  xlix.  1,  3;
Amos  i.  15.  Strictly,  Milcom  or  Malcom  is
a  proper  name  for  the  supreme  deity,  formed
from  the  word  melee,  a  king,  or,  as  it  was
pronounced  in  other  Semitic  dialects,  Mo-
loch. Orammatically,  Maleam  also  means
"their  king,"  and  even  so  belongs  to  Milcom.
For  the  crown  weighed  a  hundred  pounds,
a  ponderous  mass,  which  no  man  could  pos-
sibly bear,  and,  least  of  all,  when  making,
as  was  the  case  with  the  Ammonite  king,
his  last  stand  for  his  life.  But  after  the
capture  of  the  oity,  it  was  lifted  from  the
head  of  the  idol,  and  placed  formally  upon
David's  head,  and  held  there  for  a  few
moments,  as  a  sign  of  victory  and  of  re-
joicing over  the  fall  of  the  false  god.  There
is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  there  is  any
exaggeration  in  the  weight,  nor  will  the
Hebrew  allow  us  to  understand  the  talent
of  gold  as  referring  to  its  value.

Yer.  31. — ^Ihe  people  that  were  therein.
The  cruel  treatment  described  in  this  verse
was  inflicted,  first  of  all,  upon  those  who
had  defended  Babbah,  now  reduced  to  a
small  number  by  the  long  siege ;  but  David
next  proceeded  through  all  the  cities,  that
is,  the  fortified  towns  of  the  Ammonites,
inflicting  similar  barbarities.  They  were
confined  probably  to  the  fighting  men,  and
most  of  these  would  make  their  escape  aa


toon  as  resistance  became  hopelfss.  The
general  population  would,  of  course,  scatter
themselves  in  every  direction,  but  the  misery
caused  by  snoh  a  breaking  up  of  civil  life,
as  well  as  by  the  cruel  bloodshed,  must  have
been  terrible.  Instead  of  "  he  put  them  in  a
saw,"  we  find,  in  1  Chron.  xx.  3,  "  he  sawed
them  with  a  saw."  This  reading  difierg
from  what  we  have  here  only  in  one  le^ter,
and  is  plainly  right,  as  the  translatista,
"under  saws,"  "under  harrows  of  iron,
etc.,  found  both  in  the  Authorized  and  Be-
vised  Versions,  is  simply  an  expedient,  ren-
dered necessary  by  the  corruption  of  the
text.  If  we  restore  the  passage  by  the  help
of  the  parallel  place,  it  runs  on  thus :  "  He
sawed  with  a  saw,  and  with  threshing-
sledges  of  iron,  and  with  cutting  instru-
ments of  iron."  What  exactly  the  second
were  we  do  not  know,  as  the  word  does  not
occur  elsewhere.  The  Vulgate  renders  it
"wains  shod  with  iron,"  meaning,  appa-
rently, those  driven  over  the  com  for  thresh-
ing purposes,  and  now  driven  over  theeO
unfortunate  people.  The  barbarity  is  nut
more  horrible  than  that  of  sawing  prisoners
asunder.  He  made  them  pass  through  the
brick-kiln.  Both  the  Septuagint  and  Vul-
gate have  "brick-kiln,"  Hebrew,  mdlban,
which  the  Massorites  have  adopted,  but  the
Hebrew  text  has  malchan.  No  com-
mentator has  given  any  satisfactory  expla-
nation of  what  can  be  meant  by  making
the  Ammonites  pass  through  a  brick-kiln ;
but  Kimchi  gives  a  very  probable  interpre-
tation of  the  word  really  found  in  the
Hebrew,  and  which,  not  being  intelligible,
has  been  corrupted.  For  the  Malchan  was,
he  says,  the  place  where  the  Ammonites
made  their  children  pass  through  the  fire
to  Moloch.  He  thinks,  therefore,  that  David
put  some  of  the  people  to  death  in  this  way.
We  cannot  defend  these  cruelties,  but  they
unhappily  were  the  rule  in  Oriental  war-
fare, and  would  have  been  inflicted  on  their
enemies  by  the  Ammonites.  We  have  proof
in  1  SauL  xl.  2  and  Amos  i.  13  that  they  were
a  barbarons  race;  but  this  did  not  justify
barbarous  retaliation.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 14. — ^Tho  facts  are :  1.  God  sends  Nathan  the  prophet  to  David,  who  tells
him  a  story  of  the  greed  of  a  wicked  rich  man,  who,  to  satisfy  his  avarice,  took  away  and
slew  the  pet  ewe  lamb  of  a  poor  man.  2.  David,  accepting  the  story  as  a  matter  of  fact,
is  very  angry  with  this  man,  and  swears  that  for  his  de^  and  lack  of  compassion  he
ought  to  die  and  restore  fourfold.  3.  Nathan  thereupon  reveals  the  parabolic  character
of  his  narrative,  by  saying  unto  David,  "  Thou  art  the  man  I"  4.  He  then  proceeds  to
state  (1)  the  goodness  of  God  to  him  in  anointing  him  king,  in  delivering  him  from
Saul,  in  giving  him  the  royal  succession,  and  in  guaranteeing  all  else  that  might  be
needed ;  (2)  lus  despite  to  the  commands  of  God — his  murder  of  Uriah,  and  his  taking


292  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xii.  1— 3L

possession  of  Uriah's  wife.  5.  He  also  declares,  by  way  of  punishment,  that  war  would
arise  in  his  own  house;  that  the  purity  and  safety  of  his  domestic  life  would  he  invaded;
and  that  the  punishment  of  his  secret  sin  would  be  open.  6.  On  David  confessing  his
guilt,  Nathan  assures  him  that  the  Lord  bad  so  far  put  away  his  sin  that  he  should  not
die,  but  that  the  child  of  his  guilt  should.

Nathan'i  parahle.  This  remarkable  parable  is,  perhaps,  the  most  exquisite  gem  of
the  kind  in  the  Old  Testament.  Its  beauty  and  pathos  are  enhanced  by  the  plain
matter-of-fact  way  in  which  the  historian  narrates,  in  ch.  xi.,  the  fall  of  David  and
his  subsequent  crime.  Apart  from  its  specific  purpose,  it  indicates  to  us  the  occasional
functions  of  the  prophets  in  those  times  as  admonishers  of  kings  and  rulers,  and  conse-
quently as  representatives  of  the  Divine  element  in  the  history  of  Israel.  The  great
variety  of  teaching  in  this  parable  may  be  briefly  indicated  thus —

I.  A  DOUBLE  LIFE.  At  least  ten  months  had  elapsed  from  the  date  of  David's  fall
to  the  visit  of  Nathan.  During  that  period  many  public  and  private  acts  had  been
performed  by  the  king  in  the  ordinary  course  of  life,  in  addition  to  those  referred  to
in  oh.  xi.  14 — 27.  It  was  his  policy  to  keep  up  a  good  appearance — to  be  in  administra-
tion, in  public  worship,  in  regard  for  religious  ordinances,  and  in  general  morality  all
that  he  had  ever  been.  He  passed  still  as  the  pious,  just  ruler  and  exemplai'y  man.
That  was  one  life.  But  inwaidly  there  was  another.  The  conscience  was  dull,  or,  if
it  spoke  plainly,  was  constantly  being  suppressed.  The  uncomfortableness  of  secret  sin
induced  self-reproach  and  loss  of  self-respect.  He  was  an  instance  of  a  man  "  holding
the  truth  in  unrighteousness"  (Rom.  i.  18).  This  double  life  is  the  experience  of  every
good  man  who  falls  into  sin  and  seeks  to  cover  it  up.  He  knows  too  much  to  be  really
happy,  but  he  is  too  enslaved  by  his  sin  to  be  truly  godly.  The  outside  is  fair;  within
is  desolation.

II.  Fellowship  in  snr.  David  and  Bathsheba  shared  in  a  fellowship  of  sin.  They,
most  probably  without  words,  communed  with  each  other  over  their  guilt,  and  so  far
strengthened  the  chains  of  iniquity.  Two  individuals  in  possession  of  a  dreadful  secret
do  not,  dare  not,  speak  about  it.  There  is  simply  a  common  understanding  and  a
mutual  support  in  keeping  up  the  appearance  necessary  to  social  reputation.  It  is  a
pitiable  siuht  before  God  and  holy  angels !  It  is  a  case  of  the  fallen,  the  defiled,
the  inwardly  wretched,  and  the  prospectively  condemned,  seeking  to  find  comfort  and
strength  in  each  other's  sympathy.  The  channels  of  sympathetic  feeling  are  filled  by  a
polluted  stream  of  affection  and  interest.

III.  A  lost  chabm.  It  is  well  known  that  a  pure  disposition  and  a  clear  conscience
lend  a  charm  to  personal  life;  much  more  does  such  deep  and  strong  piety  as  once
characterized  the  "  man  after  God's  own  heart."  If  we,  in  reading  the  historic  narrative
of  David's  early  years,  and  the  psalms,  in  which  his  best  thoughts  are  embodied,  feel  the
spell  of  his  spirit,  we  may  be  sure  that  those  in  daily  converse  with  him  recognized  a
charm  of  the  most  exalted  kind.  But  all  that  was  now  gone,  because  the  honesty  and
the  purity  from  which  it  sprang  were  no  more.  In  vain  did  he  strive  to  maintain  the
form  of  godliness ;  in  vain  his  careful  discharge  of  ofiBcial  duties  and  kindly  bearing
towards  his  friends.  The  "  secret  of  the  Lord  "  was  lost.  The  salt  had  lost  its  savour.
To  truly  spiiitual  men  he  would  not  be  as  in  former  times.  This  loss  of  a  spiritual
charm  always  takes  place  when  good  men  fall  into  sin  aud  cover  it  up.  The  light  of
the  spiritual  eye  is  dim.  The  pure  ring  of  the  voice  is  gone.  The  "  form  of  godliness  "
is  lef^  but  the  "  power  "  is  no  more.

IV.  The  Divine  eesbrve.  At  least  ten  months  elapsed  before  Nathan  was  com-
missioned by  God  to  speak  to  David.  The  lustful  look,  the  secret  deed,  the  scheme
for  concealment  and  for  the  death  of  Uriah,  were  allowed  to  pass  and  issue  in  seeming
success  without  one  act  of  a  decidedly  positive  character,  as  far  as  we  know,  on  the
part  of  God  either  to  smite  with  punishment  or  bring  to  ]ienitence.  The  "  workers  of
iniquity"  flourished,  and  the  innocent  perished  unavenged  (Ps.  xcii.  7;  cf.  xii.  5;  Prov.
i.  11 — 19).  That  conscience  uttered  its  protest,  and  that  the  laws  of  mind  as  con-
stituted by  God  worked  misery  from  the  first  in  the  inner  life  of  David,  is  no  doubt
true ;  but  there  was  no  open  justice,  no  obvious  interposition  on  behalf  of  the  oppressed,
no  distinct  and  proportionate  chastisement,  no  special  call  to  repentance.  Human
nature  took  its  course,  and  human  society  remained  in  relation  to  the  sinner  unchanged.


oa.xn.  1— 31.}  THE  SECONt)  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL  293

Yet  God  is  not  indifferent.  He  sluftibereth  not.  Government  does  not  relax  its  hold
on  each  man.  The  explanation  is  that  God  is  in  no  haste  in  wliat  he  does ;  he  reserves
his  action  for  a  while  for  reasons  more  complicate  and  far-reaching  than  we  can  trace.
The  very  reserve  only  renders  the  judgment,  when  it  comes,  more  impressive.  Human
nature  is  evidently  favoured  as  a  free  power,  which  must  have  certain  scope  both  for
origination  of  evil,  maturing  of  evil,  and  filling  up  its  own  measure  of  chastisement.
There  is  a  patience,  a  goodness,  in  the  reserve  which  need  to  be  studied  (Bom.  ii.  4 — 9 ;
1  Pet.  iii.  20;  2  Pet.  iii,  9.  15).    This  reserve  attends  many  a  modem  sinner's  cause.

V.  The  Divine  beginnino  of  salvation.  Had  David  been  left  to  himself  the
probability  is  that  the  coils  of  iniquity  would  have  been  formed  around  him  more  and
more  as  time  advanced;  for  the  law  of  habit  here  holds  good.  It  is  instructive  to
observe  that  the  first  step  towards  a  change  in  his  condition  was  on  the  Divine  side.
God  sent  his  prophet  Nathan,  charged  with  a  merciful  purpose,  though  mercy  was  to
be  tempered  with  judgment.  Certainly  David  might  well  say  in  daj  s  subsequent,  "  My
salvation  cometh  from  him  "  (Ps.  Ixii.  1,  7).  Here  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  great
truth  that  God  is  the  Author  of  Our  salvation.  He  seeks  us.  He  comes  to  us  in  our
low  estate.  This  is  true  of  mankind  as  a  whole  (John  iii.  16, 17 ;  1  John  iv.  9,  10),
of  each  one  brought  from  the  ways  of  sin  (1  John  iv.  19),  and  of  the  backslider  (Ps.
xxiii.  3).  It  is  all  of  grace.  Our  Saviour's  earthly  life  of  pleading  and  seeking  was  a
visible  and  audible  illustration  of  the  outgoing  of  the  heart  of  the  Father  towards  the
fallen.

VI.  The  dkfensive  ATTrroDB  of  impenitence.  The  elaborate  simplicity  of
Nathan's  parabid,  in  order  to  reach  the  conscience  and  heart  of  David,  suggest  to  us  the
fact  of  a  certain  defensive  attitude  of  David's  mind,  which  had  to  be  broken  down.  It  is
a  special  weapon  in  a  "  holy  war,"  designed  to  attack  a  peculiar  line  of  defence.     It  is

'  well  known  how  men,  when  they  have  done  a  wrong,  are  on  the  qui  owe  lest  the  wrong
should  be  detected  and  brought  home  to  them ;  and  the  resources  of  reason,  ingenuity,
and  cunning  are  employed  to  ward  off  any  approaoh  to  the  inner  life.  Any  attempt  to
totich  the  springs  of  penitence  or  remorse,  or  to  arouse  the  fears  which  attend  conviction,
is  neutralized  by  some  counter-move  of  thought  or  resolve.  Hearers  of  the  gospel  know,
if  they  would  only  testify  honestly,  how  they  too  often  fortify  themselves  ag&inst  state-
ments, arguments,  and  appeals.  The  failure  of  some  ministers  and  teachers  lies  in  their
not  knowing  enough  of  human  nature  to  direct  their  statements  so  as  to  meet  the
actual  mental  attitude  of  those  who  live  in  sin.  A  study  of  this  subject  is  of  extreme
importance  to  all  who  seek  to  convince  and  to  save  men.  There  are  various  avenues  to
the  conscience  and  heart.  Some  are  so  utterly  closed  and  guarded  that  it  is  a  waste  of
power  to  seek  to  penetrate  through  them.  A  fortress  should  be  attacked  in  its  weakest
point,  and  only  a  very  special  survey  can  find  out  where  it  is.  Nathan  had  recon-
noitred the  position,  and  assailed  David  along  the  best  line.

VII.  The  dsb  of  the  oood  element  in  man.  Nathan  approached  David  in
friendline-ss,  recognizing  him  as  a  man  generally  mindful  of  his  people,  pitiful  towards
the  poor  and  weak,  and  a  lover  of  justice.  He  knew  that  there  were  still  elements
of  good  in  the  fallen  saint.  The  great  transgression  had  not  obliterated  all  trace  of  the
noble  qualities  of  former  days.  Where  these  did  not  come  in  the  way  of  the  one  selfish
lust  which  had  for  the  time  gained  dominion,  they  were  not  only  cherished,  but  were
at  hand  for  expression  when  occasion  required.  In  proportion  as  these  could  be
strengthened  and  utilized,  there  would  be  hope  of  bringing  them  to  bear,  by  a  reflected
light,  on  the  one  deed  in  which  they  had  been  suppressed.  By  a  flank  movement,  and
using  a  piece  of  history  as  the  instrument,  he  hoped  to  turn  the  whole  force  of  David's
better  qualities  on  the  cherished  secret  sin.  It  was  an  instance  of  a  wise  setting  of
one  part  of  a  man's  nature  against  another  part,  so  that,  by  a  sort  of  moral  dynamic,  the
worse  should  be  forced  out.  In  dealing  with  men  we  ought  to  avail  ourselves  of  their
good  qualities  and  bring  them  to  bear  on  the  removal  of  the  bad.  When  Christ  dealt
with  publicans  and  sinners  he  did  not  make  a  direct  attack  on  their  sins.  There  v.ras  a
something  in  them  which  he  made  the  ground  of  appeal.  In  the  vilest  sinner  there  is
some  human  love,  or  kindliness,  or  sense  of  right.  Who  is  wise  to  win  souls?  What
are  the  methods,  according  to  varying  temperaments,  education,  habits,  and  indulgences  ?

VIII.  God's  judoment  forestalled  bt  conboienoe.  History  is  a  mental  reflector.
In  Nathan's  story,  which  was  not  a  parable  to  David  when  he  heard  it,  David  saw  a  sin


294  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xn.  1—31


and  a  judgment.  He  was  true  to  his  better  qualities  when  he  denounced  the  sin  and
pronounced  sentence  of  death.  The  story  became  to  David  a  parable  the  moment  the
pro[ihet  said  to  him,  "  Thou  art  the  man  1 "  The  whole  figures  then  become  specific,
and  he  was  the  one  most  conspicuous  against  whom  the  judgment  was  pronounced.
The  psychological  and  moral  changes  involved  in  this  we  cannot  now  deal  with ;  the
point  is  that,  when  David's  aroused  righteous  indignation  pronounced  judgment  on  the
evil  man,  the  human  conscience  really  forestalled  the  judgment  of  God  on  David's  sin
by  declaring  its  deserts.  God  does  not,  in  providence  or  on  the  day  of  judgment,
declare  anything  really  new  to  the  impenitent  sinner.  Conscience  some  time  or  other
has  virtually  given  the  sentence  of  condemnation.  Those  who  worked  themselves  up
to  a  state  of  self-delusion  (Matt.  vii.  22,  23)  knew  a  time  when  the  conscience  witnessed
against  the  formalities  which  issued  in  its  being  seared  (Eph.  iy.  19 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  2).
It  is  this  assent  of  conscience  which  will  render  the  sense  of  Injustice  impossible  in
the  future  judgments  God  may  see  fit  to  bring  on  those  who  "hold  the  truth  in
unrighteousness."

General  lessons.  1.  We  should  take  warning  from  the  instances  in  the  Bible,  and
not  presume  on  God's  silence,  or  think  that,  because  we  are  left  to  pursue  our  own
courses,  it  will  always  be  so.  2.  There  are  always  in  existence  agents  or^  agencies  by
which  in  due  time  sin  will  be  rebuked  and  exposed  either  in  this  life  or  in  the  life  to
come  (Matt.  x.  26 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10).  3.  In  dealing  with  the  lapsed  we  should  not  act  on
the  same  rule  in  all  cases,  but  deal  with  each  according  to  his  peculiar  character.  4.
It  will  repay  parents,  teachers,  and  evangelists  to  study  human  nature  and  the  records
of  biography  and  sacred  history  to  find  out  the  best  metliods  of  reaching  the  conscience
of  the  impenitent.  5.  We  should  be  ready,  as  was  Nathan,  to  carry  through  the  most
painful  duties  when  God  calls  us  in  his  providence  to  them.

The  convicted  sinner.  The  fitness  of  the  parable  is  revealed  in  its  sequel.  Nathan,
laying  aside  the  character  of  a  friendly  visitor  relating  a  story  of  wrong,  now  assumes
the  functions  of  the  prophet  of  God,  and  turns  the  whole  light  and  force  of  David's  just
indignation  in  upon  himself,  and,  with  an  incisiveness  most  irresistible,  brings  an
accusation  of  guilt  without  naming  the  actual  deed  done ;  states  the  aggravating
circumstances  arising  out  of  the  exceeding  goodness  of  God  in  the  yaat ;  declares  the
retribution  about  to  come;  and,  on  witnessing  the  true  penitence  of  the  sinner,  annoimces
the  fact  of  forgiveness,  but  qualifies  the  announcement  by  foretelling  an  event  of
blended  justice  and  mercy.  The  commission  of  sin  is  unhappily  common  enough,  and
also,  we  may  thankfully  admit,  the  conviction  of  sinners  is  an  event  of  fiequent
occurrence.  Few  sins  exhibit  the  peculiar  aggravations  of  this  one  of  David,  and  few
convictions  are  more  sudden  and  thorough  than  his;  but  as  there  are  common  qualities
in  all  sins  and  true  convictions  of  sin,  we  may  regard  this  case  of  David's  as  setting
forth  features  in  human  experience  and  Divine  procedure  universally  true.

I.  The  fact  op  sin  is  beought  home  to  the  conscience.  David  all  along  knfcTv
of  the  existence  of  the  sin,  but  had  conducted  himself  as  though  it  were  not.  In
general  terms  he  would  doubtless  speak  of  sin  as  an  evil  of  deepest  dye,  and  desire  its
banishment  from  mankind.  Such  sentiments  were  at  the  base  of  his  deep  interest  in
Nathan's  story,  and  gave  rise  to  the  outburst  of  indignation.  Sin  was  evil,  the  sinner
ought  to  be  punished,  the  doer  of  this  deed  must  come  under  the  ban  of  law.  All  this
was  quite  correct.  It  was  orthodoxy.  The  friendly  visitor  could  not  but  admit  its
force.  But  it  was  just  here,  when  David  was  dealing  with  generalities,  and  was  eager
to  see  general  principles  applied  to  a  particular  case,  that  Nathan  brought  him  away
from  the  general  to  the  particular,  from  others  to  himself.  "  Thou  art  the  man  1 "
This  was  a  straight  charge.  Nathan  held  a  twofold  position — ^he  was  a  man  in  Israel,
a  subject  and  neighbour,  a  pious  friend  of  David's;  he  was  also  a  pro])het,  a  representa-
tive of  God,  and  in  that  capacity  a  superior  to  David.  When,  then,  the  friendly  visitor
said,  with  an  unrecordable  tone  and  gesture,  "  Thou  art  the  man  I  "  it  was  evident  to
David  (1)  that  his  deed,  long  kept  secret,  was  known  to  his  most  influential  and  incor-
ruptible subject  and  friend ;  and  (2)  that  God  was  speaking  straight  to  his  conscience.
Even  so  far  as  related  to  Nathan  as  a  good  man  in  Israel,  the  revelation  of  his  acquaint-
ance with  the  deed  was  startling  and  astounding ;  but  the  most  potent  element  in  the
utterance  was  the  direct  charge  of  GKid.    A  sinner  cannot  look  on  the  Holy  One — he


OH.  xii,  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  296


dare  not.  The  conscience  knows  the  awful  voice  of  (Jod,  and,  when  that  voice  speaks
straight  to  it,  all  thought  of  men  and  opinions  vanishes,  and  the  soul  in  its  solemn
individuality  feels  itself  in  the  actual  presence  of  the  Eternal.  In  true  conviction  the
man  "  comes  to  himself."  The  deed  of  evil  is  brought  home.  In  a  light  not  of  earth,
self  is  seen  to  be  undone,  because  the  sin,  hitherto  professedly  not  a  reality,  is  now
forced  on  self  as  its  own  offspring.

II.  The  AaOBAVATiON  of  bin  is  set  fobth.  As  soon  as  the  charge  is  brought  home,
and  before  the  paralyzed  man  can  speak,  the  prophet,  in  the  name  of  God,  with  swift
words  reminds  him  of  his  privileges  and  the  manifold  blessings  and  honours  Gud  had
showered  on  him  or  was  ready  to  grant  if  needed. .  He  was  a  chosen  servant  of  the
Eternal,  called  to  perform  a  part  in  the  working  out  of  a  great  future  for  the  world ;  he
had  filled  a  position  of  honour  and  influence ;  he  had  been  charged  with  high  and  holy
duties ;  he  had  been  blessed  with  plenty,  and  more  than  ordinary  provision  for  the
necessary  cravings  of  nature  (vers.  7, 8).  Yet,  "  Thou  art  the  man  I "  None  can  doubt
that  here  was  sin  of  the  most  aggravated  character.  No  sia  is  excusable  or  free  from
Divine  condemnation;  otherwise  it  were  not  sin,  but  weakness  or  fault.  But  some
sins  are  worthy  of  being  punished  with  "  many  stripes  "  because  of  being  committed
under  special  circumstances,  e.g.  the  possession  of  religious  light  and  feeling ;  the  occu-
pation of  a  position  of  power,  and  the  being  recipient  of  manifold  tokens  of  Divine  care
and  love.  But  be  the  privileges  many  or  few,  when  God  brings  home  the  guilt  to  the
conscience,  the  sin  is  revealed  in  the  light  of  past  mercies.  The  swift  review  of  David's
advantages  by  Nathan  finds  its  analogue  in  the  swift  floating  before  the  mind  of  the
circumstances  of  one's  position  which  render  the  sin  so  utterly  inexcusable.  Men  see
in  a  few  moments  the  reasons  for  their  utter  shame  and  self-abasement.  This  is  a
feature  in  all  true  conviction,  and  tends  to  the  proper  prostration  of  the  soul  before  God.
Saul  of  Tarsus  knew  this.  It  is  an  unspeakable  mercy  that  God  does  set  our  sins  in
the  light  of  his  great  goodness.

III.  The  heabt  is  fbobed  to  beveal  the  oaitse  or  sin.  "  Wherefore  hast  thou
despised  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  ?  "  (ver.  9).  No  sooner  did  the  light  flash  on
the  conscience  to  set  forth  the  aggravated  character  of  the  sin,  than  with  unrelenting
incisiveness  the  "  wherefore  "  followed  to  probe  those  depths  of  the  heart  from  whence  the
evil  sprang.  The  question  really  contains  an  inquiry  and  a  statement.  Why?  "Thou
didst  despise."  The  eye  of  the  sinner  is  turned  in  upon  himself,  to  search  out  and  behold
those  vile  feelings  and  false  principles  out  of  which  issued  the  preference  of  self-will
over  the  holy  will  of  God,  which  had  been  so  clearly  expressed  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord
and  in  the  special  intimations  of  Providence.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,
and  desperately  wicked:  who  can  know  it?"  The  time  of  conviction  is  a  time  of
probing  and  searching.  It  is  well  for  men  under  conviction  to  face  the  real  facts,  and
get  at  the  causes  that  lie  out  of  sight.  There  must  he  some  dreadfully  subtle  evils
lurking  within  to  induce  a  man  to  "  despise  "  the  august  majesty  of  God's  will  by  setting
it  aside.  Was  it  not  in  reference  to  this  probing,  and  probably  in  reference  to  this  very
deed,  that  the  psalmist  said,  "  Search  me,  0  God  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23 ;  cf.  li.  5,  6,  10)  ?

IV.  The  punishment  of  sin  is  beought  to  mind.  The  prophet  ceases  not;  without
giving  the  convicted  man  time  to  speak,  he  passes  on  to  tell  of  the  retribution  that  is
sure  to  come  by  the  will  of  God.  The  man  of  whom  Nathan  once  spoke  such  good
things  (ch.  vii.  12 — 17)  is  now  informed  of  coming  trouble  in  life ;  that  this  trouble  will
be  the  same  in  kind  with  that  of  his  sin — ^murder  and  adultery;  that  it  will  not  be
secret,  as  was  his,  in  performance,  but- open,  to  bis  disgrace ;  that  it  will  arise  out  of  his
own  house,  consequent  in  a  measure  on  the  mischitf  wrought  by  his  own  sin  on  his
domestic  life.  Had  David  not  fallen,  he  would  have  been  a  different  man,  and  conse-
quently his  private  influence  at  home  among  his  children  would  have  been  more  holy
and  powerful ;  his  relation  to  big  kingdom  would  have  been  more  satisfactory,  and
therefore  moral  and  political  circumstances  would  probably  arise  of  so  important  a
character  as  to  have  prevented  the  creation  of  the  conditions  out  of  which  the  troubles
how  recorded  in  his  later  history  arose.  He  was  to  reap  according  to  his  sowing.  In
the  conviction  of  sin,  the  recognition  of  personal  guilt  is  the  chief  element,  as  we  have
seen  (division  I.) ;  but  just  as  here  the  messenger  revealed  the  aggravation  of  the  guilt,
probed  the  heart  for  causes,  and  referred  to  coming  retribution,  so  in  the  simple  processes
of  mind  attending  true  conviction  there  is  an  anticipation  of  punishment — an  assurance


THE  SfiCONb  BOOK  01*  SAMUEL,  {ob.  xn.  1—31.


that  evil  is  coming  on  the  bouI  as  a  consequeuce  of  sin  done.  Sin  is  transgressi.  n  of  laW ;
law  involves  authority  to  vindicate  its  righteousness;  and,  as  soon  as  the  conviction  of
gin  is  real,  the  logic  of  conscience  points  to  coming  judgment.  Whether  it  be  a  temporal
judgment,  as  in  Old  Testament  references,  or  eternal,  as  in  New  Testament  references,
the  experience  is  virtually  the  same.

V.  The  confession  of  guilt  is  absolute.  The  guilty  king  sat  in  silence  till  the
prophet  had  delivered  his  charge.  The  time  was  brief,  but  the  power  accompanying
the  words  was  Divine.  Swifter  than  lightning  the  spell  of  hypooritical  concealment
was  broken.  The  bonds  in  which  the  unholy  passion  had  long  held  tha  soul  were
snapped  asunder.  The  eye  of  conscience,  turning  in  upon  self,  gave  fresh  life  to  the  old
suppteased  loyalty  to  righteousness  and  God,  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  confession  came,
"I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord."  The  question  as  to  whether  the  historian  here
simply  gives  a  summary  of  what  passed,  and  intended  to  include  also  the  fifty-first  psalm,
or  whether  literally  this  is  all  that  was  said  and  done,  does  not  affect  our  purpose.
There  is  here  a  recognition  prompt,  unqualifii  A,  of  sin,  not  as  a  fault,  a  weakness,  but  of
sin  as  known  by  conscience  and  stamped  with  the  curse  of  God  and  man.  It  is  also  a
recognition  of  sin  as  against  God,  not  as  a  wrong  done  to  Uriah,  Batlisheba,  or  Israel,  or
his  own  family.  The  conscience  is  not  indifferent  to  the  injuries  done  to  men,  but  when
fully  aroused,  and  face  to  face  with  sin  as  sin,  it  seems  to  see  only  God.  fiencd  the
expression  in  Ps.  li.  4.  Again,  there  is  pain  and  shame,  not  because  of  what  men  may
say  or  do,  not  because  personal  influence  will  now  be  weakened,  but  because  it  is  tin.
It  is  the  sin  which  troubles  and  appals  the  truly  convicted  soul.  Moreover,  there  is
abstention  from  all  claim  to  consideration ;  no  excuse,  no  palliation.  The  convicted  one
can  only  say,  "  I  have  sinned."  There  is  obviously  an  inward  bowing  of  the  spirit
before  the  holy  God ;  an  absolute  surrender  as  undone,  condemned,  helpless,  lost.  The
very  brevity  of  the  confession  bespeaks  the  depth  of  penitential  woe.  Contrast  the
wordy  confession  (1  Sam.  xv.  17 — 25 ;  cf.  Luke  xv.  18,  19 ;  xviii.  13).

VI.  FoBGivENEBs  IS  FREE,  FULL,  BUT  QUALIFIED.  How  long  Nathan  stood  by  the
prostrate  silent  king,  and  whether  this  confession  was  the  literal  whole  or  not,  we  do
not  know ;  but  he  saw  enough  to  enable  him  to  say  in  the  name  of  God,  "  The  Lord  hath
put  away  thy  sin  " — a  statement  clear  and  unreserved,  intended  to  go  home  to  the  smitten
heart.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  has  to  do  with  a  personal  relation  of  God  to  man.  It  is
the  restoration  of  the  personal  relation  of  favour  and  fellowship  which  had  heeU  inter-
rupted by  sin.  It  is  conditional  on  true  repentance,  the  objective  ground  being  the
sacrifioial  death  of  Christ — under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  by  anticipation  (Rom.
iii.  25),  and  under  the  New  by  retrospective  reference.  God  is  the  sole  Judge  of  the
reality  of  repentance.  He  looketh  at  the  heart.  He  knew  that  David's  conviction  had
issued  in  the  state  of  mind  known  as  true  repentance,  and  foreseeing  this  before  it
occurred,  he  commissioned  the  prophet  to  " declare  and  pionounoe "  to  David,  " being
penitent,"  the  remission  of  his  sin^  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee ! "  Blessed  words !
How  often  brouglit  to  penitents  since  our  Lord  uttered  theml  But  the  pardon  left
untouched  the  natural  consequSnoes  of  sin  referred  to  in  vers.  19, 20,  because  a  personal
relation  does  not  alter  the  course  of  the  forces  which  a  man  sets  in  motion  on  eattli  by
his  sin.  Also,  the  child  born  must  die,  not  to  its  injury,  but  gain,  yet  in  judgment,  bo
that  the  father  should  not  find  comfort  in  the  fruit  of  his  sin,  and  in  mercy,  lest  there
should  be  a  living  memorial  of  his  guilt  and  shame  to  which  men  might  point  and
further  blaspheme  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  The  same  holds  good  of  our  forgiveness ;  it  is
free,  full,  but  qualified  by  the  continuance  of  some  ill  consequences  which  chastise  us
all  our  days.  The  sinner  never  entirely  gets  rid  of  all  the  earthly  effects  of  his  sin  while
on  earth ;  they  work  in  his  flow  of  thought  and  feeling,  and  often  in  the  checks  on  his
influence,  and  possibly  on  the  character  and  health  of  others.  The  full  redemption
comes  with  the  glorified  body  and  the  new  heavens  and  earth.

Gbnekai  lessons.  1.  The  first  thing  to  be  sought  in  men  in  order  to  their  salvation
is  a  due  recognition  of  themselves  as  sinners  in  the  sight  of  God.  A  general  recognition
of  the  evil  of  sin  as  distinct  from  consciousness  of  personal  guilt  may  really  be  a  cover
for  unpardoned  sin.  2.  The  tendency  and  drift  of  God's  messages  to  men  living  in  sin
is  to  bring  them  to  a  right  mind  in  reference  to  their  personal  position  in  his  sight,  aa
a  preliminary  to  their  seeking  forgiveness.  3.  Much  will  be  found  to  depend,  in  respect
to  religious  views  and  action,  on  the  apprehension  men  have  of  what  sin  really  is  and


tin.  3C1I  1—31.]  TflE  SECOND  BOOK  Ot  SAMUEL.  297

their  own  giiiltr  A  prepared  state  of  mind  is  necessary  to  get  good  out  of  gospel  state-
ments. 4.  The  Christian  religion  especially  lays  stress  on  intense  individuality  in  our
relationships  to  Grod  and  to  good  and  evil,  and  aims  to  bring  us  to  a  true  self-knowledge.
S.  It  is  an  astonishing  illustration  of  the  tremendous  power  of  our  lower  tendencies  that
they  may  even  gain  ascendency  over  men  of  most  exalted  privileges  and  whose  very
position  would  suggest  superiority  to  them.  6.  It  behoves  Christian  people  living  in
the  enjoyment  of  many  advantages  to  consider  well  their  conduct  in  comparison  with
that  of  others  less  favoured.  ?.  The  essence  of  sin  abides  in  all  times,  though  the  form
may  vary ;  for  as  Adam  preferred  the  suggestion  of  the  evil  one  and  so  despised  the
word  of  the  Lord,  so  did  David ;  and  on  this  method  did  Satan  seek  to  win  over  Christ
in  the  wilderness.  8.  It  is  of  extreme  importance  to  remember  that  we  may  carry
about  with  us  deep4aid  and  subtle  tendencies  which  may  assert  their  power  in  an
unguarded  hour ;  and  hence  we  should  often  probe  our  heart,  and  search  and  see  by  the
htlp  of  God  whether  there  be  any  evil  way  within  us.  9.  It  should  operate  as  a
deterrent  to  know  that  our  sins  will  entail  unavoidable  social  aud  physical  troubles  as
long  as  life  lasts.  10.  We  are  authorized  in  speaking  to  the  truly  penitent  of  the  free
and  full  forgiveness  which  God  has  in  store  for  them,  aid  which  through  his  abounding
grace  they  may  have  at  once.  11.  In  the  fuller  sense  of  the  words  it  may  be  declared
to  the  penitent  that  they  shall  not  die  (John  iii,  16).  12.  The  evil  deeds  of  professors
are  a  stumbling-block  to  other  men,  and  give  occasion  to  them  to  blaspheme,  and  as
this  must  be  a  most  bitter  element  in  the  life  of  the  restored  backslider,  so  it  is  a  warn-
ing to  all  Christians  to  take  heed  lest  they  fall,  and  so  bring  occasion  for  reproach  on  the
Name  which  is  above  every  name.

Vers.  15 — SI. — ^The  facts  are ;  1.  The  child  bom  to  David  becoming  very  sick,  he
entreats  God  for  its  life  by  prayer  and  fasting.  2.  He  persists  in  refusing  the  consola-
tions which  the  elders  of  his  household  offer  him.  3.  The  child  dying  on  the  seventh
day,  and  David  observing  the  whisperings  of  his  servants,  at  once  ascertains  by  direct
inquiry  the  certainty  of  it.  4.  His  servants  noticing  that,  on  ascertaining  the  fact  of
the  child's  death,  he  lays  aside  the  tokens  of  grief  and  resumes  his  wonted  manner,  are
amazed  at  his  conduct.  6.  Whereupon  he  justifies  his  conduct,  and  intimates  his
expectation  of  some  day  going  to  the  child.  6.  Bathsheba  is  comforted  by  David,  and
bears  to  him  another  son,  Solomon.  7.  Joab,  carrying  on  war  against  Babbah  of  the
Ammonites,  and  being  abOiit  to  bring  the  war  to  a  conclusion,  urges  on  David  that  he
should  come  and  enjoy  the  honour  of  taking  the  city.  8.  David,  complying  with  this
request,  takes  possession  of  Babbah,  and  acquires  the  king's  crown  with  much  spoil.
9.  He  completes  his  conquest  of  the  Ammonites  by  causing  some  of  them  to  endure
great  suSermgs.

Providence  and  natural  affection.  The  mercy  of  (Jod  to  David  was  immediate,  and
it  continued  throughout  his  life ;  the  judgment  with  which  it  was  tempered  was  chiefly
to  come  in  days  hence,  but  it  began  in  tne  severe  sickness  of  Bathsheba's  child.  It  is
not  an  unusual  thing  for  a  father  to  have  to  face  the  loss  of  an  infant ;  in  such  cases
natural  affection  will  manifest  itself  in  unmistakable  forms.  The  extraordinary  way  in
which  David's  feelings  were  excited  by  the  apprehended  death  of  this  child  is  to  be
accounted  for  by  reasons  springing  out  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  his  position.
These  will  appear  as  we  proceed  to  consider  the  struggle  between  natural  affection  and
the  order  of  Providence.

I.  There  is  a  certain  bbasonablkness  in  the  pleading  of  natural  affec-
tion AGAINST  WHAT  SEEMS  TO  BE  THE  ORDINATION  or  GoD.  The  declaration  of  the
prophet  (ver.  14),  that  the  child  should  die,  was  accepted  by  David  as  an  ordination
of  God,  and  the  severe  sickness  which  came  on  soon  after  Nathan's  departure  was
interpreted  by  the  king  as  the  first  stage  in  the  execution  of  it.  But  David  was  not
conscious  of  a  rebellious  spirit  in  the  exhibition  of  such  distress,  and  in  such  earnest
entreaty  that  the  intended  cause  of  providential  judgment  might  be  averted.  Human
aft'ection  is  as  much  a  part  of  the  order  of  Nature  as  is  the  law  of  gravity,  and  its
spontaneous  action  is  as  natural  as  is  the  falling  of  a  weight  to  the  earth.  Affection
is  nothing  if  it  does  not  feel.  There  is  no  law  requiring  it  to  be  annihilated,  if  that
were  possible,  in  presence  of  the  inevitable.    To  the  pious  Hebrew  all  changes  in


298  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xii.  1— 31.


nature  were  brought  about  by  Qoi ;  they  were  the  outcome  of  his  will,  as  surely  as
would  be  the  death  of  this  child  according  to  the  word  of  the  prophet.  Divine  ordina-
tions were  silent  and  spoken.  Yet  the  silent  ordinations  in  daily  providence  were
modified  by  prayer  and  to  meet  new  conditions ;  and  why,  then,  might  not  this  spoken
one  be  modified  at  the  entreaty  of  an  agonized  parent  ?  As  a  father,  he  could  not  help
thinking  of  this  infant  aa  a  severe  sufferer  in  being  deprived  of  the  blessing  of  lifg
through  no  fault  of  its  own.  If  spared,  the  child  might  be  a  perpetual  memorial  of
befitting  sorrow  and  shame,  and  so  would  help  to  keep  him  lowly  and  penitent.  Nor
could  he  but  feel  for  the  poor  woman  cruelly  sinned  against,  and  whose  grief  would  be
consequent  on  her  husband's  sin.  Moreover,  precedents  were  not  wanting  in  the  case
of  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  20 — 33)  and  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  30 — 35),  in  which  men
pleaded  against  what  seemed  to  be  inevitable.  Subsequent  to  David's  time,  we  know
that  men  were  permitted  to  pray  against  the  apparently  inevitable  (Joel  ii.  12 — 14).
Our  Saviour  gave  utterance  to  human  sensibility  when  he  prayed  that,  if  possible,  the
cup  might  pass  from  him.  God  has  never  expressed  displeasure  at  the  utterance  of
the  sorrows  which  spring  from  natural  affection,  for  feelings  often  struggle  thus  with
the  course  of  providence.  Stoicism  has  no  place  in  Christianity.  The  physical  order
is  subordinate  to  the  moral.

II.  IkTENSS    feeling    18    EBASONABLE   WHERE    CUB    SINS    HAVE    TO    DO    WITH    THE

ANTICIPATED  DI8A8TEB.  The  intensity  of  David's  anguish  arose,  not  from  the  fact  that
he  was  a  father,  but  from  the  knowledge  he  had  that  the  providence  that  was  bringing
death  to  his  child  was  connected  with  his  own  sin.  That  another  should  suffer  for  his
sin,  and  this  other  a  little  child,  was  indeed  a  bitter  reason  for  pleading  with  God.
Although  the  course  of  providence,  which  connects  the  suffering  of  offspring  with  the
sins  of  parents,  is  in  the  widest  moral  bearings  of  the  fact,  both  just  and  merciful,  yet
it  is  not  always  seen  to  be  so.  Nevertheless,  the  great  anguish  of  the  evil-doer  on
that  account  is  not  a  protest  so  much  as  a  lament  over  his  own  sin,  and  a  prayer  that,
if  possible,  this  organic  issue  of  sin  may,  by  some  intervention,  be  prevented  or  modified.
The  educational  value  of  that  feeling  on  the  life  of  a  repentant  sinner  is  of  great  worth
in  itself,  and  really  leads  to  the  formation  of  a  character  that  shall,  in  the  older  of
providence,  do  much  to  lessen  the  evils  that  otherwise  would  arise.

III.  The  eesobt  op  natural  affection  when  struggling  against  the  order
OF  providence  IB  TO  GoD.  A  great  change  had  recently  come  over  David.  The
alienation  of  the  backsliding  heart  was  gone.  As  of  old,  so  he  now  brings  his  sorrows
and  troubles  to  his  God.  The  overwhelmed  heart  flies  to  the  Rook  that  is  high.  He
sits  not  with  the  scornful,  mocking  at  the  ways  of  Providence,  and  seeing  evil  where
only  there  is  mysterious  judgment.  The  best  and  tenderest  feelings  of  human  nature,
where  sanctified  by  the  spirit  of  piety,  turn  instinctively  to  God  for  help,  and  they  find
prayer  as  the  form  in  which  their  yearnings  are  expressed.  Some  men  fancy  that  they
only  see  and  feel  the  apparent  severities  of  the  providential  order,  and  that  sullen
vexation  and  displeasure  are  the  only  appropriate  conditions  of  mind  in  relation  to  it.
Christians  see  and  feel  quite  as  much,  but  their  bruised  spirit  finds  refuge  in  him  who
ordains  all  in  justice  and  mercy,  and  implores  him,  so  far  as  may  be  wise  and  good,
to  let  the  penitent,  entreating  heart  coutat  for  something  among  the  elements  which
determine  the  ultimate  issues.

IV.  When  the  course  of  pbovidbnce  is  found  to  be  usalterable,  natural

AFFECTION   IS    SUBORDINATED    TO   THE   HIGHER    PRINCIPLE    OF    ACQUIESCENCE    IN    THE

WILL  OF  God.  David  was  right  in  feeling  as  he  did,  in  expressing  his  feeling  in
earnest  prayer,  in  waiting  as  long  as  there  was  hope  of  reversal  of  the  sentence.  He
acted  as  a  father,  as  a  husband,  as  a  penitent.  But  when  once  the  human  desire  and
human  view  of  wisdom  and  kindness  were  proved,  by  accomplished  fact,  not  to  be  in
accord  with  Divine  wisdom,  then,  as  became  a  trustful,  restored  child  of  God,  David
ceased  to  plead  and  to  be  in  anguish.  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done ! "  was  the
spirit  of  his  action.  It  was  his  duty  and  privilege  now  to  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  believe
that  he  will  bring  to  pass  the  kindest  and  wisest  issue.  The  death  of  the  child  ii
accepted  as  the  best  thing,  and  the  ei<il3  once  supposed  to  issue  from  the  event  are  now
believed  to  be  qualified  by  a  love  which  maketh  all  things  work  together  for  good.  It
ii  the  sign  of  an  enlightened  mind  when  a  man  can  thus  rise  from  his  griefs,  and  con-
form his  mental  and  moral  and  social  life  to  the  unalterable  will  of  God.    It  takes


OH.  xn.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  299


time  for  a  good  man  to  recover  from  the  natural,  and,  therefore,  reasonable,  outflow
of  his  feelings ;  but  when  he  does  recover,  he  retains  all  the  sanctity  and  softening
influence  of  bis  anguish  in  combination  with  a  calm  spirit,  concerned  now  in  ministering
to  the  consolation  of  others  (ver.  24),  and  cheered  by  the  hope  of  a  time  when  the
breaches  caused  by  sin  will  be  healed  (ver.  23).

Genbbal  lessons.  1.  It  becomes  us  to  regard  all  death  in  our  homes  as  connected
with  sin,  and  we  should  always  give  due  weight  to  its  moral  causes  in  our  consideration
of  the  course  of  providence.  2.  There  may  exist  high  moral  reasons  why  intense
earnestness  in  prayer  is  not  always  successful ;  and  yet  it  may  be  true  that  God  do.  s
answer  fervent  prayer.  3.  Men  not  familiar  with  the  secret  life  of  a  Christian  are  not
in  a  position  to  understand  his  conduct  on  special  occasions,  just  as  David's  servants
could  not  understand  his  conduct  in  relation  to  the  death  of  the  child.  4.  We  should
avail  ourselves  of  such  light  concerning  the  future  as  may  be  vouchsafed,  in  order  to
obtain  consolation  amidst  the  bereavements  of  life  (vei-.  23).  5.  The  doctrine  of
recognition  in  heaven  is  certainly  in  accord  with  sanctified  instincts,  and  may  be  held
as  variously  hinted  at  in  Scripture  (ver.  23 ;  of.  Matt.  xvii.  3,  4 ;  1  Thess.  iL  19).

Tokens  of  restoration.  In  vers.  23,  24  we  have  two  statements  which  incidentally
reveal  the  reality  and  completeness  of  the  restoration  of  the  fallen  king  to  the  favour
and  care  of  Grod.  (1)  The  name  (Solomon)  given  by  himself,  probably  at  circumcision,
to  his  son ;  (2)  the  name  (Jedidiah)  which  the  prophet  was  instructed  to  give  to  the
son,  not  as  a  substitute,  but  as  a  supplement.  The  one  indicated  David's  sense  of  peace
with  God  and  in  himself,  the  other  God's  abiding  favour.    Here,  then,  we  may  observe —

I.  That  eestoeation  to  God  afteb  a  fall  is  a  reality.  It  is  not  a  state
rendered  problematical  by  the  observance  of  conditions  extending  over  a  long  period.
David  was  at  peace  with  God,  and  God  did  regard  him  with  unqualified  favour.  Old
things  had  passed  away — the  displeasure  of  God,  the  fear  and  apprehension  of  the  man ;
the  relation  of  complacent  delight  and  tender  care  on  the  one  side,  and  filial  love  and  trust
on  the  other,  was  now  complete.  It  is  important  to  keep  this  truth  clear.  It  is  bound
up  with  the  great  doctrine  of  justification.  God  once  accepting  and  forgiving  a  sinner
becomes  and  remains  to  him  a  gracious  God,  forgetting  all  the  past  and  cherishing
only  love  and  tender  interest.  It  is  a  misreading  of  the  gospel,  and  implies  an  ignor-
ance of  the  most  blessed  Christian  experience  to  imagine  that  a  really  forgiven  one  is
kept  in  suspense  and  dread,  or  that  God  is  holding  back  the  fulness  of  his  favour  till
we  have  repented  a  little  more,  or  more  fully  perfected  our  general  life.  We  are
accepted  in  Christ.  When  he  "  restoreth  "  our  "  soul "  (Ps.  xxiiL  3),  it  is  actual,  not
possible,  germinal  restoration.

II.  That  the  tokens  of  eestoration  vary  according  to  onionMSTANOES.  The
inward  token  in  David's  case  was  the  assured  peace  of  a  conscivnoe  purged  by  the  grace
of  God  (Ps.  li.  7 — 10, 12),  which  came  in  answer  to  his  penitential  cry.  The  outward
token  was  the  life  of  another  child,  the  peaceful  order  of  the  kingdom,  and  especially
this  welcome  message  of  the  prophet  (ver.  25).  The  reality  of  restoration  was  known
as  soon  as  the  almighty  word  of  pardon  was  spoken,  the  confirmatory  signs  of  it — to
strengthen  the  heart  and  ward  off  subtle  temptations  of  the  evil  one — came  in  process
of  time.  No  doubt  fallen  Peter  found  pardon  during  the  dark  night  of  his  penitence  ;
but  the  outward  token,  which  was  also  an  instruction  to  the  other  disciples  not  to  dis-
trust and  shun  him,  came  in  the  gracious  message  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  "  Tell  his
disciples,  and  Peter  "  (Mark  xvi.  7),  and  again  in  the  exhortation  and  encouragement
given  in  the  presence  of  those  who  might  otherwise  have  distrusted  him,  "  Feed  my
sheep "  (John  xxi.  15 — 17).  The  ordinary  sign  of  full  restoration  is  in  the  "  witness
of  the  Spirit "  (Rom.  viii.  14 — 16),  and  the  outward  care  and  blessing  vouchsafed  to
our  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  (John  xv.  7,  8).  God  will  be  sure  to  give  his
people  some  "  token  for  good"  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  17).

III.  That  signs  of  God's  favour  should  be  given  is.  an  illustration  of  his
wonderful  consideration  foe  his  people.  There  is  something  truly  wonderful  in
this  grace  shown  to  David.  Not  only  is  he  forgiven  and  treated  in  all  things  spiritual
as  though  he  had  not  sinned ;  not  only  permitted  to  reign  over  Israel,  and  enter  into
close,  though  it  may  be  very  subdued,  fellowship  with  God ;  but  God  goes,  as  it  were,  out
of  the  ordinary  course  of  providence,  and  sends  a  messenger  to  give  him,  in  this  other


300  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtTEL.  [oh.  xn.  1~31.

name  for  his  child,  a  special  sign  of  full  restoration.  Thus  the  occasional  douhts  sug-
gested by  the  evil  one,  the  possible  distrust  of  the  prophet  in  Israel  and  those  under
him,  and  the  sneers  of  the  profane,  are  all  anticipated  by  the  love  that  slumbers  not
and  that  cares  most  tenderly  and  minutely  for  all  the  need  of  the  reconciled  ones.
"  How  excellent  is  thy  loving-kindness,  0  God  I  *  (Ps,  xxxvL  7) ;  "  He  is  rich  in  mercy,
und  plenteous  in  redemption."

BcMah'e  lesson  to  manhind.  The  fall  of  David  occurred  while  the  war  was  going
on  under  Joab  (ch.  xi.  1,  7,  25).  It  is  probable  that,  as  the  historian  began  to  tell  the
story  of  the  fall,  he  thought  well  to  finish  it,  with  the  account  of  the  restoration,  before
he  took  up  again  the  account  of  the  campaign  being  carried  on  against  the  Ammonites.
We  shall  assume,  therefore,  that  the  fall  of  Kabbah  referred  to  in  vers.  26^31  took
place  in  the  interval  between  the  sin  of  David  and  the  birth  of  Solomon  (ver.  24).  The
narrative  is  inserted  here  doubtless  with  the  primary  design  of  completing  the  history
of  David's  wars,  and  thus  keeping  up  the  continuity  of  his  exploits.  But  as  all  Scrip-
ture ig  written  for  our  learning,  we  may  notice  a  few  incidental  lessons  suggested  by  the
capture  of  the  city  of  Kabbah.

I.  A  GOOD   man's    fall    into  8IN    UNFITS    HIM   FOB    HANT  OF    THE   DUTIES  OF   HIS

DAILY  LIFE.  Joab  was  not  only  left  to  carry  on  the  war  alone,  but  he  even  felt  it  to
be  right  (ver.  28)  to  stir  up  the  king  that  he  might  come  and  take  part,  and  so  share  in
the  honour  about  to  be  won.  The  secret  of  this  most  probably  lay  in  the  fact  that,
during  and  after  David's  entanglement  with  Bathsheba  and  crime  against  Uriah,  he
was  not  in  a  mind  to  enter  upon  the  perils  of  war.  A  woman's  spell  was  on  him ;  his
conscience  was  secretly  troubled ;  he  who  feared  not  the  lion  or  the  giant  now  fears
lest,  if  he  go  to  the  war,  he  should  be  slain.  Therefore  he  tarries  in  Jerusalem  (ch.  xi.
1^—25).  His  sins  rendered  him  incompetent  to  do  what  otherwise  he  would  have  done,
and  it  required  even  an  urgent  request  from  his  general,  coupled  with  an  assurance
that  the  city  was  virtually  captured  already  (vers.  27-^9),  to  induce  him  to  move.
There  are  sins  which  sometimes  drive  men  to  desperate  deeds  and  perilous  places,  and
give  apparently  more  zest  to  life ;  but  in  the  case  of  good  men,  a  known  habit  of  sin
impairs  their  energy  in  life  ;  it  creates  an  abiding  fear ;  it  paralyzes  certain  incumbent
moral  actions ;  it  keeps  from  entering  on  work  which  otherwise  would  be  cheerfully
undertaken ;  it  makes  him  less  a  man.

II.  Those  who  do  deliberate  deeds  or  wbong  to  others  court  a»  infliotion
OK  themselves  of  similar  evils.  This  account  of  the  infliction  of  tortures  on  the
Ammonites  (ver.  31)  is  the  first  instance  in  Hebrew  history  of  such  a  deed,  and  it
seems  strange  that  David  should  have  ordered  it.  But  wil^out  justifying  the  retalia-
tion, the  point  here  to  be  noted  is  that  the  Ammonites  laid  themselves  open  to  such
treatment  by  their  own  actions.  They  had  proposed  barbarous  conditions  of  servitude
to  men  of  Israel  in  the  time  of  trouble  (1  Sam.  xi.  1,  2),  and  they  had  cruelly  insulted
David's  ambassadors  (ch.  a.  1 — 6).  It  is  also  probable  that  in  this  protracted  war
they  may  have  carried  out  these  barbarous  tendencies  towards  prisoners  taken  in' war.
They  thus,  by  deeds  of  cruelty,  sought  for  deeds  of  cruelty  to  themselves  in  their  day
of  defeat.  There  is  doubtless  a  principle  of  retaliation  in  kind  recognizable  in  the  law
of  nature.  As  a  man  soweth  so  he  reapeth.  What  they  do  to  others  they  so  far
justify  others  to  do  to  them,  that  they  have  set  an  example  and  are  incapable  of
protest.  In  some  guarded  form  this  principle  enters  into  human  law,  national  and
international.  In  the  Mosaic  code  it  received  specific  illustration  (Exod.  xxi.  22 — 25).
Whether  David  was  right  or  wrong,  the  Ammonites  courted  torture  by  evil  deeds,
as  men  now  court  evil  from  their  imperfect  fellow-men  by  evil  deeds  to  them.  The
harsh  employer  courts  distrust  and  injury  from  the  employes.  Tyrannical  rulers  court
plots,  conspiracies,  and  possibly  assassinations,  from  oppressed  subjects.

III.  There  are  prophetic  symbols  of  honour  falling  on  the  bight  head.
It  was,  perhaps,  on  the  part  of  Joab  and  the  army,  a  mere  feat  of  military  triumph  to
place  the  heavy  crown  of  the  Ammonite  god  (for  so  we  take  it  to  he)  on  the  head  of
David ;  but  it  was  suggestive  at  the  time  to  all  spectators  of  the  honours  that  ought
to  come,  and  in  course  of  years  were  coming,  on  One  who  was  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord.
And  to  us  it  seems  to  suggest  the  ultimate  passing  of  all  highest  honours,  long  usurped,
to  him  whose  right  it  is  to  reign,  and  who  is  not  only  said  to  be  worthy  of  aSl  honoun


OH.  xn.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  801

(Bav.  iv.  11 ;  t.  12, 13),  but  is  so  gradually  acquiring  them  that  he  at  last  shall  be
crowned  with  many  crowns  (Heb.  ii.  9 ;  Rev.  iv.  10 ;  xix.  12).  In  the  triumph  of
every  good  man  over  evil,  we  see  a  symbolic  intimation  of  the  final  triumph  of  the  Son
of  man  over  all  enemies  (1  Cor.  xv.  25).  In  the  distinction  awarded  to  any  of  Christ's
servants,  who  are  really  nis  representatives  in  the  world,  because  of  the  destruction
of  some  monstrous  evil,  we  liave  a  symbolic  representation  of  the  glory  and  honour  that
will  come  on  the  head  of  the  great  Deliverer,  when  to  him  every  knee  shall  bow,  and
the  last  enemy  shall  have  been  destroyed.  Faith  can  see  coming  victories  in  passing
events.

IV.  The  education  op  the  consoibnob  in  httuan  belations  is  vebt  slow.  The
principle  of  retaliation  is  in  all  legal  punishments  (division  L),  but  the  application  of  the
principle  is  a  matter  of  judgment,  and  tbe  judgment  depends  on  the  culture  of  the  con-
science. There  are  co-ordiaate  powers  in  human  nature.  The  feeling  of  benevolence
has  a  place  as  truly  as  a  sense  of  justice.  It  depends  on  the  degree  in  which  conscience
is  cultivated  as  to  whether  the  rigid  carrying  out  of  what  justice  may  seem  to  demand,
i.e.  the  spirit  of  retaliation  in  the  name  of  love,  not  of  self,  should  be  tempered  by  kindly
consideration,  and  to  what  extent.  Probably  David  at  this  time  was  in  the  degenerate
•mood  of  mind  brought  on  by  his  fall,  and  therefore  restive  and  harsh,  as  men  are  when
the  heart  is  corroded  by  guilt.  But  at  all  events,  in  those  times  there  was  not  that
fine  sense  of  delicacy  in  regard  to  human  suffering  as  now.  The  same  mental  and
moral  condition  prevailed  during  the  ages  of  persecution  for  religion.  Romanists  and
Protestants  did  once  what  now  their  descendants  would  be  shocked  at.  It  is  a  defec-
tive education  of  conscience  which  enables  men  to  live  in  careless  ease  and  luxury  while
thousands  are  lacking  food.  Christ  only  was  perfect  Man.  If  all  wure  like  him,  every
consideration  would  be  paid  to  human  feeling  in  the  administration  of  justice,  and  in
the  private  relations  of  life.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — (Jerusalem.)  A/aitk/ul  reprover  of  sin.  "  And  Jehovah  sent  Nathan  to
David."  The  sin  of  David  could  not  be  hid.  It  was  known  to  his  servants  (ch.  xi.  4)
and  to  Joab;  it  must  have  been  surmised  by  many  from  his  hasty  marriage;  and  now
it  was  fully  manifest  (ch.  xi.  27).  About  a  year  had  elapsed.  "  What  a  year  for
David  to  have  spent !  What  a  joyless,  sunless,  godless  year  1  Were  God's  words  still
sweet  to  his  taste  ?  Were  they  still  the  rejoicing  of  his  heart?  or  had  he  come  to  hate
the  threatening  of  the  Law?"  (J.  Wright).  At  length  Nathan  (oh.  vii.  3)  came— an
example  of  a  faithful  reprover  (Ps.  cxli.  5;  Prov.  xxvii.  6;  1  Sam.  L  13;  iL  22).
Consider —

I.  His  Divine  commission.  He  came,  not  because  he  was  sent  for  by  David,  nor
because  ha  was  prompted  by  natural  reason  or  impulse  (ch.  vii.  3),  but  in  obedience
to  the  word  of  the  Lord  (ver.  7),  and  in  fulfilment  of  his  prophetic  calling.  "  It  was
the  true  mission  of  the  prophets,  as  champions  of  the  oppressed  in  the  courts  of  kincs  •
it  was  the  true  prophetic  spirit  that  spoke  through  Nathan's  mouth"  (Stanley).  °l!
Reproof  should  be  administered  only  according  to  the  villi  of  God.  It  is  not  for  every
one  to  assume  the  office  of  reprover  (Ps.  1.  16) ;  nor  to  administer  reproof  to  every  one
who  may  deserve  it,  especially  when  holding  a  position  of  authority.  In  this  matter
men  are  apt  to  run  before  they  are  sent.  The  duty  is  a  relative  one,  and  demands
careful  consideration  before  it  is  undertaken.  2.  The  will  of  God  concerning  the
administration  of  reproof  is  indicated  in  various  ways ;  such  as  the  authority  given  to
parents,  magistrates,  pastors,  and  teachers — "  reprove,  rebuke,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  iv.  2;  v.  1) ;
the  teachings  of  the  Divine  Word;  the  guidance  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  3.  When'  the
will  of  God  is  clearly  made  known,  it  should  be  humbly,  readily,  and  diligently  obeyed ;
both  when  it  requires  his  servants  to  testify  his  favour  (ch.  vii.  4,  25)  and  his  displeasure
(eh.  xi.  27).

II.  His  consummate  wisdom.  In  nothing  are  wisdom  and  prudence  more  needed
than  in  reproof.  If  given  unwisely  it  is  likely  to  excite  opposition,  produce  equivoca-
tion, repel  and  harden.  "  A  word  fitly  spoken,"  etc.  (Prov.  xxv.  11, 12).  It  should
be  given :  1.  At  a  proper  time — ^when  the  proof  of  wrong-doing  admits  of  no  denial.


302  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xn.  1—31.


and  the  m!nd  of  the  wrong-doer  is  duly  prepared.  It  ii  not  probable  tbat  Nathan
came  immediately  after  he  first  heard  of  David's  transgression.  "  His  task  was  not
to  gain  a  confession,  but  only  to  facilitate  it.  He  was  appointed  by  God  to  await
the  time  of  the  internal  crisis  of  David"  (Hengstenberg).  2,  When  the  offender  is
aione  (Matt.  xviiL  15),  and  is  likely  to  pay  greater  heed  to  it  and  to  be  less  influenced
by  what  others  think.  Sometimes,  however,  sinners  must  be  "rebuked  before  all,
that  others  also  may  fear"  (1  Tim.  v.  20).  3.  In  a  manner  adapted  to  produce
the  most  salutary  effect ;  with  harmless  wisdom  (Matt,  x.  16)  and  holy  and  beneficent
"  guile "  (2  Cor.  xii.  16)  displayed  in ;  (1)  A  respectful,  courteous,  and  concili-
atory bearing.  To  begin  with  rude  reproaches  is  to  ensure  failure.  (2)  An  ingenious
invention  of  a  "  form  of  speech  "  (ch.  xiv.  20)  and  illustration  suitable  to  the  case.  (3)
A  generous  recognition  of  the  better  qualities  in  men.  "  David's  goodness  is  not  denied
because  of  his  sin,  nor  is  David's  sin  denied  because  of  his  goodness."  (4)  A  clear
statement  of  the  truth,  avoiding  exaggeration  and  everything  that  may  hinder  its
illuminating  force.  (5)  A  strong  appeal  to  the  conscience,  so  as  to  quicken  its  action  as
a  witness  and  judge.  (6)  A  dexterous  application  of  admitted  principles  and  expressed
judgments  and  emotions.  (7)  An  effectual  removal  of  the  mists  of  self-deception,  so  as
to  enable  the  evil-doer  to  see  his  actual  character  and  conduct,  and  constrain  him  to
reprove  and  condemn  himself.  The  wisdom  of  the  prophet  in  fulfilling  his  mission  to
the  king  was  "inimitably  admirable."  "Observing  that  this  direct  road  (the  recom-
mendation of  self-knowledge)  which  led  to  it  (the  reformation  of  mankind)  was  guarded
on  all  sides  by  self-love,  and  consequently  very  difficult  to  open  access,  public  instruc-
tors soon  found  out  that  a  different  and  more  artful  course  was  requisite.  As  they
had  not  strength  to  remove  this  flattering  passion  which  stood  in  their  way  and  blocked
np  the  passages  to  the  heart,  they  endeavoured  by  stratagem  to  get  beyond  it,  and,  by
a  skilful  address,  if  possible  to  deceive  it.  This  gave  rise  to  the  only  manner  of  con-
veying their  instructions  in  parables,  fables,  and  such  sort  of  indirect  applications;
which,  though  they  could  not  conquer  this  principle  of  self-love,  yet  often  laid  it  asleep,
or  at  least  overreached  it  for  a  few  moments,  till  a  just  judgment  could  be  procured.
The  Prophet  Nathan  seems  to  have  been  a  great  master  in  this  art  of  address"
(Laurence  Sterne).

III.  His  HOLT  coTJEAGB.  His  mission  was  as  perilous  as  it  was  painful;  and  might,
if  it  failed,  have  cost  him  his  life.  But  he  feared  not  "  the  wrath  of  the  king  "  (Prov.
xvi.  14 ;  xix.  12 ;  Heb.  xi.  27).  Such  moral  courage  as  he  exhibited :  1.  Is  inspired  by
faith  in  God,  whose  face  it  beholds,  and  on  whose  might  it  relies.  2.  Consists  in  the
fearless  fulfilment  of  duty,  whatever  consequences  it  may  involve — the  loss  of  friendship
or  other  earthly  good ;  the  endurance  of  bonds,  suffering,  and  death.  "  None  of  these
things  move  me,''  etc.  (Acts  xx.  24).  3.  Appears  in  simple,  bold,  direct,  and  unre-
served utterance  of  God's  Word  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  7).  At  the  proper  moment  the  prophet
changed  his  style  of  address ;  gave  it  a  particular  application, "  the  very  life  of  doctrine ; "
and,  in  the  name  of  the  supreme  King  and  Judge,  arraigned  the  offender,  declared  his
guilt,  and  pronounced  his  sentence.  "  His  example  is  especially  to  be  noted  by  all
whose  office  is  to  'Tebuke  with  all  authority'"  (' Speaker's  Commentary ').

lY.  His  benevolent  aim.  He  came  not  only  to  testify  against  sin,  to  maintain  the
authority  of  the  Law,  etc. ;  but  also  (in  connection  therevrith)  to  benefit  the  sinner,  by :
1.  Leading  him  to  repentance.  2.  Assuring  him  of  forgiveness.  3.  Restoring  him  to
righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  (ver.  13 ;  Ps.  li.  12).  "  Beproofs  of  instruction  are  the
way  of  life  "  (Prov.  vi.  23 ;  xiii.  18 ;  xvii.  10).  Sympathy  with  the  holy  love  of  God
toward  sinners  is  an  essential  qualification  of  a  faithful  reprover  of  sin ;  and  as  it  is
,  God's  mercy  that  employs  agents  and  means  for  their  restoration,  so  it  is  his  grace  alona
that  makes  them  effectual  (John  xvL  8).

"  And  so  wide  arms
Hath  goodness  infinite,  that  it  receives
All  who  turn  to  it."

(Dante.)

D.

Vers.  1 — i. — (Thk  king's  palace.)  The  parable  of  the  rich  oppressor ;  or,  the  poor
man's  lamb,    1,  This  is  the  first  and  almost  the  only  parable  contained  in  the  Old  Testa-


OH,  xn,  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  803

ment.  There  is  one  instance  of  a  fable  of  earlier  date  (Judg.  ix.  8 — 15).  The  former
belongs  to  a  higher  order  of  teaching  than  the  latter  (Smith's  '  Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  art.
"Fable;"  Trench,  'Notes  on  the  Parables');  and  it  was  employed  most  perfectly  by
the  great  Teacher.  Compare  his  parables  of  the  unmerciful  servant,  the  rich  fool,  the
rich  man  and  Lazarus.  2.  It  was  in  part  an  acted  parable  (like  ch.  xiv.  5 — 7  ;  1  Kings
XX.  35 — 13) ;  and  was  at  first  regarded  by  the  king  as  the  simple,  literal  statement  of
a  case  in  which  one  of  his  subjects,  a  poor  man,  had  suffered  wrong  at  the  hands  of
another,  a  rich  man;  and  with  reference  to  which  the  prophet  appeared  as  an  advocate
on  behalf  of  the  former  against  the  latter,  seeking  justice  and  judgment.  "  Nathan,  it
is  likely,  used  to  come  to  him  on  such  errands,  which  made  this  the  less  suspected.  It
becomes  those  who  have  interest  in  princes  and  free  access  to  them  to  intercede  for  those
that  are  wronged,  that  they  may  have  right  done  them  "  (Matthew  Henry).  3.  Its
moral  and  spiritual  aim  (which  is  always  the  chief  thing  to  be  considered  in  the
interpretation  of  a  parable)  was  to  set  forth  the  guilt  of  a  rich  oppressor,  and  thereby
to  awaken  the  general  sense  of  outraged  justice  in  the  king  concerning  his  own  conduct.
4.  "  It  is  one  of  those  little  gems  of  Divinity  that  are  scattered  so  plentifully  through
the  sacred  Scriptures,  that  sparkle  with  a  lustre,  pure  and  brilliaDt  as  the  light  of
heaven,  and  attest  the  sacred  origin  of  the  wonderful  book  that  contains  them"
(Blaikie).    Consider,  the  guilt  of  this  rich  man  in  the  light  of —

I.  His  position  compared  with  that  of  the  poor  man,  and  his  relation  to  him.
"  There  were  two  men  in  one  city,"  etc.  (vers.  1 — 3).  1.  He  had  much  possessions,
"  exceeding  many  flocks  and  herds."  Providence  had  been  very  kind  to  him.  He  had
abundance  for  personal  gratification  and  princely  hospitality  and  liberality.  But  the
poor  man  had  nothing.  "  save  one  little  ewe  lamb,"  which  he  valued  all  the  more  on
that  account,  and  reared  amidst  his  family  with  the  utmost  care  and  tenderness.  2.
He  had  great  power,  which  he  might  use  for  good  or  evil ;  in  fulfilment  of  the  Law
or  in  frustration  of  it;  to  protect  and  benefit  "the  poor  and  needy"  or  to  oppress  and
rob  them.  3.  He  dwelt  in  the  same  city  with  the  poor  man,  and  was  well  acqu^ted
with  his  circumstance.'?.  He  knew  the  story  of  the  little  lamb.  The  picture  is
exquisitely  drawn  by  one  who  was  familiar  with  many  such  scenes  in  humble  life,  and
adapted  to  excite  sympathy  and  pity.  The  obligations  of  the  rich  man  toward  his
"  neighbour  "  are  manifest ;  and  they  shadow  forth  the  greater  obligations  of  others  in  a
still  higher  position  (vers.  7,  8).  Although  the  king  hud  well-nigh  absolute  power  over
the  property  and  lives  of  his  subjects,  it  belonged  to  the  true  idea  of  his  office  to  "  reign,
command,  and  punish,  as  though  it  were  not  he  that  reigned,  commanded,  and  punished,
but  the  One  to  whom  he  never  ceases  to  be  responsible,  and  as  though  he  might  him-
self be  in  the  position  of  any  other  member  of  the  community  and  the  latter  in  his
own  "  (Ewald, '  Antiquities ').

II.  His  disposition.  "And  there  came  a  traveller,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  "The  Jewish
doctors  say  it  represents  that  which  they  call  'the  evil  disposition,'  or  desire  that
is  in  us,  which  must  be  diligently  watched  and  observed  when  we  feel  its  motions.
'In  the  beginning  it  is  but  a  traveller,  but  in  time  it  becomes  a  guest,  and  in
conclusion  is  the  master  of  the  house ' "  (Patrick).  This  is  pressing  the  imagery  of
the  parable  too  far.  Nevertheless,  "the  sin  is  traced  to  its  root,  viz.  insatiable
covetousness ;  this  hidden  background  of  all  sins"  (Keil);  sinful,  selfish,  inordinate
desire  (ch.  xi.  1 — 5).  It  is  a  "root  of  bitterness."  And  in  the  case  supposed  what
evils  it  involved  1  1.  Discontentment  with  a  man's  own  possessions,  notwithstanding
their  abundance  "  Nature  is  content  with  little,  grace  with  less,  sin  with  nothing."
2.  Ingratitude  toward  the  Giver  of  them.  3.  Envy  of  another  man  on  account  of
some  imaginary  advantage  he  possesses,  notwithstanding  its  comparative  insignificance
— "  One  httle  ewe  lamb."  4.  Avarice.  5.  Voluptuousness.  6.  Pride  in  the  possession
of  power ;  and  its  irresponsible  exercise.  There  was  no  sense  of  personal  accountability
to  God.  7.  Vanity  or  love  of  display,  though  at  the  expense  of  another ;  an  imdue  regard
for  outward  appearance.  8.  Deceitfulness.  Did  the  guest  who  enjoyed  the  rich  man's
hospitality  dream  at  whose  cost  it  was  provided?  9.  Pitilessness  and  obduracy.
"  Becauie  he  had  no  pity  "  (ver.  6).  10.  Idolatry  (Col.  iii.  5).  It  is  oiJy  when  sin  is
viewed  in  the  light  of  the  sphituaUty  of  the  commandment,  that  its  "  exceeding  sinfiil-
ness"  becomes  manifest-  (Bom.  vii.  13).  "Covetousness  is  a  subtle  sin,  a  dangerous
■in,  a  mother  sin,  a  radical  vice,  a  breach  of  all  the  ten  commandments  "  (T.  Watson).


304  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xii.  1—31.

III.  His  conduct.  "And  he  spared  to  take  of  his  own  flock,"  etc.  It  was:  1.
Unjust.  2.  Tyrannical.  3.  Cruel ;  "  a  wanton  aggravation  of  the  evils  of  poverty,
humbling  the  poor  man  with  a  sense  of  injustice  and  inability  to  protect  himself,
deriving  a  momentary  gratification  from  seeing  his  neighbour  laid  low  at  his  feci,  ai
if  no  lamb  was  so  savoury  as  that  which  had  been  torn  from  the  poor  man's  boaom
amidst  the  tears  of  his  children."  4.  Lawless  and  reckless;  "a  despising  of  the
commandment  of  the  Lord"  (ver  9).  The  poor  man's  complaint  is  unheard.  But  is
there  not  in  Israel  a  just  God,  who  notices  and  punishes  such  acts  as  these  ?  "  It  was  a
cruel  and  wicked  deed.  It  was  I  Who  says  so  ?  Speak  not  hastily,  lest  in  so  speaking
you  condemn  yourself.  This  is  a  parable ;  and  I  would  have  you  consider  whether
under  another  name  it  is  not  spoken  concerning  you.  Reserve  your  rebuke,  lest  it  come
back  upon  yourself  "  (R.  Halley).— D.

Vers.  6,  6. — (Jebusaleu.)  The  blinding  influence  of  sin.  "  David's  anger  was
greatly  kindled  against  the  man ; "  he  declared  with  a  solemn  oath  (ch.  iv.  9 — 11)  that
he  deserved  to  die  (literally,  "  was  a  son  of  death,"  1  Sam.  xxvi.  16 ;  1  Kings  ii.  26),
and  ordered  restitution  according  to  the  Law  (Exod,  xxii.  1).  His  severity  displayed  the
fiery  temper  of  the  man,  and  the  arbitrary  power  of  the  monarch,  rather  than  the  calm
deliberation  of  the  judge ;  and  (like  the  treatment  of  the  Ammonites,  ver.  31)  indicated
a  mind  iU  at  ease  (ch.  xi.  22 — 27 ;  Ps.  xxxii.  3,  4) ;  for  he  was  not  totally  blind  to  his
sin,  nor  "past  feeling  "  (Eph.  iv.  19);  though  he  had  no  thought  of  the  application  of
the  case  to  himself.    We  have  here  an  illustration  of —

I.  An  astonishing  fact  ;  viz.  the  self-ignorance,  self-deception,  internal  hypocrisy,
of  men.  Nothing  is  more  important  than  self-knowledge.  It  is  often  enjoined.  "  From
heaven  came  the  precept,  '  Know  thyself.' "  And  it  might  naturally  appear  to  be  easily
attained,  seeing  that  it  lies  so  near  home.  Yet  how  certain,  how  common,  and  how
surprising  its  absence  I  "  There  is  not  anything  relating  to  men's  characters  more
surprising  and  unaccountable  than  this  partiality  to  themselves  which  is  observable  in
many ;  as  there  is  nothing  of  more  melancholy  reflection  respecting  morality  and
religion"  (Butler,  'Upon  Self-Deceit').  They  are  blind  (at  least  partially)  and
deceived  as  to  their  sin ;  notwithstanding :  1.  Their  perception  of  the  evil  of  sin  in
general  or  in  the' abstract.  Ingratitude,  selfishness,  oppression,  pitilessness ;  who  is
not  ready  to  denounce  these  vices  ?  2.  Their  sinfulness  in  the  sight  of  other  people.
Although  David  had  sought  to  conceal  his  sin  from  others,  perhaps  still  flattered  him-
self that  it  was  known  only  to  a  few,  and  justified  or  palliated  its  guilt  to  himself,
many  others  besides  Nathan  saw  and  abhorred  it  (Fs.  xxxvi.  2).

"  O  wad  some  power  the  glftie  gie  us
To  see  oursels  as  others  see  us  I
It  wad  frae  moule  a  blunder  free  ua^
And  foolish  notion."

3.  Their  condemnation  of  sin  in  others,  of  the  very  same  kind  as  that  which  they
tolerate  in  themselves.  The  resemblance  between  the  rich  oppressor  and  David  was  so
close  that  it  is  astonishing  it  was  not  detected.  4.  Their  abhorrence  at  another  time
and  under  other  circumstances  of  its  guilt  when  thought  of  in  relation  to  themselves
(1  Sam.  xxiv.  5).  "  What  I  is  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thiiig  ?  "
(2  Kings  viii.  13).  "  Yet  the  dog  did  it"  (Matthew  Henry).  "  Next  to  these  instances
of  self-deceit  of  our  true  disposition  and  character,  which  appear  in  not  seeing  that  in
ourselves  which  shocks  us  in  another  man,  there  is  another  species  still  more  dangerous
and  delusive,  and  which  the  more  guarded  perpetually  fall  into,  from  the  judgments  they
make  of  different  vices  according  to  their  age  and  complexion,  and  the  various  ebbs  and
flows  of  their  passions  and  desires  "  (L.  Sterne,  '  Self- Knowledge ').  5.  Their  culpability
beyond  that  of  those  whom  they  condemn.  It  was  not  a  little  lamb  of  which  he  had
robbed  the  poor  man,  but  his  dearly  loved  wife,  his  one  earthly  treasure.  It  was  not
a  lamb  that  he  had  killed,  but  a  man,  his  neighbour  and  faithful  defender.  His
superior  position  and  possessions  aggravated  his  guilt.  Was  he  not  himself  "  a  son  ol
death  "  ?  "  What  a  sad  proof  of  the  blinding  influence  of  self-love,  that  men  are  ready
to  form  so  different  an  estimate  of  their  conduct  when  it  is  not  seen  to  be  their  own  1
How  ignorant  are  we  of  ourselves,  and  how  true  it  is  that  even  when  our  own  hearts


OH.  xn.  1—31.]  THE  SEdONB  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  805

condemn  ils,  Gtod  id  greater  than  our  hearts,  and  knoweth  all  things ! "  (Blaikie).  For
this  fact  let  ub  seek —

II.  An  ArfiQUATB  cause.  It  is  seldom  due  to  insufficiency  Of  light  or  means  of
knowing  sin.  Is  it,  then,  due  to  men's  inconsideration  of  themeelves  ?  or  to  the  per-
version of  their  moral  judgment  ?  Doubtless  to  both ;  but  still  more  to  sin  iUelf,  which
is  essentially  selfishness' — a  false  and  inordinate  love  of  self.  "  For  consider :  nothing  is
more  manifest  than  that  affection  and  paSsion  of  all  kinds  influence  the  judgment"
(Butler)  J  prejudicing  its  decisions  in  their  own  favour.  Even  when  there  is  more  than
a  suspicion  that  all  is  not  Well,  it  stifles  further  inquiry  and  pretenta  full  conviction
by :  1.  Producing  a  general  persuasion  in  men  that  their  moral  condition  is  better  thati  it
really  is.  2.  Directing  exclusive  attention  to  those  dispositions  and  actions  of  which
conscience  can  approve.  3.  Inducing  unwillingness  to  consider  the  opposite,  and  to
know  the  worst  of  themselves.  The  glimpse  of  the  truth  which  thfey  perceive  is  pain-
fiil,  and  (as  in  the  case  of  diseased  vision)  it  causes  them  to  shut  their  eyes  against
perceiving  the  whole  truth  (John  iii.  20).  4.  Inventing  specious  arguments  in  justifi-
cation of  ■  the  course  to  which  they  are  disposed.  5.  Dwelling  upon  supposed  com-
pensations for  injury  done  or  guilt  incurred.  Self-love  is  wondrously  fertile  in  devising
such  excuses  and  palliatives.  David  may  have  thought  that  the  standard  by  which
others  were  judged  was  not  applicable  to  him.  "Perhaps,  as  power  is  intoxicating,  he
conceived  of  himself  as  not  subjected  to  the  ordinary  rules  of  society.  In  sending  an
order  to  his  general  to  put  Uriah  '  in  the  hottest  of  the  battle,'  he  probably  found  a
palliative  for  his  conscience ;  for  what  was  it  but  to  sive  to  a  brave  soldier  a  post  of
honour?  No  doubt  tlie  victim  considered  himself  honoured  by  the  appointment,  while
it  c;ave  occasion  to  the  king  to  solace  himself  with  the  thought  that  it  was  an  enemy
and  not  he  who  put  an  end  to  the  life  of  his  subject"  (W.  White).  His  marrying
Bathsheba,  also,  he  may  have  sujiposed,  made  amends  for  the  wrong  he  had  done  to  her.
But  the  means  which  he  adopted  to  conceal  his  sin  from  othets,  and  deemed  a  palliative
of  his  guilt,  Were  a  Special  aggravation  of  it  (vers.  9,  10).

pBSESVATloNS.  1.  Nothing  is  more  ruinous  than  self-deception  (Heb.  iii.  13 ;  Jas.
i.  i2 ;  1  John  i.  8).  2.  To  avoid  it  thfere  must  be  honest  self-examination  (Ps.  iv.  4 ;
2  Cor.  xiii.  5).  3.  We  should  especially  gUaM  against  the  blinding  influence  of
undue  self-love  (Ps.  six.  12 ;  Jer.  ±Vii.  9).  4.  There  should  also  be  earnest  prayer  to
him  who  searcheth  the  hearts,  for  true  self-knowledge  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23 ;  Job  xiii.  23 ;
xixiv.  32).— D.

Vers,  t — 10. — (The  palac».)  "  Thou  art  the  man  I "  The  proper  purpose  of  reproof  is
eanviction  ofiin.  This  purpose  was  accomplished  by  the  words  of  the  prophet.  They
were  like  a  "  two-edged  sword  "  (Heb.  iv.  12),  the  point  of  *hioh  was,  "  Thou  art  the
man!"  "If  ever  a  word  from  huiuah  lips  fell  with  crushing  weight  and  with  the
illuminating  power  of  a  gltiam  of  lightning,  itwasthls"(Kriimtaacher).  "His  indigna-
tion against  the  tich  man  of  the  parable  showed  that  the  moral  sense  was  not  wholly
extinguished.  The  instant  recollection  of  guilt  breaks  up  the  illusion  of  months"
(Stanley).  Observe  that :  1.  One  of  the  most  effectual  means  of  convincing  a  man  of
sill  is  by  Betting  it  before  him  as  ixUting  in  ahothet  person.  "  Thou  art  the  man  J "  the
story  of  *hoBe  crime  has  stirred  thine  indignation  and  called  forth  the  sentence  of
death  from  thy  lips.  Self-interest,  passibtl,  ahd  prejudice,  that  darken  a  man's  view  of
his  own  sin,  have  comparatively  little  ihfluence  Upon  him  when  looking  at  the  sin  of
another.  Here  the  Veil  is  removed ;  he  sees  clearly  and  judges  impartially.  Eor  this
reason  (among  others)  our  Lord  "  R"pake  many  things  Unto  them  in  parables."  2.  The
force  of  truth  depends  upoti  the  particular  application  Vhich  is  madeof  it.  ''  Thou  art
the  man  who  hast  dohe  this !  "  (LXX.) ;  against  thyself  thine  indignation  should  be
directed ;  upon  thyself  the  sentence  has  been  pronounced.  It  is  as  if  hittierto  only  the
back  of  the  offender  was  seen,  when.  Suddenly  turning  rouhd,  his  feed  appeared,  and
David  beheld  himself  I  "Men  often  correctly  understand  a  message  of  God  without
observing  its  personal  application  to  theth."  Hehce  the  pl'eacher,  like  the  prophet  of
old  (1  Kings  Xiv.  1 ;  xviii.  18;  xxi.  19;  2  EiUgs  v.  26;  Dan.  v.  22;  Matt.  xiv.  4),
must  directly,  wisely,  and  faithfully  apply  the  truth  to  his  hearers.  " '  Thou  art  the
man ! '  is  or  ought  to  be  the  conclusion,  expre>ised  or  Unexpressed,  of  every  practibal  ser-
mon."   What  is  a  sword  without  a  point  ?    "  Here  also  is  a  lesson  to  hearers.    David

n.  SASIUEL.  X


306  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xn.  1— SI.

listened  to  a  eermon  from  Nathan,  which  exactly  suited  his  own  case,  and  yet  he  did
not  apply  it  to  himsdf.  He  turned  the  edge  of  it  from  himself  to  another.  The  benefit
of  sermons  depends  more  upon  the  hearer  than  the  preacher.  The  best  sermon  is  that
which  is  hest  applied  by  those  to  whom  it  is  preached  "  (Wordsworth).  "  Application  is
the  life  of  preaching ;  and  self-application  is  the  life  of  hearing."  "  They  profit  most,  not
who  hear  most,  but  who  apply  most  what  they  hear  to  their  own  hearts.''  3.  Every
man  is  remcntible  to  God  for  the  sin  which  he  has  committed.  "  Thou  art  inexcusable,
O  man  "  ^tom.  ii.  1),  however  thou  mayest  have  persuaded  thyself  to  the  contrary.  Is
the  man  whom  thou  judgest  accountable  for  his  conduct;  and  art  not  thou  for  thine?
Is  he  accountable  to  thee?  How  much  more  art  thou  to  God?  No  position,  however
exalted,  can  release  from  responsibility  to  him  or  exempt  from  obedience  to  his  com-
mandment ;  no  constitutional  tendency,  no  temptation,  expediency,  or  necessity  be  an
adequate  reason  for  despising  it  (Ezek.  xvili.  4 ;  Bom.  iii.  6).

«  And  self  to  take  or  leave  is  free.
Feeling  its  own  sufficiency :
bi  spite  of  science,  spite  of  fate.
The  judge  within  thee,  soon  or  late,
Will  blame  but  thee,  O  maul

**  Say  not, '  I  would,  but  could  not.    He
Bhould  bear  the  blame  who  fashioned  mei
Call  a  mere  change  of  motive  choice  ? '
Booming  enoh  pleas,  the  inner  voice
dies,  'Thine  the  deed,  O  man t '"

(J.  A.  Symonds.)

4.  A  meisenger  of  Heaven  is  always  in  readiness  to  single  out  the  sinner,  bring  his  sin
to  remembrance,  and  call  him  to  account.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,"  etc
(ver.  7),  "  Wherefore  hast  thou  despised  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  to  do  evil  in  his
Bight?"  etc.  (ver.  9).  Every  wrong  done  to  man,  yea,  every  sin,  is  a  factual  contempt
of  his  commandment  (Ps.  IL  4).  Whilst  the  supreme  King  and  Judge  observes  it,  and  is
long-suffering  towards  the  doer  of  it,  he  provides  many  witnesses,  holds  them  in  reserve,
and  sends  them  with  his  word  at  the  proper  moment  to  declare  all  its  enormity — ^its
ingratitude  (ver.  8),  presumption  (ver.  9),  disloyalty  before  bim,  its  "intense  and
brutal  selfishness,"  sensuality,  cruelty,  and  craft.  Conscience  also  awakes  to  confirm
their  testimony,  with  "  a  thousand  several  tongues,  and  every  tongue  "  crying,  "  Thou
art  the  man ! "  5.  The  less  enacted  the  charge  preferred  against  the  sinner,  the  more
overwhelming  his  conviction  of  guilt.  "  The  further  D^vid  was  from  thinking  of  a
reference  to  himself,  the  greater  the  force  with  which  the  word  must  have  struclt  him  "
(Erdmann).  There  conld  be  no  defence,  no  extenuation,  no  answer  (Acts  xxiv.  25  ;
Matt.  xxii.  12).  6.  The  condemnation  which  one  man  pronounces  on  another  some-
times recoils  upon  himself  with  increased  severity.  "Out  of  thine  own  mouth,"  etc.
(Luke  xix.  22).  "  Now  therefore  the  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine  house,"
etc.  "  For  a  single  moment  the  features  of  the  king  are  charged  with  the  expression  of
astonishment.  He  gazes  eagerly  at  the  prophet  like  one  at  a  loss  to  divine  his  meaning.
But,  almost  instantly,  as  if  an  inward  light  had  burst  upon  his  soul,  the  expression
changes  to  one  of  agony  and  horror.  The  deeds  of  the  last  twelve  months  glare  in  all
their  infamous  baseness  upon  him,  and  outraged  justice,  with  a  hundred  glittering
swords,  seems  all  impatient  to  devour  him  "  (Blaikie).  "  O  wicked  man,  thou  shalt
surely  die  1 "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  8).  7.  The  conviction  of  sin  is  the  first  step  in  the  way  of
restoration  to  righteousness.  The  sense  of  sin  is  the  beginning  of  salvation.  "  He
that  humbleth  himself,"  etc.  (Luke  xiv.  11 ;  1  John  L  9).  "  If  we  would  judge  our-
selves," etc.  (1  Cor.  xi.  31,  32).  Every  man  must  be  revealed  to  himself  in  the  Ught  of
God's  righteous  judgment  here  or  hereafter  (Eccles.  xL  9 ;  xiL  14).— D.

Vers.  10 — 12.— (The  palaob.)  Th«  penalties  of  sin.  "Now  therefore  the  sword
shall  never  depart  from  thine  house,"  etc.  1.  Sin  is  connected  with  suffering.  The
connection  is  real,  intimate,  inevitable.  Nothing  is  more  clearly  manifest  or  mora
generally  admitted ;  yet  nothing  is  more  practically  disregarded.  Men  commit  sin
nnder  the  delusion  that  they  can  do  go  with  impunity.    But  "  they  that  plough  iniquity.


OH.  XII.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  807

and  BOW  wickedness,  reap  the  same "  (Job  iv.  8 ;  Gal.  vi.  7).  2.  Sin  gerveB  to  aecoitnt
for  Euffering ;  explains  and  justifies  its  existence  under  the  righteous  and  beneficent
government  of  God.  The  subsequent  sufierings  of  David  would  have  been  inexplicable
if  his  great  transgression  had  not  been  recorded.  "  The  remainder  of  David's  life  was
as  disastrous  as  the  beginning  had  been  prosperous  "  (Hale).  Personal  suffering,  how-
ever, often  appears  disproportionate  to  personal  transgression  (1  Sam.  iv.  3) ;  and  its
reason  in  such  cases  must  be  sought  in  hereditary  or  other  relationships,  and  in  the
purposes  to  which  it  is  subservient.  The  penalties  of  sin  (such  as  David  suffered)  take
place —

I.  By  Divikb  inpliotion.  "Behold,  I  will  raise  up  evil  against  thee,"  etc.  (ver.  11 ;
ch.  ix.  27).  They  are :  1.  Necessitated  by  the  justice  of  God.  "  Justice  is  that
causality  in  God  which  connects  suffering  with  actual  sin  "  (Schleiermacher).  He  who
"  despises  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  "  wtght  to  be  punished.  2.  Declared  by  the
Word  of  God,  both  in  the  Law  aud  the  prophets.  The  word  of  Nathan  was  a  sentence,
as  well  as  a  prediction  of  judgment.  3.  Bifectuated  by  the  power  of  God,  which
operates,  not  only  by  extraordinary  agencies,  but  also,  and  most  commonly,  in  the
ordinary  course  of  things,  and  by  way  of  natural  consequence ;  directs  and  controls  the
actions  of  men  to  the  accomplishment  of  special  results ;  and  often  makes  use  of
the  eins  of  one  man  to  punish  those  of  another.  Natural  law  is  the  regular  method  of
Divine  activity.  In  accordance  therewith  the  violation  of  moral  law  is  followed  by
internal  misery  and  external  calamity,  which  are  closely  associated  (Isa.  xlv.  7  ;  Amos
iii.  4).     "  Vengeance  is  mine,"  etc.

n.  With  siGNiriCANT  severity  ;  which  appears  in :  1.  The  peculiarity/  of  their
form.  Not  only  do  they  follow  sin  by  way  of  natural  consequence,  but  also  the  manner
of  their  infliction  corresponds  with  that  of  its  commission ;  as  that  which  is  reaped
resembles  that  which  is  sown  (1  Sam.  iv.  1 — 11).  "  The  seeds  of  our  own  punish-
ment are  sown  at  the  same  time  we  commit  sin  "  (Hesiod).  Having  sinned  with  the
sword,  his  house  would  be  ravaged  with  the  sword ;  and  having  sinned  by  the  indul-
gence of  impure  passion,  he  would  bo  troubled  in  like  manner.  "  Amnon,  Absalom,
Adonijah  I  Amnon  thought, '  Has  my  father  indulged  in  it  ? — Absalom  relied  on  the
resentment  of  the  people  on  account  of  the  double  crime.  Adonijah  fell  because  he
wished  to  make  the  best  of  the  precedence  of  his  birth  in  opposition  to  him  who  had
been  begotten  with  Bathsheba"  (Thenius).

**  The  gods  are  just,  and  of  oar  pleasant  vioei
Make  instruments  to  plague  us."

There  ia  »  tendency  in  the  sin  of  one  to  perpetuate  itself  in  others  over  whom  his
influence  extends,  and  so  to  recoil  upon  himself.  2.  The ^«6Ka/y  of  their  exhibition.
"  For  thou  didst  it  secretly,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  Falsehood  and  injustice  seek  darkness ;
truth  and  justice  seek  light.  The  evil,  which  is  concealed  for  the  sake  of  public  honour,
iu  followed  by  public  shame.  3.  The  extent  and  perpetuity  of  their  infliction.  "  The
sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine  house.'  "  The  fortunes  of  David  turned  upon  this
one  sin,  which,  according  to  Scripture,  itself  eclipsed  every  other"  (Blunt).  "One  sin
led  to  another ;  the  bitter  spring  of  sin  grew  in  time  to  a  river  of  destruction  that
flowed  over  the  whole  land,  and  even  endangered  his  throne  and  hfe"  (Baumgarten),
Who  can  tell  the  far-reaching  effects  of  one  transgression  (Eccles.  ix.  18)  ?

in.  Fob  manifold  purposes.  1.  To  manifest  the  justice  of  God  and  uphold  the
authority  of  his  Law.  2.  To  exhibit  the  evil  of  sin,  and  deter  the  sinner  himself  an' I
others  from  its  commission.  3.  To  humble,  prove,  chastise,  instruct,  purify,  and  con-
firm the  sufferer.  "  If  he  commit  iniquity,  I  will  chasten  him,"  etc.  (ch.  viL  14 ;
Deut.  viii.  3,  5;  Job  v.  17  ;  Ps.  xciv.  I'J ;  Heb.  xii.  6).  This  last  effect  is  wrought
only  on  those  who  turn  to  God  in  penitence  and  trust.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  and
restoration  to  righteousness  do  not  counteract,  except  in  a  limited  degree,  the  natural
consequences  of  past  transgression ;  but  they  transform  punishment  into  chastisement,
and  alleviate  the  pressure  of  suffering  and  sonow  by  Divine  fellowship,  and  the  inw.ird
peace,  strength,  and  hope  which  it  imparts.  "  In  general  the  forgiveness  of  sin  has
only  this  result — punishment  is  changed  into  fatherly  chastisement,  the  rod  into  the-
correction  of  love.  Outwardly  the  consequences  of  sin  remain  the  same ;  their  internal
chft rioter  is  changed.    If  it  were  otherwise,- the  forgiveness  of  eins  pright  too  readily  bs


308  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xii.  1—31.

attributed  to  caprice"  (Hengstenberg).  "The  personal  forgiveness  indulged  to  the
King  of  Israel,  in  consideration  of  his  penitence,  did  not  break  the  connection  between
causes  and  their  effects.  This  ccnneotion  is  stamped  on  the  unchanging  laws  of  God
in  nature ;  and  it  becomes  every  man,  instead  of  arraigning  the  appointment,  to  bring
support  to  his  domes' ic  happiness  by  the  instrumentality  of  a  good  example"
(W.  White).  His  family,  his  kingdom,  and  even  his  own  character,  were  permanently
affected  by  his  sin.  "  Broken  in  spirit  by  the  consciousness  of  how  deeply  he  had
sinned  against  God  and  against  men ;  humbled  in  the  eyes  of  his  subjects,  and  his
influence  with  them  weakened  by  the  knowledge  of  his  crimes ;  and  even  his  authority
in  his  own  household,  and  his  claim  to  the  reverence  of  his  sons,  relaxed  by  the  loss  of
character ;  David  appears  henceforth  a  much-altered  man.  He  is  as  one  who  goes  down
to  the  grave  mourning.  His  active  history  is  past — henceforth  he  is  passive  merely.
All  that  was  high  and  firm  and  noble  in  his  character  goes  out  of  view,  and  all  that
is  weak  and  low  and  wayward  comes  out  in  strong  relief.  The  balance  of  his  character-
is  broken.  Alas  for  him  I  The  bird  which  once  rose  to  heights  unattained  before  by
mortal  wing,  filling  the  air  with  its  joyful  songs,  now  lies  with  maimed  wing  upon  the
ground,  pouring  forth  its  doleful  cries  to  God  '  (Kitto, '  Daily  Bible  lUust.'). — D.

Ver.  13. — (The  palace.)  The  acknowledgment  of  sin.  "  And  David  said  unto
Nathan,  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord."  1.  The  words  of  the  prophet  were  a  decisive
test  of  the  character  of  David.  Had  he  treated  the  messenger  and  his  message  as  others
have  done  (1  Sam.  xv.  1 2— 21 ;  1  Kings  xiii.  4 ;  xxi.  20 ;  xxii.  8 ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  23 ;  Luke
iii.  10 ;  Acts  xxiv.  25),  his  partial  blindness  to  his  sin  would  have  become  total,  and  he
would  have  fallen  to  a  stiU  lower  depth,  perhaps  never  to  rise  again.  Bat  his  genuine
piety,  as  well  as  the  exceeding  grace  of  God  (oh.  vii.  15),  ensured  a  better  issue ;  and
the  confidence  in  his  recovery,  which  Nathan  probably  felt  in  coming  to  him,  was
fully  justified.  2.  Hardly  was  the  sentence  pronounced,  "  Thou  art  the  man ! "  before
the  long-repressed  confession  broke  from  his  lips  (1  Sam.  vii.  6;  xv.  24-31),  "/am
the  man  I  Who  says  this  of  me  ?  Yet — God  knows  all — yes,  I  am  the  man.  I  have
sinned  against  the  Lord."

"  Never  so  fast,  in  silent  April  shower.
Flushed  into  green  the  dry  and  leafless  bower.
As  Israel's  crownM  mourner  felt
The  dull  bard  stone  wlthia  him  melt "

(Keble.)

The  ruling  principle  of  his  nature  was  like  a  spring  of  water  which,  though  choked  and
buried  beneath  a  heap  of  rubbish,  at  length  finds  its  way  again  to  the  surface.  "  The
fundamental  trait  in  David's  character  is  a  deep  And  tender  susceptibility,  which,
although  even  for  a  time  it  may  yield  to  lust  or  the  pressure  of  the  world,  yet  always
quickly  rises  again  in  repentance  and  faith  "  ('  Old  Test.  Hist,  of  Eedemption ').  "  If
in  this  matter  Nathan  shows  himself  great,  David  is  no  less  so.  The  cutting  truth  of
the  prophetic  word  shakes  him  out  of  the  hollow  passion  in  which  he  has  lived  since
first  he  saw  this  woman,  and  rouses  him  again  to  the  consciousness  of  his  better  self.
His  greatness,  however,  is  shown  in  the  fact-  that,  king  as  he  was,  he  soon  humbled
himself,  like  the  lowliest,  before  the  higher  truth ;  and,  although  his  penitence  Was
as  deep  and  sincere  as  possible,  it  did  not  cause  him  either  to  lose  his  dignity  or  to
forget  his  royal  duties  "  (Ewald).  3.  There  is  no  part  of  his  life  for  the  proper  under-
standing of  which  it  is  so  necessary  to  read  the  history  in  connection  with  what  he
himself  has  written — "  the  songs  of  sore  repentance,"  which  he  "  sang  in  sorrowful
mood  "  (Dante).  Ps.  li.  (see  inscription), '  The  prayer  of  the  penitent ; '  the  germ  of
which  lay  in  this  confession,  but  which  was  composed  after  the  utterance  of  the  word,
"  The  Lord  also  hath  put  away  thy  sin ; "  for  "  the  promise  of  forgiveness  did  not  take
immediate  possession  of  his  soul,  but  simply  kept  him  from  despair  at  first,  and  gave
him  strength  to  attain  to  a  thorough  knowledge  of  his  guilt  through  prayer  and  suppli-
cation, and  to  pray  for  its  entire  removal  that  the  heart  might  he  renewed  and  fortified
through  the  Holy  Ghost "  (KeU).  "  It  is  a  generally  acknowledged  experience  that
there  is  often  a  great  gulf  between  the  objective  word  of  forgiveness,  presented  from
withijut,  and  its  subjective  appropriation  by  man,  which  hesitating  conscience  is  unable


eft.  xn.  1—31.]  TflE  SECOND  BOOK  OB*  SAMUEL.  809


to  bridge  without  great  struggles  "  (Tholuck).  Pb.  zxxii.,  ♦  The  blessedness  of  forgive-
ness ; '  written  subsequently.  Other  psalms  have  been  sometimes  associated  with  his
confession,  viz.  Ps.  vi.,  xxxviii. ;  three  others,  viz.  Ps.  cii.,  cxxx.,  cxliii.,  make  up  "  the
seven  penitential  psalms."  4.  David  is  here  set  before  us  as  "  the  model  and  ideal
of  and  the  encouragement  to  true  penitence."  Consider  his  acknowledgment  of  sin
ftS  to^

I.  Its  matter  ;  or  the  conviction,  contrition,  change  of  mind  and  will,  which  is
expressed.  For  words  alone  are  not  properly  confession  in  the  view  of  him  who
"  looketh  at  the  heart."  Having,  by  means  of  the  prophetic  word,  been  led  to  enter
into  himself  (  Luke  xv.  17),  and  had  his  sin  brought  to  remembrance  ("  the  twin-brother
of  repentance"),  its  aggravation  described  and  its  punishment  declared,  he  not  only
recognizes  the  fact  of  his  sin ;  but  also :  1.  Looks  at  it  as  committed  against  the  Lord ;
the  living  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel;  and  not  simply  against  man.  "Yhou  last
despised  me"  (ver.  10).

"For  my  transgressions  do  I  know,
And  my  sin  is  ever  before  me.
Against  thee  only  have  I  sinned,
Ajid  done  that  which  is  evU  in  thine  eyes,"  eto.

(Ps.  U.  3,  4.)

2.  Takes  the  blame  of  it  entirely  to  himself,  as  individually  responsible,  inexcusable,
and  guilty ;  thus  accepting  the  judgment  of  conscience,  without  indulging  vuin  and
misleading  thoughts.  3.  Feels  sorrow,  shame,  and  self-condemnation  on  account  of  its
nature  and  enormity ;  transgression,  iniquity,  sin  (Ps.  xxzii.  1,  2) ;  rebellion  against  the
supreme  King,  disobedience  to  his  Law ;  debt,  pollution,  guile,  leprosy,  bloodguiltiness
(Ps.  li.  14).  He  expresses  no/ear  of  consequences,  and  deprecates  them  only  in  so  fr»r
as  they  include  separation  from  God  and  loss  of  the  blessings  of  his  fellowship.  4.  Puts
it  away  from  him  with  aversion  and  hatred,  and  purposes  to  forsake  it  completely
(Prov.  zxviiL  13)  j  which  confossion  implies  and  testifies.

"  For  mine  iniquity  will  I  confess ;
I  will  be  sorry  for  my  sin."

(Ps.  xxzviiL  18.)

n.  Its  manneb  ;  or  the  evidence  afforded  of  its  sincerity  by  the  language  employed
and  the  attendant  circumstances.  Observe :  1.  Its  promptness,  readiness,  and  spon-
taneity. As  soon  as  he  became  fully  alive  to  his  sin,  he  said,  "1  will  confess  my
transgressions  unto  Ji^hovah"  ^s.  xxxii.  6).  2.  Its  brevity.  Two  words  only:
"  I-have-sinned  against- Jehovah.  "  There  is  in  the  Bible  no  confession  so  uncon-
ditional, no  expression  of  repentance  so  short,  but  also  none  so  thoroughly  true"
(Disselhoff).  "Saul  confessed  his  sin  more  largely,  less  effectually.  God  cares  not
for  phrases,  but  for  affections"  (Hall).  3.  Its  frankness  ani.  fulness,  vdthout  prevarica-
tion or  extenuation.  "  The  plain  and  simple  confession, '  I  have  sinned  against  God,'
is  a  great  thing,  if  we  remember  how  rich  the  corrupt  heart  is  in  the  discovery  of
excuses  and  apparent  justification,  and  that  the  king  was  assailed  by  one  of  his  subjects
with  hard,  imsparing  rebuke"  (Hengstenberg).  4.  Its  publicity.  He  had  sought  to
hide  his  sin,  but  he  did  not  seek  to  hide  his  penitence.  He  would  have  it  set  "  in  the
sight  of  this  sun,"  even  as  his  chastisement  would  be ;  in  order  that  the  ways  of  God
might  be  justified  before  men,  and  the  evil  effects  of  transgression  upon  them  in  some
measure  repaired.  It  is  for  this  purpose,  among  others,  that  confession  is  made  a
condition  of  forgiveness  (Job  xxxiii.  27,  28 ;  1  John  i.  9).  "  The  necessity  of  confession
(to  God)  arises  from  the  load  of  unacknowledged  guilt.  By  confession  we  sever
ourselves  from  our  sin  and  we  disown  it.  Confession  relieves  by  giving  a  sense  of
honesty.  So  long  as  we  retain  sin  unconfessed,  we  are  conscious  of  a  secret  insincerity  "
(P.  W.  Robertson,  vol.  v.).

III.  Its  accompaniment  ;  or  the  further  thoughts,  feelings,  and  purposes  which
should  be  present  in  every  penitential  confession.  1.  Faith  in  the  "  loving-kindiiess  and
tender  mercies  "  of  God  (Ps.  li.  1).

"  But  with  thee  is  forgiveness.
That  thou  mayest  be  feared."

(Ps.  oxxx.  4, 7.)


310  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xu.  1—31.

2.  Prayer  for  pardon,  purity,  the  Holy  Spirit  (1  Sam.  xvi.  4 — 13);  steadfastncs^f,
freedom,  joy,  and  salvation  (Ps.  li.  7 — 12).  3.  Submission  to  the  will  of  God  (Ps.  xxxii.
9;  xxxviii.  13).  4.  Consecration  to  bis  service  (Ps.  li.  13 — 17).  "They  were  nut
many  words  which  he  spoke,  but  in  them  he  owned  two  realities — sin  and  Qod.  But  to
own  them  in  their  true  meaning — sin  as  against  Grod,  and  God  as  ihe  Holy  One,  and  yc  t
God  as  merciful  and  gracious — was  to  return  to  the  way  of  peace.  Lower  than  tliis
penitence  could  not  descend,  higher  than  this  faith  could  not  rise;  and  God  «:is
Jehovah,  and  David's  sin  was  put  away"  (Bdersheim).  "  It  was  not  his  sin,  but  his
struggle  with  sin,  which  makes  his  history  remarkable"  (D.  Macleod).  "David
experienced  in  a  greater  degree  than  any  other  Old  Testament  character  the  restlessiness
and  desolation  of  a  soul  burdened  with  the  consciousness  of  guilt,  the  desire  for
reconciliation  with  God,  the  struggle  after  purity  and  renovation  of  heart,  the  joy  of
fellowship,  the  heroic,  the  all-conquering  power  of  confidence  in  God,  the  ardent  love
of  a  gracious  heart  for  God  ;  and  has  given  in  his  psalms  the  imiierishable  testimony
as  to  what  is  the  fruit  of  the  Law  and  what  the  fruit  of  the, Spirit  in  man"  (Oebler,
'  Theology  of  the  Old  Test.,'  ii.  159).  "  The  charm  of  his  great  name  is  broken.  Our
reverence  for  David  is  shaken,  not  destroyed.  He  is  not  what  he  was  before;  but  he
is  far  nobler  and  greater  than  many  a  just  man  who  never  fell  and  never  repented.  He
is  far  more  closely  bound  up  with  the  sympathies  of  mankLud  than  if  he  had  never
fallen"  (Stanley).  Even  Bayle  is  constrained  to  say,  "His  amour  with  the  wife  of
Uriah  and  the  order  he  gave  to  destroy  her  husband  are  two  most  enormous  crimes.
But  he  was  so  grieved  for  them,  and  expiated  them  by  so  admirable  a  repentance,  that
this  is  not  the  passage  in  his  life  wherein  he  contributes  the  least  to  the  instruction
and  edification  of  the  faithful.  We  therein  learn  the  frailty  of  saints,  and  it  is  a
precept  of  vigilance ;  we  therein  learn  in  what  manner  we  ought  to  lament  our  sins,  and
it  is  an  exceUent  modeL" — D.

Ver.  13. — (The  palace.)  The  forgiveness  of  sin.  "  And  Nathan  said  unto  David,
The  Iioid  also  hath  put  away  thy  siu ;  thou  shalt  not  die."

**  The  absolver  saw  the  mighty  grief.
And  hastened  with  relief; —

•The  Lord  forgives;  thou  shalt  not  die!

*Twas  gently  spoke,  yet  heard  on  high,
And  all  the  band  of  angels,  us'd  to  sing
In  heaven,  accordant  to  his  raptured  siring

Who  many  a  month  had  turned  away

With  veiled  eyes,  nor  own'd  liis  lay,

*  Now  spread  their  wings  and  throng  around
To  the  glad  mournful  sound.
And  welcome  with  bright,  open  face
The  broken  heart  to  love's  embrace.
The  rock  is  smitten,  and  to  future  years
Springs  ever  fresh  the  tide  of  holy  tears
And  holy  music,  whispering  peace
Till  time  and  sin  together  cease."

(Keble, '  Sixth  Sunday  after  Trinity.^

In  tlie  Interview  of  Nathan  with  David  much  may  have  passed  which  is  not  recorded.
But  it  is  improbable  that  (as  some  have  supposed)  there  was  a  long  interval  between
the  confession  of  sin  and  the  assurance  of  forgiveness,  or  that  the  latter  was  given  at  a
second  interview  (ver.  15).  Perceiving  the  sincerity  of  the  king's  repentance,  the
prophet  forthwith  declared  that  Jehovah  also  put  away  (literally,  "caused  to  pass  over,"
ch.  xxiv.  10;  Zech.  iii.  4)  his  sin,  remitting  the  penalty  of  death,  which  the  Law
Bppointed  and  himself  had  pronounced  (ver.  5) ;  and  became  a  messeiiger  of  mercy,
"  one  of  a  thousand  "  (Job  xxxiii.  23),  as  well  as  of  judgment.  "  Where  sin  abounded,
grace  did  much  more  abound."    Consider  remission,  pardon,  forgiveness  of  sin,  as —

I.  Needed  by  a  sinful  man.  'Forgiveness  of  sin  is  a  change  of  personal  relation
between  God  and  man ;  in  which  there  is :  1.  Eelease  from  condemnation  incurred  by
the  latter,  through  his  violation  of  Divine  Law ;  the  removal  of  the  displeasure  (ch.  x .


CH.  xn.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  BAMtJEL.  311

27)  and  wrath  (Fs.  xxxviii.  1)  of  Oroi ;  the  blotting  out  of  transgressions  (Ps.  IL  1 ;
xxxii.  1,  2;  Isa.  xliii.  25;  Rom.  viiL  1);  deliverance  from  death  (Ezek.  xviiL  21).
Since  "  all  have  sinned,"  all  have  need  of  it ;  but  only  those  who  are  convinced  of  sin
value,  desire,  and  seek  it.  It  also'involves :  2.  Restoration  of  communion  with  God ;
which  is  hindered  by  sin,  as  the  light  of  the  sun  is  intercepted  by  a  cloud.  "  It  is  the
foundation  of  all  our  communion  with  God  here,  and  of  all  undeceiving  expectations  of
our  enjoyment  of  hira  hereafter"  (Owen,  in  Fa.  cxxx.).  3.  Renevoal  of  the  heart  in
righteousness;  which,  though  separate  from  it  in  thought,  is  never  so  in  reality,  and
which  was  longed  for  by  David  with  the  game  intensity  and  prayed  for  in  the  same
breath  (Fs.  li.  9,  10).  How  lamentable  is  the  condition  of  that  man  on  whom  the
wrath  of  eternal,  holy  love  "  abideth  "  (John  iii  36)  1
11.  Gbanted  bt  a  MEBCiFxni  God.    Forgiveness  of  sin  is  an  act  or  gift,  which :

1.  Ood  alone  can  perform  or  bestow ;  the  prerogative  of  the  supreme  Ruler,  against
whom  it  has  been  committed  (Dan.  ix.  9 ;  Mark  iL  7).  "  The  Lord  hath  put  away  thy
sin."  "  To  pardon  sin  is  one  of  the  jura  regalia,  the  flowers  of  God's  crown  "  (T.  Watson).

2.  Proceeds  from  hit  abounding  mercy  and^race  (Exod.  xxxiv.  7).  "  It  is  impossible  this
flower  should  spring  from  any  other  root "  (Fs.  li.  1).  3.  Rests  upon  an  adequate  ground
or  moral  cause;  which,  although  little  known  to  David,  was  always  present  to  the
mind  of  God  (1  Pet.  i.  20),  shadowed  forth  in  the  "  mediatorial  sovereignty  "  of  former
ages  and  manifested  in  Jesus  Christ, "  in  whom  we  have  forgiveness  of  sins"  (Acts  xiii.
88;  Eph.L7).

-  Here  is  the  might.
And  here  the  wisdom,  which  did  open  lay
The  path,  that  had  been  yeam&d  for  so  long,
Betwixt  the  heaven  and  earth."

(Dante,*  Par.,*  xxliL)

in.  Announced  by  a  paithpui.  ministeb.  The  prophet  said  not,  "  I  forgive ; "  he
simply  declared  what  God  had  dune  or  purposed  to  do  (1  Sam.  xv.  28) ;  and  in  this
sense  only  can  there  be  absolution  by  man.  "  To  forgive  sins  is  the  part  and  inalienable
prerogative  of  God.  To  absolve  is  to  dispense  and  convey  forgiveness  to  those  who
have  the  right  dispositions  of  heart  for  receiving  it;  and  this  is  the  part  of  God's
messengers  and  representatives,  whether  under  the  Old  or  New  dispensations  "  (E.  M.
Goulbum).  The  claim  of  any  other  power  is  a  groundless  assumption.  The  language
employed  in  the  New  Testament  refers  either  to  cases  of  discipline  in  the  Church,  or  to
the  declaration  of  the  forgiving  love  of  God,  the  reconciliation  of  God  in  Christ,  and  the
assurance  of  its  reality  (Matt,  xviii.  15 — ^20 ;  John  xx.  23 ;  2  Cor.  iL  10) ;  this  assurance
depending,  for  its  beneficial  influence,  on :  1.  Its  accordance  with  the  revealed  Word  of
Ood  (Jer.  xxiiL  28 ;  Gal.  L  8).  2.  Its  utterance  by  a  faithful,  holy,  merciful  servant
of  Ood,  in  his  ministerial  and  representative  character.  "The  power  of  absolution
belonged  to  the  Church,  and  to  the  apostle  through  the  Church.  It  was  a  power
belonging  to  aU  Christians :  to  the  apostle,  because  he  was  a  Christian,  not  because  he
was  an  apostle.  A  priestly  power,  no  doubt,  because  Christ  has  made  all  Christians
kings  and  priests  "  (F.  W.  Robertson,  vol.  iii.).  3.  Its  communication  to  and  reception
by  such  as  are  truly  penitent.  "The  poet  .said  with  a  great  deal  of  jiistice,  that  no
sinner  is  absolved  by  himself;  yet,  in  another  sense,  the  sinner  is  absolved  by  that
very  self-accusation ;  and,  sorrowing  for  bis  sins,  is  freed  from  the  guilt  of  them  "
(Leighton).

IV.  Appbofbiated  m  a  belietino  heabt.  The  inward  assurance  of  the  blessing
of  forgiveness:  1.  Is  usually  gained  through  many  struggles  and  fervent  prayers.
David  prayed  for  pardon  after  the  prophet's  assurance  of  it.  "  Fs.  IL  shows  us  how
David  struggles  to  gain  an  inward  and  conscious  certainty  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin,
which  was  announced  to  him  by  Nathan "  (Delitzsch).  « Under  the  Old  Testament
none  loved  God  more  than  he,  none  was  loved  by  God  more  than  he.  The  paths  of
faith  and  love  wherein  he  walked  are  unto  the  most  of  us  like  the  way  of  an  eagle  in
the  air — too  high  and  hard  for  us.  Yet  to  this  day  do  the  cries  of  this  man  after
God's  own  heart  sound  in  our  ears"  (Owen).  2.  Is  personally  realized  through  faith
in  the  Word  inspired  by  God  and  declaring  his  mercy.  "  They  that  really  believe
forgiveness  in  God  do  thereby  obtain  forgiveness."    3.  Is  commonly  attended  with


312  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xn.  1—31

peace,  refreshment,  and  gladness,  "sweet  as  the  living  stream  to  summer  thirst."
Happy  is  he  who  can  say  from  the  heart,  "  I  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins  1 "

"  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  taken  away,
Whose  sin  is  covered ;

Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  Jehovah  doth  not  reckon  iniquity.
And  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile."

(Pa.  xxiii.  1,  2;  Eom.  it.  7.)

D.

Ver.  14. — (The  palace.)  Oiving  occasion  to  Waspheme.  "  Nevertheless,  because  by
this  deed  thou  hast  surely  caused  [literally, '  causing,'  etc., '  hast  caused,'  etc.]  the  enemies
of  Jehovah  to  speak  evil  ['  despise,' '  contemn,' '  abhor,' '  provoke,' '  blaspheme '],"  etc.
A  scorner,  being  in  company  with  a  devout  man,  took  occasion  to  speak  contemptuously
of  those  whom  he  called  "  the  Old  Testament  saints,"  and  especially  of  David  as  "  a  man
after  God's  own  heart,"  asking,  "And  what  did  he  do?"  "He  wrote  the  flfty-first
psalm  and  the  thirty-second,"  was  the  reply ;  "  and  if  you  cherish  such  feelings  as  he
there  expresses,  you  will  be  a  man  after  God's  own  heart."  "  But,"  he  persisted,  "  tell
me  what  he  did  besides."  "  He  did  that  which  the  Prophet  Nathan  said  would  '  cause
the  enemies  of  God  to  blaspheme.' "  The  scorner  felt  the  rebuke,  and  was  silent.
Even  to  this  day  the  pernicious  influence  of  his  sin  appears;  but,  on' the  other  hand,
the  fact  of  its  having  been  recorded  is  an  evidence  of,  at  least,  the  truthfulness  of
Scripture ;  whilst  the  invaluable  lessons  taught  by  it  more  than  compensate  for  the
evil  effects  it  produces.  "  The  sacred  writer  is  perfectly  aware  of  the  tendency  of  this
passage  of  David's  history,  and  yet  he  is  not  directed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  suppress  it.
It  might  have  been  suppressed!.  The  failings  of  David  are  not  less  useful  than  his
virtues,  if  we  will  only  faithfully  improve  the  warnings  they  afford  us.  It  is  only  to  the
enemies  of  the  Lord  that  they  afford  occasion  of  blasphemy.  They,  indeed,  will  never
want  occasion ;  and  we  are  not  to  be  denied  the  salutary  examples  which  the  Scriptures
hold  forth  to  us  because  there  are  those  who  wrest  them  to  their  own  destruction.  But
it  is  chiefly  in  the  failings  of  the  good  that  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  find  cause  of
triumph"  (Thompson,  'Davidica").  Concerning  the  sin  of  David  and  other  godly
men,  observe  that—

I.  It  is  KEKDEEED   all   the   MOBB  culpable  and  CONSPICDOUS  by  THEIB  PBKVIOtIS

EXALTATION.  Culpable,  inasmuch  as  their  profession  of  godliness,  especially  when
united  with  eminent  position,  increases  their  responsibility,  and  furnishes  special
motives  to  a  consistent  course  of  conduct;  conspicuous,  inasmuch  as  their  apparent
superiority  to  others :  1.  Attracts  the  attention  of  men  to  them  more  than  others,  and
makes  it  impossible  that  their  failings  should  pass  unnoticed.  2.  Naturally  leads  men
to  expect  more  from  them  than  others.  3.  Produces  a  deeper  impression  by  the  cjntrast
exhibited  between  what  is  expected  from  them  and  what  is  actually  done  by  them.
The  transgression  of  David  was  in  itself  great ;  but  it  was  all  the  greater,  in  the  view
of  men,  because  committed  by  one  of  his  acknowledged  piety,  and  "  in  the  fierce  light
that  beats  upon  the  throne,  and  blackens  every  blot."

II.  It  is  CALCULATED  TO  BXEET  A  MOST  INJURIOUS  INFLUENCE  ON  OTHER  ME».      The

sin  of  every  man  has  a  baneful  effect  on  his  fellow-men ;  but  that  of  a  godly  man,  in  an
eminent  degree,  by :  1.  Causing  them  not  only  to  despise  him,  but  also  others,  who  are
associated  and  identified  with  him  in  religious  faith  and  service,  as  (like  him)  unworthy
of  respect,  insincere,  and  hypocritical.  2.  Inciting  them  to  contemn  religion  itself;  doubt
the  Word  of  God,  distrust  the  reality  of  piety  everywhere,  and  even  speak  evil  of  God
himself;  wherein  it  is  commonly  implied  that  sin  is  sanctioned  by  religion,  or  atlea^,t
is  not  prevented  by  it  because  of  its  essential  weakness.  A  false  impression  of  the
requirements  and  character  of  God  is  given.  3.  Lessening  the  restraints  of  holy  example,
hindering  the  acceptance  of  the  truth,  multiplying  excuses  for  neglect,  encouraging
indulgence  in  sin.  4.  Affoi\ling  means  of  opposition  to  the  faith,  whereby  others  still
are  made  to  stumble.  "  This  observation  gives  us  a  deep  insight  into  the  whole  position
of  David.  In  him  the  good  principle  had  attained  to  supremacy;  the  godless  party  had
seen  this  with  terror,  and  now  they  mocked  piety  in  its  representative,  who,  because  he
held  this  position,  ought  to  have  kept  watch  over  his  heart  the  more  carefully,  and
aft«rward8  made  use  of  the  first  opportunity  of  throwing  off  the  burdensome  yoke "


OS.  xn.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OE  SAMtJEL.  813

(Hengstenberg).  "  Towards  the  heathen  Israel's  duty  was,  by  obedience  to  God's  Word
and  commands,  to  set  forth  the  theocracy,  and  bring  it  to  himour  and  recognition.
Transgressions  of  God's  command  by  the  king  himself  must  lead  the  heathen  to  heap
shame  and  reproach  on  Israel  and  on  Israel's  God  "  (Brdmann).

III.  Its  injttrious  effect  on  others  depends  upon  their  own  oharaoteb.  It  la
only  "  the  enemies  of  the  Lord"  who  despise  the  Lord,  his  Word,  or  his  people.  1.
Their  enmity  disposes  them  to  make  use  of  the  sin  of  another  as  a  reason  in  favour  of
the  course  upon  which  their  heart  is  already  set ;  thus  silencing  the  voice  of  conscience,
increasing  their  pride  and  self-deception,  and  confirming  themselves  in  unbelief  and
disobedience.  2.  It  also  indisposes  them  to  regard  it  in  a  proper  manner ;  to  consider
the  strength  of  his  temptation,  the  depth  of  his  penitence,  the  earnestness  of  his
aspirations  after  righteousness  j  that  the  conduct  of  one  man  does  not  prove  the
character  of  all  with  whom  he  is  associated,  still  less  the  truth  of  the  religion  they
profess,  or  the  character  of  the  God  they  serve ;  that  it  may  not  be  sanctioned  by
God,  but  forbidden,  reproved,  and  punished  by  him;  that  it  is  not  the  standard  of
practice,  which  is  found  in  the  Law  of  God  alone;  and  that  "every  man  must  give
account  of  himself  to  God."  Those  who  stand  may  be  led  by  it  to  take  heed  lest  they
fall,  and  those  who  fall  to  hope  to  rise  again ;  but  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  see  in  it
nothing  hut  an  excuse  for  persisting  in  the  evil  of  their  way.  "Bees  will  collect  honey
and  spiders  poison  from  the  same  plant,  according  to  their  different  natures  "  (Scott).
3.  Their  sin  is  not  lessened  by  the  sin  of  another,  but  rather  increased  by  the  use  they
make  of  it.  Nevertheless,  "  all  conduct  of  ours  which  tends  in  the  slightest  degree  to
strengthen  that  system  of  false  reasoning,  by  which  sinners  confirm  themselves  in  their
sins,  and  undermine  the  faith  and  practice  of  others,  is  sin  of  the  deepest  dye "
(Thompson).

IV.  Although  it  may  be  pardoned,  it  cannot  oo  unponished.  "  The  child  also
that  is  horn  unto  thee  shall  surely  die."  1.  To  manifest  the  justice  and  righteousness
of  God.  The  penalty  of  death  which  he  had  incurred  was  transferred  from  the  guilty
father  to  the  innocent  son.  2.  To  humble  him  more  deeply  on  account  of  his  sin,  and
to  produce  in  him  "  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness "  (Heb.  xii.  11).  "  For  the
most  grievous  sins  a  provision  of  mercy  is  so  made  as  to  secure  long  and  humbling
recollections  of  the  aggravated  guilt "  (Halley).  3.  To  counteract  the  evil  effects  of  his
sin,  and  "  that  the  visible  occasion  of  any  further  blasphemy  should  be  taken  away."
"  God  in  his  wisdom  did  take  away  this  child,  because  he  should  have  lived  but  to  be  a
shame  unto  David  "  (Willet).  This  was  only  the  beginning  of  a  long  course  of  chastise-
ment in  his  family  (ch.  xiii.),  his  person  (Ps.  xli.,  Iv.,  xxxix.),  and  his  kingdom  (ch.
xiv.).  Judgment  was  mingled  with  mercy ;  yea,  it  was  itself  the  chastisement  of  love.
"What  was  the  answer  to  his  prayer?  First,  the  death  of  Bathsheba's  child.  Next,
the  discovery  of  hateful  crimes  in  his  household.  Finally,  the  revolt  of  the  beloved
Absalom.  These  answers  to  a  prayer  for  forgiveness?  Yes,  if  forgiveness  be  what
David  took  it  to  mean — having  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  knowing  wisdom  secretly "
(Maurice). — D.

Vers.  15 — 23. — (The  palace  and  the  tabernacle.)  David's  behaviour  in  affliction.
In  one  of  the  chambers  of  David's  palace  his  little  child  lies  smitten  with  a  fatal  malady.
In  another  the  king,  divested  of  his  royal  robes  and  clothed  in  sackcloth,  prostrates
himself  in  profound  sorrow  and  abasement.  He  prays,  weeps,  fasts,  and  lies  all  night
upon  the  ground.  His  oldest  and  most  confidential  servants  endeavour  to  comfort  him,
and  beseech  him  to  take  food,  in  vain.  At  length  the  blow  falls ;  and  his  servants  fear
to  communicate  the  intelligence,  lest  it  should  plunge  him  into  a  dangerous  paroxysm
of  grief.  But  their  reserved  demeanour  and  soft  whispering  among  themselves  indicate
what  has  happened;  and  their  answer  to  his  question,  " Is  the  child  dead?"  confirms
his  conclusion.  Contrary  to  their  expectation,  however,  he  rises  up,  washes  and  anoints
himself,  ]iuts  on  becoming  garments,  goes  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  (the  tabernacle
adjoining  the  palace),  and  pours  forth  his  heart  in  lowly  adoration.'  Then,  returning,
he  asks  for  bread,  and  eats.  Astonished,  at  his  conduct,  they  inquire  the  reason  of  it ;
and  he  replies  (in  effect)  that  he  has  acted,  not  from  thoughtlessness  or  indifference,  but
from  a  due  regard  to  the  will  of  God  and  the  altered  circumstances  of  the  case.  Whilst
tbe  life  of  the  child  hung  in  suspense,  he  might  hope,  by  prayer  and  humiliaticn  (oincv


3U  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xii.  1—31.


God  deals  with  men  according  to  their  moral  attitude  toward  him),  to  avert  the
threatening  calamity ;  but  now  he  is  gone  it  is  useless  to  indulge  in  lamentation ;  the
will  of  God  must  he  submitted  to  without  repining  (1  Sam.  iii.  18).  "  Those  who  are
ignorant  of  the  Divine  life  cannot  comprehend  the  reasons  of  a  believer's  conduct  in  his
varied  experiences  "  (Scott).  "  How  little  can  any  one  of  us  understand  another  1  The
element  of  conscious  sin  gave  to  David  thoughts  and  feelings  other  than  the  ordinary
ones,  and  beyond  the  appreciation  of  those  who  looked  for  the  usual  signs  of  grief "
(B.  Tuck).  "  In  the  case  of  a  man  whose  penitence  was  so  earnest  and  so  deep,  the
pnyer  for  the  preservation  of  his  child  must  have  sprung  from  some  other  source  than
excessive  love  of  any  created  object.  His  great  desire  was  to  avert  the  stroke,  as  a  sign
of  the  wrath  of  God,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  be  able  to  discern,  in  the  preservation
of  the  child,  a  proof  of  Divine  favour  cousequent  upon  the  restoration  of  his  fellowship
with  Gbd.  But  when  the  child  was  dead  he  humbled  himself  under  the  mighty  hand
of  God,  and  rested  satisfied  with  his  grace,  without  giving  himself  up  to  fruitless  pain  "
(0.  Ton  Gerlach).    Consider —

L  His  BELIEVING  BECOQNITION  OF  THE  HAND  OP  GoD.  "  David  was  a  great  lover  of
his  children "  (Patrick) ;  and  to  such  a  father  the  sufferings  of  his  child  must  have
been  naturaUya  severe  affliction.  But:  1.  He  also  perceived  therein  a  just  chastisement
of  his  transgression.  It  is  a  common  fact  of  experience  (no  less  than  a  solemn  declara-
tion of  Scripture)  that  the  sufferings  of  a  child  are  often  the  immediate  and  inevitable
fruit  of  the  father's  sin.  This  is,  indeed,  by  no  means  always  the  case.  In  most
instances  no  moral  cause  thereof  can  be  discerned,  save  the  sinfulness  of  the  race  to
which  he  beloi^,  and  which  is  subject  to  the  universal  law  of  sorrow  and  mortality.
2.  He  perceived  therein,  moreover,  a  merciful  administration  of  such  chastisement.
"  Thou  shalt  not  die.  flowbeit,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  His  life  was  spared  in  mercy  to  him-
self and  his  people.  He  was  afflicted  in  such  a  manner  as  would  be  most  conducive  to
his  benefit.  His  child  was  smitten  to  stop  the  mouths  of  blasphemers.  The  innocent
suffers  for  the  guilty ;  suffers — who  shall  say  (believing  in  the  perfect  wisdom,  righteous-
ness, uid  love  of  God)  either  unjustly  or  to  his  own  ultimate  disac^vantage?  3.  And
he  believed  in  the  Divine  susceptibility  to  human  entreaty;  and  that  it  might  be
possible  for  the  impending  blow  to  be  turned  aside.  "  Who  can  tell  whether  God  will
he  gracious  to  me  ?  "  (ver.  22).  He  evidently  regarded  the  prediction  of  the  prophet,
though  absolute  in  form,  as  really  conditional  (Isa.  xxxviii.  1 ;  Jer.  xviii.  7,  8).  We
have  to  do,  not  with  an  iron  fate,  but  with  a  loving  Father, "  full  of  pity  and  merciful "
(Jas.  iv.  11 ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  15 ;  ciii.  13).

IL  His  PBATEEPtrL  humiliation  in  the  pbesence  or  God.  1.  His  grief  was  not
merely  natural,  but  spiritual;  penitential  sorrow  for  sin,  exhibited  in  solitary,
thoughtful,  continued  self-abasement,  fasting,  weeping,  and  genuine  purposes  of  amend-
ment (Ps.  IL  3,  4,  13).  This  is  the  end  of  God's  afSictive  discipline ;  and,  when
attained,  it  may  be  hoped  that  the  immediate  occasion  thereof  will  be  removed.  Even
when  affliction  is  not  directly  due  to  personal  transgression,  it  should  lead  to  reflection,
humiliation,  and  "godly  sorrow."  2.  It  was  associated  with  fervent  supplication.
"  And  David  besought  God  for  the  child "  (ver.  16).  "  He  herein  only  showed  his
natural  affection,  still  subordinating  his  prayer  to  the  will  of  God ;  as  Christ  did  to
show  his  human  condition  when  he  prayed  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  him "
(Willet).  What  evils  does  prayer  avert,  what  blessings  does  it  obtain,  both  for  ourselves
and  others  I  3.  Although  the  immediate  object  in  view  was  not  gained,  his  prayer  was
not  unavailing.  He  received  light,  strength,  and  comfort ;  was  kept  from  despair  and
enabled  to  endure  in  a  right  spirit  whatever  might  occur.  God  always  hears  the  cries
of  his  children ;  but  he  often  withholds  what  they  ask.  He  fulfils  their  requests  in  a
higher  way,  transforms  the  curse  into  a  blessing,  and  gives  them  abundant  tokens  of
his  favour  (ver.  25).  "  If  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will,  he  htareth  us,"  etc.
(1  John  V.  14,  15).

III.  HiB  oheebful  AOQniESCENOE  IK  THE  WILL  OF  GoD.  "And  Davld  arose  from  the
ground,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  Deeming  it  vain  to  strive  against  and  mourn  over  an  event
which  could  not  be  altered,  and  which  he  regarded  as  the  expression  of  the  settled
determination  of  God  (Deut.  iii.  26),  he  acted  accordingly :  1.  With  loyal  submission
to  his  sovereign,  wise,  and  beneficent  will ;  strengthened  by  the  conviction  that  he
himself  would,  ere  long,  "  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth,"  and  be  at  rest ;  and  by  the  hops


eti.  xn.  1— 31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  81S

of  meeting  his  child  again  in  God  (ver.  23).  "  Eeligion,"  it  has  been  remarlted,  "  is
summed  up  in  jne  word — submission.  The  chief  virtue  of  Christianity  and  the  root  of
all  the  rest  is  readiness  under  all  circumstances  to  fulfil  the  will  of  God  in  doing  and
suffering."  2.  With  resolute  restraint  upon  his  natural  feelings  of  sorrow  and  regret.
"  The  unprofitable  and  bad  consequences,  the  sinful  nature,  of  profuse  sorrowing  for
the  dead,  are  easily  deduced  from  the  former  part  of  this  reflection  ('  Wherefore  should
I  fast?'  etc.);  in  the  latter  ('I  shall  go  to  him')  we  have  the  strongest  motives  to
enforce  our  striving  against  it — a  remedy  exactly  suited  to  the  disease"  (John  Wesley).
3.  With  cheerful  peiformance  of  immediate,  practical,  appropriate  duties;  in  due
attention  to  personal  appearance  and  needs,  public  worship  in  the  house  of  God
("  weeping  must  not  hinder  worship  "),  edifying  conversation  with  friends,  consoling
counsel  to  the  sorrowful  (ver.  24).  In  this  manner  bereavement  is  most  easily  borne
and  most  effectually  sanctified,  and  God  is  most  worthily  served  and  glorified. — D.

Ver.  23. — (The  palace.)  The  death  of  a  child.  "  I  shall  go  to  him."  David  bad
at  least  a  glimpse  of  the  future  life.  The  expectation  of  going  to  his  child  in  the  grave
would  have  afforded  him  little  comfort.  But  whatever  meaning  may  be  attached  to
the  words  as  uttered  by  him,  they  may  be  profitably  considered  by  us  in  the  light  of
the  gospel.  Reason  sheds  only  starlight  on  the  future;  the  revelations  of  the  Old
Testament  only  twilight;  but  Jesus  Christ,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  illumines  it  with
daylight.    The  Christian  parent,  bereaved  of  his  little  child,  has —

I.  The  peesuasion  of  the  continued  existence  of  the  dbpaetbd,  in  the  unseen,
spiritual,  eternal  world, "  the  Father's  house ; "  where  he :  1.  Retains  his  conscious
personality  (neither  ceasing  to  be,  nor  "  swallowpd  up  in  the  general  sea  of  being ").

2.  Attains  the  highest  perfection  of  which  his  nature  is  capable  (his  capacities  of  know-
ledge, holiness,  and  happiness  being  gradually  developed).  3.  Remains  in  permanent
security  (for  ever  freed  from  the  temptations  and  sorrows  of  this  life).  On  what
grounds  does  such  a  persuasion  rest  ?  (1)  The  nature  of  a  child — spiritual,  immortal,
blameless,  "having  no  knowledge  between  good  and  evil"  (Deut.  L  39).  (2)  The
character  of  God;  his  justice  and  benevolence,  and  his  fatherly  relationship  (Jer.  xix.
4;  Ezek.  xvi.  21 ;  Joel  ii.  16;  Jonah  iv.  11),  wtiich,  though  consistent  with  the  suffer! rig
of  the  innocent  in  this-world  (because  of  the  beneficent  purposes  to  which  it  is  sub-
servient), is  not  so  with  their  final  condemnation.  (3)  The  teachings  and  actions  of
Christ,  and  his  redemptive  work  (Matt,  xviii.  1 — 14 ;  xix.  13 — 15 ;  xxi.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xv.
22).  "  They  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Whatever  disadvantages  they  suffer
from  their  relation  to  Adam  are  more  than  surpassed  by  the  abounding  grace  of  God  in
Christ.  "  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom  "  (Isa.
xl.  11).

II.  The  anticipation  of  futube  beunion  with  the  departed  ;  implying :  1.  Hope
of  personal  salvation  on  the  part  of  him  who  cherishes  it.  2.  Belief  in  the  individual
lecoguition  of  those  who  are  known  on  earth.

"  I  have  heard  you  say
That  we  shall  see  and  know  our  friends  in  heaven  |
If  that  be  true,  I  shall  see  my  boy  again."

('  King  John,'  act  Hi.  bc.  4.)

3.  Expectancy  of  common  participation  in  the  heavenly  fellowship,  service,  aud  joy  si
th«  Lord.

"Ah  !  thy  merciless  stem  mercy  hath  chastised  us.

Goading  us  along  the  narrow  road ;
Thy  bird,  who  warmed  and  dazzled  us  a  moment

Hath  returned  to  thine  abode.
Lord,  when  we  are  purged  within  the  furnace,

May  we  have  our  little  child  again  ?
All  thine  anguish  by  the  olives  in  the  garden.

All  thy  life  and  death  are  vain,

If  thou  yield  us  not  our  own  again  1 "

(Eoden  Noel, '  A  Little  Child's  Monmnent.*)

in.  CoHSOLATTON  IK  THE  PAINFUI.  LOSS  OF  THE  DEPARTED ;  derived  from  what  hM


3ie  tSfi  SECOND  BOOK  Of  SAMtJEU  i<m.Tn,i—&\.


been  said,  the  fact  that  it  comes  from  a  Father's  hand,  and  the  benefitt  which  it.  brings
by  (1)  teaching  patience  in  the  trials  of  life;  (2)  moderating  attachment  to  its  bless-
ings ;  (3)  spiritualizing  affection  for  those  who  are  left ;  (4)  intensifying  desire  for  the
heavenly  home.  "  Let  us  consider  to  whom  they  have  gone,  from  what  they  have  been
taken,  for  what  they  have  been  taken,  and  how  this  bereavement  will  appear  to  us
when  we  come  to  die  ourselves  "  (W.  M.  Taylor).

« 'Tis  sorrow  builds  the  shining  ladder  up,
Whose  golden  rounds  are  our  calamitiea."

Vers.  24,  25.— (Jebubalem.)  The  hirth  of  Solomon,  (/fe/erences;  1  Kings  i.—xi.;
1  Chron.  xxii. — xxix. ;  2  Chron.  i. — is.. ;  Ps.  Ixxii. ;  Prov.  i.  1 ;  Bccles.  i.  1 ;  Cant.  i.  1.)
Where  a  while  ago  a  dead  child  lay  amidst  signs  of  grief,  there  now  lies  a  living  child
amidst  signs  of  gladness.  In  him  David  sees  a  gift  of  God,  an  answer  to  prayer  which
seemed  to  be  denied,  "  a  pledge  of  pardon  and  a  sign  of  hope."  In  him  we  see  one  who
was  destined  to  become  the  wisest  of  men,  the  most  glorious  of  monarchs — Solomon
(whose  name  occurs  only  here  and  ch.  v.  14,  in  this  book)—

"The  lofty  light,  endow'd
With  sapience  so  profound,  if  truth  be  truthi
That  with  a  ken  of  such  \tide  amplitude
No  seoond  hath  arisen."

(Dante, 'Par.,' X.)

Notice;  1.  Sit  parentage.  David,  Bathsheba;  from  whom  he  inherited  physical
strength  and  beauty,  mental  and  moral  qualities,  a  piercing  insight,  large-heartedness,
skill  in  ruling,  sensuous  susceptibilities,  etc.,  royal  rank  ani  privileges.  "The  history
of  a  man's  childhood  is  the  description  of  his  parents'  environment"  (Oariyle).  2.  Bis
birth.  Alter  David's  fall,  repentance,  and  forgiveness,  and  the  death  of  his  unnamed
infant  (see,  however,  1  Chron.  iii.  5) ;  when  Babbah  had  fallen,  peace  was  established,
and  prosperity  abounded.  The  time  was  propitious.  3.  Bis  name.  (1  Sam.  i.  20.)
"And  he  called  his  name  Solomon"  (equivalent  to  "the  man  of  peaces"  "pacific,"
Friedrich),  "  because  he  regarded  his  birth  as  a  pledge  that"  he  should  now  become
a  partaker  again  of  the  peace  of  QoA "  (Keil) ;  or  perhaps  in  allusion  to  the  peaceful
condition  of  the  kingdom  and  "  from  the  wish  that  peace  might  be  allotted  him  as  a  gift
of  God,  in  contrast  with  the  wars  of  his  father's  lile  "  (Erdmann ;  ch.  vii.  12 ;  1  Chron.
xxii.  9).  "  And  Jehovah  loved  him,"  and  spared  his  life,  in  contrast  with  that  of  the
dead  child.  "  And  he  [Jehovah]  sent  by  the  hand  [through]  Nathan  the  prophet ;  and
he  [Nathan]  called  his  name  Jedid-jah  [Jedid  equivalent  to  'David,'  'darling;'  'beloved
of  Jah,'  his  own  name  being  combined  with  that  of  Jehovah],  because  of  the  Lord,"  who
loved  him ;  "a  practical  declaration  on  the  part  of  Jehovah  that  the  Lord  loved  Solomon,
from  which  David  could  and  was  intended  to  discern  that  the  Lord  had  blessed  his  marriage
with  Bathsheba.  Jedidiah,  therefore,  was  not  actually  adopted  as  Solomon's  name  "
(Keil).  "  The  pious  father,  in  his  happiness,  entreated  the  oracle,  through  Nathan,  to
confer  on  the  new-bom  child  some  name  of  lofty  import,  and  Solomon,  as  his  parents
called  him,  received  through  the  prophet  the  glorious  additional  name  of  Jedidiah.  The
sadness  of  the  fate  of  his  first  child  rendered  the  omens  under  which  the  second  stepped
into  its  place  the  more  auspcious ;  and  we  can  easily  understand  that  of  all  his  sons  this
one  became  the  dearest "  (Ewald).  4.  Bis  education ;  or  the  influences  that  went  to
form  his  character ;  of  Nathan,  to  whom  it  may  have  been  entrusted ;  of  David,  during
his  declining  years ;  of  Bathsheba  (ch.  xi.  3) ;  of  a  home  and  court  where  polygamy
prevailed ;  of  all  the  learning  of  the  age ;  of  the  revolt  of  Absalom,  and  other  public
events.  "A  shepherd-life,  like  his  father's,  furnished,  we  may  believe,  a  better
education  for  his  kingly  calling.  Bom  to  the  pui'ple,  there  was  the  inevitable  risk  of
a  selfish  luxury.  Cradled  in  liturgies^  trained  to  think  diiefiy  of  the  magnificent
'  palace '  of  Jehovah,  of  which  he  was  to  be  tlie  builder,  there  was  the  danger  first  of
an  esthetic  formalism,  and  then  of  ultimate  indifference"  (Soutb,  'Diet,  of  the  Bible ').
6.  Bis  prospects,  after  the  death  of  Absalom,  if  not  even  before  (ch.  vii.  12 ;  1  Chron.
xxii.  9 ;  1  Kings  i.  13) ;  his  accession  and  eminence.  6.  His  closing  years.  7.  Bis  pre-
figurement,  not  in  personal  character  but  royal  office,  of  "  the  Prince  of  Peace."    "  We


OH,xn.  1— 31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  317

must  ilot  confine  our  view  to  David's  personal  life  and  reign.  After  we  have  seen  him
fallen  and  suffering  for  sin,  we  must  see  him  rising  again  and  reviving  in  a  more
glorious  reign,  in  Solomon  his  son,  who  began  to  reign  while  David  his  father  was  still
alive,  in  order  that  the  continuity  might  be  more  clearly  marked.  And  above  all,  we
must  contemplate  him  as  culminating  Upward  and  attaining  the  climax  of  his  glory,
whiph  God  had  revealed  to  him,  and  ior  which  he  yearned  with  devout  aspiration,  in
Christ,  the  Divine  David  and  the  Son  of  David,  the  Solomon,  the  Jedidiah,  the  Builder
of  the  Church  visible  on  earth  and  glorified  in  heaven  "  (Wordsworth). — ^D.

Vers.  26—31  (1  Chron.  xx.  1—3).— The  fall  of  Edbbah.  This  event,  which
occurred  after  a  two  years'  siege,  between  the  fall  of  David  and  his  repentance,  presents
several  significant  contrasts.  1.  Material  success  associated  with  moral  failure.  His
army  victorious,  his  enterprise  terminating  in  triumph ;  David  himself  overcome  by
temptation,  and  troubled  with  a  guilty  conscience.  Worldly  success  and  prosperity  are
no  true  measure  of  moral  worth  and  inward  peace  and  happiness.  2.  Praiselvorthy
conduit  displayed  ly  an,  unworthy  character.  Having  captured  the  lower  city,  Joab,
before  attacking  tlie  citadel,  "sent  messengers,"  etc.  (ver.  27).  The  politic  general
may  have  wished  to  escape  the  envy  and  secure  the  favour  of  the  king;  apparently,
however,  his  conduct  exhibited  consideration  for  the  honour  of  his  master,  modesty,
and  humility.  Even  the  worst  men  have  some  good  qualities,  and  often  perform
excellent  actions.  "  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to  be  faithful  to  some  one  person,  and
perfidious  to  others.  1  do  not  find  Joab  other  than  firm  and  loyal  to  David  in  the
midst  of  all  his  private  falsehoods"  (Hall).  3.  A  disastrous  end  following  apresump-
tuousleginning.  (Ver.  29.)  In  this  city  the  great  conflict  was  commenced,  wantonly,
proudly,  and  contemptuously  (ch.  x.  1—4).  On  the  king  (slain  in  battle)  and  the
people  a  terrible  retribution  fell ;  and  their  confidence  in  Moloch  (Malcom)  was  dis-
appointed. 4.  Excessive  severity  practised  by  a  generous-minded  ruler  (ver.  31) ;  not
sanctioned  by  God;  but  expressive  of  David's  present  temper  (ch.  xi.  22 — 27),  and
demanded  by  the  excitement  of  popular  indignation.  (1)  The  cruel  conduct  of  the
Ammonites  (1  Sam.  xi;  2 ;  Amos  i.  8) ;  (2)  the  common  practices  of  the  age ;  (3)  an
intense  zeal  against  idolatry ;  (4)  the  strong  conviction  of  being  an  appointed
instrument  of  executing  Divine  vengeance  (Ps.  cxlix.  7) ; — may  palliate  the  culpability,
though  they  cannot  justify  the  procedure  of  David ;  which,  in  the  light  of  truth  and
righteousness,  must  be  condemned  and  regarded  as  a  blot  upon  his  great  renown.
This  proceeds  on  the  assumption  of  the  correctness  of  the  explanation  usually  given  of
the  text,  which  is  by  no  means  certain  (see  critical  Commentaries). — ^D.

Vers.  5 — 7. —  Unconscious  self-condemnation.  Great  sinners  are  generally  able  to
discern  and  condemn  in  others  wickedness  similar  to  their  own.  This  gives  an
advantage  to  those  who  would  convince  them  of  their  sins.  Nathan  made  use  of  it  in
dealing  with  David,  and  with  good  effect.

I.  Nathan's  paeablb.  It  presents  a  picture  of  conduct  sufiiciently  like  that  of
David  to  prepare  the  way  for  his  self-condemnation,  and  yet  so  far  different  that  its
drift  should  not  be  at  once  detected.  It  is  a  picture  of:  1.  Oross  covetousness.  For
a  poor  man  to  covet  some  part  of  a  rich  man's  abundance  is  natural,  though  wrong ;
but  for  a  rich  man  to  covet  the  little  of  a  poor  man  is  monstrous  wickedness.  Such
had  been  David's  conduct  towards  Uriah.  2.  jRoblery.  3.  Oppression  of  the  weak  by
the  strong.  4.  Violation  of  feelings  which  should  have  been  tenderly  respected.  The
attachment  of  the  poor  man  to  his  pet  lamb.  The  counterpart  was  the  affection  of
Uriah  for  his  wife,  and,  till  she  was  seduced,  of  the  wife  for  her  husband.

II.  Its  effect  on  the  kino.  It  seems  surprising  that  he  did  not  at  once  see  the
prophet's  meaning  and  intention.  Perhaps  Nathan  had  been  accustomed  to  come  to
him  to  plead  the  cause  of  the  injured  who  could  obtain  no  redress  otherwise,  and
David  imagined  this  to  be  his  errand  now.  Besides,  it  was  a  good  while  since  David's
sius  were  committed ;  yet  the  prophet  had  hitherto  been  silent  about  them,  and  would
the  less  be  suspected  of  coming  to  administer  reproof  for  them  now.  Hence,  all
imconsciously,  he:  1.  Displayed  hot  anger  against  the  wrong-doer.  2.  Passed  a
severe  sentence  up6ti  hint;  saying  that  he  deserved  death,  and  condemning  him  to  the
fourfold  restitulibn  which  the  Law  required  (Exod.  xxii.  1) — a  remarkable  illustratiu  i


318  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xn.  1— 31.

of  Bom.  ii.  1.  Had  he  been  aware  that  he  was  passing  sentence  upon  himself,  he  would
probably  have  been  less  severe.  Or  if  he  had  remembered  his  own  greater  crimes,  he
would  hardly  so  harshly  have  conrlemned  a  man  whose  crime  was  so  much  less  heinous.
But  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  great  offenders  to  be  harsh  in  their  judgment  of
others  who  are  far  less  culpable  than  themselves.

III.  Nathan's  rbjoindeb.  1.  He  ivpplied  to  David  himself  the  judgment  he  had
pronounced.  "  Thou  art  the  man  I "  With  what  terrific  force  this  must  have  fallen
apoi»  the  king's  ears!  He  was  self-convicted,  self-condemned.  To  such  self-condemna-
tion it  should  be  the  aim  of  religious  teachers  to  lead  their  hearers.  It  is  not  per-
missible, indeed,  unless  in  very  extreme  cases,  to  address  individuals  in  public  in  such
words  as  Nathan's  to  David ;  but  the  preacher's  work  is  not  effectually  done  until  each
hearer  whose  sin  is  described  is  broug^.t  to  say  to  himself,  "  I  am  the  man ! "  To  use
the  language  of  a  great  preacher  of  a  former  generation  (Robert  Hall),  "Without
descending  to  such  a  minute  specification  of  circumstances  as  shall  make  our  addresses
personal,  they  ouglit  unquestionably  to  be  characteristic,  that  the  conscience  of  the
audience  may  feel  the  hand  of  the  preacher  searching  it,  and  every  individual  know
where  to  class  himself.  The  preacher  who  aims  at  doing  good  will  endeavour,  above
all  things,  to  insulate  his  hearers,  to  place  each  of  them  apart,  and  render  it  impossible
for  him  to  escape  by  losing  himself  in  the  crowd.  At  the  day  of  judgment,  the
attention  excited  by  the  surrounding  scene,  the  strange  aspect  of  nature,  the  dissolution
of  the  elements,  and  the  last  trump,  will  have  no  other  effect  than  to  cause  the
reflections  of  the  sinner  to  return  with  a  more  overwhelming  tide  on  his  own  character,
his  sentence,  his  imchanging  destiny ;  and  amid  the  innumerable  millions  who  surround
him,  he  will  mourn  apart.  It  is  thus  the  Christian  minister  should  endeavour  to
prepare  the  tribunal  of  conscience,  and  turn  the  eyes  of  every  one  of  his  hearers  on
himself."  Hearers  should  welcome  such  preaching,  and  thank  God  for  the  convictions
it  produces,  as  a  necessary  step  in  the  process  of  their  salvation.  2.  Be  faithfully
delivered  God's  message  to  him.  (1)  Eemindins;  him  of  the  great  kindness  of  God  to
him.  (2)  Charging  him  distinctly  with  his  crimes.  (3)  Pronouncing  upon  him  the
Divine  sentence.  In  the  whole  interview,  Nathan  acted  with  lingular  courage,  and
fidelity  to  him  who  sent  him.

IV.  The  kesult.  David's  frank  and  penitent  confession  of  his  sin ;  and  his  pardon.
Had  he  been  utterly  hardened,  be  might  have  resented  the  prophet's  faithfulness,
dismissed  him  with  anger,  or  even  ordered  him  to  prison  or  death.  But  the  workinca
of  his  own  conscience  had  prepared  him  to  recognize  the  justice  of  Nathan's  words-
and  these  now  melted  into  contrition  the  long-burdened  yet  stubborn  heart,  which  at
length  found  relief  in  the  brief  but  sincere  words,  "  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord ;  "
to  which  the  prophet  was  able  to  return  the  consoling  reply,  "  The  Lord  also  hath  put
away  thy  sin  ;  thou  shalt  not  die  "  (comp.  Ps.  xxxii.  3 — 5).

Learn :  1.  The  duty  of  reproving  sin  in  others.  (Lev.  xix.  17.)  2.  The  value  of
a  minister  or  other  friend  faithfvJ,  enough  to  administer  reproof.  3.  The  responsibility
which  attaches  to  the  power  to  discern  and  condemn  sin  in  others.  (1)  It  should
induce  us  to  avoid  the  sins  which  we  condemn,  and  others  like  them.  (2)  It  increases
our  guilt  if  we  commit  snch  sins.  (3)  It  ought  to  induce  hearty  self-condemnation
and  penitence  when  we  fall  into  them.  The  indignation  we  feel  against  the  sins  of
others  should  be  turned  on  our  own,  in  dealing  with  which  there  is  more  hope  than
in  endeavouring  to  convince  and  reform  our  neighbours ;  besides  which,  when  we  have
forsaken  our  own  sins,  we  shall  be  better  fitted  to  reprove  and  amend  other  offenders
(»ee  Matt.  vii.  4,  5).  4.  The  goodness  of  Ood  in  first  sending  reprovers  to  warn  and
convert,  rather  than  inflicting  swift  punishment. — G.  W.

Ver.  9.— Despising  the  commandments  of  God.  David,  by  his  grievons  sins,  had
virtually  shown  contempt  for  the  well-known  commandments  of  God  against  covetinc
the  wife  of  another,  and  against  adultery  and  murder.  Hence  the  force  of  this  remon-
strance. _  It  may  be  properly  addressed  to  all  who  in  any  way  show  contempt  for  any
of  the  Divine  commandments;  to  all  men,  therefore,  since  all  are  in  some  respects  and
in  some  degree  guilty  of  this  sin.

I.  Who  mat  bk  said  to  despise  the  commandments  op  God  ?  1.  Those  who  tak»
w.  j)ainf  to  knovi  and  understand  them,    Who  do  not  think  it  worth  while  to  inquire,


CH.  XII.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  819

in  reference  to  their  course  of  life,  their  duty  to  others,  or  any  particular  action,  or
even  their  religious  faith  and  observances,  what  the  will  of  God  is;  btft  are  content  to
follow  without  question  the  customs  of  the  world  around  them,  or  their  own  inclinations
and  habits.  2.  ITiose  who  refuse  to  give  heed  when  their  attention  is  called  to  them.
Which  may  be  by  their  own  consciences,  or  by  other  men.  3.  Those  who  disobey  them.
And  the  degree  of  contempt  shown  by  disobedience  will  be  in  proportion  to  (1)  their
knowledge ;  (2)  their  remembrance,  at  the  time,  of  the  commandment,  its  Author,  and
its  sanctions;  (3)  the  difBoulties  of  disobedience  which  have  to  be  overcome;  and
(4)  the  remonstrances  of  conscience,  and  of  the  Spirit  of  Grod,  which  are  resisted  and
conquered.

II.  Thbib  sin  and  roLLT.  They  may  be  addressed  as  the  prophet  addressed  David,
"  Wherefore,"  etc.  1.  What  rational  grotmd  have  you  for  doing  iff  Seeing  the  com-
mandment (1)  is  "  of  the  Lord,"  who  has  the  higKest  right  to  the  obedience  of  his
creatures;  (2)  proceeds  from  the  perfect  reason  and  the  infinite  love;  and  therefore
(3)  is  adapted  to  promote  the  good  of  each  and  all.  "  The  Law  is  holy,  and  the
commandment  holy,  and  just,  and  good  (Rom.  vii.  12).  Considei'  any  particular  com-
mandment you  have  disregarded,  and  you  will  see  that  all  this  is  true  of  it ;  and  that,
therefore,  your  conduct  is  foolish  and  wicked.  2.  How  can  "you"  do  iff  Who  have
been  laid  under  obligations  so  weighty  by  the  kindness  of  God ;  who  know  so  well  hia
character,  claims,  and  laws ;  who  have  so  often  and  in  such  various  ways  professed
love  and  loyalty  to  him;  who  are  bound  by  so  many  considerations  to  set  a  good
example ;  or  (as  in  David's  case)  are  appointed  to  be  an  upholder  of  law,  a  guardian
of  innocence,  a  protector  of  the  public  morals.  3.  How  "  dare  "  you  do  it  f  In  view
of  the  shame  and  moral  injury  you  bring  on  yourself;  the  evil  you  do  to  others ;  the
terrible  threatenings  of  the  Word  of  God  against  sinners;  his  knowledge  of  all  you  do;
his  awful  holiness  and  justice;  and  his  almighty  power  to  execute  his  threatenings.
In  view  also  ot  death,  and  of  the  day  of  judgment,  when  your  most  secret  sins  will  be
brought  to  light  and  punished. — Q.  W.

Ver.  10. — Bespisers  of  God.  "Thou  hast  despised  me."  In  the  dreadful  sins  of
wliioh  David  had  been  guilty  he  had  treated  God  with  contempt.  He  had  treated  as
of  no  account  all  the  kindness  of  God  to  him;  had  disregarded  his  claims;  shown
contempt  practically  for  his  authority,  his  precepts,  his  observance  of  his  conduct,
his  justice  and  its  penalties,  his  favour,  his  voice  in  the  conscience.  The  charge
brought  against  David  may  be  brought  against  many  who  are  not  guilty  of  gross  and
flagrant  crimes  like  his.

I.  Who  are  guilty  op  dbspibino  Gob  ?  1.  All  sin  involves  contempt  of  him.  It
shows  :  (1)  Indifference  as  to  his  Being  and  perfections.  If  the  sinner  does  not  boldly
say,  "no  God,"  he  practically  ignores  him,  leaves  him  out  of  account  in  his  conduct,
and  treats  his  presence  and  observation  of  him,  his  hatred  to  sin,  his  threatened
judgments,  as  of  no  importance,  not  worthy  of  serious  consideration  (see  Ps.  x.  13).
(2)  Contempt  for  his  authority.  (3)  Despisal  of  his  kindness  (Rom.  ii.  4).  (4)  Con-
tempt of  his  wisdom,  as  expressed  in  his  laws.  As  if  the  sinner  thought  he  could
guide  and  govern  himself  better  than  God.  (5)  Disesteem  of  his  favour  and  friend-
ship. 2.  Certain  hinds  of  sin  may  he  mentioned  as  showing  such  contempt.  (1)
Unthankfulness  and  discontent.  As  if  God's  gifts  were  not  worth  having.  (2)
Eejection  of  Christ  and  salvation — his  best  gifts,  in  which  he  appears  more  fully  and
manifestly  than  in  aught  else.  "  He  that  despiseth  me  despiseth  him  that  sent  me  "
(Luke  X.  16).  "  Hath  done  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace "  (Heb.  x.  29).  (3)
Neglect  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.  In  them  God  comes  to  instruct  us,  to  make  us
partakers  of  his  own  wisdom,  to  make  known  his  will,  etc.  To  neglect  them  is  to
show  contempt  of  him.  (4)  Negligence  as  to  his  service.  As  to  the  hours  and  exer-
cises of  devotion.  God  invites  us  to  converse  with  him,  to  make  known  our  requests,
with  the  promise  of  gracious  answers.  To  disregard  prayer,  or  offer  unreal  worship,  is
t<i  treat  him  with  contempt.  He  is  most  worthy  to  be  praised.  To  decline  to  praise
him,  or  to  praise  in  words  only,  is  to  despise  him.  In  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's
Supper  he  comes  specially  near  to  us,  to  commune  with  us  in  Christ,  to  feed  us  with
the  body  and  blood  of  his  Son.  To  turn  away  from  the  holy  feast,  or  come  with
hyjwcrisy,  or  with  hearts  or  bands  stained  with  uorepented  sin,  is  to  treat  him


320  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xii.  1—31.

with  contempt.  And  in  more  active  life,  to  be  slovenly,  slothful,  indifferent;  to  offei
hitn  a  half-bearted  service ;  to  present  him  with  niggard  offerings ;  is  to  show  grievous
disrespect  to  him  (see  Mai.  i.  6 — 8).  (5)  Contempt  for  his  people,  or  any  of  them.
As  if  the  godlv  were  necessarily  fanatical.  Or  because  they  may  be  feeble,  or
inexperienced  (^alt.  xviii.  10),  or  poor  (Jas.  ii.  6).  Or  because  tljey  differ  from  us  in
judgment  or  observanceB  (Bom.  xiv.  3,  10).  "  He  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  me"
(Luke  X.  16).

II.  Their  follt  and  wiokbdkesb.  Considering:  1.  Who  is  despised.  "Me."
The  infinite  Majesty,  the  Source  and  Sustainer  of  all  beings,  the  Giver  of  all  good,  the
Creator,  Preserver,  and  Benefactor  of  those  who  despise  him,  without  whom  they  have
nothing  and  can  do  nothing ;  perfect  in  all  that  is  good,  anil  worthy  of  all  esteem  and
love ;  who  is  reverenced,  adored,  loved,  and  served  by  the  loftiest  intelligences,  by  all
the  wise  and  good  in  all  worlds ;  the  Father  of  our  Lord  JesUs  Christ,  in  whom  all  that
is  glorious  in  holiness  and  love  appears,  revealing  the  glorious  excellences  of  God.

2.  Who  is  the  despiser.  "  Thou."  So  ignorant,  so  needy,  so  dependent,  so  greatly
blessed,  so  siuful,  so  perverted  in  mind  and  heart,  and  incapable,  while  untaught  of
God,  of  judging  aright  as  to  the  best  things.  It  is  the  creature  despising  his  Creator,
folly  despising  wisdom,  weakness  despising  Omnipotence,  the  lost  dei-pising  his
Deliverer,  the  destitute  despising  him  who  would  enrfch  him  with  everlasting  riches.

3.  The  contrast  letween  him  who  is  despised  and  the  things  which  are  valued.  God  is
rejected  and  treated  as  of  little  or  no  account ;  while  things  which  are  worthless  or
injurious,  or  which  if  valuable  have  only  a  limited  and  transient  worth,  are  highly
prized  and  pursued  as  if  of  supreme  worth  and  importance.  4.  What  is  involved  in
despising  Ood.  It  is  to  despise  ourselves,  our  own  souls  and  their  salvation,  the  true
riches  and  honour,  our  true  and  everlasting  happiness,  eternal  life,  all  that  most
deserves  to  be  valued.

III.  Their  doom.  1.  To  le  themselves  despised.  "  They  that  despise  me  shall  be
lightly  esteemed "  (1  Sam.  ii.  30).  They  shall  rise  "  to  shame  and  everlasting
contempt"  (Dan.  xii.  2),  exposed  and  regarded  as  fools,  and  treated  as  worthless.
"  Eeprobate  silver  shall  men  call  them,  because  the  Lord  hath  rejected  them  "  (Jer.
vi.  30).  2.  To  find  hy  wretched  experience  how  real  and  how  essential  to  their  hap-
piness is  he  whom  they  have  sliglited.  To  learn  the  value  of  his  favour  by  the
irreparable  loss  of  ii.  The  sin  of  despising  him  they  will  no  longer  be  able  to  commit.
But  the  doom  may  be  averted  by  repentance,  as  David's  case  teaches  (ver.  13). — Q.  W.

Ver.  13. — Confession  and  pardon.  Two  things  are  very  surprising  in  this  narratire
— ^the  awful  wickedness  of  David,  and  the  abounding  mercy  of  God.

I.  David's  confession.  It  was:  1.  Very  prompt.  The  prophet's  address  awakened
no  resentment.  There  was  no  attempt  at  evasion,  palliation,  or  self-justification.  How
could  there  be?  He  at  once  acknowledged  his  sin.  This  was  the  result,  not  only  of
Nathan's  faithful  reproof,  but  of  the  king's  own  previous  mental  exercises.  The  time
which  had  elapsed  since  the  commission  of  his  sins,  or  some  part  of  it,  had  been  a
sorrowful  time  for  him.  Burdened  with  conscious  guilt,  but  not  subdued  to  contrition,
he  had  been  wretched  (see  Ps.  xxxii.  3,  4).  Nathan's  admonitions  completed  the
work ;  the  king's  heart  was  melted  to  penitence,  and  he  unburdened  his  soul  by  a
frank  confession.  2.  Very  brief.  Like  the  prayer  of  the  publican  (Luke  xviii.  13).
When  the  heart  is  fullest,  the  words  are  fewest.  Not  the  length  of  a  confession,  but
its  meaning  and  sincerity,  are  the  important  thing.  It  is  bo  with  confessions  of  men  to
each  other:  a  word,  a  look,  or  an  action  without  a  word,  is  often  sufficient,  always
better  than  a  long  speech.  3.  Very  appropriatt.  Acknowledged  sin — sin  "against  the
Lord."  Nathan  had  laid  stress  on  this  point,  and  David  responds  accordingly.  He
had  grievously  wronged  Uriah,  Bathsheba  too,  and  had  sinned  against  the  people  imder
his  rule  ;  but  most  had  he  sinned  against  God.  Hence  his  language  in  Ps.  Ii.  4.  Only
as  sin  is  thus  viewed  is  "godly  sorrow"  possible.

II.  His  FORGIVENESS.  Which  was :  1.  Immediate.  It  Startles  us  that  so  great  a
sinner  should  have  been  so  speedily  pardoned,  so  soon  assured  of  pardon.  We  might
have  deemed  some  delay  more  suitable.  But  God  is  ever  ready  to  forgive  j  he  waits
only  for  the  sinner's  penitent  confession.  There  is  no  reason  for  delay  of  forgiveness
except  the  sinner's  impeuitence  and  unbeliet    The  moment  these  are  subdued,  pardon


OH.  xu.  1—31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  821

is  granted.  This  was  assured  by  the  promises  of  the  Old  Testament,  such  as  Isa.  Iv.  7.
In  the  New  we  have  the  same  assurances,  and  the  diEBculties  which  arise  from  the
penitent  sinner's  conviction  of  the  Tightness  of  the  punishment  threatened  to  transgres-
sors (his  conscience  being  on  the  side  of  the  Divine  justice)  are  removed  by  the  atoning
sacrifice  of  Christ.  2.  Free.  Burdened  with  no  conditions,  no  demand  for  penances,
or  compensations,  or  sin  offerings.  The  sin  was  too  serious  for  these.  So  David  felt
(Ps.  li.  16).  Only  a  perfectly  free  pardon  could  meet  the  case.  New  love  and  service
would  follow ;  but  these  would  spring  from  gratitude  for  forgiveness,  not  from  the
expectation  of  securing  it.  The  attempt  to  merit  or  earn  pardon  for  past  transgressions
by  voluntary  sufferings,  by  multiplied  prayers  or  ceremonies,  or  by  future  obedience,  is
absurd  on  the  face  of  it,  and  as  contrary  to  the  Old  Testament  as  to  the  New.  It  was
to  the  "  multitude  of  God's  tender  mercies  "  (Ps.  li.  1)  that  David  appealed ;  and  it  U
to  the  same  abounding  grace  as  shown  in  the  gospel  that  we  must  trust.  3.  Declared.
Nathan  pronounced  the  king's  absolution :  "  The  Lord  also  hath  put  away  thy  sin ;
thou  shalt  not  die."  Men  would  like  a  similar  assurance  to  themselves  individually;
and  the  system  of  some  Churches  is  constructed  to  meet  this  wish.  On  confession  of
sin  to  a  priest,  he  pronounces  absolution.  But  this  practice  is  unwarranted  and
delusive.  Confessedly  the  absolution  is  worthless  unless  the  sinner  be  truly  penitent ;
and  if  he  be,  it  is  useless ;  and  in  multitudes  of  cases  it  is  most  pernicious,  fostering
baseless  hopes.  If  men  could  read  the  heart,  or  had,  like  Nathan,  a  special  message
of  pardon  from  God  in  each  case,  they  might  safely  pronounce  absolution.  But  in
ordinary  cases  none  can  know  the  reality  of  repentance  until  it  is  proved  by  the  life ;
and  therefore  none  can  safely  assure  the  sinner  of  his  actual  forgiveness  until  such
assurance  is  needless.  The  repenting  sinner,  coming  to  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,
is  assured  of  pardon  (1)  by  the  promises  of  God,  and  (2)  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  his
heart  applying  the  promises  to  the  individual  and  enabling  him  to  confide  in  them,
and  commencing  in  him  the  Christian  life.  A  new  heart  is  given  with  pardon ;  and
this,  with  its  fruit  in  the  conduct,  becomes  a  growing  evidence  of  pardon.  4.  Tet  with
a  reservation.  The  penalty  of  death,  to  which  David  had  virtually  condemned  himself,
was  remitted;  but  other  penalties  were  not.  One  was  specifically  mentioned — the
deiith  of  the  child  (ver.  14);  and  the  others,  denounced  (vers.  10 — 12)  before  the
confession  and  forgiveness,  we  know  from  the  subsequent  history  were  inflicted.  And
it  is  often  the  case  that  the  painful  consequences  of  sin  continue  long  after  pardon  is
granted,  perhaps  till  death.  Shall  we  say,  then,  that  the  forgiveness  is  not  real  and
full  ?  By  no  means.  But  because  it  is  real  and  full  the  pardoned  sinner  must  suffer.
Suffering,  however,  changes  its  character.  As  from  God,  it  is  no  longer  penal  infliction,
but  fatherly  chastisement  and  discipline  (1)  to  maintain  a  salutary  remembrance  of
the  sin,  and  produce  constant  gratitude  and  humility ;  (2)  to  preserve  in  obedience  and
promote  holiness ;  (3)  to  vindicate  to  others  the  justice  of  God,  and  warn  them  against
sin.  And  as  to  the  penitent  himself,  his  suffering  produces  no  bitterness,  abjectness,  or
sullenness.  Love  to  him  that  chastises,  kept  alive  by  the  sense  of  his  forgiving  and
fatherly  love,  enables  him  to  yield  himself  to  the  chastisement,  thankful,  resigned,
acquiescent,  and  earnestly  seeking  to  realize  the  intended  profit.
.  In  conclusion:  1.  Admire,  adore,  trust,  and  proclaim  the  pardoning  love  of  God,  2.
Let  sinners  repent  of,  confess,  and  forsake  their  sins,  that  they  may  obtain  forgiveness.
For,  notwithstanding  the  love  of  God  and  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  no  impenitent  sinner
shall  be  forgiven,  3.  Let  no  penitent  despair.  Not  even  the  backslider,  and  though
his  sins  have  been  as  bad  as  David's.  4.  Let  none  presume.  One  of  the  worst  and
most  persistent  consequences  of  David's  sin  and  pardon  has  been  the  encouragement
to  sin,  which  foolish  and  wicked  persons  have  derived  from  them,  or — shall  we  say  ? —
pretended  to  derive.  For  so  foolish  and  impious  is  it  to  turn  the  narrative  to  such  a
purpose  that  it  is  difficult  to  believe  in  the  siiicerity  of  those  who  do  so.  Bather  they
love  their  sins,  and  are  glad  of  anything  that  may  quiet  somewhat  their  consciences  in
committing  them.  Let  any  such  consider  that  the  proper  effect  of  the  narrative  is  to
render  sin  odious  and  to  awaken  a  dread  of  it ;  and  that  the  sins  of  those  who  read  it
and  persist  in  sin  are  rendered  doubly  guilty.  Such  are  hardening  their  hearts  and
promoting  in  themselves  incapacity  to  repent,  and  so  incapability  of  being  forgiven.
— G.W.

n.  sAinnoi.  ■


322  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xn.  1—31.

Ver.  14. — Beligion  reproached  through  the  conduct  of  the  religious.  David's  wicked-
ness gave  occasion  for  reproach  of  religion  by  the  ungodly  among  his  subjects,  and  by
the  heathen  peoples  around.  Indeed,  it  occasions  blasphemy  and  contempt  of  religion
down  to  the  present  day.

I.  OONDTTOT   WHICH   OOOASIONS   CONTEMPT  AND  BBPBOACH  OF  BELIOIOIT.      The  COnduot

must  be  that  of  professedly  religious  men,  and  the  more  strict  their  profession,  and  the
more  prominent  their  position,  so  much  the  greater  the  mischief  they  do.  1.  Great
inconsistency  between  profession  and  conduct.  Gross  immorality,  fraud,  falsehood,
avarice,  intemperance,  hasty  temper,  revenge,  etc.  2.  Unworthy  presentation  of
religion  itself.  Ignorant  rant,  unctuous  cant,  too  much  insistence  on  mere  doctrinal
refinements  which  have  little  or  no  bearing  on  practical  life,  elaborate  ceremonialism,
fierce  strife  in  a  Church,  sectarian  bitterness  and  exclusiveness,  indifference  to  the  well-
being  of  the  general  population,  clerical  pretensions,  ambition,  or  avarice, — all  in  their
various  ways  and  degrees  occasion  "  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme."

II.  The  class  of  pebsons  led  teebebt  to  despise  and  befboach  belioion.
"  The  enemies  of  the  Lord."  Not  his  friends ;  they  know  too  well  the  value  of
religion;  reverence  and  love  it  too  much.  The  effect  of  such  conduct  on  them  is
sorrow,  self-examination,  and  greater  watchfulness  and  prayer,  lest  they  also  should  be
overcome  by  temptation.  Also  prayer  and  effort  (if  possible)  to  restore  those  who  have
sinned.  To  take  occasion  from  the  inconsistencies  of  Christian^  to  despise  and  revile
their  religion  is  a  manifest  sign  of  enmity  to  God.  It  is  also  a  mark  of  great  ignorance
of  the  religion  they  revile ;  for,  did  they  understand  it,  they  would  perceive  its  opposi-
tion to  the  sins  and  follies  of  its  professed  adherents  ;  and  that  its  truth  and  goodness
remained  the  same,  whatever  their  conduct.  Or,  if  it  be  said  that  it  is  only  the
profession  of  religion  that  is  spoken  of  with  contempt,  it  is  plainly  unjust  to  cast  a  slur
on  all  who  make  it  because  of  the  sins  of  a  few  of  their  number.

III.  The  seeiotjs  evils  thus  weought.  1.  The  slanderers  are  themselves  injured.
To  occasion  them  to  blaspheme  is  to  occasion  the  increase  of  their  guilt,  and  the  greater
hardening  of  their  hearts ;  whereas  it  should  be  the  aim  of  good  men  to  do  all  that  is
possible  to  bring  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  and  the  experience  of  salvation.
2.  Discredit  is  brought  upon  religion.  Hence  some  who  might  have  been  disposed  to
inquire  into  its  claims,  and  others  who  were  preparing  to  make  an  open  profession  of
godliness,  are  deterred  from  doing  so.  In  this  view  the  inconsistencies  of  Christians
are  a  serious  matter.  They  help  to  promote  in  society  a  sentiment  adverse  to  earnest
godliness  and  the  profession  of  it.  3.  The  hearts  of  true-hearted  and  consistent
Christians  are  wounded  and  distressed.  4.  Above  all,  and  including  all,  the  Name  of
God  is  dishonoured,  and  the  progress  of  his  kingdom  checked.

Finally,  let  inconsistent  professors  of  religion  ponder  the  words  of  our  Lord  (Matt.
xviii.  7,  Revised  Version),  "  Woe  unto  the  world  because  of  occasions  of  stumbling !
for  it  must  needs  be  that  the  occasions  come  ;  but  woe  to  that  man  through  whom  the
occasion  coraeth  I " — G.  W.

Vers.  22,  23. — An  infanfs  illness  and  death.  This  part  of  the  narrative  introduces
us  to  a  spectacle  which,  in  its  main  features,  is  common  enough.  A  child  sickening
and  dying,  a  parent  striving  with  God  in  prayer  and  fasting  for  its  life,  but  striving
in  vain.  But  there  are  peculiar  circumstances  here  which  give  the  scene  a  special
interest.

I.  The  child's  fatal  biokkess.  1.  The  cause  of  it.  The  sufferings  and  deaths
of  little  children  are  painful  to  witness,  and  awaken  many  questionings.  Why  should
these  innocent  lambs  suffer  ?  Why  should  the  sinless  die  ?  To  which  we  may  reply.
Why  should  they  not,  seeing  that  to  them  death  is  an  escape  from  a  world  of  sin
and  misery,  with  its  awful  possibilities,  of  evil,  into  the  world  of  perfect  and  eternal
purity,  safety,  and  bliss?  Besides,  he  who  gave  life  may  take  it  at  his  pleasure.  Holy
Scripture  throws  some  further  light  upon  the  mystery.  It  teaches  us  in  general,  that,
death  cnme  into  the  world  through  sin.  Children  die  because  they  belong  to  a
sinful,  dying  race.  Their  deaths  are  part  of  the  penalty  of  the  sins  of  men.  In  them
the  u.uocent  suffer  for  the  guilty,  because  of  their  guilt,  and  to  promote  their  deliver*
ance  J  i  om  sin.  Amongst  the  forces  at  work  to  promote  repentance  and  holiness,  not
&B  least  powerful  u«  tLe  deaths  of  little  children.     God  thus  finds  a  way  to  tha


OH.xn.  1— 31.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  823

hearts  of  parents  and  their  surviving  children.  In  the  case  of  David  we  have  express
Divine  explanation  of  the  death  of  the  hahe  (ver.  14).  It  was  inflicted  on  account
of  the  sin  to  which  it  owed  its  existence,  and  to  vindicate  the  justice  of  God  as  pgninpt
the  blasphemies  of  his  enemies.  And  not  unfrequently  now  the  child's  death  is  the
direct  consequence  and  penalty  of  the  sins  of  its  father  or  mother.  But  in  such  cases,
as  in  David's,  love  is  revealed  as  well  as  righteousness.  "The  Lord  struck  "  David's
child,  not  only  to  show  his  displeasure  at  David's  sin,  but  to  deepen  his  penitence,  and
promote  his  godliness  and  holiness.  2.  Its  effect  on  David.  It  might  have  seemed
probable  that,  when  the  babe  was  taken  ill,  the  father,  while  not  actually  desiring  its
death,  would  at  least  not  have  been  much  grieved  at  the  prospect  of  it.  For  it  was
a  child  of  shame,  and  as  long  as  it  lived  would  be  a  perpetual  reminder  of  the  dreadful
past,  and  would  keep  alive  the  memory  of  it  in  the  court  and  nation.  And  it  is  a
striking  proof  of  the  tenderness  and  strength  of  the  monarch's  affections  that  the
prospect  of  the  death  of  his  little  hoy  was  so  distressing  to  him.  Partly,  however,  his
intense  longing  that  the  child's  life  should  be  spared  sprang  probably  from  the  feeling
that  this  would  be  a  fresh  assurance  to  him  that  his  sins  were  forgiven.  In  his  distress
he  resorted  to  pra3'er  for  the  child's  restoration.  How  could  he  do  this,  seeing  Nathan
had  expressly  told  him  that  it  should  certainly  die?  It  seems  that  Divine  announce-
ments of  punishments  were  not  regarded  as  irrevocable,  however  positive  their  terms.
Compare  the  cases  of  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xx.  1 — 6)  and  of  Nineveh  (Jonah  iii.  4 — 10).
So  David  said,  "  Who  can  tell  whether  God  will  be  gracious  to  me,  that  the  child  may
live  ? "  and  he  persevered  in  prayer  and  fasting  and  self-humiliation  until  the  death
of  the  child  extinguished  all  hope.  He  "  went  in  "  to  a  retired  part  of  his  palace,  and
cast  himself  on  the  ground,  beseeching  God  for  the  child,  and  fasting  (ver.  16) ;  and  in
these  exercises  he  continued  day  and  night,  until  on  the  seventh  day  the  child  died
(ver.  18).  Doubtless,  during  that  period  of  solitary  commupion  with  God,  not  only
did  he  pray  for  the  child's  life,  but  reflected  much  on  his  sins,  indulged  anew  his
penitential  grief,  prayed  for  forgiveness  and  a  cleansed  heart,  surrendered  himself  and
his  babe  to  the  Divine  will,  sought  strength  to  endure  whatever  might  be  before  him,  ■
and  grace  to  derive  lasting  profit  from  all  that  he  was  passing  through,  whatever  the
issue  inight  be.    In  all  which  we  do  well  to  take  him  as  an  example.

II.  The  child's  death.  The  prayers  offered  for  the  restoration  of  the  child  were
sincere,  importunate,  persevering;  but  they  were  offered  in  vain.  "The  child  died."
Yet  not  in  vain.  No  true  prayer  is  in  vain.  It  brings  blessing  to  'him  who  offers  it
greater  than  that  which  is  denied  to  him.  God  gives  "  more  than  we  ask,"  better  than
we  ask.  The  effect  of  his  child's  death  on  David  astonished  his  servants.  He  "  arose
from  the  earth,  and  washed,  and  anointed  himself,  and  changed  his  apparel,  and  came
into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  worshipped,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  1.  He  laid  aside  all  signs
of  mowrning.  2.  Hewent  into  the  holy  tent,  amd  worshipped.  His  worship  would  now
be  of  a  different  character  from  that  which  he  had  oftered  in  his  own  privacy.  No
longer  entreaties  for  the  life  of  the  child,  but  expressions  of  submission  to  the  will  of
God  at  length  made  plain ;  acknowledgment  of  God's  righteousness  and  loving-kindness
in  what  he  had  done ;  prayers  for  support  and  consolation  and  sanctifying  grace,  for
himself  and  the  sorrowing  mother,  and  that  God  would,  through  this  painful  stroke,
glorify  his  own  Name.  3.  Ee  explained  and  Justified  his  Mnduct  to  his  astonished
M/rva/nts.  They  expressed  their  perplexity.  He  explains  by  reminding  them  of  the  utter
uselessness  of  further  fasting  and  weeping.  The  dead  cannot  be  recalled  to  life.  The
living  will  go  to  the  dead ;  the  dead  will  not  come  back  to  the  living.  It  is  true  that
this  consideration  has  often  a  terrible  effect  in  increasing  the  anguish  of  bereavement.
It  adds  despair  to  sorrow.  The  feeling  that  it  is  impossible  to  recall  the  departed ;  that
no  more  will  the  loved  one  be  seen,  or  heard,  or  embraced ;  that  the  rest  of  life  must
be  spent  without  the  society  that  was  so  dear  and  seemed  so  essential  to  happiness,
is  overpowering.  Nevertheless,  the  sense  of  the  unalterableness  of  the  fact,  and  the
utter  uselessness  of  prolonged  sorrow,  has  ultimately  a  calming  effect.  Men  come
at  length  to  reconcile  themselves  to  the  unchangeable.  But  there  is  greater  peace  and
consolation  in  the  truth  that  the  unchangeable  is  the  expression  of  the  will  of  the
infinitely  Wise  and  Good.  Believing  this,  we  reconcile  our  minds,  not  to  a  mere  hard,
stern  fact,  but  to  the  will  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  who  loves  us,  and  pains  us  because
he  loves  us.    The  second  expression  employed  by  David  in  reference  to  the  impossibility


824


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  xm.  1 — 39.


of  regaining  his  child  is  worthy  of  notice.  "  He  shall  not  return  to  me."  It  remindg
us  that  when  our  friends  are  dead  all  opportunity,  not  only  of  enjoying  their  presence
and  society,  but  of  benefiting  them,  and  otherwise  doing  our  duty  to  them,  is  gone.  A
cause  for  regret  and  penitential  sorrow  if  we  have  failed  in  our  duty  to  them ;  and
a  reason  for  greater  care  in  doing  our  duty  to  those  that  remain,  and  for  seeking  their
forgiveness  while  we  may  for  any  wrong  we  have  done  to  them.  There  is  consolation,
too,  in  reference  to  those  who  have  been  taken  from  us,  that  they  cannot  return,  when
we  have  good  assurance  that  they  are  in  heaven.  We  cannot  wish  them  to  return  from
heaven  to  earth.  We  thank  God  for  their  complete  deliverance  from  sin  and  sorrow,
and  all  liability  to  those  evils.  4.  He  expressed  his  own  expectations  as  to  the/uture.  "  I
shall  go  to  him  "  (ver.  23).  Whither  ?  To  the  grave  ?  to  Sheol  (equivalent  to  Hades)  ?
or  to  heaven  ?  The  precise  thought  of  David  in  these  words  is  hardly  ascertainable.
He  may  have  intended  to  say  only  that  he  must  join  the  child  in  the  region  of  death.
Probably,  however,  he  expressed  a  hope  of  conscious  reunion  in  the  future  world ;  and
the  Christian,  taking  up  the  words,  can  express  by  them  a  fuller  and  more  confident
hope  of  rejoining  Ms  little  children  and  Christian  relatives  and  friends  in  a  state
of  blessedness  than  was  possible  to  Old  Testament  believers,  though  glimpses  of  the
glorious  future  were  at  times  enjoyed  by  them,  "Not  lost,  but  gone  before"  is  a
thought  that  is  daily  comforting  thousands.  And  it  is  felt  how  much  better  it  is  that
the  desire  for  reunion  should  be  fulfilled  yonder  rather  than  here — that  we  should
go  to  our  departed  friends  into  that  world  of  perfection  and  joy,  not  they  come  back
to  us  into  this  world  of  imperfection  and  trouble.  Only  let  us  take  care  so  to  live  that
such  hopes  may  be  reasonable.  Think  how  terrible  the  thought,  "  I  shall  go  to  him,"
as  cherished  by  one  impenitent  sinner  in  respect  to  another  who  has  gone  to  his  doom !
How  dreadful  the  reunions  hereafter  of  those  who  have  lived  together  in  ungodliness  and
sin  here,  and  encouraged  and  helped  each  other  in  the  practice  of  them  1  Better  to
have  died  in  infancy  1     Better  not  to  have  been  born  1 — G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEH  Xm.


Ver.  1. — After  this.  This  phrase,  as  we
have  seen  on  ch.  x.  1,  has  little  chronologioal
force,  but  the  date  of  the  sad  event  which
foi-med  the  second  stage  in  David's  punish-
ment can  be  settled  with  considerable  cer-
tainty. Tamar  was  the  daughter  of  Maaeah,
a  princess  of  Geshur,  and  David's  marriage
with  her,  while  still  at  Hebron,  is  mentioned
as  a  proof  of  his  growing  power,  and  conse-
quently some  time  must  have  elapsed  after
his  appointment  as  king  before  this  alliance
took  place.  As  Absalom  was  apparently
older  than  Tamar,  if  she  were  now  fifteen  or
sixteen  years  of  age,  David  would  have  been
king  of  all  Israel  at  least  thirteen  or  fourteen
years,  and  would  have  reached  the  summit
of  his  glory.  His  wars  would  be  over,
Eabbah  captured,  and  his  empire  firmly
established.  For  twenty  more  years  he
must  sit  upon  his  throne,  but  as  a  culprit,
and  bear  the  many  sorrows  resulting  from
his  sin.  Amnon  was  David's  firstborn,  the
son  of  Ahiaoam  of  Jezreel ;  and  probably  he
would  never  have  committed  his  shameless
crime  had  not  David's  own  sin  loosed  the
bonds  of  parental  authority.  As  it  was,  he
hesitated,  but  was '  encouraged  to  it  by  his
cousin,  who  was  too  subtle  a  man  not  to
weigh  David's  character  well  before  coming


to  the  oonolnslon  that  Amnon  might  safely
gratify  his  lusts.  The  name  Tamar  means
"  palm  tree,"  and  both  she  and  Absalom
were  remarkable  for  their  personal  beauty.

Ver.  2.— Amnon  was  so  vexed,  that  he  fell
siok.  The  Hebrew  literally  is,  and  it  was
narrow  to  Amnon,  even  to  hecmning  sick.  To
an  Oriental  a  feeling  of  narrowness  means
distress,  while  in  joy  there  is  a  sense  of
largeness  and  expansion.  Our  words  for
distress  have  lost  this  picturesque  force.
That  Amnon  thought  it  hard  does  not  mean
that  he  had  any  feeling  for  his  sister's  dis-
grace, but  that  he  knew  that  his  attempt  was
difficult.  He  did  not  see  how  he  could  get
Tamar  into  his  power,  and  feared  the  conse-
quences. The  wives  had  each  her  own
dwelling,  and  the  daughters  were  kept  in
strict  seclusion.

Ver.  3. — Tonadab,  the  son  of  Shimeah.  He
is  called  Shammah  in  1  Sam.  xvi.  9,  and  is
there  described  as  Jesse's  third  son.  A
brother  of  Jonadab,  named  Jonathan,  is  men-
tioned in  ch.  xxi.  21  as  a  valiant  soldier
who  slew  one  of  the  Philistine  giants.
Subtil  is  not  used  in  a  bad  sense,  but  means
clever,  ready  in  devising  means.

Ver.  4. — Why  art  thou,  being  the  king's
son,  leaul  The  Hebrew  is,  Why,  0  eon  of
the  king,  dost  fhou  pine  away  morning  by
morning?    There  was  probably  a  gathering


OH.  xin.  1— 39,]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


825


of  firiends  every  moming  at  the  young  prince's
house,  and  hia  cousin,  attending  this  levee,
noticed  Amnon's  melancholy,  and,  having
forced  a  confession  from  him,  is  unserupuloua
enough  to  guggest  a  plan  that  would  make
Tamar  her  brother's  victim.     ■

Ver.  5. — When  thy  father  oometh  to  see
thee.  While  the  daughters  lived  in  Oriental
seclusion  in  the  dweUings  of  their  mothers,
the  eons  seem  to  have  had  separate  apart-
ments assigned  them  in  the  palace.  And
David  evidently  was  an  affectionate  father,
■who  even  went  to  the  abodes  of  his  sons  in  a
loving  and  unceremonious  way,  to  see  how
they  fared.  But  Jonadab  abused  the  king's
affection,  and  made  it  the  very  means  of  re-
moving the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  his
daughter's  disgrace.  And  like  the  whole
tribe  of  flatterers  and  time-servers,  he  em-
ployed his  cleverness  to  gratify  his  patron's
momentary  passion,  indifferent  to  the  miser-
able consequences  which  must  inevitably
follow.  For  the  least  punishment  which
Amnon  would  have  to  bear  would  be  ex-
clusion from  the  succession  to  the  crown,
besides  disgrace  and  his  father's  anger.
Absalom,  who  was  three  or  four  years
younger  than  Anmon,  he  despised,  and
counted  for  nothing.

Ver.  9.— She  took  a  pan.  Many  of  the
words  are  difQcult  because,  being  the  names
of  ordinary  domestic  articles,  they  do  not
occur  in  literature.  A  man  may  bo  a  good
French  scholar,  and  yet  find  it  difficult  in
France  to  ask  for  things  in  common  use.
Here  the  Syriac  is  probably  right  in  under-
standing, not  a  pan,  but  the  delicacy  Tamar
had  been  cooking.  In  ver.  8  the  word  ren-
dered "flour"  is  certainly  "dough,"  and  is
so  rendered  in  the  Kevised  Version.  The
cakes  were  a  kind  of  pancake,  fitted  to  tempt
the  appetite  of  a  sickly  person.  The  picture
is  a  very  interesting  one :  the  palace  parcelled
out  into  separate  dwellings ;  the  king  kindly
visiting  all ;  the  girls  on  friendly  terms  with
their  brothers,  yet  not  allowed  to  go  to  their
rooms  without  special  permission;  and  finally
Tamar's  skill  in  cookery — an  accomplishment
by  no  means  despised  in  an  Oriental  m^age,
or  thought  unworthy  of  a  king's  daughter.

Ver.  12. — Do  not  force  me;  literally,  do
not  humhle  me.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the
word  should  be  changed,  as  it  bears  testimony
to  the  nobleness  of  the  Hebrew  women,  who
regarded  their  chastity  as  their  crown  of
honour.  The  word  folly  is  used  in  the  sense
of  unohastity  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  7  and  elsewhere,
and  it  is  noteworthy  that  tlie  Jews  thus  con-
nected crime  with  stupidity.  Vain,  that  is,
empty  persons  were  the  criminal  pnrt  of  the
population  (Judg.  ix.  4),  and  to  call  a  man
"  a  fool "  was  to  attribute  to  him  every  pos-
sible kind  of  wickedness  (Matt,  v,  22).  The
thought  which  lay  at  the  root  of  this  view


of  sin  was  that  Israel  was  a  peculiar  people,
sanctified  to  God's  service ;  and  all  unlioli-
ness,  therefore,  was  not  merely  criminal  in
itself,  but  a  proof  that  the  guilty  person  wag
incapable  of  rightly  estimating  his  privileges.
Tamar  urges  this  upon  her  "  empty"  brother,
and  then  pathetically  dwells  upon  their
mutual  shame,  and,  finding  all  in  vain,  she
even  suggests  that  the  king  might  permit
their  marriage.  Such  marriages  between
half-brothers  and  half-sisters  were  strictly
forbidden,  as  tending  to  loosen  the  bonds  of
family  pvirity'(Lev.  xviii.  9;  Dent,  xxvii
22);  but  possibly  the  Levitioal  code  was
occasionally  violated,  or  Tamar  may  have
suggested  it  in  the  hope  of  escaping  imme-
diate violence.

Ver.  15. — ^Amnon  hated  her  exoeedingly.
Amnon  had  not  really  ever  loved  Tamar;
his  passion  had  been  mere  animal  desire,
which,  by  a  well-known  psychological  law,
when  gratified  turned  to  hatred.  Had  he
possessed  any  dignity  of  character  or  self-
respect,  he  would  have  resisted  this  double
wrong  to  one  so  near  to  him,  and  whom  ha
had  so  terribly  disgraced ;  but  he  can  only
remember  the  indignant  words  she  had
spoken — her  comparison  of  him  to  "  the  fools
in  Israel,"  and  her  obstinate  resistance  to
his  wishes.  With  coarse  violence  he  orders
her  away ;  and  when,  humbled  and  heart-
broken, she  begs  for  milder  treatment,  he
adds  insult  to  the  wrong,  and  bids  his  man-
servant push  her  out,  and  bolt  the  door  after
her.  By  such  an  order  the  manservant  and
all  Amnon's  people  would  be  led  to  believe
that  she  was  the  guilty  person,  and  Amnon
the  victim  of  her  enticements.

Ver.  16. — There  is  no  cause.  This  is
certainly  not  a  possible  translation  of  the
Hebrew,  which  is  probably  corrupt;  and
though  Tamar's  words  may  have  been  broken
and  hysterical,  we  cannot  suppose  that  the
narrator  intended  to  represent  her  sobs.  The
text  is  rendered  by  Philippsohn,  "  And  she
said  to  him  respecting  the  evil  deed,  Greater
is  this  than  the  other."  Similarly  Cahen
renders  it,  "  au  f  ujet  de  ce  mal."  Flat  as
this  is,  no  bettor  rendering  is  possible ;  but
the  Vatican  copy  of  tlie  Septuagint  has  a
reading  which  suggests  the  line  of  probable
emendation :  "  Nay,  my  brother,  this  evil  is
greater  than  the  other."  It  was  greater
because  it  cast  the  reproach  upon  her,  re-
fused her  the  solace  of  his  affection,  and
made  her  feel  that  she  had  been  humbled,
not  because  he  loved  her,  but  for  mere  phan-
tasy. He  has  had  his  will,  and,  careless  of
her  sorrow,  he  sends  her  contemptuously
away,  indifferent  to  the  wrong  he  has  done
her,  and  piqued  and  mortified  at  her  indig-
nant resistance.  However  much  we  may
disapprove  of  Absalom's  conduct,  Amnou
richly  deserved  his  punishment.


329


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xin.  1— 39.


Ver.  18.— A  garment  of  direis  colours.
Thia  was  probably  a  long  tunic  with  sleeves,
so  woven  as  for  the  colours  to  form  patterns
like  those  of  the  Scottish  tartans  (see  on
Gen.  xxxvii.  3).  The  next  sentence  ia  pro-
bably a  note,  which  has  crept  from  the
Jnaigin  into  the  text,  and  which  literally  is,
"  For  so  king's  daughters,  while  unmarried,
wore  over-mantles"  (me'ils;  see  note  on
1  Sam.  ii.  19).  Both  the  Authorized  Version
and  the  Eevised  Version  so  render  as  if  the
coloured  chetoneth  and  the  me'il  were  the
lame ;  but  the  meaning  of  the  note  rather  is
to  guard  against  the  supposition  that  the
princess,  while  wearing  the  close-fitting  long
tunic  with  sleeves,  had  dispensed  with  the
comely  mantle.  It  is,  indeed,  possible  that,
w)ille  busy  in  cooking,  she  had  laid  the  me'il
by,  and  now  rushed  away  without  it.  But
it  was  the  tunic  with  its  bright  colours  which
made  both  Amnon's  servitor  and  also  the
people  aware  that  she  was  one  of  the  king's
daughters.

Ver.  19. — ^Tamar  pnt  ashes.  'There  was
no  concealment  of  her  wrong,  bnt,  thrust  out
of  the  inner  chamber  into  which  Amnon  had
enticed  her  (ver.  10),  she  cast  ashes  upon
her  head  from  the  very  fire  which  she  had
just  used  in  cooking,  and,  rending  her  gar-
ment, hastened  away  with  her  hand  on  her
head,  and  with  cries  of  lamentation.  If
David  had  foreseen  this  sad  sight  when
giving  way  to  his  passion  for  Bathsh^ba,  he
would  have  felt  that  sin  is  indeed  "folly,"
and  that  its  pleasure  is  followed  by  shame
and  bitter  anp:ui8h.

Ver.  20.— Hath  Amnon!  The  Hebrew
has  Aminon,  a  diminutive,  which  some
authorities  regard  as  expressive  of  contempt.
More  probably  it  is  an  accidental  variety  of
spelling.  Hold  now  thy  peace.  We  must
not  suppose  that  Absalom  did  not  comfort
his  sister,  and  make  her  conscious  of  his
love.  He  was,  in  fact,  so  indignant  at  her
treatment  as  to  have  purposed  the  sternest
vengeance.  But  this  he  concealed  from  her,
■nd  counselled  patience,  not  merely  because
she  would  have  dissuaded  him  from  a  course
to  full  of  danger  to  himself,  but  because  it
was  the  duty  of  both  to  wait  and  see  what
course  David  would  take.  Where  polygamy
is  permitted,  it  is  the  duty  especially  of  the
brothers  to  defend  their  sisters'  honour
(Gen.  xxxiv.  31).  But  David  was  both  her
father  and  the  chief  magistrate ;  and,  more-
over, he  bad  been  made  an  instrument  in
his  daughter's  wrong.  They  must  be
patient,  and  only  if  David  failed  in  his  duty
would  Absalom's  turn  come.  Meanwhile,
Tamar  dwelt  in  his  house  desolate,  as  one
whose  honour  and  happiness  had  been  laid
waste.

Ver.  21. — ^Davld  . . .  was  very  wroth.    The
legal  punishment  foi  Amnon's  crime  was


"the  being  cnt  off  in  the  sight  of  the  people  "
(Lev.  IX.  17).  But  how  could  David,  who  had
himself  committed  crimes  for  which  death
was  the  appointed  penalty,  carry  out  the
law  against  his  firstborn  for  following  his
example  ?  Still,  he  might  have  done  more
than  merely  give  Amnon  words  of  reproof.
Eli  had  done  as  much,  and  been  punished
with  the  death  of  his  sons  for  his  neglect  of
duty  (1  Sam.  ii.  34).  The  sin  of  David's
son  had  been  even  more  heartless  than
theirs;  and  could  David  hope  to  escape  the
like  penalty  ?  It  would  have  been  wise  to
have  given  proof  that  his  repentance  included
the  suppression  of  the  crime  to  which  his
previous  conduct  had  given  encouragement.
But  David  was  a  man  whose  conduct  was
generally  governed  by  his  feelings.  He  v/as
a  creature  of  warm  and  often  generous  im-
pulse, but  his  character  lacked  the  steadi-
ness of  thoughtful  and  consistent  pnrpose.

Ver.  22. — Absalom  spake  . . .  neither  good
noT  bad.  (On  this  phrase,  see  Gen.  xxiv.  50 ;
xxxi.  24.)  Absalom's  outward  demeanour
was  one  of  utter  indifference,  concealing  a
cruel  determination.  It  is  strange  how  un-
like the  son  was  to  the  father.

Ver.  23. — Absalom  had  sheep-shearers  in
Baal-hazor.  The  sheep-shearing  was  a
usual  occasion  for  feasting  and  holiday-keep-
ing (see  1  Sam.  xxv.  2,  8).  Baal-hazor  was
apparently  the  name  of  Absalom's  estate,
situated  near  the  town  Ephraim  (2  Chron.
xiii.  19),  which,  according  to  Eusebius,  lay
about  eight  miles  north  of  Jerusalem.  As
Ephraim  was  near  the  wilderness  of  Judah,
it  was  probably  the  same  town  as  that  to
which  001  Lord  withdrew  (John  xi.  54).
The  phrase  beside,  literally,  near,  Ephraim,
shows  that  it  must  be  the  town,  and  not  the
tribal  territory,  which  is  here  meant.  Two
full  years ;  Hebrew,  years  of  days.

Ver.  25. — Bnt  blessed  him.  These  words,
in  the  courtly  language  of  the  East,  not
only  mean  tliat  David  parted  from  Absalom
with  :  kindly  feelings  and  good  wishes,
but  that  he  made  him  a  rich  present  (see
note  on  1  Sam.  xxv.  27,  where  the  same
word  occurs;  and  observe  the  nature  of
Abigail's  blessing  described  there).  David's
court  had  evidently  become  lavish,  when
thus  a  visit  from  him  to  his  son's  farm
would  be  too  costly  for  the  young  prince's
means ;  but  had  he  so  increased  his  present
as  to  have  made  it  reasonable  for  himself
and  his  chief  officers  to  go,  Absalom  must
have  deferred  his  crime.  As  it  was,  the
invitation  put  David  off  his  guard,  and,  for-
getting the  fatal  consequences  of  his  good
nature  in  permitting  Tamar's  visit  to  Amnon,
he  allowed  his  sons  to  go  to  the  festival.  Nor
must  we  bliime  him  for  his  compliance.  He
had  probably  at  first  been  full  of  anxiety  as
to  the  course  Absalom  might  pursue,  but


OH.  xin.  1— 39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


327


his  silence  and  forbeaiance  made  him  sap-
pose  that  Tamar's  wrong  had  not  caused
her  brother  any  deep  sorrow.  Himself  a
man  of  warm  feelings,  he  had  expected  an
immediate  outburst  of  anger,  but  such  stern
lanconr  persevered  in  for  so  long  a  time
with  such  feline  calmness  oT  manner  was
beyond  the  range  of  his  suspicions ;  and  the
invitation,  first  to  himself  and  then  to  all
his  sons,  made  him  suppose  that  Absalom
had  nothing  but  affectionate  feelings  toward
them  all.

Ver.  28. — Smite  Amnon.  The  order  was
given  before  the  banquet  began,  and  every
arrangement  made  to  render  the  attack  suc-
cessful.  Though  Tamar's  wrong  was  the
mainspring  of  Absalom's  oonduot,,yet  neither
he  nor  his  men  would  forget  that  Amnon
stood  between  him  and  tiie  crown;  and
Amnon,  entirely  off  bis  guard,  never  very
wise  at  his  best,  and  with  his  senses  made
dull  by  wine,  seems  to  have  fallen  an  easy
prey.  And  aa  soon  as  the  murder  was  com-
mitted, the  rest  of  the  Mug's  sons,  though
all  had  attendants  with  them,  fled  in  dismay,
not  knowing  what  might  be  the  extent  of
Absalom's  purpose.  It  is  said  that  they  fled
on  mules,  this  being  the  first  place  in  which
this  animal  is  mentioned,  as  the  word  so
translated  in  Oen.  xxxvi.  24  really  means
"hot  springs,"  and  is  so  translated  in  the
Eevised  Version.  The  breeding  of  hybrids
was  forbidden  in  Lev.  xix.  19,  and  probably
they  were  procured,  as  were  horses,  by  trade.
Up  to  this  time  the  ass  bad  been  used  for
riding ;  but  now  David  had  a  favourite  mule
(1  Kings  i.  33),  and  Solomon  received  mules
as  tribute  (1  Kings  x.  25).  Hurses  seem  to
have  been  used  chiefly  for  chariots.

Ver.  30. — Tidings  oame.  Some  of  the
servants  seem  to  have  fled  immediately  that
the  attack  was  made,  and  in  their  terror
reported,  not  what  had  really  happened,  but
what  they  assumed  was  Absalom's  purpose.
It  shows,  however,  how  thoroughly  Absalom
had  dissembled  when  thus  they  entirely
forgot  that  he  had  a  grudge  against  Amnon.
And  David,  in  utter  misery,  tears  his  robes,
and  throws  himself  prostrate  on  the  ground,
while  his  courtiers,  with  rent  garments,
stand  speechless  round  him.  But  the  guilty
Jonadab  guesses  more  correctly  the  truth.
He  had  probably  watched  Absalom  closely,
and  distrusted  his  silence.  Nothing,  per-
haps, had  happened  to  justify  his  suspicions,
but  as  soon  as  the  tidings  came  he  divined
the  real  meaning.  And,  wicked  as  he  was,
he  could  never  have  supposed  that  Amnon
would  turn  upon  the  woman  he  had  wronged,
and  insult  and  disgrace  her.  He  probably
imagined  that  Amnon  really  loved  her,  and
that  the  matter  would  be  patched  up.  But
when  the  wretched  youth  acted  so  shame-
lessly, Jonadab   probably   felt   sure    that


Absalom  would  sooner  or  later  take  hif
revenge.

Ver.  32. — ^By  the  appointment;  literally,
for  upon  the  mouth  of  Abtalom  tt  wat  laid
from  tin  day  he  humbled  Tamar  hit  sister.
"  Month  "  is  not  the  word  we  should  hav«
expected  here,  and  the  Syriac  instead  has
"mind,"  and  the  Ohaldee  "heart."  But
the  mouth  often  expresses  determination,
and  Jonadab  may  have  noticed  Absalom
looking  at  his  brother  with  compressed  lips.
More  probably,  however,  it  is  a  colloquial
phrase,  with  no  special  application  to  Absa-
lom ;  and  the  Syriac  gives  the  true  sense.

Ver.  3i. — But  Absalom  fled.  These  words
break  the  form  of  the  narrative,  but  com-
plete the  sense.  They  briefly  state  that
Jonadab  was  right ;  for,  go  far  from  molesting
any  of  the  rest  of  the  king's  sons,  Absalom
had  no  other  thought  than  for  his  own  safety.
He  had  avenged  his  sister,  but  had  at  pre-
sent no  other  sinister  design.  It  was  David's
method  of  treating  him  which  drove  this
youth,  with  a  nature  fit  for  treachery,  into
schemes  of  rebellion.  The  way  of  the  Mil-
side  behind  him.  This  may  mean  "  from  the
west,"  as,  in  taldng  the  points  of  the  com-
pass, the  Hebrews  looked  to  the  east,  which
would  thus  be  "  before  them."  Compare
"  the  backside  of  the  desert,"  that  is,  "  the
western  side,"  in  Exod.  iii.  1;  and  "the
Syrians  before  and  the  Philistines  behind,"
that  is,  on  the  east  and  west  (Isa.  ix.  12),
But  the  versions  differ  so  strangely  in  their
renderings  that  they  could  scarcely  have
been  made  from  our  present  text.

Ver.  36. — The  king  also  and  all  his  servants
wept  very  sore.  The  narrative  sets  very
clearly  before  us  the  great  terror  of  the  king,
who  at  first  supposes  that  all  his  sons  are
murdered;  there  is  then  suspense  while
Jonadab  suggests  that  one  only  has  been
sacrificed  to  private  vengeance;  then  quickly
comes  the  watchman's  report  of  the  appear-
ance of  much  people  rapidly  descending  the
hillside,  and  this  is  followed  by  the  hasty
rush  of  the  fugitives  into  his  presence,  and
the  terrible  certainty  that  one  son  has,  with
long-premeditated  malice,  murdered  his
brother.  •  And  as  he  wept,  David,  we  may
feel  sure,  thought  of  Uriah,  murdered  b»-
cause  of  his  own  base  passions,  whereas
Amnon  had  brought  death  upon  himself  by
following,  alas  I  the  example  of  his  own
father.  He  would  think,  too,  of  the  words
of  his  sentence,  that  "  the  sword  should
never  depart  from  his  house."  It  had
claimed  one  victim,  and  who  could  now  stop
the  outburst  of  angry  passions  in  a  family
which  previously  had  dwelt  in  kindly  friend-
ship ?  Probably,  too,  he  reproached  himself
for  not  punishing  Amnon.  Had  he  done  eo
with  sufScient  severity  to  have  satisfied
Absalom,  he  would  have  saved  the  life  ot


823


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xm.  1—89.


his  firstborn,  and  not  haTedriyen  hts  second
son  into  terrible  crime.  He  had  not  done
BO  because  his  own  Bins  had  tied  his  hands.
Yes;  David  had  good  reason  for  weeping
sore,

Vers.  37,  38.— So  Absalom  fled.  The
triple  repetition  of  these  words,  and  the
fragmentary  style,  make  it  probable  that  we
have  here  an  abridgment  of  a  longer  narra-
tive. So  in  ver.  34  the  words  probably  are
a  summary  of  a  more  circumstantial  account
of  Absalom's  doings  after  his  young  men
liail  slain  Amnon.  (On  Talmai  and  Geshur,
see  notes  on  oh.  iii.  3.)

Ver.  39. — And  {{he  soul  of)  king  David
longed  to  go  forth  unto  Absalom.  This
translation  has  the  support  of  the  Jewish
Targum,  and,  as  tlie  verb  is  feminine,  the
insertion  of  the  added  word  is  possible,
thougli  the  sense  seems  to  require '"  anger  "
instead  of  "the  soul."  But  the  versions
(Septuagint,  Syriac,  and  Vulgate)  all  give
the  verb  its  ordinary  meaning  of  "  ceasing,"
and.  though  there  is  something  harsh  in
taking  it  impersonally,  yet  their  authority


is  too  great  for  us  to  say  that  inch  a  mode
of  rendering  it  must  be  wrong.  And  if  the
grammar  be  difficult,  the  sense  put  upon
the  words  by  the  versions  is  excellent.
Literally  they  are,  At  to  King  David,  there
vxu  a  ceasing  to  go  forth  after  Absalom ;  for
he  was  contorted,  etc.  At  first  he  had
demanded  of  Talmai  the  surrender  of  the
offender,  and,  when  Talmai  refused,  David
tried  other  means;  but  in  time,  when  hia
grief  for  Amnon  was  assuaged,  he  desisted
from  his  efforts.  But  even  so  it  required
much  subtlety  on  Joab's  part  to  obtain  Ab-
salom's recall,  which  would  scarcely  have
been  the  case  if  David's  soul  was  longing
for  his  son's  return;  and,  even  after  his
coming, David  long  maintainedan  unfriendly
attitude.  Amnoa  was  his  firstborn,  and
evidently  dearly  loved,  but  David's  culpable
leniency  had  borne  bitter  fruit.  And  again
he  acts  without  thoughtful  sense  of  justice,
and  thongh  at  first  he  would  have  given
Absalom  merited  punishment,  yet  gradually
paternal  feeling  resumed  its  sway,  unhappily
only  to  be  miserably  abused.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 22. — The  firstfruits  of  iniquity.  The  facts  are :  1.  Amnon  entertains  an
improper  affection  for  his  half-sister  Tamar,  and  meditates  evil.  2.  Making  known
his  secret  passion  to  Jonadab,  he  is  prompted  to  a  device  for  securing  a  personal  inter-
view with  her.  3.  The  king,  visiting  Amnon  in  his  pretended  sickness,  kindly  arranges
that  Tamar  should  wait  upon  him  with  special  food  in  his  chamber.  4.  Seizing  an
opportunity  in  the  absence  of  attendants,  he  accomplishes  his  purpose  in  defiance  of  her
protests  and  pretexts.  5.  By  a  sudden  revulsion  of  feeling,  he  now  hates  her,  and
causes  her  to  be  driven  away  in  disgrace.  6.  Her  trouble  becoming  known  to  the  king
and  to  Absalom,  the  one  is  very  wroth  and  does  nothing,  and  the  other  conceals  his
cherished  hatred  and  revenge.  The  rather  long  account  giren  of  the  base  sin  of
Amnon  is  no  doubt  intended  to  show  how  the  chastisements  pronounced  by  Kathan
(ch.  xii.  10,  11)  were  brought  about.  In  this  way  the  spiritual  character  of  the
narrative  shines  through  all  the  details,  which  in  themselves  seem  worthy  of  being  for
ever  lost  in  oblivion.  It  is  in  connection  with  the  evil,  and  often  through  the  evil,
of  life  that  the  righteousness  of  God  is  historically  revealed.  Those  who  object  to  such
passages  as  these  in  the  Bible  know  not  the  principle  on  which  it,  as  a  book,  is
construrted.  It  is  not  the  deeds  that  are  the  object  of  thought  and  instruction,  but '
the  fulfilment  of  the  righteous  judgments  of  God,  brought  to  pass  in  the  fact  and
consequences  of  their  occurrence.  In  the  deeds  here  recorded  we  have  a  graphic
description  of  the  firstfruits  of  the  dreadful  sin  of  David.

I.   An   SIN   SOONBE    OB   LATER   BBAB8    FRUIT   IN    HUMAN   800IBTT.      "  Sin "  is  a  term

descriptive  of  the  moral  quality  of  thought  or  action.  It  is  a  demonstrable  fact  in  the
sphere  of  mind  and  life,  that  every  distinct  thought  and  mental  act,  to  say  nothing  of
the  outward  expression  of  it,  is  a  power  or  force  contributed  towards  a  modification
of  the  existing  forces  at  work  in  the  world.  No  mental  life  is  the  same  after  a  given
thought  has  been  formed  as  it  would  have  been  had  some  other  been  in  its  place.  The
law  of  dynamics,  by  which  every  wave  of  motion  produces  an  effect  for  ever,  holds
good  in  the  mental  and  moral  sphere.  Sin  is  a  wave  of  evil,  a  force  in  an  oblique
direction,  or  as  a  seed  to  germinate  and  reproduce  its  kind.  David's  dreadful  deed
could  not  but  be  an  instance  of  this  inevitable  law.  Other  counter-influences  of  good
might  arise,  but  they  would  not  annihilate  the  fact  of  the  evil  influence,  and  social  lif*
Vould  not  be  the  same  as  it  would  have  been  in  case  his  energy  had  all  gone  in  the  lina


<IH.  XIII.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEU  829

of  good,  and  the  energy  of  the  counteraction  had  been,  not  counteractive,  but  supple-
mentary to  the  force  of  his  vinbroken  holy  life.  It  is  an  awful  fact  that  the  universe,
after  sin,  is  a  changed  place,  and  that  the  trace  of  the  curse  in  some  form,  though  not
necessarily  active,  will  ever  be  found  in  the  thought  and  constitution  of  society.

IL  The  immediate  action  of  oonspiottous  sin  is  to  weaken  the  bestraints
ON  BXiSTiNO  evil  TENDENCIES.  There  are  always  in  the  human  heart  propensities
urgent  for  activity,  and  they  are  kept  back  very  much  by  reason  of  the  force  of
goodness  in  the  good,  as  well  as  by  the  natural  action  of  conscience.  '  There  can  be
no  question  that  Amnon  was,  like  many,  prone  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  that  the
fact  of  David's  fall  had  lessened  the  restraints  upon  him.  The  secrecy  encouraged
by  Jonadab  might  well  be  stimulated  by  the  previous  secrecy  of  David  in  his  sin,
so  far  as  it  was  known  to  his  family.  The  influence  of  David's  sin  on  the  mind  of  Joab
could  not  fail  to  render  court  life  more  corrupt  in  its  springs;  for  it  is  a  mournful  fact
that,  while  we  by  our  sins  set  a  new  force  for  evil  at  work  which  gives  momentum
to  those  already  active,  we  do  not  convey  to  society  the  blessedness  which  subsequently
may  come  to  us  in  a  free  pardon.  A  notorious  sin  in  high  stations  is  the  foster-parent
of  kindred  sins.  A  parent  by  his  known  sin  sheds  influences  around  his  children  that
tend  to  develop  the  worst  elements  of  their  nature.     It  is  fuel  to  Are.

III.  Those  who  have  committed  open  sins  must  especially  feel  the  pain  of
WITNESSING  THE  FBDIT  OF  THEIP.  DEEDS.  The  enlarging  family  of  David  offered  wider
scope  for  the  ill  effects  of  his  conduct  to  work  upon.  The  addition  of  Bathsheba  to  the
harem  under  the  peculiar  circumstances  could  not  but  awaken  jealousies,  and  among
the  various  children  loosen  the  bonds  of  restraint  on  the  lower  tendencies  of  life.  He
who  had  so  cleverly  sought  to  cover  sin  in  the  case  of  Uriah  and  his  wife,  could  not
detect  the  secret  plot  covered  by  the  sickness  of  his  son,  whom  he  with  paternal
kindness  visited  and  comforted  (ver.  6).  The  iniquity  thus  coming  to  maturity  at  last
came  to  his  knowledge  in  a  form  little  suspected.  Its  distinctly  incestuous  character,
and  the  cool  cunning  with  which  it  was  prepared  for  and  perpetrated,  must  have  given
intense  pain  to  David,  apart  from  the  evil  of  the  act,  inasmuch  as  it  would  forcibly
remind  him  of  days  and  nights  of  scheming  to  accomplish  a  horrid  crime,  and  compel
him  to  see  that  the  son  has  learnt  too  well  to  imitate  the  deeds  of  the  father.  The
more  sincere  his  recent  penitence,  and  the  more  perfect  his  restoration  to  God's  favour,
the  more  keen  the  anguish  that  now  would  fill  his  spirit ;  for  he  would  see  and  feel
as  a  holy  reconciled  man  only  can.  A  similar  experience  is  that  of  parents  who
witness  in  their  sons,  it  may  be,  bolder  forms  of  the  sin  to  which  they  were  once  the
victims.  There  are  such  in  Christian  society.  Their  peace  with  God  may  be  real
through  the  merits  of  Christ,  but  their  pathway  is  beclouded  by  a  terrible  sorrow.  The
terrible  evils  of  sin  in  this  life,  even  to  the  good  1    Bitter  is  the  firstfruit  I

IV.  Those  who  have  committed  open  sin  akb  paralyzed  in  theib  action
TOWARDS  SINS  OF  THE  SAME  CHARACTER.  It  is  Said  that  wheu  Davld  learnt  the  full
facts  of  Amnon's  conduct  towards  Tamar,  he  "  was  very  wroth  "  (ver.  21).  No  doubt.
Every  kind  and  holy  feeling  of  the  restored  man  would  be  outraged  by  this  vile  conduct.
But  it  is  significant  that  nothing  further  is  said.  No  action  of  a  legal  character  was
taken.  The  sentence  of  the  Mosaic  Law  was  not  enforced.  The  remembrance  of  his
own  sin  unfitted  him  to  deal  with  Amnon  as  was  due.  Direct  action  on  his  part  for
his  punishment  would,  he  thought,  he  met  by  the  reproach  of  his  own  deeds.  "  Physician,
heal  thyself,"  had  a  paralyzing  meaning  for  him.  The  reference  to  Absalom  nourishing
revenge  till  occasion  offered  is  an  historical  set-off  to  David's  inactivity.  There  is
nothing  unusual  in  David's  conduct.  It  is  repeated  every  day.  The  liar's  tongue
is  deprived  of  its  power  in  reproving  lies  in  others.  The  deceiver  in  business  affairs
cannot  with  energy  and  force  warn  others  against  fraud.  Men  who  have  openly
induced  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  speak  with  bated  breath  and  act  with  indecision  when
public  questions  concerning  the  suppression  and  pimishment  of  licentiousness  are
discussed.  They  may  be  sincere  in  their  expression  of  pain,  and  be  intensely  angry
if  any  of  their  offspring  fall  into  vile  ways,  but  they  are  conscious  of  a  secret  force
checking  the  action  which  otherwise  would  have  been  taken.  None  can  speak  and  act
on  moral  questions  as  the  pure.  Our  Saviour's  words  on  all  moral  subjects  carry  with
them  the  force  of  his  uusullieji  life.    Herein  is  an  example  for  teachers  and  taught.

General  lessons.    1.  There  should  be  an  avoidance  of  all  customs  in  society  that


330  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xin.  1— 39.

in  any  way  tend  to  strengthen,  and  give  occasion  for  the  development  of,  the  baser
feelings  of  human  nature.  Oriental  harems  may  bare  their  counterparts  in  certain
usages  of  Western  life.  Whatever  weakens  the  feelings  of  purity  and  chastity  is
a  positive  evil.  2.  Care  sliould  be  taken  to  avoid  the  company  and  services  of  men
clever  in  evil.  There  are  Jonadabs  in  society,  whose  services  are  ready,  but  are  fraught
with  woe.  3.  The  man  who  can  make  use  of  the  kindly  sympathies  of  others  in  order
to  encompass  their  ruin  is  already  far  gone  towards  perdition ;  and  inasmuch  as  tliere
are  many  such  still  in  society,  men  who  abuse  the  tenderest  affections  for  lustful  ends,
their  persons  should  be  abhorred  and  shunned  by  all  Christian  people,  4.  The  selBsh-
ness  and  cruelty  of  sin  is  a  universal  quality  (vers.  15 — 17),  and  as  such  it  deserves  the
utmost  detestation.  All  sin  is  self  against  God  and  God's  holy  order.  The  adulterer
in  his  lust,  the  defrauder  in  his  deceit,  the  extortioner  in  his  greed,  the  rebellious  son
in  his  disobedience,  know  this  too  well.  Their  deeds  are  damage  to  the  universe  for
sake  of  self.  5.  There  is  always  being  treasured  up  somewhere  retribution  for  those
who  seem  to  escape  the  punishment  due  to  their  sin.  Absalom's  self-control  (ver.  22)
is  suggestive  of  restraint  on  the  forces  which  at  last  cannot  but  overwhelm  the  wicked
with  destruction  (2  Pet.  IL  3 ;  Jude  16).

Vers.  23 — 39. — ITie  facts  are :  1.  Absalom,  holding  a  sheep-shearing  festival  at  Baal-
hazor,  invites  the  king  and  his  sons.  2.  The  king,  declining  to  go  on  account  of  being
unneceisarily  burdensome,  gets  rid  of  Absalom's  entreaty,  and  bestows  on  him  a  parting
blessing.  3.  After  some  persuasion,  Absalom  obtains  permission  for  all  the  king's  sons
to  accompany  him.  4.  During  the  festivities  the  servants  of  Absalom,  in  obedience
to  their  master,  smite  Amnon,  whereupon  all  the  other  of  the  king's  sons  flee.  5.
A  false  report  having  reached  the  king  that  all  his  sons  were  slain,  he  gives  vent
to  his  grief  in  most  distressing  form,  until  Jonadab,  who  was  in  the  secret  of  the  affair,
informs  him  of  the  actual  facts  of  the  case.  6.  Absalom  flees,  and  the  rest  of  tlie  sons
return  home,  and  join  their  father  in  lamentation  over  the  event.  7.  During  Absalom's
exile  for  three  years,  David,  while  recovering  from  his  grief  over  Amnon,  was  in  a  mind
to  go  out  after  him,  were  it  possible.

Home  trouhlet.  The  words  of  the  prophet  were  being  swiftly  and  terribly  falfilled
in  the  experience  of  the  king.  His  own  crimes  of  adultery  and  murder  by  stealth  were
now  bearing  retributive  fruit  in  his  own  family  in  the  form  of  adultery  and  murder,
with  the  increment  of  incest.  That  these  young  men  acted  as  free  agents  and  were
responsible  for  their  deeds  makes  no  difference  to  the  fact  that,  in  relation  to  the
previous  conduct  of  their  father,  it  was  a  terrible  retribution  in  the  order  of  providence.
God  does  chastise  his  people  with  the  human  rod.  The  blessed  covenant  made  with
the  chosen  one  was  not  broken — his  soul  was  delivered  from  the  mouth  of  destruction
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  33 — 36) ;  but  a  harvest  of  evil  had  to  be  reaped  in  the  place  where  the
dreadful  seed  had  been  sown — in  the  family.  Never,  perhaps,  has  this  family  trouble
been  paralleled  in  the  experience  of  good  men;  but  though  its  precise  features  are
mercifully  exceptional,  we  may  see  mirrored  in  this  family  trouble  elements  of  evil
found  in  some  form  or  other  in  other  domestic  circles.

I.  Jealousies  and  hatreds  consequent  on  deeds  of  wrong.  There  were  signs
of  ill  feeling  in  this  home  sprung  from  an  Oriental  harem,  before  the  vile  deed  of  Amnon
was  perpetrated;  but  this  act  developed  and  intensified  whatever  feeling  of  that  character
was  in  existence.  In  the  most  imperfect  and  unhappy  homes  a  positive  deed  of  wrong
to  a  member  of  the  family  is  sure  to  be  resented  by  some  other  member  whose  tempera-
ment or  sympathies  flow  in  a  certain  direction.  The  world  does  not  see  the  acts
of  harshness  and  even  cruelty  sometimes  done  within  the  sphere  of  home;  these  acts
are  the  parents  of  a  brood  of  ill  feelings,  which  rankle  and  burn,  yraiting  for  occasion
to  vent  their  force  on  some  marked  object  of  hatred.  And  as  the  love  of  home  is
the  tenderest  and  sweetest  of  all  loves,  so,  when  it  is  lost,  there  rises  in  its  place  the
bitterest  and  most  irreconcilable  of  hates.     The  best  wine  makes  the  sourest  vinegar.

II.  Parents  obitiobsbd.  Reading  between  the  lines  of  this  piece  of  domestic  history,
we  can  see  that  the  past  conduct  of  David  was  not  only  known,  so  far  at  least  as
Bathsheba  was  concerned,  but  that  it  had  not  escaped  the  critical  observation  of  his
ions.    How  could  it?    A  father's  domestic  conduct  is  in  open  light  to  his  children.


OH.  xm.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  331

and,  although  natural  reTerenoe  may  away  their  hearing  toward  him,  they  cannot
help  making  critical  observations  on  anything  that  undermines  the  reapect  due.  A
really  pious  son  would  have  wept  in  solitude  over  the  father's  sin,  and  have  tenderly
covered  his  shame ;  but  the  base  tendencies  of  such  young  men  as  Amnon,  and  the
pride  of  an  Absalom,  would  only  have  given  keenness  to  the  critical  spirit.  It  is  a  sad
prophecy  of  trouble  when  children  begin  to  criticize  a  parent's  conduct,  and  it  is  moral
ruin  in  a  home  when  a  father  does  deeds  which  his  children,  even  wiih  their  slight
knowledge  of  things,  cannot  but  deplore.  Once  break  down  respect  for  moral  conduct,
and  the  home  is  open  to  the  invasion  of  numberless  ills.

III.  Pakbnts'  appbbhbnsion.  There  is  always  some  room  for  apprehension  in
connection  with  domestic  life;  for  the  powers  of  evil  are  active,  and  the  best-guarded
home  may  be  occasionally  invaded  from  without  by  a  foul  spirit.  But,  as  a  rule,  where
prudence  in  management  is  combined  with  correctness  of  conduct  and  a  spirit  of  true
practical  godliness,  confidence  is  in  the  ascendant.  The  blessing  of  God  is  on  the  abode
of  the  faithful.  In  David's  house  at  this  time,  consequent  on  the  influence  of  his
recent  sin  and  the  crime  of  Amnon,  there  was  evident  fear  in  the  father's  heart  (vers.
26,  27).  He  had  secret  reasons  for  not  going  or  wishing  Amnon  to  go  to  the  feast.  Pears
of  business  failures,  and  of  possible  changes  in  domestic  material  comforts,  are  common
»nd  not  to  be  altogether  avoided,  yet  they  may  carry  with  them  no  secret  sting ;  but
anticipa;tions  of  possible  moral  disasters  and  complications  in  the  home  life  are  of  all
things  most  fearful  burdens  to  bear,  and  their  gravity  is  the  greater  when  they  are  felt
to  be  connected  with  one's  own  misconduct.  Fathers  and  mothers  should  take  care
that  they  lay  no  foundation  for  painful  apprehensions  concerning  the  conduct  of  their
children  in  deeds  of  their  own  performance.

IV.  Developments  op  suppressed  animosities.  The  spirit  of  David  was  evidently
troubled  by  observing  the  strained  relations  between  his  sons  Amnon  and  Absalom.  The
probability  is  that  they  were  not  on  terms  of  familiarity,  and  seldom  visited  each  other.
ITie  Ul  feeling  created  by  the  ruin  of  his. sister  had  been  secretly  but  steadily  cherished
for  two  years,  and  the  treasured  revenge  at  last  broke  forth  in  the  murder  at  the  festival
of  sheep-shearing.  It  is  the  pain  of  a  father  still  sometimes  to  witness  the  development
in  violent  and  distressing  forms  of  passions  which  he  either,  through  loss  of  personal
influence,  could  not  or  would  not  seek  to  remove  or  tone  down.  The  first  part  of
the  prophet's  prediction  had  now  been  fulfilled  two  years;  the  other  part  was  on
its  way,  and  only  awaited  the  maturity  of  the  forces  that  were  being  secretly  gathered.
When  domestic  troubles,  having  a  root  in  moral  evil,  begin  in  a  home,  it  is  hard  to
say  how  long  it  will  be  before  the  powers  of  evil  assume  a  portentous  development.
David  was  fearful,  but  he  scarcely  looked  for  such  an  issue  of  a  family  festival.  Literally,
in  this,  as  in  other  cases,  sin  when  it  is  finished  brought  forth  death  (Jas.  i.  15).  The
harvest  came  after  the  sowing  and  germinating  of  the  seed.

V.  A  father's  deeds  the  justification  of  evil.  The  bitterest  element  in  David's
domestic  trouble  was  not  simply  the  death  of  an  incestuous  son,  sad  as  the  death  ol
a  firstborn  always  is,  but  the  knowledge  that  his  own  conduct  was,  in  the  mind  of
Absalom,  the  justification  of  the  murder.  Absalom  seems  to  have  reasoned  thus :  "Amnon
has  done  a  guilty  deed  worthy  of  death ;  no  severe  punishment  has  been  inflicted  on
him  by  my  father,  perhaps  because  of  his  own  previous  adultery  with  Bathsheba,  or
because  this  is  his  firstborn ;  shame  has  been  brought  by  this  crime  on  the  entire  famUy ,
as  the  brother  of  the  disgraced  and  ruined  woman,  I  am  her  legitimate  avenger  in  the
failure  of  law ;  and  as  the  injury  has  been  an  open  one  in  the  centre  of  the  family  life,
the  doom  shall  be  open,  in  the  presence,  if  possible,  of  father  and  brothers."  If  David
was  the  man  of  discernment  now  as  formerly,  he  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  see  that
there  was  something  like  this  current  of  thought  in  the  mind  of  his  son  Absalom,  and
that  it  formed  a  specious  justification  of  his  daring  deed.  Eightly  or  wrongly,  some  do
reason  in  defence  of  their  rash  and  evil  deeds,  and  it  is  the  most  serious  element  of  the
domestic  trouble  when  the  foundation  of  their  reasoning  is  found  in  the  deeds  or  neglect
of  their  parents.  The  devil  encourages  those  who  do  wrong  to  get  all  possible  support
from  the  actions  of  those  professing  to  be  good.

VI.  A  fomentbr  of  mischief  and  evil.  One  of  the  troubles  in  David's  home
life  was  the  presence  of  an  influential  double-faced  man,  who,  being  in  the  secrets,
entered  as  adviser  into  the  schemes  of  some  of  the  family,  and  was  instrumental  in


832  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xm.  1—39.

promoting  incest,  and  then,  on  his  own  showing,  knew  that  it  was  a  settled  thing  to
murder  the  incestuous  man  (vers.  3 — 5 ;  cf.  vers.  32,  33).  This  cunning  man,  who  had
not  the  courage  or  honesty  to  tell  David  of  the  design  of  Absalom,  was  a  moral  plague
in  David's  family  connection.  It  is  an  instance  of  how  much  evil  may  come  to  a  home
by  cultivating  the  friendship  and  intimacy  of  unprincipled  or  cowardly  relatives.  Alas !
for  the  home  (and  there  are  such  in  our  country)  that  is  invaded  by  the  pestilential
influence  of  men  who  trample  under  their  feet  chastity,  love,  and,  if  need  be,  life  itself  I
There  are  vipers  and  dragons  in  the  world  still  (Matt.  iii.  7 ;  cf.  Ps.  xci.  13).

Genrkal  lessons.  1.  We  see  the  wonderful  contrast  in  domestic  life  where  piety
is  maintained  in  unfading  beauty.  Instead  of  jealousies  and  hatreds,  parents  blamed
by  sons  and  full  of  fear,  evil  feelings  maturing  into  developed  deeds  of  violence  and
cruelty,  justified  by  reference  to  parental  conduct,  and  stimulated  or  connived  at  by
base  friends,  we  shall  see  love  and  consideration,  reverence  for  parents,  confidence  in
children,  generous  sentiments  ripening  into  holy  deeds,  encouragement  for  kind  actions
found  in  parental  example,  and  friendships  formed  conducive  to  peace  and  harmony.
2.  We  learn  the  danger  of  deliberately  nourishing  feelings  of  revenge  even  when  wrong
has  been  done.  It  is  for  God  to  vindicate  his  own  justice  (Rom.  xii.  9).  Just  senti-
ments of  anger  may,  unless  guard  be  kept  over  them,  burn  into  more  questionable
forms.  3.  The  festive  scenes  of  wicked  men  should  be  avoided,  because  of  the  evil
communications  which  corrupt  good  manners,  and  the  possible  incidental  evUs  arising
therefrom.  4.  When  men  are  known  to  be  proud  and  imperious  and  revengeful,  they
are  likely  to  be  credited  with  more  evil  than  they  have  really  done  (ver.  30) ;  hence
avoid  such  a  spirit.  6.  It  is  a  shame  to  a  man  to  be  in  the  secrets  of  those  intent  on
evil  (vers.  3 — 5 ;  of.  ver.  32) ;  and,  though  such  may  escape  punishment  in  human
society,  God  will  visit  their  sins  on  their  own  head.  6.  Bulers  and  parents  who  show
an  unwise  partiality  (vers.  21,  22)  in  not  adequately  chastising  evil-doers,  only  defer
the  day  of  trouble  and  increase  its  sorrows  (ver.  36).

Lost  and  exiled.  The  closing  verses  of  this  chapter  are  very  obscure  in  their  con-
struction and  meaning.  The  sense  most  probable,  and  which  we  here  proceed  upon,
is  that  Absalom's  asylum  with  the  King  of  Geshur  was  a  reason  why  David  did  not
follow  after  him  with  a  view  to  his  apprehension  and  chastisement,  and  that  while  at
first  he  mourned  for  Amnon  every  day,  he  was  in  process  of  time  able  to  bear  up  under
his  loss.  The  calamity  brought  on  by  his  own  sins  (ch.  xii.  9 — 12)  had  now  culminated
in  one  son  lost  and  another  in  exile.

I.  THBEB   18   A   KATDBAL   PEOGBESSION  IN   THE  TROUBLES  CONSEQUENT   ON   SIN.      The

first  temporal  human  trouble  attendant  on  David's  sin  was  dislike  and  aversion  of
his  other  wives,  and  this  small  beginning  was  followed  by  his  being  put  under  the
power  of  Joab  (ch.  xi.  6, 18 — 21),  his  exposure  to  others,  the  incest  of  his  children,  the
loss  of  influence  by  refraining  from  duty  (vers.  21,  22),  and  now  it  came  to  a  climax
in  the  firstborn  being  in  his  grave,  and  the  second  son  being  banished  as  an  exile.  It
is  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing  to  sin  against  God,  the  more  so  according  to  the  station
and  privileges  of  (rhe  sinner.  A  firstborn  lost  I  A  young  man  cut  down  with,  so  far
as  we  can  see,  the  vilest  sins  unforgiven  on  his  head !  The  flower  of  the  family,  the
man  of  spirit,  and  avenger  in  daring  way  of  a  sister's  wrong,  in  a  foreign  land,  finding
refuge  from  a  father's  wrath  with  the  heathen !  Fathers  and  mothers,  read  the  lesson
well,  and  seek  for  grace  to  be  in  the  home  pure  and  wise  and  loving,  like  unto  the
holy  Saviour.

II.  ThEEK    IB    SHEER    HELPLESSNESS    IH    FACE    OP    THB    ACCUMULATED    CALAMITIES

CONSEQUENT  ON  BIN.  Davidcould  only  mourn  over  the  lost  one.  And  what  bitterness
in  the  mounting !  The  dire  chain  of  moral  causes  ending  in  that  wretched  death  could
not  be  broken;  for  an  inscrutable  and  just  Providence  had  welded  them  to  the  first
adulterous  link  of  his  own  manufacture.  Whatever  anger  was  cherished  against  the
brother-assassin,  and  whatever  desire  to  vindicate  the  law  against  him,  policy  and
other  considerations  prevented  his  going  out  after  him  to  drag  him  from  the  asylum
afforded  by  another  king.  It  was  a  time  of  correction  in  righteousness  when  the  bitter
but  wholesome  lessons  of  his  life  were  to  be  taken  to  heart.  It  is  fortunate  if  men,
having  by  a  succession  of  faults  and  sins  brought  themselves  face  to  face  with  hard
nnalteraUe  facts,  apply  their  hearts  with  all  earnestness  to  Ch>d  for  his  sanctify  iiig  grace.


CH.  XIII.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  833

in.   The   DISCHABGB   of    THB    duties   of    life    becomes    INOEBASINQLT     DIFFICUUt

WHEN  THE  JOTS  OF  HOME  LIFE  ABE  DESTBOYED.  Though  dwelling  in  distinct  sbodes
in  Jerusalem,  the  royal  family  had  a  common  home  life,  and,  under  hallowed  influences,
this  might  have  been  to  David  a  source  of  strength  in  the  administration  of  affairs.
Kow,  however,  the  joy  of  his  heart  was  gone.  Energy  was  spent  in  sorrowful  memories
and  thoughts  concerning  the  possible  future  efforts  of  the  ambitious  and  now  reckless
exile,  which  otherwise  would  have  gone  in  the  direction  of  cheerful  daily  work  for  the
nation.  Fears  of  yet  further  troubles,  and  passionate  desire  to  remove  the  public
reproach  of  letting  crime  in  his  house  go  by  default,  were  not  helpful  to  calm  effort  for
public  good.  -Many  a  man  loses  energy  for  business  consequent  on  the  loss  of  domestic
joys.  Home  is  the  proper  place  for  weary  men  to  find  refreshment  after  toil,  and  cheer
for  new  endeavours.  We  may  truly  pity  the  man  whose  domestic  troubles  come  in
such  form  as  to  impair  his  strength  for  the  battle  of  life.  If  he  has  not  the  grace  of
God  in  his  heart,  it  is  not  surprising  if  he  yields  to  temptation  and  seeks  relief  In  aiufiil
pleasures.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 33. — (Jebdsalbm.)  The  etime  of  Amnon.  The  chastisements  which
David  experienced  came  upon  him  chiefly  through  his  family.  The  misconduct  of  his
sons  was  largely  due  to  his  own  "  in  the  matter  of  Uriah,"  and  his  defective  discipline
(l  Sam.  iii.  13 ;  1  Kings  i.  6)  in  connection  with  polygamy  (ch.  iii.  1 — 5).  "  This
institiition  is  the  absolutely  irrepressible  source  of  numberless  evils  of  this  description.
It  ever  furnishes  a  ready  stimulus  to  unbounded  sensual  desire  in  the  sovereign,  and,
should  he  be  exalted  above  it,  is  likely  to  introduce  a  dissolute  life  among  the  very
different  children  of  different  mothers,  by  bringing  the  pleasures  of  sense  so  prominently
and  so  early  before  their  eyes.  The  subsequent  troubles  with  Amnon,  Absalom,  and
Adonijah  were  all  connected  with  this  fundamental  wrong ;  and  on  the  same  thread
hung  many  of  the  evils  which  were  felt  under  David's  successors  "  (Ewald).  "  Having
grown  up  without  strict  paternal  discipline,  simply  under  the  care  of  their  different
mothers,  who  were  jealous  of  one  another,  his  sons  fancied  that  they  might  gratify
their  own  fleshly  lusts,  and  carry  out  their  own  ambitious  plans  "  (Keil).  Amnon  his
eldest  son  (by  Ahinoam  of  Jezreel,  whom  David  married  during  his  exUe,  1  Sam.  ixv.
43 ;  and  born  in  Hebron,  ch.  iii.  2)  was  now  about  twenty  years  of  age.  "  His  character
and  conduct  were  doubtless  affected  by  the  fact  that  he  was  the  firstborn  son,  and
of  a  mother  apparently  not  of  the  noblest  birth."  In  him  (regarded  as  a  warning
especially  to  young  men)  we  notice —

I.  Imp0EE  affection,  springing  up  in  the  heart,  and  not  repressed,  but  fondly
cherished.  His  passion  was  contrary  to  the  Divine  Law,  not  merely  because  the  object
of  it  was  his  half-sister  (ver.  13),  but  also  because  of  its  licentious  nature  (Matt.  v.  28).
His  subsequent  conduct  indicates  that  it  was  not

"  True  love,  that  ever  shows  itself  as  clear
In  kindness  as  loose  appetite  in  wrong."

(Dante.)

It  is  not  improbable,  from  his  ready  entertainment  of  it,  and  the  question  of  Absalom
(ver.  20),  that  already  he  had  given  himself  to  unrestrained  indulgence  of  his  passions.
Whea  ones  "  reason  by  lust  is  swayed,"  the  heart  becomes  a  congenial  soil  for  all
unholy  affections.  And  the  only  sure  safeguard  is  to  "  keep  the  heart  with  aU  diligence,"
by  giving  no  place  to  an  impure  thought,  avoiding  every  incentive  to  "  fleshly  lusts,
which  war  against  the  soul,"  the  exercise  of  habitual  self-denial,  and  prayer  for  Divine
grace  (Matt.  v.  29  ;  xv.  19).

II.  Inward  misery,  proceeding  from  restless  passion  and  fretful  discontent  at
hindrances  and  restraints  in  the  way  of  its  gratification  (ver.  2).  It  is  well  that  such
hindrances  and  restraints  exist  (in  Divine  Law,  public  opinion,  providential  circum-
stances) ;  for  they  afford  opportunity  for  reflection,  conviction  of  its  sinful  nature,  and
the  adoption  of  all  proper  means  whereby  it  may  be  overcome.  Where  it  is  still
cherished,  its  strength  increases  and  its  force  is  felt  more  powerfully,  as  that  of  a
river  appears  when  a  rock  opposes  its  progress  (Eom.  vii.  7).    "  There  is  no  peace  to


834  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xni.  1—391

the  wicked."  "  Amnon  here  neglected,  indeed,  the  right  means;  viz.  in  time  to  have
resisted  his  affections  and  not  to  have  given  way  unto  them ;  to  have  given  himself  to
abstinence  and  some  honest  exercises  which  might  have  occupied  his  mind ;  then  hy
some  lawful  matrimonial  love  to  have  overcome  his  unlawful  lust ;  and  to  have  prayed
unto  God  for  grace"  (Willet).

III.  Deliberate  dissimulation,  displayed  in  crafty  devices,  adopted  in  accordance
with  evil  suggestion,  in  order  to  selfish  indulgence.  He  who  suffers  a  sinful  desire
to  reign  within  him  is  peculiarly  susceptible  to  temptation,  and  readily  yields  to  it ;
sometimes  pursues  a  course  of  guile,  and  talies  advantage  of  affection,  kindness,  and
unsuspecting  confidence.  "  The  seducer  is  brother  to  the  murderer."  Blinded  and
infatuated,  be  resorts  to  the  most  subtle  and  contemptible  expedients.  And,  alas!  he
too  often  succeeds.

IV.  Wilful  peesistenot  in  wickedness,  notwithstanding  the  strongest  inducements
to  the  contrary  (vers.  12,  13).  "  It  is  enough  to  suppose  that  the  king  had  a  dispens-
ing power,  which  was  conceived  to  cover  even  extreme  cases."  When  persuasive  craft
is  employed  in  vain  to  entice  into  sin,  and  the  slave  of  passion  meets  with  another
merciful  check  by  the  opposition  of  virtue  and  piety  ("  in  Israel "),  he  is  driven  on  to
more  brutal,  though  less  diabolical  methods  of  accomplishing  his  base  designs.  The
dishonour  done  to  the  highest  claims  (of  God,  religion,  his  people),  the  disgrace  incurred,
the  misery  inflicted,  should  be  sufficient  to  deter  from  "  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts ; "  but
with  him  they  are  of  no  avail.  "  The  unjust  knoweth  no  shame  "  (Zepb.  iii.  5 ;  laa,
xxvL  10).    Theii  one  evil  passion  is  replaced  by  another.

"  Sweet  love,  I  see,  changing  his  property.
Turns  to  the  sourest  and  most  deadly  hate."

(Shakespeare.)

"He  hated  her,  but  did  not  hate  his  own  sin.  Thus  he  showed  that  the  love  he  had
prolessed  to  her  was  not  love,  but  lust ;  that  it  was  not  of  God,  but  of  the  evil  one "
(Wordsworth).  "  It  is  characteristic  of  human  nature  to  bate  whom  you  have  injured  "
(Tacitus).  "  Such  are  the  baits  and  allurements  of  sin,  which  have  a  pleasant  taste  at
the  first,  but  in  the  end  bite  like  a  serpent;  therefore  one  saith  that  pleasures  must
be  consideied,  not  as  they  come,  but  as  they  go  "  (Willet).  "He  feedetb  on  ashes,"
etc.  (Isa.  xliv.  20).  The  victim  of  evil  desire  becomes  an  object  of  bitter  aversion,
is  pitilessly  thrust  away,  maliciously  defamed,  and  thus  more  grievously  wronged  :  the
true  picture  of  many  a  desolated  life  I  "  What  men  dignify  with  the  name  of  love  is
commonly  a  base  sensual  inclination,  entire  selfishness,  which  triumphs  over  the
conscience  and  the  fear  of  God,  and  without  pity  consigns  its  object  to  irreparable
disgrace  and  misery  for  the  sake  of  a  momentary  gratification !  How  different  from
that  love  which  the  Law  of  God  commands !  yea,  how  contrary  to  it ! "  (Scott).

V.  Delusive  secukity,  arising  from  the  persuasion  that  secret  iniquity  may  escape
retribution.  The  transgressor  thinks,  perhaps,  that  it  cannot  be  proved,  no  one  will
veiiture  to  call  him  to  account  for  it,  and  that  it  is  not  worse  than  other  crimes  that
go  unpunished.  Whatever  fears  (ver.  21)  or  suspicions  he  may  at  first  entertain,  are
laid  asleep  by  the  lapse  of  time  (ver.  23).  He  is  not  led  to  repentance  by  the  long-
suffering  of  Heaven,  and  he  heeds  not  its  wrath.  But  "judgment  lingereth  not,"  etc.
(2  Pet.  ii.  3).

VI.  Sudden  destruction,  inflicted  by  an  unexpected  hand  (vers.  20,  28,  32).
Where  public  law  fails  to  do  justice,  private  hostility  finds  means  to  take  vengeance.
One  sin  produces  another,  and  is  punished  by  it ;  craft  by  craft,  violence  by  violence,
hatred  by  hatred.  "The  way  of  trangiessors  is  hard"  (Prov. ziii.  15;  vL  15;  xxix.
1).-D.

Ver.  3. — (Jerusalem.)  A  false  friend.  "  And  Jonadab  was  a  very  subtil  man."
Every  virtue  has  its  counterfeit.  As  there  is  a  friendship  which  is  true  and  beneficial,
so  there  is  what  appears  to  be  such  but  is  false  and  injurious.  Of  the  former  we  have
an  instance  in  David  and  Jonathan  (1  Sam.  xviU.  1 — 4),  of  the  latter  in  Amnon  and
Jonadab  (his  cousin,  a  son  of  Shammah,  1  Sam.  xvi.  9;  ch.  xxi.  21),  "one  of  those
characters  who  in  great  houses  pride  themselves  on  being  acquainted  and  on  dealing
with  all  the  secrets  of  the  family "  (Stanley).     In  Jonadab,  the  daily  companion  of


OH.  XIII.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  838

Amnon  (ver.  4),  we  see  tlie  kind  of  friend  that  should  not  be  chosen.  1.  Bie  is  die-
Unfinished  for  subtlety,  not  for  virtue  and  piety.  "  In  the  choice  of  a  friend,  let  him
be  virtuous;  for  vice  is  contagious,  and  there  is-no  trusting  of  the  sound  aud  the  sick
together "  (Seneca).  "  Friendship  is  nothing  else  but  benevolence  or  charity,  under
some  modifications,  viz.  that  it  be  in  a  special  manner  intense,  that  it  be  mutual,  and
that  it  be  manifest  or  mutually  known.  It  cannot  be  but  between  good  men,  because
an  ill  man  cannot  have  any  true  charity,  much  less  such  an  intense  degree  of  it  as  is
requisite  to  friendship  "  (J.  Norris,  '  Miscellanies  ').  A  companion  is  sometimes  chosen
solely  for  his  cleverness  and  insinuating  address ;  but  his  superior  intelligence  (he  ivever
desirable  in  itself),  unless  it  be  combined  with  moral  excellence,  enables  him  to  do  all
the  greater  mischief  (Jer.  iv.  22).  2.  In  professing  concern  for  anothet's  welfare  he
seeks  only  to  serve  his  own  interests ;  his  own  pleasure,  gain,  influence,  and  advancement
(ver.  4).  True  friendship  is  disinterested.  Jonadab  appears  to  have  cared  only  for
himself.  Hence  (to  avoid  getting  himself  into  trouble)  he  gave  no  warning  to  others
of  what  he  foresaw  (ver.  32\  "  This  young  man,  who  probably  desired  to  make  him-
self of  some  importance  as  David's  nephew,  was  clever  enough  to  guess  the  truth  from
the  first ;  but  it  is  sad  to  think  that  his  thought  and  his  advice  were  never  founded  on
anything  but  a  knowledge  of  the  devil  in  man"  (Bwald).  3.  When  he  is  acquainted
with  the  secret  thoughts  of  another,  he  fails  to  give  him  faithful  counsel.  (Ver.  5.)  Such
acquaintance  is  often  obtained  by  flattery — "  thou  a  king's  son  " — and  frequent  question-
ing ;  but  it  is  not  followed,  in  the  case  of  improper  desires  and  purposes,  by  admonition.
"  No  flatterer  can  be  a  true  friend."  "  Had  he  been  a  true  friend,  he  had  bent  all  the
forces  of  his  dissuasion  against  the  wicked  motions  of  that  sinful  lust "  (Hall).  "  Faith-
ful are  the  wounds  of  a  friend."  4.  Whilst  he  devises  means  for  another's  gratification,
he  smoothes  his  way  to  destruction.  His  aim  is  only  to  please.  He  advises  what  is
agreeable,  but  what  is  morally  wrong;  and  thus  incites  to  sin;  for  which,  with  all  its
consequences,  he  is,  in  part,  responsible.  "  In  wise  counsel  two  things  must  be  con-
sidered— that  both  the  end  be  good,  and  the  means  honest  and  lawfuL  Jonadab's
counsel  failed  in  both."  "  The  rapacious  friend,  the  insincere  friend,  the  friend  who
speaks  only  to  please,  and  he  who  is  a  companion  in  vicious  pleasures, — recognizing
these  four  to  be  false  friends,  the  wise  man  flies  far  from  them,  as  he  would  from  a  road
beset  by  Aanget"  {Contemporary  jBewtej«,  xxvii.  421).  "A  companion  of  fools  shall
be  destroyed"  (Prov.  xiii.  20;  i.  10).— D.

Ver.  7. — Tamctr,  A  princess;  the  daughter  of  David  and  Maacah  (of  Geshur),  an(:
sister  of  Absalom ;  distinguished  for  her  beauty,  modesty,  domesticity,  obedience  (ver,
8),  tender-heartedness,  piety,  and  misfortunes.  In  her  we  see  an  illustration  of  (what
has  often  occurred):  1.  Purity  pursued  by  licentious  desire  (ver.  2).  2.  Simplicity
beset  by  wily  designs  (ver.  5).  3.  Kindness  requited  by  selfish  ingratitude  (vers.  9,
10).  4.  Confidence  exposed  to  enticing  persuasions  and  perilous  temptation  (ver.  11).
6.  Virtue  overpowered  by  brutal  violence  (ver.  14).  6.  Innocence  vilified-  by  guilty
aversion  (ver.  17).  "  So  fair  had  she  gone  forth  on  what  seemed  her  errand  of  mercy,
80  foully  had  she  been  driven  back"  (Edersheim).  "Let  no  one  ever  expect  better
treatment  from  those  who  are  capable  of  attempting  their  seduction ;  but  it  is  better
to  suffer  the  greatest  wrong  than  to  commit  the  least  sin  "  (Matthew  Henry).  7.  Sorrow
assuaged  by  brotherly  sympathy  (ver.  20).  8.  Injury  avenged  with  terrible  severity
(ver.  28).— D.

Ver.  21. — Impunity.  "And  King  David  heard  of  all  these  things,  and  wa«  very
wroth ; "  but  "  he  did  not  grieve  the  spirit  of  his  son  Amnon,  because  he  loved  him,
for  he  was  his  firstborn "  (LXX.).  And  he  did  not  punish  him  (1  Sam.  iii.  13) ;
which  must  be  looked  upon  as —

L  An  omission  of  manifest  duty.  If  he  had  been  only  a  father,  he  would  have
been  bound  to  chastise  his  children  for  their  misbehaviour ;  but,  being  also  a  king,  he
was  under  still  stronger  obligation  to  punish  the  guilty.  To  do  this :  1.  Properly
belonged  to  the  authority  delegated  to  him.  2.  Was  expressly  enjoined  in  the  Divine
Law  (Lev.  xx.  17).  3.  Urgently  demanded  by  the  sense  of  justice.  4.  Indispensably
necessary  to  the  protection  of  his  subjects.  "  Kings,  then,  have  not  absolute  power  to
do  in  thek  goverwoent  what  pleases  them ;  their  power  is  limited  by  God's  Word ;  so


336  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xni.  1— 39

that  if  they  strike  not  where  God  has  commanded  to  strike,  they  and  their  throne  art
criminal  and  guilty  of  the  wickedness  which  abounds  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  for
lack  of  punishment "  (John  Knox).

IL  Unwarranted  by  adequate  reasons.  In  Israel  (as  in  Persia  and  other  Eastern
countries)  the  king,  as  vicegerent  of  heaven,  had  a  large  discretionary  power  of  dis-
pensing with  the  penalties  of  the  Law ;  but  it  behoved  him  to  exercise  it  without
partiality  and  on  sufficient  grounds.  Although  David's  omission  to  punish  is  not
expressly  condemned,  yet  the  consequences  by  which  it  was  followed  show  that  it  took
place  (not,  as  some  have  supposed,  on  "  principle,"  or  because  it  was  "  impossible  "  for
him  to  do  otherwise,  but)  without  such  grounds.  1.  The  affection  of  a  father.  This,
however,  ought  not  to  have  prevented  punishment  by  a  father  or  judge ;  as  it  did,  being
inordinate  and  blamable,  in  Eli  (1  Sam.  ii.  22,  30).  2.  The  rank  of  the  offender ;  the
king's  son,  his  firstborn,  heir  to  the  crown.  But  he  was  not  above  the  law ;  nor  less
guilty  than  another  of  inferior  position  would  have  been.  "Grod  is  no  respecter  of
persons."  3.  The  transgression  and  forgiveness  of  the  Jcing  himself.  Nevertheless,
whilst  both  may  have  exerted  a  pernicious  influence,  Amnon  was  responsible  for  his
own  conduct ;  and  David's  exemption  (only  from  legal  punishment)  rested  on  grounds
which  did  not  exist  in  the  case  of  his  ungodly  and  impenitent  son.  The  king's  wrath
proves  his  full  conviction  of  Amnon's  guilt  and  his  moral  abhorrence  of  its  enormity ;
his  failure  to  "grieve,"  or  inflict  suffering  upon  him,  indicates  his  own  weakness  and
dereliction  of  duty.  "  Punishment  is  an  eflbrt  of  man  to  find  a  more  exact  relation
between  sin  and  suffering  than  this  world  affords  us.  A  duty  is  laid  upon  us  to  make
tliis  relationship  of  sin  to  suffering  as  real,  and  as  natural,  and  as  exact  in  proportion
as  it  is  possible  to  be  made.  This  is  the  moral  root  of  the  whole  doctrine  of  punish-
ment. But  if  the  adjustment  of  pain  to  vice  he  the  main  ground  of  punishment,  it
must  be  admitted  that  there  are  other  ends  which  society  has  in  view  in  its  infliction.
These  secondary  elements  in  punishment  appear  to  be  (1)  the  reformation  of  the
offender ;  (2)jthe  prevention  of  further  offences  by  the  offender ;  (3)  the  repression  of
offences  in  others  "  (Edward  Fry,  Nineteenth  Century,  No.  Ixxix.  p.  524).

III.  Productive  op  disastrous  effects.  1.  It  does  not  appear  to  have  produced
any  other  effect  on  the  offender  than  to  confirm  him  in  recklessness  and  fancied
security.  "  Punishment  connected  with  sin  operates  towards  reform  in  two  ways :
(1)  by  the  association  of  ideas — the  linking  together  of  that  from  which  our  nature
shrinks  with  that  from  which  it  ought  to  shrink,  so  that  the  temptation  to  sin  recalls
not  only  the  pleasure  of  sin,  but  the  pain  of  suffering ;  (2)  by  the  shock  to  the  habits
of  thought  and  of  practice  which  suffering  produces,  by  the  solution  of  continuity  in
the  man's  life  which  it  causes,  by  the  opportunity  for  reflection  and  thought  which  it
thus  affords"  (Lord  Justice  Fry).  2.  On  others,  also,  it  was  injurious;  weakening
respect  for  royal  authority  and  public  justice,  causing  the  law  to  be  despised,  furnishing
grounds  for  private  revenge,  leading  to  further  impunity  (ver.  39;  ch.  xiv.  24,  38),
more  daring  crimes  (ch.  xv.  7 ;  xvi.  21),  widespread  disaffection  and  rebellion.  3.  On
the  king  himself.  Further  impairing;  his  personal,  moral,  kingly  energy,  and  accumu-
lating "  sorrow  upon  sorrow "  (vers.  31,  37 ;  ch.  xv.  13).  It  was  another  link  in  the
chain  of  painful  consequences  resulting  from  his  great  transgression ;  naturally,  slowly,
effectually  vfrought  out  under  the  direction  and  control  of  the  perfect  justice  of  the
supreme  King;  accomplishing  a  beneficent  end,  in  purifying  his  heart,  restoring  him
to  God,  averting  his  final  condemnation,  and  teaching,  warning,  benefiting  mankind.
"  The  dark  sin  of  which  he  had  been  guilty  spoke  of  a  character  that  had  lost  its  self-
control,  its  truthfulness,  its  generosity.  His  penitence  was  not  able  to  undo  all  its
consequences  and  to  bring  back  the  old  energy  and  life.  Over  and  above  its  direct
results  in  alienating  the  hearts  of  his  most  trusted  counsellors,  and  placing  him  at  the
mercy  of  a  hard  taskmaster,  that  dark  hour  left  behind  it  the  penalty  of  an  enfeebled
will,  the  cowardice  of  a  hidden  crime,  the  remorse  which  weeps  for  the  past,  yet
cannot  rouse  itself  to  the  duties  of  the  present.  He  leaves  the  sin  of  Amnon  unpunished
in  spite  of  the  fearful  promise  it  gave  of  a  reign  of  brutal  passion,  •  because  he  loved
him,  for  he  was  his  firstborn.'  Half  suspecting,  apparently,  that  Absalom  had  soma
ficheme  for  revenging  the  wrong  which  he  had  failed  to  redress,  he  has  no  energy  to
stop  its  executkm.  He  shrinks  only  from  being  present  at  a  meeting  the  meaning
and   issues  of  which  he  does  not  comprehend,  and  yet  dimly  fears.     When  the


OH.  xm.  1—39.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  837


exaggerated  report  is  brought  back  that  Absalom  had  slain  all  his  brothers — sure  sign,
if  it  had  been  so,  that  he  was  claiming  the  throne,  and  marching  to  it  through  the
blood  of  his  kindred — David's  attitude  is  that  of  passive,  panic-stricken  submission  "
(E,  H.  Plumptre,  'Biblical  Studies,'  p.  89).  Who  can  say  that  he  sinned  with
impunity  f  "  Thenceforward  the  days  of  his  years  became  full  of  evil,  and  if  he  lived
(for  the  hold  caused  death  to  pass  from  himself  to  the  child  by  a  vicarious  dispensation),
it  was  to  be  a  king,  with  more  than  kingly  sorrows,  but  with  little  of  kingly  power;
to  be  banished  by  his  son;  bearded  by  his  servant;  betrayed  by  his  friends;  deserted
by  his  people ;  bereaved  of  his  children ;  and  to  feel  all,  all  these  bitter  griefs,  bound,
as  it  were,  by  a  chain  of  complicated  cause  and  effect,  to  this  one  great,  original
transgression  "  (Blunt, '  Undesigned  Coincidences,'  p.  146).

"It  often  falls,  in  course  of  common  life.

That  right  long  time  is  overborne  of  wrong;
Through  avarice,  or  power,  or  guile,  or  strife.
That  weakens  her,  and  makes  her  party  strong.
But  justice,  though  her  doom  she  do  prolong,
Yet  at  the  last  she  will  her  own  cause  right."

(Spenser.)

D.

Verg.  22 — 29. — (Baal-hazoe.)  The  revenge  of  Alsalom.  "  Absalom  hated  Amnon."
References:  1.  Third  son  (Chileab,  probably,  being  dead)  of  David,  by  Maacah,
daughter  of  Talmai,  King  of  Geshur ;  born  at  Hebron,  his  name  ("  father  of  peace  ")
indicating,  perhaps,  the  hope  entertained  at  his  birth  (oh.  iii.  1 — 5).  "The  young
handsome  hero  must  have  been  conspicuous  among  the  soldiers  of  Israel,  and  taken  his
place  among  the  sons  of  David,  who  were  '  chief  rulers.' "  2.  Hatred  (when  about
eighteen'years  old)  and  murder  (after  two  years).  3.  Plight  to  Geshur  (ver.  38)  and
residence  there  (three  years).  4.  Return  (ch.  xiv.  23,  24)  and  partial  reconciliation
(during  two  years) ;  married  about  this  time,  and  father  of  three  sons  (dying  in  infancy,
ch.  xiv.  27;  xyiii.  18)  and  one  daughter  (Tamar,  named  after  his  sister).  5.  Pull
reconciliation  (oh.  xiv.  83 ;  xv.  1 — 11)  and  preparation  for  revolt  (four  years).  6.  Con-
spiracy in  Hebron  (ch.  xv.  12,  13).  7.  Occupation  of  Jerusalem  (ch.  xv.  37 ;  xvi.
15 — 19),  possession  of  the  palace  (ch.  xv.  20 — 23),  anointed  king  (oh.  xix.  10),
consultations  (ch.  xvii.  1 — 14).  8.  Pursuit  of  David,  and  defeat  in  battle  (ch.  xvii.
24—26 ;  xviji.  1—8).  9.  Slain  by  Joab  (ch.  xviii.  9—18).  10.  Lamented  by  David
(ch.  xviii.  33 ;  xix.  1 — 4).  Bevenge  is  sinful  resentment.  It  is  felt^  on  account  of  real
or  supposed  injury,  toward  the  perion  rather  than  the  conduct  of  the  offender ;  desires
his  soSering,  not  his  improvement;  and  seeks  it  maliciously,  deliberately,  and  unlaw-
fully. "  All  pain  occasioned  to  another  in  consequence  of  an  offence  or  injury  received
from  him,  further  than  what  is  calculated  to  procure  reparation  or  promote  the  just
ends  of  pnnishment,  is  so  much  revenge  "  (Paley,  '  Mor.  Ph.').  It  is  "  a  kind  of  wild
justice"  (Bacon,  'Essays').  Of  the  spirit  of  revenge,  which  was  embodied  in
Absalom,  and  too  often  finds  a  place  in  others,  observe —

I.  Its  seeming  justification  ;  for  he  who  indulges  it  commonly  seeks  to  justify
himself  therein  (ch.  xiv.  32),  it  may  be,  on  account  of:  1.  The  grievous  lurong
suffered,  directly  or  in  the  person  of  another  with  whom  he  is  closely  connected.  The
more  this  is  brooded  over,  the  greater  it  appears  and  the  more  it  incites  to  wrath.  2.
The  natwral  instinct  of  anger  and  retaliation,  which  is

"  Far,  far  too  dear  to  every  mortal  breast,
Sweet  to  the  soul  as  honey  to  the  taste  "

(Homer.)

But  it  must  be  directed,  controlled,  often  completely  repressed  by  justice  and  love.
"  The  taking  vengeance  on  a  foe  is  honourable,"  it  has  been  said,  "  rather  than  the
being  reconciled"  (Aristotle,  'Rhetoric').  True  wisdom  teaches  otherwise  (1  Sam.  xi.
12,  13  ;  Prov.  xx.  22 ;  xxiv.  29).  3.  The  culpable  failure  of  justice,  on  the  part  of  the
civil  magistrate,  "  the  minister  of  God,"  etc.  (Rom.  xiii.  4).  It  may  be  a  temptation
to  private  vengeance ;  but  it  does  not  warrant  any  one  in  taking  the  law  into  his  own
bands ;  whilst  by  doisg  so  he  becomes  a  breaker  of  the  law  and  justly  liable  to  its
n.  bahuum  a


838  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xni.  1—39.

penalty.  "  The  revenge  which  he  took  for  the  foul  wrong  that  his  sister  had  suffered
at  the  hands  of  Amnon  did  not  shook  the  men  of  Israel  as  it  shocks  us.  To  him,  by
the  feeling  of  all  Oriental  nations,  belonged  the  special  guardianship  of  her  honour ;  and
subtly  as  the  punishment  was  inflicted,  it  was  nothing  more  than  the  monstrous
turpitude  of  the  guilt  deserved.  Had  David  been  true  to  his  kingly  calling,  instead  of
passing  the  crime  over  with  a  weak  sorrow  and  a  yet  weaker  leniency,  there  would
have  been  no  occasion  for  the  vengeance  which  Absalom  felt  himself  bound  to  take.
The  two  long  years  of  waiting  which  followed  on  his  revenge,  must  have  been  a  time
in  which  disappointment,  irritation,  bitterness  against  bis  father,  were  gaining,  slowly
but  surely,  the  mastery  over  him  "  (Plumptre).

II.  Its  spboiaii  chaeactbkistics.  1.  Enduring  and  implacable  hatred  (ver.  23);
a  malicious  purpose  formed  from  the  first  (as  his  intimate  companion  read  in  his
countenance,  ver.  32),  but  concealed  that  it  might  be  the  more  effectually  accomplished
when  opportunity  served.  "A  man  that  studieth  revenge  keeps  his  own  wounds
green,  which  otherwise  would  heal  and  do  well"  (Bacon).  2.  Subtle  and  deceitful
scheming  (vers.  24,  26) ;  under  pretence  of  kindness ;  and  taking  a  base  advantage  of
affection,  consideration,  and  confidence.  Ver.  25  is  "  the  first  instance  history  offers
of  the  ruinous  cost  of  royal  visits  to  those  who  a,re  honoured  with  them  "  (Kitto).  3.
Pitiless  and  treacherous  cruelty  (ver.  28;  ch.  xi.  13).  Another  instance  of  indulgence
in  intoxication  (1  Sam.  xxv.  36,  37;  oh.  xi.  13).  "Absalom  calls  the  execution  of
this  base  cruelty  in  his  servants,  courage  and  valour ;  being  indeed  but  treacherous  and
cowardly  murder;  which  shows  that  vices  are  ofttimes  coloured  with  the  name  of
virtues,  as  drunkenness  is  called  good  fellowship,  avarice  good  husbandry,  subtlety  to
deceive  wisdom,  and  pride  magnanimity"  (Guild).  It  is  not  improbable  that  he
wished  to  get  rid  of  Amnon  as  an  obstacle  in  the  way  to  the  throne.  "  The  wild  acts
of  Absalom's  life  may  have  been  to  some  extent  the  results  of  maternal  training ;  they
were  at  least  characteristic  of  the  stock  from  which  he  sprang "  (Smith,  '  Diet.').
"  From  his  father  he  inherited  nothing  but  his  regal  pride"  (Ewald).  "  He  was  a  man
who  could  scheme  deeply,  bide  his  time  patiently,  and  then  strike  with  decision  and
daring  "  (D.  Macleod).

III.  Its  BXCBBDmo  sinfulness.  1.  Disbelief  in  the  presence  and  justice  of  God,
who,  though  man  fails  to  punish,  "  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  2.  Insensi-
bility to  his  forbearance,  which  should  teach  the  like  (1  Sam.  ixiv.  13 ;  Matt.  v.  48).
3.  Disobedience  to  the  Divine  Law,  which  is  "  fulfilled  in  one  word,"  etc.  (Gal.  v.  14),
and  to  many  special  injunctions  (Eom.  xii.  9;  Matt.  vL  15).  4.  Fruitfulness  in
wickedness  and  crime  (1  John  iiL  15),  with  all  their  evil  consequences  to  others  and
to  a  man  himself  (vers.  36,  37).  "  Absalom  fled  from  man,  who  only  could  kill  the
body ;  but  he  could  not  fly  from  blood-guiltiness  and  an  accusing  conscience,  nor  yet
from  the  hand  of  God's  justice,  which  did  reach  him  afterwards"  (Guild).  "It  was
asked  of  the  sage, '  In  what  one  virtue  are  all  the  rest  comprised?*  'Patience,'  was  Mb
answer.  'And  in  what  single  vice  are  all  others  concentrated?'  'Vindictiveness'"
(Rabbi  Salomon  Ibn  Gabirol).  "Whereas  some  may  be  apt  to  suspect  that  the
patient  bearing  of  one  injury  may  invite  another,  I  believe  it  will  be  found  quite
otherwise,  that  the  revenging  of  one  injury  brings  on  another ;  the  one  is  like  the  with-
drawing of  fuel  or  combustible  matter,  which  will  soon  put  out  the  fire,  and  the  other
is  continually  furnishing  fresh  fuel,  mixed  with  oil  and  gunpowder  and  such  inflaming
materials  as  are  apt  to  spread  the  fire  of  contention,  but  not  to  extinguish  it "  (J.  Blair :
1740).

Conclusion,  How  odious  is  the  spirit  of  revenge  1  He  who  gives  way  to  it
might  as  well  cherish  a  venomous  serpent  in  his  bosom.  "  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,
but  overcome  evil  with  good"  (Eom.  xii.  21). — D.

Vers.  30 — 39. — (Jbeusalem.)  Parental  sorrows.  "  And  the  king  also  and  all  hia
servants  wept  very  sore "  (ver.  36).  David's  intense  feeling  appears  in  his  affection
(vers.  6,  25,  39),  his  wrath  (ver.  21),  and  his  grief  (ver.  31).  The  delight  which
a  father  finds  in  his  children  is  seldom  imalloyed.    His  sorrows,  on  their  account,  are—

I.  Ofttimbb  pbouliably  severe.  1.  Their  misbehaviour.  "  A  '  house-cross '  is  the
heaviest  of  all  earthly  crosses.  The  gall  which  is  mingled  in  our  cup  by  those  who  an
nearest  to  us  surpasses  all  others  iu  bitterness  "  (Emmmacher),


Ok.  Mil.  1— 3&.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  839

"How  Bbarper  than  a  serpent's  tooth  it  U
To  hare  a  thankless  chUd  I "

C  King  Lear.*)

2.  Their  mlsfortime  (ver.  19).  3.  Their  disappointment  of  his  hopes ;  his  consternation,
trembling  anxieties,  exaggerated  fears  (ver.  30) ;  his  bereavement  by  death  (ver.  32)
and  by  enforced  exile  through  crime  (ver.  34) ;  his  son  a  fratricide,  like  Cain,  alive  yet
dead.  What  a  heavy  burden  of  trouble  was  thus  laid  upon  David  I  It  is  not  sur-
prising that  it  was  followed  by  serious  and  protracted  hudily  affliction,  favourable  to
the  designs  of  his  enemies  and  conducive  tu  still  deeper  distress  (ch.  xv.  4,  30),  aa
several  psalms  seem  to  indicate  (Ps.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.,  xli.,  Iv.).

"O  Jehovah,  rebuke  me  not  in  thine  anger,
Nor  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure.
For  thine  arrows  stick  fast  iu  me,
And  thy  hand  presseth  me  sore,"  eto.

(Pi.  zzxviiL  1,  2.)

n.  SoMETIHBS  DC1S  TO  HIS  OWN  FAULT.  1.  Eis  sinful  example.  Children  are
more  ready  to  imitate  their  father's  vices  than  his  virtues.  2.  His  defective  discipline.
"  David's  failure  in  the  government  of  his  family  was  due  in  part  to  the  excessive,
even  morbid,  tenderness  of  his  feelings  towards  his  children,  especially  some  of  them.
He  may  also  have  thought  of  his  family  circle  as  too  exclusively  a  scene  for  relaxa-
tion and  enjoyment ;  he  may  have  forgotten  that  even  there  there  is  a  call  for  much
vigilance  and  self-denial"  (Blaikie).  "By  this  example  we  see  that  children  whom
their  parents  spare  to  correct  will  in  the  end  be  a  grief  unto  them"  (Willet).
"  Chastisement  without  love  is  an  outrage ;  no  father  is  at  liberty  to  plague  or  torture
his  child ;  but  a  love  that  cannot  chastise  is  no  love,  and  reaps  a  poor  reward.  A  child
that  does  not  at  the  proper  time  feel  the  father's  rod  becomes  at  last  a  rod  for  his
father"  (Schlier).  "Oft times  the  child  whom  the  father  loves  most  (as  David  did
Amnon)  becomes  his  greatest  grief  by  too  much  indulgence"  (Guild).  3.  His
culpable  clemency  in  the  case  of  a  great  crime  (ver.  21).  Even  if  David  did  inflict
some  punishment  on  Amnon,  as  it  has  been  supposed  (Chandler),  yet  it  was  altogether
inadequate  to  the  offence.  The  sorrows  of  a  fatiier  over  the  sins  and  sufferings  of  his
children  are  intensified  by  the  knowledge  that  they  are,  in  some  degree,  the  result  of
his  own  errors  and  transgressions.  "  A  parent  can  have  no  sharper  pang  than  the
sight  of  his  own  sin  reappearing  in  his  child.  David  saw  the  ghastly  reflection  of  bis
unbridled  passion  in  his  eldest  son's  foul  crime  (and  even  a  gleam  of  it  in  his  unhappy
daughter)  and  of  his  murderous  craft  in  his  second  son's  bloody  revenge  "  (Maclaren).

III.  Not  without  mebcifui.  alleviation.  1.  The  occasion  of  trouble  is  less
calamitous  than  it  might  have  been ;  less  than  it  was  feared  to  be  (ver.  32).  2.  Grief
is  assuaged  by  the  lapse  of  time  (vers.  37,  38).  3.  It  is  vain  to  mourn  over  what  is
irreparable  (ver.  39 ;  ch.  xii.  23 ;  xiv.  14).  4.  These  afBictions  are  chastisements  from
the  heavenly  Father's  hand,  and  should  be  endured  with  patience  and  hope  (Ps.
xxxix.  7,  9 ;  xxxviii.  15).  5.  They  are  mingled  with  tokens  of  Divine  favour  (ch.  xii.
13,  25 ;  Ps.  xli.  1 — 3 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  8).  6.  Their  purpose  is  morally  beneiioial  (Heb.  xii.
11).  "  It  may  seem  strange  to  say  it,  but  it  is  most  true,  that  the  tears  which  flow
from  the  eyelids  of  a  man  are  aa  needful  to  the  fj:uitfulneas  of  his  heart  as  the
dews  which  descend  from  the  eyelids  of  the  morning  are  to  the  thirsty  ground  "  (E.
Irving). — D.

Ver.  3. — A  didboUeal friend:  a  homUyfor  young  men.  This  chapter  contains  a
dreadful  story.  The  unnatural  lust  of  Amnon,  the  vile  counsels  of  Jonadab,  the
unsuspiciousness  of  the  king,  the  confiding  innocence  of  Tamar,  her  unavailing  remon-
strances and  resistance,  the  hardened  villainy  of  her  half-brother,  his  hatred  and  cruel
expulsion  of  his  innocent  victim,  her  bitter  anguish  and  lamentations,  the  imjust
leniency  of  David  towards  the  offender  (although  "  very  wroth "),  the  vengeance  so
quietly  prepared  and  so  sternly  executed  by  Absalom,  the  king's  lamentations  over  the
death  of  Amnon,  his  subsequent  longing  after  the  fugitive  Absalom, — present  a  picture
of  horrible  wickedness,  of  helpless  misery,  of  weak  negligence,  of  fierce  and  deadly
revenge,  which  moves  us  with  alternate  detestation  and  pity,  as  well  as  wonder  that  so


340  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xni.  1— 39,

much  depravity  should  have  been  found  in  the  family  of  a  man  so  godly  and  devout,
imtil  we  remember  the  unfavourableness  of  polygamy  to  the  right  training  of  families,
the  foolish  indulgence  of  David  towards  his  children,  and  his  own  evil  conduct,  which
weakened  his  authority.  Passing  by,  however,  all  other  particulars,  let  us  consider
awhile  this  statement,  "  Amnon  had  a  friend,  whose  name  was  Jonadab ...  a  very
subtil  man."

I.  A  KIND  OP  FBiENDBHiP  TO  BE  ABHORBED  AND  AVOIDED.  At  first  view  the  friend-
ship of  Jonadab  and  Anmon  seems  natural  and  proper.  They  were  first  cousins ;
Jonadab  was  a  man  of  intelligence  ("  subtil,"  equivalent  to  "  wise,"  not  necessarily
"  subtle "  in  the  bad  sense) ;  he  "  showed  himself  friendly  "  by  noticing  his  friend's
doleful  appearance  and  inquiring  the  cause.  Not  until  we  observe  the  advice  he  gave,
and  see  how  it  was  accepted  and  followed,  do  we  discover  how  base  he  was,  how  base
they  both  were.  Amnon's  vileness  appears,  indeed,  earlier,  in  his  indulgence  of  a
passion  for  his  beautiful  half-sister,  and  that  so  violent,  while  so  seemingly  hopeless,
that  it  affected  his  health.  A  case,  surely,  calling  for  pity  and  sympathy !  No  wonder
that  his  dear  Mend  so  feelingly  inquired  after  his  health,  and  employed  his  subtlety  to
find  a  remedy !  They  must  have  known  each  other  very  well  for  one  to  acknowledge
so  disreputable  a  cause  of  his  iU  looks,  and  the  other  to  suggest  so  infamous  a  resto-
rative. What  a  real  friend  would  have  advised  is  obvious.  He  would  have  urged
Anmon,  by  every  consideration  of  morality  and  religion,  of  regard  for  the  honour  of  his
family  and  nation,  the  happiness  of  his  father,  and  the  duty  he  owed  to  his  sister,  to
conquer  his  guilty  passion.  But  Amnon  knew  well  that  he  was  in  no  peril  of  being
troubled  with  such  counsel,  or  he  would  not  have  acknowledged  his  shameful  lust.
Observe,  too,  how  utterly  this  pair  of  Mends,  like  all  their  tribe,  disregarded  the  ruin
and  misery  which  they  were  plotting  for  the  innocent  Tamar.  They  seem  to  have  been
tolerably  sure  that  the  offence  would  not  be  thought  very  serious  by  "  society,"  and
that  the  law  would  not  be  put  in  force  by  David.  His  own  sins  of  a  similar  kind  would
give  them  confidence  of  impunity.  Even  after  committing  the  foul  crime,  Amnon  does
not  seem  to  have  thought  it  necessary,  for  the  sake  either  of  safety  or  decency,  to  retire
for  at  least  a  time  from  Jerusalem  until  the  affair  had  "  blown  over."  What  a  contrast
between  this  Mendship  and  that  of  David  and  Jonathan !  Many  such  Mends,  alas  I
are  to  be  found  in  the  world ;  men  who  are  counselling  and  aiding  and  hardening  each
other  in  licentiousness,  whose  delight  is  to  ruin  the  innocent,  and  bring  dishonour  and
misery  on  their  families ;  and  who  are  preparing  each  other  for  well-merited  damnation.
Tet  their  debauchery  is  overlooked  by  "  society,"  especially  if  they  be  of  high  rank,
while  their  victims  receive  no  pity.  It  would  be  of  little  use  to  address  such  wretches,
even  if  we  could  gain  access  to  them.  But  we  may  warn  young  men  who  have  not  yet
come  under  their  deadly  influence,  but  who  may  be  in  danger  of  doing  so.  For  in  all
classes  of  society  persons  are  to  be  found  who,  corrupt  themselves,  delight  in  corrupting
others.  Young  men  coming  from  the  country  to  great  cities,  where  at  present  they
have  no  Mends,  are  in  peril,  not  only  from  prostitutes  or  sometimes  from  loose  married
women,  but  from  men  of  the  class  referred  to.  These  will  test  them  by  using  double
entendres,  advancing  to  outspoken  ribaldry  and  freer  conversation  about  sexual  indul-
gences. If  discouraged,  they  will  laugh  at  the  "  innocence  "  and  "  squeamishness  "  of
the  youth  they  would  corrupt.  If  he  at  all  encourage  them,  they  will  introduce  him  to
indecent  books,  or  offer  themselves  as  guides  to  the  places  where  he  may  safely  indulge
his  passions.  To  an  inexperienced  youth,  not  yet  well  grounded  in  Christian  prin-
ciples, such  approaches  present  very  powerful  temptations.  The  assault  from  without
meets  vrith  auxiliaries  within,  in  the  awakening  passions  themselves,  and  in  a  curiosity
"  to  see  a  little  life."  The  manner  in  which  such  temptations  are  met  at  the  begin-
ning is  likely  to  determine  the  character  of  the  youth's  whole  future  life.  To  yield  is
to  be  undone ;  to  resist  and  conquer  is  to  gain  new  strength  for  future  conflict  and
victory.  Let,  then,  those  who  are  thus  tempted  shrink  back  from  their  tempter  as  from
a  viper.  At  the  first  indication  of  such  depravity  let  them  "cut"  those  who  display
it,  however  related  to  them  by  blood,  however  agreeable  as  companions  (the  more  agree-
able the  more  dangerous),  however  able  to  help  them  in  their  worldly  career.  If  their
counsel  be  not  followed,  yet  friendly  association  with  them  in  any  degree  must  exer-
cise a  debasing  influence.  It  may  not  be  possible  to  avoid  them  altogether ;  they  may
be  employed  in  the  same  establishment,  and  indulge  themselves  in  loose  language  in


OH.  roi.  1— 39.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  541

the  hearing  of  their  fellows ;  but  let  a  loathing  of  them  he  cherished,  and  every  prac-
ticable effort  be  made  to  silence  and  suppress  them.

II.  The  surest  safeouaeds  aoainst  buch  friendship.  1.  Close  and  decided
friendship  tuith  Christ.  Begun  early,  cultivated  diligently  by  daily  communion  with
him  in  secret,  through  devout  study  of  his  Word,  believing  meditation,  fervent  prayer.
Thus  the  heart  will  become  filled  with  the  purest  and  noblest  affections,  leaving  no
room  for  the  vile ;  and  thus  wiU  the  youth  become  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the
power  of  his  might,"  and  "  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day "  (Eph.  vi.  10, 13).
2.  Friendship  with  the  best  Christians.  Union  and  communion  with  them  in  Church
fellowship,  in  Divine  ordinances,  in  Christian  work,  in  social  life  and  its  pure  enjoyments.
Christian  people  should  interest  themselves  in  the  young  (especially  young  men  from
home),  and  welcome  them  to  their  confidence,  their  friendship,  their  homes.  For  the
young  must  have  friends ;  and  if  there  be  difficulty  in  associating  with  the  good,  they
are  in  so  much  greater  danger  of  contenting  themselves  with  the  evil  or  the  doubtful.
But  if  they  fonn  Christian  friendships,  these  will  be  as  an  impassable  barrier  against
the  advances  of  such  as  would  lead  them  astray.  3.  Constant  watc^fvlnesa  and
pra^yer.  Against  everything  that,  if  indulged,  would  make  the  society  of  the  wicked
welcome.  Guard  the  heart,  for  out  of  it  springs  the  life  (Prov.  iv.  23).  Seek  of  God  a
clean  heart  (Ps.  li.  10).  Suppress  every  impure  thought  and  feeling  (see  Matt.  v.
28),  and  every  impulse  to  utter  impure  words  (Bph.  iv.  29  ;  v.  3).  Let  the  psalmist's
prayers  (Ps.  cxli.  3,  4;  cxxxiz.  23,  24)  be  yours.  Ever  cherish  the  thought,  "  Thou
God  seest  me  "  (Gen.  xvi.  13).  4.  Consideration  of  the  certain  result  of  follovdng
evil  counsellors,  "  A  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed  "  (Prov.  xiii.  20).  Amnoa
found  it  so.  Let  the  young  man  think,  when  sinners  entice  him,  "  They  are  inviting
me  to  misery,  death,  hell  I "

Finally,  it  is  not  only  those  who  are  unchaste  and  the  abettors  of  unchastity
whose  close  acquaintance  and  counsel  are  to  be  avoided,  but  the  irreligious  and  immoral
in  general;  all  who  are  "lovers  of  pleasure  rather  than  lovers  of  God"  (2  Tim.  iii.
4,  Bevised  Version) ;  all  who  adopt,  practice,  and  tempt  to  infidelity,  sabbath-break-
ing, intemperance,  gambling,  untruthfulness,  dishonesty,  or  any  other  form  of  evil.
"  Be  not  deceived :  evil  company  "  of  any  kind  "  doth  corrupt  good  manners  "  (1  Cor.
XV.  33,  Bevised  Version).— G.  W.

Ver.  12. — Tilings  that  ought  not  to  le  done  in  Iirad.  The  plea  of  Tamar,  "  no  such
thing  ought  to  be  done  in  Israel,"  is  interesting,  as  showing  that  the  sentiment  was
prevalent  amongst  the  Israelites,  morally  imperfect  as  they  were,  that  they  were  not  to
be  as  the  nations  around  them ;  that  practices  prevalent  elsewhere  were  altogether  out
of  keeping  with  their  position  and  calling.  "It  may  be  so  elsewhere ;  but  it  must  not
be  BO  m  Israel."  A  similar  sentiment  as  to  what  is  suitable  and  becoming  is  appealed
to  in  the  New  Testament.  Christians  are  exhorted  to  act  "  as  becometh  saints"  (Eph.
V.  3 ;  Bom.  xvi.  2),  to  "  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord,"  "  worthy  of  their  vocation,"  etc
(Col.  1.10;  Eph.iv.  1).

I.  The  grounds  of  such  a  sentiment.  Why  should  the  people  of  God  regard
themselves  as  under  special  obligations  to  live  pure  and  holy  lives  ?  1.  The  character
of  their  Ood.  "  Te  shall  be  holy,  for  I  am  holy  "  was  the  language  of  God  to  Israel
(Lev.  xi.  44) ;  and  it  was  repeated  to  Christians  (1  Pet.  i.  15,  16).  The  injunction
could  not  have  been  addressed — cannot  now — to  the  worshippers  of  other  gods.  2.  ITieir
own  consecration  to  Ood.  Israel  was  separated  by  God  from  other  people  to  ha  his  own
people,  devoted  to  the  practice  of  purity  and  righteousness  (Lev.  xx.  24,  26).  All
their  history,  laws,  and  institutions  had  this  for  their  aim,  and  were  adapted  to  it.  In
like  manner  Christians  are  "  called  to  he  saints  "  (Bom.  i.  7),  chosen  of  God,  "  that  they
should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  him  in  love"  (Eph.  i.  4).  The  Son  of  Gfod
is  called  Jesus,  because  he  came  to  "  save  his  people  from  their  sins  "  (Matt.  i.  21).
The  purpose  of  his  love  and  self-sacrifice  for  them  is  to  "  redeem  them  from  all  iniquity,
and  purify  unto  himself  a  people  for  his  own  possession,  zealous  of  good  works  "
(Titus  ii.  14,  Bevised  Version).  This  aim  is  expressed  by  the  rite  by  which  they  are
consecrated  to  God  and  introduced  into  his  kingdom— it  is  a  baptism,  a  washing  from
unclfeanness.  For  this  they  are  united  into  a  holy  fellowship,  with  sacred  ministriei
knd  services,  and  godly  discipline ;  and  all  the  inspired  instructions  and  admonitiona


842  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL         [cit.  tin.  1-3


addreesed  to  them,  and  expounded  to  them  by  their  teachers,  have  manifestly  the  same
end  and  tendency.  With  all  and  above  all,  the  Spirit  which  dwells  amongst  them
and  gives  life  and  reality  to  all  their  communion,  worship,  and  service,  is  the  ffolg
Spirit,  and  his  work  is  to  regenerate  and  sanctify  their  nature,  and  produce  in  them
all  goodness.  3.  The  tuonders  hy  which  they  have  been  redeemed  amd  amsecrated.
Ancient  Israel,  by  a  long  succession  of  supernatural  revelations,  marvellous  miracles,
and  providential  interpositions.  The  Church  of  Christ,  by  the  incarnation  of  the
Eternal  Word,  and  all  that  followed  in  the  life,  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension
of  our  Lord,  and  the  miraculous  bestowment  and  works  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Yea,  every
true  Christian  is  himself,  as  such,  a  product  of  the  Spirit's  supernatural  power,  being
"bom  again,"  "born  of  the  Spirit"  (John  iii.  3,  6).  Thus  it  is  that  this  "holy
nation  "  is  perpetuated  in  the  earth.  4.  ITwir  privileges  and  hopes.  "  The  children  of
Israel "  were  "  a  people  near  unto  God  "  (Ps.  cxlviii.  14).  He  was  their  "  Portion ; "
they  enjoyed  his  special  presence,  guidance,  government,  and  defence.  In  a  yet  more
emphatic  sense  Christians  have  God  as  their  God,  enjoy  constant  union  and  communion
with  him,  and  are  assured  of  his  love  and  sympathy,  care  and  protection.  Moreover,  to
them  is  given,  more  clearly  and  fully  than  to  the  Old  Testament  Church,  the  hope  of
eternal  life.  And  what  is  this  hope  ?  It  is  that  of  seeing  God  and  beins  like  him
(1  John  iii.  2),  of  becoming  "  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any
such  thing,  but .  .  .  holy  and  without  blemish "  (Eph.  v.  27),  presented  "  faultless
before  the  presence  of  his  glory  "  (Jude  24).  It  is  to  be  admitted  into  the  "  New
Jerusalem,"  into  which  nothing  unholy  can  enter  (Rev.  xxi.  27).  The  condition  of
realizing  this  blessedness  is  purity  of  heart — that  "  holiness  without  which  no  man  shall
see  the  Lord"  (Matt,  v,  8;  Heb.  xiL  14).  It  is  clear  that  in  such  a  community
nothing  unholy  "  ought  to  be  done,"  however  common  elsewhere.  Such  things  are
utterly  inconsistent  with  their  position,  their  knowledge,  their  professions,  and  their
prospects.

n.  The  conduct  wmoH  this  bentimbnt  condemnb.  We  need  not  dwell  on  gross
sensuality,  such  as  that  against  which  the  words  of  the  text  were  first  used.  They
were  appropriate  then,  because  the  standard  of  morality  "  in  Israel "  was  so  much
higher  in  respect  to  such  practices  than  in  the  surrounding  nations.  But  the  respect-
able part  of  general  society  in  our  time  and  country  recognizes  "no  such  thing"  as
Amnon  proposed  as  lawfuL  And  as  to  many  other  departments  of  morality,  the  moral
standard  of  society  has  been  elevated  by  the  influence  of  Christianity.  In  using  the
words,  therefore,  we  do  well  to  think  of  practices  which  are  permitted  or  at  least
thought  lightly  of  by  others,  but  which  are  nevertheless  contrary  to  the  precepts  or
spirit  of  our  religion.  Amongst  these  may  be  named ;  1.  Selfishness.  Including
covetousness,  worldly  ambition,  illiberality,  etc.,  with  the  disregard  or  violation  of  the
claims  and  rights  of  others  that  are  allied  to  them.  These  are  common  enough  in
Christian  countries,  but  ought  not  to  exist  amongst  Christian  people,  whose  religion  is
a  product  of  Divine  love,  whose  great  Leader  and  Master  is  the  incarnation  of  love,  who
have  received  numberless  precepts  enjoining  the  love  of  others  as  of  themselves,  and
have  been  assured  that  love  is  greater  than  faith  and  hope  (1  Cor.  xiiL  13),  much  greater,
then,  than  religious  ceremonies,  and  ecclesiastical  forms  and  observances.  Covetous-
ness in  particular  is  closely  associated  in  the  New  Testament  with  sensuality,  as  a  vice
not  even  to  be  named  amongst  Christians,  and  is  declared  to  be  idolatry  (Eph.  v.  3,  5 ;
Col.  iii.  5;  1  Cor.  v.  10,  11).  2.  Pride.  Whether  of  rank,  or  wealth,  or  intellect.
Holy  Scripture,  in  both  Testaments,  abounds  in  precepts  and  examples  against  pride.
The  Lord  Jesus  "humbled  himself"  in  becoming  man,  and  in  the  whole  of  his  life  on
earth,  and  frequently  enjoined  humility  on  bis  disciples,  and  reproved  every  indication
of  a  proud  spirit  in  them.  Common,  therefore,  as  pride  is  in  the  world,  "  no  such  thing
ought  to  be  in  the  Church.  3.  Similar  remarks  may  be  made  as  to  unkindnest,  the
revengeful  spirit,  the  unforgiving  spirit,  quarrelsomeness,  uncharitableness,  evil-speaking,
and  the  like.  4.  To  these  may  be  adiei  frivolity,  gaiety — dissipation,  a  life  of  mere
amusement,  with  no  serious,  worthy  purpose  or  pursuit.  These  are  not  becoming  in
those  who  are  enjoined  to  work  out  their  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ;  to  be
sober  and  vigilant  because  of  the  activity  of  Satan  in  seeking  their  destruction ;  to
deny  themselves,  etc.  (Phil.  iL  12 ;  1  Pet.  v.  8 ;  Luke  ix.  23).  5.  Indifference  to  the
(piritual  welfare  of  others.    The  gospel  brings  into  prominence  the  claims  which  men


ett.  xln.  1— 3D.]         THE  SECOJMD  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  341


haye  upon  Christians  in  this  respect.  Jesus  very  solemnly  warns  against  "offending,"
Others,  even  the  least,  hy  doing  or  saying  what  would  lead  them  into  sin  or  hinder  their
salvation  (Matt,  xviii.  6,  7).  He  repeatedly  teaches  his  disciples  that  he  gave  them
light  in  order  that  they  might  "  shine  before  men,"  and  so  lead  them  to  glorify  God
(Matt.  V.  14 — 16 ;  Mark  iv.  21,  22).  St.  Paul  commends  the  Philippians  for  their
"  fellowship  in  furtherance  of  the  gospel,"  and  urges  them  to  "  strive "  on  its  behalf
(Phil.  i.  5,  27,  Revised  Version).  St.  Peter  enjoins  that  "  as  every  man  hath  received
the  gift "  he  should  use  it  for  the  good  of  others,  in  teaching  and  ministering  (1  Pet.
iv.  10, 11).  And  in  general,  the  cause  of  Christ  is  committed  to  his  disciples,  that
they  may  sustain  and  extend  it  both  by  active  service  and  by  pecuniary  gifts.  To  the
discharge  of  this  duty  by  others  we  owe  our  own  Christian  privileges  and  character.
If  we  disregard  it,  we  display  ingratitude,  unfaithfulness  to  our  Lord,  insensibility  to
his  great  love  to  ourselves.  Unconcern  as  to  the  salvation  of  men  is  natural  enough
in  men  of  the  world,  but  "  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  "  found  amongst  Christians.

Finally,  in  the  absence  of  specific  precepts,  we  may  settle  many  a  doubt  as  to  our
duty  by  considering  whether  the  act  or  habit  in  question  is  suitable  and  becoming  in
those  who  profess  themselves  earnest  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ ;  whether  it  is  in  har-
mony with  his  spirit  and  character,  and  conducive,  or  at  least  not  hostile,  to  our  spiritual
benefit,  or  that  of  others. — G.  W.

Ver.  13. — Fools  in  Israel.  Sad  as  was  the  case  of  the  injured  Tamar,  that  of  her
wicked  brother  was  sadder  still.  She  was  outraged,  but  innocent ;  he  was  "  as  one  of
tlie  fools  in  Israel."

I.  Wicked  men  are  "  fools."  The  term  is  often  used  in  Holy  Scripture  as  syno-
nymous with  "  godless,"  "  lawless,"  "  sinful ; "  especially  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  where
pisty  and  holiness  are  designated  "  wisdom."  The  folly  of  sinners  appears  in  that :
1.  iTieir  life  is  opposed  to  right  reason.  To  wisdom,  as  recognizable  by  the  intellect
and  moral  sense,  and  as  revealed  in  the  Sacred  Word.  They  reject  the  guidance  of
"  the  only  wise  God  " — the  Infinite  and  All-perfect  Wisdom.  This  is  true,  not  only  of
gross  and  brutal  sinners  like  Amnon,  but  of  the  most  refined  and  intellectual.  Either
they  know  not  how  to  live,  or,  worse,  will  not  live  according  to  their  knowledge.  Of
many  in  our  day  we  may  use  the  words  of  St.  Paul  (Rom.  i.  22),  "  Professing  them-
selves to  be  wise,  they  became  fools."  2.  2%ey  act  contrary  to  their  own  well-being.
They  reject  the  greatest  blessings  for  this  life  and  the  next ;  and  choose  for  themselves
degradation,  destruction,  and  misery.  They  sell  their  souls  for  transient  gain  or
pleasure,  or  surrender  them  to  destruction  because  they  are  too  proud  to  learn  or  to
accept  salvation  as  a  free  gift  of  God  to  the  undeserving.  3.  They  are  in  many
instances  the  subjects  of  strange  and  fatal  delusions.  Believing  themselves  Christians,
though  destitute  of  the  most  essential  characteristics  of  Christ's  true  disciples ;  imagin-
ing themselves  safe  for  eternity  because  of  their  devotion  to  ritual  observances  and
dutiful  submission  to  their  priests,  although  they  continue  in  their  sins.

II.  Such  fools  aeb  to  be  todnd  even  "  in  Israel."  In  the  most  enlightened  com-
munities ;  in  Christian  congregations ;  in  the  purest  Churches.

III.  Fools  "  in  Isbabl  "  are  the  worst  fools.  The  most  guilty,  the  most  hopeless
of  the  class.  Because  of:  1.  The  light  which  shines  there.  Revealing  God,  truth,  duty,
sin  and  holiness,  life  and  death.  They  "  rebel  against  the  light "  (Job  xxiv.  13),
either  by  ignoring  it,  or  hating  and  consciously  rejecting  it.  2.  The  influences  enjoyed
there.  From  the  examples  of  good  men ;  from  the  institutions  and  life  of  the  Church ;
from  the  presence  and  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  The  privileges  accessible  there.
The  friendship  of  Christ  and  Christians ;  approach  with  assurance  to  the  throne  of  grace
in  prayer  for  all  needful  Divine  guidance  and  strength.  4.  The  convictions  produced
there.  Living  "  in  Israel,"  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  escape  impressions  and  convictions
which  especially  bring  wisdom  within  reach,  and  render  continuance  in  folly  and  sin
the  more  deplorable.  They  furnish  opportunities  of  repentance  and  salvation  which,
being  neglected,  greatly  increase  guilt.  5.  The  heavier  doom  incurred  there.  By
those,  that  is,  to  whom  the  advantages  there  enjoyed  become  occasions  of  greater  sin.
To  them  belong  the  "many  stripes"  (Luke  xii.  47)  and  the  "sorer  punishment"
(Heb.  X.  29).    Let  each  of  us,  then,  bo  concerned  not  to  be  "  as  one  of  the  focis  iq

oV—Qt:


344  THE  SECONB  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xiv.  1—33


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIV.


Ver.  1. — The  king's  heart  was  toward
Absalom,  Again  there  ia  a  diversity  of
view  as  to  the  right  rendering.  The  prepo-
gition  does  not  usually  mean  "  toward,"  but
"  against,"  and  is  so  rendered  in  ver.  13.
The  whole  phrase  occurs  again  only  in  Dan.
xi.  28,  and  certainly  there  implies  enmity.
The  whole  attitude  of  David  towards  Absa-
lom is  one  of  persistent  hostility,  and,  even
when  Joab  had  obtained  his  recall,  for  two
full  years  he  would  not  admit  him  into  his
presence.  What  has  led  most  commentators
to  force  the  meaning  here  and  In  ch.  xiii.
39  is  the  passionate  burst  of  grief  when
news  was  brought  of  Absalom's  death  fol-
lowing upon  the  auxions  orders  given  to  the
generals  to  be  careful  of  the  young  man's
life.  But  David  was  a  man  of  very  warm
affections,  and  while  this  would  make  him
feel  intense  sorrow  for  the  death  of  a  son  by
his  brother's  hand,  and  stern  indignation
towards  the  murderer,  there  would  still  lie
deep  in  the  father's  heart  true  love  towards
his  sinning  child,  and  Absalom's  fall  was
sad  enough  to  cause  a  strong  revulsion  of
feeling.  David's  grief  would  be  not  merely
for  the  death  of  his  son,  but  that  he  should
have  died  so  miserably,  and  in  an  attempt
BO  shameful.  Was  not,  too,  the  natural
grief  of  a  father  made  the  more  deep  by  the
feeling  that  this  was  the  third  stage  of  the
penalty  denounced  on  his  own  sin,  and
that  the  son's  death  was  the  result  of  the
father's  crime  ?

Ver.  2. — Tekoah.  This  town,  famous  as
the  birthplace  of  the  Prophet  Amos,  lay
upon  the  borders  of  the  grpat  wilderness
south-east  of  Jerusalem.  As  it  was  only
five  miles  to  the  south  of  Bethlehem,  Joab's
birthplace,  he  had  probably  often  heard
tales  of  this  woman's  intelligence ;  and,
though  he  contrived  the  parable  himself,
yet  it  would  need  tact  and  adroitness  on
the  woman's  part  to  give  the  tale  with
tragic  effect,  and  answer  the  king's  ques-
tions with  all  the  signs  of  genuine  emotion.
If  her  acting  was  bad,  the  king  would  see
thiough  the  plot,  and  only  by  great  skill
would  his  heart  be  so  moved  as  to  force  him
to  some  such  expression  of  feeling  as  would
serve  Joab's  purpose.

Ver.  4. — When  the  woman  of  Tekoah
spake.  All  the  versions  and  several  maiiu-
Bcripts  read,  as  the  sense  requires,  "  when
the  woman  of  Tekoah  came.'  There  is  an
interesting  article  in  De  Eossi,  fixing  with
much  probability  the  twelfth  century  as  the
date  of  this  error.  Though  Absalom  sub-
cequently  (oh.  zr,  4)  complained  of  the  lax


administration  of  justice  in  the  realm,  yet
evidently  this  woman  had  the  right  of
bringing  her  suit  before  the  king ;  and  we
may  be  sure  that  Joab  would  take  care  that
nothing  unusual  was  done,  lest  it  should
awaken  the  kind's  suspicions.  But  possibly
there  was  a  want  of  method  in  judicial
matters,  and  very  much  was  left  in  the
hands  of  the  tribal  officers,  such  as  we  find
mentioned  in  Josh.  xxiv.  1.

Ver.  7. — The  whole  family.  This  does
not  mean  the  kinsfolk,  in  whom  such  a  dis-
regard of  the  mother's  feelings  would  have
been  cruel,  but  one  of  the  great  divisions
of  the  tribe  (see  note  on  the  mishpachah,  in
1  Sam.  XX.  6,  and  comp.  1  Sam.  x.  21).  In
ver.  15  she  rightly  calls  them  "the  people."
We  have  thus  a  glimpse  of  the  ordinary
method  of  administering  the  criminal  law,
and  find  that  each  portion  of  a  tribe  exer-
cised justice  within  its  own  district,  being
summoned  to  a  general  convention  by  its
hereditary  chief ;  and  in  this  case  the  widow
represents  it  as  determined  to  punish  the
crime  of  fratricide  with  inflexible  severity,
and  we  may  assume  that  such  was  the  usual
practice.  The  mother  sets  before  David  the
other  side  of  the  matter — her  own  loneliness,
the  wiping  out  of  the  father's  house,  the
utter  ruin  of  her  home  if  the  last  live  coal
on  her  hearth  be  extinguished.  And  in  this
way  she  moves  his  generous  sympathies  even
to  the  point  of  overriding  the  legal  rights  of
the  mishpachah.  In  modern  oommunitiea
there  is  always  some  formal  power  of  soften-
ing or  entirely  remitting  penalties  required
by  the  letter  of  the  law,  and  of  taking  into
consideration  matters  of  equity  and  even  of
feeling,  which  the  judge  must  put  aside;
and  in  monarchies  this  is  always  the  high
prerogative  of  the  crown.  And  we  will  de-
stroy the  heir  also.  The  Syriac  has  the
third  person,  "And  they  will  destroy  even  the
heir,  and  quench  my  coal  that  is  left,"  This
is  more  natural,  but  there  is  greater  pun-
gency in  the  widow  putting  into  the  mouth
of  the  heads  of  the  clan,  not  words  which
they  had  actually  spoken,  but  words  which
showed  what  would  be  the  real  effect  of
their  determination.  There  is  great  force
and  beauty  also  in  the  description  of  her
son  as  the  last  live  coal  left  to  keep  the
family  hearth  burning.  In  another  but
allied  sense  David  is  called  "  the  lamp  of
Israel "  (oh.  xxi,  17,  marg.).

Ver.  9. — The  iniquity  be  on  me.  The  king
had  given  a  general  promise  to  help  the
widow,  but  she  wants  to  lead  him  on  to  a
definite  assurance  that  her  son  shall  be  par-
doned. Less  than  this  would  not  help
Absalom's  case.   Instead,  therefore,  of  with-


oa.  XIV.  1—33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


845


drawing,  she  represents  herself  as  dissatis-
fied, and  pleads  for  full  forgiveness ;  and  as
this  would  be  a  violation  of  the  letter  of  the
Levitical  Law,  in  order  to  remove  David's
supposed  scruples,  she  takes  upon  herself  the
penalty.

Ver.  11. — I  pray  thee,  let  the  king  re-
member, etc.  TheniuB  says  that  the  woman
plays  well  the  part  of  a  talkative  gossip,
but  really  she  was  using  the  skill  for  which
Jaab  employed  her  in  bringing  the  king  to
give  her  son  a  free  pardon.  Nothing  sliort
of  this  would  serve  Absalom,  who  already
was  so  far  forgiven  as  to  be  in  no  fear  of
actual  punishment.  It  is  remarkable  that
David  does  not  hesitate  finally  to  grant  this
without  making  further  Inquiry,  though  he
must  have  known  that  a  mother's  pleas  were
not  likely  to  be  very  impartial.  Moreover,
while  in  ver.  9  she  had  acknowledged  that
there  might  be  a  breach  of  the  law  in  par-
doning a  murderer,  she  now  appeals  to  the
mercy  of  Jehovah,  who  had  himself  provided
limits  to  the  anger  of  the  avenger  of  blood
(see  Numb.  xzxv.).  He  had  thus  shown
himself  to  be  a  God  of  equity,  in  whom
mercy  triumphed  over  the  rigid  enactments
of  law.  The  words  which  follow  more
exactly  mean,  "  That  the  avenger  of  blood
do  not  multiply  destruction,  and  that  they
destroy  not  my  son."  Moved  by  this  en-
treaty, the  king  grants  her  sou  full  pardon,
under  the  solemn  guaranty  of  an  oath.

Ver.  13. — Against  the  people  of  Ood.
Very  skilfully,  and  so  as  for  the  meaning
only  gradually  to  unfold  itself  to  the  king,
slie  represents  the  people  of  Israel  as  the
widowed  mother,  who  has  lost  one  son ;  and
David  as  the  stern  clan-folk  who  will  de-
prive her  of  a  second  though  guilty  child.
But  now  he  is  bound  by  the  solemn  oath  he
lias  taken  to  her  to  remit  the  penalty ;  for
literally  the  words  are,  and  iy  the  Mng'i
epeaking  this  word  he  is  as  one  guilty,  unless
he  fetch  home  again  his  banished  one.  She
claims  to  have  spoken  in  the  name  of  all
Isiael,  and  very  probably  she  really  did
express  their  feelings,  as  Absalom  was  very
popular,  and  the  people  saw  in  Tamar's
wrong  a  sufficient  reason  for,  and  vindica-
tion of,  his  crime.

Ver.  14.— Neither  doth  God,  etc.  This
translation  is  altogether  wrong.  What  the
woman  says  is,  "  G-od  taketh  not  life  [He-
brew, 'a  soul']  away, but  thinketh  thoughts
not  to  banish  from  him  his  banished  one."
Her  argument  is  that  death  is  the  common
lot,  and  that  there  is  no  way  of  bringing
back  the  dead  to  life.  But  though  death  is
thus  a  universal  law,  yet  God  does  not  kill.
Death  is  not  a  penalty  exacted  as  a  punish-
ment, but,  on  the  contrary,  he  is  merciful,
and  when  a  man  has  sinned,  instead  of  put-
ting him  to  death,  he  ia  ready  to  forgive  and


welcome  back  one  rejected  because  of  hii
wickedness.  The  application  is  plain.  The
king  cannot  restore  Amnon  to  life,  and  neither
must  he  kill  the  guilty  Absalom,  but  must
recall  his  banished  son.  The  argument  is
full  of  poetry,  and  touching  to  the  feelings,
but  is  not  very  sound.  For  God  requires
repentance  and  change  of  heart ;  and  there
was  no  sign  of  contrition  on  Absalom's  part.
The  power  of  the  woman's  appeal  lay  in
what  she  sav  of  God's  nature.  He  is  not
intent  on  p  .  jhing,  nor  bent  on  carrying
out  the  sentbiices  of  the  Law  in  their  stem
literalness ;  but  he  is  ready  to  forgive,  and
"  deviseth  devices "  to  bring  home  those
now  separate  from  him.  There  is  also
much  that  is  worth  pondering  over  in  the
distinction  between  death  as  a  law  of  nature,
and  death  as  a  penalty.  The  one  is  neces-
sary, and  often  gentle  and  beneficial;  bat
death  as  a  penalty  is  stern  and  terrible.

Vers.  15 — 17. — Now  therefore  that  I  am
oome,  etc.  The  woman  now  professes  to
return  to  her  old  story  as  the  reason  for  her
importunity,  but  she  repeats  it  in  so  eager
and  indirect  a  manner  as  to  indicate  that  it
had  another  meaning.  Instead,  too,  of  thank-
ing the  king  for  fully  granting  her  petition,
she  still  flatters  and  coaxes  as  one  whose
purpose  was  as  yet  ungained.  The  king's
word  is,  for  rest  (see  margin):  it  puts  an
end  to  vexation,  and,  by  deciding  matters,
sets  the  disputants  at  peace.  He  is  as  an
angel  of  God,  as  God's  messenger,  whose
words  have  Divine  authority ;  and  his  office
is,  not  to  discern,  but  "  to  hear  the  good  and
the  evil,"  unmoved,  as  the  Vulgate  renders
it,  by  blessing  and  cursing.  His  mission  is
too  high  for  him  to  be  influenced  either  by
good  words  or  by  evil,  but  having  patiently
heard  both  sides,  and  calmly  thought  over
the  reasons  for  and  against,  he  will  decide
righteously.  Finally,  she  ends  with  the
prayer.  And  may  Jehovah  thy  God  be  with,
thee  !  By  such  words  she  hoped  to  propi-
tiate the  Mng,  who  now  could  not  faU  to
see  that  the  errand  of  the  woman  was  personal
to  himself.

Ver.  19. — Is  the  hand  of  Joab  with  thee
in  aU  thisl  The  "not,"  inserted  by  the
Authorized  Version,  must  be  omitted,  as  it
alters  the  meaning.  The  king  really  was
uncertain,  and  asked  dubiously,  whereas
the  Authorized  Version  admits  oidy  of  an
afSrmative  answer.  David  had  seen  the
general  drift  of  the  woman's  meaning,  but
she  had  involved  it  in  too  much  obscurity
for  him  to  do  more  than  suspect  that  she
was  the  mouthpiece  of  Joab,  who  was  stand-
ing by,  and  whose  face  may  have  given
signs  of  a  more  than  ordinary  interest  in
the  woman's  narrative.  She  now  frankly
acknowledges  the  truth,  but  skilfully  inter-
weaves much  flattery  in  her  anawer.    And


S4«


THE  SECOND  BOOlt  OP  SAMUEL.         ten,  xir.  1—33.


her  words  are  far  more  expressive  tban  what
U  given  in  onr  versionB.  Literally  they
are,  By  thy  life,  0  my  lord  the  king,  there  is
nothing  on  the  right  or  on  the  left  of  all  that
my  lord  the  king  hat  epoken.  His  words  bad
gone  straight  to  the  mark,  without  the
slightest  deviation  on  either  side.

Ver.  20.— To  fetoh  about  this  form  of
ipeeoh ;  correctly,  as  in  the  Bevised  Version,
to  change  the  face  of  the  matter  hath  thy
servant  Joab,  etc.  The  matter  was  that
referred  to  in  ver.  15,  which  the  king  now
anderstands  to  refer  to  Absulom.  For  in
the  earth,  translate  in  the  land.  The  Hebrew
has  no  means  of  distinguishing  the  wider
and  narrower  significations  of  the  word;
but  while  the  king  would  be  flattered  by  the
supposition  that  he  knew  all  that  happened
in  his  dominions,  the  assertion  that  he
knew  all  that  was  done  in  all  the  world
was  too  broad  and  general  to  be  agreeable.
The  Authorized  Version  has  been  misled  by
the  thought  of  what  an  angel  might  know ;
but  while  it  was  a  compliment  to  ascribe  to
the  king  an  angel's  intelligence  in  his  own
sphere,  it  would  have  been  bad  taste  and
unmeaning  to  ascribe  to  him  omniscience.
Nay,  it  is  an  assumption  without  proof  that
even  an  augel  knows  "all  things  that  are
in  the  earth."

Ver.  21. — I  have  done  this  thing.  This
is  an  Oriental  form  of  assent,  just  as  we  say
in  English,  "  It  is  done,"  that  is,  as  good  as
done,  now  that  the  order  is  given.  A  few
manuscripts,  nevertheless,  support  a  Mas-
Boretie  emendation  (K'ri),  namely,  "Thou
hast  done  this :  go  therefore,"  ete.  But  both
the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate  agree  with  the
written  text  (K'tib),  and  it  is  less  flat  and
commonplace  than  the  supposed  emendation.

Ver.  22.— In  that  the  king  hath  fulfilled
the  request  of  his  servant.  Eeil  concludes
from  this  that  Joab  had  often  interceded  for
Absalom's  pardon,  and  that  this  had  made
the  king  suspect  him  of  being  the  prime
mover  in  the  affair.  But  this  is  to  force  the
meaning.  Joab  now  stood  confessed  as  the
person  who  had  brought  the  woman  before
the  king,  and  had  employed  her  to  gain
a  hearing.  Had  he  been  allowed  to  plead
freely,  her  intervention  would  not  have  been
necessary.  We  have  seen,  too,  that  the
king's  suspicions  have  been  made  in  the
Authorized  Version  much  stronger  than
they  really  were.  Many  commentators  also
assume  that  Joab  had  a  friendship  for
Absalom,  but  there  are  few  traces  of  it  in
his  conduct,  and  more  probably  Joab  was
chiefly  influenced  by  politic  motives.  It
was  injurious  to  the  well-being  of  the  nation
that  there  should  be  discord  and  enmity
between  tiie  king  and  his  eldest  son,  and
that  tiie  latter  should  be  living  in  exile.
The  K'ri,  thy  leiruit,  placed  in  the  margin^


is  to  be  decidedly  rejected,  with  all  othei
attempts  of  the  Massorites  to  remove  little
roughnesses  of  grammar.

Ver.  24. — Let  him  turn  to  his  own  house,
eto.  This  half-forgiveness  was  unwise,  and
led  to  unhappy  results.  It  seems  even  as
if  Absalom  was  a  prisoner  in  his  house,
as  he  could  not  leave  it  to  visit  Joab.  Still,
we  must  not  assume  that  even  kind  treat-
ment would  have  made  Absalom  a  dutiful
son.  or  weaned  him  from  his  ambitious  pur-
poses. The  long-plotted  revenge,  carried  out
so  determinately,  gives  us  a  low  idea  of  his
character,  and  probably  during  these  two
years  of  waiting,  he  had  brooded  over  David's
criminal  leniency,  and  regarded  it  as  a  jus-
tification for  his  own  foul  deed.  And  now,
when  allowed  to  come  home,  but  still  treated
unkindly,  thoughts  condemnatory  of  hia
father's  conduct  were  cherished  by  him.  It
seems,  too,  as  if  a  protracted  punishment  is
always  dangerous  to  the  moral  character  of
the  criminal.  And  must  we  not  add  another
reason?  Absalom,  we  may  feel  sure,  saw
with  indignation  the  growing  influence  of
Bathsheba  over  the  king.  A  granddaughter
of  Ahithophel,  she  was  sure  to  be  an  adept
in  those  intrigues  in  which  the  women  of  a
harem  pass  their  time;  and  even  if,  upon
the  whole,  we  form  a  favourable  judgment
upon  her  character,  yet  undoubtedly  she
was  a  very  able  woman,  and  could  have  no
affection  for  Absalom.

Ver.  26. — ^Iwo  hundred  shekels  after  the
king's  weight.  Unless  the  royal  shekel  was
smaller  than  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary,
the  weight  of  Absalom's  hair  would  be  six
pounds.  But  we  cannot  believe  that  the
king's  shekel  was  not  full  weight;  for  to
imagine  this  is  to  suppose  that  the  king
had  tampered  with  tiie  coinage;  for  the
shekel  was  a  coin  as  well  as  a  weight,  being
originally  a  fixed  quantity  of  silver.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  David  had  amassed  too  much
silver  to  have  need  of  resorting  to  what  is
the  expedient  of  feeble  and  impoverished
princes.  Nor  can  we  grant  an  error  in  the
number ;  for  the  versions  all  agree  with  the
Hebrew,  so  that  any  mistake  must,  at  all
events,  be  of  great  antiquity.  Josephus  says
that  Solomon's  body-guard  wore  long  hair
powdered  with  gold  dust,  and  undoubtedly
Absalom's  hair  was  something  extraordinary
(ch.  xviii.  9).  But  six  pounds  is  so  enormous
a  weight  that  it  is  just  possible  that  some
ancient  copyist  has  enlarged  the  number,  to
make  it  accord  with  a  legend  current  among
the  people,  in  which  this  feature  of  Absa-
lom's beauty  had  been  exaggerated.

Ver.  27. — ^Three  sons.  Their  names  are  not
given,  because  they  died  early  (see  ch.  xviii
]  8).  O  f  his  daughter  Tamar,  named  after  her
aunt,  and,  like  her,  possessed  of  great  beauty,
the  Beptuagint  adds  that  she  became  the


ca.xiv.l-85J         THE  SECOND  SOOE  OF  SAMUEL.


m


wife  of  Eehoboam,  and  mother  of  Abijah.
la  1  Kings  xv.  2  we  are  told  that  Abijah's
mother  was  "Maaohah  the  daughter  of
Abishalom;"  and  in  2  Chron.  xiii.  2  that
her  name  was  "Michaiah  the  daughter  of
Uriel  of  Gibeah."  We  thus  gather  that
Tamar  married  Uriel,  and  that  it  was  the
granddaughter  of  Absalom  who  became
Kehoboam's  queen.  It  is  strictly  in  ac-
cordance with  Hebrew  custom  to  call  Absa-
lom's granddaughter  his  daughter,  and,  as
Uriel  was  a  man  of  no  political  importance,
he  is  passed  over,  as  the  narrator's  object
was  to  show  that  Abijah's  mother  was
sprung  from  the  handsome  and  notorious
son  of  David  (see  also  2  Chron.  xi.  20,  21).

Ter.  29. — ^Absalom  sent  for  Joab.  As
Joab  had  been  the  means  of  bringing  him
back,  Absalom  naturally  regarded  him  as  a
friend.  But  Joab  had  performed  the  former
service  for  other  reasons,  and  it  does  not
seem  as  if  he  really  had  any  affection  for
Absalom.

Ver.  30. — Go,  and  set  it  on  Are.  The
Hebrew  has,  Go,  and  I  will  set  it  on  fire.
Absalom  represents  himself  as  doing  in  his
own  person  what  his  servants  were  to  be  his
instruments  in  accomplishing.  The  versions,
however,  agree  with  the  Massorites  in  sub-
stitnting  the  easy  phrase  in  the  text.  But
few  languages  are  so  indifferent  to  persons
and  ntunbers  as  the  Hebrew.

Ver.  31. — Then  Joab  arose.  This  high-
handed proceeding  forced  Joab  to  pay  the
wished-for  visit  But,  while  we  cannot  ac-
quit Absalom  of  petulance,  we  must  not
regard  his  act  as  one  of  angry  revenge ;  had
it  been  so,  Joab  would  have  openly  resented
it,  and  he  was  quite  capable  of  making  even
the  heir-apparent  feel  his  anger.  It  was
probably  intended  as  a  rougli  practical  joke,
which  taught  Joab  better  manners,  and
which  he  must  laugh  at,  though  with  in-
ward displeasiua.


Ver.  32. — If  there  be  (any)  iniquity  in  me,
let  him  kill  me.  The  word  "any,"  wrongly
inserted  in  the  Authorized  Version,  ii
omitted  in  the  Eevised  Version.  It  would
have  been  monstrous  for  Absalom  to  profess
innocence,  with  the  murder  of  Amnon  fresh
in  his  memory ;  but  the  phrase,  "if  there  be
iniquity  in  me,"  means,  "if  my  offence  is
still  unpardoned."  If  year  after  year  he
was  to  be  treated  as  a  criminal,  then  he
would  rather  be  put  to  death  at  once.  And
Absalom's  plea  succeeds.  Joab,  who  had
been  unwilling  to  visit  the  prisoner,  now
consents  to  act  as  mediator,  reports  to
David  his  son's  vexation  at  such  long-
continued  coldness,  and  obtains  full  pardon.

Ver.  S.S.— Ihe  king  kissed  Absalom.  The
father's  kiss  was,  as  in  the  case  of  tha
prodigal  son  (Luke  it.  20),  the  sign  of  per-
fect reconciliation,  and  of  the  restoration  of
Absalom  to  his  place  as  a  son,  with  all  its
privileges.  But  God's  pardon  was  immediate
(ch,  3di,  13),  while  David's  was  unwilling,
and  wrung  from  him.  The  kiss,  we  may
feel  quite  sure,  was  preceded  by  a  conversa-
tion between  David  and  his  son,  the  record
of  which  is  omitted  simply  for  the  sake  of
brevity.  Evidently  it  satisfied  the  king,
and  ended  in  the  kiss  which  gave  the  son
all  he  desired.  But  whatever  may  have
been  his  professions,  Absalom's  subsequent
conduct  is  proof  that  he  still  regarded
Amnon's  death  as  a  just  retribution  for  his
conduct  to  Tamar,  and  secretly  cherished
a  sullen  anger  against  Iiis  father  for  not
having  punished  the  wrong-doer  himself.
It  was  the  contrast  between  his  own  five
years  of  punishment  and  the  mere  verbal
reiiroof  which  was  all  that  Amnon  had  to
suBer  for  his  shameless  conduct,  which
rankled  in  Absalom's  mind,  and  gave  him
an  excuse  fat  finally  plotting  his  father's
ruin.


HOMILBTICa.

Vem.  1—20. — ^The  faett  are :  1.  Joab,  observing  that  the,  Itfn^s  keart  was  still  adverse
to  Absalom,  devised,  in  order  to  bring  him  round  to  a  different  feeling,  that  a  wise
woman  from  Tekoah  should  appear  before  him  and  plead  a  cause.  2.  The  woman
appears  before  the  king,  and  narrates  as  facts  certain  circumstances,  namely,  (1)  that
she  was  a  widow,  and  that  on  two  of  her  sons  falling  into  strife,  one  slew  the  other;
(2)  that  all  the  rest  of  the  family  connections  were  urging  that  the  survivor  should
be  put  to  death,  much  to  her  grief.  3.  David,  touched  with  her  story,  undertakes  to
grant  her  request,  whereupon  the  woman,  recognizing  the  usage  in  such  cases,  desires
to  exonerate  the  king  from  blame  in  this  exercise  of  his  clemency.  4.  The  king  giving
her  a  renewed  assurance  of  safety,  should  any  reproach  her  for  thus  trading  on  hia
clemency,  she  again,  by  a  reference  to  God's  presence  and  knowledge,  dwells  on  the
Toyal  promise;  whereupon  he  swears  most  solemnly  that  the  son  shall  be  spared.  5.
The  woman  then  ventures  to  bring  the  royal  concession  to  her  to  bear  on  the  case  of
Absalom,  by  suggesting  that,  in  granting  her  request  as  a  just  one,  he  virtually  brings
\)Uim  on  himseLf  for  cherishing  revengeful  feeling  against  a  banished  one,  and  be  oaa


S4d  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  hv.  1—33,

rf  the  people  of  God.  6.  She  fortifies  her  argument  by  alluding  to  man's  inevitable
mortality  and  to  God's  way  of  dealing  with  wrong-doers,  namely,  that  he  devises
means  of  restoring  the  exile.  7.  Reverting  to  her  own  suit,  she  next  pretends  that
the  people's  desire  for  vengeance  has  caused  the  fear  -Which  prompts  this  her  request,
believing,  as  she  does,  in  the  king's  magnanimity  and  superior  discrimination.  8.  David,
perceiving  that  she  is  presenting  a  parabolic  case,  now  asks  whether  Joab  is  not  at  the
origin  of  it,  which,  with  an  Oriental  compliment  to  his  discernment,  she  candidly
admits.

Astuteness  in  human  affairs.  There  are  a  few  facts  which,  put  together,  seem  to
warrant  the  conclusion  that  David  was  hostile  in  mind  to  Absalom,  and  that  therefore
the  expression  in  ver.  1,  rendered  "  toward,"  should  be  "  adverse  to,"  hy_.  These  facts  are,
his  evident  sorrow  for  Amnon;  the  related  flight  of  Absalom  and  absence  for  three  years,
but  no  mention  of  any  messenger  of  peace  being  sent  to  him ;  the  necessity  of  the  device
of  the  wise  woman  to  awaken  kindly  interest  in  the  king ;  and  his  unwillingness  to  see*
Absalom  for  two  years  after  having  yielded  to  the  force  of  the  argument  for  his  restora-
tion (ver.  28).  It  was  in  the  endeavour  to  overcome  the  king's  hostility  that  Joab
manifested  the  remarkable  astuteness  of  his  nature.  Taking  Joab's  conduct  in  this
instance  as  our  exemplar,  we  may  get  an  insight  as  to  what  constitutes  the  astuteness
in  human  affairs  which  then  gave  and  always  has  given  some  men  an  advantage  over
others.

I.  There  is  a  shrewd  observation  op  events.  Joab  was  not  a  mere  military
man,  whose  range  of  observation  was  limited  by  his  profession.  He  had  his  eyes  wide
open  to  notice,  in  their  bearing  one  on  the  other,  the  various  incidents  in  the  history  of
Israel,  embracing  both  the  private  and  public  life,  king  and  people.  'ITie  remark  that
he  perceived  that  the  king's  heart  .was  adverse  to  Absalom  is  but  an  index  of  the  man's
character.  Some  generals  would  simply  have  confined  their  attention  to  military  duties,
paying  little  or  no  heed  to  what  passed  in  the  mind  of  the  king,  and  what  was  the
effect  of  his  attitude  on  the  nation.  The  widely  and  minutely  observant  eye  is  a  great
blessing,  and,  when  under  the  government  of  a  holy  purpose,  is  a  means  of  personal  and
relative  enrichment.  All  men  astute  in  affairs  have  cultivated  it  vrith  zeal,  and  its
activity  and  range  account  In  part  for  the  superiority  they  have  acquired  over 'their
fellow-creatures.  Human  life  is  a  voluminous  book,  ever  being  laid,  page  by  page,  before
us ;  and  he  who  can  with  simple  and  steady  glance  note  what  is  there  written,  and
treasure  up  the  record  for  .future  use,  has  procured  an  advantage,  which,  in  days  to
come,  will  be  converted  into  power.  "  The  wise  man's  eyes  are  in  his  head ;  but  the  fool
walketh  in  darkness"  (Eccles.  ii.  14).

n.  There  is  a  cwnstant  looking  ahead.  This  characteristic  of  Joab  is  seen  in
many  instances  (e.g.  ch.  xi.  16,  18 — 20 ;  xii.  28 ;  iiii.  19).  He  was  a  man  who  sought
to  forecast  the  issue  of  events  at  present  transpiring,  or  conditions  that  might  arise  to
modify  his  plans.  He  seemed  to  see  the  complications  that  might  arise  should  Absalom
be  kept  in  perpetual  exile,  botli  on  account  of  his  fine  manly  bearing  being  popular
with  the  people,  and  of  the  possible  strife  should  the  king  die,  and  the  exile  then
return  to  contend  with  a  nominee  of  David's.  The  prophetic  forecast  is  a  vision  of
coming  reality ;  the  forecast  of  astuteness  is  the  clever  calculation  of  the  hearings  of
passing  events  on  what  may  be,  the  tracking  out  by  anticipation  the  working  on  men
and  things  of  the  various  forces  now  in  operation.  In  so  far  as  a  man  possesses  this
quality,  he  certainly  is  a  power  in  society,  and  his  opinions  with  reference  to  contin-
gencies, and  the  provision  wherewith  to  meet  them,  should  have  weight.  The  degree  to
which  some  men  injure  themselves  and  others  because  they  have  no  prevision,  no
power  of  anticipating  events,  is  often  very  painful.  In  so  far  as  this  kind  of  prevision
can  be  cultivated  in  early  years,  apart  from  the  cunning  with  which  it  is  sometimes
allied,  so  will  be  the  gain  for  the  entire  life.

III.  There  is  a  seeking  of  personal  ends  combined  with  public  good.  Selfish
cunning  looks  on,  but  looks  only  for  self,  and  cares  not  for  general  interests.  Astuteness
looks  on,  but  seeks  deliberately  to  combine  the  personal  and  the  general  good.  The
former  may  be  a  prominent  consideration,  but  the  latter  has  a  real  place  sincerely

flven.    In  Joab  we  have  a  striking  example  of  this.     Even  in  the  killing  of  Abner
oab  probably  felt  that  the  presence  of  such  a  rival  might  bring  on  troubles  in  Israel,


OH.  XIV.  1— 33.J  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  349

When,  by  complicity  with  David's  sin  (ch.  xi.  17),  he  advanced  his  own  amhition  by
gaining  power  over  David,  he  had  an  idea  that  the  country  would  be  the  stronger  for
king  and  general  to  be  of  one  mind.  His  sending  for  David  to  conquer  Babbah  (ch,
xii.  26 — 30)  promoted  his  own  influence  over  the  king,  and  at  the  same  time  gave  the
nation  the  advantage  of  a  regal  triumph.  No  doubt  he  foresaw  that,  as  Absalom  wag
now  the  eldest  son,  he  might  possibly  come  to  the  throne,  and  hence  it  was  important
to  secure  his  favour  by  being  the  instrument  of  procuring  his  recall ;  at  the  same  time,  he
saw  it  would  be  better  for  king  and  people  that  this  family  quarrel  should  be  adjusted.
There  is  no  astuteness  in  pure  benevolence,  and  there  is  no  pure  benevolence  in  astute-
ness. Its  characteristic  is  that  it  uses  a  knowledge  of  men  and  things,  and  an
anticipation  of  coming  and  possible  events,  in  such  a  way  as  to  secure  personal  interests
in  promoting  public  good.  There  is  too  much  conscience  for  pure  selfishness,  and  too
little  for  pure  benevolence.  These  children  of  the  world  are  certainly  wise  in  their
generation  (Luke  xvi.  8).

IV.  There  is  a  special  kkowlbd&b  op  humah  natubb,  and  of  the  means  op
ACTING  on  it.  Joab  knew  men — their  foibles  and  their  strength.  He  had  acquired  that
kind  of  penetration  which  comes  of  having  much  to  do  with  men  of  divers  tempera-
ments and  preferences.  He  knew  how  to  touch  David's  natural  amhition  at  Babbah
(ch.  xii.  28-— 30).  He  understood  how  he  would  feign  displeasure  and  sorrow  at  the
assault  which  brought  about  the  death  of  Uriah,  and  how  the  courtiers  could  be  put  otf
suspicion  (ch.  xii.  20,  21).  He  knew  that  a  story  appealing  to  generous,  magnanimous
feelings  would  be  sure  to  touch  the  king's  heart  (ver.  2).  This  knowledge  of  men
is  an  inestimable  treasure  for  practical  purposes.  Some  persons  never  acquire  it,  and
consequently  are  at  a  great  disadvantafje  in  the  struggle  for  life.  Others  avail  them-
selves of  it  for  low,  cunning  purposes,  which  are  more  becoming  fiends  than  men.  The
astute  man,  whose  character  is  toned  by  a  moral  aim,  uses  his  knowledge  to  avoid  some
and  secure  the  favour  of  others,  and  also  to  bring  men  round  to  the  furtherance  of
the  objects  he  has  in  hand.  There  is  not  in  such  a  quality  the  simplicity  which  some-
times passes  for  Christian  guilelessnesa;  it  may  even  seem,  in  some  cases,  to  savour  of
cunning ;  but  there  are  instances  in  which  it  combines  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  and
the  harmlessness  of  the  dove.  The  Apostle  Paul  was  certainly  an  astute  Christian.
He  knew  men,  and  how  to  deal  with  them  on  Christian  principles.  His  addresses  before
his  judges  and  his  Epistles  bear  witness.

General  lessons.  1.  All  who  wish  to  be  effective  in  Christian  service  should
endeavour  to  extend  their  knowledge  of  human  nature ;  for  it  is  said  of  Christ  that  he
knew  what  was  in  man  (John  ii.  25).  2.  In  seeking  a  more  thorough  knowledge  of
human  nature,  we  should  avoid  the  risking  the  habitual  feeling  of  distrust  and  suspicion
which  many  of  the  sad  facts  of  life  may  well  suggest ;  for  our  Saviour,  who  knew  alt
that  is  in  man,  the  worst  and  the  best,  acted  in  his  relations  to  them  on  the  principle
of  generous  consideration.  3.  We  should  see  to  it  that  the  intellectual  qualities  of
astuteness  are  allied  in  us  with  Christian  qualities  that  will  save  us  from  low  cunning
and  mere  utilitarian  motive,  and  make  duty  the  guide  of  action.  4.  It  behoves  us  to
make  use  of  all  innocent  means — "  wise  women,"  if  need  be — sparables,  or  direct  argument,
to  bring  others  to  act  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God.  5.  In  dealing  with  men  we
should  endeavour  to  touch  the  better  springs  of  action  in  their  nature,  and  assume  that
they  are  prepared  to  do  justly  and  generously.

Means  to  hring  hack  the  banished.  The  woman  of  Tekoah  showed  her  wisdom  in
very  deftly  blending  the  argument  suggested  by  Joab  with  thoughts  and  pleadings
designed  to  meet  the  successive  replies  of  the  king.  To  gain  her  point,  she  proceeded
from  the  assumption  of  his  natural  sympathy  with  a  distressed  widow  up  to  the  over-
whelming argument  derived  from  a  consideration  of  God's  method  in  dealing  with  his
children  when  they  are,  by  reason  of  their  sins,  banished  from  his  presence.  There
may  seem  to  be  a  weakness  in  the  parallel  she  implies  between  the  case  of  her  sons  and
the  case  of  Absalom  and  Amnon,  inasmuch  as  the  death  of  Amnon  was  brought  about
by  a  deliberate  design,  while  the  death  of  the  other  was  a  consequence  of  a  sudden
strife ;  but  in  reality  she  was  right.  The  strife  of  her  sons  was  "  in  the  field,"  but  there
may  have  been  antecedents  which  led  to  that  mortal  conflict;  and,  so  far  as  concerned
the  sons  of  David,  it  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a  family  quarrel,  brought  on  by


S50  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xiv.  1-33.

the  wrong  done  to  Absalom  in  the  ruin  of  his  sister,  and  the  wise  woman  evidently
regarded  the  whole  affair  as  a  "  strife  in  the  field."  Provocation  had  been  given  by
Amnon,  and  the  anger  of  Absalom,  thus  aroused,  occasioned  his  death.  Amnon  would
not  have  died,  but  for  his  attack  on  the  honour  of  Absalom.  Two  things  in  the  final
argument  come  home  to  David.  (1)  The  reference  to  the  ways  of  God.  David,  as  a
pious  man  and  as  a  righteous  ruler,  rejoiced  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord ;  to  him  they  were
just  and  true  and  wise ;  they  were  the  professed  model  of  his  own  conduct.  This
moral  argument  to  a  good  man  is  perfectly  irresistible.  (2)  The  reference  to  Go(Fs
banished  ones.  David  had  of  late  been  a  banished  one.  He  had  known  the  anguish  of
being  far  from  his  heavenly  Father,  a  spiritual  exile,  no  longer  permitted  or  inclined
to  the  close  and  blessed  fellowship  of  former  times.  The  widow's  word  "banished"
brought  back  the  sad  remembrance,  followed  in  a  moment  by  the  remembrance  of  the
mercy  that  had  blotted  out  all  his  sins  and  restored  him  to  the  joys  of  salvation.  Wise
woman,  thus  to  touch  the  deepest  and  tenderest  springs  of  the  heart  I  Consider  what
is  implied  in  the  blessed  words,  "  He  doth  devise  means,  that  his  banished  be  not
expelled  from  him."

L  Man's  condition  bt  reason  or  bin  is  one  of  banishment.  As  truly  as
Absalom  was  now  banished  from  David  as  a  consequence  of  his  transgressions,  so  man
is  separated  from  God.  The  information  given  us  of  the  fallen  angels  is  slight,  but  it
amounts  to  this — that  they  are  banished  because  of  sin  (2  Pet.  ii.  4 ;  Jude  6).  Our
first  parents  were  banished  from  Paradise  because  of  sin.  Those  who  are  not  welcomed
at  last  to  heaven  will  have  to  refer  the  banishment  to  sin  (Matt.  vii.  23 ;  zxv.  45,  46  ;
Bev.  xzi.  27).  The  state  of  mankind,  while  sin  is  loved  and  followed,  is  one  of  aliena-
tion. The  carnal  mind  is  not  subject  to  the  Law  of  Qod.  We  are  as  sheep  going
astray.  Apart  from  any  positive  decree,  the  fact  of  sin 'constitutes  moral  severance
from  God.  The  child  wanders,  heedless  of  the  Father's  love,  and  all  the  moral  laws  of
the  imiverse  combine  with  psychological  laws  to  keep  him,  while  in  that  state,  outside
the  blessed  sphere  of  fellowship  and  rest.  It  was  instinctive  for  Absalom  to  flee  from  the
face  of  the  king.  He  banished  himself  by  his  deed,  and  the  king  could  not  render  it
otherwise.  It  is  instinctive  for  one  in  sin  to  flee  irom  the  face  of  the  holy  God,  and
the  Eternal,  though  omnipotent,  cannot  render  it  otherwise.  The  constitution  of  nature
renders  it  inevitable.  To  suppose  that  it  is  an  arbitrary  arrangement  is  to  imagine  an
impossibility.  No  power  can  make  sin  equivalent  to  holiness,  and  consequently  no
power  can  confer  on  sin  the  blessedness  of  tie  Divine  favour.

II.  God  nevebtheless  begabds  the  banished  as  his.  Absalom  was  the  son  of
David,  though  an  exiled  wanderer.  David  felt  for  him  the  mingled  sorrow  and  dis-
]ileasure  of  a  just  and  good  parent.  The  change  jof  character  and  position  does  not
destroy  natural  relationship.  Adam  was  God's  wandering  child  when,  with  sad  heart,
he  turned  his  back  on  Paradise.  The  prodigal  son  is  represented  as  being  a  son,  though
wasting  his  substance  with  riotous  living.  Our  Saviour,  in  teaching  us  how  to  pray,
would  have  us  think  of  God  as  our  Father.  The  whole  tenor  of  his  life  on  earth
was  to  cause  sinful  men  to  feel  that  God  the  Father  looks  on  them  as  his,  even  while
in  rebellion  against  his  will.  Had  he  disowned  us  in  this  respect,  there  would  indeed
have  been  no  hope.  It  is  much  to  know,  in  our  sins  and  errors  and  dreadful  guilt,
that  we  are  God's  offspring,  that  he  has  a  proprietary  right  in  us,  and  thinks  of  us  as
only  a  father  can  think  of  his  children  (Ezek.  xzxiii.  11).

III.  God  makes  provision  fob  BRmaiNO  the  banished  back  to  himself.  "He
doth  devise  means,  that  his  banished  be  not  expelled  from  him."  Wonderful  words  for
that  age,  and  from  a  widow !  The  great  and  precious  truth  is  the  comfort  of  myriaris
all  over  the  world,  and  the  occasion  of  wonder  and  joy  in  heaven.  Such  an  incidental
statement  reveals  to  tis  that  the  pious  of  Israel  in  those  times  possessed  much  fuller  and
clearer  knowledge  concerning  God  and  his  salvation  than  they  sometimes  get  credit
for,  or  would  be  inferred  from  the  outlines  of  national  history  contained  in  the  Bible.
The  history  is  designed  to  trace  the  great  historic  line  along  which  Christ  came,  and
the  fact  that  God  was,  through  the  Jewish  people,  working  out  a  great  purpose  to  be
gradually  revealed  in  Christ.  We  are  not  told  of  all  the  detailed  teaching  of  holy  priests
and  prophets.  We  may  fairly  regard  this  wonderful  statement  of  the  widow  as  an  index
of  truth  widely  possessed,  distinct  from  the  provision  of  such  means  of  blessing  as  the
brazen  serpent  and  the  cities  of  refuge.    There  is  a  twofold  sense  in  which  the  expre*-


OH.  XIV.  1—33,]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  851

sion  may  bo  under  stood.  1.  God  provides  mecms/or  the  redemption  of  the  world.  The
Mosaic  economy  was,  in  some  of  its  institutions,  a  shadow  of  the  provision  that  centres
in  the  cross  of  Christ.  Our  salvation  is  of  God.  If  he  does  not  find  means  to  cover
sin  and  influence  our  evil  hearts,  there  is  no  hope.  We  cannot,  and  are  unwilling.  Ha
deviseth  means  (John  iii  16).  There  is  an  intimation  of  the  wisdom  requisite.  Sin
produces  such  confusion  in  the  moral  sphere,  and  runs  so  against  the  order  of  govern*
ment,  and  lays  so  strong  a  hold  on  the  human  heart,  that  only  infinite  wisdom  could
find  out  the  way  by  which  we  might  come  back  to  God.  Hence  the  atoning  sacrifice
of  Christ,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  appointment  of  faith  as  the  condition  and  of
preaching  as  the  instrumentality,  are  all  ascribed  to  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God.
It  is  by  the  Church  thus  saved  that  the  wisdom  of  God  is  revealed  to  all  ages  (Rom.  iii.
23—26;  iv.  16;  viii.  14;  1  Cor.  i.  21—30;  Bph.  iii.  10).  2.  Ood  provides  means  for
the  restoration  of  those  who  backslide  from  him.  By  chastisements,  by  the  voice  of
prophets  and  conscience,  by  the  pleading  of  the  Spirit,  by  the  varied  events  of  provi-
dence causing  the  erring  child  to  feel  how  evil  and  bitter  a  thing  it  is  to  depart  from
God,  he  opens  a  way  by  which  they  are  brought  back  again.  David  knew  this.  "  He
restoreth  my  soul"  (Ps.  xxiii.  3).  How  wonderfully  wise  and  gentle  these  means  often
are  is  well  known  to  many  who  once  were  as  sheep  going  astray,  and  had  lost  tha
blessedness  of  fellowship  formerly  known.

"  Eetum  I  .  .  .  O  chosen  of  my  love  I
Fear  not  to  meet  thy  beckoning  Saviour's  view
Long  ere  I  called  thee  by  thy  name,  I  knew
That  very  treacherously  thou  wouldst  deal ;
Now  I  have  seen  thy  ways,  yet  I  will  heal.
Beturn  1    Wilt  thou  yet  linger  far  from  me  ?
My  wrath  is  turned  away,  I  have  redeemed  thee."

('Life  Mosaic,'  by  F.  B.  Havergal,  p.  72.)

IV.  God's  ways  in  dbalino  with  his  banished  ones  are  a  model  for  us.  The
wise  woman  had  spoken  of  the  ways  of  God  with  his  banished  ones  in  order  to  induce
David  to  follow  in  the  same  course  with  respect  to  Absalom — the  implication  being  that,
when  once  a  good  man  is  reminded  of  the  ways  of  God,  he  will  without  further  urging
act  in  the  same  manner.  The  parallel  between  the  relation  of  Absalom  to  David  and  the
relation  of  a  sinner  to  God  may  not  in  every  detail  be  perfect;  but  there  being  a  resem-
blance in  the  substantial  facts — ^banishment  of  a  son  because  of  high-handed  deeds  of
wrong — it  follows  that  there  should  be  a  resemblance,  in  the  bearing  of  the  earthly
father-king  to  his  son,  to  that  of  God  to  his  sinful  chUd.  The  two  features  of  God's
bearing  toward  his  own  are :  (1)  He  does  not  take  away  life ;  but  (2)  devises  means  by
which  those  who  deserve  to  die  are  brought  back  to  him  (ver.  14).  The  reference
evidently  is  not  to  the  legal  code,  which  in  several  cases  recognizes  capital  punishment
for  certain  offences,  for  ends  civil  and  social,  but  to  the  general  principle  and  method
of  God's  dealing  with  sinful  man  in  his  highest  relations  to  himself.  He  desireth  not
the  death  of  the  sinner,  and  therefore  he,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  finds  out
some  way  of  bringing  about  a  restoration  to  favour  consistent  with  his  own  honour  and
the  claims  of  righteousness.  In  the  New  Testament  this  example  is  set  forth  in  strong
»nd  varied  terms  (Matt.  v. 43 — 48;  vi.  14, 15;  Eph.  iv.  31,  32).  The  fact  that  there
is  a  model  in  God's  bearing  toward  us  is  only  half  the  truth.  It  is  our  duty  and  privi-
lege to  act  according  to  it.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  kindly  disposed.  We  are  to  "  devise
devices  " — take  the  initiative — in  seeking  to  restore  those  who  may  have  done  wrong  and
merited  our  displeasure.  This  is  the  hard  lesson  taught  by  Christ,  which  even  his  own
people  are  so  slow  to  learn.  When  will  Christians  be  as  Christ  was  and  act  as  Christ
did?    It  is  often  easier  to  sing  hymns,  hear  sermons,  and  bow  the  knee  in  prayer.

General  lessons.  1.  The  proper  course  for  the  poor  and  sorrowful  and  oppressed
is,  after  the  example  of  this  widow,  to  have  recourse  to  him  who  sitteth  as  King  in
Zion ;  for  his  ear  is  ever  open  to  their  cry,  and  there  is  an  open  way  of  access  to  his
throne.  2.  In  all  our  approaches  to  the  supreme  throne  we  may,  with  more  confidence
than  was  displayed  by  this  widow  in  David,  act  on  the  assumption  of  a  mercy  and
Wisdom  that  never  I'aU.  3.  It  is  not  only  a  solace  to  the  weary  heart,  but  a  sure  means
of  help  in  our  domestic  cares,  if  we  bring  them  before  the  notice  of  our  God.     4.  We


352  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xit.  1— 3S.

see  how  often  the  best  and  most  exalted  of  men,  in  their  conduct  and  feelings,  come  far
short  of  the  character  they  should  manifest,  and  how  they  may  require  even  the  teach-
ing which  comes  from  the  spirit  and  deeds  of  the  poor  and  troubled  to  raise  them  to  a
higher  level  of  life.  5.  It  is  possible  for  good  men  to  be  kind  and  generous  towards
others,  and  at  the  same  time  be  unaware,  till  forced  to  see  it,  that  there  are  features  in
their  personal  conduct  day  by  day  not  in  accord  with  the  general  generosity  which  they
recognize  and  display.  6.  We  need  to  be  reminded  that  the  death  of  those  we  have
oared  for,  should  it  come  about  while  we  are  not  acting  kindly  toward  them  (ver.  14),
is  an  unalteiable  event,  a  change  which  renders  acts  of  kindness  impossible — as  water
spUt  on  the  ground  cannot  be  gathered  up  again ;  and  consequently  we  should  seize
passing  opportunities  of  blessing  them.  7.  The  sinful  state  of  man  is  as  unnatural  as  is
exile  to  a  king's  son,  and  should  ever  be  so  represented  (Isa. i. 2, 3).  8.  All  thanks  and
praise  are  due  to  God,  in  that  he  needed  not  any  one  to  procure  our  restoration ;  all  is
of  his  own  eternal  love  and  free  grace.  9.  We  should  distinguish  between  the  human
setting  of  a  truth  and  the  truth  itself.  To  "devise  a  means"  is  a  human  way  of
expressing  the  truth  that  God,  from  the  beginning,  before  the  foundation  of  the  world
(Eph.  i.  4;  Eev.  xiii.  8),  ordained  and  arranged  for  our  salvation,  but  that  we  see  the
pre-arrangement  coming  into  form  subsequent  to  the  advent  of  sin,  and  think  of  it  as
being  devised  to  meet  that  event  after  its  occurrence.  We  say,  "  the  sun  rises,"  but  it
does  not.  Our  forms  of  expression  consequent  on  the  appearance  of  things  to  UB  is  not
the  exact  utterance  of  absolute  truth.  10.  The  force  of  a  Divine  example,  when  brough  t
to  bear  on  men  who  recognize  the  government  of  God,  will  often  compel  conviction  when
other  means  fail.

Vers.  21 — 33. — Imperfect  reconciliation.  T^e  facts  are :  1.  David,  referring  to  the
promise  he  bad  made,  sends  Joab  to  bring  Absalom  from  Geshur,  Joab  expressing  in
lowly  form  his  thanks  for  the  king's  gracious  attention  to  his  request.  2.  On  Absalom's
return  he  is  ordered  to  abide  in  his  own  house,  and  not  to  see  the  king's  face.  3.  The
personal  beauty  of  Absalom  is  famous  throughout  Israel,  and  of  his  four  children  the
only  daughter  is  also  reputed  to  be  fair.  4.  For  two  years  Absalom  remains  in  Jerusa-
lem without  seeing  the  king,  whereupon  he  becomes  dissatisfied,  and  sends  to  Joab,
hoping  to  send  him  to  the  king.  5.  Joab,  for  some  unexpressed  reason,  declines  to  give
heed  to  the  message,  and,  as  a  consequence,  Absalom  orders  his  field  of  barley  to  be
burnt.  6.  This  event  bringing  Joab  to  him,  Absalom  remonstrates  with  the  king
through  him  against  this  semi-imprisonment,  and  demands  to  see  the  king.  7.  The
king  yielding  to  the  request,  Absalom  presents  himself,  and  receives  his  father's  kiss.
Whatever  may  have  been  the  secret  causes  operating  on  both  sides,  the  course  of
the  narrative  clearly  shows  us  that,  although  Joab  seemed  to  have  gained  his  point
through  the  wise  woman  of  Tekoah,  yet  the  restoration  of  Absalom  to  his  father's  love
and  confidence  was  not  perfect.  There  are,  in  the  account  here  given  of  the  relation
of  David  to  his  son,  illustrations  of  several  important  truths  or  recurring  incidents  of
human  life.

I.  Concessions  with  ebsbbvations.  In  the  interview  with  Joab  (vers.  21,  22)
David  distinctly  intimated  to  him  that  he  had  "done  this  thing" — consented  to  Absa-
lom's return  in  consequence  of  having  been  caught  within  the  coils  of  the  parabolic
pleadings  of  the  wise  woman  whom  he  had  employed  for  that  purpose.  Apart  from
the  force  of  the  argument,  the  king  was  no  doubt  willing  in  some  degree  to  comply  with
the  request  of  so  influential  a  man,  especially  as  he  knew  more  of  his  own  life  than  was
comfortable  to  reflect  upon.  Joab  regarded  it  as  a  work  of  special  grace  that  his  wishes
were  thus  considered ;  and  most  probably  he  went  to  Geshur  to  fetch  Absalom,  with
cheerful  expectations  of  a  speedy  removal  of  family  difficulties.  But  although  the  king
kept  the  letter  of  his  concession  in  Absalom's  permitted  return,  it  is  evident  that  he
either  repented  of  his  original  decision  or  had  made,  when  giving  it,  a  private  reserva-
tion that,  though  returned,  be  should  not  give  him  a  hearty  welcome.  Both  Joab  and
Absalom  (ver.  '24)  appear  to  have  reported  themselves  at  the  king's  house,  in  expectation
of  full  restoration,  for  he  "returned  to  his  own  house."  Such  concessions  as  this  are
valuable  in  so  far  as  they  confer  privileges  otherwise  not  attainable,  but  they  lose  much
value  in  being  extracted  by  pressure  and  especially  by  the  reservation  which  becomes
subsequently  known.     It  had  been  well,  perhaps,  had  conditions  been  stated  from  the


OH.  XIV.  1—33.]  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  363


u  ■'''^  possible,  our  agreements  and  promises  should  be  expressed  in  terms  that  cover
all  we  think  and  intend.  The  mutual  confidence  of  society  depends  on  the  cultivation
01  frankness  and  candour.  The  first  inconvenience  is  the  least.  The  promises  of  Q-od
are  "yea  and  Amen."  There  is  no  disappointing  reservation  for  lu  when  we  arrive  at
the  palace  of  the  great  King.

n.  Embarbassmbnts  op  paternal  oondwot.  Great  consideration  is  due  to  David
when  we  endeavour  to  form  an  estimate  of  his  conduct.  His  position,  brought  on,  it  is
true,  by  his  own  sad  sin,  was  most  perplexing.  On  the  one  side  there  was  (1)  the
very  natural  and  great  displeasure  against  a  son  who  could  cherish  revenge  for  two
whole  years,  and  then  presume  to  take  upon  himself  the  vindication  of  justice,  thus
reflecting  on  royal  authority;  (2)  the  absolute  need  of  chastisement  for  a  young  man
of  violent  spirit  and  haughty  temper;  (3)  the  importance  of  maintaining  influence
over  the  people  by  not  seeming  to  palliate  the  violence  of  his  own  family ;  (4)  the
temptation  to  which  so  handsome  and  attractive  a  young  man  would  be  exposed  were
he  to  be  prematurely  welcomed  into  society  again ;  (5)  the  secret  influence  of  his
favourite  wife,  Bathsheba,  who  could  not  but  remind  him  of  the  claims  on  the  succession
of  the  son  specially  named  by  the  prophet  as  "beloved  of  the  Lord"  (oh.  xii.  24,  25).
1  hen  on  the  other  side  there  was  (1)  his  natural  yearning  over  a  hitherto  favourite
Bon,  the  more  so  as  he  feared  lest  he  should  fall  a  victim  to  evil  ways ;  (2)  Joab's
evident  interest  in  Absalom,  and  the  expediency  of  conciliating  so  powerful  a  man ;
(3)  the  near  connection  of  Absalom  with  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  the  danger  of  raising
up  a  party  should  there  be  an  appearance  of  harshness ;  (4)  the  remembrance  of  the
unqualified  promise  virtually  given  to  the  wise  woman  of  Tekoab.that  he  would  regard
God's  mercy  to  his  banished  ones  as  his  model ;  (5)  the  re9eotion  that,  after  his  own
dreadful  sin  in  the  case  of  Uriah,  God  had  restored  him  to  personal  favour.  Under  some
such  conflicting  influence  David  could  not  grant  all  that  was  desired.  Happily  modern
parents  have  not  to  decide  on  the  doom  of  fratricides ;  but  troubles  do  arise  which  place
them  in  most  embarrassing  circumstances.  Much  charity  is  needed  in  our  judgments
on  the  action  taken  in  oases  of  difficulty.  There  is  much  unknown  to  the  outward
observer.  It  is  important,  in  all  these  times  of  perplexity,  to  east  our  care  on  the  Lord,
and  seek  the  special  guidance  which  lie  has  promised.  Divine  influence  alone  can  keep
us  from  being  unduly  biassed  in  either  direction.  Our  decisions  may  mean  perpetual
weal  or  woe  to  children.

IIL  The  DrsoiPLiNB  or  partial  pbivilbob.  It  is  a  severe  but  wholesome  discipline
for  Absalom  to  be  kept  two  years  without  full  restoration.  Possibly  David  may  have
ascertained  from  others  that  his  temper  was  not  much  improved,  and  that  he  did  not
show  the  signs  of  penitence  or  regret  becoming  one  who  looked  for  full  restoration  to
paternal  favour.  Then,  also,  David  could  not  but  remember  that,  with  his  own  resto-
ration to  God,  there  was  attached  a  temporal  chastisement,  which,  while  it  did  not  touch
the  reality  of  the  Divine  forgiveness,  whs  designed  for  public  good ;  and  possibly  he  may
have  thought  that  the  privilege  of  returning  to  Jerusalem  only  might  be  accepted  as  a
sign  of  actual  personal  forgiveness,  and  at  the  same  time  put  Absalom  under  wholesome
restraints.  This  kind  of  discipline  does  exist  in  human  affairs  and  in  Church  life.
Children  and  men  are  caused  to  feel  that  some  inconvenience  has  resulted  from  their
conduct,  even  though  they  are  no  longer  punished.  lu  so  far  as  we  fall  in  with  the
natural  or  designed  tendency  of  this  discipline,  we  may  turn  its  annoyances  into  a  meai  s
of  recovery  from  the  moral  failings  which  have  been  our  bane.

IV.  The  perils  op  personal  attractions.  The  beauty  of  Absalom  is  referred  to
in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  that  he  was  not  only  aware  of  it,  but  that  it  exercised  J
fascinating  influence  over  others,  and  tended  to  gather  around  him  persons  likely  to  bn
influenced  by  personal  appearances,  and  therefore  not  the  most  helpful  to  one  who  needs
the  stimulus  and  support  of  high  moral  principles.  Personal  beauty  is  a  gift  of  God,
and,  were  not  sin  in  the  world  as  a  disturbing  element  in  the  physical  and  moral
development  of  the  human  race,  the  probability  is  that  the  average  beauty  of  form  and
expression  would  equal  or  surpass  what  is  now  regarded  as  exceptional.  Unfortunately,
it  is  sometimes  allied  to  a  vain  and  frivolous  spirit,  and  in  that  case  it  becomes  a  snare.
There  are  instances  in  whict  beauty  has  been  associated  with  the  devout  earnest  spirit
of  religion,  and  has  been  made  tributai'y  to  obtaining  a  hallowed  influence  over  others.
Special,  prayer  and  strong  safeguards  are  required  for  our  sons  and  daughters  whose

n.  SAMUEL.  2  A


354  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xiv.  1—33.

personal  attractions  may  lay  them  open  to  the  flatteries  and  friendships  of  the  imwise
and  unholy.

V.  The  intimations  op  danqbeous  tendencies.  It  was  natural  for  Absalom  to
be  restless  under  the  restraint  of  two  years,  though,  had  his  spirit  been  very  lowly  and
peniteut,  he  would  have  kept  it  within  due  limits.  The  treatment  of  Joab  was  an
intimation  that  the  daring  temper  which  slew  Amnon  was  still  there.  He  who  could
set  a  field  of  barley  on  fire  in  order  to  get  his  messages  attended  to  was  capable,  unless
the  tendencies  were  checked,  of  producing  a  more  serious  conflagration.  The  presence
within  a  young  man  of  strong  passions,  a  violent  temper,  a  hatred  of  restraint  or  love  of
pleasure,  is  a  sign  of  danger.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  forces  to  work  their  way  outward.
If  we  say,  "  the  child  is  father  to  the  man,"  we  may  also  say  that  the  moral  forces  within
are  the  creators  of  the  life  without.  Unless  strong  counter-influences  are  brought  to  bear
to  neutralize  their  action  or  to  extirpate  them,  they  will  gain  power  by  being  daily
cherished,  and  a  free,  jovial,  handsome  Absalom  may  become  the  notorious  rebel,  whose
hand  turns  against  his  own  father.  Human  life  exhibits  such  developments  still.
Young  men  should  interrogate  their  own  nature,  and  fairly  face  the  moral  dangers  that
may  lie  there,  before  their  power  renders  introspection  and  suppression  difficult  if  not
impossible.  Those  who  have  charge  of  the  young  should  note  signs  of  struggling
forces,  and  adapt  the  moral  .education  according  to  the  individual  requirement.


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — ^20J — (Jerusalem.)  The  woman  of  Tekoah.  1.  In  David  "the  king"
we  here  see  that  fatherly  affection  may  come  into  conflict  with  regal  justice.  He  must
have  perceived  the  ill  eBects  of  sparing  Amnon,  aud  felt  constrained  to  punish  Absalom.
But  liis  grief  and  resentment  were  mitigated  by  the  lapse  of  time  (oh.  xiii.  39).  Never-
theless, though  prompted  by  natural  afi'ection  to  recall  his  son,  he  was  deterred  from
(icing  so  by  political  and  judicial  considerations.  And  to  overcome  his  reluctance
a  stratagem  was  devised,  which,  as  the  sequel  shows,  was  only  too  successfuL  For  by
his  weakness  towards  Absalom  "he  became  guilty  of  the  further  dissolution  of  tho
theocratic  rule  in  his  house  and  in  his  kingdom  "  (Erdmann).  2.  In  Joah  "  the  son  of
Zeruiah  "  (ch.  iii.  39)  we  see  that  a  man  may  promote  another's  interest  out  of  regard
for  his  own  (oh.  iii.  22 — 30;  xi.  16 — 21).  "He  may  have  been  induced  to  take  these
steps  by  his  personal  attachment  to  Absalom,  but  the  principal  reason  no  doubt  was
that  Absalom  had  the  best  prospect  of  succeeding  to  the  throne,  and  Joab  thought  this
the  best  way  to  secure  himself  from  punishment  for  the  murder  which  he  had  committed.
But  the  issue  of  events  frustrated  all  such  hopes.  Absalom  did  not  succeed  to  the
throne,  Joab  did  not  escape  punishment,  and  David  was  severely  chastised  for  his
weakness  and  injustice"  (Keil).  "Joab  formed  a  project  by  which  the  king,  in  his  very
capacity  of  chief  judge,  should  find  the  glimmering  fire  of  parental  love  suddenly  fanned
into  a  burning  flame  "  (Ewald).  3.  In  the  "■  wise  woman  "  of  Tekoah  we  see  that  skilful
persuasion  may  so  work  upon  natural  feeling  as  to  induce  a  course  which  is  neither
expedient  nor  just.  The  cleverness,  insight,  readiness  of  speech,  tact,  boldness  mingled
with  caution,  and  perseverance,  which  she  displayed  (under  the  direction  of  Joab,  who
perhaps  "  stood  by  at  some  distance  whilst  she  addressed  herself  to  the  king,"  ver.  21)
are  remarkable.  Such  qualities  may  be  employed  for  a  good  or  an  evil  purpose.  In
oontrast  with  the  reproof  of  Nathan,  her  persuasion  (1)  was  inspired,  not  by  God,  but  by
man ;  (2)  was  addressed,  not  to  conscience,  but  to  pity  and  afifection  ;  (3)  aimed,  not  to
manifest  the  truth,  but  to  obsciu'e  it ;  (4)  and  "  to  give  effect,  not  to  the  convictions  of
duty,  but  to  the  promptings  of  inclination  "  (Blaikie) ;  (5)  sought  to  do  this,  not  sincerely
and  openly,  but  insincerely  and  insidiously ;  (6)  and  not  by  proper  motives  alone,  and
honest,  though  unpleasant  speech,  but  by  improper  motives  and  "with  flattering  lips ;"
and  (7)  produced,  not  a  beneficial,  but  an  injurious  effect.  In  her  persuasive  address  we
Botice,  more  particularly —

I.  An  affectino  but  fiotitiods  appeal.  .(Vers.  4 — 11.)  "And  the  woman  of
Tekoah  came  to  the  king,"  etc.,  making  her  appeal  for  help  in  an  acted  parable,  like  that
of  Nathan  (ch.  xii.  1 — 4).  "Parables  sped  well  with  David;  one  drew  him  to  repent
of  hit  own  sin,  another  to  remit  Absalom's  punishment "  (Hall).    This  parable  of  th*


OH.  XIV.  1—33.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  355

hapless  son,  or  the  avengers  of  blood,  was  intended,  adapted,  and  employed :  1.  To  excite
compassion  toward  the  unfortunate!  a  son  who  had  slain  his  brother  "unawares"
(Numb.  XXXV.  11)  in  the  field,  and  whose  life  was  imperilled  by  the  avengers,  "the
whole  family  "  (ver.  7) ;  and  his  widowed  mother,  whose  only  stay  and  comfort  he  was,
whose  "  live  coal  which  is  left "  would  be  quenched,  and  whose  husband's  "  name  and
posterity  "  would  be  destroyed.  "  The  power  of  the  discourse  lies  in  the  fact  that  they
are  represented  as  already  doing  what  their  words  show  to  be  their  purpose."  2.  Ta
procure  protection  against  the  avengers;  who,  according  to  ancient  custom,  sought  to
take  his  life  (oh.  iii.  22 — 30) ;  their  conduct  being  portrayed  as  persistently  pitiless  (ver.
11),  "  and  actuated,  not  so  much  by  a  wish  to  observe  the  Law,  as  by  covetousness  and
a  desire  to  share  the  inheritance  among  themselves"  (Kirkpatrick);  obscurely  suggestive
of  the  hostility  exhibited  toward  Absalom.  "  Her  circumstances  (as  a  widow  and  living
at  some  distance  from  Jerusalem,  which  rendered  the  case  difficult  to  be  readily  inquired
into),  her  mournful  tale,  her  widow's  weeds,  her  aged  person,  and  her  impresbive  manner,
all  combined  to  make  one  united  impression  on  the  king's  heart"  (A.  Clarke).  "In  all
this  she  intended  to  frame  a  case  as  like  to  David's  as  she  could  do ;  by  determining
which  in  her  favour,  he  might  judge  how  much  more  reasonable  it  was  to  preserve
Absalom.  But  there  was  a  wide  difference  between  her  case  and  his,  however  plausible
soever  their  likeness  might  appear  "  (Patrick).  3.  To  obtain  assurance  of  preservation
from  the  king ;  which  was  given  at  first  as  an  indefinite  promise  (ver.  8),  afterwards
(through  her  importunity)  in  a  more  definite  engagement  (ver.  10),  and  finally  confirmed
by  an  oath  (ver.  11).  "  Had  David  first  proved  and  inquired  into  the  matter  which
with  cunning  and  deceit  was  brought  before  him,  he  would  not  have  given  assurance
with  an  oath  "  (Schlier).  "  We  should  learn  from  David's  example  to  be  more  guarded
over  all  our  feelings  and  affections,  even  such  as  are  in  their  proper  degree  essential  to
a  religious  character  "  (Lindsay).  "  Neither  shalt  thou  countenance  a  poor  man  in  his
cause  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  3).

IL  An  effective  but  fallacious  akgumbnt  (vers.  13, 14) ;  based  upon  the  assumed
resemblance  between  the  case  of  the  hapless  son,  of  whom  she  had  spoken,  and  that  of
Absalom,  to  whom  she  alluded  as  fully  as  she  might  venture.  For  her  appeal  had  "  a
double  sense,"  or  twofold  purpose — one  clear,  immediate,  feigned,  subordinate ;  the
other  dark,  ultimate,  real,  supreme ;  and  to  the  latter  she  now  comes.  "  And  why
dost  thou  think  [devise]  such  a  thing  [as  that  of  which  I  am  now  permitted  to  speak]
against  people  of  God?  And  by  the  king's  speaking  this  word  ['As  Jehovah  liveth,
etc.,  ver.  11]  he  is  as  one  that  is  guilty  [or,  '  self-condemned '],  in  that  the  king  does  not
bring  back  his  tanished  one"  " My  banished  one ! "  he  must  have  thought,  as  the
main  object  of  the  woman's  appeal  flashed  upon  him.  But  she  went  on:  "For  w«
must  die  ['  shall  surely  die,'  Gen.  ii.  17],  and  are  as  water  poured  out  on  the  ground  that
is  not  gathered  up.  And  God  takes  not  away  a  soul  \nephesh,  equivalent  to  '  individual
life'],  but  thinks  thoughts  [devises  devices]  to  the  end  that  he  may  not  banish  from
him  [utterly]  a  banished  one."  She  thus  sought  to  persuade  the  king  to  recall  his  son
by :  1.  The  obligation  of  his  oath,  in  which  "  he  had  acknowledged  the  possibility  of  an
exception  to  the  general  rule  of  punishment  for  murder;"  sworn  to  save  her  son,  who
had  killed  his  brother  under  severe  provocation ;  and  was  consistently  bound  to  spare
and  restore  his  own  son  in  similar  circumstances.  But  the  difference  between  them,
here  kept  out  of  view,  was  fatal  to  the  argument.  Absalom's  crime  was  deliberately
planned,  executed  by  his  servants  under  his  order,  and  seen  by  many  witnesses.  2.
The  welfare  of  the  people  of  God,  involved  in  the  preservation  and  retiurn  of  the  heir
to  the  throne.  Although  the  king's  sons  and  the  whole  court  were  against  Absalom
(ver.  7),  a  large  party  of  the  people  was  in  his  favour.  But  the  general  welfare  would
have  been  more  promoted  by  his  just  punishment,  or  continuance  in  exile,  than  by  his
restoiation,  as  the  subsequent  history  shows.  3.  The  mortality  of  men — ^the  inevitable
and  irreparable  decease  of  Amnon,  Absalom,  the  king  himself;  the  consideration
of  which  should  induce  compassion  and  speedy  help,  lest  it  should  be  too  late.  But
"even  compassion,  amiable  as  it  is,  will  not  justify  our  violation  of  the  Divine  Law,
or  neglecting  the  important  duties  of  our  station "  (Scott).  4.  The  clemency  of  Qod  t
in  forbearance  and  long-suffering  toward  sinful  men,  and  devising  means  for  their
restoration  to  his  presence ;  such  as  David  himself  had  experienced  (ch,  xii.  13 ;  Ps.  IL
11).    His  example  should  be  imitated.    But  his  forbearance  b  limited — he  pardonf  only


356  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xiv.  1—33.

those  who  repent,  and  punishes  the  guilty ;  and  for  the  king  to  spare  the  guilty  on
insuBBcient  grounds,  or  pardon  the  impenitent,  would  be  to  harden  the  wicked  in  their
wickedness,  and  to  act  contrary  to  the  purpose  for  whigh  he  is  made  "  an  avenger  for
wrath  to  him  that  doeth  evil."  The  reasons  assigned,  though  excellent  in  themselves,
were  inapplicable  and  fallacious.  The  noblest  truths  may  be  perverted  to  a  bad
purpose.  A  weak  argument  appears  strong  to  one  who  is  already  disposed  to  accept
its  conclusion ;  and  is  a  sufficient  excuse  for  a  course  which  he  is  inclined  to  pursue.
By  the  manner  in  which  her  words  were  received  by  the  king,  the  "wise  woman"
perceived  that  her  point  was  practically  gained ;  enough  had  been  said,  and  leaving
it  to  work  its  effect  on  his  mind,  she  returned  to  the  ostensible  occasion  of  her  petition
for  help ;  and  "  now  she  would  go  home  happy  (she  said),  as  if  this  reference  to  the
kind's  behaviour  had  been  only  the  casual  chatter  of  a  talkative  woman  "  (P.  Thomson).
III.  An  APPEOPBIA.TB  BUT  FLATTEEiNQ  APOLOGY  for  intrusion  On  the  king  (vers.  15—
20) ;  expressive  of:  1.  The  anxious/ear  and  hope  with  which  she  had  been  impelled  to
make  her  request  (ver.  15).  2.  The  joyful  anticipation  and  grateful  assurance  of  rest
which  she  now  felt  (vers.  16,  17).  3.  Devout  admiration  and  praise  of  the  king,  on
account  of  his  wisdom  in  judgment;  with  a  prayer  for  his  prosperity:  "May  Jehovah
thy  God  be  with  thee  1 "  Fully  acknowledging  that,  as  the  king  surmised,  she  had  acted
under  the  direction  of  Joab,  "  in  order  to  bring  round  the  face  [aspect]  of  the  matter  "
(to  alter  Absalom's  relation  to  his  father),  she  again  commends  the  discernment  of  the
king  ;  "My  lord  is  wise,"  etc.  (vers.  18 — ^20).  "When  we  are  most  commended  for
our  discernment  we  generally  act  most  foolishly ;  for  those  very  praises  cloud  and
pervert  the  judgment "  (Scott).  "  And  the  king  said  unto  Joab,  Behold  now,  I  have
done  this  thing :  go  and  bring  the  young  man  Absalom  back  "  (ver.  21).  "  The  feelings
of  the  father  triumphed  over  the  duty  of  the  king,  who,  as  supreme  magistrate,  was
bound  to  execute  impartial  justice  on  every  murderer,  by  the  express  Law  of  God  (Gen.
ix.  9 ;  Numb.  xxxv.  30,  31),  which  he  had  no  power  to  dispense  with  (Deut.  xviii.  18 ;
Josh.  i.  8  i  1  Sam.  x.  25)  "  (Jamieson).  Although  neither  the  end  of  the  woman's  address
nor  some  of  the  means  she  employed  can  be  approved,  yet  much  may  be  learnt  from  it
concerning  the  art  of  persuasion ;  e.g.  the  importance  of  (1)  knowing  the  character  and
sentiments  of  those  who  are  addressed ;  (2)  having  a  definite  aim  in  view ;  (3)  arresting
attention  and  awakening  interest  and  sympathy;  (4)  earnestness  and  fervency  of  man-
ner; (5)  using  argnment  and  illustration  adapted  to  present  the  matter  in  the  most
attractive  light ;  (6)  saying  enough  and  no  more,  especially  on  a  difficult  and  delicate
subject;  (7)  advancing  step  by  step  with  a  persistent  determination  to  succeed. — D.

Ver.  14. — "  As  water  spilt  upon  the  ground."  Water  is  a  gift  of  God,  very  precious,
especially  in  lands  where  it  is  scarce,  and  often  longed  for  as  a  means  of  quenching
thirst,  renewing  strength,  and  preserving  life  (ch.  xxiii.  15 ;  Ps.  Ixiii.  1). .  But  it  may
be  thrown  away,  pourel  out  and  lost,  by  design  or  accident,  through  the  overturning
or  fracture  of  the  vessel  in  which  it  is  contained.  Human  life,  also,  is  a  Divine  gift,
precious  beyond  all  earthly  possessions.  But  it  is  contained  in  "  a  body  of  fragile  clay  "
(2  Cor.  iv.  7),  which  is  sooner  or  later  destroyed  like  "  the  pitcher  shattered  at  the  well "
(Eccles.  xii.  6);  and  thus  "  wo  are  as  water,"  etc.     We  have  here-^

L  An  impressive  aspect  op  death.  1.  It  must  take  place  in  all,  without  excep-
tion. "  It  is  appointed,"  etc.  (Gen.  iii.  19 ;  Rom.  v.  12 ;  Heb.  ix.  27).  2.  It  may  occur
to  each  of  us  at  any  moment  (1  Sam.  x.  3).  3.  It  puts  an  end  to  the  useful  service
which  might  have  been  rendered.  Only  while  the  water  remain?  iij  t\re  vessel  can  it  be
of  immediate  use.  4.  It  cannot  by  any  possibility  be  repaired,  or  "  gathered  up  again."
"As  the  waters  fail  from  the  sea,"  etc.  (Job  xiv.  11;  vii.  10);  "as  waters  melt  away,"
etc.  (Ps.  Iviii.  7 ;  xxxix.  13 ;  xlix.  7 — 10 ;  ciii.  16).  "  Death  is  of  all  things  the  most
terribli^  for  it  is  the  end"  (Aristotle).

"  What  is  youi  life  ?    'Tis  a  delicate  shell,

Cast  up  by  Eternity's  flow ;
Ou  Time's  bank  of  quicksand  to  dwell,

A  moment  its  loveliness  show.
Betumed  to  its  element  grand

Is  the  billow  that  brought  it  on  shore;
See,  another  is  washing  the  strand.

And  the  beautiful  shell  is  no  more."


OH.  XIV.  1—33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  857

II.  An  instructive  admonition  for  life.  Is  it  so  ?  Then :  1.  Bestrain  immo-
derate indulgence  in  sorrow,  "  the  grief  that  saps  the  mind,  for  those  on  earth  we  sea
no  more."  No  weeping,  anger,  nor  endeavour  can  bring  back  Amnon  (ch.  xii.  23).
Accept  calmly  what  cannot  be  altered.  2.  Eepress  improper  feelings  of  resentment
toward  others.  Even  though  it  be  just,  it  should  not  be  perpetual  (Eph.  iv.  26).  They
and  you  alike  must  die  and  pass  away.  "  Be  reconciled."  3.  Regard  all  around  you
with  sympathy  and  kindly  affection.  Before  to-morrow  they  may  be  gone.  4.  Redeem
the  rest  of  your  time  "  in  the  flesh,"  by  prompt,  diligent,  zealous  use  of  every  oppor-
tunity of  serving  Grod  and  doing  good,  according  to  the  pattern  of  long-Buffering  and
benevolence  which  he  has  set  before  you,  in  "  not  taking  away  a  soul,"  etc.  (latter  part
of  the  verse).

Consider  :  1.  The  death  of  the  body  is  not  the  end  of  the  man.  He  disappears  here
only  to  appear  elsewhere  as  water  in  the  cloud ;  gathered  "with  sinners"  (Ps.  xxvi.  9;
Matt.  xiii.  30)  or  with  saints  (Gen.  xxv.  8;  2  Kings  xxii.  20;  2  Thess.  ii  1).  2.  The
life  which  a  man  leads  "in  the  body"  determines  his  condition  in  the  unseen  and
eternal  world.  3.  The  conviction  of  these  things  makes  the  view  of  death  more
impressive,  and  should  make  the  course  of  life  more  just,  merciful,  and  devout. — D.

Ver.  14. — God's  restoration  of  his  ianisTied.  It  is  hardly  possible  for  a  father  to  bo
so  completely  estranged  from  his  child  as  to  lose  all  affection  for  him.  He  may  have
just  cause  to  feel  angry  with  him;  but,  with  absence  and  the  lapse  of  time,  his  anger
dies  away,  and  his  natural  affection  springs  up  afresh.  It  was  thus  with  David  in
relation  to  his  son  Absalom.  Yet  he  hesitated  to  give  way  to  his  parental  feelings,  to
set  aside  the  claims  of  public  justice,  and  exercise  his  royal  prerogative  of  showing
mercy  toward  the  guilty.  And  to  induce  him  to  do  this  it  was  urged  (among  the
means  devised  for  the  purpose)  that  God,  who  has  ordained  that  men  should  die,
permits  them  to  live,  and  even  devises  means  for  their  restoration.  Was  not  this
an  indication  that  Absalom  should  be  spared?  Was  not  this  an  example  which
the  king  should  imitate?  It  has  been  supposed  that  there  is  allusion  to  the  cities
of  refuge  (Numb.  xxxv.  9 — 34 ;  Deut.  xix.  6 ;  Josh,  xx.),  where  the  mansla3'er,
"  though  banished  from  his  habitation  for  a  time,  was  not  quite  expelled,  but  might
return  again  after  the  death  of  the  high  priest "  (Patrick).  The  argument  used  was
not  properly  applicable  to  the  particular  instance,  but  the  truth  expressed  is  profound
and  striking.    Notice —

I.  The  AiiENATBD  CONDITION  OF  MAN.  "Banished ; "  estranged, separated,  " cast  out
cf  God's  presence,"  away  from  his  sanctuary,  fellowship,  and  inheritance  (ver.  16),  in
"  a  far  country "  (Luke  xv.  13).  That  this  is  the  moral  and  spiritual  state  of  man
(naturally  and  generally)  is  not  only  testified  by  the  Scriptures,  but  also  by  his  own
heart  and  conscience ;  his  aversion  and  dread  with  respect  to  God.  It  is :  1.  Vdlimtary,
By  his  own  free  act  Absalom  broke  the  Law,  incurred  the  displeasure,  fled  from  the  &oe
of  his  father,  and  continued  In  exile.     So  has  it  been  with  man  from  the  first.

"The  nature  with  its  Maker  thus  conjoin'd.
Created  first  was  blameless,  pure,  and  good;
But,  through  itself  alone,  was  driven  forth
From  Paradise,  because  it  had  eschew'd
The  way  of  truth  and  life,  to  evil  turn'd."

(Dante, '  Paradise,'  vll.)

Of  his  own  accord  he  departs  from  God  and  seeks  to  hide  himself  from  him.  2.
Unhappy.  Absalom  found  friendly  associates  and  material  comforts  in  Geshur,  but  he
could  not  have  been  at  home  there,  and  must  have  carried  in  his  breast  a  restless  and
troubled  heart.  And  it  is  impossible  for  him  who  departs  from  God,  and  tries  to
live  without  him,  to  possess  inward  rest  and  peace.  The  soul  is  made  for  God :  how  can
it  be  satisfied  with  anything  short  of  him  ?  Oh  the  misery  that  multitudes  at  this
moment  endure  because  they  have  forsaken  the  "Fountain  of  living  waters,"  and  seek
their  happiness  where  it  can  never  be  found!  3.  Perilous.  The  sinner  is  under
condemnation.  The  "avengers  of  blood"  are  on  his  track.  Life  is  precarious  and
must  soon  terminate,  with  all  its  alleviations,  privileges,  and  possibilities ;  "  and  after
that  the  judgment,"  when  voluntary  exile  becomes  involuntary,  partial  unhappiuesi


858  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xit.  1— Sa

complete  wretoyiedness,  temporary  estrangement  "everlasting;  destruction  from  th«
presence  of  the  Lord"  (2  Thess.  i.  9).  4.  Not  hopeless.  Absalom  was  still  a  son,
though  a  disobedient  one;  still  "in  the  land  of  the  living;"  and  might  entertain  the
hope  tliat,  through  bis  father's  affeotioc,  his  banishment  would  not  be  perpetual.
However  far  man  may  have  wandered  from  the  Father's  house,  he  is  still  an  object  of
the  Father's  love.  "  Behold,  all  sonls  are  mine,"  etc. ;  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the
death  of  him  that  dieth,"  etc.  (Ezek.  xviii.  4,  32;  xxiii.  11);  "Turn  you  to  the
stronghold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope  "  (Zech.  ix.  12).

11.  The  meboiful  means  devised  fob  his  kbstoeation.  Man's  misery  is  from
himself,  but  "salvation  is  of  the  Lord"  (Pb.  iii.  8;  Jonah  ii.  9).  It  is  effected  by  and
through :  1.  2'he  long  patience  and  forbearance  which  he  shows  toward  the  transgiessor;
restraining  the  outgoings  of  wrath  (Luke  xiii.  7),  sparing  forfeited  life,  affording  space
for  repentance,  "making  his  sun  to  rise,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  45).  "The  long-suffering  of  our
Lord  is  salvation"  (2  Pet.  iii.  15;  Rom.  iL  4).  2.  An  extraordinary  provision,  where-
by the  way  of  his  return  is  opened,  consistently  with  the  requirements  of  eternal
righteousness,  and  his  fatherly  love  is  revealed  in  the  highest  degree.  By  restoring
Absalom  without  due  regard  to  the  demands  of  justice,  and  even  without  repentance,
David  weakened  his  own  authority  as  king,  contributed  to  a  popular  rebellion,  and
well-nigh  lost  his  throne  and  life.  But  in  the  method  which  God  in  infinite  wisdom
has  "devised"  for  the  restoration  of  laaa,  justice  and  mercy  are  alike  manifested,  an
adequate  groimd  or  reason  for  forgiveness  is  furnished,  sinners  are  "  put  in  the  capacity
of  salvation"  (Butler),  and  the  Law  is  magnified  and  "established"  (Eom.  iii.  19—31).
"  God  commendeth  his  own  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ
died  for  us  "  (Bom.  v.  8) ;  "  redeemed  us  from  the  cvu-se  of  the  Law,  having  become  a
curse  for  us  "  (Gal.  iii.  13) ;  "  suffered  for  sins  once,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  aught
bring  us  to  God  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  18>

*  Man  in  himself  had  ever  lacked  the  means
Of  satisfaction.  .  .  .    Then  behoved
That  God  should  by  his  own  ways  lead  him  back
Unto  the  life  from  whence  he  fell,  restored ;
By  both  his  ways,  I  mean,  or  one  alone.

But  since  the  deed  is  ever  prized  the  more^
The  more  the  doer's  good  intent  appears ;
Goodness  celestial,  whose  broad  signature
Is  on  the  universe,  of  all  its  ways
To  raise  ye  up,  was  fain  to  leave  out  nonew

Nor  aught  so  vast  or  so  magnificent,
Either  for  him  who  gave  or  who  received.
Between  the  last  night  and  the  primal  day.
Was  or  can  be.    For  God  more  bounty  show'dt
Giving  himself  to  make  man  capable
Of  his  return  to  life,  then  had  the  terms
Been  mere  and  unconditional  release.

And  for  his  justice,  every  method  else
Were  all  too  scant,  had  not  the  Son  of  God
Humbled  himself  to  put  on  mortul  flesh."

(Dante,  «Pa^adis^•  Til)

8.  Numerous  messages,  efficient  motives,  and  gracious  influences,  in  connection  with  that
provision,  to  dispose  him  to  avail  himself  thereof :  the  Word,  with  its  invitations,  warn-
ings, appeals  to  reason,  affection,  conscience,  hope  and  fear ;  messengers  (ver.  31) —
ministers  and  teachers  of  the  Word ;  above  all,  the  Holy  Spirit,  striving  with  sinners,
convicting  of  sin,  etc.  (John  xvi.  8),  and  renewing  the  heart  in  righteousness.  4.  The
end  of  all  is  reconciliation  (ver.  33),  filial  fellowship,  perfect  holiness,  and  endless
blessedness  in  God.     "  Return ; "  "Be  ye  reconciled  to  God."

CoKOLUBlON.  1.  How  wonderful  is  "  the  kindness  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  his  love
toward  man  "  (Titus  iii.  4)  I  2.  How  entirely  is  man  his  own  destroyer  (Hos.  xiii.  9)  I
8.  "  Beloved,  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  also  ought  to  love  one  another ; "  and  to  devise
Beans  in  oidar  that  no  "  banished  one  "  may  be  utterly  banished  from  him.


OH.  xiT,  1— 33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  359

"Oh  let  the  dead  now  hear  thy  voice;
Now  let  thy  banished  onei  rejoice."

D.

Ver.  20, — Flatten/.  "My  lord  is  wise,  according  to  the  wisdom  of  an  angel  of
God,"  etc.  Commendation  is  often  proper  and  beneficial  (ch.  ii.  5—7).  But  flattery
(false,  partial,  or  extravagant  praise)  is  alwa3-9  improper  and.pernicious.  This  language
was  not  mere  Oriental  compliment,  but  a  flattering  speech,  intended  to  make  the  king
pleased  with  himself  in  doing  what  he  was  urged  to  do.  1.  It  is  agreeable  to  most
persons  when  skilfully  administered.  "Flattery  and  the  flatterer  are  pleasant;  since
the  flatterer  is  a  seeming  admirer  and  a  seeming  friend  "  (Aristotle, '  Bhetoric').

"  When  I  tell  him  he  hates  flatterers,
He  saya  he  does ;  being  then  most  flattered."

(Shakespeare.)

"  We  believe  that  we  hate  flattery,  when  all  which  we  hate  is  the  awkwardness  of  the
flatterer"  (La  Rochefoucault).  2.  It  assumes  various  forms,  and  is  usually  obsequious
and  disingenuous ;  is  direct  or  indirect ;  is  shown  in  praising  personal  qualities,  advan-
tages, achievements,  etc.,  giving  " flattering  titles  "  (Job  xxxii.  31 — 32),  "  good  M:ister  "
(Mark  x.  17 ;  xii.  14),  "  my  Lord,"  etc.  Making  or  suggesting  favourable  comparisons,
it  may  be,  by  detracting  from  the  good  name  of  others  (ch.  iv.  8).  It  is  sometimes
sincere;  but  "people  generally  despise  where  they  flatter  and  cringe  to  those  they
would  gladly  surpass."  3.  It  is  commonly  designed  by  those  who  employ  it  to  serve
some  interest  of  their  own  (ver.  22).  Hence,  it  is  so  frequently  used  to  gain  the  favour
of  kings,  and  such  as  possess  authority,  influence,  or  wealth  (Jude  16).  When  Alex-
ander the  Great  was  hit  with  an  arrow  in  the  siege  of  an  Indian  city,  and  the  wound
would  not  heal,  he  said  to  his  flatterers,  "  You  say  that  I  am  Jupiter's  son,  but
this  woimd  cries  that  I  am  but  man."  4.  It  blinds  those  who  listen  to  it  to  their
defects,  ministers  to  their  vanity,  and  fills  them  with  perilous  self-complacency.  "  It's
the  death  of  virtue."  5.  It  also  induces  them  to  pursue  erroneous  and  sin/id  courses,
which  they  might  otherwise  have  avoided.  "A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour
spreadeth  a  net  for  his  feet "  (Prov.  xxix.  5 ;  xxvi.  28).  "  Ah !  how  good  might  many
men  have  been  who  are  now  exceedingly  bad  had  they  not  sold  their  ears  to  Batterers !
Flatterers  are  soul-murderers.  Flattery  is  the  very  spring  and  mother  of  all  impiety.
It  put  our  flrst  parent  on  tasting  the  forbidden  fruit.  It  put  Absalom  upon  dethroning
his  father.  It  blows  the  trumpet  and  draws  poor  souls  into  rebellion  against  God,  as
Sheba  drew  Israel  to  rebel  against  David.  It  makes  men  call  evil  good  and  good  evil,
darkness  light  and  light  darkness"  (T.Brooks).  6.  It  is  only  less  culpable  in  those
who  listen  to  it  than  in  those  who  employ  it.  They  are  willing  captives.  "  As  a  wolf
resembles  a  dog,  so  doth  a  flatterer  a  friend.  Take  heed,  therefore,  that,  instead  of
guardian  dogs,  you  do  not  incautiously  admit  ravening  wolves "  (Bpictetus).  7.  Its
folly  and  guilt  are  sometimes  discovered  too  late ;  when  its  ruinous  consequences  cannot
be  repaired  (ch.~xv.  13 ;  Ps.  xii.  3 ;  Acts  xii.  23). — ^D.

Ver.  25. — Fhysiad  beauty.    "  And  in  all  Israel  there  was  none  to  be  so  much  praiiad
u  Absalom  for  his  beauty,"  etc.  (see  1  Sam.  xvi.  7,  12 ;  ch.  xi.  2 ;  xiii.  1;  ver.  27).

"Of  all  God's  works,  which  do  this  world  adorn.

There  is  no  one  more  fair  and  excellent
Than  is  man's  body,  both  for  power  and  form,

Whilst  it  is  kept  in  sober  government ;

But  none  than  it  more  foul  and  indecent,
Distempered  through  misrule  and  passions  base ;

It  grows  a  monster,  and  incontinent
Doth  lose  its  dignity  and  native  grace :
Behold,  who  list,  both  one  and  other  in  this  place  "

(Spenser, '  The  Faerie  Queene,'  canto  EC.)

Itf»-

I.  Ah  admibkd  kndowmbnt;  iuvoluntarily  conferred,  without  personal  effort  and
beyond  human  control  (Matt,  v.  36 ;  vi.  27) ;  yet  one  of  the  most  personal  and  enviable


360  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xir.  1— 33.

of  human  posgessioM.  "  Beauty  is  a  thinf  of  great  recommendation  in  the  correspou-
dence  amongst  men ;  it  is  the  principal  means  of  acquiring  the  favour  and  gnod-liking  of
one  another,  and  no  man  is  so  barbarous  r.nd  morose  that  does  not  perceiy«  himself  in
some  sort  struck  with  its  attraction  "  (ilontaigne).  "  Beauty  is,  indeed,  a  good  gift  of
God ;  but  that  the  good  may  not  think  it  a  great  good,  God  dispenses  it  even  to  the
wicked"  (Augustine).

"A  beautiful  and  fair  yonng  man  is  he;
In  all  his  body  is  no  blemish  seen ;
His  hair  is  like  the  wire  of  David's  harp.
That  twines  about  his  bright  aud  ivory  neck;
In  Israel  is  not  such  a  good  I  v  man."

(Geo.  Peole, '  The  Tragedy  of  Absolon : '  1599.)

n.  A  BUPERFloiAT.  DISTINCTION;  shadowiDg  forth,  indeed,  beauty  of  mind  and
character;  and  heightened  by  the  latter,  when  present;  but  often,  in  fact,  disassociated
from  it ;  and  covering,  "  skin-deep,"  dreadful  moral  deformity  (Prov.  xi.  22).  Absa-
lom was  beautiful  externally,  but  not  "  beautiful  within."  Wisdom,  tnith,  humility,
modesty,  purity,  patience,  meekness,  piety,  mercy,  charity, — these  constitute  inward,
substantial,  spiritual  beauty,  "  the  beauty  of  holiness,"  the  product  of  the  grace  and  the
reflection  of  the  beauty  and  glory  of  the  Lord  (Ps.  xc.  17;  cxlix.  4);  in  which  he
delights,  and  which  all  persons  may  acquire  (Bph.  iv.  24  ;  Gal.  v.  22 ;  Phil.  ii.  5).
"  "Whatsoever  things  are  lovily,"  etc.  (Phil.  iv.  8).  "  The  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  the
richest  ornaments  of  the  reasonable  creature."

III.  A  DAKGBKons  IKFLIJEKCB ;  ou  its  possessoTs,  making  them  vain  and  presumptuous,
aud  exposing  them  to  many  temptations ;  on  its  haholders,  directing  undue  attention  to
"  the  outward  appearance,"  disposing  to  excuses  for  mental  and  moral  defects,  alluring
to  evil  (ch.  XV.  1—6).  The  beauty  of  Absalom  was  a  snare  to  the  people.  "His  hur
was  his  halter  "  (ch.  xviii.  9).

"  Where  is  the  virtue  of  thy  beauty,  Absolon  ?
WiU  any  of  us  here  now  fear  tliy  locks.
Or  be  in  love  with  that  thy  golden  hair.
Wherein  was  wrapt  rebellion  'gainst  thy  sire.
And  words  prepared  to  stop  thy  father's  breath  ?"

(Geo.  Feele.)

IV.  A  TBAN8IENT  POSSESSION.  Prccarious,  short-lived,  inevitably  turning  to  dust
(ver.  U) ;  "a  fading  flower"  (Isa.  xxviii.  4;  xL  8;  Ps.  xxxix.  11),  whose  "root  is  e^er
in  its  grave."

*'  A  doubtful  good,  a  gloss,  a  glass,  a  flower,
Lost,  faded,  broken,  dead,  within  an  hour."

"  So  have  T  seen  a  rose  newly  springing  from  the  clefts  of  its  hood,  and  at  iirst  it  was
fair  as  the  morning,  and  full  with  the  dew  of  heaven  as  a  lamb's  fleece;  but  when  a
ruder  breath  had  forced  open  its  virgin  modesty,  and  dismantled  its  too  youthlul  and
unripe  retirements,  it  began  to  put  on  darkness,  and  to  decline  to  softness  and  the
symijtoms  of  a  sickly  age ;  it  bowed  the  head,  and  bioke  its  stalk,  and  at  night,  having
lost  some  of  its  leaves  and  all  its  beauty,  it  fell  into  the  portion  of  weeds  and  outworn
faces.  The  same  is  the  portion  of  every  man  and  every  woman  "  (Jeremy  Taylor,
'Holy  Dying').  But  goodness  is  immortal;  it  "  ladeth  not  away"  (I  Pet.  i.  4).
"  Beauty  belongs  to  youth  and  dies  with  it,  but  the  odours  of  piety  survive  death  and
pe/fume  the  tomb."

"  Only  the  actions  of  the  just
Bmell  sweet  and  blossom  in  the  dust"

D.

Vers.  28 — 33. — Restored,  hut  not  reformed.  "Wherefore  am  I  come  from  Geshur?
it  were  better  for  me  that  I  were  there  still ;  and  now  I  will  see  the  king's  face;  and  if
there  be  any  iniquity  in  me,  let  him  put  me  to  death  "  (ver.  31).  While  in  Geshur
Absalom   showed   no  repentance  for  his  crime ;   sought  no  forgiveness  of  it ;  rather


OB.  XIV.  1—33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  861

justified  himself  in  its  commission.  On  tliis  account,  perhaps,  David  would  not  pennit
him,  when  recalled,  to  see  his  face,  but  ordered  him  to  remain  at  his  own  house  (ver.
24);  testifying  his  abhorrence  of  the  crime,  and  desiring  "to  carry  further  the  dis-
cipline of  approval,  to  wait  till  his  son  was  more  manifestly  penitent."  If  Absalom
had  been  in  a  proper  frame  of  mind,  it  might  have  been  beneficial ;  as  it  was,  "  this
half-forgiveness  was  an  imprudent  measure,  really  worse  than  no  forgiveness  at  all,  and
bore  very  bitter  fruit"  (Keil).  "The  end  showed  how  fatal  the  policy  of  expectation
was,  how  terribly  it  added  bitterness  to  the  sense  of  alienation  that  had  already  been
growing  only  too  strong  within  him"  (Plumptre).  "A  flash  of  his  old  kingliness
blazes  out  for  a  moment  in  his  refusal  to  see  his  son.  But  even  that  slight  satisfaction
to  justice  vanishes  as  soon  as  Joab  chooses  to  insist  that  Absalom  shall  return  to  court.
He  seems  to  have  no  will  of  his  own.  He  has  become  a  mere  tool  in  the  hands  of  his
fierce  general ;  and  Joab's  hold  upon  him  was  his  complicity  in  Uriah's  murder.  Thus
at  every  step  he  was  dogged  by  the  consequences  of  his  crime,  even  though  it  was
pardoned  sin"  (Maclaren).  Yet  immediate  and  full  forgiveness  might  have  failed  to
subdue  the  heart  of  Absalom,  and  win  filial  confidence  and  affection.  "  Let  favour  be
showed  to  the  wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteousness,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxvi.  10).  In
his  spirit  and  conduct  wo  observe :  1.  Ingratitude  for  the  favour  shown  toward  him.
He  estimated  it  lightly  (knowing  little  of  the  fatherly  love  from  which  it  proceeded),
save  as  a  means  to  his  own  honour  and  advancement.  Than  ingratitude  nothing  is  more
odious.  2.  /mj)afeMce,  fretfulness,  discontent  under  restraint  and  chastisement ;  which
a  true  penitent  would  have  endured  humbly  and  cheerfully ;  increased  as  time  passed
away  (two  years)  and  no  further  sign  of  royal  favour  appeared.  3.  Presumption  on
account  of  the  privilege  already  granted  to  him,  but  which  be  repudiated  as  worthless,
unless  followed  by  other  privileges,  such  as  became  his  royal  birth  and  involved  his
reinstatement  in  his  former  dignity.  He  looked  upon  himself  as  rightful  heir  to  the
throne.  He  may.however,  have  suspected  a  rival  in  the  youthful  Solomon  (now  six  or
eight  years  old),  and  feared  the  influence  of  Bathsheba  on  behalf  of  her  son.  4.  Resent-
ment and  revenge  for  the  neglect,  contempt,  and  wrong  which  (as  he  conceived)  he
suffered  (ver.  29).  "  See,  Joab's  field  is  beside  mine,  and  he  has  barley  there ;  go  and
set  it  on  fire  "  (ver.  30).  This  appears  to  have  been  an  act  of  passion  rather  than  of
policy.  Joab's  slackness,  in  contrast  with  his  former  zeal  (ver.  23),  was  doubtless  due
to  his  desire  to  make  the  most  of  his  influence  with  the  king,  to  constrain  Absalom
humbly  to  entreat  his  intercession,  and  so  to  increase  his  feeling  of  dependence  and  obliga-
tion ;  it  was  only  when  he  perceived  that  he  had  to  deal  with  "  a  character  wild,  im  pulsive,
and  passionate,"  that  he  deemed  it  necessary  again  to  alter  his  tactics.  5.  Wilfulness  in
seeking  the  attainment  of  his  ambitious  aims.  "I  wUl  see  the  king's  face."  His
presence  at  court  was  essential  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  daring  design  upon  the  crown,
which  he  may  have  already  formed ;  and  he  would  brook  no  denial.  Possibly  his  bereave-
ment (ver.  27 ;  ch.  xviii.  18)  intensified  his  determination.  "  The  strongest  yearning  of
an  Israelite's  heart  was  thrown  back  upon  itself,  after  a  short-lived  joy,  and  his  feelings
towards  his  own  father  were  turned  to  bitterness  and  hate."  6.  Defiance  of  conviction
of  guilt.  "  If  there  be  any  iniquity  in  me,"  etc.  "  The  manner  in  which  he  sought  to
obtain  forgiveuess  by  force  manifested  an  evident  spirit  of  defiance,  by  which,  with  the
well-known  mildness  of  David's  temper,  he  hoped  to  attain  his  object,  and  in  fact  did
attain  it"  (Keil).  He  also  doubtless  relied  on  the  support  of  a  party  of  the  people,
dissatisfied  with  the  king's  severity  toward  him,  and  favourable  to  his  complete  restora-
tion. Even  Joab  yielded  for  the  present  to  his  imperious  and  resolute  demand.  7.
Heartless  formality.  "  He  bowed  himself  on  his  face  to  the  ground  before  the  king :
and  the  king  kissed  Absalom  "  (ver.  38).  His  heart  was  not  humbled,  but  lifted  up  in
pride ;  yet  he  openly  received  the  pledge  of  reconciliation;  and  herein  David's  blindness
and  weakness  reached  their  culmination.  "  He  did  not  kiss  the  ill  will  out  of  the  heart
of  his  son"  (Krummacher).  "  When  parents  and  rulers  countenance  such  imperious
characters,  they  will  soon  experience  the  most  fatal  effects."  (Here  is  another  "meeting
of  three  remarkable  men,"  1  Sam.  xix.  22 — 24,  Joab,  Absalom,  David.)  Remarks.  X.
No  hard  and  impenitent  heart  is  prepared  to  receive  and  profit  by  forgiveness.  2.  Such
a  heart  is  capable  of  turning  the  greatest  benefits  into  means  of  fiurther  and  more  daring
rebellion  ;  and  "  treasures  up  for  itself  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath."  3.  Whilst
"  ulod  is  good  and  ready  to  forgive,"  he  grants  forgiveness  only  to  those  "  who  call  npori


862  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xiv.  1— Si

him"  in  humility  and  sincerity,  confessing  and  forsaking  their  sins  (Ps.  Izxxvi.  6;
oxxxviii.  6 ;  xxxii.  5 ;  lu  17). — ^D.

Ver.  11. — Bememhrance  of  God.  "Let  the  king  remember  the  Lord  thy  God."
This  passage  occurs  in  a  singular  bit  of  history,  which  illustrates,  inter  alia,  the  care-
fulness which  even  the  most  favoured  and  powerful  of  the  subjects  of  an  Eastern
monarch  must  at  times  exercise  in  seeking  to  influence  him ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
the  accessibility  of  such  a  monarch  to  the  meanest  subject  desirous  of  his  interposition.
Perhaps,  however,  this  "wise  woman"  may  have  belonged  to  a  class  which,  like
prophets,  could  (or  would)  take  special  liberties  with  royal  and  other  great  persons
(comp.  ch.  XX.  16 — 22,  the  only  other  passage  in  which  the  phrase,  "  wise  woman,"
occurs  in  the  same  sense).  This  woman  showed  herself  "  wise  "  in  her  management  of
the  case  which  Joab  had  entrusted  to  her.  It  was  after  she  had  succeeded  in  making
8  favourable  impression  upon  David,  that,  desirous  of  a  more  solemn  and  specific  assur-
ance, she  addressed  him  in  the  words  of  the  text.  This  appeal  had  the  desired  effect :
the  king  declared  with  an  oath  that  no  harm  should  be  done  to  her  son,  whom  she  had
represented  as  in  danger  of  death  from  having  killed  his  brother.  The  exhortation  is
«ver  suitable  and  seasonable.

L  The  remembrance  op  God  which  shoitld  bb  pbaotisbd.  It  includes  mindful-
ness of:  1.  His  existence  and  perfectiuns.  2.  His  relation  to  the  universe  and  to  our-
selves— Creator,  Sustainer,  Ruler,  Redeemer,  Father  of  spirits,  etc.  3.  His  revelations
and  commands.  4.  His  goodness  to  us.  What  he  has  done,  is  doing,  and  has  promised
to  do.

II.  When  we  should  remember  him.  When  should  we  not?  The  remembrance
should  be :  1.  HabituaL  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me  "  (Ps.  xvL  8) ;  "  Be
ye  mindful  always  of  his  covenant "  (1  Chron.  xvi.  15).  2.  At  stated  times.  Without
special  remembrances  the  habitual  will  not  be  maintained.  Hence  the  value  of  the
hours  of  devotion,  private  and  public.  3.  At  times  of  special  need.  When  duty  is
hard,  temptation  urgent,  trouble  pressing.

m.  Who  are  rbquibbd  to  remember  him.  All — ^kings  as  well  as  subjects.  The
higher  men  are  raised  above  their  fellow-men,  the  more  they  need  to  keep  in  mind
him  who  is  higher  than  they,  and  who  will  call  them  to  account.  The  greater  the
trust  God  has  committed  to  any,  and  the  more  they  are  independent  of  others  in  dis-
charging it,  the  more  they  need  to  look  to  God  for  help  in  discerning  and  practising
what  is  right.  In  an  unlimited,  or  only  partially  limited,  monarchy,  the  king  has
peculiar  reason  to  keep  the  King  of  kings  in  mind,  that  he  may  be  preserved  from
injustice,  partiality,  and  oppression.  But  people  of  all  classes  are  bound  to  remember
Gk>d,  and  live  as  in  his  sight.

IV.  Why  we  should  cherish  such  remembrances.  1.  It  is  our  plain  duty.
From  our  relation  to  God,  and  from  his  commandments.  And  it  is  no  less  absurd
than  impious  to  forget  him  "  with  whom  we  have  to  do "  (Heb.  iv.  13)  more  than
with  any  and  all  others.    2.  It  is  greatly  for  owr  profit.    It  will  be  productive  of :

(1)  Kety  and  holiness.  These  spring  from  the  knowledge  of  God,  but  only  as  it  is
kept  in  mind.  To  have  God  in  our  creed,  but  not  in  our  memory,  is  much  the  same  as
to  have  no  God  at  all.    It  is  thought  which  stirs  emotion  and  nourishes  moral  principle.

(2)  Strength  and  safety  under  temptation.  (3)  Happiness.  In  ordinary  life,  and  in
times  of  trial  and  suffering.  Remembrance  of  God  will  sanctify  all  things,  heighten  all
innocent  pleasures,  turn  duties  into  delights,  afford  consolation  and  support  when  all
else  fails.  3.  It  will  save  from  the  pangs  of  too-late  remembrances  on  earth  or  in  heU,
(See  Prov.  v.  11—14 ;  Luke  xvi.  25, "  Son,  remember.")  Mindfulness  of  God  is  universal
in  the  eternal  world,  for  joy  or  sorrow.

v.  Thb  need  there  is  to  remind  men  or  this  duty.  "  Let  the  king  remember,"
etc.  Men  are  apt  to  forget  God,  even  when  the  memory  of  him  is  most  desirable  and
incumbent.  Such  forgetfulness  may  spring  from :  1.  Negligence.  2.  The  pressure  of
other  thoughts.  The  worldly.  The  anxious  and  troubled.  It  is  often  a  great  kind-
ness to  remind  troubled  Christians  of  their  God.  3.  Dislike  of  God.  Unwillingness
that  he  should  interfere  with  life  and  action.  4.  Love  of  sin.  The  pleasure  of  sin,  i(
Dot  sin  itself,  would  be  impossible  if  God  were  thought  of.  fi.  Pride  and  self-satisfao-
Uoa  rDeut.  viii.  10—19).


OH.  3av.  1— 33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  863

Finally :  1.  Sememhrance  of  God,  spontaneously  and  lovingly  cherished,  is  a  good
evidence  of  sincere  piety.  2.  The  compatibility  or  incompatibility  of  it  with  any  act  or
habit  furnishes  a  safe  guide  when  distinct  precepts  are  wanting.— -Q.  W.

Ver.  14. — God  fetching  home  his  banished.  The  "  wise  woman,"  having  Bucoeeded
in  that  which  she  pretended  to  be  her  object  in  comiDg  to  David,  skilfully  approached
the  real  purpose  of  her  visit.  She  insinuates,  in  general  and  guarded  language,  that  he
was  cherishing  thoughts  which  were  "  against  the  people  of  God,"  and  that  the  decision
he  had  given  in  favour  of  her  son  was  inconsistent  with  his  not  fetching  home  again
his  own  banished  one.  Then,  in  our  text,  she  presents,  still  in  a  general  and  indefinite
way,  reasons  why  the  king  should  restore  his  banished  one.  1.  2%e  universal  mortality
of  manJcind.  "  We  must  needs  die,"  etc.  This  may  contain  a  hint  that  it  was  useless
longer  to  be  grieved  or  angry  about  Amnon's  death — nothing  could  restore  him  to  life.
Or,  jnst  as  likely,  it  may  be  mentioned  as  a  reason  for  doing  rightly  (in  this  caise,  exer-
cising mercy)  while  we  may,  since  we  and  those  we  can  benefit  will  soon  be  alike  in
the  grave ;  and  for  doing  nothing  to  embitter  this  brief  life  to  any  while  it  lasts,  or  to
shorten  it  needlessly  by  our  conduct.  Or  it  may  be  intended  to  soften  the  king's  heart
and  prepare  him  to  exercise  compassion,  as  G!od  is  said  to  pity  us  because  "he
knoweth  our  frame;  he  remembereth  that  we  are  dust"  (Ps.  ciii.  13,  14).  2.  The
long-suffering  of  God.  "  Neither  doth  God  take  away  life  "  (Eevised  Version) ;  i.e.
He  does  not  usually  strike  down  the  sinner  at  once  in  his  sins,  but  bears  long  with
him,  and  gives  him  space  for  repentance.  This  may  be  a  skilful  allusion  to  the  mercy
shown  to  David  himself  (ch.  xii.  13,  "Thou  shalt  not  die").  3.  The  provision  which
God  makes  for  the  return  of  sinners  to  himself.  "  He  deviseth  means,  that  he  that  is
banished  be  not  an  outcast  from  him "  (Eevised  Version).  In  this  also  there  may  be
an  allusion  to  God's  treatment  of  David,  in  sending  to  him  Nathan  to  rouse  his  con-
science, bring  him  to  repentance,  and  then  assure  him  of  pardon.  Or  the  woman  may
have  in  her  mind  the  provisions  of  the  Mosaic  Law  for  restoring  to  the  congregation
and  the  temple  services  those  who  had  been  separated  from  them  through  contracting
some  uncleanness  or  committing  some  sin  (see  Lev.  iv.,  v.,  vi.  1 — 7).  Or  she  may,  by
a  flash  of  inspiration,  have  had  a  glimpse  of  the  great  principles  underlying  these  legal
and  ceremonial  appointments,  and  which  are  more  fully  made  manifest  in  Christ.  We,
at  least,  can  hardly  err  in  interpreting  her  words  in  the  light  of  the  gospel.  Thus
regarded,  they  suggest  to  us —

I.  The  condition  op  sinnebs.  That  is,  of  mankind  apart  from  Christ.  They  are
"  banished,"  and  in  danger  of  being  "  expelled,"  from  God,  and  becoming  utterly  out-
cast. 1.  "Banished ;"  self-banished,  like  Absalom,.  (1)  Sin  separates  between  man
and  God ;  severs  from  the  Divine  friendship  and  favour ;  from  the  Father's  home,  society,
and  blessing ;  from  the  family  of  God,  its  occupations,  privileges,  and  joys.  Men  may
be  externally  associated  with  the  godly  in  worship  and  service,  yet  banished  spiritually,
cut  off  from  real  communion.  Two  persons  may  sit  side  by  side  in  the  same  church,
one  holding  converse  with  God  and  having  fellowship  with  his  .people  in  their  worship,
the  other  having  no  real  participation  in  these  exercises,  far  from  God  even  in  his  house.
Of  Ijie  banished  there  are  two  classes — ^those  who  have  never  known  God,  and  those
who^having  known  him,  have  turned  away  from  him.  The  case  of  the  latter  is  the
saddest  (2  Pet.  ii.  20,  21).  (2)  Sin  ever  tends  to  produce  increased  separation  from
God.  In  heart,  and  also  outwardly.  When  the  heart  is  alienated  from  God,  distaste
for  the  forms  of  worship,  and  all  that  reminds  of  him,  increases ;  and  often  ends  in  the
entire  abandonment  of  them.  As  the  prodigal  son  went  "  into  a  far  country "  (Luku
XV.  13).  "  Banished."  It  is  a  wretched  condition.  To  depart  from  God  is  to  commit
great  sin  ;  to  be  destitute  of  the  highest  blessings  and  exposed  to  the  worst  miseries.
To  be  without  him  is  to  be  without  true  life,  solid  happiness,  and  well-grounded  hope.
2.  "  Banished,"  but  not  yet  utterly  outcast.  (1)  Although  they  have  forsaken  God,  he
has  not  quite  forsaken  them.  He  does  theiii  good  continually  in  his  providence ;  and,
by  the  blessings  he  bestows  upon  them,  protests  against  their  unnatural  conduct,  and
urges  them  to  return  to  him.  (2)  They  are  in  constant  peril  of  becoming  entirely
and  hopelessly  outcast ;  for  the  practice  of  sin  hardens  the  heart  increasingly,  and
threatens  to  obliterate  in  the  sinner's  nature  whatever  might  leave  a  hops  of  repentance
and  reconciliation.    And  "the  wrath  of  Qod"  «ver  "abideth  on  him"  fJohn  iii.  3f)).


§64  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtTEL.  [pa.  xtv.  1—Si.

and  may  at  any  moment  banish  him  "  into  the  outer  darkness"  (Matt.  'wii.  12,  Revised
Version).

II.  The  pubpose  of  God.  To  secure  "  that  his  banished  be  not  expelled  from  him  ; "
but  be  brought  back,  reconciled,  restored  to  himself,  bis  family,  and  service.  To  "  fetch
home  again  his  banished."  Whence  this  purpose  ?  1.  The  Divine  knowledge  of  the
nature  and  consequent  worth  of  man.  That  he  is  not  as  the  brutes,  but  was  "made
after  the  similitude  of  God  "  (Jas.  iii.  9).  That,  though  he  "must  needs  die"  and
become  as  spUt  water,  he  must  needs  also  live  after  doath.  Hence  he  is  worthy  of
much  Divine  expenditure  in  order  to  his  salvation.  The  spiritual  nature  and  the
immortality  of  man  render  him  an  object  of  intense  interest  to  his  Maker,  and  to  all  who
recognize  them.  2.  'The  desire  of  Qod  that  his  purpose  in  the  creation  of  mankind
should  not  he  frustrated.  3.  The  abounding  love  of  Ood.  Though  the  sinner  is
banished  from  his  favour,  he  is  not  from  his  heart.  He  yearns  over  him  while  he
expresses  his  displeasure  with  his  conduct.  He  expresses  his  displeasure  as  one  step
towards  his  restoration.  He  desires  the  happiness  of  the  sinner,  but  knows  he  cannot
be  happy  apart  from  himself.  He  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all
ehould  come  to  repentance  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  9).

III.  The  means  he  devised  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  pnBPOSE.  1.  The
incarnation  and  work  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  He  came  "  to  seek  and  save  the
lost  "(Luke  xix.  10).  By  his  personal  manifestation  of  God,  his  teaching,  example,
and  especially  his  death,  he  became  the  Way  to  the  Father  (John  xiv.  6).  He
"  suffered  for  sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God  "  (1  Pet.  iii.
18).  2.  The  gospel.  Which  is  God's  message  to  his  banished  ones,  calling  them
back  to  him,  and  showing  the  way  of  return.  3.  The  Church,  its  ordinances  and
ministries.  One  main  business  of  the  Church,  its  ministers,  yea,  of  all  its  members,
is  to  labour  to  "fetch  home  again  "  God's  banished  ones.  4.  The  events  of  life.  The
providence  of  God  is  subservient  to  his  grace.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  "  Head  over  all
things,"  that  all  may  further  the  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  for  which  he  lived
and  died  on  earth,  and  lives  and  reigns  in  heaven.  Hence  providential  events,  on  the
wide  scale  and  in  individual  life,  are  often  rendered  effectual  unto  salvation.  5.  2^e
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  render  all  other  means  effectual  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of
mr-n.     To  convince,  incline,  persuaile,  convert,  sanctify,  save.

IV.  The  imitation  of  God  in  this  respect  to  which  we  are  called.  The
woman  thus  spoke  that  she  might  induce  David  to  recall  his  banished  son,  Absalom.
So  we  are  called  to  imitate  God :  1.  By  a  readiness  to  forgive  and  restore  our  own
banished  ones;  those  who  have  forfeited  our  favour  by  misconduct.  Some  are
implacable  even  toward  their  own  children,  however  penitent  they  may  be ;  but  this  is

.  contrary  to  Christ,  and  quite  unbecoming  those  who  owe  their  own  place  in  God's
family  to  his  forgiving  mercy.  2.  By  hearty  co-operation  with  Qod  in  the  work  of
restoring  those  who  have  departed  from  him.  This  is  the  most  glorious  purpose  for
which  we  can  live,  the  Divinest  work  in  which  we  can  engage.  In  this  work  we  must
bear  in  mind  that  to  be  successful  we  must  conform  to  the  methods  which  God  has
devised  and  furnished;  as,  in  fact,  in  all  departments  of  life,  success  springs  from
learning  the  Divine  laws,  and  acting  in  harmony  with  them.  There  is  no  room  for  our
own  inventions,  no  possibility  of  independent  action.  In  such  imitation  and  co-ope-
ration we  should  be  impelled  to  faithfulness  and  diligence  by  the  consideration  that
both  ourselves  and  those  we  are  to  benefit  "  must  needs  die  "  (see  John  ix.  4).  And
let  the  same  consideration  lead  those  who  have  departed  from  God  to  return  with  all
speed  (see  John  xii.  35 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  1,  2).  Let  not  all  the  Divine  thoughts  and
methods  of  mercy  be,  in  your  case,  in  vain.  For  all  had  respect  to  you  individually.
This  we  may  be  aided  to  realize  by  the  singular  number  used  here,  "  his  banished
one."  "  It  was  for  me  that  all  this  movement  of  Divine  love  took  place,  and  all  these
wonderful  means  have  been  employed.  For  me  the  Saviour  died ;  to  me  the  Divine
message  is  sent,"  etc.  Let  not  your  return,  however,  be  like  Absalom's,  in  outward
act  only,  but  in  heart.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man
his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him ;
and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon  "  (Isa.  Iv.  7). — G.  W,

Ver.  17. — An  dll-co7nprehensive  blessing.    "  The  Lord  thy  God  be  with  thee  "  (Be-


OH.  xnr.  1— 33.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  865

vised  Version).  The  "  wise  woman,"  in  closing  her  address  to  David  and  taking
leave,  as  she  thought,  of  him,  pronounces  this  blessing  upon  him.  It  was  a  usual
form  of  salutation  amongst  the  Israelites ;  and,  like  our  similar  forms  ("  Adieu,"  eqvii-
valent  to  "  to  God  [I  commend  thee] ; "  "  Good-bye,''  equivalent,  perhaps,  to  "  God  bs
with  thee  "),  was  doubtless  often  employed  without  thought  or  feeling  as  to  its  signifi-
cance. But  in  its  full  meaning  it  is  the  best  blessing  we  can  pronounce  on  our  friends,
the  most  comprehensive  prayer  we  can  offer  for  them.  "  The  Lord  Jesus  he  with  thy
spirit "  (2  Tim.  iv.  22)  is  a  similar  benediction.

I.  It  18  A  PRATER  OF  TRDE  FRIENDSHIP.  We  Can  desirc  nothing  more  or  better  for
our  friends  than  what  these  words  express.  For  consider :  1.  What  is  included  in  God
being  "  with  "  men.  Not  simply  his  nearness,  but :  (1)  His  favour.  His  presence  as
a  Friend  with  friends.  Not  merely  as  he  is  near  to  all  men,  the  Upholder  of  their
being  and  the  Source  of  whatever  they  enjoy ;  but  as  he  is  near  to  those  who  are
reconciled  to  him,  whom  he  has  forgiven  and  received  into  his  spiritual  family,  who
love  him  and  delight  in  his  love.  (2)  His  constant  help.  To  defend,  uphold,  guide,
8up[iy  with  all  needed  and  real  good,  temporal  and  spiritual;  to  impart  to  them
wisdom,  holiness,  strength,  and  happiness.  (3)  His  converse  with  them.  The
manifestation  of  his  presence  and  loving-kindness  ;  so  that  they  discern  his  nearness,
are  conscious  of  his  love  and  care  and  oo-operation.  2.  Whose  friendship  is  thus
invoked.  That  of  "  Jehovah  thy  God."  The  living  God,  the  Eternal,  the  Almiothty,  the
All-wise,  the  All-good,  etc.  Better  to  have  him  with  us  than  all  the  world,  all  the
universe.  In  fact,  if  God  is  with  us,  all  things  are  really  with  us  (see  Eom.  viii.  28,
31—39  i  1  Pet.  iii.  13).

II.  It  is  a  pbateb  natural  to  a  pious  man.  Springing  from  his  personal
experience  of  the  blessedness  of  those  who  have  God  with  them,  and  his  desire  that  all,
and  especially  those  in  whom  he  feels  the  deepest  interest,  should  he  partakers  of  the
same  blessedness.

III.  It  is  a  prater  espkoiallt  suitable  to  be  offered  on  certain  occasions.
To  express  feelings  of  friendship,  gratitude,  benevolence,  affection :  (1)  To  benefactors,
whose  kindness  we  feel  we  cannot  requite.  "  I  cannot  repay  you,  but  God  can.  May
he  be  with  you  I "  (2)  To  needy  persons,  whose  necessities  we  feel  we  cannot  meet.
Whether  the  need  be  temporal  or  spiritual.  The  poor,  the  sick,  the  perplexed ;  friends
engaged  in  difficult  enterprises  or  going  into  perilous  circumstances;  such  as  are  leaving
home  or  country;  friends  from  whom  we  are  parting,  not  knowing  what  may  befall
them  or  us.  (3)  To  dying  friends,  or  those  near  us  when  we  die.  "I  die,  but  God
shall  be  with  you  "  (Gen.  xlviii.  21).  It  is  a  prayer  that  gives  comfort  and  peace  to
him  who  presents  it,  quieting  the  tumult  excited  by  the  combination  of  strong  desire
with  conscious  helplessness.

IV.  It  is  a  pbateb  which  will  be  fulfilled  to  the  righteous.  The  unrighteous
can  only  secure  the  blessing  for  themselves  by  becoming  righteous  (see  2  Chron.  xv.  2),
through  repentance  and  faith  in  Immanuel  (equivalent  to  "  God  with  us  "). — G.  W.

Ver.  25.1 — Absalom's  beauty.  This  remark,  thrown  in  by  the  way,  has  more  to  do
with  the  main  course  of  the  narrative  than  at  first  appears.  The  personal  beauty  nf
Absalom  accounts  in  part  for  the  excessive  fondness  of  David  for  him,  for  his  vanity
and  ambition,  and  for  his  powerful  influence  over  others;  and,  so  far  as  it  consisted  iu
abundance  of  fine  hair,  appears  to  have  been  the  immediate  occasion  of  his  miserable
end.     It  may  serve  us  as  the  starting-point  of  some  remarks  on  beauty  of  person.

L  Its  worth.  1.  It  is  in  itself  good  as  a  fair  work  and  gift  of  God.  A  sober
alls  it  "  a  beam  of  the  majesty  of  God."     2.  It  ts  pleasa


divine  (Man ton)  calls  it  "a  beam  of  the  majesty  of  God."  2.  It  %s  pleasant  to  looJc
upon.  Beautiful  people  are  so  many  pictures  moving  about  in  society  for  the  innocent
gratification  of  beholders,  with  this  superiority  to  other  pictures,  that  they  are  alive,  and
present  continual  variety.  3.  It  may  be  of  great  advantage  to  its  possessor.  It  attracts
others;  makes  it  easier  to  secure  friends.  A  comely  face  and  form  are  an  introduction
to  notice  and  favour.  4.  It  may  be  a  power  for  good  to  others.  In  a  ruler,  a  preacher,
any  leader  in  society,  it  is  an  element  of  influence.  Is  not,  therefore,  to  be  despised
either  by  its  possessor  or  by  others,

II.  Its  perils.     1.  It  is  apt  to  excite  vanity  and  pride — themselves  the  parents  of
many  sins,    2.  When  overvalued,  it  leads  to  the  neglect  of  higher  things — the  cultura


369  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv.  1—37.

of  mind,  heart,  and  character.  3.  In  children  it  may  awaken  in  their  parents  a  foolish
fondness  which  hinders  parental  discipline.  (Comp.  1  Kings  L  6.)  4.  H  attracts
flatterers  and  seducers,  and  thus  often  occasions  moral  rmn.  It  was  Tamar's  beauty  that
kindled  Amnon'8  lust  (ch.  ziii.  1).  It  is  a  very  perilous  endowment  to  young  women,
especially  among  the  poor.  5.  It  may  lead  its  possessor  to  lecome  a  tempter  of  others ;
and  renders  his  (or  her)  temptations  all  the  more  seductive.  Lord  Bacon  (in  his  essay
'  On  Beauty ')  says,  "  For  the  most  part  it  makes  a  dissolute  youth,  and  an  age  a  little
out  of  countenance ;  but  yet  certainly  again,  if  it  light  well,  it  maketh  virtues  shine
and  vices  blush."

in.  Its  INFEEIORITT.  In  comparison  with  mental,'  moral,  and  spiritual  beauty,
1.  In  essential  nature.  The  latter  belong  to  a  far  higher  region,  are  a  far  more
valuable  product  of  the  Divine  hand.  The  beauties  of  holiness  are  the  features  of  the
Divine  Father  appearing  in  his  children,  and  manifesting  their  parentage.  2.  In
appearance.  Moral  loveliness  is  far  more  beautiful  than  physical  in  the  sight  of  Grod
and  the  good  (comp.  1  Sam.  xvi.  7),  and  it  has  the  power  of  rendering  very  plain  faces
interestiag  and.  attractive,  if  not  beautiful.  3.  In  value  to  its  possessor  and  to  others.
Beauty  of  character  is  a  priceless  treasure  (1  Pet.  iii.  4),  indicating  one  still  mo-e
precious — the  character  itself;  it  excites  the  deepest  and  best  kind  of  admiration  and
commendation  (Prov.  zxxi.  30) ;  and  it  gives  those  in  whom  it  appears  a  power  over
others  for  their  good  which  incalculably  surpasses  the  influence  of  mere  beauty  of
person ;  and  which  "  adorning  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  "  (Titus  ii.  10) — the
chief  instrument  of  good  to  men — wins  for  it  a  readier  acceptance.  4.  In  facility  of
attainment.  Beauty  of  person,  if  not  a  gift  of  nature,  cannot  be  acquired ;  but  that
of  the  soul  can.  The  Lord  Jesus  came  to  earth  to  make  it  possible  for  the  ugly  and
deformed  to  bef  ome  lovely ;  he  lives  to  effect  this  great  transformation.  Those  who  are
in  him  cecome  the  subjects  of  a  new  creation:  "Old  things  are  passed  away;  aU  things
are  become  new"  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  The  Holy  Ghost  adorns  the  soul  with  heavenly
grace  and  attractiveness  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  And  when  the  process  is  complete  on  the
■whole  Church  of  Christ,  he  will  "present  it  to  himself"  as  his  beauteous  bride,
"  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but  .  .  .  holy  and
vfithout  blemish"  (Eph.  v.  27).  Faith  in,  and  habitual  converse  with,  him  who  is
"altogether  lovely,"  is  the  way  to  experience  for  ourselves  this  wondrous  change.
"  Beholding  as  in  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image
from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  Even  the
body  will  at  length  be  beautified  (Phil.  iii.  21).  5.  In  duration.  The  beauty  which
is  of  earth  fades  and  passes  away,  but  that  which  is  of  heaven  abides  evermore.  The
former  may  vanish  even  in  youth  through  the  ravages  of  disease ;  will  almost  certainly
in  after-life,  unless  heightened  and  ripened  by  sense  and  goodness ;  and  certainly  will
turn  to  corruption  after  death.  But  the  latter  will  survive  the  decay  and  destruction
of  all  things,  and  adorn  the  "  Father's  house  "  for  ever.

In  conclusion,  this  subject  appeals  especially  to  the  young.  Let  them  seek  with
all  their  heart  the  beauty  which  is  spiritual  and  everlasting;  and  regard  as  of  small
account  that  which  is  in  itself  of  little  value,  and  at  best  of  short  duration ;  and  which,
if  separate  from  moral  excellence,  is  like  the  beauty  of  a  sepulchre,  covering  death  and
corruption. — G.  W.

EXPOSITION.
CHAPTER  XV.


Ver.  1. — After  this.  The  Hebrew  is  a
more  precise  phrase  than  that  on  which
we  have  commented  on  ch.  x.  1  and
xiii.  1,  and  implies  that  Absalom  began
his  devices  soon  after  obtaining  his  liberty.
Chariots  and  horses;  Hebrew,  a  chariot  and
horses ;  that  is,  a  chariot  for  state  occasions,
in  which  Absalom  rode,  while  tifty  footmen
ran  at  his  side.     Probably  his  grandfather


Talmai  practised  similar  magnificence  at
Geshur.  In  India  it  is  still  common  for  luen
of  rank  to  be  attended  by  runners  on  foot,
who  will  keep  up  with  horses  or  elephants
for  an  incredible  distance.

Ver.  2. — The  way  of  the  gate.  The  gate
would  be  that  of  the  royal  palace,  where  the
king  gave  audience  and  administered  justice.
At  the  gate  of  the  city  the  elders  were  the
judges,  and,  though  the  higher  authoiity  ol
the  king  may  have  weakened  the  action  oi


OH.  XV.  1—37.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


«G7


this  citizen  court,  yet  passages  such  as  Isa.
1,  23  and  Jer.  v.  28  imply,  not  only  its  con-
tinued existence,  but  also  that  it  retained
much  importance.  Probably  all  causes  be-
tween citizens  were  tried  by  it,  just  as  causes
in  the  country  were  tried  by  the  mishpachah
(see  note  on  ch.  xiv.  7) ;  but  with  an  appeal
in  weighty  matters  to  the  king.  It  is  a
mistake  to  suppose  that  David  altogether
neglected  his  judicial  functions.  On  the
contrary,  the  woman  of  Tekoah  obtained  an
audieuce,  as  a  matter  of  course;  and  Absalom
would  not  have  risen  up  thus  early  unless
David  had  also  taken  his  seat  in  the  early
morning  on  the  royal  divan  to  administer
justice.  It  was  the  suitors  on  their  way  to
the  king  whom  Absalom  accosted,  and  made
believe  that  he  would  be  more  assiduous  in
his  duties  than  his  father,  and  that  he  would
have  decided  every  suit  in  favour  of  the  per-
son to  whom  he  was  talking,  whereas  really
one  side  alone  can  gain  the  cause.  Still,  we
may  well  believe  that,  guilty  himself  of
adultery  and  murder,  and  with  his  two
elder  sons  stained  with  such  terrible  crimes,
David's  administration  of  justice  had  be-
come half-hearted.  And  thus  his  sin  again
found  him  out,  and  brought  stern  punish-
ment. For  Absalom  used  this  weakness
against  his  father,  and,  intercepting  the
suitors  on  their  way,  would  ask  their  city
and  tribe,  and  listen  to  their  complaint,  and
assure  them  of  the  goodness  of  their  cause,
and  lament  that,  as  the  king  could  not  hear
all  causes  easily  himself,  he  did  not  appoint
others  to  aid  him  in  his  duties.  It  was  delay
and  procrastination  of  which  Absalom  com-
plained ;  and  as  many  of  tlie  litigants  had
probably  come  day  after  day,  and  not  suc-
ceeded in  getting  a  hearing,  they  were
already  in  ill  humour  and  prepared  to  find
fault.  Now,  as  David  possessed  great  powers
of  organization,  we  may  well  believe  that  he
would  have  taken  measures  for  the  adequate
administration  of  law  had  it  not  been  for  the
moral  malady  which  enfeebled  his  wUl.  In
the  appointment  of  Jehoshaphat  and  Seraiah
(ch.  viiL  16, 17)  he  had  made  a  beginning,
bat  soon  his  hands  grew  feeble,  and  he  did
no  more.

Ver.  6. — ^Absalom  stole  the  hearts.  By
professing  anxiety  to  devote  himself  to  the
hearing  and  deciding  of  the  people's  causes,
by  flattering  each  one  with  the  assurance
that  his  case  wus  so  good  that  it  needed  only
a  hearing  to  be  decided  in  his  favour,  and
by  his  affabiUty,  made  the  more  charming
and  irresistible  by  his  personal  beauty,  he
won  the  love  of  the  people  almost  without
their  knowing  how  devoted  they  had  become
to  him.

Ver.  7. — ^After  forty  years.  As  Absalom
was  bom  in  Hebron  after  David  was  made
king  (ch.  iii.  3),  and  as  David's  whole  reign


lasted  only  forty  years  and  six  months,  the
reading  "  forty "  is  •  evidently  incorrect.
Suggestions,  such,  for  Instance,  as  that  the
forty  years  are  to  be  reckoned  from  the
desire  of  the  Israelites  to  have  a  Mng,  or
from  the  anointing  of  David  by  Samuel,  are
merely  methods  of  evading  a  difficulty.  The
Syriac,  however,  and  the  Vulgate — except
the  Oodex  Amiatinus,  which  reads  "  forty,"
supported  by  Joseplius  and  some  manu-
scripts—  have  "four  years,"  which  would
give  ample,  yet  not  too  long,  time  for  the
growth  of  Absalom's  popularity,  and  of  dis-
satisfaction at  David's  terdy  administration
of  justice.  In  Hebron.  Absalom  chose  this
town,  both  as  being  his  birthplace,  and  also
because  it  was  on  the  road  to  Geshur
(1  Sam.  xxvii.  8),  whither  flight  might  be
necessary  should  the  enterprise  fail.  He
hoped  also  to  win  to  his  cause  some  of  the
powerful  tribe  of  Judah,  though  it  generally
was  the  mainstay  of  David's  throne.  Local
sacrifices  were  still  customary  (see  note  on
1  Sam.  xvi.  2),  and  the  visit  of  the  king's
son  for  such  a  purpose  would  be  celebrated
by  a  general  holiday  and  much  feasting  at
Hebron.  As  Ewald  remarks,  David's  confi-
dence and  want  rf  suspicion  were  the  results
of  a  noble-minded  generosity.  And  besides,
there  was  no  state  police  ever  on  the  watch,
and  ready  to  put  an  unfavourable  construc-
tion on  all  til  at  was  done;  and  probably
David  was  even  pleased  at  his  son's  popu-
larity, and  took  his  professions  as  proof  that
he  would  be  a  just  and  wise  ruler  on  succeed-
ing to  his  father's  place.  Perhaps,  too,  he
was  glad  at  this  indication  of  religious  feel-
ing on  Absalom's  part ;  for  a  father  is  sure
to  look  on  the  better  side  of  his  son's  acts.
He  had  been  tardy  enough  in  fulfilling  his
vow,  but  it  seemed  to  David  that  conscience
had  at  last  prevailed,  and  that  right  was  to
be  done.

Ver.  10. — Absalom  sent  spies.  The  word
means  "  those  who  go  hither  and  thither,"
and,  as  the  object  of  such  journeying  would
usually  be  to  gather  information,  the  right
translation  often  is  "  spies."  Here  there  was
no  such  purpose,  nor  were  they  to  report  to
Absalom,  but  to  disperse  themselves  every-
where, and,  when  the  signal  was  given  at
Hebron,  they  were  to  endeavour  to  gather
the  people  to  Absalom's  standard.  Some
simple-minded  commentators  wonder  how
one  trumpet  could  be  heard  throughout  the
land.  It  was  heard  only  at  Hebron,  but  the
news  of  the  proclamation  would  rapidly
spread ;  and,  though  the  rumour  might  be
vague  and  confused,  yet  these  emissaries,
fully  acquainted  beforehand  with  its  mean-
ing, would  turn  it  to  Absalom's  advantage,
and  urge  the  people  to  confirm  the  choice,
made,  as  they  would  affirm,  by  the  whole
tribe  of  Judah.    In  such  attempts  every-


368


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[CH.  XV.  1—37.


thing  depends  upon  gathering  a  powerful
following  at  first ;  and  usually  a  good  deal
of  vigour  and  even  force  is  necessary  to
make  men  take  part  in  a  revolt.  But  as  the
numbers  swell,  adherents  readily  flock  in  to
what  seems  to  be  the  winning  side.

Ver.  11. — Two  hundred  men.  These,
doubtless,  were  courtiers  and  men  of  rank,
who  were  so  accustomed  to  Absalom's  love
of  display,  that,  when  called,  that  is,  invited,
they  would  go  without  suspicion.  To  Ab-
salom their  attendance  was  most  important,
not  only  because,  being  compromised,  many
would  join  him,  and  even  all  of  them  for  a
time  be  forced  to  yield  obedience,  but  be-
cause they  would  make  the  people  of  Hebron
suppose  tliat  Absalom  had  a  powerful  body
of  supporters  at  Jerusalem.  It  is  quite
possible  that  at  Hebron,  and  generally  in
Judah,  there  was  great  discontent  because
David  had  left  their  tribe  to  choose  a  capital
elsewhere,  and  because  he  did  not  show  them
any  decided  preference  over  the  other  tribes,
whose  good  will  he  would  rightly  seek  to
conciliate.  The  existence  of  much  jealousy
between  Judah  and  the  ten  tribeg  is  plain
from  ch.  xir.  41 — 43.

"Ver.  12.-Ahithophel  the  Gilonite.  The
desertion  of  David  by  Ahithophel  is  in  every
way  remarkable,  even  if  he  were  Bathsheba's
grandfather  (see  note  on  ch.  xi.  3).  For  he
was  far  too  subtle  a  man  to  have  joined  the
conspiracy  unless  he  had  felt  reasonably
sure  that  it  would  be  successful.  Successful
it  would  have  been  had  his  advice  been
followed;  but  so  correctly  did  he  estimate
the  result  if  David  were  allowed  time  to
gather  his  friends,  that,  when  his  counsel
was  rejected,  he  withdrew  immediately
to  Giloli,  and  committed  suicide.  Still  if
the  revolt  had  been  successful,  it  would
have  involved,  if  not  the  death  of  Bath-
sheba,  yet  certainly  that  of  her  sons,  and
the  exclusion  of  Ahithophel's  great-grand-
children from  the  throne.  In  Ps.  xli.,
written  at  this  time,  we  learn  what  were
David's  feelings  when  he  heard  the  news
of  this  conspiracy,  and  Ahithophel  is  the
familiar  friend,  in  whom  he  had  trusted,
and'  who  had  eaten  at  his  table,  but  now
raised  up  his  heel  to  kick  at  him.  In  John
xiii.  18  the  words  are  quoted  of  Judas
Isoariot,  of  whom  Ahithophel  was  a  type  in
his  treachery  and  in  his  death  by  his  own
hand.  The  translation,  "sent  for  Ahithu-
pb«l."  cannot  be  maintained.  The  Hebrew
is  "  sent  Ahithophel,"  but  for  what  purpose
or  on  what  embassy  is  not  mentioned.  As
thus  something  must  have  dropped  out  of
the  Hebrew  text,  it  possibly  may  be  the
preposition  "for,"  as  this  gives  a  good  sense.
For  Giloh,  Ahithophel's  town,  was  situated
a  few  miles  to  the  south  of  Hebron  (Josh.
ST.  51),  and  Ahithophel  had  probably  been


working  there  secretly  for  Absalom /or  some
time.  As  David's  counsellor,  his  proper
place  of  residence  would  have  been  Jeru-
salem, but  the  conspiracy  had  been  kept  so
secret  that  he  had  been  able  to  get  away
without  suspicion..  He  is  now  summoned
to  Absalom's  side,  and  his  presence  there
brings  in  so  many  adherents  that  a  rapid
march  on  Jerusalem  might  have  put  David
into  their  power.  The  Bevised  Version  is
right  in  translating,  while  he  offered  the
sacrifices ;  namely,  those  which  he  had
vowed,  and  which  were  the  reason  given
for  his  visit  to  Hebron.

Ver.  14. — Arise,  and  let  n»  flee.  The  re-
bellion of  Absalom,  and  David's  humiliating
flight,  bring  out  all  the  better  parts  of  the
king's  character,  and  set  him  once  again
before  us  as  a  man  after  God's  own  heart.
For  this  period  is  richly  illustrated  by  the
psalms  which  were  written  under  the  pres-
sure of  this  great  affliction,  and  which  are
marked  by  firm  confidence  in  God,  and  an
assured  sense  of  the  Divine  nearness  and
protection.  Ps.  xli.  shows  how  poignant  wa»
his  anguish  at  Ahithophel's  treachery,  but
it  inspired  no  fear :  "  As  for  me,  thou  up-
holdest  me  in  mine  integrity,  and  settest  me
before  thy  face  for  ever  "  (Ps.  xli.  12).  It  was
a  firm  faith  which. prompted  such  words.
In  Ps.  Ixiii.,  written  "  in  the  wilderness  of
Judah,"  before  David  had  reached  the
Jordan,  he  gives  utterance  to  his  grief  at  the
loss  of  his  religious  privileges  at  Jerusalem ;
but  Jehovah  is  still  his  strong  Tower,  and
his  dwelling  will  be  in  God's  tabernacle  for
ever.  Ps.  iii.  and  iv.  are  his  morning  and
evening  hymns  written  "  when  he  fied  from
Absalom  his  son."  Ps.  Iv.  is  one  more  sad
even  than  Pa.  xli.  He  describes  in  it  his
panic-stricken  feelings  when  the  news
reached  him,  his  longing  to  escape  from  the
turmoil  of  life,  and  flee  into  the  wilderness
and  be  at  rest ;  and  his  grief  at  his  desertion
by  men  in  whose  company  he  had  worshipped
in  the  house  of  God.  Upon  this  follows  an  out-
burst of  vehement  indignation,  made  themora
bitter  by  the  sense  of  the  treachery  where-
by he  had  been  duped  into  connivance  with
Absalom's  plans  (ver.  21) ;  but  amidst  it  all
bis  confidence  was  unshaken  that  if  he  east
his  burden  upon  God,  "  he  would  sustain  him,
and  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be  moved."
Finally,  in  Pa.  ixvii.  we  have  the  contrast
between  Jehovah's  abiding  goodness  and  the
inconstancy  of  men ;  while  Pss.  Ixi.  and  IxU.
were  probably  written  at  Mahanaim,  when
David's  anguish  of  mind  was  being  assuaged,
and  a  calm  confidence  was  taking  its  place.
Everywhere  in  all  of  them  David  speaks  aa
one  who  had  now  given  all  his  heart  to  God.
As  regards  his  terror  and  flight  (Ps.  Iv.  5^
8),  it  may  seem  strange  that  David  should
have  withdrawn  so  hurriedly  from  a  city  s«


OH.XY.  1— 37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


869


strong  as  Jerusalem.  But  we  must  not  sup-
pose that  he  had  a  standing  army,  and  his
few  Cherethites  and  Pelethites  could  have
made  no  head  against  the  nation.  Probably,
too,  the  fortifications  of  the  city  were  incom-
plete (Pb.  U.  18);  and  even  if  in  good  cider,
yet,  cooped  up  in  Jerusalem,  David  would
have  left  the  whole  country  in  Absalom's
power,  and  finally,  after  a  long  blockade,  he
must  have  been  driven  by  famine  to  sur-
render. Away  from  Jerusalem  he  was  the
centre  whither  all  who  disliked  Absalom's
•ttemp.  icould  gather,  and  every  day  as  it
passed  would  make  men  refieot  more  and
more  upoo  wtut.t  David  had  done  for  them,
and  the  more  iteecy  and  thoughtful  of  them
would  finally  deoide  in  his  favour.  There
would  be,  moreover, the  secret  conviction  that
David,  with  such  men  round  him  as  Joab
and  Abishai,  if  free  to  take  his  own  course,
would  be  more  than  a  match  for  Absalom
and  his  larger  numbers.  This  was  what
Ahithophel  foresaw,  and  was  so  convinced
that,  if  David  were  not  crushed  at  once,  be
would  gain  the  day,  that  he  did  not  even
wait  to  see,  but  destroyed  himself.  Abar-
banel  thinks  that  the  wish  of  the  people
had  never  been  for  more  than  the  association
of  Absalom  with  David  on  the  throne,  ac-
cording to  what  he  had  himself  suggested
(ver.  4);  and  that  there  was  a  great  re-
vulsion of  feeling  when  they  saw  that  they
must  choose  absolutely  between  father  and
Bon,  and  that  whoever  lost  the  crown  must
lose  his  life  as  well.  Some  commentators
consider  that  Ps.  xxxi.  also  belongs  to  this
period,  though  others  ascribe  it  to  Jeremiah.
Parts  of  it  are  singularly  applicable  to  the
circumstances  of  David's  flight,  as  where  the
psalmist  spealts  of  Jehovah  as  being  his
Fortress  in  contrast  with  Jerusalem,  and
adds,  "  Thou  hast  not  shut  me  up  into  the
hands  of  the  enemy,  but  hast  set  my  feet
in  a  large  space,"  as  though  "  the  net  wliich
the  conspirators  had  privily  laid  for  him"
bad  been  the  design  to  coop  him  up  within
the  walls  of  the  city.  There  are  touching
words,  too,  of  distress  at  the  slander  and
reproach  breaking  forth  on  every  side,  and
at  the  completeness  of  his  fall,  so  that
wliereas  but  a  few  days  before  he  liad  been
a  king,  now  "  he  was  clean  forgotten,  as  a
dead  man  out  of  mind;  and  cast  aside  as
though  he  were  now  of  no  more  account
than  the  sherds  of  a  broken  vessel."  But,
with  the  calm  strength  of  faith  he  adds,
"  My  times  are  in  thy  hand ; "  "  Thou  slialt
hide  all  who  trust  in  thee  in  the  secret  of
thy  presence;"  "Oh,  then,  love  Jehovah,
and  be  of  good  courage  I  for  he  shall
strengthen  the  heart  of  all  whose  hope  is
fixed  on  him."

Ver.   15. — The  king's   servants.     These
were    the   officers    of   David's    court   and

n.  SAMUEL.


household,  numerous  enough  to  hamper  his
movements,  but  not  enough  to  protect  him.
All  David's  wives,  moreover,  went,  and  his
children,  and  some  of  his  concubines  (ch.  xix,
5),  ten,  however,  being  left  in  charge  of  th^
palace.

Yer.  17. — And  tarried  in  a  place  that  was
far  off;  Bevised  Version,  in  Beth-merhak.
"The  Far  House" — so  we  may  translate  tliig
proper  name — was  probably  not  a  dwelling,
but  a  pavilion  overlooking  the  Eidron
valley;  and  here  David  halted  his  house-
hold until  all  were  assembled,  and  arrange-
ments made  for  their  journey.  Here,  too,
the  body-guard  would  gather,  and  they
would  cross  the  Kidron  only  when  every-
thing was  ready  for  their  orderly  progress.
Confusion  at  such  a  time  would  breed  a
panic  and  invite  an  attack.

Ver.  18. — All  the  Oittxtes,  six  hundred
men  which  came  after  him  from  Qath.  The
Septuagint  reads  "  Gibborim,"  and  without
doubt  these  are  the  persons  meant;  but
while  they  were  styled  Gibborimi  the
"mighties,"  for  honour's  sake,  because  of
their  prowess,  they  probably  were  popularly
called  David's  Gittites,  because  they  were  the
six  hundred  men  who  had  formed  his  little
army  when  he  sought  refuge  with  Achish,
King  of  Gath  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  2;  xxx.  9).
They  were  not  Philistines,  but  Israelites  of
desperate  fortune  (1  Sam.  xxii.  2) ;  and  it  is
a  proof  of  David's  great  ability,  and  of  the
moral  influence  of  his  character,  that  he
was  successful,  not  only  in  controlling  them
and  maintaining  discipline,  but  also  in
forming  them  into  as  noble  a  set  of  heroes
as  ever  existed,  and  who  were  faithful  to
him  in  all  his  fortunes.  To  their  number
belonged  the  thirty-seven  champions  enu-
merated in  oh.  xxiii.,  and  possibly  the  title
"  Gibborim"  strictly  belonged  to  them  only.
As  they  are  still  called  "  the  six  hundred,"
it  is  probable  that  the  corps  was  maintained
at  this  number  by  new  appointments,  and
that  they  had  special  privileges  which  made
their  position  very  desirable.  Certainly
David  would  never  forget  men  who  bad
shared  all  his  fortunes,  and  been  so  true  and
so  useful  to  him;  and  it  is  evident,  Arom
Hushai's  counsel  (ch.  xvii.  8),  that  Absalom
feared  their  resolute  valour,  and  hesitated
to  attack  without  overwhelming  numbers.
Thenlus  compares  these  veterans  to  Napo-
leon's Old  Guard.

Ver.  19. — Ittai  the  Gittite.  Ittai  was  not
one  of  the  six  hundred,  though  there  was
an  Ittai  among  them,  a  Benjamite.  Ho
was  a  citizen  of  Gath,  who  had  lately  come
("  yesterday,"  see  ver.  20),  with  all  his  house-
hold of  slaves  and  dependents,  his  clan,
Hebrew,  his  taf — ^translated  in  ver.  22  his
"little  ones."  He  had  evidently  been  •
person  of  importance  in  his  own  country,

2  B


S70


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[en.  XV.  1—37.


whence  be  had  been  driven,  perhaps  by
political  troubles,  and  was  now,  therefore,  an
exile  and  a  foreigner  (Anthorized  Version,
"  stranger")  at  Jeiusalem.  As  David  made
him  joint  commander  of  his  army  with  Joab
and  Abishai  (ch.  xviil.  2),  he  must  also  have
been  a  general  of  recognized  military  skill.
As  he  was  thns  not  personally  interested  in
tile  government  of  Israel,  and,  in  fact,  had
only  lately  come  thither,  David  recommends
him  to  return  .  .  .  and  abide  with  the  king,
that  is,  with  the  defado  king,  Absalom.  But
so  great  was  the  fascination  which  David
exercised  upon  those  around  him,  that  this
foreigner  boldly  threw  in  his  lot  with  him,
and  accompanied  him  in  his  flight.  Betnm
to  thy  place.  This  is  a  very  daring  trans-
position, as  the  Hebrew  is,  Eeturn  and  abide
with  the  king ;  for  thou  art  a  foreigner,  and
also  an  exile  art  thou  to  thy  place.  The  Bevised
Version  gives  tbe  same  sense  as  the  Author-
ized, though  it  shows  more  respect  to  the
grammar.  But  the  Septuagint,  Syriac,  and
Vulgate,  by  "his  own  place"  understand
Gath,  either  taking  the  words  as  meaning
"  an  exile  as  to  thy  own  place,"  or  having  a
different  reading.  The  Hebrew  then  pro-
ceeds, Yesterday  leas  thy  coming,  and  shall  I
to-day  make  thee  wander  to  go  with  us,  seeing
I  go  whither  I  got  that  is,  I  go  I  know  not
whither.  Betum  thou,  and  take  back  thy
brethren — in  mercy  and  truth.  This  gives
a  very  good  sense,  but  the  Septuagint  and
Vulgate  have  a  different  reading :  "  Take
back  thy  brethren  with  thee,  and  the  Lord
shew  thee  mercy  and  truth."  The  Syriac
gives  the  general  sense  of  the  Hebrew,  ren-
dering, "  Take  back  thy  brethren  well."

Ver.  22. — ^All  the  little  ones;  Hebrew,
all  Hie  taf;  in  ver.  20  called  "  his  brethren,"
that  is,  aU  the  relatives  and  dependents  who
had  accompanied  him  in  his  exile.  Their
presence  with  him  proves  that  he  had  en-
tirely broken  with  the  Philistines,  and  left
his  country  for  good.  He  may  have  taken
this  step  for  religious  reasons,  though  his
swearing  by  Jehovah  (ver.  21)  does  not
prove  it,  as  Achish  did  the  same  (1  Sam.
xxix.  6);  or  Ittai,  after  the  capture  of  Gath
by  David  (oh.  viii.  1),  may  have  made  him-
self unpopular  by  becoming  the  ally  of  the
conqueror,  and  so  finally  have  determined  to
leave  the  city,  and  find  a  home  in  Israel.

Ver.  23.— AU  the  country  wept.  This
general  lamentation  proves  that  David  was
not  reidly  unpopular  in  Jerusalem,  though
it  was  there  that  Absalom  had  dazzled  the
people  by  his  magnificence,  and  sought  to
win  favour  by  his  gracious  ways.  By  the
tountry  the  inhabitants  are  meant,  who
watched  the  king's  departure;  while  the
people  are  David's  followers — his  retinue
and  attendants.  The  brook  Eidron.  This
IS  a   winter  torrent,  dry  during  most  of


the  year,  but  serving  at  the  rainy  season*
to  carry  off  the  rainfall  firom  the  Valley  of
Jehoshaphat.  It  lay  on  the  east  of  Jeru-
salem, and  beyond  it  was  Mount  Olivet.
The  direction  of  David's  flight  was  toward
the  wild  country  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan,
in  which  Ishbosheth  had  found  a  refuge
after  the  defeat  of  Gilboa.  To  reach  it  he
must  pass  by  Jericho,  and  thence  through
the  Arabah  (Jer.  xxxix.  4)  to  tbe  ford  of
the  Jordan,  after  crossing  which  he  would
be  in  comparative  safety.  Ahithophel
would  liave  followed  that  very  night,  and
have  attacked  before  David  had  placed  tbe
river  between  himself  and  his  pursuers.

Ver.  24. — And  Abiathar  went  up.  This
rendering,  though  confirmed  by  the  versions,
is  very  unintelligible.  Whither  -did  Abia-
thar go  up  ?  And  moreover  it  is  said  that
he  continued  going  up  until  all  David's
followers  had  passed  out  of  the  city.  Another
possible  rendering  is,  "And  Abiathar  offered
(sacrifices)  until  all  the  people  had  done
passing  out  of  the  city."  Passages  quoted
in  proof  that  the  verb  may  be  so  rendered
without  the  addition  of  the  word  "  sacrifice  "
are  1  Sam.  ii.  28  and  ch.  xxiv.  22 ;  but  in
both  these  places  the  context  makes  the
sense  plain.  Such  a  sacrifice  would,  of
course,  sanctify  both  king  and  people  in
their  flight ;  but  as  none  of  the  versions
support  this  method  of  translating  the  text,
it  seems  unsafe  to  adopt  it,  and  the  passage
must  remain  obscure.  On  the  one  hand,  it
is  unlikely  that  there  would  be  time  to
ofier  sacrifices  at  so  hasty  a  flight ;  but  on
tbe  other  hand,  the  removal  of  the  ark  was
a  solemn  thing,  which  probably  required
some  such  religious  ceremonial,  and  Oahen
and  other  Jewish  authorities  translate,
"  Abiathar  ofiered  burnt  offerings."

Ver.  26.— -Let  him  do  to  me  as  seemeth
good  unto  him.  David's  answer  is  full,  not
only  of  devout  resignation  and  trust  in  God,
but  is  remarkable  also  for  the  absence  of
supeiBtition.  He  feels  that  God  will  not
judge  him  by  any  mere  outward  sign  or
privilege,  but  in  truth  and  equity.  If  he
deserves  condemnation,  he  will  not  escape  it
by  carrying  the  ark  about  wiith  him.  If,  on
the  contrary,  God  accepts  him,  he  will  re-
store him  to  the  enjoyment  of  his  spiritnal
privileges,  and  bring  him  back  to  worship
at  the  place  which  he  has  chosen  for  his
dwelling.  We  must  notice  that  he  addresses
these  words  to  Zadok,  who  had  remained
with  the  ark.  This  was  natural  if  Abiathar
was  occupied  in  offering,  but  hard  to  under-
stand if  he  had  gone  up,  that  is,  in  advance
of  the  ark,  to  acquaint  David  with  their
purpose.

Ver.  27.— Art  thou  (not)  a  seerl  Both
the  Authorized  Version  and  the  Bevised
Version  evade  the  difSculty  of  this  passage


OH.  XV.  1—37.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,


371


by  inBeiting  the  word  "  not."  It  is  one  of
the  merits  of  the  Bevised  Yersion  that
usually  it  does  not  take  these  libeities.
But  "Art  thou  a  eeer?"  is  meaningless;
and  the  attempts,  moreover,  to  show  that
Zadok  was  a  seer  fail  entirely  in  proof.
The  receiving  revelations  by  Urim  and
Thummim  was  a  priestly,  and  not  a  pro-
phetic, function.  Without  altering-the  text,
the  words  may  be  correctly  translated,
"  Seest  thou  ?  "  This  was  probably  a  col-
loquial phrase,  of  which  the  Septuagint
gives  the  sense  by  rendering  it  in  the  im-
perative, "  See ; "  while  the  Syriac,  regard-
ing it  as  an  expletive,  boldly  omits  it.

Yer.  28. — In  the  plain  of  the  wilderness.
The  Revised  Version  has  "at  the  fords  of
the  wilderness,"  that  is,  it  rightly  keeps  to
the  written  Hebrew  text  (the  K'tib),  while
the  Authorized  Version  adopts  a  conjecture
of  the  Massorites  (the  K'ri).  This  conjec-
ture is  the  substitution  of  arioth  for  dbroth,
and  they  have  made  the  same  alteration  ut
eh.  xvii.  16.  But  the  substitution  is  un-
called for  and  mischievous;  for  David
would  not  halt  indefinitely  in  the  plain,  the
Arabah  (of  which  Arboth  is  the  plural),  but
would  press  on  to  the  fords,  wliere  some
delay  must  take  place,  and  where  the  king's
presence  would  be  important  in  giving  in-
structions for  what  was  by  no  means  an
easy  operation  (comp.  ch.  xix.  18).  At  the
river,  moreover,  David  could  be  assailed
only  in  fiont,  where  his  "  mighties  "  would
make  a  strong  defence,  while  in  the  Arabah
they  might  be  surrounded  ;  and,  encumbered
as  they  were  with  women,  their  line  must
be  so  extended  as  to  be  weakened.  We
find,  too,  in  Judg.  iii.  28  that  the  fords  of
the  Jordan  formed  a  good  military  position.
In  ch.  xvii.  22  it  is  expressly  said  that  the
fording  of  the  river  did  not  take  place  until
Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz  came  with  their
report;  and  their  words  there,  in  ver.  21,
show  that  David  was  on  the  bank  when
they  arrived,  with  his  preparations  so  com-
plete, that,  in  the  next  few  hours,  all  his
company  were  safely  carried  over  to  the
other  side.  Ahimaaz  was  a  famous  runner
(see  ch.  xviii.  27),  and,  if  David  was  ready,
the  time  gained  by  him  upon  any  body  of
troops  leaving  Jerusalem  at  the  same  hour,
would  have  enabled  the  king  to  get  his
people  across ;  but  if  he  hiid  still  some
miles  to  march,  with  a  number  of  women
and  children,  Ahimaaz's  fieetness  would
have  been  rendered  useless.

Ver.  30. — The  ascent  of  mount  Olivet;
Hebrew,  the  ascent  of  the  olive  trees.  The
hill  never  was  called  Olivet,  which  is  a
word  formed  from  the  Latin  nums  oliveti,
the  mount  of  the  olive  grove.  David  had
his  head  covered.  This  was  a  sign  of  grief
among  the  Persians,  Egyptians,  and  Bomang,


as  well  as  the  Hebrews  (for  whom  see  Ezek.
xxiv.  17),  it  being  originally  a  natural  move-
ment to  concetil  an  outburst  of  tears.  So
we  in  great  sorrow  bury  our  faces  in  our
hands.  In  this  mark  of  mourning  all
joined,  but  David  added  the  going  barefoot
as  a  sign  of  deeper  humiliation.  Accord-
ing to  the  Jewish  Midrasfa,  it  was  upon  the
Mount  of  Olives  that  David  composed  the
third  psalm.  More  probably  it  was  at
the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  after  David,  wearied
with  the  fatigues  of  the  march,  had  enjoyed
a  short  refreshing  slumber,  and  while  he
was  waiting  for  his  two  young  friends,  that
he  comforted  himself  by  this  outpouring  of
his  heart  to  God.

Ver.  31.— And  one  told  David.  The
Hebrew  literally  is,  and  David  told.  But
we  cannot  suppose  that  David  had  previously
known  of  Ahithopliel's  defection.  The  text
is  evidently  corrupt,  and  the  Authorized
Version  gives  the  right  sense.  On  hearing
of  the  defection  of  a  man  so  famous  for
practiciil  sound  judgment,  David  prays  to
God  to  frustrate  his  counsel,  and  the  oppor-
tunity for  devising  means  for  this  end
quickly  follows.

Ver.  32. — Where  he  worshipped  God;  more
correctly,  where  God  was  worshipped,  and
so  the  Revised  Version.  The  summit  of  the
Mount  of  Olives  was  one  of  the  many  bamoth,
or  high  places,  situated  on  the  top  of  hills,
where,  in  the  old  Canaanitish  time,  men
had  worshipped  their  heathenish  deities.
They  were  still  regarded  as  consecrated
places,  but  the  worship  had  now  been  trans-
ferred to  Elohim,  the  true  God.  They  con-
tinued to  be  hallowed  spots,  with  Levitical
priests  to  minister  at  them,  until  the  stricter
times  of  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii.  8),  when
such  worship  was  forbidden ;  but  even  then
tliese  priests  seem  to  have  retained  consider-
able privileges,  though  their  position  was
inferior  to  that  held  by  the  priests  of  the
temple.  It  was  at  this  hallowed  spot  that
David's  old  friend  and  privy  counsellor  (ver.
37),  Hushai,  met  him,  with  his  coat  rent — not
the  upper  garment,  but  the  hutloneth,  the
under  tunic,  the  rending  of  which  was  a
sign  of  deeper  sorrow.  We  read  of  "the
border  of  the  Arohites"  (so  the  Revised
Version,  rightly)  in  Josh.  xvL  2,  near  Bethel,
in  the  tribe  of  Manasseh;  and  Hushai's
birtliplaoe  was  probably  there.

Ver.  33. — A  burden  unto  me.  Most  likely
because  Hushai  was  old  and  infirm.  Others,
with  lees  probability,  think  that  it  was
because  of  bis  rank,  which  would  demand
special  attendance.

Ver.  34. — Then  mayest  thou  for  me  defeat
the  oounsel  of  Ahithophel.  David  was  thus
meeting  treachery  by  treachery,  and  we
cannot  approve  of  it,  even  granting  that
Ahithophel's  conduct  was  base  and  gelflsh.


372


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[oh.  XV.  1 — 37.


wMle  Hnshai  was  risking  his  life  for  his
master.  Still,  he  was  sent  back  to  tell  a
falsehood,  and  his  excuse  was  necessity ;  for
Ahitliophel  was  so  sagacious  that,  if  his
counsel  were  not  upset,  David's  cause  was
lost.  It  was  not  Christian  morality,  but  yet
it  has  a  sort  of  nobleness  about  it  in  Hushai's
devotion  to  his  king.  And  even  now,  in  war
and  diplomacy,  such  acts  are  not  uncommon,
and  a  distinction  is  unhappily  drawn  between
political  and  social  morality.  Even  in
common  life  immoral  doings  are  often  sanc-
tioned by  use.  Thus  many  customs  of  trade
are  frauds,  considered  legitimate  because
generally  practised.  Even  among  ourselves
Christian  morality  is  far  below  the  level
of  our  Master's  teaching;  and  the  Old
Testament  must  not  be  taken  as  approving
all  that  it  records.  Similar  blame  does  not
attach  to  Zadok  and  Abiathar.  They  were
known  to  be  David's  friends,  and  had  even
tried  to  go  with  him,  bearing  with  them  the
ark.  They  professed  no  friendship  for
Absalom,  and  returned  for  no  covert  pur-
pose, looking  for  protection,  not  to  guile,
but  to  their  sacred  ofSce.  And  Absalom
would  be  glad  to  have  them  in  his  power,


and  would  make  them  continue  the  ons-
ternary  sacrifices,  and,  if  his  rebellion  proved
successful,  would  force  them  to  anoint  him,
and  so  give  his  usurpation  a  religious  sano>
tion.  But  he  would  tell  them  none  of  hig
plans,  nor  would  they  try  to  insinuate  them-
selves into  his  confidence.  They  would
have  a  perfect  right  to  he  useful  in  any
way  they  could  to  their  true  master,  but
would  do  so  at  the  risk  of  severe  punish-
ment. Hushai's  way  of  defeating  Ahitho-
phel  was  treacherous ;  but  there  was  no
deceit  in  the  young  men  carrying  a  message
from  him,  for  they  were  openly  David's
friends.

Yer.  37. — ^Absalom  came  into  Jemsalein.
Absalom  had  evidently  pushed  rapidly  for-
ward from  Hebron,  in  hopes,  perhaps,  ot
surprising  David  in  tlie  city.  Evidently  he
entered  it  on  the  day  of  David's  flight  (oh.
xvii.  ]),  and  Ahithophel's  proposal  to  select
twelve  thousand  men  from  Absalom's  fol-
lowers shows  how  very  powerful  the  con-
spiracy was.  Had  this  advice  been  followed,
the  decisive  battle  would  have  been  fought
that  evening  at  the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  a
few  miles  only  Irom  Jerusalem.


HOMILBTICa

Vers.  1 — 12. — Hie  thady  side  of  human  nature.  The  facts  are :  1.  Absalom  sets  up
a  large  domestic  establi-shment  with  a  semblance  of  royalty.  2.  Bising  early  in  the
morning  of  each  day,  he  is  first  to  meet  the  suitors  for  judgment  at  the  gate  of  the  city,
and  seizes  the  occasion  for  insinuating  that  there  is  defect  in  the  king's  provision  for
the  administration  of  justice.  3.  He  also  professes  to  manifest  sympathy  with  suitors
by  expressing  the  wish  that  he  were  in  a  position  to  do  them  justice,  and  gives  outward
evidence  of  his  concern  for  them  by  taking  each  one  by  the  hand  and  kissing  him.  4.
These  plans  being  in  progress,  he  next  asks  permission  of  David  to  go  to  Hebron,  on
the  plea  that  he  iiesired  to  redeem  a  vow  which  he  had  sacredly  made  to  God  while  in
exile  ;  and  David  granting  his  request,  he  sets  out  for  Hebron,  vrith  a  company  of  men
ignorant  of  his  design.  5.  Meanwhile  he  sends  spies  throughout  Israel,  so  that  on  a
given  signal  they  might  simultaneously  make  the  announcement,  "Absalom  reigneth
in  Hebron."  6.  He  moreover  gains  to  his  side  Ahithophel,  David's  counsellor,  and  so
advances  his  cause  among  the  people.  The  narrative  gives  us  in  brief  form  the  scheme,
the  principles,  the  methods,  and  early  form  of  Absalom's  conspiracy.  He  knew  his  own
mind,  and  was  set  on  the  overthrow  of  his  father's  authority,  from  sheer  vanity  and
lust  of  power.  The  outline  of  his  method  was  clearly  defined:  (1)  to  win  over  the
people  by  criticizing  the  king's  administration,  and  gratifying  them  by  a  showy  establish-
ment, professed  zeal  for  justice,  and  marked  personal  attentions ;  (2)  to  secure  a  good
centre  for  proclaiming  his  authority,  and  this  by  a  hypocritical  profession  of  religion
wiiich  required  him  to  go  there ;  (3)  by  scattering  agents  through  the  land,  and  gaining
to  his  side  the  king's  most  sagacious  adviser.  There  is  not  one  relieving  feature  to  the
dark  picture  of  pride,  ingratitude,  filial  alienation,  low  cunning,  and  religious  hypocrisy.
It  is,  however,  our  province  to  extract  good  out  of  evil,  and  in  the  early  stages  of
Absalom's  rebellion  we  may  see  illustrations  of  the  shady  side  of  human  nature,  which,
if  noted  and  aiplied  to  conduct,  may  warn  against  often-recurring  evils,  and  put  us  on
our  guard  against  the  same  tendencies  in  other  departments  of  life.

I.  The  pHiNciPLES  and  methods  op  unjustifiable  rebellion.  Bebellion  against
existing  authority  may  perhaps  be  right  under  special  circumstances.  People  do  not
exist  for  governments,  but  governments  for  the  people;  and  it  is  possible  that  the


oa.  tv.  1-3?.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of  SAMtJEL.  8?3

rights  cf  the  people  may  be  so  utterly  trodden  upon  that  it  is  the  duty  of  self-preser-
vation to  rebel.  Even  parental  authority  must  be  resisted  when  it  comes  into  direct
collision  with  conscience  and  with  Christ  (Matt.  x.  33 — 38).  But  rebellion  is  wicked
when,  as  in  this  case,  it  springs  from  a  blending  of  conceit,  dislike  of  constituted
authority,  and  lust  for  power.  This  may  characterize  rebellion  originating  in  an  indi-
vidual or  in  a  restless  people,  "talk  of  oppression,  justice,  kindness  and  consideration
for  the  oppressed,  may  be  but  a  cloak  for  a  selfish  aversion  to  restraint  and  a  love  of
self-will.  Even  where  there  is  justification  for  resistance  to  an  evil  rule,  it  is  wicked
to  have  recourse  to  flattery,  deceit,  hypocrisy,  and  low  cunning  to  accomplish  the  end  in
view.  In  times  of  turbulence  and  agitation  it  is  important  that  men  scrutinize  the
secret  motives  of  their  actions.  As  a  rule,  injustice  in  rulers  can  be  best  resisted
by  the  calm,  sober  protest  and  passive  resistance  of  conscientious  men.  Faith  in  G<id,
and  in  the  force  of  true  principles,  with  patient  persistence,  will  in  the  end  accomplish
more  than  can  be  secured  by  violence ;  and  where  injustice  exists  only  in  the  imagina-
tion of  the  restless,  and  the  evils  of  life  spring  from  their  own  habits  and  practices,  then
rebellion  is  one  of  the  greatest  crimes  of  which  man  is  capable.

•  II.  Incidental  hbvelations  of  ohahactee.  The  character  of  a  man  lies  primarily
in  the  main  principles  and  passions  that  are  deep  down  in  his  nature,  and  which  in
course  of  years  shape  his  outward  conduct.  Absalom's  real  character  was  in  existence
long  before  it  came  out  to  the  eye  of  the  public  in  the  form  of  rebellion  against  his
fatiier's  authority.  Probably  David  discerned  its  incipient  form,  and  hence  his  extreme
slowness  in  recalling  him  to  a  position  of  prominence.  The  setting  up  by  Absalom  of
a  large  princely  establishment,  with  chariots  and  horses  and  runners,  was  really  an
incidental  revelation  in  palpable  form  of  a  character  internally  maturing.  It  was  a
sign  to  such  men  as  David  and  Nathan  of  what  they  had  believed  to  exist — a  vain,
proud,  ostentatious  spirit.  So  in  course  of  time  men  generally  do  something  in  their
domestic  arrangements  or  business  developments  which,  if  the  world  will  only  read
aright,  brings  into  public  view  tendencies  and  tastes  which  hitherto  have  been  kept
under  restraint.  Our  visible  acts  and  creations  are  the  succcessive  revelations  of  our
condition.  A  man's  dress,  his  handwriting,  bis  domestic  establishment,  his  bearing
before  the  public,  his  mode  of  transacting  business,  is  a  manifestation  of  the  hidden  man
— the  indicator  of  the  elements  entering  into  the  permanent  character.  The  outward
aspects  of  a  man's  life  may  be  studied  with  a  view  to  a  knowledge  of  the  habits  and
tastes  of  his  mind.

III.  Evil  tendencies  in  congenial  environment.  The  evil  tendencies  of  Absalom
were  somewhat  pronounced  when  he  set  up  his  pretentious  establishment,  but  by  his
own  act  those  tendencies  were  placed  in  the  midst  of  circumstances  eminently  calculated
to  strengthen  and  develop  them  further.  The  heart  of  man  can  devise  things  out  of
its  own  tastes  and  propensities  which  become  at  once  food  on  which  those  tastes  and
propensities  grow  to  further  power.  A  man  of  pleasure  out  of  liis  own  desires  creates
occupations  and  pursuits  which  become  the  nourishers  of  the  passion  for  pleasure.  The
same  holds  of  dreadful  vices  and  blessed  virtues.  There  is  a  self-proraotive  power  in
the  forces  that  dwell  within  our  moral  nature.  Intellectual  and  physical  forces  are  not
so  recuperative  of  themselves  by  means  of  what  they  create  as  are  the  moral.  We  are
to  ponder  the  path  of  our  feet,  for  every  step  increases  the  momentum  in  the  road,  be
it  good  or  bad.

IV.  Lust  of  powbb  minus  fitness  for  its  exercise.  Absalom  set  hig  heart  on
being  King  of  Israel.  The  vision  of  a  throne  and  a  submissive  people  had  great  attrac-
tions for  him.  The  princely  establishment,  with  chariots  and  horsemen,  was  only  the
first  instalment  of  ft  splendour  soon  to  be  won.  Like  all  such  men,  he  had  imlimited
confidence  in  himself.  He  could  administer  justice !  He  could  win  the  people  and
hold  them  in  subjection  1  And  yet  this  vanity,  this  low  cunning,  this  love  of  outward
show,  and  mean  lying  flattery  of  the  people,  disqualified  him  for  ruling  as  a  king.
Morally  speaking,  he  was  a  handsome  fool,  and  knew  it  not.  The  lust  for  power  is
common,  and  often  very  strong  in  men.  As  manifested  in  bad  men,  it  is  an  abnormal
development  of  a  love  of  mastery  over  what  is  not  self.  The  possession  of  power  over
man  is  safe  and  good  only  when  there  coexist  with  it  justice,  generosity,  considerate-
ness,  and  honesty.

Y.  AUKNATION  rBOU  A  FATHER'S  HEABT  THE  OLIUAX  07  BTHi.     Absalom  WIS  Df


S.U  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtTEL.  [m.tiv.l—A1.

longer  a  true  son.  No  man  could  have  entered  on  such  a  scheme  and  have  devised
Buch  means  unless  he  had  lost  all  true  natural  affection.  To  find  fault  with  a  father's
administration,  to  expose  a  father  to  ridicule,  to  seek  to  alienate  men  from  attachment
to  a  father,  and,  in  short,  crush  a  father's  hopes  and  life's  work,  could  only  proceed  from
a  heart  utterly  alienated.  And  such  a  father!  Weak  and  erring  as  David  in  a  notable
instance  had  been,  he  was  the  most  generous,  and  magnanimous  of  men,  and  had
brought  peace  and  plenty  and  honour  to  Israel.  Absalom's  crime  was  one  of  the
basest  ever  recorded.  And  all  alienation  from  a  true  father's  heart  is  utterly  base  and
deserving  the  strongest  detestation.  There  is  hope  for  sons  when  they  still  cherish  love
and  reverence  for  parents ;  none  when  these  are  gone.  Every  feeling,  and  act,  and  com-
panionship, and  habit  which  tend  towards  this  awful  separation  of  heart,  should  be
shunned  as  men  shun  the  road  to  death.  And  yet  this  is  the  real  state  of  the  human
heart  in  relation  to  God.  The  gulf  is  awful ;  and  nothing  but  a  new  creation  will  lead
to  a  reconciliation  (John  iii.  5  ;  Rom.  viii.  7).

VI.  PsEUDO-PATEioTiSM  AN  ASSUMED  VIRT0B.  Patriotism  is  strong  in  men  whose
country  has  been  associated  in  memory  with  great  deeds.  To  care  for  one's  land  and
people,  to  be  more  concerned  for  the  maintenance  of  justice  and  adjustment  of  the  claims
of  the  poor  than  for  the  form  and  personnel  of  government, — this  is  always  commend-
able ;  and  so  much  is  this  virtue  esteemed  that  it  is  assumed  by  Absalom  for  his  own
purposes.  We  cannot  believe  in  the  patriotism  of  any  man  who  shuts  his  heart  against
a  good  father.  Civil  virtues  cannot  make  amends  for  the  absence  of  the  domestic  and
primary  virtues.  It  is  easy  to  prate  about  justice  and  the  oppressed,  and  to  speak  smoothly
to  the  populace;  to  keep  the  heart  pure,  loving,  true  toward  man  and  God,  is  not  so
easy.  There  is  much  pseudo-patriotism  in  political  life.  Men  claim  virtues  they  do
not  possess,  and  use  the  claim  for  gaining  an  influence  that  else  would  be  unattainable.

VII.  RELioroN  A  CLOAK  FOR  EVIL  DESIGNS.  Absalom  knew  his  father  to  be  a  pious
man,  and  therefore  seeks  to  accomplish  his  purpose  by  a  profession  of  piety.  The  heart-
less son  finds  no  difiBculty  in  taking  the  holy  name  of  God  in  vain,  and  concocting  a
tissue  of  lies.  To  the  populace  he  can  be  a  critic  of  the  government ;  to  the  pious  king
he  can  be  a  devout  man,  intent  on  keeping  sacred  vows.  No  clearer  proof  of  a  Satanic
spirit  than  when  men  dare  to  lay  hold  of  the  most  sacred  things  and  use  them  for  vile
and  selfish  purposes.  Righteous,  indeed,  was  the  indignation  of  Christ  against  such
"hypocrites."  "Woe"  from  the  lips  of  love  came  upon  them.  Manifold  are  the
forms  and  degrees  in  which  this  evil  appears.  To  worship  in  order  to  be  respectnble,
to  profess  religion  for  the  sake  of  trade,  to  utter  pious  phrases  in  order  to  win  pojDular
applause,  are  but  the  less  repulsive  forms  of  the  veiy  crime  of  Absalom.  How
abominable  such  persons  must  appear  in  the  sight  of  the  aU-searching  God  I

VIII.  Taking  undue  advantage  or  another's  difficulty.  In  consequence  of
the  immense  work  thrown  on  an  absolute  monarch,  the  growing  complications  of  a
flourishing  state,  and  the  incompetence  of  subordinates,  there  would  necessarily  arise
many  difiiculties  in  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom.  In  all  lands
people  have  to  wait  for  justice  when  others  are  being  served.  But  the  evil  heart  of
Absalom  showed  itself  in  using  whatever  incidental  delays  arose  as  an  occasion  of  pro-
moting its  own  wicked  schemes.  There  is  too  much  of  this  in  the  world.  The  rich
have  often  taken  advantage  of  the  ignorance  and  helplessness  of  the  poor  to  secure  ends
otherwise  unattainable.  In  political  life  it  is  a  maxim  to  seize  the  hour  of  weakness
for  a  party  triumph.  It  is  the  devil's  opporttmity  with  feeble  souls  to  render  more  sure
their  destruction.  Trouble  in  state,  Church,  or  family  affords  opportunity  for  testing
the  qualities  of  men.  Love  or  hate,  sympathy  or  antagonism,  will  thereby  be  revealed.
How  different  to  others  the  blessed  Saviour  in  presence  of  human  infirmity !

IX.  Popularity  on  an  unstable  and  hollow  basis.  The  people's  hearts  were
won  to  Absalom.  It  seems  a  great  triumph  to  win  the  hearts  of  mtiltitudes;  it  is  an
indication  of  great  power  on  the  part  of  the  conqueror  or  of  fickleness  on  the  part  of
the  conquered.  But  in  this,  as  in  many  instances,  the  conquest  was  a  revelation  ot
shallow  thinking  on  the  one  side  and  basest  cunning  on  the  other.  There  is  in  most
men  a  soil  for  receiving  the  seeds  of  discontent  from  the  hand  of  a  deft  sower.  People
are  easily  caught  by  flatteries  and  personal  attentions.  A  visible  parade  of  splendour
dazzles  and  pleases  the  crowd,  who  think  modest,  quiet  bearing  a  sign  of  mediocrity.
The  dash  and  careless  promises  of  a  young  and  handsome  man  excite  the  imagination,


ea.xv.  1— 8?.]  TflE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  8T5

and  raise  up  pictures  of  great  possibilities.  The  mass  of  men  do  not  think ;  they  feel,
and  are  led  by  the  clever  orator  who  can  stir  up  their  feelings.  It  is  not  always  a  credit
to  "  go  >nth  the  multitude,"  and  fall  in  with  an  order  of  things  because  it  is  popular.
The  vox  popuK  maxim  is  often  false.  Of  One  it  was  once  true,  "  Of  the  people  there
was  none  with  him."    He  was  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men."

X.  An  illustration  of  the  most  dreadful  op  conspiraotes.  It  b  not  necessary
to  endeavour  to  trace  resemblance  in  all  details  between  antagonism  to  the  mortal  king
in  Zion  and  opposition  to  the  immortal  King  in  Zion.  But  there  has  been  and  still  is
a  plot  to  destroy  the  authority  of  him  whose  right  it  is  to  reign.  Fashion,  wealth,
power  of  speech,  wit,  and  alliances  with  wise  Ahitbophels,  continue  to  undermine  and
eventually  overthrow  the  influence  of  Christ  over  the  hearts  of  men.  The  "  gates  of
heU  "  take  counsel  against  the  Lord  and  his  Anointed.  Another  seat  of  supreme  influence
is  being  set  up  as  a  substitute  for  that  occupied  by  the  Anointed  One,  and  "  spies  "  are
abroad  seeking  to  create  doubt  and  distrust  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful.  As  we  read
the  account  of  Absalom's  ingratitude,  daring,  and  baseness,  and  feel  for  his  deeds  the
utmost  detestation,  so  holy  beings  who  look  on  the  endeavour  to  destroy  the  authority
of  Christ  over  men  cannot  but  regard  the  deed  as  the  basest,  most  daring,  and  at  the
same  time  most  fatal  to  the  perpetrators,  ever  attempted.  The  wicked  may  seem  to
triumph,  but  their  end  is  destruction.

Vers.  13 — 30. — The  facts  are :  1.  David,  being  informed  of  the  rising  in  favour  of
Absalom,  calls  upon  his  friends  to  flee  from  Jerusalem,  in  order  to  avoid  its  being  smitten
by  a  sudden  attack.  2.  His  servants  being  willing  to  go  with  him,  he  leads  -out  his
entire  household,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  to  take  care  of  the  house.  3..  In  his
departure  he  is  accompanied  by  his  body-guard,  and  the  six  hundred  men  which  followed
him  from  Gath.  4.  Observing  Ittai  in  the  company,  he  suggests  that,  being  a  stranger
and  exile,  he  should  not  risk  his  fortunes  with  his  own ;  but,  on  receiving  an  assurance
that  it  was  his  deliberate  desire  so  to  do,  he  permits  him  to  pass  on.  5.  The  people  of
the  district  weep  with  a  loud  noise  as  he  crosses  the  brook  Kidron,  and  passes  on
toward  the  wilderness.  6.  The  ark  of  the  covenant  being  brought  out  into  the  pro-
cession, when  the  people  have  passed  the  brook,  David  urges  on  Zadok  that  the  ark  be
conveyed  back  to  the  city,  expressing  his  humble  hope  that  it  might  please  God  to
allow  him  to  see  it  once  more,  and,  in  any  case,  he  submits  to  the  appointments  of
Providence.  7.  David  requests  Zadok  and  others  with  the  ark  to  return  to  the  city,  and
to  inform  him  in  the  wilderness  should  anything  of  great  importance  arise.  8.  The
king  expresses  his  grief  by  passing  up  the  Mount  of  Olives,  with  covered  head  and
weeping,  accompanied  by  a  covered  and  weeping  multitude.

Svhmission  in  the  day  of  adversity.  The  order  of  the  narrative  of  David's  departure
from  Jerusalem  is  rather  involved,  as  may  be  seen  by  comparing  vers.  17,  19,  23,  30 ;
but  the  actual  facts  are  clear  enough.  As  soon  as  he  became  aware  of  the  extent  of
the  rebellion,  he  resolved  to  leave  the  city,  and  we  have  a  record  of  the  fact  and  the
incidents  accompanying  it.  The  first  and  most  obvious  impression  produced  on  the
mind  of  the  reader  is  the  prompt  and  quiet  submission  of  the  king  to  the  force  of
circumstances,  not  because  he  was  of  cowardly  spirit,  but  because  he  saw  in  what  was
happening  the  providence  of  Gkid.  If  we  analyze  the  conduct  and  words  of  David
in  their  relation  to  the  great  fall  and  Nathan's  prophecy  (oh.  xii.  9 — 13),  we  shall  see
the  leading  features  characterizing  his  submission,  and  in  so  doing  we  shall  get  a  view
of  the  main  characteristics  of  all  true  Christian  submission  in  the  day  of  adversity.

L  A  BECOONiTioN  OF  PERSONAL  DESERT.  The  prompt  action,  the  surrender  of  regal
state,  the  broken  spirit,  the  barefooted  departure  from  the  seat  of  authority,  and  the
tender  references  to  God  doing  with  him  aa  seemed  him  good  (ver.  26),  all  point  to
more  than  a  forced  submission  to  mere  military  necessity.  There  may  have  been  a  deep
inexpressible  anguish  on  account  of  filial  ingratitude,  and  the  father's  heart  could  not
but  weep  in  silence  over  an  erring  lost  child ;  but  the  remembrance  of  his  own  great  sin,
and  the  words  of  the  prophet  of  God,  furnished  the  chief  theme  of  reflection ;  for  the
son's  ingratitude  base  as  it  was,  had  become  the  rod  to  chastise  for  the  errors  of  the
past.  A  forgiven  man  does  not  the  less  think  of  the  sin  as  a  disgrace  and  worthy  of
peing  branded  as  evil    Adversities  come  to  us  all— happily,  few  kno^  the  sorrow  o{


878  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv.  1—87.

such  filial  ingratitude — and  the  enligbtoned  mind  sees  in  them  more  than  physical
sequence.  The  doctrine  that  every  sorrow  ihut  falls  is  for  a  specific  sin  need  not  be
held.  Yet  all  trouble  is  connected  with  the  fact  that  sin  is  in  the  world,  and  a  con-
sciousness of  personal  shortcomings  makes  us  feel,  when  adversity  in  home,  estate,  or
health  falls,  that  we  deserve  every  pain  that  enters  the  heart.  There  is  no  assertion  of
right  to  be  free  from  the  trouble ;  ratVier  the  true  heart  says,  "It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies
that  we  are  not  consumed"  (Lam.  iii.  22).

IL  AcQuiBSOBNoE  IN  God's  rightbottsness.  To  a  human  observer  it  might  seem
that  it  was  a  very  imrighteous  thing  for  the  Supreme  Euler  to  allow  so  wise  and  good  a
king  to  be  set  aside  and  humiliated  by  a  man  so  base  and  vain  as  Absilom,  and  many
a  man  in  his  anguish  might  question  the  equity  which  allowed  such  sorrow  to  fall
upon  him  when  he  had  recovered  from  his  special  sins.  David's  spirit  was  the  re-
verse of  this.  Not  a  word  of  complaint,  not  a  murmur  or  a  fret  in  trouble.  During
bis  long  exile,  when  death  encompassed  him  about,  and  he  had  washed  his  hands  in
innocency,  and  all  the  blame  lay  with  Saul  and  Doeg  the  Bdomite,  he  trusted  in  the
justice  of  God ;  and  this  confidence,  won  in  the  days  of  comparative  innocence,  failed
him  not  now,  when,  after  hiB  recovery  from  a  fall,  the  storm  burst  upon  him  with  more
terrible  violence.  He  knew  and  rested  in  the  precious  truth  that  the  Lord  reigned  in
righteousness  and  brought  correction  to  his  servants  for  their  good.  Tes;  this  is  the
faith  of  the  faithful.  Never  do  they,  however  terrible  the  disaster  in  this  life,  distrust
the  righteousness  of  God.  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  him,"  was  true  for  Job
and  all  of  kindred  spirit.  Men  who  know  not  the  new  life  cannot  understand  this.
It  is  the  alphabet  of  religious  experience  to  all  who  are  really  born  again  and  accepted
in  Christ.     None  of  those  things  move  them.

III.  Accommodation  to  kbw  oihodmstancbs.  David  does  not  yield  to  fretfulness
and  irresolution.  He  vacates  his  home,  provides  for  his  house,  goes  out  to  a  place  of
safety,  and,  by  his  discreet  arrangement  with  Zadok  and  Abiathar,  keeps  up  means  of
connection  with  the  city  (vers.  27,  28).  Utter  prostration  under  calnmity  does  not
come  where  there  is  the  counteractive  element  of  recngnition  of  personal  un  worthiness
and  of  I  he  righteousness  of  God.  Whether  this  trouble  would  pass  he  knew  not,  but  as
a  wise  man  he  adsipted  himself  to  the  storm.  As  Jacob  to  his  exile  (Gen.  xxviii.  10 — 22),
as  Moses  to  his  deprivation  (Deut.  iii.  25—27;  of.  xxxiv.  1^6),  so  David  makes  the
best  of  his  position.  Providential  chastisements  are  not  designed  to  paralyze  action ;
their  benefit  is  secured  when,  in  a  spirit  of  resignation  and  trust,  we  use  our  powers  to
bear  them  and  to  mitigate  their  incidence  (Htb.  xii.  5 — 12).  Adversity  becomes  truly
educational  when  wo  are  stirred  up  to  adjust  our  life  to  its  conditions.

IV.  Consideration  fob  others,  that  they  be  not  unnecessabilt  dbawn  into
OUB  SORROWS.  David's  removal  into  the  open  country  was  partly  from  policy  and  partly
from  feelings  of  kindness.  He  probably  had  suspicions,  seeing  that  his  trusty  counsellor
had  been  drawn  over  to  Absalom  (ver.  12 ;  cf.  Ps.  xli.  9 ;  Iv.  10 — 14),  that  Absalom  had
many  friends  in  the  city,  and  should  he  in  concert  with  them  come  suddenly  upon  him
and  his  friends,  multitudes  would  fall  victims  to  his  malice.  It  was  the  same  generous
feeling  that  prompted  him  to  suggest  that  Ittai,  not  being  a  Hebrew,  should  not  embroil
himself  in  this  sad  conflict,  and  so  run  a  risk  in  case  another  king  should  reign.  We
see  the  same  David  as  in  earlier  years,  ever  mindful  of  others,  and  magnanimous  to  the
extreme.  The  dreadful  sin  had  not  destroyed  his  noble  qualities,  but  had  given  a  sadly
tender  form  to  their  expression.  There  are  beautiful  instances  in  Christian  life  of  this
kindly  consideration  for  others.  Fathers  and  mothers  strive  to  shield  their  children
from  the  woes  which  they  may  connect  with  their  own  want  of  wisdom  or  goodness.
The  great  Saviour  himself,  in  his  dire  trouble,  sought  to  shield  his  faithful  followers
(John  xiv.  1,  27  ;  xvii.  9—12;  xviii.  8).

V.  Grateful  acceptance  op  sympathy  and  aid.  The  voluntary  sympathy  and
aid  of  the  faithful  body-guard,  and  the  six  hundred  who  had  shared  his  fortunes  prior
and  subsequent  to  his  departure  from  Gath,  was  as  cool  water  to  a  thirsty  soul ;  and  the
free  services  of  Ittai  and  Zadok  were  greatly  valued.  In  the  adversities  which  Provi-
dence permits  to  come  for  purposes  of  discipline  there  is  the  meyoiful  admixture  of  some
provision  to  meet  the  pressing  need  of  the  hour — some  human  channel  for  Divine
sympathy  and  compassion  to  enter  the  heart.  Submission  to  the  inscrutable  will
always  includes  a  grateful  recognition  of  this  relief.    The  love  and  presence  of  Buth


CH.  XV.  1—37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMtJfili.  Zl7

wa«  as  balm  to  the  desolate  heart  of  Naomi  as  she  mourned  her  forlorn  condition,
imparted  a  sweet  gentleoess  to  her,  and  enabled  her  to  submit  to  the  blow  that  had
shattered  her  early  joys.    David  and  she  had  herein  a  common  experience.

VI.  A  THOUGHTFUL   SELF-SAOBIFIOINO  CARE    FOB   THE   INTERESTS 'OF    RELmiOfT.       It

was  very  beautiful  conduct  on  the  part  of  Zadok  and  Abiathar  to  bring  out  the  ark  of
the  covenant  (ver.  24),  to  form  a  prominent  object  in  the  sad  procession  out  of  the  city;
it  revealed  a  tender  consideration  for  the  man  who  in  his  prosperity  had  associated  his
purest  joys  and  most  glorious  triumphs  with  that  precious  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.
The  ark  could  not  but  remind  David  of  the  mercy  that  endureth  for  ever,  and  its
presence  with  him  would  be  regarded  as  a  pledge  of  blessing  in  his  wandering.  But  he
desired  the  priests  to  take  back  the  treasure,  and  he,  meekly  bowing  to  the  chastisement,
would  go  out  and  suffer  the  loss  of  the  outward  privileges  of  the  sanctuary.  The  reason
of  this  no  doubt  was  that,  as  he  had  been  the  means  of  procuring  a  permanent  resting-
place  for  the  ark  (oh.  vi.  17 — 19),  and  constituting  Jerusalem  the  centre  of  religious
influence  for  the  nation,  he  would  not  now  undo  that  work  and  serve  his  own  personal
advantage  at  the  cost  of  the  people.  No ;  the  religious  institutions  should  remain  intact,
the  blessings  of  public  worship  and  spiritual  comfort  should  abide  for  Jerusalem,  though
he  a  poor  exile  pine  in  solitude  and  peril  for  the  "  beauty  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xlii.  1 — i ;
xliii.  1,  2).  How  beautiful  this  tender  care  for  the  interests  of  religion  appears  in  true
submission  to  adverse  providences  is  known  to  all  acquainted  with  Christian  biography.
Not  a  deed,  not  a  word,  not  a  thought  is  allowed  that  might  be  prejudicial  to  the
kingdom  of  God.  Storms  may  come,  hopes  may  be  blasted,  if  only  the  Name  that  is
above  every  name  be  still  honoured.

VII.  A  DELIBERATE  COMMITTAL  OF  PRESENT  AND  FUTURE  INTBBBBT8  INTO  THE  HANDS

OP  God.  "  If  I  shall  find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  he  will  bring  me  again,  and
show  me  both  it,  and  his  habitation.  But  if  he  thus  say,  I  have  no  delight  in  thee ;
behold,  here  I  am,  let  him  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto  him  "  (vers.  25, 26).  O  blessed
trust !  0  sweet  resignation !  O  modest  yet  unshaken  hope  1  Truly  the  discipline  was
already  bearing  precious  fruit.  The  spiritual  barrenness  of  those  hot  days  of  prosperity
(ch.  xi.)  was  clean  gone.  The  temporal  chastisement  was  in  process,  but  the  wandering
child  was  a  wanderer  no  more.  Enviable  beyond  expression  is  this  surrender  of  all
interests  to  the  wise  and  gracious  hands  of  the  covenant-keeping  God.  Here  comes  out
the  essence  of  the  true  submission  in  the  season  of  adversity.  "He  will,"  if  he
"delight"  in  me!  "Let  him  do  as  seemeth  him  good!"  No  self-wiU,  no  boast  of
claim,  no  thought  of  shame ;  God  is  over  all  and  can  do  all ;  all  is  in  his  care,  and  what
he  does  shall  be  deemed  the  best  and  kindest  and  most  just.  Who  does  not  see  the
purifying  power  of  the  grace  of  God?     Holy  David  once  fallen!

Appendix.  The  sorrowing  king,  passing  over  the  ridge  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  on
bare  feet  and  weeping,  bearing  on  his  heart  a  terrible  woe,  and  full  of  pity  for  the
people  rejecting  his  authority,  and  at  the  same  time  entirely  submissive  to  the
sovereign  will  that  so  ordains,  reminds  us  of  the  other  King,  greater,  wiser,  more  holy,
and  bearing  on  his  heart  the  woes  of  many  sins  not  his  own,  pacing  the  slopes  of  that
same  mount,  weeping  bitter  tears,  lamenting  for  the  rebellious  people,  bearing  all
for  others'  good,  and  submitting  with  unparalleled  gentleness  and  trust  to  the  sovereign
will  that  ordained  that  so  he  must  suffer.

Fidelity  in  minforiune.  It  is  believed  by  many  that  more  remarkable  virtues  are
developed  in  seasons  of  adversity  than  in  those  of  prosperity.  Their  precise  form  will
depend  on  the  individuals  concerned  and  the  stress  of  the  time.  The  conduct  of  the
Gittites,  and  Ittai,  and  Zadok,  and  Abiathar  is  in  pleasing  contrast  with  that  of  Ahitho-
phel  and  his  co-conspirators.  In  these  men  we  may  trace  the  characteristics  of  fidelity
in  misfortune.

I.  It  is  booted  in  intelliqekt  sympathy.  The  six  hundred  had  probably  been  with
David  and  shared  in  his  trials  prior  to  his  departure  from  Gath  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  2).
They  knew  him  better  than  any  others ;  they  had  formed  a  sympathy  for  him  based
on  true  knowledge,  and  they  stood  the  test  of  the  evil  time.  Of  Ittai  we  do  not  know
so  much,  but  the  words  of  the  man  prove  that  he  appreciated  the  real  character  ol
David  in  spite  of  the  slanders  which  such  men  as  Ahithophel  may  have  insinuated.
The  priestly  Ainctions  of  Zadok  and  Abiathar  account  for  their  interest  in  m  devout  a


378  THE  SECOND  BOOK  Of*  SAMtJEL.  tofi.iV.l— SI

man  as  David.  Their  fidelity  was  not  based  on  personal  beauty,  vague  promises,  and
outward  splendour  (vers.  1—6),  but  on  intelligence  and  the  feeling  wbioh  accompanies
it  in  a  pure  heart.  So  Euth  was  true  to  Naomi  (Euth  i.  16, 17).  Any  promise  of
attachment  not  resting  on  this  foundation  is  worth  nothing.

II.  It  is  nourished  by  ebilection  on  the  PiST.  There  were  probably  hours  when
the  voice  of  temptation  would  come  to  allure  them  from  a  course  so  perilous  in  appear-
ance, to  a  course  promising  reputation,  wealth,  and  honour ;  for  these  men  were  of  like
passions  with  us  all,  and  had  no  love  for  poverty  and  exile  in  themselves.  But  they
knew  David's  history,  and  when  temptation  to  prefer  the  winning  side  came  they  would
nourish  their  vow  by  thinking  of  what  he  had  been,  how  God  had  befriended  him
before,  and  how  he  had  risen  from  the  fall  which  once  was  his  shame.  It  is  something
to  be  attached  to  a  man  with  a  good  history.  When  we  have  pledged  ourselves  to
a  just  though  suffering  cause,  we  may  ward  off  many  a  temptation  by  allowing  the
reflective  powers  to  work  on  the  antecedents  of  the  cause  to  which  we  are  pledged.
Thus  the  early  Christians,  by  reflecting  on  Christ,  his  words  and  work,  and  all  he  had
been  to  them,  could  endorse  the  dying  words  of  the  aged  Folycarp.

III.  It  is  ebspoksivb  to  frankness  and  magnanimity.  The  frank  and  mag-
nanimous way  in  which  David  offered  to  release  them  from  all  risks  only  drew  out  into
stronger  and  more  pronounced  form  the  attachment  already  cherished  (vers.  19 — 21).
Zadok  could  not  but  feel  a  profounder  regard  for  the  king  after  hearing  his  words  con-
cerning the  ark  (ver,  2S).  There  is  something  so  noble  in  this  frankness  and  mag-
nanimity in  misfortune  that  a  faithful  heart  recruits  its  strength  by  the  very  sight  and
sound  of  the  nobleness.  Holy  sentiments  grow  in  exchange.  There  is  no  sure  bond
between  the  wicked.     Sin  is  morally  a  weakuess.     Holiness  is  a  strength.

IV.  It  is  capable  of  eisks.  Whatever  might  befall  the  king  in  his  trouble,  these
faithful  ones  were  prepared  to  share  in  it.  True  affection  is  not  blind,  as  some  would
say ;  it  sees,  but  it  fears  not.  The  faithful  mind  is  intent  on  being  on  the  side  of  right
and  weakness,  not  on  securing  anything  for  self.  There  are  risks  in  adherence  to  &
righteous  cause  in  the  day  of  adversity.  Christ  points  this  out  to  his  followers,  and  it
is  the  sign  of  true  as  distinguished  from  professional  fidelity  that  it  can  bear  and  is
determined  to  bear  whatever  may  come.  The  real  clue  to  the  determination  is  the  con-
viction that  right  is  supreme  in  its  claims,  and  that  present  suffering  is  only  an  incident
of  a  well-directed  human  existence  (Matt.  x.  16 — 18,  38 ;  xx.  22 ;  Phil.  iii.  7 — 9).

Vers.  31 — 37. — Prayer  for  Divine  intervention.  The  facts  are :  1.  David,  hearing
that  Ahithophel  was  among  the  conspirators,  prays  that  God  would  turn  his  counsel
into  foolishness.  2.  On  reaching  the  top  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  the  aged  Hushai
expresses  his  desire  to  go  with  David  into  exile,  but  David  declines  his  offer  on  aocount
of  his  infirmities.  3.  On  the  other  hand,  David  suggests  that  he  can  render  hiri  good
service  by  returning  to  the  city  and  living  as  a  servant  of  Absalom,  and  he  advises  him
to  act  in  concert  with  Zadok  and  Abiathar.  4.  Acting  on  this  suggestion,  Hushai
returns  to  the  city,  and,  some  time  after,  Absalom  also  enters.  There  passed  a  pang
through  the  heart  of  David  as  he  heard  of  the  treachery  of  his  trusty  counsellor  Ahitho-
phel, bitter  because  he  had  relied  so  much  on  this  wise  man's  honesty  and  sagacity,  and
more  bitter  still  as  he  remembered  the  cruel  conspiracy  which  he  once  entered  into
with  Joab  against  the  life  of  Uriah.  Yet  the  forgiven  and  renewed  king,  in  the  fulness
of  his  anguish,  was  true  to  his  revived  religious  instincts  in  at  once  raising  his  heart  to
Gk)d  with  the  prayer  that  he  would  bring  his  own  wisdom  to  bear  so  as  to  defeat  the
wisdom  of  this  man.    We  see  here —

I.  That  tbebb  is  in  this  wobld  a  conflict  between  human  and  Divink
WISDOM.  David  was  well  acquainted  with  two  great  facts :  (1)  that  the  wisdom  of  God
bad  designed  him  to  be  king  over  Israel  to  the  end  of  his  days  (ch.  vii.  11 — 16,  28,  29);
(2)  that  the  wisest  man  in  the  land  was  devising  means  to  frustrate  this  purpose,  not
perhaps  consciously,  yet  practically.  This  is  an  epitome  of  the  history  of  mankind.
G«d  has  a  purpose  to  carry  out,  and  employs  good  men  as  his  instruments, — all  is
arranged  according  to  his  infinite  wisdom ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  men  who
bring  their  powers  to  bear  so  as  to  frustrate  this  purpose.  They  may  not  know  that
they  are  setting  their  wisdom  against  the  wisdom  of  God,  but  the  facts  are  to  that
•ffeot    Adam  and  Eve  went  against  wisdom  in  the  exercise  of  their  wisdom.    Pharaoh


oa.x\^.l— 37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  «Tft

contrived  to  prevent  what  wisdom  had  ordained.  The  wisdom  of  scribes  and  Pharisees
was  arrayed  against  him  who  was  the  "Wisdom  of  God."  In  the  antagonism  of  men
to  the  gospel  the  apostle  saw  a  case  of  the  "  wisdom  of  the  world  "  striving  against  the
wisdom  which  was  so  far  above  theirs  that  their  wisdom  was  more  properly  folly  (1
Cor.  i.  18 — 25).  Men  who  live  in  sin,  who  try  to  dispense  with  Christ,  really  set  their
wisdom  against  the  great  and  blessed  order  which  is  founded  on  eternal  wisdom.  The
attitude  of  the  world  to  the  Church  may  be  expressed  in  the  terms  just  stated.  Oh
that  men  were  wise !

II.  That  a  good  man  believes  in  God's  power  to  countbkaot  thb  wisdom  of
MEN.  This  was  the  intellectual  basis  of  David's  prayer  for  intervention  against  the
devices  of  Ahithophel.  Faith  in  God's  appointment  of  prayer  is  associated  with  a  per-
ception of  the  fact  that  God  can  and  does  so  control  human  action  as  to  restrain  it
within  definite  lines,  and  to  secure  in  spite  of  it  certain  issues  that  are  for  the  good  of
the  world.  A  theism  that  renders  God  inactive,  or  bound  in  the  unbreakable  chains  of
a  physical  necessity,  had  better  be  frank  and  renounce  the  sacred  name,  and  say  once
for  all,  "  Force  is  in  eternal  motion  along  lines  eternally  fixed."  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  as
such  lias  free  access  to  the  spirits  of  men.  His  unseen  and  unconscious  contact  may
paralyze  or  divert  thought,  and  render  possible  ideas  which,  when  carried  out,  will
prove  to  be  subversive  of  the  very  ends  which  the  wicked  thinker  once  had  set  his  heart
upon.  We  don't  know  how  much  we  owe  to  this  silent  action  of  God  on  evil  men.
He  also,  as  a  free  Spirit,  is  in  contact  with  the  ultimate  elements  of  things,  and  can
act  on  them  without  dislocation  of  the  order  of  nature,  more  perfectly  than  we  can  in
the  effort  of  our  will.  Many  Christian  people  do  not,  it  is  feared,  half  believe  in  this
great  truth,  and  do  not  sufficiently  see  its  ample  bearing  on  the  great  stress  of  life.  God
not  only  looks  into  men  and  sees  them  through  and  through ;  he  is  an  Actor,  and  brings
his  wisdom  to  put  to  nought  the  wisdom  of  the  wise.

III.  That  a  good  man  in  extremity  naturally  puts  this  belief  into  practice.
David  felt  that  he  could  not  cope  with  the  combination  against  him.  His  heart  fainted
at  the  thought  of  the  sagacity  of  the  counsellor  uniting  with  the  daring  and  dash  of  the
ambitious  usurper.  His  prayer  was  true  to  nature.  We  do  not  in  ordinary  circum-
stances allow  our  faith  to  have  sufficient  influence  over  our  lives.  Trouble  brings  us
stiaight  to  God.  Our  vast  resources  are  drawn  upon  when  heart  and  flesh  begin  to  fail.
All  prayer  is  a  cry  for  God's  help,  or  it  is  nothing ;  but  the  earnestness  and  intensity  of
the  cry  are  proportioned  to  the  perception  of  peril.

IV.  That  phayeb  for  help,  in  the  case  of  a  good  man,  is  attended  with  a
DiscuBET  UBE  OF  MEANS  TO  SECURE  THB  END  IN  VIEW.  The  practical  character  of
David's  religion  is  seen  in  this — ^that,  as  soon  as  he  had  committed  his  desperate  case  to
God,  he  took  steps,  through  Hushai,  to  counteract  the  wisdom  of  Ahithophel.  He
knew  that  God  worked  on  the  minds  of  men  partly  by  the  agency  of  other  men,  to
whom  he  secretly  imparts  wi>df)m  and  discretion.  Not  only  would  secret  unconscious
influences  operate  within  Ahithophel  to  cause  him  to  blunder  in  advice,  but  thoughts
would  be  directed  in  the  minds  of  Hushai  and  Zadok  so  that  they  would  act  at  the
right  season  and  in  the  right  way.  This  combination  of  trust  in  God  and  action  among;
men  is  characteristic  of  all  true  religiojis  life.  "  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  the
righteous  man  availeth  much,"  and  his  labour  also  "  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."

General  lessons.  1.  In  all  our  dealings  with  men,  and  efforts  to  get  them  to  act,
we  should  remember  that  we  can  get  at  them  through  God.  2.  The  Church,  in  its  conflict
^ith  the  world,  should  rest  in  the  consolation  that  the  wisdom  of  God  can  never  fail.
3.  Much  of  our  success  in  Christian  work  depends  on  our  assigning  men  to  duties  suited
to  their  character,  age,  and  position.  4.  Good  men  who  are  compelled  by  force  of  circum-
stances to  live  among  men  of  evil  purpose  may  use  their  knowledge  of  the  world  and  its
ways  so  as  to  promote  the  best  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 121 — (Jerusalem,  Hebron.)  The  rebellion  of  Absalom.  About  twe'vc
years  had  elapsed  since  David's  fall  into  sin.  One  of  its  effects  was  the  rebellion  of
Absalom.    The  history  of  this  event — most  critical  for  the  thtocratic  monarchy,  and


S80  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEti,  [oa.  xt*1— 37,

"revealing  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts" — sheds  a  clear  light  upon  the  condition  of
Israel.  "  We  seem  to  know  all  the  people  j  the  natural  manners  and  vivid  outburati
of  feeling  make  the  scene  stand  out  with  a  kind  of  homely  poetry."  In  it  we  discern
the  presence  and  influence  of :  1.  Divine  chastisement,  announced  by  the  prophet  (ch.
xii.  10),  "  The  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine  house,"  etc.  Forgiveness  of  gin
does  not  annul  its  natural  consequences.  Such  consequences  are  sure,  however  they
may  appear  to  be  delayed ;  and,  though  inflicted  by  the  hand  of  man,  they  do  not  less
really  proceed  from  the  hand  of  God.  Already  David  had  experienced  the  effects  of
his  transgression  in  his  family ;  he  must  now  experience  them,  on  a  larger  scale,  in  his
kingdom.  2.  Defective  administration  of  judgment  by  the  king  (ver.  3) ;  due,  not  so
much  to  advancing  age  (over  sixty),  as  to  timidity,  irresolution,  and  want  of  energy,
consequent  on  what  had  taken  place ;  and  "  a  tendency  to  shrink  into  private  life,  with
a  preference  for  such  duties  as  preparing  materials  for  the  future  temple  rather  than
those  of  active  government ;  "  perhaps  also  to  serious  illness,  brought  on  by  trouble  of
heart,  and  partially  incapacitating  him  from  performing  the  increasing  duties  of  his
office  (Ps.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.,  xli.,  Iv.).  3.  Prevalent  dissatisfaction  among  the  people.
His  sin  "broke  the  powerful  speU  which  had  hitherto  bound  the  whole  nation  to  the
name  of  David"  (Ewald).  "The  imperfections  and  defects  of  his  internal  administra-
tion of  the  kingdom,  when  the  time  of  his  brilliant  victories  was  past,  became  more  and
more  perceptible  to  the  people,  and  furnished  occasion  for  dissatisfaction  with  his
government"  (Keil).  "His  pious  actions,  his  attention  to  the  public  ordinances  of
worship,  perhaps  even  his  psalms,  had  for  the  time  lost  their  credit  and  their  sacred  ness.
Not  every  one  was  capable  of  estimating  aright  the  repentance  of  the  fallen  man,  and
his  humiliation  before  the  Almighty.  It  was  almost  forgotten  that  he  was  king  by
the  grace  of  God  "  (Krummacher).  "  The  infirm  condition  of  the  king,  his  eminent
godliness  and  opposition  to  popular  feelings,  and  the  distance  of  age  that  now  separated
him  from  the  sympathies  of  the  younger  portion  of  the  people"  (Blaikie);  some  dis-
content in  his  own  tribe  of  Judah  (ver.  10);  "the  still  lingering  hopes  of  the  house
of  Saul  and  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  (ch.  xvi.  3,  8) ;  and  the  deep-rooted  feeling  of
Ephraim  and  the  northern  tribes  (ch.  xix.  41)  against  Judah  "  (Stanley) ; — all  combined
to  make  the  people  ripe  for  insurrection.  4.  Private  animosity  on  the  part  of  its
leaders :  Absalom,  on  account  of  his  long  banishment  in  Gesbur  and  exclusion  from
court;  Ahithophel,  the  grandfather  of  Bathsheba  (ver.  12;  ch.  xi.  3),  on  account  of
the  dishonour  done  to  his  house ;  Amasa,  son  of  Abigal,  David's  half-sister  (ch.  xvii.
25),  possibly  on  account  of  some  neglect  or  discourtesy  shown  toward  him.  "  These
four  years  (ver.  7)  were  for  David  a  time  of  increasing  care  and  anxiety,  for  that  which
was  planned  cannot  have  remained  altogether  concealed  from  him;  but  he  had  neither
the  courage  nor  the  strength  to  smother  the  evil  undertaking  in  the  germ  "  (Delitzsch,
in  Ps.  xli.).  The  course  of  Absalom  (now  twenty-seven  years  of  age)  was  marked  by —
I.  Ambition  criminallt  ruDnLGED.  Sinful  perversion  of  the  natural  desire  of  pre-
eminence ;  unhallowed  love  of  power  and  glory  (as  in  the  case  of  Adonijah,  his  brother,
1  Kings  i.  6),  the  bait  by  which  Satan  seeks  to  allure  men  to  a  false  worship  (Matt.  it.
9 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  1—9).

"  He  showed  him  in  a  jewell'd  wreath
All  crowns  the  earth  bestows ;
But  not  the  rankling  tborns  beneath.
That  pierce  the  wearer's  brows."

Ab^lom's  amUtion  was  peculiarly  culpable ;  because  of  his :  1.  Self-conceit ;  his
selfish,  proud,  and  false  estimate  of  his  own  worth.  He  was  "  the  representative  of
vain-glory  and  self-conceit "  (Wordsworth).  "  Those  are  commonly  most  ambitious  of
preferment  that  are  least  fit  for  it"  (Matthew  Henry).  2.  Covetousness ;  the  object
of  his  desire  belonging  to  another,  and  unattainable  save  by  injustice.  It  is  not  likely
that  he  wished  simply  to  share  the  sovereignty  of  Israel.  3.  DisMffection  and  unnatural
envy  toward  his  father.  4.  Disloyalty  toward  the  king.  5.  Bebellion  against  God,
the  supreme  King  of  Israel,  by  whose  ordinance  David  had  been  appointed.  He  had,
apparently,  "  no  spark  of  religious  principle  in  his  breast."  6.  Self-will ;  indisposition
to  submit  to  the  will  of  Jehovah,  to  defer  to  the  nomination  of  the  king,  or  to  wait  for
his  decease^    He  resolved  to  anticipate  all,  and  have  his  own  way,    "  He  that  deatroyi


OH.XT.  1— 37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  381

self-will,  destroys  hell."  7.  Suspicion  and  jealousy  of  his  brother.  "  It  is  our  impres-
sion that  David  already  knew  that  Solomon  was,  by  the  Lord's  appointment,  to  be  his
successor  to  the  throne.  In  the  promise  made  to  David  through  Nathan,  it  was  clearly
indicated  that  a  son  not  yet  born  was  to  sit  upon  his  throne,  and  when  Solumon  was
bom  he  could  not  but  imderstand  that  this  applied  to  him.  If  he  had  any  doubt  of
this,  it  must  have  been  removed  by  his  knowledge  that  the  '  Lord  loved  him,'  and  had,
through  Nathan,  bestowed  upon  him  the  new  name  of  Jedidiah  (ch.  xii.  24,  25).  It
is  even  probable  that  he  had,  long  before  the  present  time,  if  not  from  the  first,  received
those  more  distinct  intimations  of  the  Lord's  will  in  this  matter,  which  he  mentions  in
1  Chron.  xxviii.  5 — 7. ...  As  the  intimations  we  have  traced  were  long  before  afforded,
it  is  likely  that  the  pledge  (1  Kings  i.  17)  which  was  founded  on  them  had  not  been  so
long  delayed  "  (Kitto, '  Daily  Bible  lUust.'),  "  Absalom  was  a  bold,  valiant,  revengeful,
haughty,  enterprising,  magnificent,  eloquent,  and  popular  prince;  he  was  also  rich,
ambitious,  and  vain  of  his  personal  accomplishments ;  and,  after  the  death  of  Amnoii
and  his  reconciliation  with  his  father,  he  saw  no  hindrance  in  his  way  to  the  throne.
He  despised  Solomon  because  of  the  meanness  of  his  birth  and  his  tender  years.  He
was  himself  of  the  blood-royal,  not  only  by  his  father,  but  also  by  his  mother;  and
doubtless  in  his  own  apprehension  of  sufQcient  age,  authority,  and  wisdom  to  sustain
the  weight  of  government.  He  seemed  to  stand  nearest  to  the  throne ;  but  his  sin  was
that  he  sought  it  during  his  father's  lifetime,  and  endeavoured  to  dethrone  him  ia  order
to  ait  in  his  stead  "  (Calmet).

*  O  sacred  hunger  of  ambitious  minds,

And  impotent  desire  of  men  to  reign  I
Whom  neither  dread  of  God,  that  devils  binds,

Nor  laws  of  men,  that  commonweals  contain,

Nor  bands  of  nature,  that  wild  beasts  restrain.
Can  keep  from  outrage  and  from  doing  wrong,

Where  they  may  hope  a  kingdom  to  obtain :
No  faith  so  &:m,  no  trust  can  be  so  strong.
No  love  so  lasting  then,  that  may  endure  long."

('  The  Faeiie  Queene,'  oanto  xii.)

n.  PoPULABiTY  PRAUDULBNTLY'  ACQ0IEED.  "  Absalom  Stole  the  hearts  of  the  men
of  Israel "  (ver.  6) ;  by  methods  which  many  a  demagogue  has  since  adopted.  "  David
won  their  hearts  by  noble  deeds  of  generosity,  as  well  as  by  deeds  of  prowess ; "  but
Absalom  stole  them  by :  1.  Subtlety  and  guUe.  2.  Ustentation  ;  affecting  royal  state.
"Absalom  prepared  him  chariots,"  etc.  (ver.  1;  ch.  xiii.  23,  27;  1  Sam.  viii.  4 — 22).
3.  Assiduity,  in  attending  to  public  affairs.  "  Absalom  rose  up  early,"  etc.  (ver.  •/).
"  Those  who  least  understand  the  duties  and  could  least  endure  the  burdens  of  authority
are  commonly  most  desirous  of  it ;  but  when  ambition  prompts,  the  most  self-indulgent
assume  the  appearance  of  diligence,  and  the  most  haughty  that  of  afi'ability  and
condescension;  and  while  men  aspire  to  the  pinnacle  of  earthly  grandeur,  they,  for  the
time,  pay  the  most  abject  court  to  the  meanest  of  the  mob !"  (Scott).  4.  Courtesy
and  pretended  sympathy.  "  Absalom  called  unto  him,  and  said,  Of  what  city  art
thou?"  etc.;  "He  put  forth  his  hand,  and  took  him,  and  kissed  him"  (ver.  6).

"  And  then  I  stole  all  courtesy  from  heaven.
And  dressed  myself  in  such  humility,
That  I  did  pluck  allegiance  from  men's  hearts.
Loud  shouts  and  salutations  from  their  mouths,
Even  in  the  presence  of  the  orownM  Hng."

('King  Henry  IV.,'  Part  I.  act  iii.  sc.  2.)

5.  Flattery.    "Absalom  said  unto  him.  See,  thy  matters  are  good  and  right "  (ver.  3),

6.  Disparagement  of  the  existing  administration,  and  insinuation  of  the  king's  incapa-
bility and  neglect.  "  But  there  is  no  man  deputed  of  the  king  to  hear  thee."  7,  Fair
and  lavish  promises,  and  holding  out  the  prospect  of  a  golden  age  under  his  reign.
"  And  Absalom  said,  Oh  that  I  were  made  judge  in  the  land  I "  etc.  (ver.  4).  It  is  not
to  be  wondered  at  that,  by  such  arts  as  these,  aided  by  his  ready  speech  and  attractive
person  and  manners,  he  turned  the  hearts  of  the  people,  already  prepared  for  change,
from  their  rightful  monarch.    "  After  thus  flattering  the  people,  and  ingratiating  him-


382  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv,  1—37.

self  into  their  favour  during  four  years,  he  decides  upon  the  execution  of  his  cunningly
devised  project "  (Ewald).  "  The  success  of  this  godless  rebel  shows  a  lack  of  true
theocratic  feeling  in  the  mass  of  the  people,  who,  in  abandooing  the  king's  government,
were  guilty  of  opposition  to  the  government  of  God  "  (Erdmann).

HI.  Conspiracy  craftily  carried  out  (vers.  7 — 12) ;  apparent  in :  1.  The  selection
of  the  place,  Hebron  (his  birthplace),  notable  on  many  accounts,  especially  as  the  chief
city  of  Judah,  where  sympathy  could  be  calculated  upon.  "There  may  have  been
many  persons  there  who  had  been  displeased  by  the  removal  of  the  court  to  Jerusalem"
(Keil).  "  Accustomed  from  the  earliest  times  to  independence  and  pre-eminence,
Judah  stood  proudly  apart  under  David  even  after  Saul's  death,  and  now  probably
offered  some  opposition  to  the  growing  unity  of  the  kingdom"  (Ewald).  2.  The
profession  of  a  religious  purpose — the  fulfilment  of  a  vow  (vers.  7,  8;  1  Sam.  i.  11).
"  With  a  subtle  refinement  of  hypocrisy,  he  pretended  that  his  thank-offering  was  for
his  return  to  Jerusalem  "  (Plumptre).  "  No  villainy  can  be  termed  complete  which  is
not  disguised  under  the  mask  of  religion,  especially  at  those  times  when  the  profession
of  godliness  is  treated  with  general  respect."  3.  The  obtaining  of  the  king's  sanction :
"Gio  in  peace"  (ver.  9);  thereby  disarming  suspicion  and  winning  confidence.  4.  The
despatch  of  emissaries  through  all  the  tribes,  to  prepare  for  the  simultaneous  proclama-
tion, "  Absalom  reigneth  in  Hebron  I "  (ver.  10).  5.  The  securing  of  the  presence
of  numerous  persons  from  Jerusalem;  depriving  the  king  of  their  aid,  and  making
them  unwittingly  adherents  of  Absalom  (ver.  11).  6.  The  gaining  of  the  open  support
of  Ahithophel,  whose  secret  counsel  had  doubtless  been  long  before  afforded  (vers.  12,
31).  He  was  "  the  sinews  of  Absalom's  cause  "  (Blunt).  "  While  the  sacrifices  were
proceeding,  Absalom  sent  for  him  from  Griloh,  and  the  presence  of  this  influential
personage  appears  to  have  caused  the  final  outbreak  of  a  conspiracy  which  had  been
carefully  prepared,  and  which  immediately  spread  with  amazing  rapidity,  and  pouring
like  a  wild  mountain  torrent  from  the  ancient  capital  of  Judah,  soon  threatened  to
flood  the  whole  country"  (Ewald).

IV.  Inburuection  successfully  incited,  only  to  be  disastrously  defeated.  "And
the  conspiracy  was  strong,"  etc.  Its  success  was :  1.  Great,  swift,  surprising.  A  few
hours  later,  Jerusalem  was  iu  the  hands  of  Absalom.  2.  Temporary.  The  prosperity
of  the  wicked  is  but  for  a  moment.  3.  Followed  by  signal  retribution,  whilst  itself
employed  as  an  instrument  thereof,  by  Divine  providence,  whose  ways,  though
mysterious,  are  always  just  and  right.  The  death  of  Absalom  (ch.  xviii.  14)  was  "the
end  uf  a  b  tter  family  history,  whose  every  sorrow  was  linked  to  the  father's  blame."
The  people  who  shared  his  crime  shared  his  punishment.  The  fatal  spark  of  tribal
enmity  kimiled  under  his  influence,  though  quenched  for  the  moment,  soon  burst
forth  again,  and  ultimately  destroyed  the  unity,  independence,  and  streugth  of  the
nation. — D.

Vers.  13 — 18. — BavicCs  flight  from  Jerusalem.  "Arise!  and  let  us  flee  "(ver.  14).
References  :  1.  Leaving  the  palace,  on  receiving  news  from  Hebron  (after  the  harvest
and  vintage,  ch.  xvi.  1 ;  xvii.  28 ;  Ps.  iv.  7).  2.  At  "  the  Par  House  "  (Beth-ham-
merhak),  on  tlie  outskirts  of  the  city  (ver.  17);  and  at  "the  olive  tree  in  (on  the
road  to)  the  \i  ilderness  of  Judah  "  (LXX.) ;  the  procession  formed  ;  Ittai  the  Gittite.

3.  Fassinn  over  the  Kidron;  the  signal  of  flight;  loud  and  general  wailing  (ver.  23).

4.  Commencement  of  the  ascent  of  Mount  Olivet;  Zadok  and  Abiathar  (vers.  24 — 29).

5.  Ascendin.;  the  mountain  amidst  loud  wailing  (ver.  30);  tidings  concerning  Ahitho-
phel (ver.  31).  6.  At  the  top  (about  noonday),  "  where  God  was  worshipped "  (ver.
32);  Hushai  the  Archite  (vers.  32 — 37).  7.  De3<ending,  on  the  other  side ;  Ziba,  with
refreshmeiits  (ch.  xvi.  1—4).  8.  At  Bahurim ;  Shimei  (ch.  xvi.  5 — 13).  9.  Coming
"  weary  "  (ur,  to  "  Ayephim  ")  (ch.  xvi.  14) ;  to  the  fords  (Authorized  Version, "  plains  ")
of  the  wilderness,  or  passages  of  the  wilderness  leading  to  the  Jordan;  and  resting
there  for  the  night.  10.  Crossing  the  river  (after  midnight),  on  the  arrival  of  Ahimaaz
and  Jonathan  'with  news  from  Jerusalem  (oh.  xvii.  21,  22) ;  and  marching  onward  "  by
the  morning  light "  toward  Mahanaim  (oh.  xvii.  24,  27 — 29).  "  There  is  no  single
day  in  the  Jewish  history  of  which  so  elaborate  an  accoimt  remains  as  of  this  memor-
able flight"  (Stanley).  It  was  probably  the  morning  after  Absalom's  revolt  when
new8  came  from  Hebron.    Of  all  the  "  evil  tidings "  that  David  ever  received  (ch.


OH.  XV.  1—37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  883

xiii.  21,  30),  none  were  more  unexpected  or  alarming.  He  must  determine  at  onca
whether  to  face  the  gathering  storm  or  flee  before  it.  With  something  of  his  former
decision  he  chose  the  latter  course ;  his  servants  (state  officers,  attendants,  soldiers)
declared  themselves  ready  to  do  his  bidding  ;  and  "  he  vyent  forth  and  all  his  house-
hold" (wives,  sons,  daughters),  "  all  the  people"  ("  servants,"  LXX.)  "  after  him,"  etc.
At  first,  no  doubt,  struck  with  consternation,  he  yet  speedily  regained  his  composure
(Ps.  cxii.  12) ;  and  came  to  his  decision  not  from  abject  fear,  or  personal  cowardice
(ch.  xviii.  2),  but  (as  others  should  do  in  similar  critical  and  perilous  positions)  from
motives  of —

I.  Piety  ;  or  humble  submission  to  the  chastisement  of  God.  Lest  he  "bring  evil
upon  us;"  or  "drive  over  us  the  evil"  or  calamity  which  now  threatens,  and  in  which
David  sees  the  fulfilment  of  predicted  judgment  (ch.  xii.  10,  11).  1.  He  discerns
therein  the  operation  of  Divine  justice  on  account  of  his  sin  (oh.  xvi.  11).  Trouble
and  danger  bring  sin  to  remembrance ;  and  those  who  remember  their  sin  are  quick  tc
perceive  the  chastening  hand  of  God  where  others  see  only  the  wrathful  hand  of  man.
Iq  the  view  of  faith,  wicked  men  are  instruments  employed  by  the  supreme  and
righteous  Judge.  Besentraent  toward  them  is  thereby  moderated,  the  sense  of  sin
deepened,  and  suffering  borne  in  a  different  manner.  "  Wherefore  doth  a  living  man
complain  ?  "  etc.  (Lam.  iii.  39 ;  Micah  vii.  9).  2.  He  is  persuaded  of  the  folly  of  resist-
ance to  the  Divine  power.  Such  resistance  can  be  of  no  avail  against  the  Almighty ;
it  ought  not  to  be  attempted;  and  it  can  only  result  in  defeat  and  ruin  (as  in  the  case
of  Saul).  If  he  should  remain  and  defend  the  city,  David  had  no  inward  assurance,  as
in  former  conflicts,  that  God  would  be  with  him.  He  rather  felt  that  in  resisting
Absalom  at  this  moment  he  would  be  resisting  God.  He  did  not  even  deem  it  neediul
to  consult  the  oracle  (ver.  24).  3.  He  acquiesces  without  murmuring  in  the  Divine
will  (ver.  26),  "  accepts  the  punishment  of  his  iniquity  "  (Lev.  xxvi.  41),  and  patiently
endures  the  wrath  of  man,  knowing  that  it  is  subject  to  Divine  control.  When  a
hurricane  sweeps  over  the  land,  the  things  that  cannot  bend  are  broken;  but  those  that
bow  beneath  it  are  preserved,  and  rise  up  again  when  it  has  passed  by.  "Humble
yourselves,"  etc.  (Jas.  iv.  10).  4.  He  hopes  for  deliverance  in  the  Divine  mercy  (var.
25 ;  ch.  xvi.  12).  "  But  as  for  me,  I  trust  in  thee  "  (Ps.  Iv.  23).  Herein  lay  the  secret
of  David's  passivity,  tranquillity,  and  forbearance  during  his  flight.

II.  Policy  ;  or  prudent  counsel  against  the  assaults  of  the  wicked.  Piety  without
policy  is  too  simple  to  be  safe.  1.  He  does  not  presume  upon  the  protection  of  God,
without,  on  his  part,  exercising  proper  caution  and  energy.  A  good  man's  submission
to  Divine  chastisement  does  not  require  that  he  should  always  remain  in  the  way  of
danger  or  voluntarily  invite  human  hostility  and  cruelty.  "  When  they  persecute
you  in  this  city,  flee  ye  into  another"  (Matt.  x.  23).  2.  He  does  not  undertake  an
enterprise  rashly,  or  withoitt  adequate  means  of  success.  David  probably  deemed  the
number  of  his  "  servants  "  present  with  him  in  Jerusalem  insufficient  for  the  defence
of  the  city.  If,  indeed,  he  had  the  assurance  of  Divine  help,  he  might  have  thought
otherwise  (ch.  v.  19).  "His  departure  was  an  admirable  means  of  testing  the  real
strength  of  both  parties  "  (Bwald).  3.  He  does  not  place  an  undue  confidence  in  man.
"  David  was  perhaps  afraid  that  Jerusalem  might  fall  into  Absalom's  power  through
treachery  "  (Keil).  "  Beware  of  men "  (Matt.  x.  17  ;  John  ii.  24 ;  Ps.  cxviii.  8,  9).
4.  He  makes  use  of  the  means  which  are  most  likely  to  ensure  safety  and  success.  "  A
prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself"  (Prov.  xxii.  3).  If  there  must  be
conflict,  delay  appeared  to  him  desirable ;  it  would  afford  time  for  his  faithful  adherents
to  assemble ;  and,  in  the  open  field,  the  tried  valour  and  discipline  of  his  veterans
would  give  them  an  advantage.  Pious  men  are  not  unfrequently  deficient  in  prudence
(Luke  xvi.  8) ;  since,  however,  they  are  sometimes  beset  by  ravening  wolves,  it  is
necessary  that  they  should  be  "  wise  as  serpents  "  (Matt.  x.  16),  taking  care  neverthe-
less to  avoid  guile,  and  to  be  "  harmless  as  doves,"  "  When  he  was  reviled,"  etc.
(1  Pet.  ii.  23).

HI.  Pitt  ;  or  generous  concern  for  the  preservation  of  the  imperilled.  Foreseeing
the  misery  and  bloodshed  likely  to  ensue  from  awaiting  the  attack  of  Absalom,  he
sought  by  flight  not  merely  to  save  his  own  life,  but  chiefly :  1.  To  secure  the  safety
of  his  helpless  household,  and  aid  the  escape  of  his  faithful  followers  (vers.  19,  20).
2.  To  spare  the  city  the  horrors  of  a  siege.    "  He  preferred  the  safety  of  the  people  to


884  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1—37.


his  own ;  and  was  thus  also  a  figure  of  him  who  said,  in  the  garden  of  Grethsemane, '  If
ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way ' "  (Wordsworth).  3.  To  save  the  life  of  his  rebellious
son-  (oh.  xviii.  12) ;  for  which  he  would  have  given  his  own  (ch.  xviiL  33).  4.  To
prevent  the  miseries  of  civil  war  (ch.  ii.  26 ;  iii.  1),  and  promote  the  welfare  of  the
divided  and  misguided  people.  If  collision  could  be  now  avoided,  it  might  perchance
be  altogether  averted  (ver.  25),  or  at  least  occur  with  le«e  injurious  consequences.  He
was  willing  to  sacrifice  himself  for  the  good- of  the  "sheep"  (ch.  v.  2;  xxiv.  17).
"  I  et  thy  blessing  be  upon  tliy  people"  (Ps.  iii.  8).  His  piety  was  honoured,  his
policy  justified,  his  pity  succeeded  by  renewed  attachment  (ch.  xix.  14),  and,  in  all,
the  overruling  providence  of  God  was  displayed.  He  left  Jerusalem  in  humiliation
and  grief;  he  returned  (three  months  afterwards)  in  triumph  (ch.  xix.  89,  40).  Having
practically  resigned  his  sceptre  to  God,  from  whom  he  received  it,  God  gave  it  back
into  his  hands.  "  As  David  falls  away  from  Jehovah  to  be  more  firmly  bound  to  him^
so  Israel  turns  away  from  David  to  be  (as  the  close  of  the  history  shows)  more  devoutly
attached  to  him.  The  prelude  to  this  first  olearing-up  of  the  relations  between  king
anil  people  is  given  in  the  conduct  of  the  faithful  band  who  stand  firmly  by  David  in
the  general  defection"  (Baumgarten). — D.

Vers.  19 — 22. — (Beth-hammbrhak.)  The  devotedness  of  Ittat,  "  As  Jehovah  liveth,"
etc.  (ver.  21).  In  his  flight  from  Jerusalem  :  1.  David  experienced  much  alleviation
of  his  trouble ;  as  in  his  flight  from  the  court  of  Saul  (nearly  forty  years  before).  He
was  not  left  alone  (1  Sam.  xxii.  1,  2).  His  "servants"  gathered  round  him,  and  pro-
fessed their  readiness  to  follow  him  (ver.  15).  Halting  with  his  household  at  "  the
Far  House,"  he  foimd  himself  accompanied  by  his  body-guard,  the  Cretans  and
Philistines  (under  Benaiah,  oh.  viii.  18) ;  his  six  hundred  veterans  (under  Abishai,  ch.
xxiii.  17 — 39)  who  had  been  with  him  in  his  earlv  wanderings  and  followed  him  from
Gath  onward  (Gittites,  equivalent  to  "Gihborim,"  1  Sam.  xxiii.  13  ;  xxviL  2;  xxx.  9 ;
ch.  ii.  3 ;  V.  6) ;  and  a  part  at  least  of  the  regular  soldiery — the  host  (under  Joab,  ch.  viii.
16 ;  xviii.  1,  2).  His  attention  was  arrested  by  the  presence  of  Ittai  the  Gittite  (who,
from  some  unknown  cause,  had  recently  come  from  Gath)  with  his  brethren  (kinsfolk)
and  children.  "  The  Lord  has  the  hearts  of  all  men  in  his  hands,  and  if  he  be  our
friend,  we  shall  not  want  friends"  (Guild).  "Our  foremost  friends  are  sometimes
raised  up  among  persons  from  whom  we  had  the  least  expectations "  (Scott).  2.  lie
exhibited  noble  generosity/  in  his  conduct.  "Wherefore  goest  thou  with  us?"  etc.
(vers.  19 — 21).  "This  unexpected  meeting  with  Ittai  appeared  to  the  royal  fugitive
almost  like  a  friendly  greeting  of  his  God,  and  dropped  the  first  soothing  balsam-drops
into  the  painful  wounds  of  his  deeply  lacerated  heart "  (Krummacher).  But  David,
now  himself  a  wanderer,  had  no  desire  to  make  the  condition  of  this  "  stranger  and
exile "  more  homeless  and  distressing  by  dragging  him  into  his  own  misfortunes ;
released  him  from  whatever  obligations  of  service  he  may  have  incurred ;  advised  him
to  offer  his  services  to  the  new  king ;  and  expressed  the  wish,  "  Mercy  and  truth  ^from
God]  be  with  thee  "  (ch.  ii.  6).

**  I  am  a  poor  fallen  man,  nnworthy  now
To  be  thy  lord  and  master ;  seek  the  king  .  .
Megleot  him  not ;  make  use  now,  and  provide

For  thine  own  future  safety."

('  King  Henry  VHI.')

8.  Ee  exerted  a  powerful  attraction  on  his  foUowers ;  as  aforetime.  His  language  was
really  a  pathetic  appeal;  not  unlike  that  of  Jesus,  "Will  ye  also  go  away?"  etc.
(John  vu  66 — 69).  "  Ittai  declared  his  resolution  (with  a  fervour  which  almost
inevitably  recalls  a  like  profession  made  almost  on  the  same  spot  to  the  great  Descend-
ant of  David,  Matt.  xxvi.  35,  centuries  afterwards)  to  follow  him  in  life  and  death  "
(Stanley).  It  was  "  a  beautiful  instance  of  loyal  constancy  and  faithful  devotion  in
a  Philistine  soldier  at  a  time  of  apostasy  and  defection.  His  truth  and  fidelity  are
brought  out  in  a  stronger  and  clearer  light  by  the  contrast  with  the  treachery  of
Absalom,  Ahithophel,  and  eventually  of  Joab  and  Abiathar  "  (Wordsworth).  He  may
be  regarded,  in  his  devotion  to  David,  as  a  pattern  of  devotion  to  Christ.  It  was —
L  Skvekbly  tested.    Like  him,  the  follower  of  Christ  is  often  tried  and  proved,  by  i


CH.  XV.  1—37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  885


1.  The  prospect  of  difficulties,  frivations,  and  perils  in  his  service.  These  are  all
known  to  the  Lord,  for  he  has  himself  endured  them  ;  and  he  forewarns  his  disciples
of  them  (Luke  ix.  57,  58 ;  xiv.  25 — 33).  He  would  not  have  them  follow  him  from
mere  impulse.  2.  The  promise  of  ease,  safety, amd  advantage  in  other  service ;  worldly
pleasure,  treasure,  power,  honour,  in  devotion  to  the  prince  and  "  god  of  this  world."
3.  The  exa/mple  and  influence  of  many  persons ;  bound  by  stronger  ties  to  serve  their
rightful  king;  but  forsaking  their  allegiance  to  him,  joining  in  revolt  against  his
authority,  seeking  his  life,  and  heaping  reproaches  on  his  head  (ch.  xvi.  11).  "  From
that  time  many  of  his  disciples  went  back,"  etc.  (John  vi.  66;  Mark  xiv.  50  ;  2  Tim.
iv.  10 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  17).  4.  The  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed,  the  special
inducements  suggested  thereby,  and  the  favourable  opportunities  afforded  for  the
exercise  of  his  freedom.  There  are  times  in  which  the  Lord  (liowever  much  he  values
and  desires  his  aid)  does  not  urge  him  to  coniiniie,  but  seems  to  do  the  opposite,  and
give  him  liberty,  if  he  be  disposed,  to  depart.  So  he  tests  his  disciples,  sifis  the  false
from  the  true,  and,  though  it  cause  the  former  to  fall  away,  it  makes  the  latter  cling
to  him  more  closely  than  ever.  The  decision  between  Christ  and  antichrist  has  to
be  made,  not  only  at  first,  but  also  often  afterwards.

IL  WoETHiLT  DISPLAYED,  as  it  sliould  be  by  every  follower  of  "  the  Son  of  David,"
in :  1,  Tiie  deliberate  preference  of  his  service  to  any  other.  "  Just  as  in  the  great
French  Revolution,  the  famous  Swiss  Guard  sliowed  a  brave,  though  mercenary  fidelity,
so  Ittai,  having  eaten  of  the  king's  salt,  determines  that  where  his  lord  the  king  is,
in  life  or  death,  he  will  be."  2.  The  disinterested  motives  by  which  he  is  actuated
(Ruth  i.  16).  Ittai  was  not  a  mere  mercenary,  serviug  David  for  advantage  (Job  i.  9).
He  was  influenced  possibly  by  gratitude  for  the  kind  reception  he  met  with  on  coming
from  Gath  as  "  a  stranger  and  an  exilf,"  by  a  sense  of  obligation  imposed  by  friend-
ship and  previous  engagements,  by  a  conviction  of  the  rectitude  of  the  king's  cause  ;
certainly  by  admiration  and  affection  for  his  person.  Hence  he  wished  to  be  with  him,
to  share  his  sufferings  and  to  aid  in  his  defence.  He  was  ready  "  to  lay  down  his
life  for  his  sake."  An  intelligent,  sincere,  passionate  love  to  the  Person  of  Christ  is
essential  to  his  service.  "  Lovest  thou  me  ?  "  3.  The  open  and  solemn  pledge  of
loyalty  and  fidelity.  "As  Jehovah  liveth,"  etc.  (1  Sam.  xxix.  6;  ch.  iv.  9).  Ittai  was
doubtless  a  convert  to  the  faith  of  I.~rael.  "  Whosoever  shall  confess  me  before  men,"
etc.  (Matt.  X.  32  ;  Horn.  x.  10).  4.  The  practical,  unconditional,  whole-hearted  conse-
cration of  himself  and  all  he  posseased  to  the  king's  service.  "  And  Ittai  the  Gittite
1  assed  over,  and  all  his  men,  and  all  the  little  ones  that  were  with  him."  "Who  then
is  willing  to  consecrate  himself  this  day  unto  the  Lord?"  (1  Chron.  xxix.  5).

111.  Geaciously  approved.  "  And  David  said  to  Ittai,  Go  and  pass  over  "  (ver.  22),
"  with  me  "  (LXX.).  if  he  said  no  more,  his  look  and  manner  would  give  peculiar  signifi-
cance to  his  words.  The  Lord  testifies  his  reception  and  approval  of  every  devoted
servant  by :  1.  Giving  him  the  assurance  thereof  in  his  heart.  2.  Fulfilling  his  desire
to  be  with  him.  "  If  any  man  serve  mo,"  etc.  (John  xii.  26).  3.  Appointing  him  to
his  post  of  duty,  and  making  his  way  plain  (John  xi.  9,  10).  4.  Exalting  him  to  a
position  of  responsibility  and  honour  (ch.  xviii.  2),  in  which  he  aids  the  king  in  gaining
a  great  victory,  and  shares  the  joy  of  a  great  triumph.  The  latter,  like  the  former  life
of  this  Philistine,  is  wrapped  in  obscurity.  But  his  devotion  to  "  the  Lord's  anointed  "
shines  like  a  star  among  the  heathen,  and  condemns  the  lukewarmness,  selfishness,  and
unfaithfulness  of  many  "  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians."

"Lo!  of  those
Who  call, '  Christ  I  Christ  1 '  there  shall  be  many  found,
In  judgment,  further  off  from  him  by  far
Than  such  to  whom  his  Name  was  never  known.
Christians  like  these  the  Bthiop  shall  condemn ;
When  that  the  two  asserablagea  shall  part —
One  rich  eternally,  the  other  poor."

(Dante, 'Purg.,  ziz.)

D

Yen.  23 — 29. — (Across  the  Kidron.)  The  ark  restored  to  its  place.  "  Carry  back
the  ark  of  God  to  the  city  "  (ver.  25).    Having  crossed  the  Kidron  ravine  amidst  the

II.  RAMlllil,.  k;   c


386  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1— 37.

loud  wailing  of  the  people,  and  baited  for  a  moment  in  tlie  ascent  of  Olivet,  David
was  met  by  Zadok  (of  the  elder  branch  of  the  Aaronio  family),  with  the  Levites,  carry-
ing the  ark  (ch.  vi.),  and  by  Abiathar  (a  descendant  of  Eli,  of  the  younger  branch).
The  former  had  come  to  him  at  Hebron  (about  thirty  years  before),  "  a  young  man
mighty  of  valour "  (1  Chron.  xii.  28) ;  the  latter  was  a  still  older  friend  of  David  (1
Sam.  xxii.  23),  occupying  the  highest  official  position  (Zadok  being  his  vicar  only,  or
sagan,  1  Kings  ii.  27,  35;  1  Chron.  xvi.  39),  but  not  taking  the  most  prominent  part
in  active  service,  and  perhaps  entertaining  "jealousy  of  his  rival"  (Blunt).  They
doubtless  intended  to  render  valuable  seiTice  to  the  king  by  bringing  the  ark.  Why,
then,  did  he  send  it  hack  f  Not  from  want  of  proper  regard  for  it  (ver.  25,  latter  part).
He  did  not,  indeed,  put  a  superstitious  confidence  in  it,  like  Hophni  and  Phinehas.  He
esteemed  and  reverenced  it  as  an  appointed  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  and  "  favour,"
and  a  valuable  means  of  Divine  worship  and  service  (1  Sam.  iv.  11),  just  as  highly  as
when  he  conducted  it  in  triumph  to  its  resting-place  (oh.  vi.  16).  But  "  he  would  not
use  the  ark  as  a  charm ;  he  had  too  much  reverence  for  it  to  risk  it  in  his  personal
peril "  (Stanley).  He  looked  upon  it  as  belonging  to  God  and  to  his  people,  not  to
himself;  considered,  not  only  that  it  would  be  of  no  advantage  to  him  in  present
circumstances,  but  also  that  he  was  not  justified  in  removing  it  from  the  city  and
depriving  the  people  of  its  presence ;  that  rather  it  was  the  will  of  God  that  he  should
himself  be  deprived  of  it,  at  least  for  a  season ;  and  thus  he  honoured  God  in  adversity
as  he  had  formerly  done  in  prosperity.  "  David  is  always  great  in  affliction.  His  con-
duct throughout,  his  goodness,  resignation,  and  patience,  are  clearly  evinced  in  all  these
trying  scenes  "  (Kitto).  Consider  him  as  an  example  of:  1.  Spiritual  insight.  He
perceived  the  true  nature  and  worth  of  the  ark ;  that  the  symbol  was  distinct  from
the  reality  of  the  Divine  favour,  did  not  necessarily  ensure  its  possession,  was  not  an
essential  condition  of  it;  that  its  value  depended  u]X)n  the  relation  of  men  to  God
(1  Sam.  vi.  1 — 9).  Affliction  often  teaches  us  how  to  regard  the  outward  piivileges
and  ordinances  of  religion.  "  He  was  contented  at  this  time  to  forbear  the  presence  of
the  ark,  having  his  confidence  in  God,  and  not  relying  altogether  upon  the  external
sacrament "  (Willet).  2.  Deep  humility.  Having  acted  unworthily  of  the  ark  of  the
'•testimony,  and  disobeyed  the  commandments  of  God,  he  deemed  himself  unworthy
of  the  honour  of  its  presence.  His  deprivation  of  it  was  a  just  chastisement  for  bis
misuse  and  abuse  of  it.  "  I  am  not  worthy,"  etc.  (Gen.  xxxii.  10;  Luke  v.  8 ;  Matt.
viii.  8).  3.  Holy  affection  toward  the  "habitation"  of  God  (Ps.  sxvi.  8);  toward
God  himself;  and  toward  his  people.  Hence,  although  banished  from  the  ark  of  God,
he  desired  that  the  God  of  the  ark  should  still  be  honoxu-ed  by  others,  and  do  them
good.  "  Observe  his  disinterested  self-sacrifice  for  the  good  of  the  people.  He  would
not  punish  his  subjects  for  his  son's  sins  "  (Wordsworth).  "  It  argues  a  good  principle
to  be  more  concerned  for  the  Church's  prosperity  than  for  our  own,  to  prefer  Jerusalem
bflfwe  our  chief  joy,  the  success  of  the  gospel  and  the  flourishing  of  the  Church  above
our  own  wealth,  credit,  ease,  safety,  even  when  they  are  most  at  hazard  "  (Matthew  Henry).
"  L«t  thy  Name  be  magnified  for  ever  "  (ch.  vii.  26).  4.  Lofty  faith  in  the  presence  of
God  in  all  places,  his  superintendence  of  all  events,  his  acquaintance  with  all  hearts,
his  righteousness  and  goodness,  favour,  guidance,  mercy,  and  truth  (ver.  20).  It  is
"  an  instance  of  David's  clear  faith  in  the  omnipresence  of  God  and  of  his  spiritual
elevation  from  the  outward  symbols  of  the  sanctuary  to  the  Divine  essence  that  wu
symbolized  by  them."  "  Salvation  belongeth  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.  (Ps.  iii.  8 ;  iv.  3 ;  v.
7).  5.  Unquenchable  hope.  "  If  I  find  favour,"  etc.  (ver.  26).  So  far  from  despairing
of  God's  favour,  he  cherished  the  expectation  of  being  delivered  "  out  of  all  his  troubles,"
brought  back  to  Jerusalem,  seeing  the  ark  again,  and  worshipping  in  his  tabernacle
with  joy.  "  My  hope  is  in  thee  "  (Ps.  zxxix.  7  ;  xlii.  5 ;  Ixxi.  14).  6.  Entire  resigna-
tion. "  And  if  he  thus  say,  I  have  no  delight  in  thee ;  behold,  here  am  I,  let  him  do
to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto  hun  "  (ver.  26 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  18 ;  ch.  xii.  15 — 23).  "  He
besought  God,  as  Alexander  Seveius  told  his  soldiers  a  generous  and  a  wise  man  should ;
praying  for  the  best  things  and  bearing  whatever  should  befall"  (Delany).  "This
marks  strongly  his  subdued  and  right  spirit,  partly  induced,  we  doubt  not,  by  the
humility  of  his  own  conscious  transgressions.  He  fell;  but  it  was  the  fall  of  the
U[/ikht,  and  he  rose  again ;  submitting  himself  meekly  in  the  mean  time  to  the  will  of
God  "  (Chalmers).     7.  Fractical  wisdom.     "  Art  thou  a  seer  ?  return  to  the  city,"  etc.


on.xv.  1— 37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  387


(vers.  27 — 29);  "Behold!  return,"  etc.  (LXX.).  « The  peculiar  exercises  of  religion
ought  to  precede,  but  not  to  exclude,  the  use  of  every  prudent  means  of  securing  success
in  lawful  undertekings "  (Scott).  When,  in  time  of  adversity,  we  decline  the  aid  of
our  friends  in  one  form,  because  it  seems  to  us  injudicious  and  improper,  we  should
gladly  avail  ourselves  of  it  in  another ;  knowing  that  by  such  instrumentality  the  help
for  wiich  we  look  to  God  is  most  commonly  vouchsafed.  "  Among  the  few  faithful
amidst  the  faithless,  the  first  place  belongs  to  the  priests,  whom  loyalty  and  interest
alike  bound  to  the  throne.  So  they  were  ready  if  they  had  been  permitted  to  have
tarried  even  the  ark  to  share  the  exile  of  the  king.  They  will  live  their  loyalty
crowned  by  seeing  the  ark,  the  tent  of  a  once  nomad  worship,  signifying  by  its  flame
a  spiritual  life,  set  up  in  Jerusalem ;  the  younger  amongst  them  may  see  a  temple  rise,
the  scene  of  as  noble  a  worship  as  the  world  has  yet  known"  (R.  WUliams). — ^D.

Ver.  30. — Daviess  tears  on  OUvet.  1.  What  a  scene  of  fallen  greatness  and  bitter
grief  is  here  depicted  1  He  who  yesterday  reigned  in  Jerusalem,  as  the  anointed
(Messiah)  of  Jehovah,  is  to-day  a  homeless  fugitive  (ver.  20),  toiling  up  the  ascent  of
Olivet,  in  deep  humiliation  and  undisguised  sorrow,  with  head  covered  (ch.  iii.  31,  32  ;
xix.  4)  and  feet  bare ;  accompanied  by  stem  warriors  and  tender  women  and  children,
all,  like  himself,  with  covered  heads  "  going  and  weeping."  Tt  is  "  as  one  long  funeral
procession  of  men  wailing  over  the  fall  of  all  their  hopes  "  (Plumptre).  2.  What  an
instance  of  moral  excellence  and  overcoming  faith  is  here  afforded  I  "  The  greatuess
of  David  did  not  depend  on  his  royal  state ;  it  was  within  his  lofty  soul  and  insepar-
able from  his  commanding  character  "  (Milman).  He  is  considerate,  generous  (ver.  19),
submissive  (ver.  26),  prayerful  (ver.  31),  grateful  (ch.  xvi.  4),  forbearing  (ch.  xvi.  10),
and  hopeful  (ch.  xvi.  12).  His  suffering  manifests  his  sincerity,  his  outward  shame
his  inward  worth ;  and  "  out  of  the  depths "  of  his  trouble  he  rises  to  the  loftiest
elevation  (Ps.  cxxx.  1 ;  Ixxxiv.  6 ;  ch.  xxiii.  13,  14 ;  Hos.  ii.  15).  3.  What  an  out-
line is  here  furnished  of  the  ideal  representation,  given  by  psalmist  and  prophet,  of
the  suffering  Servant  of  Jc'hovah  (Ps.  xxii. ;  Isa.  liii.),  and  fully  realized  in  hinn  who,  on
the  same  spot,  a  thousand  years  afterwards,  wept  over  the  sinning  and  perishing  city !
"  And  when  he  was  come  near,"  etc.  (Luke  xix.  41 — 44 ;  xxiii.  27 — 31).     Consider —

L  The  soekows  of  David.  Why  did  he  weep  ?  Not  so  much  on  account  of  his
exile,  privation,  etc.,  as  on  account  of:  1.  The  grievous  transgressions  which  he  had
formerly  committed  (Ps.  xxxix.  12 ;  vi.  6),  and  which  were  now  brought  afresh  to
remembrance.  "  My  sin  is  ever  before  me."  2.  The  ungrateful  treatment  which  he
received,  from  his  son  whom  he  tenderly  loved  (ch.  xvi.  11),  from  his  subjects  whom
he  faithfully  served,  from  his  adversaries  who  hated  him  "  wrongfully  "  and  "  without
a  cause"  (Ps.  Ixix.  3 — 5).  Neither  his  former  transgressions  nor  his  recent  defects
justified  rebellion  against  his  authority  as  king.  Indeed,  his  personal  piety  and  theo-
cratic policy  made  him  to  many  an  object  of  hatred  and  reproach ;  and  in  him  the
Divine  King  of  Israel  himself  was  despised  (Ps.  v.  10 ;  xxii.  8  ;  xlii.  3 ;  Ixix.  7,  9,  20).
"  Though  David  suffered  for  his  many  sins,  he  had  yet  through  penitetjce  already
obtained  forgiveness  of  sins.  Thus  he  was  the  righteous  sufferer,  who  could  appeal  to
God  for  the  purity  of  his  heart  and  the  holiness  of  his  cause  "  (Erdmann).  3.  The
•i.ational  catoTOJiy  which  he  beheld — the  distress  of  "  all  the  people  that  was  with  him"
(ver.  23),  the  distracted  condition  of  the  conntry,  the  ruin  which  thousands  would  bring
upon  themselves ;  filling  him  with  commiseration  (1  Sam.  xv.  35 ;  Ps.  cxix.  136).  4.
The  Divine  displeasure  which  he  experienced  against  his  sin  and  the  sins  of  the  people ;
regarding  this  calamity  as  a  sign  thereof,  enduring  it  in  common  with  them,  and  bearing
it,  as  far  as  possible,  in  his  own  person  (ch.  xxiv.  17).  "  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be
any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow,"  etc.  (Lam.  L  12 ;  Jer.  ix.  1).  "  When  I  fall  I  shall
arise,"  etc.  (Micah  vii.  8,  9 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  5).

II.  The  sorrows  or  Christ  ;  arising  from :  1.  Eis  relation  to  a  sinful  race,  whose
nature  he  assumed  and  among  whom  he  dwelt,  "  yet  without  sin ; "  the  suffering
"  which  a  pure  and  holy  nature  must  feel  from  the  mere  contiguity  of  evil ;  and  the
reflected  and  borrowed  shame  and  pain  which  noble  natures  feel  for  the  sins  of  those
with  whom  they  are  closely  connected"  (Caird).  2.  His  rejection  by  the  world,  which
he  came  to  save ;  beins;  reproached,  persecuted,  betrayed,  deserted,  condemned,  and
crucified;  and  thus  made  the  victim  of  human  wickeduess.    Uis  righteouBness  and


388  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1— 37.

lov«,  his  Diyino  dignity,  as  the  Son  of  (Jod,  the  King  Messiah  (ch.  vii.  16),  rendered
his  treatment  peculiarly  sinful,  and  reveals  the  sin  of  men  in  its  true  light.  3.  His
compassion  for  human  misery — ^loss,  suffering,  bondage,  death,  in  the  prescit  and  the
future ;  the  necessary  fruit  of  human  sin  (Matt.  viii.  17  ;  John  xi.  35 ;  Luke  xiii.  34,
35).  4.  His  endurance  of  Divine  abandonment  to  the  power  of  darkness  and  death
(Pb.  xxii.  1 ;  Luke  xxii.  44 ;  Mark  xv.  34 ;  Heb.  v.  7) ;  wherein  (without  the  sense
of  personal  guilt  and  remorse)  he  gathered  into  his  experience  all  the  griefs  endured  by
the  servants  of  God  in  all  ages  from  and  for  transgressors,  and  all  the  woes  of  humanity
arising  from  alienation  from  God;  and  whereby,  in  unfaltering  trust  and  entire  self-
devotion,  he  fulfilled  the  Father's  wiU,  overcame  sin,  death,  and  hell,  and  "  became  unto
all  them  that  obey  him  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation."  "  The  chastisement  was  laid
upon  him  for  our  peace ;  and  through  his  stripes  we  were  healed  "  (Isa.  liii.  5. 10 :  Ps.
xxii.  8, 16,  18,  24—31).

III.  The  sokeows  of  the  Christian.  For  every  one  who  follows  Christ  must
tread  the  path  of  sorrows  (not  only  such  as  are  natural,  but  such  as  are  spiritual  and
Divine),  on  account  of:  1.  The  manifold  sins  of  which  he  has  been  euUtv  asainst
the  Lord  (Matt.  V.  4).

"  We  have  not  time  to  mourn.    The  worse  for  as.
He  that  lacks  time  to  mourn  lacks  time  to  mend ;
Eternity  mourns  that."

('  Philip  van  ArteTelde.*)

2.  The  evU  effects  wrought  thereby  in  himself  and  others.

"Weep  not  for  broad  lands  lost;
Weep  not  for  fair  hopes  crost ;
Weep  not  when  limbs  wax  old ;
Weep  not  when  friends  grow  oold;
Weep  not  that  death  must  part
Thine  and  the  beat-loved  heart;

Yet  weep,  weep  all  thou  can-
Weep,  weep,  because  thou  art

A  sin-defllM  man."

(Trench.)

3.  The  sinful  opposition  of  men  to  Christ,  his  kingdom,  and  his  people ;  unbelief,  enmity,
and  persecution  ;  the  effects  of  which  he  shares  with  his  Lord  and  for  his  sake  (John
xvi.  33  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  13  ;  Phil.  i.  29 ;  Col.  i.  24).  "  For  many  walk,  of  whom  I  told  you
often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  18).  4.  The  miserabh  condition
and  gloomy  prospects  of  the  impenitent.  He  mourns  over  them  "with  many  tears"
(Acts  XX.  19,  31)  "  in  the  tender  mercies  of  Jesus  Christ "  (Phil.  i.  8),  and  is  willing
to  undergo  the  greatest  sacrifice  and  suffering  for  their  salvation  (Bom.  iz.  2,  3).  "  If
we  suffer  we  shall  also  reign  with  him  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).— D.

Ver.  31. — (Mount  Olivkt.)  The  counsel  of  Ahithophel.  "  Turn,  I  pray  thee,  the
counsel  of  Ahithophel  into  foolishness,  0  Jehovah."  {Beferences :  ch.  xv.  12,  34 ;
xvi.  ]  5,  20 — 23 ;  xvii.  1 — 7,  15,  23  ;  1  Chron.  xxvii.  33.)  While  ascending  the  Mount
of  Olives,  David  received  intelligence  that  his  counsellor,  Ahithophel  the  Gilonite,  had
gone  over  to  Absalom.  He  was  the  wisest  statesman  in  Israel,  and  nothing  was  more
adapted  than  his  counsel  to  ensure  the  success  of  the  revolt.  The  effect  which  his
defection  produced  upon  David  is  evident  from  the  prayer  (suggested  probably  by  his
name,  "  brother  of  a  fool ")  that  forthwith  broke  from  his  iips.  As  he  continued  his
journey,  he,  perhaps,  reflected  on  the  former  course  of  Ahithophel  (the  Old  Testament
J  udas)  in  the  light  of  present  knowledge,  and  indulged  some  such  sentiments  as  are
expressed  in  Ps.  xli.,  'The  comfort  of  the  afflicted  and  betrayed;'  P».  Iv.,  'Prayer
against  a  treacherous  friend ; '  Ps.  Ixix.,  cix.     Observe  that—

I,   A   FAMir.IAlt  FJtIEND   HAT   BECOUB   A   DEADLY   FOE.

"Also  my  friend  [literally,  'man  of  my  jieace'],  whom  I  tinsted,
Who  did  eat  of  my  bread.
Hath  lifted  np  his  heel  against  me."

(Fb.  xIL  10;  John  xiii.  18  >


CH.  XV.  1—37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  S89

"  For  it  is  not  an  enemy,  etc.
But  thou  wast  a  man  on  an  equality  with  me.
My  companion  and  familiar  friend."  etc.

(Pg.  It.  13—15.)

The  motiTes  of  Ahithophel  are  not  expressly  stated;  but  they  were  proliably:  1.
Dislike  of  the  religious  earnestness  and  theocratic  policy  of  David.  2.  Ambition  to  be
the  sole  adviser  and  prime  minister  of  Absalom.  "There  may  have  been  jealousy  of
Joab,  or  the  natural  tendency  to  worship  the  rising  instead  of  the  setting  sun,  or  the
impatieijce  of  a  hypocrite  at  the  round  of  religious  services  in  which  he  was  compelled
to  bear  a  part,  affecting  a  devotion  he  did  not  feel,  Ps.  Iv.  13,  14  "  (Plumptre).  3.
Revenge  "  for  the  dishonour  done  to  his  fiimily  in  the  person  of  Bathsheba,  which  no
subsequent  marriage  could  repair  or  efface  "  (Delany).  "  He  was  urged  by  the  desire
of  punishing  David's  greatest  crime,  if  he  were  not  at  the  bottom  of  the  movement.  It
is  but  reasonable  to  trace  in  the  conspiring  Ahithophel  one  of  the  intricate  methods
by  which  the  judicial  providence  of  God  works  out  its  own  ends ;  suffering  a  great
offender,  notwithstanding  his  penitence,  to  eat  the  fruit  of  his  deeds ;  yet  reserving  for
treachery  in  time  its  reward "  (R.  Williams).  "  This  text  is  a  glass  wherein  God's
justice  is  plainly  to  be  seen.  David  had  formerly  forsaken  Uriah,  and  now  God
suffers  Ahithophel  to  forsake  David.  (1)  Let  us  learn,  when  our  friends  forsake  us,  to
enter  into  a  serious  scrutiny  with  our  own  souls.  (2)  The  most  politic  heads  have  not
always  the  faithfuUest  hearts.  (3)  False  friends  will  forsake  thee  in  times  of
adversity  "  (T.  Fuller).  "  My  brethren  have  dealt  deceitfully  as  a  brook,"  etc.  (Job
vi.  15;  Jacox,  'Stray  Side-Lights  on  Scripture  Texts').

II.  GbEAT   gifts   AE3    SOMETIMES    PERVERTED   TO    UNGODLY    UBBS.      "  That  Oraculaj

wisdom  which  made  his  house  a  kind  of  shrine  (oh.  xvi.  23)  seems  to  move  the  spirit
of  the  sacred  writer  with  an  involuntary  admiration"  (Stanley).  "His  great  crimes
were  enhanced  by  his  immense  talents,  of  which  God  gave  him  the  use  and  the  devil
the  application."  His  criminality  appears  not  only  in  (1)  his  sanctioning  and  promoting
rebellion  against  the  authority  of  the  king;  but  also  in  (2)  his  lawless  and  shameless
advice  against  his  honour  (ch.  xvi.  21,  22),  whereby  be  sought  to  make  reconciliation
and  compromise  impossible  in  the  view  of  all,  and  to  gratify  his  revenge  in  the  most
effective  and  significant  manner  (ch.  xi.  2,  4,  11) ;  becoming,  consciously  or  uncon-
sciously, an  instrument  of  retribution.  "  This  cursed  policy  showed  him  rather  an
oracle  of  the  devil  than  of  God  "  (Matthew  Henry).  (3)  His  malicious  and  cruel  proposal
to  take  away  his  life  (ch.  xvii.  2).  None  but  a  man  devoid  of  all  moral  and  religious
principle  could  have  given  such  counsel.  A  powerful  intellect  is,  alas !  too  often  united
with  a  depraved  heart.  "It  is  often  found  true  by  experience  that  persons  of  superior
pgnetration  and  wisdom  are  of  bad  intentions ;  they  see  further  than  other  men,  and
are  under  a  temptation  to  turn  iheir  minds  to  the  overreaching  of  others,  and  effecting
mischief;  their  ability  in  accomplishing  wickedness  is  a  snare  and  a  temptation  to
them;  they  find  they  can  do  it,  and  therefore  aie  le&ij  and  willing  to  do  it"  (W.
Jones,  of  Naylaud).  "  This  man,  while  he  was  one  of  David's  deep  counsellors,  was
one  of  David's  fools,  that  said  in  their  hearts, '  There  is  no  God ; '  else  he  could  not
have  hoped  to  make  good  an  evil  with  worse,  to  build  the  success  of  treason  upon
incest."  "  Oh  the  policy  of  this  Machiavelli  of  Israel,  no  less  deep  than  hell  itself  I  Oh
the  wisdom  of  the  Almighty,  that  can  use  the  worst  evils  well,  and  most  justly  make
the  sins  of  man  his  executioners  I "  (Hall).

III.  God  is  able  to  fkustbate  the  craftiest  counsels.  "  Turn,"  etc.,  "  either
infatuate  him,  that  he  may  give  foolish  counsel ;  or,  let  his  counsel  be  rejected  as  foolish,
or  spoiled  by  the  foolish  execution  of  it "  (Poole).  "  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own
craftiness,"  etc.  (Job  v.  13 ;  1  Cor,  iii.  19).  Of  this  David  was  persuaded  from  :  1.  His
supreme  and  infinite  wisdom,  in  coiiiparison  with  which  the  highest  human  wisdom  is
foolishness.  2.  His  abundant  and  varied  resources  for  the  direction  and  control  of
men's  purposes  and  actions,  so  that  they  are  made  of  none  effect,  or  turn  out  contrary
to  what  was  intended  and  expected.  8.  His  frequent  and  extraordinary  interpositions
for  that  end.  History  is  full  of  such  instances  (Acts  iv.  28).  So  are  individual  lives
(1  Sam.  xxiii.  24 — 28).  "Though  Ahithophel  spoke  as  an  oracle  of  God  (as  we  often
gee  statesmen  wiser  than  priests),  yet  as  he  turned  to  treachery  his  counsel  turned  to
fouUshnesa."


390  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1— 37

IV.   A   GOOD    MAN    HAS    AN     CNPAILINa  EBSOUBOB   IN    EVBBY   TBOtJBLB,   VIZ.   Sincere,

believing,  fervent  prayer.  "  Call  upon  me,"  etc.  (Ps.  1.  15).  1.  However  beset  by
the  craft  and  power  of  his  adversaries,  he  cannot  be  deprived  of  this  privilege,  but  has
access  to  God  in  all  circumstances,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places  (ver.  32).  "A
Christian  cannot  always  hear,  or  always  read,  or  always  communicate,  but  he  may
pray  continually.  If  he  be  on  the  top  of  a  house  with  Peter,  he  may  pray;  if  he  ba
in  the  bottom  uf  the  ocean  with  Jonah,  he  may  pray ;  if  he  be  walking  in  the  field
with  Isaac,  he  may  pray  when  no  eye  seeth  him ;  if  he  be  waiting  at  table  with
Nehemiah,  he  may  pray  when  no  ear  heareth  him  ;  if  he  be  in  the  mountains  with  ow
Saviour,  he  may  pray ;  if  he  be  in  the  prison  with  Paul,  he  may  pray  ;  wherever  he  is,
prayer  will  help  him  to  find  God  out.  Every  saint  is  God's  temple;  and  he  that
carrieth  his  temple  about  him,  saith  Austin,  may  go  to  prayer  when  he  pleaseth.
Indeed,  to  a  Christian  every  house  is  a  house  of  prayer;  every  closet  a  chamber  of
presence ;  and  every  place  he  comes  to  an  altar  whereon  he  may  offer  the  sacrifice  of
prayer"  (Swinnock,  '  The  Christian  Man's  Calling').  2.  The  depth  of  his  helplessness
and  peril  is  an  incentive  to  higher  earnestness  and  an  argument  for  the  fulfilment  of
Divine  promises.  "Ejaculations  are  short  prayers  darted  up  to  God  on  emergent
occasions.  When  we  are  time-bound,  place-bound,  or  person-bound,  so  that  we
cannot  compose  ourselves  to  make  a  large  solemn  prayer,  this  is  the  right  instant  for
ejaculations,  whether  orally  uttered  or  only  poured  forth  inwardly  in  the  heart "
(T.  Fuller).  3.  And  his  prayer  is  not  offered  in  vain.  Sometimes  while  he  is  "yet
speaking  "  (Isa.  Ixv.  24)  the  answer  comes  (ver.  32).  "  In  answer  to  a  single  emphatical
ejaculation  the  counsel  of  the  prudent  is  carried  headlong  "  (Scott).

"As  for  me — unto  God  will  I  cry.
And  Jehovah  will  save  me.

Evening  and  morning  and  at  noon  will  I  complain  and  groan.
And  he  will  hear  my  voice.
Cast  thy  burden  upon  Jehovah,
He — he  will  sustain  thee."

(Pb.  Iv.  16,  17,  22.)

D.

Vers.  32 — 37. — (The  top  of  Mount  Glivbt.)  The  friendship  of  Bushai.  (^Refer-
ences :  Josh.  xvi.  2 ;  ch.  xvi.  16 — 19 ;  ivii.  5 — 15 ;  1  Chron.  xxvii.  33  ;  1  Kings  iv.  16.)
Like  Uriah  and  Ittai,  he  may  have  been  of  Gentile  origin  and  a  proselyte ;  was  far
advanced  in  life  (ver.  33),  "  the  king's  friend  "  or  confidential  adviser,  and  doubtless,
in  disposition,  more  congenial  with  David  than  the  cool  and  calculating  Ahitliophel.
"  In  him  David  saw  the  first  gleam  of  hope.  For  warlike  purposes  he  was  useless ;  but
of  political  stratagem  he  was  master.  The  moment  before  the  tidings  had  come  of  the
treason  of  Ahithophel.  To  frustrate  his  designs,  he  was  sent  back  just  in  time  to  meet
Absalom  arriving  from  Hebron "  (Stanley).  Notice :  1.  His  opportune  presence ;  in
answer  to  prayer  (ver.  31) ;  at  a  time  of  need,  when  others  were  unfaithful,  trouble
oppressed,  and  danger  threatened.  A  faithful  friend  is  one  of  Heaven's  best  gifts.
"  When  friends  come  to  us  just  at  the  moment  when  we  want  them,  and  for  a  purpose
which  no  one  else  could  accomplish  as  well  as  they,  and  for  a  time  which  is  precisely
conterminous  with  our  necessity,  it  is  hard  not  to  look  on  them  as  much  sent  from  God
as  the  angels  who  met  Jacob  at  Mahanaim,  or  who  stood  by  the  open  tomb  to  tell
Mary  of  Christ "  (Thorold,  '  On  the  Use  of  Friends').

"  When  true  friends  meet  in  adverse  hour,
'Tis  like  a  sunbeam  through  a  shower;
The  watery  ray  an  instant  seen,
The  darkly  dosing  clouds  between."

(Sir  W.  Scott)

"A  faithful  friend  ia  the  medicine  of  life"  (Ecclus.  vi.  16,  14).  "The  Lord  has
the  hearts  of  all  men  in  his  hands,  and  if  be  be  our  Friend  he  will  not  let  us  want
friends ;  yea,  will  make  our  most  cruel  enemies  to  be  our  friends  "  (Guild).  2.  His
genuine  sympathy;  voluntarily  and  appropriately  expressed;  and  adapted  to  cheer
and  strengthen.     "  There  are  eight  chief  uses  in  the  gift  of  friendship — viz.  counsel.


on.  XV.  1—37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  891

defence,  appreciation,  correction,  society,  intercession,  aid,  sympathy "  (chi  vii.  1,  2 ;
1  Sam.  xviii.  1 — 4).  3.  Hit  tested  loyaUy,  Would  lie  prove  his  fidelity,  not  by  going
into  exile  (ver.  21),  hut  by  returuing  to  Jerusalem,  professing  allegiance  to  Absalom,
endeavouring  to  frustrate  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel,  and  communicating  secretly  with
David?  "The  boldness  and  originality  of  this  step  revealed  the  remarkable  genius
which,  on  former  occasions,  as  in  the  contest  with  Guliath,  had  devised  methods  so
original  yet  simple  for  the  attainment  of  its  object "  (Blaikie).  This  deceptive  policy
is  recorded,  but  not  commended ;  it  was  not  contrary  to  the  ideas  which  prevailed
among  Eastern  nations  at  the  time  on  the  subject  of  veracity;  it  has  been  since
practised  by  Christian  monarchs,  statesmen,  and  warriors,  toward  their  enemies,  in
perilous  emergencies,  as  a  justifiable  stratagem;  and  often  approved,  like  a  skillul  choice
of  weapons  in  conflict  with  an  enemy,  or  like  a  clever  move  in  a  game  of  chess.  It
ought  not,  therefore,  to  be  censured  in  David  with  undue  severity ;  and  "  we  must  not
think  that  the  king's  religion  was  a  hypocrisy  because  it  did  not  bear  at  once  the  fruit
of  the  spotless  honour  and  unswerving  truth  that  mark  the  highest  forms  of  Christian
goodness"  (Plumptre).  But  such  duplicity  cannot  be  justified  on  the  ground  of
necessity;  or  that  those  against  whom  it  is  practised  may  have  (like  Absalom)
"  forfeited  all  the  rights  of  society  "  (Delany) ;  or  that  the  end  which  is  aimed  at  is
good.  In  the  light  of  revelation  it  must  be  condemned  (Lev.  xix.  11).  "  And  in  this
respect  we  have  (in  David)  a  contrast  with  the  Divine  Antitype,  the  Son  of  David,
who  in  all  his  sorrows  and  sufierings  retained  his  holiness,  purity,  and  truth  unsullied
and  undefiled"  (Wordsworth).  4.  His  ready  service.  (Ver.  37.)  He  at  once  complied
with  the  wishes  of  the  king,  and  evidently  without  any  conception  that  what  he  was
about  to  do  was  morally  wrong.  "  We  can  hardly  excuse  his  thrusting  himself  even
upon  a  traitor's  confidence  in  order  to  play  the  traitor ;  though  the  picture  is  character-
istic of  the  East ;  and  this  is  one  of  many  drawbacks  which  remind  us  that  the  Bible
embodies  an  experience  and  a  tone  of  sentiment  which  are  not  always  perfect  models
for  the  franker  races  of  the  West.  At  least  let  us  remember,  though  a  friend  may  ask
many  things  of  us,  he  should  not  ask  us  to  sacrifice  the  truth  and  the  right ;  for  these
are  not  ours  to  give  him"  (R.  Williams).  5.  His  daring  cowrage.  Should  his
treachery  be  discovered,  he  might  have  to  pay  the  penalty  with  his  head.  6.  Ei$  skilful
and  prompt  activity.  (Ch.  xvi.  16 ;  xvii.  7, 15.)  7.  His  complete  success.  (Ch.  xvii.  14.)
"  In  justifying  the  ways  of  God  to  men,  and  admiring  the  issues  of  his  will,  we  are  in
no  case  obliged  to  approve  actions  which  have  nothing  but  their  success  to  commend
them"  (Kitto,  'Cyc.').— D.

Vers.  7 — 9. — Absalom's  pious  vow.  David  and  his  ministers  must  have  beea
singularly  blind  and  negligent  to  have  allowed  Absalom  so  far  to  have  prepared  the
way  for  the  revolution  he  contemplated  as  he  must  have  done  before  asking  permission
to  go  to  Hebron.  Nor  does  the  permission  itself  show  less  blindness.  David  should
have  known  his  son  better  than  to  have  so  readily  believed  that  he  was  likely  to  have
made  a  pious  vow,  and  to  be  burdened  in  conscience  by  its  long  non-fulfilment,
especially  as  he  had  allowed  four  years  (ver.  7,  not  "  forty ")  to  elapse  before  taking
steps  for  its  fulfilment.  But  David's  fooUsb  fondness  prepared  him  to  be  easily
imposed  upon  by  favourite  children.  The  purport  of  the  pretended  vow  appears  from
what  follows.  It  was  to  hold  solemn  sacrificial  services  at  Hebron  in  thanksgiving  for
his  return  to  his  home  and  reconciliation  with  his  father.  Hebron  was  chosen  because
it  was  the  place  of  his  birth  and  early  life,  where  he  would  have  many  friends ;  and
the  first  capital  of  the  kingdom;  where  many  may  have  been  still  disaffected  to  David
on  account  of  his  transfer  of  the  court  to  Jerusalem.  Sacrificial  services  were  chosen
as  furnishing  a  plausible  pretext  for  a  large  gathering  of  leading  men  who  either  were
already  disaffected,  or,  if  going  to  the  festival  (like  the  two  hundred  from  Jerusalem,
ver.  11)  "in  their  simplicity,"  knowing  nothing,  might  be  won  over  by  Absalom's
representations.     In  his  representations  to  his  father  we  have  a  glaring  instance  ot^ —

I.  Htpocbitical  pretences  in  religion.  1.  Their  nature.  They  are  imitations  ol
real  piety;  and  the  closer  the  imitation  the  more  likely  are  they  to  deceive  and  be
successful  in  their  object.  Hypocrites  are  actors  of  a  part,  and  the  more  skilful  the
actor  the  stronger  the  impression  of  reality.  What  more  natural  than  the  vow
Absalom  said  he  had  made,  and  the  language  in  which  he  describes  it?    A  good


392  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OE  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv.  1—37.

Hebrew  prince,  banished  from  home  and  kingdom,  and  with  his  prospects  for  the
future  darkened  thereby,  might  well  have  longed  to  return,  prayed  to  God  to  restore
him,  and  vowed  that,  if  his  prayer  were  answered,  he  would  make  some  singular
demonstration  of  his  gratitude.  Absalom  most  likely  lied  when  he  said  he  had  so
vowed,  as  well  as  offered  the  sacrifices  only  as  a  cloak  of  wickedness.  The  counterfeit,
however,  illustrates  the  genuine ;  and  in  this  case  suggests  that  in  great  trouble  we
should  seek  relief  and  deliverance  from  God ;  that  earnest  prayer  may  be  accompanied
by  promises  of  special  acts  of  thanksgiving,  and  that,  when  deliverance  comes,  we
should  scrupulously  perform  the  vows  we  have  uttered  (see  Ps.  Ixvi.  13,  et  seq.),  2.
The  motives  from  which  they  proceed.  These  are  as  various  as  the  objects  which  men
pursue,  and  the  attainment  of  which  they  think  may  be  furthered  by  the  appearance
of  piety.  In  Absalom  the  ultimate  aim  was  the  throne ;  the  intermediate  were  the
concealment  from  David  of  his  purposes,  the  obtaining  of  leave  of  absence  from
Jerusalem,  and  opportunity  for  assembling  his  partisans  and  others  around  him,  and
maturing  bis  plans  with  them,  before  striking  the  decisive  blow.  Hypocrites  some-
times pretend  to  piety  in  order  to  conceal  their  wickedness  and  practise  it  without
suspicion ;  sometimes  with  a  view  to  gain  (Matt,  xxiii.  14) ;  sometimes  to  obtain  credit
for  virtues  they  do  not  possess  (Acts  v.  1 — 8),  and  secure  praise  from  men  (Matt,  vi,  2).
In  times  of  persecution  the  object  may  be  to  avoid  penalties;  and  any  measure  of
favour  shown  to  the  professors  of  a  particular  creed,  or  of  disability  imposed  on  others,
is  a  direct  incentive  to  hypocrisy.  How  much  do  they  promote  hypocrisy  amongst
the  poor  who  administer  their  charity  in  the  form  of  "doles"  given  away  after  public
worship,  or  carefully  limited  to  those  who  attend  particular  religious  services!  Again,
the  hypocrite  may  pretend  to  a  religion  he  does  not  possess,  in  order  to  obtain
customers  in  his  business  from  religious  people,  or  to  ingratiate  himself  with  his
piously  disposed  fellow-citizens,  in  order  to  obtain  a  seat  in  the  town  council,  or  in
parliament,  or  other  position  in  public  life.  How  many  large  gifts  to  churches  and
chapels  might  be  thus  accounted  for !  Or  the  motive  may  be  to  secure  the  favour  of
parents,  uncles,  or  aunts,  with  a  view  to  a  good  place  in  their  wills.  Or,  again,  the
forms  of  religion  may  be  kept  up  because  it  is  the  habit  of  respectable  society,  without
any  real  attachment  to  religion.  Nor  must  we  omit  another  motive.  Piety  may  be
seen  to  be  necessary  to  secure  deliverance  from  hell  and  admission  to  heaven;  and,  in
total  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  piety,  its  forms  may  be  adopted  with  that  view.  But
this  is  rather  formalism  than  deliberate  hypocrisy.  The  two  run  into  each  other.  It
follows  that  hypocrisy  is  a  sin  most  likely  to  be  committed  where  real  religion  is
prevalent  and  honoured.  Absalom  would  not  have  pretended  to  piety  if  his  father  had
not  been  religious ;  and  when  and  where  religion  is  disregarded,  no  one  would  think  of
professirjg  it  from  unworthy  motives.  Though,  to  be  sure,  the  general  prevalence
of  formal  religion  may  present  the  same  temptation  ea  that  of  real  godliness.  When,
however,  ungodliness  and  vice  prevail  in  the  neighbourhood  or  the  circle  in  which
a  man  moves,  he  may  pretend  to  be  worse  than  he  is  from  motives  similar  to  those
which  induce  others  to  pretend  to  be  better  than  they  are.

II.  Thbib  enormous  wickbdnbss  and  subs  doom.  1.  TTiey  evince  «t«<A  hnowhdgt
of  the  nature,  grounds,  and  obligations  of  piety  as  enhances  the  guilt  of  their  impiety.
2.  ITiey  insult  Ood.  By  offering  him  what  is  worthless  as  if  it  were  precious ;  and
treating  him  as  if  he  were  unable  to  distinguish  between  the  real  and  the  unreal,  or  did
not  care,  so  long  as  his  creatures  pay  homage  to  him,  whether  it  be  with  the  heart  or
not.  8.  They  deceive  and  defraud  men.  Imposing  upon  them  with  a  mere  appearance
of  goodness ;  inducing  them  to  honour  what  is  detestable  and  reward  the  unworthy ;
and  diverting  from  genuine  goodness  its  due  notice  and  reward.  4.  They  seriously
injure  those  who  are  guilty  of  them.  They  eat  like  a  canker  into  the  moral  natiue.  A
single  act  of  hypocrisy  affects  injuriously  the  whole  character,  and  throws  suspicion  on
all  that  looks  good.  Habitual  hypocrisy  tends  to  destroy  the  possibility  of  sincere
goodness,  and  to  render  salvation  impossible.  5.  2%ey  deserve  and  ensure  "  the  greater
damnation "  (Matt,  xxiii.  14).  It  is  impossible  that  the  imposition  can  last  or  ulti-
mately be  successful.  It  will  be  exploded,  exposed,  and  punished  in  the  great  day  of
revelation  and  judgment  (1  Cor.  iv.  6). — G.  W.

Ver.  20. — A  farewell  blessing.    "  Mercy  and  truth  be  with  thee."    Times  of  adversity


CH.  XV  1—370  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  393


»re  testing-times.  They  try  and  make  manifest  the  character  hoth  of  the  sufferer  and
of  his  friends.  The  base  and  the  noble  in  men,  their  selfishness  and  their  disinterested-
ness, their  faithlessness  and  their  fidelity,,  are  revealed  and  heightened.  David  never
•ppeared  in  better  light  (in  all  but,  perhaps,  courage)  than  at  the  fearful  crisis  vf  hen  his
son  was  usurping  his  throne  and  ready  to  take  his  life,  and  he  himself  became  for  a
time  an  exile  from  home  and  metropolis  and  sanctuary ;  and  while  some  of  his  servants
made  manifest  their  inherent  baseness,  the  virtues  of  others  shone  forth  in  new  lustre.
The  conversation  between  David  and  Ittai  illustrates  these  remarks.  It  is  a  contest  of
nobleness,  in  which  both  appear  to  great  advantage.  The  words  of  the  text  were
intended  by  David  as  a  farewell  Ittai  would  not,  however,  accept  them  as  such,  but
persisted  in  accompanying  him  whithersoever  he  might  go.  They  contain  a  prayer
suitable  for  all  in  addressing  their  friends  in  parting,  or  indeed  at  any  time.  "  Mercy
and  truth  "  are,  of  course,  those  of  God.  "  May  God  exercise  towards  thee  his  mercy
»nd  truth."

I.  "Meeot  : "  HEBE  EQUIVALENT  TO  ORAOB,  KINDNESS,  LOVE.  Man  IS  entirely  dependent
on  the  kindness  of  God  both  as  a  creature  and  as  a  sinner.  All  in  some  degree  are  its
objects;  but  in  desiring  that  it  may  be  with  any,  we  wish  that  they  may  enjoy  it  to
the  fullest  extent,  both  in  body  and  soul,  in  time  and  in  eternity.  It  thus  includes  all
manifestations  and  exercises  of  Divine  grace.  1.  Providential.  2.  Pardoning.  3.
Sanctifying.  4.  Defending  and  preserving.  6.  Comforting  and  gladdening.  6.  Eter-
nally saving.

II.  "Tbijth  : "  EQUIVALENT  T.0  TRUTHFULNESS,  FAITHFULNESS.  That  perfection  of  the
Divine  nature  which  assures  us  that  God  will  ever  act  in  a  manner  true  to  himself  as  he
reveals  himself  in  his  Word,  and  to  the  promises  he  has  given  us.  In  desiring  that  the
truth  of  God  may  be  vrfth  any,  we  pray  that  they  may  to  the  fullest  extent  experience
how  trustworthy  are  the  revelations  he  has  made  of  himself,  how  faithfully  his  promiiies
are  fulfilled,  how  happy  they  are  who  confide  in  him.

III.  The  "meroy  and  truth"  of  God  are  often  presented  together  in  the
HOLT  writings,  ESPECIALLY  IN  THE  BooK  OP  PsALMS.  They  exhibit  the  two  aspects
of  the  nature  of  God  with  which  we  are  chiefly  concerned ;  and,  taken  comprehensively,
include  his  whole  moral  character.  To  desire,  therefore,  that  they  may  be  with  any  one
is  to  pray  that  God  may  be  with  him  in  the  fulness  of  his  Being,  as  his  God ;  that  he
may  experience  for  himself  all  that  he  can  be  to  one  of  his  creatures— his  kindness  in
the  utmost  meaning  of  his  faithful  representations ;  his  truth,  not  in  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  threateniugs,  but  in  the  amplest  fulfilment  of  his  gracious  promises.

IV.  These  Divine  perfections  ark  "  with  us  "  when  thky  ark  ■xbrgised  fob
OUR  GOOD.  This  often  takes  place  when  they  are  not  present  to  our  consciousness.
But  the  highest  blessedness  is  to  enjoy  their  exercise  in  the  full  consciousness  that  it  is
the  "mercy  and  truth"  of  God  that  are  blessing  our  lives.  The  crowning  bliss  is  to
enjoy  their  uninterrupted  exercise  towards  us,  and  that  for  ever.

V.  Fob  to  have  God's  "  merot  and  truth"  with  us  is  to  enjoy  all  real  good,
and  to  be  sure  of  its  enjoyment  for  kveb.  Hence  these  words  express  all  that  the
wisest,  kindest,  and  best  can  address  to  their  friends  in  parting  with  them,  or  on  birth-
days, new  year's  days,  etc. .  We  cannot  be  so  certain  that  we  are  pronouncing  a  blessing
on  them  when  we  wish  them  health,  wealth,  long  life,  abundance  of  friends,  etc.

VI.  One  op  the  best  effects  of  God's  "  mercy  and  truth  "  is  to  produce  their
own  likeness  in  those  with  whom  they  dwell,  making  them  kind  and  loving,  true  and
faithful.  The  possession  and  cultivation  of  these  qualities  are  a  necessary  part  of  the
evidence  that  we  have  savingly  experienced  the  Divine  grace  and  faithfulness,  and  a
necessary  condition  of  our  continuing  to  enjoy  them  (see  FVov.  iii.  8,  4). — G.  W.

Ver.  21. — Ittai  an  example  to  Christians,  It  is  interesting  to  find  a  Gentile,  and  he
a  Gittite,  so  attached  to  David,  so  devoted  in  duty  to  him,  and  so  honoured  as  to  have
(ch.  xviii.  2)  been  entrusted  with  the  command  of  one-third  of  the  army  in  the  battle
with  Absalom  and  his  forces.  The  proposal  of  David  (vers.  19,  20)  was  generous  and
reasonable ;  but  to  Ittai's  loyal  spirit  was  quite  inadmissible.  He  expresses  his  deter-
mination to  cleave  to  David  whether  for  life  or  for  death ;  and  swears  to  do  so  by  the
life  of  God  and  the  life  of  the  king.  His  devotedness  presents  an  example  to  subjects
and  soldiers,  to  servants  and  friends.    His  language  is  worthy  of  adoption  by  us  in


394  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv.  1—37.

addressing  our  glorious  King,  the  Divino  Son  of  David.  It  reminds  us  of  the  words  of
Peter,  when  speaking  for  all  the  twelve  (John  vi.  68)  and  when  sjieaking  only  for  him-
self (John  xiii.  17),  and  which  expressed  his  genuine  determination,  notwithstanding
his  subsequent  fall.  It  reminds  us  also  of  the  exhortation  of  Barnabas  to  the  new  con-
verts at  Antioch,  "  that  with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  cleave  unto  the  Lord  "  (Acts
xi.  23) — an  exhortation  which  meets  with  a  cordial  response  in  every  Christian's  heart.
His  resolve,  his  vow,  is  to  cleave  unto  Christ  for  life  and  death  ;  to  follow  him  whither-
soever he  may  lead.

L  Whence  this  determination  abisbs.  Primarily  from  the  marvellous  power  of
Christ  to  attract  and  attach  to  himself  the  hearts  of  men.  David  had  a  similar  power,
of  an  inferior  kind  and  on  a  smaller  scale.  Christ  draws  and  influences,  not  only  by  his
character  and  works,  but  by  his  Spirit  working  directly  in  the  heart.  But  regarded  as
springing  from  the  Christian's  heart,  the  resolve  and  vow  are  the  result  of:  1.  Faith  in
Jimt  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour  and  King  of  men.  Who  has,  therefore,  a
right  to  supreme  homage  and  service  (John  vi.  69).  2.  Ardent  love  to  him.  In  rettirn
for  his  love  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15);  and  as  the  result  <rf  knowledge  and  experience,  per-
ception of  his  Divine  and  human  excellences,  delight  in  his  society  and  service.
3.  Desire  and  hope  to  make  him  some  suitable  return  for  his  love  and  self-sacrifice,  and
the  invaluable  blessings  he  has  secured  and  conferred.  The  ardent  Christian  will  pant
for,  and  delight  in,  opportunities  for  serving  Christ  at  the  cost  of  peril,  loss,  suffering,
disgrace  with  the  world,  or  even  sacrifice  of  life ;  and  for  showing  his  fidelity  when
others  forsake  him.  4.  Conviction  that  safety,  happiness,  and  l^e  everlasting  are  to  be
found  only  with  Christ.

♦'  Whither,  ah  I  whither  should  I  go,
A  wretched  wanderer  from  my  Lord?
Can  this  dark  world  of  sin  and  woe
One  glimpse  of  happiness  afford?
Depart  from  thee  I    'Tis  death ;  'tia  more^
'Tis  endless  ruin,  deep  despair  I "

5.  Memory  of  past  vows.    "  I  have  sworn,  and  I  will  perform  it "  (Ps.  cxlx.  106),

II.  How  IT  IS  TO  BE  FULFILLED.  Not  merely  by  warm  feelings  at  times  of  special
devotion,  or  by  words  of  endearment,  or  promise,  or  lavish  praise ;  but  by :  1.  Bold
confession  of  Christ  hifore  men.  Wearing  his  uniform,  marching  under  his  banner,
acknowledging  him  openly  as  King  and  Captain.  2.  Union  and  communion  with  his
people.  In  profession  of  his  Name,  in  worship,  at  the  Lord's  table,  in  social  life,  etc.
Christ  is  in  his  Church ;  they  are  his  visible  representatives ;  openly  with  them  all
should  be  who  wish  to  be  "  in  what  place  their  Lord  the  King  may  be."  3.  Visiting
cmtstantly  the  places  where  Christ  is  specially  to  be  found,  and  avoiding  those  which
he  avoids.  Frequenting  the  closet,  the  sanctuary,  the  houses  of  poor,  sick,  and  dying
brethren.  Avoiding  the  hatmts  of  dissipation  and  iniquity.  Going  nowhere  where  we
cannot  think  with  satisfaction  that  Christ  is  near  and  approving.  4.  Active  and  zealous
co-operation  unth  him.  Doing,  daring,  enduring,  in  promoting  his  kingdom  and  the
welfare  of  mankind.  "Always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord"  (1  Cor.  xv.  58).
"  Enduring  hardship, 'as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ"  (2  Tim.  ii.  3).  Pressing  eagerly
to  the  front  with  Christ  where  his  battles  are  to  be  fought,  as  Ittai  with  David,  regard-
less of  diflBculties,  danger,  or  death.  5.  Perseverance  in  all.  Which  is  the  crowning
proof  of  the  deep  sincerity  of  the  determination.

III.  The  eewabds  of  such  dbvotbdness.  1.  Now.  Further  opportunities  of,
calls  to,  and  fitness  for,  service,  suffering,  aud  honour.

"  What  his  guerdon  here  ?
Many  a  sorrow,  many  a  laboiar.
Many  a  tear."

But  with  these,  the  manifested  presence  of  Christ,  and  his  smile  and  words  of  approval  j
the  pleasures  which  accompany  the  exercise  of  the  powers  in  the  noblest  possible
•mployment,  and  those  which  arise  from  association  with  the  noblest  of  God's  creatures
in  earth  and  heaven.  2.  Hereafter.  To  be  with  Christ  and  share  his  glory  and  bliss
evermore.  "  Enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord  "  (Matt.  xxv.  21).  "  If  we  endure,  we  shall
also  reign  with  him"  (2  Tim.  ii.  12,  Bevised  Version). — G.  W.


OH.XV.  1— 37.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  395

Vers.  25,  26. — BavicPs  resignation  to  the  will  of  God.  David's  character  shone  most
brightly  amid  the  darkness  of  adversity — ^in  the  early  struggles  and  perils,  and  in  these
later  ones.  In  these  verses  we  see  his  superiority  to  a  superstitious  dependence  on  the
presence  of  the  ark  as  ensuring  the  presence  and  aid  of  God.  He  was  thus  much  in
advance  of  the  Israelites,  elders  and  people  alilce,  in  the.days  of  Bli  (1  Sam.  iv.  3 — 5).
We  take  the  verses,  however,  as  evidencing  David's  profound  submission  to  the  will  of
God,  and  illustrating  the  nature  and  excellence  of  godly  resignation.

I.  To  WHAT  HE  WAS  RESIGNED.  To  whatever  might  be  the  will  of  God.  To  the
enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour,  or  the  experience  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  In  par-
ticular :  1.  To  defeat  or  victory  in  the  contest  with  his  unnatmral  son ;  and,  as  results
of  one  or  the  other :  2.  To  the  permanent  loss  or  the  regaining  of  his  throne.  3.  To
exile  from  Jerusalem  or  return  to  it.  4.  To  banishment  from  the  ark  and  house  of
Ood  or  restoration  to  them.  This  is  specially  referred  to  in  ver.  25.  5.  To  death
or  life.

II.  The  NATtTRK  OF  HIS  EBSiGNATioN,  1.  It  wos  not  inscnsibUity  or  indifference.
How  much  he  felt  the  position  in  which  he  was  placed  is  evident  from  his  language
here,  and  his  tears  and  other  signs  of  mourning  referred  to  in  ver.  30.  Those  who  do
not  feel  their  troubles  cannot  cherish  resignation  to  them.  Troubles  which  do  not
trouble  require  no  exercise  of  submission.  Resignation  may  be  most  eminently  dis-
played by  those  who  are  most  susceptible  of  suffering.  2.  It  was  not  a  stoical  submis-
sion to  the  inevitable.  This  is  better  than  vain  struggles  and  useless  murmurs,  but  is
not  godly  resignation.  3.  Nor  did  it  involve  abandonment  of  all  prayer  and  effort  to
secure  what  was  felt  to  be  desirable.  David,  while  surrendering  himself  to  the  disposal
of  the  Most  High,  carefully  planned  and  laboured,  and  was  prepared  to  fight,  that  he
might  obtain  the  victory.  Christian  resignation  is  not  fatalism.  4.  It  was  trustful,
loving  submission  to  whatever  might  prove  to  be  the  will  of  God.  David  reco°:nized  the
hand  of  God  in  his  adversities,  saw  that  the  issue  of  events  would  be  according  to  the
Divine  appointment,  and  on  this  account  was  prepared  to  acquiesce  in  it.  "  Let  him
do  to  me  as  seemeth  good  unto  him."

III.  Motives  to  such  resignation.  1.  The  rightful  sovereignty  of  God.  He  does
rule  over  all,  whether  we  wiU  or  no ;  and  the  recognition  of  his  right  to  rule  will  much
aid  in  producing  willing  submission  to  his  will.  "  You  know,  my  dear,"  said  a  poor
man  to  his  wife,  when  they  were  mourning  the  loss  of  a  peculiarly  interesting  and
affectionate  child,  "  this  family  is  God's  garden,  and  he  has  a  right  to  come  into  it  and
pluck  any  flower  that  pleases  him  best."  2.  His  omnipotence.  "  Humble  yourselves
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God  "  (1  Pet.  v.  6).  Because  he  is  almighty,  his  will  must
be  accomplished;  resistance  is  futile.  At  the  same  time,  he  is  almighty  to  support,  to
bring  good  out  of  evil,  and  to  "  exalt  in  due  time  "  (1  Pet.  v.  6).  3.  Sis  wisdom  and
goodness.  Which  assure  us  that  he  does  not  act  according  to  arbitrary  choice,  but  that
what  "  seemeth  good  unto  him  "  is  really  good ;  so  that  in  submitting  to  him  we  are
acquiescing  in  our  own  ultimate  well-being.  4.  Our  sinfulness  and  unworthiness.
David  was  doubtless  aided  in  resigning  himself  to  the  will  of  God  by  the  memory  of
his  heinous  sins  (comp.  Judg.  x.  15 ;  Neh.  ix.  33 ;  Lam.  i.  18 ;  iii.  39 ;  Dan.  ix.  14 ;
Micah  vii.  9).  We  deserve  more  suffering  than  is  inflicted  upon  us ;  we  merit  no  good
thing;  the  more  readily,  therefore,  should  we  resign  ourselves  to  whatever  may  be
appointed  for  us.  6.  The  blessings  enjoyed  by  us  or  assured  to  us.  The  memory  of  past
enjoyments,  which  tends  to  embitter  present  griefs,  should  nevertheless  awaken  a  grati-
tude which  tends  to  reconcile  us  to  them.  "  Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,
and  shall  we  not  receive  evil?"  (Job  ii.  IG).  The  mercies  still  remaining  to  us,  duly
appreciated  and  acknowledged,  will  have  a  similar  beneficial  effect.  The  way  in  which
God  has  led  us  through  pastdifBculties  should  strengthen  confidence  in  him,  and  render
us  willing  to  trust  him  with  our  future.  Specially,  if  we  are  Christians  indeed,  let  us
keep  in  mind :  (1)  The  relation  in  which  we  stand  towards  God,  as  his  children,
redeemed,  reconciled,  renewed ;  and  the  childlike  spirit  which  becomes  us.  (2)  The
unspeakable  blessings  which  as  Christians  we  enjoy.  Pardon,  peace  with  God,  access
to  him,  assurance  of  his  fatherly  pity  and  love,  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  with
his  special  guidance,  support,  and  consolation,  (3)  The  promises  made  to  us  of  all  need-
ful good  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11 ;  Matt.  vi.  33) ;  the  co-operation  of  all  things  for  our  good
(Bom.  Till.  28);  the  Divine  care,  sympathy,  and  support  (Ps.  Iv.  22  ;  Heb.  xiii.  5,  &)•


S90  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv.  1—37.

and  final  deliverance  from  all  afBiction,  and  enjoyment  of  eternal  glory — glory  far  out-
weighing all  present  trouble,  and  prepared  for  and  increased  through  its  right  endurance
(Rev.  xxi.  4 ;  Eom.  viii.  18 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).  6.  The  cross  of  Christ  illustrates  and
enhances  all  other  motives.  The  love  of  God  in  Christ  assures  us  in  the  darkest  hours
that  he  is  love,  and  his  ways  are  love.  The  sufferings  of  Jesus  as  our  atoning  Saviour
make  sure  to  us  all  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings.  His  greater  sufferings  are  adapted
to  reconcile  us  to  our  so  much  lesser  ones.  In  his  resignation  we  have  the  brightest
and  most  powerful  example,  and  reasons  for  imitation  of  it.  As  our  fellow-Sufferer  we
know  that  he  can,  and  are  assured  that  he  does,  sympathize  with  us ;  and  that  he  is  the
better  able  to  succour  us.  7.  The  benefits  which  flow  from  resignation.  (1)  "  The  peace
of  God  "  (PhiL  iv.  7),  and  with  it  strength  to  endure :  power  also  to  do  whatever  may
be  possible  towards  deliverance.  (2)  Evidence  to  our  own  consciousness  that  we  are
the  children  of  God.  (3)  Good  influence  over  others.  Proof  to  them  of  the  worth  of
religion.

In  conclusion,  let  ub  lay  to  heart  that  in  any  case  we  must  suffer  affliction.  The
only  question  is  how  and  with  what  results?  Shall  we  suffer  in  faith  and  hope  and
submission,  and  thus  secure  Divine  approval,  support,  and  blessing  ?  or  shall  we  suffer
impatiently  and  rebelliously,  thus  adding  to  our  sufferings,  and  gaining  no  blessing
from  them  ?    "Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  I "  (Isa.  xlv.  9).— G.  W.

Ver.  32. — The  place  of  worship,  "  The  top  of  the  mount  where  God  was  worshipped  "
(Revised  Version).  This  "  top  of  the  mount "  is  one  of  the  most  sacred  spots  in  the  world
— the  universe.  For  here  the  Son  of  God  wept  over  Jerusalem,  which  lay  full  in  view
at  his  feet,  as  he  thought  of  its  coming  destruction,  and  declared  the  cause  of  it  (Luke
xix.  41).  In  David's  time  there  appears  to  have  been  a  "  high  place  "  there,  where
men  were  accustomed  to  worship  God.  It  seems  strange  that  so  near  to  the  tabernacle
such  a  place  should  have  been  tolerated,  however  difiSoult  it  was  to  abolish  such  separate
worship  elsewhere.  Perhaps,  however,  this  was  simply  "a  place  of  prayer"  (Acts  xvi.
13),  not  of  sacrifice  or  incense-burning,  in  which  case  it  would  not  come  under  the  con-
demnation of  the  Mosaic  Law.  One  can  hardly  doubt  that  such  places  of  worship  must
have  been  scattered  over  the  land  long  before  the  known  existence  of  synagogues.  How
otherwise  could  social  religion,  or  religion  at  all,  have  been  maintained?  Three  visits
a  year  to  the  tabernaSle  or  temple,  and  those  of  the  men  only,  could  not  have  been
sufBcient.  How  also  could  the  sabbaths  have  been  kept  as  days  holy  to  the  Lord  ?
But  without  attempting  to  settle  such  questions,  this  Scripture  may  be  used  as
suggesting  some  thoughts  on  places  of  worship.

I.  Thbib  sanctity.  1.  Because  specially  set  apart  and  used  for  the  worship  of  God.
Consecrated  in  the  purpose  of  men,  and  by  their  devotions ;  by  the  prayers  by  which
they  are  dedicated,  and  the  worship  constantly  offered  afterwards.  2.  Because  they  are
scenes  of  Divine  manifestation  and  grcKious  operation.  (Exod.  xx.  24 ;  Ps.  Ixiii.  2 ;
Matt,  xviii.  20.)  They  are  meeting-places,  not  only  between  men  and  men,  but  between
God  and  men,  heaven  and  earth,  consecrated  by  the  presence  and  blessing  of  God.

II.  Thbib  valttb.  1.  As  witnesses.  (1)  For  God;  reminding  men  of  him,  and  call-
ing on  them  to  worship  and  serve  him.  (2)  Of  the  nature  of  men;  as  spiritual,  fitted
and  designed  for  worship,  and  immortal.  2.  As  inviting  to  rest  from  ordinary  occupa-
tions and  employment  in  spiritual  exercises.  3.  As  furnishing  valuable  opportunities
for  the  exercise  of  gifts  for  the  good  of  others.  Gifts  of  teaching,  singing,  organization,
etc.  4.  In  uniting  men  to  each  other  in  sacred  bonds,  and  fostering  mutual  love  and
service.  5.  In  promoting  piety,  holiness,  and  happiness.  The  moral  virtues,  as  well  as
the  godliness,  of  a  peo|.le  depend  to  a  large  extent  on  their  places  of  worship.

III.  1'hbir  blessed  associations  and  memobies.  There  "our  fathers  praised"  God
(Isa.  Ixiv.  11) ;  thither  "  we  walked  in  company  "  with  our  own  parents  and  best  friends
(Ps.  Iv.  14) ;  there  many  of  our  most  happy  and  profitable  hours  have  been  s[)ent.
There,  it  may  be,  we  were  first  led  to  Christ ;  there  we  have  often  met  with  God,  and
consciously  received  his  blessing ;  there  we  have  received  instructions  and  influences
which  have  moulded  our  charaqter  and  elevated  our  lives.  There  we  have  been  relieved
of  anxieties,  calmed  when  agitated,  comforted  when  sorrowful,  revived  when  languid,
recalled  to  duty  when  we  have  wandered,  strengthened  in  faith  and  courage  when  we
bftve  become  enfeebled.    There  many  a  glimpse  of  heaven  has  been  gained,  and  many  •


CH.  XVI.  1—23.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


897


foretaste  of  its  bliss  Bnjoyed.  Maay  have  attended  their  place  of  worship  from  childhood
to  old  age ;  and  esteem  it  one  of  the  chief  blessings  of  their  life.  "  Planted  in  the  house
of  the  Lord,"  they  "  flourish  in  the  courts  of  our  Q-od,"  and  still  "  bring  forth  fruit  in
old  age"  (Ps.  xcii.  13,  14),  waiting  to  be  transplanted  to  "the  paradise  of  God"
(Rev.  ii.  7).

IV.  OuB  CONSEQUENT  DUTT  IN  KESPBOT  TO  THEM.  1.  To  It  thankful  for  them.
2.  To  take  mxir  part  in  establishing  and  maintaining  them.  3.  To  attend  them.  Fre-
quently, regularly,  punctually.  To  be  negligent  in  these  respects  is  to  dishonour  God,
and  to  rob  ourselves  of  blessing.  4.  To  induce  others  to  do  so.  Happy  the  city,  happy
the  land,, in  which  places  where  men  worship  God  abound,  and  are  attended  by  crowds
of  true  worshippers  1—G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVL


Yer.  1. — Zibathe  servant  of  Mephibosheth.
It  18  the  misfortune  of  troubled  times  like
those  in  which  David  found  himself,  that
unscrupulous  men  use  them  for  selfish  pur-
poses. For  those  in  danger  have  no  time
for  careful  examination,  nor  are  their  minds
Buf&ciently  calm  for  impartial  judgment,
but  they  act  on  first  impressions,  and  catch
at  every  straw.  Ziba's  present  would
naturally  raise  everybody's  spirits,  and  be
taken  as  a  good  oraou ;  for  it  showed  that
David  had  adherents  in  unlikely  quarters,
when  thus  a  servant  of  the  house  of  Saul  of
his  own  accord  brought  so  timely  an  oft'er-
iug.  The  asses  saddled  for  riding  contradict
the  idea  that  Ziba  met  David  by  chance  as
he  was  bringing  the  produce  of  the  farm  for
the  use  of  Mephibosheth's  household.  More
probably  the  asses  had  been  saddled  fOT
Mephibosheth's  own  use  (comp.  oh.  xix.  26),
and  the  provisiuns  had  been  prepared  as  a
contribution  to  the  king's  neeils :  but  at  the
last  moment  the  cunning  Ziba  managed  to
hurry  away  with  his  men,  leaving  his
master  iu  the  lurch,  and  unable  to  get
anything  to  ride  upon  in  the  short  interval
between  David's  escape  and  Absalom's
entry.  Moreover,  possibly  from  being  a
cripple,  and  from  the  distressiog  circum-
stances of  his  early  life,  Mephibosheth
always  seems  deficient  in  energy,  and  per-
haps David's  conduct  in  mulcting  him  of
half  his  property  may  not  jeally  have  been
so  unjust  as  it  looks,  supposing  that  it  was
his  diiatoriness  which  gave  Ziba  the  chance
of  goiug  awiiy  with  the  whole  convoy  while
ho  was  wasting  time.  It  was  this  apparent
desertion  of  him  by  one  whom  he  had  so  be-
friended which  may  have  made  David  say,
"All  men  are  liars"  (Ps.  oxvi.  11),  though
subsequently  he  learned  that  the  lie  was
Ziba's.  The  food  consisted  of  two  hundred
loaves,  or  rather  flat  cakee  of  bread,  a
hundred  bunches  of  dried  grapes,  a  hundred
cakes  of  pressed  dates,  and  a  skin  of  wine.
Instead  of  "  date-cakes,"  some  of  the  versions


render  "  fig-cakes ; "  but  for  this  there  It  a
special  Hebrew  word  (see  1  Sam.  xxx.  12).

Yer.  3. — Thy  master's  son;  that  is,  the
son  of  Jonathan,  or  even  of  Saul,  as  the  word
"  son  "  is  used  very  indefinitely  in  Hebrew.
Mephibosheth  held  the  property  as  their
representative.  To-day  shall  the  house,  etc.
Ziba's  slander  was  absurd  Mephibosheth
was  likely  to  meet  with  no  kind  treatment
from  Absalom;  but  perhaps  he  was  a
visionary,  and  David  may  have  thought
that  he  was  holding  back  for  any  chance
that  might  turn  up.  But  upon  this  slander
David  acts  with  blamable  impetuosity,  and,
indignant  that  the  son  of  his  old  friend
should  so  desert  him,  he  gives  Ziba  all  hia
lands.  The  grant  would  be  valid  only  if
David's  cause  prevailed,  and  Ziba  so  far
deserves  credit  in  that  he  attached  himself
to  a  ruined  man;  but  his  motive  was  not
love  to  David,  but  selfish  calculation.

Yer.  4. — I  humbly  beseech  thee  that,  etc.
The  words  are  really  a  form  of  grateful
acceptance.  "  I  do  obeisance  "  (see  margin),
that  is,  "  I  make  my  humble  bow :  may  I
find  favour,"  etc. ;  may  the  king  continue
to  look  favourably  upon  me.

Yer.  5.— Bahurim.  The  exact  site  of  this
place  is  unknown  (see  note  on  ch.  Ui.  16).
Lieut.  Conder,  following  a  Jewish  tradition,
identifies  it  with  Almit,  a  village  about
tova  miles  north-east  of  Jerusalem.  If  so  it
lay,  not  on  the  direct  road  to  the  fords,  but
on  a  side  route.  A  man.  of  the  family  of  the
house  of  SauL  The  words  do  not  mean  that
he  was  a  near  relative  of  Saul,  but  that  he
was  a  member  of  the  mishpachah,  the  larger
division  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  to  which
the  house  of  Saul,  a  much  smaller  subdivi-
sion of  the  family,  belonged  (see  note  on
ch.  xiv.  7).  But  he  was  a  strong  partisan,
and  so  fanatical  as  to  care  little  tor  his  life,
if  only  he  could  annoy  the  usurper.  For
besides  "  all  the  people,"  David  had  with
him  "the  mighty  men,"  a  few  of  whom
could  easily  have  punished  him.

Yer.  7.— Come  out;  rather,  out,  out;  thai
it,  "get  out;    begone,  begone,  thou  mur-


398


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  xvl  1—23


derer  and  worthless  man."  Shimei  eould
scarcely  hare  referred  to  the  murders  of
Ishboehelh  and  Abner,  which  were  too
remote  to  have  so  rankled  in  his  memory ;
but  as  ch.  xxi.  is  not  in  its  chronological
order,  what  probably  called  forth  his  anger
was  the  surrender  of  Saul's  sons  and  grand-
sons into  the  hands  of  the  Gibeonites.
Shimei,  probably,  even  resented  David's
taloDg  the  side  of  the  Gibeonites,  and  treat-
ing as  a  crime  to  be  severely  punished  what
he  and  all  Saul's  partisans  regarded  as
righteous  zeal  for  Israel.  The  three  years'
famine,  followed  by  the  execution  of  Saul's
sons,  made  more  trnglc  by  the  noble  conduct
of  Eizpah,  contributed  largely  to  the  revolt
of  the  nation  from  David,  and  helps  to
explain  that  abandonment  of  him  by  the
people,  which  otherwise  seems  so  hard  to
understand  (on  the  date  of  the  famine,  see
note  on  ch.  xxi.).

Ver.  9. — Then  said  Abishoi.  Abishai's
indignation  was  natural,  and  it  is  evident,
from  ver.  10,  that  Joab  shared  it.  Shimei's
conduct  was  abominable,  and  David  finally
condemned  him  to  dentil  for  it  (1  Kings  ii.
8,  9),  having  probably  found  that,  even  after
his  pardon,  lie  was  an  implacable  enemy.
His  revilings  now  must  not  only  have  been
painful  to  David,  but  depressing  to  all  the
people  that  were  with  him,  and  there  must
have  been  many  a  murmur  in  the  ranks  at
the  king  allowing  such  conduct  to  go  un-
punished. But  he  was  in  a  state  of  great
mental  distress  and  self-condemnation.  He
had  borne  sorrow  after  sorrow  since  the  day
when,  by  his  own  great  sin,  he  had  opened
the  floor!  gates  of  wickedness ;  and  now  the
sou  whom  he  dearly  loved,  and  who  had
first  been  put  wrong  by  a  crime  whicli
might  never  have  been  committed  but  for
his  owu  c'Xi.mple,  was  seeking  both  his
crown  and  his  life,  and  had  made  his  cup
of  sorrow  full  to  the  brim  and  running  over.
At  such  a  time  of  agony  it  was  even  a  relief
to  have  outward  affliction  to  bear;  for  it
brought  the  consoling  thought  that  the
Divine  chastisement  had  its  merciful  limit.
Jehovah  had  bidden  Shimei  revile  him,  and
he  would  bear  it  because  it  was  Jehovah's
doing.  "  It  may  be  that  Jehovah  will  look
upon  my  wrong,  and  that  he  will  requite  me
good  for  his  cursing  of  me  this  day."  Go
over.  Abishai's  word  is  explained  by  ver.
l.S.  David's  route  seems  to  have  lain  in  a
narrow  valley,  and  Shimei,  running  along
the  ridge  on  one  side,  was  near  enough  for
his  words  to  be  heard,  and  for  his  stones  to
come  near  the  king's  retinue.  Abishai,
therefore,  asked  permission  to  cross  over  to
Shimei's  side  of  the  steep  ravine  with  a  few
men,  who  would  seize  him  and  put  him  to
death.

Vei.  12. — nine  afBiction,     This  reading


is  supported  by  the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate.
The  Syiioo  has  "  my  snbjection,"  possibly  a
free  translation  of  the  same  reading.  Bat
the  written  text  (K'tib)  has  "  my  wrong,"
either  the  wrong  I  bare  done,  and  of  which
I  am  bearing  the  punishment,  or,  as  in  the
Bevised  Version, "  the  wrong  done  unto  me."
The  conection  of  the  Massorites  (K'ri),
is  literally  "  my  eye,"  that  is,  "  my  tears."

Ver.  14. — Weary.  Evidently  the  name
of  a  place;  for  David  "refreshed  himself
there."  It  was  probably  a  caravanserai,  the
fuU  name  of  which  was,  "Rest  for  the,
weary,"  but  gradually  the  title  was  shortened
down  to  the  last  word,  "Weary,"  Hebrew
Ayephim,  which  the  Bevised  Version  puts
as  a  proper  name  in  the  margin.

Ver.  17. — ^Is  this  thy  kindness  to  thy
friend  1  After  carrying  the  king  to  Ay€phim,
on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  the  narrator  now
turns  back  to  Absalom,  because  David  was
to  wait  at  the  caravanserai  for  news  from
Jerusalem.  And  immediately  on  his  arrival,
Husbai  hastens  into  Absalom's  presence,
loudly  exclaiming,  "  Long  live  the  king !  "
for  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew.
The  young  man  is  surprised;  for  Husbai
was  David's  friend  and  trusted  confidant.
Yet  he  does  not  suspect  this  sudden  breaking
of  old  ties,  but,  looking  at  the  bright  side
only,  sees  in  it  a  proof  that  his  party  was
looked  upoiL  as  sure  of  success,  and  David's
cause  as  hopeless,  ^e  welcomes,  therefore,
BO  notable  an  adherent,  and  Hushai's  pre-
tences confirm  his  self-deceit;  for  he  pro-
fesses to  regard  Absalom  as  king,  not  liy
fraud  and  violence,  but  by  the  formal  choice
of  both  Jehovah  and  the  people.  On  this
assumption,  obedience  to  the  nation's  choice
became  a  religious  duty,  and  Hus  ai's  love
to  the  father  was  a  pledge  of  love  to  the  son.
We  must  not,  however,  condemn  Absalom
for  too  easy  credulity.  The  nation  was  in
his  favour,  and,  had  he  acted  with  prompti-
tude, David's  cause  would  have  been  lost.

Ver.  18. — The  men  of  Israel  Here  and
in  ver.  15  the  men  of  Israel  are  not  con-
trasted with  the  men  of  Judah,  but  include
them  (see  ch.  xv.  10).  Absalom's  rebellion
began  at  Hebron,  in  Judsen,  and  the  selection
of  Amasa,  a  first  cousin  both  of  David  and
Joab,  as  commander-in-chief,  suggests  the
conclusion  that  Absalom's  chief  strength
lay  in  David's  own  tribe,  though  men  from
all  tlie  tribes  on  the  west  of  the  Jordan  had
also  flocked  to  bis  standard.  Besides  them,
Hushai  speaks  of  this  people,  that  is,  the
citizens  of  Jerusalem.  For,  while  there
had  been  general  lamentation  at  David's
departure  (eh.  xv.  23),  yet  the  citizens  had
admitted  Absalom  without  a  struggle,  and
submitted  to  him.  David's  adherents  are
also  constantly  called  "  the  people,"  because
they  did  not  belong  to  any  special  tribe,


CH.  XVI.  1—23.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


399


but  were    drawn  indifferently  from  them
all.

Ver.  20.  —  Give  connsel  among  you  ;
Hebrew,  /or  you;  but  we  have  no  way  in
English  of  expreBsing  the  force  of  this
phrase.  In  Greek  it  is  called  the  ethio
dative,  and  is  supposed  to  give  character  to
the  address,  and  indicate  that  those  to  whom
the  words  are  spoken  have  also  an  interest
in  the  matter.

Ver.  21.— Ahithophel  said.  Ahithophel's
counsel  was  utterly  abominable,  even  though
the  deed  would  not  be  regarded  by  any  of
the  Israelites  as  incestuous.  A  king  in-
iierited  his  predecessor's  liarem,  and  Absa-
lom's act  was  a  coarse  and  rude  assertion
that  David's  rights  were  at  an  end,  and  that
i-r'iwn  and  lands  and  property,  even  to  his
wives,  now  all  belonged  to  the  usurper.  But,
wuile  polygamy  had  thus  degraded  the
^ives  and  concubines  into  mere  chattels,
the  harem  was  the  property  most  jealously
guarded  by  its  owner  (oh.  iii.  7 ;  1  Kings
ii.  22);  and  Absalom's  act  was  an  outrage
which  David  could  never  have  pardoned..
And  this  was  what  Ahithophel  wanted.  He
was  afraid  that  if  Absalom's  cause  began  to
decline,  he  might  come  to  terms  with  his
father,  who  would  readily  forgive  a  son  if
he  submitted,  but  would  cerlainly  punish
Ahithophel.  For  his  own  selfish  purposes,
therefore,  he  led  Absalom  on  to  a  crime
which  rendered  a  reconciliation  with  David
impossible,  and  pledged  all  the  conspirators
to  carry  out  the  matter  to  the  bitter  end;
and  that  end  could  ouly  be  the  death  of
David  if  the  conspiracy  succeeded.  But
this    bitterness    to    David    would   vex    all


moderate  men,  and  weaken  Absalom's  cause.
It  was  of  advantage  only  to  such  as  were
deeply  committed  to  the  rebellion,  and  bent
on  killing  David.  To  him  it  was  terrible
sorrow;  for  he  knew  that  this  open  shame
was  the  punishment  of  his  own  secret
infamy  (oh.  xii.  11, 12) ;  and  in  it,  again,  he
saw  the  meshes  of  the  avenger's  net  tight-
ening around  him.

Ver.  22. — A  tent ;  Hebrew,  the  tent ;  that
constantly  used  by  David  and  his  family  for
the  enjoyment  of  the  cool  evening  breeze,
and  which  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem  had
frequently  seen  erected  on  the  flat  roof  of
David's  house.  It  was  when  walking  on
this  roof  that  David  had  given  way  to  guilty
passion,  and  now  it  is  the  scene  of  his
dishonour.

Ver.  23. — The  counsel  of  Ahithophel,  etc.
These  words  form  a  sort  of  apology  for
Absalom.  He  ought  to  have  had  more
respect  for  his  father  than  to  offer  him  so
grievous  an  insult,  and  aggravate  by  so
terrible  a  deed  the  quarrel  between  them.
But  his  conduct  from  first  to  last  was  utterly
mean  and  selfish,  and  his  only  excuse  here
is  that  there  was  such  a  glamour  round
Ahithophel,  that  men  yielded  up  their  own
judgment  to  him  without  an  effort,  and  did
what  he  advised  as  if  it  had  a  religious
sanction.  At  the  oraole  of  God;  Hebrew,
had  asked  the  Word  of  God;  that  is,  had
consulted  God  by  Urim  and  Thummim.
When  a  man  went  to  the  priest  to  inquire
in  this  way,  he  .did  whatever  he  was  told ;
and  the  word  of  Ahithophel  waa  accepted
with  equal  deference.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  facts  are:  1.  David,  passing  on  his  vsray,  is  met  hy  Ziba  with  a  pre-
sent for  the  king  and  his  servants.  2.  On  inquiring  after  Mephibosheth,  David  is  told
by  Ziba  that  he  was  staying  in  Jei  usalem  in  expectation  that,  as  a  result  of  the  present
revolt,  the  kingdom  would  be  restored  to  him  as  representative  of  the  house  of  Saul.
3.  Acceptina;  this  statement  as  correct,  David  assigns  Mephibosheth 's  property  (ch.  ix.
9 — 12)  to  Ziba,  who  thereupon  makes  obeisance.  4.  Proceeding  to  Bahurim,  David  is
assailed  by  Shimei,  who  curses  him,  casts  stones  at  him,  reproaches  him  with  deeds  of
evil,  and  avers  that,  as  a  punishment,  God  had  taken  the  kingdom  from  him  and  given
it  to  Absalom.  5.  Astonished  at  the  insolence,  Abishai  seeks  permission  to  slay  the
man  ;  but  David,  piously  recognizing  a  providential  chastisement  in  the  event,  will
not  have  it  so,  and  points  out  further  to  his  people  that  this  was  but  a  small  trouble  in
comparison  with  Absalom's  conduct,  and  that  probably  God  would  have  compassion  and
vouchsafe  a  compensating  blessing.  6.  David  and  his  company  proceed  on  their  way,
BtiU  insulted  by  Shimei,  till  they  come  to  a  place  where  they  can  refresh  themselves.

ITie  cruelty  of  avarice.  In  this  chapter  the  historian  gives  us  a  foil  to  the  loyalty
and  devotion  of  the  men  referred  to  hitherto.  Ittai,  Zadok,  Abiathar,  and  Hushai
have  their  oppnsites  in  Ziba  and  Shimei  and  Ahithophel.  It  is  said  that  the  beasts  of
prey  and  creeping  things  come  forth  in  the  night ;  and  so  in  this  dark  and  sad  time
for  David,  the  foul  creatures  come  forth  and  manifest  their  full  strength.     Good  men


400  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvi.  1— 23.


are  always  encompassed  by  evils,  but  they  are  kept  in  check  by  the  very  force  of  the
prosperity  of  the  good.  When  once  that  begins  to  wane,  they  revive  and  put  forth
their  destructive  powers.  The  time  had  now  come  for  their  appearance.  In  the  case
of  Ziba  we  see  avarice  in  its  most  hideous  form.

I.  It  carefully  frames  its  schemes.  An  avaricioug  man  is  usually  endowed
with  a  good  mtasiire  of  prevision,  and  his  success  lies  very  much  in  the  wicked  per-
version of  this  gift.  The  elaborate  present  of  Ziba  to  David  (vers.  1,  2),  and  the
meeting  with  him  just  when  a  token  of  kindness  would  be  most  acceptable,  was  the
result  of  hours  and  days  of  scheming.  The  end  in  view  is  so  precious  to  the  greedy
soul  that  trouble  and  toil  to  attain  to  it  go  for  nothing.  There  is  a  spontaneous  avarice,
as  when  men  suddenly  seek  to  grasp  what  is  apparently  within  their  reach,  for  the  evil
principle,  like  a  slumbering  hungry  dog,  is  ever  quick  to  discern  and  to  act;  but  ti.e
great  achievements  of  avarice,  by  which  men  become  rich  or  gain  some  swift  advantage,
are  the  result  of  the  prostitution  of  the  gifts  of  foresight  and  skill  in  arrangement  to
low  cunning  and  selfishness.  There  is  many  a  scheme  being  concocted  at  this  hour,
in  commercial  and  political  cii'cles,  for  the  circumvention  of  others  to  the  enrichment
of  self.

II.  It  confoems  its  plans  to  the  nature  op  men  and  customs  of  the  aoe.
Ziba  knew  what  David  had  done  for  Mephibosheth  (ch.  ix.  1 — 10),  how  generous  wo.?
the  king's  heart,  how  he  would  appreciate  fidelity  in  the  time  of  trouble  and  scorn
ungrateful  conduct,  how  his  associates  in  trial  would  approve  any  favour  conferred  en
the  loyal  at  the  cost  of  the  disloyal,  and  how  it  was  within  the  prerogative  of  a
monarch  to  confiscate  the  property  of  a  traitor.  Avarice  is  a  careful  student  of  human
nature  and  of  the  usages  of  the  world.  Its  success  often  depends  on  quickness  of  dis-
cernment, and  a  practical  ap[ilication  of  the  knowledge  of  men  and  things  to  the  purposes
of  a  base,  greedy  heart.  A  good  and  generous  man  may  be  as  quick  in  discernment,
and  may  in  the  intercourse  of  life  gather  as  much  knowledge  of  human  naturoi  but  ho
differs  from  the  avaricious  man  in  that  he  scorns  to  turn  all  this  to  the  sole  promotica
of  purely  selfish  interests.

III.  It  takes  special  advantage  op  the  troubles  and  weakness  op  others.
There  is  a  fiendish  sagacity  iu  avarice.  Ziba  saw  that  the  sorrows  of  David  furnished
a  choice  opportunity  for  making  an  impression  on  his  geiierous  sympathetic  nature  by
a  manifestation  of  loyal  interest  and  kindly  consideration  for  bis  comfort ;  and  he  saw
also  that  the  bodily  infirmity  of  Mi  phibosheth  (ch.  ix.  13 ;  xix.  25, 26)  would  prevent  his
going  oat  to  David  to  express  his  own  loyalty.  How  splendid  the  opportunity  of  so
representing  matters  as  to  secure  the  confiscation  of  Mephihosheth's  inheritance  to  him-
self as  a  reward  for  his  personal  faithfulness  1  How  this  is  too  often  illustrated,  in  the
eager  rush  after  wealth,  in  the  conduct  of  certain  nations  towards  others,  is  well  known.
There  are  hard-hearted  men  who  rejoice  in  the  commercial  calamities  of  others,  because
they  see  their  chance  of  turning  them  to  their  own  advantage,  and  not  a  few  are  willing
to  profit  by  the  incapacity,  physical,  social,  and  intellectual,  of  others,  by  not  providing
them  with  the  means  by  which  they  can  rise  above  it,  and  act  their  own  part  in  the
world's  affairs.    The  curse  of  God  surely  rests  on  such  evil-doers.

IV.  It  is  heedless  op  the  pain  it  inplicts.  David's  heart  was  sad  enough.
Trouble  in  most  fearful  form  had  come  on  him.  His  anguish  is  seen  in  the  comfort  he
felt  in  the  fidelity  of  the  high  priests  and  in  the  presence  of  the  ark.  But  what  though
his  heart  was  smitten !  Avarice  can  rive  it  the  more  by  concocting  a  lie  naost  suited
for  such  a  purpose.  Ziba  knew  that  the  story  about  Mephibosheth  would  rend  further
the  sore  wounds  of  the  much-riven  heart.  What  of  that  ?  Property  would  be  acquired.
What  of  blasting  the  reputation  and  scattering  the  fortunes  of  an  innocent  cripple?
His  property  would  become  Ziba's.  Such  things  do  occur  still  in  the  earth.  There
may  be  degrees  in  avarice,  but  in  every  case  there  is  a  heedless  infliction  of  pain  and  a
jiositive  injury  to  the  innocent.  Is  there  a  God  to  avenge  wrong?  Is  there  a  future
retribution  ?  Seeing  that  many  avaricious  men  escape  positive  punishment  in  this  life
(I's.  xlix.  16 — 20;  Ixxiii.  1 — 17),  a  righteous  moral  order  must  either  be  denied  or  we
must  look  on  to  the  day  when  God  shall  give  to  every  man  according  to  the  deeds  done
in  the  body  (2  Cor.  v.  10).

V.  It  assumes  the  form  op  noblest  virtues.  Ziba  comes  to  David  as  a  kindly,
faithful,  generous  subject,  sorrowful  for  his  affliction,  ready  to  minister  to  his  comfort,


on.  XVI.  1—23.]  THE  SEOOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  401

and  even  prepared  to  break  the  tiea  which  for  years  had  held  him  to  Mephibosheth.
Loyalty  and  religion  are  publicly  professed.  The  assembled  friends  of  the  king  are
witnesses  to  his  noble  conduct.  Wolves  may  come  in  sheep's  clothing,  Satan  may
assume  the  appearance  of  an  angel  of  light,  and,  in  the  same  way,  avarice  may,  if
occasion  requires  it,  hide  its  hateful  form  under  the  guise  of  the  two  most  reputablo  of
all  qualities — loyalty  and  religion.  This  is  done  in  varying  degrees.  There  is  a  con-
formity to  prevalent  political  opinion,  to  social  customs,  to  decency  of  bearing,  aiid  to
the  observanops  of  the  sanctuary,  not  because  of  a  thorough  conviction  of  right  founded
on  knowledge  and  principle,  but  because  it  will  contribute  to  swell  the  amount  of  one's
gains  and  elevate  one's  position  in  the  world.  God  desireth  truth  in  the  inward  parta
(Pa.  li.  6).  The  whited  sepulchre  is  no  screen  from  his  eye  (Matt.  xxii.  27;  of.
Pb.  cxxxix.).

The  reproaches  of  the  wiohed.  A  more  graphic  account  of  insult  and  personal
wrong  than  this  is  not  found  in  the  Bible.  The  language  of  the  sixty-ninth  psalm  is
fitly  descriptive  of  the  events  of  this  sad  day,  as  also  of  Ps.  iii,  and  iv.  The  harsh
voice  of  Shimei,  it  is  to  he  feared,  was  but  the  index  of  a  feeling  in  many  hearts  (owcirds
the  unfortunate  man  of  God.  The  political  element  enters  into  the  {ittaol!  (ver.  8),  but
there  was  a  deeper  sentiment  of  hostility  in  which  the  ungodly  of  Jerusalem  would  be
piedisposed  to  share.  Everything  seems  intense  in  David's  life,  as  a  consequence  of  the
nntiiral  force  of  his  character,  the  depth  of  his  feelings,  and  the  corresponding  strength
of  emotion,  whether  of  love  or  hate,  which  his  conduct  aroused.  Kxcept  in  seasons  i.f
fierce  persecution,  and  most  of  all  in  the  instance  of  our  Bedeomer,  the  reproaches  of  the
wicked  do  not  assume  the  violent  form  here  indicated,  but  in  every  instance  of  their
occurrence  we  may  trace  features  in  common  with  this.

1.  They  proceed  fbom  keligioub  avubsion,  Davjd  was  a  religious  man.  His
kingly  position  was  won  by  virtue  of  his  being  a  man  after  God's  own  heart  (1  Sam.
XV.  28 ;  ivi.  7 — 13).  In  spite  of  his  great  fall,  he  was  a  lowly,  devout  servant  of  God,
intent  on  the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  people.  When  Shimei  assailed  Oavid  as  ausurper
(ver.  8),  and  so  made  a  political  allusion,  he  revealed  his  own  intense  aversion  both  to
David's  piety  and  the  religious  reason  for  his  elevation  to  the  throne  in  the  place  of
Saul.  He  evidently  did  not  enter  into  the  theocratic  views  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xv„  .-ivi.).
He  was  a  man  who  preferred  the  unspirituftl  order  of  Saul's  government  to  the  Divine
order  of  David's.  Here  lay  the  real  secret  of  the  reproaches  heaped  upon  the  unfortunate
ki  ng.  No  godly  man,  no  man  of  elevated  views  or  of  spiritual  sympathies,  could  originate
such  malicious  words.  This  was  the  secret  also  of  the  reproaches  heaped  on  Christ.
He  was  better  than  his  haters  liked  him  to  be.  Intense  aversion  to  nis  superior  spiri-
tuality was  the  spring  of  their  conduct.  They  hated  him  without  a  cause,  i.e.  a  valid
reason.  In  looking  at  the  reproaches  against  the  persecuted  Christians,  we  find  the
same  to  be  true.  The  evil  words  spoken  nowadays  against  good  men  have  their  rpot
in  a  dislike  of  the  holy  life  which,  by  contrast,  is  a  reminder  of  sin  and  guilt.

H.  They  abe  professedly  based  on  defects  of  ohauactbr.  It  might  bo
inferred  from  the  words  of  Shimei  (ver.  7)  that  he  was  a  yery  righteous,  peaceful.  God-
fearing man,  for  he  comes  forth  as  the  accuser  of  the  king,  and  pleader  for  what  is  just
to  man  and  God.  But  we  know  that  thiii  was  only  a  cover  for  the  real  feeling,  Those
who  are  not  holy  are  obliged,  by  compulsion  of  conscience,  to  find  a  plea  for  deeds  of
shame.  The  failure  of  David  in  one  period  of  his  life  was  most  probably  Jcnown  to
Shimei,  and  it  is  seized  with  eagerness  and  made  the  justification  of  ^  reproaoh  bearing
on  his  entire  life,  and  imputing  deeds  of  which  David  was  innocent,  $aving  the  case
of  Batbsheba  and  Uriah,  David's  life  was  anything  but  one  of  blood  and  worthlessness
(Belial).  To  Saul  and  his  sons  he  had  been  unusually  kind.  The  eleyation  of  hia
cha'acter  had  given  dignity  and  power  to  the  kingdom.  These  tactics  of  wicked  men
are  constant ;  the  occasional  weaknesses  of  life  are  laid  hold  of,  and  magnified  so  as  to
be  representative  of  the  entire  life.  The  free  and  frank  words  of  Christ,  true  as  they
were,  not  long  before  his  death,  were  laid  hold  of  and  used  as  though  blasphemy  and  evi>
works  were  his  geneial  cbaracteristics  (Matt.  xii.  24;  John  x-  32 — 36).  Our  failings
in  Christian  life  doubtless  are  a  reproaph  to  ns,  and  give  occasion  to  the  enemy  to
blaspheme ;  but  the  maliqe  of  the  wicked  is  seen  in  that  they  glE|,dly  lay  hold  of  these  as
a  plea  for  gratifying  the  feeling  of  aversion  they  chef  ii^h  towards  the  religion  we  protess,

m  SAiJUBt.  2  9


402  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvi.  1— 23.

IIL  They  aee  especially  developed  in  the  day  of  adversity.  The  slumber-
ing aversion  of  Shimei  found  expression  in  form  of  outrageous  insult  when  David's
fortunes  began  to  wane.  Malice  is  associated  with  cowardice,  and  it  is  only  when  fear
of  punishment  passes  away  that  the  malice  puts  forth  its  vigour.  Malice  is  cruel,  and
therefore  it  adds  wound  to  wound.  The  history  of  Christian  persecution  illustrates
this.  The  very  sorrows  which  ordinarily  would  draw  forth  sympathy  only  induce  the
feeling  expressed  in  "There  is  no  help  for  him  in  God."  The  natur^  tendency  of  the
multitude  to  adhere  to  the  prosperous  and  stand  aloof  from  the  failing  cause,  becomes
intensified  into  active  opposition  when  a  lurking  aversion  to  the  individual  and  his
cause  has  been  cherished  (Ps.  xxxv.  15  j  xlix.  18).  Even  the  patience  and  sorrow
displayed  in  the  season  of  providential  trial  are  turned  against  the  sufferer  by  the
keeunisss  of  an  evil  ingenuity.  So  much  freedom  does  the  evil  spirit  find  in  the  day  of
calamity  that  the  whole  life  is  charged  with  the  faults  that  belong  only  to  a  portion  of
it.  No  consideration  is  given  to  repentance  and  amendment.  To  crush  and  ruin  are
the  sole  aim  of  the  reproach.

IV.  They  abb  ohaeactebizbd  by  the  dabino  encoubaoed  by  a  sense  of
BECUBITY.  Shimei  knew  his  victim  well  enough  to  believe  that  he  would  not  have
the  heart  to  allow  the  sword  to  smite  him  down ;  for  all  the  antecedents  of  David's  life
were  in  the  direction  of  leniency  and  gentleness  towards  those  who  sought  his  hurt,
though  he  spared  not  the  man  who  sought  or  professed  to  take  away  the  life  of  Saul.
He  was  shrewd  enough  to  notice  that  the  grief  of  the  king  was  so  intense,  as  bare-
footed and  in  silence  he  passed  out  of  the  city,  as  not  to  allow  of  his  finding  room  for
thoughts  of  vengeance,  and  thus,  being  secure,  the  reproaches  poured  forth.  The  same
conclusion  was  arrived  at  by  the  vindictive  Pharisees,  who  loaded  the  Saviour  with
reproach.  They  knew,  from  all  they  had  seen  and  heard,  that  he  would  not  use  force
against  them,  and  would  not  avail  himself  of  the  Koman  authority  in  self-defence,  and
hence,  secure  in  these  directions,  they  were  very  darinpr,  and  spared  not  words  and
deeds  to  crush  stiU  further  the  spirit  of  the  illustrious  Man  of  sorrows.  In  daily  life
young  Christians  are  often  loaded  with  reproaches  by  wicked  young  men,  with  a  bold-
ness that  gains  strength  from  the  fact  that  there  is  no  one  present  to  rebuke  them,  and
that  the  assailed  youth  is  prohibited  by  the  principles  he  professes  from  using  reproach
and  violence  in  return  (Matt.  v.  39,  43,  44).

General  lessons.  1.  In  the  providential  discipline  of  life,  we  may  look  for  a
combination  of  sorrows  from  independent  sources,  but  yet  all  subservient  to  good  for
the  children  of  God.  2.  We  should  be  so  careful  of  our  life  every  day  that  we  give  no
apparent  occasion  for  any  one  to  bring  charges  against  us.  when  the  failure  of  our  earthly
prosperity  arouses  attention.  3.  The  freedom  exercised  by  wicked  men  in  pouring
forth  their  hatred  against  the  good  is  of  short  duration,  and  cannot  really  hurt  those
who  bear  their  reproaches  in  a  right  spirit.  4.  We  ought  to  discount  largely  the  accusa-
tions brought  against  good  men  by  those  whose  life  and  conduct  reveal  an  absence  of
sympathy  with  the  kingdom  of  God.

The  waves  and  hillows  of  God.  The  events  narrated  in  vers.  5 — 13  have  an  aspect
towards  man  and  towards  God.  The  scene  of  a  rejected  monarch  leaving  his  seat  of
government,  and,  while  so  doing,  assailed  by  an  enemy,  is  a  vicissitude  in  human  affairs
which,  though  special  in  its  colouring,  is  frequent  in  the  annals  of  the  world.  It  is  a
case  of  human  ingratitude  and  violence  on  the  one  side,  and  human  suffering  on  the
other.  But  to  the  mind  of  David  the  sufferer,  and  to  the  sacred  historian,  the  vicissitude
is  seen  to  stand  in  direct  relation  to  the  government  of  God,  and  is  invested  with  its
deepest  interest  in  that  aspect.  The  expression  of  the  psalmist  here  finds  exemplifica-
tion :  "  All  thy  waves  and  thy  billows  are  gone  over  me  "  (Ps.  xlii.  7).  The  troubles
are  earthly;  they  roll  on  according  to  fixed  laws,  and  are  raised  by  agencies  that  seem
to  act  by  virtue  of  their  own  nature ;  and  yet  theyare  God's.  The  Hebrew  discernment
of  the  Divine  clement  in  the  bitterest  trials  is  clear  and  sure.  We  learn  here  the
following  truths.

1.  Theee  are  qeadations  op  trouble  in  the  experience  or  THE  GODLY.  There
are  distinct  troubles  in  David's  experience  as  here  described,  and  they  are  graduated  in
weight.  It  was  something  to  leave  the  city  and  worship  he  loved;  it  was  more  to
breiJt  up  a  home;  it  was  worse  to  lose  regal  authority;  it  was  worse  still  to  pass  out


CH.  XVI.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  409

In  Bight  of  the  thouBands  of  Israel,  poor  and  powerless ;  it  was  a  greater  wave  to  have
to  listen  to  the  reproaches  and  cursings  of  the  wicked ;  but  the  greatest  billow  of  all
was  the  knowledge  that  his  now  eldest  son,  his  former  pride  and  delight,  was  in
rebellion  against  him,  and  was  seeking  his  life  (ver.  11).  Fathers,  kind  and  loving,
only  can  estimate  the  greatness  of  this  swelling  billow.  Compared  with  this,  all  else
in  form  of  loss  of  property  and  home  and  friends,  must  be  expressed  by  the  inferior
term  "  waves.  **  And,  as  we  shall  see,  the  magnitude  of  this  is  the  greater  still,  because
perceived  to  be  in  some  sort  the  consequent  of  the  former  errors  of  the  sufferer.  There
are  many  tribulations  for  the  righteous,  in  many  instances  arising  out  of  their  own
conduct,  and  it  may  seem  a  truism  to  say  that  some  are  greater  than  others ;  but  the
fact  deserves  noting,  inasmuch  as  material  and  social  troubles,  which  to  an  observer
seem  to  press  most  heavily,  are  often  slight  compared  with  others  that  enter  more  into
the  depths  of  the  soul.

II.  The  bbai.  okadation  of  tbouble  is  often  not  discernible  bt  ant  but
THE  suFFEBER.  To  Joab  and  men  of  his  character  it  would  seem  to  be  the  climax
of  all  calamity  that  a  "dead  dog"  should  curse  and  throw  stones  at  a  king.  It  was
a  climax  in  the  sense  of  coming  upon  other  calamities,  but  only  David  could  perceive
its  relative  weight  in  the  storm  then  passing  over  him.  His  fatherly  heart  alone  conld
feel  the  full  crushing  force  of  the  son's  ingratitude  and  cruelty.  He  alone  could  discern
with  agonizing  feeling  the  relation  between  his  own  sin  and  this  dire  evil.  He  only
knew  the  rebound  in  this  dreadful  form  of  the  recent  alienation  of  his  own  heart  from
purity  and  God.  We  often  spend  our  pity  on  suffering  men  and  women  ■  when  visible
disasters  fall,  and  perhaps  fix  on  some  loss  of  property,  or  health,  or  children,  or  some
terrible  blasting  of  a  life's  hopes,  as  the_  item  most  oppressive  to  the  smitten  one.
Possibly,  in  the  unrevealed  record  of  their  own  personal  experience  in  relation  to  &od,
there  is  a  fact  which  does  more  to  bow  down  the  spirit  than  all  else  beside.  The  heart
of  each  man  knoweth  its  own  bitterness.  There  are  secrets  never  to  be  unravelled  here
below,  or,  if  made  known  in  words,  fully  realized  in  their  sorrow-causing  power  only  by
those  whose  past  experience  is  bound  up  with  their  existence.

III.  They  abb  associated  in  the  mind  of  the  supfebeb  with  a  sense  of
personal  demerit.  The  connection  of  the  events  of  this  period  of  David's  life  with
his  past  life  was  not  simply  discerned  to  be  organic,  but  in  that  discernment  there  was
a  distinct  recognition  of  his  own  unworthiness  in  the  sight  of  God,  yea,  of  his  richly
deserving  these  troubles  of  varying  gravity.  Probably  not  one  man  in  that  strange
procession,  except  Nathan,  divined  the  real  thoughts  and  feelings  of  David.  The  curses
of  Shimei  were  as  the  echo  of  his  own  conscience  on  that  dark  and  dreadful  day  when
love  to  God  yielded  to  unohastity  and  design  to  slay.  The  horrible  sin  came  forth,
and,  though  truly  forgiven,  was  now  "  ever  before"  him  (Ps.  li.  3).  No  curses  of  the
wicked  were  too  bad  for  him  !  No  rebellion  of  cherished  son  was  too  severe  a  chastise-
ment for  him  I  The  "  waves  and  billows  "  rolled  on.  Were  they  not  fitly  framed  to
swallow  up  one  so  self-condemned,  so  unworthy  of  pity  ?  Yes ;  here  lies  the  meaning
of  those  bared  feet,  that  bowed  head,  that  silence  under  the  curse,  that  moral  inability
to  raise  a  finger  to  stay  the  swelling  flood  of  troubles.  Nor  are  we  to  wonder  that  this
should  be  so  in  the  case  of  a  forgiven  and  restored  soul  (ch.  xii.  13);  for  the  more  pure
the  heart  of  the  restored  one,  the  more  blessed  the  sense  of  actual  forgiveness,  the  keener
will  be  the  feeing  of  demerit  when  the  old  sin  is  brought  to  the  memoiy  by  calamitous
svents  which  it  set  in  train.  It  takes  a  very  holy  nature  to  appreciate  properly  what
sin  really  is.  In  the  instance  of  all  who  experience  the  "  waves  and  billows"  of  Gorl,
there  is,  with  a  clearness  more  or  less  full,  an  association  of  the  trouble  with  their
own  past  demerit.  Whether  they  can,  as  David  did,  actually  trace  the  lines,  they
know  that  all  trouble  is  in  some  way  connected  with  the  presence  of  sin  in  the  world,
and  that  their  own  past  relation  to  God  was  at  one  time  such  that  no  earthly  disaster
could  be  too  great  as  a  chastisement.  Irreligious  men  don't  kflow  what  this  is ;  but  it  is
a  real  fact  in  Christian  life.  "  I  am  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  thy  mercies ; "  "  It  is  oi
the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed  "  (Gen.  xxxii.  10;  Lara.  iii.  22).

IV.  There  is  a  distinct  recognition  of  the  will  of  God  in  them.    There  is
an  instructive  difference  in  the  conduct  of  Abishai  and  David.     The  man  of  the  worW
saw  the  passion  and  heard  the  voice  of  Shimei,  and  his  anger  was  roused  accordingly
the  sorrowing  man  of  Go4  saw  only  the  will  of  (JotJ.    5e  seemed  de^  to  the  torreni


«0t  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvi.  1^23.

of  curses ;  with  head  bowed  to  the  earth,  he  saw  not  the  man,  and  the  thud  of  the
f  tones  made  no  impression.  "  The  Lord  hath  said  unto  him,  Curse  David."  Yes ;  it
was  the  Lord.  The  words  of  the  prophet  were  true  (ch.  xii.  10 — 14).  Spiritual  per-
ception is  spontaneous,  and,  to  the  godly  man,  infallible.  It  passes  by  the  visible  to
the  invisible.  Second  causes  are  lost  in  the  efficient  Cause.  Speculative  questions  as
to  human  freedom  and  consecution  of  events  are  left  behind.  The  sqlution  of  the
actual  experience  in  the  passing  events  is  found.  It  is  God.  This  is  the  significance
of  all  to  David.  The  "  waves  and  billows  "  are  his.  They  roll  to  do  his  will.  ^  The
force  of  almightiness  is  in  them.  This  spiritual  discernment  plays  an  important  part  in
the  lives  of  all  true  Christians.  It  is  not  ignoianoe,  it  is  not  a  disregard  of  philosophy
(lU  their  part,  it  is  not  a  violation  of  the  sequences  of  scientific  law,  when,  with  an
intuition  clear  aiud  irresistible,  they  see  God  in  the  troubles  that  fall  upon  themselves.
For  spiritual  intuition  is  a  higher  faculty  than  logical  judgment,  and  relates  to  a  sphere
above  all  physical  sequences.  There  is  no  more  possibility  of  men  setting  this  aside  by
reasonings  and  discussions  concerning  physical  laws,  than  the  perception  of  an  external
world  by  vision  can  be  set  aside  by  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  physiological
structure  of  the  eye.  If  commercial  disaster  falls,  if  health  fails,  if  friends  die,  if
children  become  rebellious,  if  the  seeds  of  former  sins  bear  their  bitter  fruit, — in  all
Grod  is  seen.  Nothing  comes  in  form  of  trouble  to  his  children  bat  that  he  has  a  will
iu  it.  There  may  be  a  human,  even  physical  side,  but  the  child  will  discern  the
Father's  will  (Heb.  xii.  5—10).

V.  The  sense  of  pbbsonal  demerit  and  discernment  of  the  will  of  God  tonb
DOWN  THE  HAEDBK  TENDENCIES  OF  HUMAN  NATUBB.  Abishai  was  true  to  his  nature  in
wishing  to  cut  off  the  head  of  the  "  dead  dog ;"  and  David  was  true  to  the  chastening
effect  on  his  nature  of  these  terrible  trials  when  he  resisted  the  suggestion  (ver.  10).
The  heart  becomes  tender  and  gentle  when  under  the  chastening  hand  of  God,  provided,
as  in  David's  case,  there  is  a  due  discernment  of  personal  unworthiness,  and  of  the
gracious  though  just  purpose  of  God  in  the  trouble.  We  are  reminded  of  One  who  also
endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself;  who  when  reviled,  reviled  not
again,  and  even  when  bearing  more  than  David  could  here  was  pitiful  and  kind  to  his
foes  (Heb.  xii.  2, 3 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  23 ;  Luke  xxiii.  34).  It  is  the  mark  of  a  true  endurance
of  the  righteous  will  of  God,  and  conformity  of  self  to  the  scope  of  the  Divine  purpose,
that  there  is  in  time  of  trouble  no  fretting  and  chafing  against  the  instruments  which
he  may  use,  be  they  men  or  things.  Who  can  curse  when  the  holy  will  is  doing  its
work?  Who  can  be  in  wrath  and  find  time  for  antagonisms  when  the  soul  is  absorbed
in  contrite  recognition  of  sin  and  humble  prostration  before  a  storm  designed  to  purify
the  heart  ?  What  gratitude  is  due  to  God  for  the  softening  influences  of  calamity !  How
much  richer  in  meekness  and  gentleness  and  the  milder  and  more  Ohristly  virtues  are
many  for  the  poverty  and  pain  they  have  experienced !  The  sons  of  Zeruiah|  still  so
strong  and  fierce  in  the  world,  little  know  the  bleasedness  of  being  like  unto  him  who
was  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."

VI.  With  silent  homage  to  the  majebtt  op  God  there  is  blended  tbubt  nt  mi
MBROY.  David  was  not  playing  a  part  before  the  eye  of  man.  There  was  nothing
histrionic  in  his  conduct.  The  profound  homage  to  the  Holy  One  which  underlay  his
confession  before  Nathan,  "  I  have  sinned  "  (ch.  lii.  13),  was  now  again  rendered  in
the  secrecy  of  bis  own  soul.  The  head  bowed  in  submission  to  the  fierceness  of  the
storm  indicated  an  acknowledgment  of  the  righteousness  of  God.  Much  rather  would
the  humbled  king  have  been  free  from  the  necessity  of  speaking  with  the  "  sons  of
Zeruiah,"  and  have  borne  the  terrible  storm  without  a  thought  of  protest  or  feeling  of
complaint.  It  is  in  the  most  critical  moments  of  life  that  the  soul  shrinks  from  the
outward  strife  of  tongues,  and  in  the  solemn  silence  of  its  own  thoughts  renders  to
God  a  sinful  creature's  homage.  But  with  this  utter  surrender  to  the  rights  and
punitive  appointments  of  the  Eternal  there  is  blended  a  quiet,  modest  trust  in  his
great  mercy.  "  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  look  on  mine  affliction  "  (ver.  12).  "  It
may  be."  Note  the  content  of  the  words :  "  He  is  merciful  and  gracious.  It  is
inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  Author  of  the  covenant  with  Israel  to  be  so.  The  words
of  the  past  are  evidence  of  this.  I  am  undone  and  have  no  clum ;  all  that  comes  to
crush  me  comes  justly ;  what  he  does  he  dues  for  his  Name's  sake.  Other  poor  sinnem
have  waited  not  in  vain ;  the  hour  may  come  when  he  will  see  his  glory  to  be  one  with


CH.  tvi.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  405

my  delivemnoe,  and  then  the  storm  will  cease.  '  He  will  requite  me.'  Mercy  will
find  a  way  of  enriching  my  poor  teouhled  soul  out  of  the  very  ills  which  bo  justly  hatre
come  upon  me."  The  true  heart  in  its  deepest  sorrows  never  loses  faith  in  God's  good-
ness and  care.  It  holds  to  the  possibility  of  a  turn  in  the  tide.  It  rests  not  on  its
merits,  not  on  speculations  upon  what  is  unknown,  but  upon  the  assured  character  of
God  as  revealed  in  Christ.  It  assumes  and  presumes  nothing,  but  leaves  all  with  him,
and  so  finds  comfort  in  the  hope  that  through  his  free  unmerited  grace  all  things  shall
be  found  to  work  together  for  good  (Roni.  viii.  28).

General  Lessoks.  1.  It  is  an  illustration  of  the  dreadful  nature  of  sin  that  it
deposits  seeds  of  trouble  which  may  be  inactive  during  a  season  of  prosperity,  but
which  put  forth  their  strength  when  adversity  falls  upon  us  (vers.  5,  6).  2.  The  Ohildren
of  God  may  do  well  to  remember  that  there  are  watchful  foes,  human  and  Satanic,
ready  to  take  advantage  of  any  circumstance  that  may  bring  reproach  on  them  as
servants  of  the  living  God  (vers.  5,  6).  3.  Our  faithful  attachment  to  those  bearing
sorrow  because  of  their  shortcomings  is  a  duty,  when  they  bear  it  in  a  submissive  spirit,
even  though  it  cause  us  to  bo  sharers  in  their  sufferings  (vers.  6, 13j  14).  4.  In  seek-
ing to  alleviate  the  sufferings  of  the  oppressed,  we.  should  abstain  from  vindictive
passions  (ver.  10).  5.  The  most  tender  consideration  and  sympathy  should  be
extended  towards  those  whose  hearts  are  crushed  by  the  ingratitude  and  cruelty  of  their
own  children  (ver.  11).  6.  The  most  effective  way  of  mihistering  to  those  whose  Spirits
are  broken  down  by  providential  chastisements  is  to  foster  ui  their  hearts  simple  trust
in  God's  great  mercy  (ver.  12)^  We  obtain  evidence  of  our  being  true  children  of
God  when,  i&  the  time  of  out  calamity  and  amidst  persecutions,  we  ar«  followers  to
those  who,  when  "  reviled,  reviled  not  agaia"  (ver.  11 ;  of.  1  Pet.  iL  23).

Vers.  1.5 — 23. — Illustrations  of  facts  and  principles.  The  facts  are:  1.  Absnlom
enters  Jerusalem  with  his  adherents  and  AhithopheL  2.  Hushai  presents  himself  before
Absalom,  with  a  salutation  in  atnbiguous  language.  3.  On  Absalom  expressing  sur-
prise that  he  had  not  gone  with  David,  he,  with  studied  caution,  expresses  his  readiness
to  serve  whom  the  Lord  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  niight  choose,  and  further  declares
his  intention  to  "  serve  "  in  the  son's  presence  as  he  had  in  the  fftther's.  4.  Absalom,
seeking  counsel,  is  advised  by  Ahithophel  to  strengthen  his  position  by  taking  posses-
sion of  his  father's  concubines.  5.  Whereupon  Absalom,  in  the  view  of  the  people,
conforms  to  the  advice.  6.  Ahithophel  is  represented  as  a  man  whose  reputation
as  a  counsellor  was  of  the  highest  character.  The  historian  passes  from  the  sorrows
of  David  to  the  aspirations  and  first  measures  of  Absalom,  and  reveals  another
line  of  providential  events  apparently  Working  in  another  direction,  and  yet,  in  the
light  of  Nathan's  words  (ch.  xii.  7---12),  clearly  tending  to  the  realiisation  of  one
purpose.  It  is  only  the  religious  man  tliat  can  discern  the  mind  of  God  in  occurrences
utterly  dissimilar  in  their  bearing.  The  good  are  crushed  and  the  vUe  are  exalted,  but
the  crushing  and  the  elevation  are  but  products  of  free  human  instrumentality,  taken
hold  of  by  an  unseen  Power,  to  bring  about  the  ends  of  a  righteous  administration  of
justice.  In  the  opening  accounts  of  Absalom's  entrance  on  political  power  we  have
instructive  illustrations  of  facts  and  principles.

L  Deference  won  bt  age  and  ohabacteb.  The  rash  and  reckless  Absalom  treats
the  aged  Hushai  with  unwonted  respect,  even  while  regarding  him  as  a  "  friend "  of
David  (vers.  16, 17).  The  Violence  usually  accompanying  a  bold  revolt  was  evidently
restrained  by  the  will  of  God  acting  through  the  natural  influence  of  years  combined
with  reputation  for  moral  worth.  Occasionally  wicked  men  have  been  heedless  of
infancy  and  age,  and  the  better  the  men  associated  with  their  opponents,  the  more
readily  have  they  cut  them  off.  But  as  a  rule  it  is  not  so.  History  records  oases  of
tlie  kind  here  narrated.  The  reason  is  plain :  sin  is  ashatned  in  presence  of  goodtieSS,
and  the  sinner's  arm  is  weak  to  smite  down  what  is  its  own  cobdemnation.  Conscience
revives  and  restrains  action  in  the  presence  of  goodness ;  and  the  heart  must  be  brutal
beyond  all  relief  if  hoary  hairs  do  not  touch  it.  They  speak  of  the  coming  grave,
and  the  voice  is  not  in  vain.  Integer  vitss  scelerisque  purus,  man  wields  a  silent
power,  not  only  over  the  fabled  wolf;  but  over  wolf-like  men  (Horace,  I.  ode  xxii.).

IL  The  past  of  saoacious  men  in  human  affairs.  Hushai  and  AJiithophel  differed
much  in  moral  character^  but  they  were  similar  in  their  position  as  advisers  in  ih«


408  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvi.  1— 2*

affairs  of  state.  Their  acts  show  them  to  hare  heen  men  of  sagacious  mind,  able  to
apply  the  results  of  extended  observation  and  insight  into  character  to  the  chanjing
circumstances  oi  the  day.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  played  the  most  important  part,
by  means  of  theii  tagacity,  in  the  events  of  this  part  of  David's  life;  and  their  action
suggests  to  us  how  much  of  human  life  in  its  social  and  political  relations  is  connected
with  the  thoughts  and  plans  of  men  of  this  class.  As  in  a  ship  a  few  really  control
the  fate  of  the  many,  so  in  nations  a  few  regulate  affairs  that  involve  the  weal  or
woe  of  millions.  No  system  of  government  can  avoid  this  fact.  Mental  power  is
supreme  in  the  state.  Moral  influences  from  the  mass  may  set  limits  to  its  action,
and  open  lines  along  which  it  must  work,  but  its  mighty  force  is  manifest.  It  is  a
case  of  mind  rising  above  mind.  Hence  the  need  of  prayer  that  our  mentally  gifted
men  may  be  good  men.     Hence,  also,  their  solemn  responsibilities  before  God.

in.   The  EESP0N8IBILITT  OF  A   POST   OP  EXTREME   DELICACY   AND    DANQEE.      Hushai

was  just  now  entering  on  his  perilous  duties  as  friend  of  David  in  the  court  of  Absalom,
and  the  utmost  care  was  requisite  that  he  might  both  save  his  own  head  and  serve  his
beloved  king.  Had  he  not  been  sustained  by  the  confidence  that  God  would  bring  to
nought  the  devices  of  the  wicked,  he  must  have  often  been  overwhelmed  by  the  pres-
sure of  his  responsibilities.  There  are  analogous  positions  still  in  life.  Diplomacy
knows  them ;  commerce  is  not  a  stranger  to  them ;  the  Church  fiimishes  them ;
benevolent  men  have  often  to  work  in  secrecy,  though  not  by  deceit ;  peacemakers
find  that  they  may  mar  their  work  for  lack  of  discretion,  and  run  the  risk  of  losing
reputation  with  one  or  both  parties.  In  all  such  instances  the  consciousness  of  being
in  the  right,  that  wit  and  wisdom  are  devoted  to  unselfish  ends,  and  that  God  may  be
asked  to  give  his  help,  will  sustain  the  heart,  give  penetration  to  moral  perceptions,  and
ensure  self-possession.  All  honour  to  the  men  who  for  a  good  cause  assume  such
responsibilities  I

IV.  The  coexistence  with  evil  of  NEnTBALiziNa  fobcbs.  Ahithopbel  had  a
great  reputation,  and  devoted  the  force  of  his  sagacity  to  the  evil  cause  of  a  rebel.  The
forces  of  evil  at  work  against  David  were  strong,  and,  to  ordinary  men  in  Israel,,  invin-
cible. Yet  we  who  know  more  than  Absalom  and  his  friends  then  knew,  can  see  that
all  this  time  there  were,  coexisting  with  and  working  secretly  and  silently  against  all
the  forces  of  evil,  other  forces  which  could  not  but  tend  to  neutralize  their  action.  In
this  we  have  on  a  small  scale  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that,  though  there  are  in  the
world  many  pronounced  forms  of  evil  at  work  against  the  good  of  man  and  the  rightful
authority  of^Christ  over  mankind,  there  is  also  a  silent,  and  in  its  operation  a  secret,
force  at  work,  through  the  agency  of  the  faithful  few,  which  all  the  time  tends  to  check
the  evil,  and  must  in  the  end  overcome  it.  It  has  been  so  from  the  day  when  the  Seed
of  the  woman  was  promised  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  This  fact  should  inspire  the
hearts  of  the  faithful  in  every  land  in  spite  of  outward  appearances.

V.  The  city  of  God  is  sometimes  the  scene  op  contendinq  powebs.  The  holy
city,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  the  chosen  abode  of  the  Eternal,  and  the  natural  abode
of  peace,  was  now  the  scene  of  a  strife  between  adverse  powers  of  good  and  evil.  The
happy  days  when  the  people  sang  for  joy  and  felt  secure  in  the  presence  of  the  symbol
of  the  Divine  favour  (ch.  vi.  12 — 19)  were  no  more.  As  in  some  great  historic  wars
the  conflict  becomes  concentrated  on  the  seat  of  government  and  influence,  so  now  the
great  question  which  involved  the  welfare  of  Israel  and  the  Gentiles  was  being  fuaght
out  in  Jerusalem.  Here  we  certainly  find  an  analogue  to  times  of  trouble  when  the
city  of  God — the  Jerusalem  of  the  Christian  dispensation — has  been  the  scene  of  con-
flict between  the  powers  that  would  get  rid  of  the  Divine  authority  and  set  up  an
order  of  things  not  of  God.  Men  have  contended  within  the  Church  to  rob  Christ  of
his  Divine  rights,  and  the  faithful  few  have  striven  to  render  service  for  him  according
to  the  measure  of  their  wisdom  and  goodness.  The  apostles  seem  to  have  anticipated
such  seasons  (2  Pet.  ii.  1,  2).  As  this  trouble  in  Jerusalem  was  connected  with  the
failings  of  David  as  well  as  the  vices  of  Absalom,  so  the  contentions  and  sorrows  that
have  been  experienced  in  the  Church  hare  not  been  unconnected  with  the  shortcomings
of  the  elect  of  God.

VI.  Ambiguous  fidelity  is  a  pceely  human  expedient.  The  words  of  Hushai
to  Absalom  were  understood  by  the  latter  to  be  the  expression  of  his  loyalty  to  him*
self;  and,  on  the  surface  of  them,  the  words  doubtless  bad  that  meaning.    But  u  a


OH.  XVI.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  407

matter  of  fact,  Husliai's  heart  was  with  David,  and  his  language  was  capable  of  being
interpreted  in  accordance  with  hia  true  feelings.  It  is  a  question  of  casuistry  as  to
whether,  under  the  circumstances,  he  was  warranted  in  devising  means  for  deluding
Absalom.  The  Bible  does  not  commit  itself  to  all  the  acts  of  its  characters ;  and  in
our  judgment  on  men  we  ought  to  have  some  regard  to  the  moral  atmosphere  of  their
daily  lives.  But  in  this  ambiguous  expression  of  fidelity  we  have  an  instance  of  what
largely  prevails  in  the  world.  Men  still  coin  phrases  to  afford  satisl'action  to  others
while  keeping  peace  with  their  own  convictions.  Forms  are  adopted  which  are  unim-
peachable; but  the  real  feeling  is  kept  secret.  In  some  countries  there  are  current
forms  for  expressing  loyalty  to  the  "  powers  that  be,"  freely  employed  to  the  satisfac-
tion of  rulers  and  the  safety  of  those  who  use  them.  Attachment  to  certain  political
principles  is  announced  while  the  particular  application  of  them  is  a  matter  of  private
reservation.  In  commercial  houses  a  form  of  loyalty  to  em|iloyers'  interests  often  passes
with  a  purpose  to  sacrifice  them  to  a  rival  interest.  In  Church  affairs  it  is  possible  to
accept  standards  in  form  and  empty  them  of  essential  content.  The  practice  is  to  be
condemned  in  every  case.  Strong  faith  in  God  can  dispense  with  such  expedients.
He  who  was  chastising  David  through  Absalom  knew  how  to  restore  the  chastened
one  in  due  time,  without  the  expedients  of  human  duplicity.  The  example  of  Christ
and  his  apostles  is  better  than  that  of  Abraham,  Jacob,  and  Hushai  (cf.  Gen.  xii.  13 —
20;  xxvii.  20—27 ;  John  xviii.  33—37 ;  Acts  iv.  7—12).

VII.  Great  pbinoiples  are  uablb  to  abuse.  Hushai  evidently  laid  down  a  great
and  sound  principle  as  the  rule  of  his  conduct  when  lie  declared  that,  as  for  himself,
he  was  prepared  to  serve  him  whom  the  "  Lord,  and  this  people,  and  all  the  men  of
Israel "  might  choose.  Had  Absalom  been  as  keen  as  he  was  ambitious,  he  would  have
seen  that  this  was  a  principle  which  so  lar  could  not  ensure  attachments  to  himself,
because  two  of  the  conditions  were  not  fulfilled^  at  present.  No  doubt  he  hoped  that,
in  some  strange  way,  his  choice  by  "  this  people  "  would  he  supplemented  by  the  choice
of  G«d  and  all  Israel.  There  was  here  an  abuse  of  a  principle,  commonly  recognized
in  those  times,  by  both  Hushai  and  Absalom.  Hushai  took  it  as  a  mere  cover  for
saving  his  conscience,  while  getting  Absalom  to  believe  in  his  fidelity.  The  same
twofold  object  was  sought  by  the  following  question  and  the  very  safe  assertion,  "  As
when  (ys'ta)  I  served  in  thy  father's  presence,  so  will  I  be  (rrm  js)  in  thy  presence."  He
would  be  the  same  man  while  professing  to  serve  Absalom.  On  the  other  hand,
Absalom  evidently  thought  the  principle  laid  down  very  pious  and  patriotic,  and  to
be  respected  because  it  wag  a  principle,  and  in  his  superstitious  and  superficial  deference
to  an  orthodox  utterance,  he  detected  not  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  stated.  In  the
one  case  a  principle  was  subordinated  to  cunning  in  a  good  cause ;  and  in  the  other  it
was  simply  admired  as  a  platitude  by  a  bad  man.  The  trade  in  important  principles
of  action  is  very  common.  They  are  made  to  subserve  ends  by  no  means  good.
Advantage  is  taken  of  their  natural  influence  over  men,  by  reason  of  their  clearness
and  moral  force,  to  hoodwink  them  for  carrying  out  special  designs.  Platform  and  press
too  frequently  have  dealt  with  great  truths  for  no  special  love  of  the  truths,  but  lor
party  purposes,  and  to  save  credit  for  intelligence  and  good  sense.  Also  there  is  a
superstitious  regard  for  a  certain  class  of  religious,  moral,  and  political  principles  which
causes  many  persons  to  think  well  of  those  who  proclaim  them,  simply  because  of
proclaiming  them.  This  unreality  In  both  public  and  private  life  should  be  dis-
countenanced.

VIII.  Great  powers  conoemtrate  against  the  Lord's  anointed.  The  followers
of  Absalom,  under  the  guidance  of  Ahithophel,  confer  with  him  as  to  the  best  course  to
pursue  in  order  to  effectually  establish  the  position  of  the  usurper,  and  cut  off  the
fugitive  king.  In  ameasure,  the  second  psalm  is  now  fulfilled,  substituting  "counsellors"
for  "  kings "  (Ps.  ii.  2).  The  fact  that  David  had  been  anointed  by  God  must  have
been  familiar  to  them  all.  This  evidence  of  his  right  to  reign  was  clear  enough,  and
no  counter-deposition  had  come  from  God ;  and  yet  such  is  the  blindness  and  desperate
nature  of  men  when  alienated  from  God,  that  they  meditate  the  destruction  of  a  rule
guaranteed  from  on  high.  Sin  is  madness  as  well  as  vileness.  Our  Saviour  reminds
his  disciples  that  the  same  combination  will  take  place  against  his  authority  (Ps.  ii. ;
Matt.  xvi.  18).  The  conspiracy  was  formed  when  keen  and  crafty  men  sought  hia
death  (Matt.  xii.  14 ;  xxvii.  7 ;  John  xviii.  14) ;  it  was  revived  when  they  sought  t«


403  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  [oH.  xvi.  1—23.

crush  his  disciples  (Acts  v.  33) ;  and  it  is  in  force  now  when  men  presume  to  dispense
with  his  teaching  and  saving  power.  It  is  the  old  antagonism  of  the  serpent  ahd  the
Seed.     Let  every  Christian  hrace  himself  to  the  conflict.

IX.  There  is  an  unconscioiJs  fulfilmi^nt  of  pboPhect.  It  is  not  likely  that
either  Nathan  or  David  proclaimed  to  the  world  the  terrible  prediction  that  was  to  he
fulfilled  within  a  few  years  (oh.  xii.  7-^12).  Ahithophel  was,  therefore,  an  Unconscious
instrument  in  fulfilling  the  Word  of  God  when  he  gave  the  desperate  advice  to  Absalom
(vers.  21,  22).  It  is  thus  that,  in  the  perfectly  free  action  of  men,  Gud's  purposes  are
realized.  He  chastises  his  children  by  using  men  who  at  the  same  time  are  uncon-
scious of  being  so  used.  This  wonderful  foreknowledge  of  What  free  men  will  do,  and
the  execution  of  moral  ends  by  the  action  of  responsible  agents,  is  poSsihle  alone  to  the
Infinite  One.  There  is  involved  in  it  a  mystery  before  wliich  we  do  Well  to  bo^v  with
all  humility.  Men  little  think  how  their  very  deeds  of  evil  are  being  Worked  into  the
warp  and  woof  of  the  world's  life,  so  as  at  last  to  bring  out  to  view  the  wisdom  and
righteousness  of  God.

X.  Pdblio  men  have  it  in  theie  poweb  to  debase  public  Mobals.  By  the
counsel  given  to  Absalom,  Ahithophel  no  doubt  widened  the  breach  between  father  and
son  beyond  the  point  of  reconciliation,  and  by  a  bold  stroke  inspired  confidence  in  the
minds  of  waverers  ;  but  he  did  it  at  the  cost  of  public  morality.  The  tone  of  public
life  was  lowered.  Vice  became  familiar.  A  blow  was  struck  in  an  ostentatious  way
at  purity  of  thought  and  feeling.  A  voluptuous  throne  meant  a  sensual  people.  There
is  always  a  temptation  to  public  men  to  strike  for  power  by  deeds  Of  doubtful  and
sometimes  immoral  character.  Political  ends  may  be  secured  at  the  cost  of  loss  of
moral  tone  to  the  community.  'J'hose  who  do  this  may  be  great  and  wise  in  the  eye
of  the  world,  but  they  are  the  real  enemies  of  the  people,  and  deServe,  as  they  will
experience,  the  retribution  of  God.

XI.  Reputations  great  in  the  world  are  not,  THBBfiPOBB,  great  with  God.
Ahithophel  was  a  man  in  great  repute  as  a  counsellor  (ver.  23),  but  he  wis  not  in
honour  with  God.  The  clever  head  was  associated  with  a  base  and  treacherous  heart.
The  standard  of  distinction  on  earth  is  not  the  same  as  that  in  heaven.  Intellectual
powers  are  often  grand  in  their  range,  but  the  excellence  of  the  man  lies  in  the  sub-
ordination of  them  to  high  and  holy  moral  principles.  The  greater  the  abilities,  the
greater  the  sin  of  not  using  them  for  God  and  his  kingdom.  There  are  many  "  fijst "
in  this  life  who  will  some  day  be  "  last "  (Matt.  xix.  30).  The  worship  of  intellect  is
one  of  the  banes  of  modern  times.  Conformity  to  the  sermon  on  the  mount  is  more
honourable  than  cleverness  in  human  affairs.

General  Lessons.  1.  It  is  a  safe  rule  of  life  to  commit  ourselves  to  an  undertaking
only  on  the  condition  that  God  approves  as  well  as  "all  the  men."  2.  It  is  of
immense  advantage  in  times  of  perplexity  to  have  in  the  mind  a  few  Clear  and  well-
defined  principles  of  conduct  to  which  we  may  refer  for  guidance.  3.  It  is  legitimate
to  bring  the  force  of  first  principles  to  bear  on  those  who  are  bent  on  evil  Ways,  though
it  is  not  right  to  use  them  as  a  cloak  for  double-facedness.  4.  In  the  midst  of  contend-
ing claims  on  our  allegiance,  we  should  give  due  force  to  the  inquiry  as  to  Whom  we
are  under  the  most  binding  obligations  to  serve,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  Christ  bfts  the
prior  claim.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 4. — (Olivet.)  The  benefaction  of  Ziba.  (B^erences :  oh.  Ix.  3,  9-^13 ;  xix.
24 — SO.)  David  had  taken  his  last  look  at  Jerusalem,  and  was  "a  little  past  the  top"
of  Mount  Olivet  in  his  descent  on  the  other  side,  when  he  was  met  by  Ziba,  the  servant
of  Mephibosheth,  with  an  apparenlly  thoughtful  and  generous  present.  This  man  was
originally  a  slave  of  the  house  of  Saul ;  became  a  freed-man  at  its  downfall ;  made  his
fortune  out  of  its  ruins ;  and  had  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  slaves.  About  seventeen
years  before,  when  inquiry  was  made  for  "  any  of  the  house  of  Saulj"  he  gave  informa-
tion concerning  the  son  of  Jonathan,  By  the  restoration  of  Mephibosheth  to  his
patrimony,  Ziba  was  reduced  to  his  former  status,  and  thenceforward  Cultivated  the
land  for  his  master.    And  new,  foreseeing  the  issue  of  the  conflict,  he  sought  to  ingra-


OH  ivi.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  409

tiale  himself  with  the  king,  regain  his  position,  and  obtain  his  master's  estate.    Such
appears  to  be  the  key  to  his  conduct.    We  have  here  an  illustfatiou  of  a  benefaction  i  1.
Occurring  at  a  seasonable  moment ;  when  most  needed  and  least  expected ;  valiiable  in
itself,  and  still  more  for  the  faithfulness  and  kindness  it  seemed  to  manifest.     A  man
•of  David's  generosity  could  not  but  be  greatly  affected  by  it.     Bnt  an  admirable  gift
does  not  always  express  a  commendable  purpose  (Deut.  xvi.  19 ;  Bccles.  vii.  7).    "  What-
ever Ziba  intended  in  this  present,  God's  providence  sent  it  to  David  for  his  support"
(Matthew  Henry).     2.  Proceeding  from  unworthy  motives :  selflsliness,  cOvetousness,
cunning  craftiness  (oh.  i.  2 — 10),  hidden  under  an  ostentatious  display  of  loyalty,
sympathy,  and  benevolence.    Ziba  was  well  acquainted  wilh  the  character  of  David,  and
shrewdly  calculated  upon  the  means  of  improving  his  present  necessities  to  secure  his
own  advantage.    Impure  motives  often  lurk,  sometimes  unconsciously,  beneath  imposing
Iwnefactions.     3.  Conferred  at  another's  expense ;  and  by  the  employment  of  deceit,
treachery,  and  robbery.    "  The  whole,  though  offered  as  Ziba's,  is  the  property  of  Mephi-
boslieth :  the  asses  are  his,  one  of  them  his  own  riding  animal :  the  fruits  are  from  his
gardens  and  orchards  "  (Smith,  '  Dictionary ').     Poor  Mepliibosheth !     He  was  at  this
moment  waiting  for  the  return  of  his  faithless  and  pitiless  slave  with  the  ass,  to  enable
him  to  follow  the  king.    His  own  account  of  his  absence  was  consistent  with  his  actions
(ch.  xix.  24) ;  and  the  treachery  of  Ziba  could  not  be  denied.     "  Treacherous  servants
are  a  curse  to  their  masters."    It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  one  man  to  seek  the  credit
which  is  due  to  another,  and  obtain  it  by  deceiving,  disappointing,  and  injuring  him.
4.  Accompanied  with  a  false  accusation.    "  And  Ziba  said,"  etc.  (ver.  3).     It  was  not
improbable  that  the  adherents  of  the  faUen  dynasty  might  seize  the  opportunity  to
attempt  its  restoration  (ver.  5 ;  ch.  xx.  1) ;  and  already,  perhaps,  David  entertained
some  suspicion  of  the  loyalty  of  Mephibosheth.    Uence  Ziba  might  calculate  on  finding
a  ready  hearing  for  his  calumny.     But  "every  tie,  both  of  intp,rest  and  gratitude,
combined  to  keep  Mephibosheth  faithful  to  David's  cause."    Innocent  men  are  often
suspected  and  accused  groundlessly.     "  When  much  treachery  and  ingratitude  have
been  experienced,  men  are  apt  to  become  too  suspicious,  and  to  listen  to  every  plausible
tale  of  calumny"  (Scott).     "I  cannot  but  pity  the  condition  of  this  good  son  of
Jonathan ;  into  ill  hands  did  honest  Mephibosheth  fall,  first  of  a  careless  nurse,  then
of  a  treaclierous  servant;  she  maimed  his  body,  he  would  have  overthrown  his  estate"
(Hall).    "A  false  witness  will  utter  lies  "  (Prov.  xiv.  5).     5.  Receiving  an  undeserved
recompense.    "  Behold,  thine  is  all  that  belonged  to  Mephibosheth  "  (ver.  4).     "  David,
in  the  excitement  of  a  momentary  misfortune,  is  here  guilty  of  a  double  wrong-^first  in
treating  the  faithful  Mephii)osheth  as  a  traitor,  and  then  in  royally  rewarding  the  false
and  slanderous  Ziba  "  (Erdmann).    "  Hearsay  is  no  safe  ground  of  any  judgment.   Ziba
slanders,  David  believes,  and  Mephibosheth  suffers  "  (Hall).     6.  Followed  by /oMer^ij
servility.     "I  humbly  iDBseech  thee,"  etc.    "He  pretends  to  value  the  king's  favour
more  than  the  gift  he  had  bestowed"  (Patrick).    7.  Revealed  at  length  in  its  true
character  (ch.  Six.  27),  as  a  selfish,  deceitful,  and  base  procedure ;  though  even  then
the  wrong  done  to  the  master  is  not  fully  repaired,  nor  the  wickedness  of  the  servant
adequately  punished.

Afflioation.  1.  Look  beneath  the  outward  appearance  (John  vii.  24).  2.  Guard
against  plausible  detractors.  3.  Avoid  hasty  judgments  (Ps.  cxvi.  11 ;  Prov.  xiv.  15) ;
and  hear  the  other  side.  4.  Wait  for  the  revelation  <rf  the  righteous  judgment  of
(}od.— D.

Vers.  6 — 13.— (Bahukim.)     The  reviling  of  Shimel,     (Beferences:  oh.  xix,  16;   1

Kings  ii.  8,  9,  86-— 46.^  On  pursuing  his  flight  until  he  reached  the  Benjamite  village
of  Bahurim  (ch.  iii.  6),  DavW  was  encountered  by  another  man  connected  with  the
house  of  Saul,  who,  instead  of  bringing  flatteries  and  presents,  flung  "  grievous  curses"
and  stones ;  and  (from  a  safe  distance)  gave  vent  to  the  long-repressed  rage  which,  in
common  with  other  partisans  of  the  fallen  dynasty,  he  felt  on  account  of  David's
exaltation  (ver.  8).  "  Along  the  ridge  he  ran,  throwing  stones,  as  if  for  the  adulterer'a
punishment,  or  when  he  came  to  a  patch  of  dust  on  the  dried  hillside,  taking  up  and
scattering  it  over  the  royal  party  below,  with  the  elaborate  curses  of  which  only  Eastern
partisans  are  fully  masters-Msurses  Which  David  never  forgot,  and  of  which,  accoiding
to  Jewish  tradition,  every  letter  was  sigtiiflcant"  (Stanley).    Abishai  returned  ieviling


410  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtJEL.  [ch.  Xvi.  1— 23.

for  reviling,  and  wished  to  take  instant  vengeance.  But  David  said,  "  Let  him  alone,"
etc.;  presenting  an  instructive  contrast  to  both.  "He  strikes  the  same  string  oi
nobleness  as  before."    We  have  here —

I.  An  instance  of  railino  accttsation.  "  Out,  out  [of  the  kingdon}],  thou  man
of  blood,"  etc.  1  The  language  and  conduct  of  Shimei  were :  1.  Cruel.  He  rails  against
David  in  the  day  of  his  calamity,  and  has  " no  pity."  2.  Oowardly.  Piar  had  kept
him  silent  all  these  years ;  but  "  he  that  smiled  on  David  on  his  throne  curseth  him
in  his  flight"  (Hall^.  Seeing  that  he  is  not  pursued,  he  is  encouraged  to  continue  his
imprecations,  and  becomes  more  furious  (ver.  13).  3.  Malicious ;  imbued  with  personal
hatred.  "  The  ungodly  are  always  selfish.  They  judge  of  others,  not  by  the  laws  of
impartial  justice,  but  by  the  standard  of  self-interest.  David  was  called  a  usurper,  a
man  of  Belial,  a  murderer  ;  and  why?  Because  he  had  made  himself  the  slave  of  lust,
and  had  cruelly  slain  the  noble  Uriah?  No;  because  he  had  been  elevated  by  God
to  the  throne  of  Israel,  and  had  thus  marred  the  prospects  of  the  ambitious  Shimei "
(C.  Bradley).  4.  Unfounded  and  unjust.  "Every  word  of  Shimei  was  a  slander."
His  accusations  of  wickedness  in  general,  and  of  "  the  blood  of  the  house  of  Saul "  in
particular  (ch.  iv.  11 ;  xxi.  6),  are  the  offspring  of  a  wicked  heart.  "  Shimei  curses
and  stones  at  David,  and  barks  like  a  live  dog,  though  Abishai  calls  him  a  dead  one.
The  only  unjust  act  that  ever  David  had  done  against  the  house  of  Sanl  he  had  newly
done ;  that  was,  giving  Mepbibosheth's  land ;  and  here  a  man  of  the  house  of  Saul  is
soon  upon  him  "  (Lightfoot).  5.  Misinterpretive.  (Ver.  8.)  Whilst  recognizing  the
judgment  of  God,  he  makes  a  wrong  application  of  it.  "  We  may  here  learn  how
falsely  and  wickedly  men  sometimes  wrest  the  providence  of  God,  to  justify  their
unjust  surmises  and  gratify  their  malignant  passions  "  (Lindsay).  6.  Criminal.  He  is
guilty  of  high  treason  and  blasphemy,  and  might  justly  suffer  the  penalty  of  the  Law
(Exod.  xxii.  28 ;  ch.  xix.  21 ;  1  Kings  xxi.  13) ;  and  if  David  had  put  him  to  death
at  the  time,  he  would  not  have  been  condemned  for  injustice.  7.  i'rovocative  of  wrath.
Surely  no  man  might  more  reasonably  feel  resentment  than  David ;  no  man  was  ever
more  strongly  incited  to  inflict  punishment;  and  nothing  but  "a  spirit  of  meekness"
could  have  restrained  him.  It  is  not  improbable  that  Ps.  cix.  records  "  the  very  words
of  Shimei,  and  the  curses  which  he  threw  out  against  David,  and  which,  as  they
could  not  but  make  a  deep  impression  on  his  memory,  he  here  repeats  and  then  con-
demns. They  are  directly  contrary  to  that  temper  and  disposition  shown  by  David
in  the  other  parts  of  the  psalm ;  and  they  run  all  along  in  the  singular  number,  whereas
David  speaks  of  his  enemies  in  the  plural"  (G.  Peters,  'Sermons:'  1776;  see  1  Sanu
xxii.  18, 19 ;  xxvi.  13—25 ;  Expositor,  ii.  325).

"  O  Ood  of  my  praise,  be  not  silent  I
For  a  wicked  mouth  and  a  deceitful  month  have  they  opened  against  m*;
They  have  ipokeu  against  me  with  a  lying  tongue,"  eto.

(Ft.  cix.  1— A.)

•  And  they  have  requited  me  with  evil  for  good.
And  with  hatred  for  my  love  (saying) :
Set  thou  a  wicked  man  over  him,
And  let  an  adversary  stand  at  his  right  hand;
When  he  is  judged,  let  him  go  forth  guilty.
And  let  his  prayer  become  sin,"  etc

(Ps.  oix.  6—19.)

"  This  will  be  the  reward  of  mine  adversaries  from  Jehovah,
And  of  those  who  speak  evil  against  my  soul.
IJut  thou,  O  JehovaU  Lord,  deal  with  me  for  thy  Name's  sake
lieoauce  thy  loving-kindness  is  good,  deliver  thou  me  I
They  curse,  but  thou  blessest ;
They  arise  and  are  ashamed,  and  thy  servant  is  glad,"  eto.

(Ps.  oil.  20—31.)

n.  An  exaufle  of  patience  and  roRBBABANca.  "Let  him  curse,"  etc.  (rera.
10 — 12).  The  manner  in  which  David  endured  it  was:  1.  Uncomplaining.  He  doei
not  retaliate ;  does  not  even  vindicate  himself;  but  is  silent  (1  Sam.  x.  '26,  27 ;  Isa.  liii


2n.  XVI.  1-23.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  411

5 ;  Luke  xxiii,  9).  "  When  Shimei  railed  on  him,  he  held  his  peace,  and,  though  he
had  many  armed  men  about  him,  yet  did  he  not  retort  aught  savouring  of  revenge,
yea,  repelled  with  the  high  courage  of  a  patient  spirit  the  instigation  of  the  son  of
Gera.  He  went,  therefore,  as  one  dumb  and  humbled  to  the  dust ;  he  went  as  one
mute  and  not  moved  at  all.  .  .  ■  Consider  not  what  is  rendered  by  others,  keep  thou
thy  place,  preserve  thou  the  simplicity  and  purity  of  thine  own  heart.  Answer  thou
not  the  angry  man  according  to  his  anger,  nor  the  unwise  man  according  to  his  indis-
cretion ;  one  fault  quickly  provoketh  another.  If  thou  strikest  two  flints  together,
doth  not  fire  break  forth  ?  "  (Ambrose,  '  De  OfBciis ').  2.  Repressive  of  resentment,  not
only  in  himself,  but  also  in  others.     "  Answer  him  not"  (Isa.  xxxvi.  21 ;  xxxvii.  3,  4).

3.  Self-accusing.  Although  guiltless  of  the  crimes  imputed  to  him,  he  feels  himself
guilty  of  others  not  less  heinous.  "  Conscience  in  that  hour  had  her  own  tale  to  tell,
of  the  Almighty  Disposer  of  events,  who  speaks  to  us  by  the  reproaches  of  men  as  well
as  by  his  own  blessings.  Had  he  not  merited  from  God,  if  not  from  men,  whatever
disaster  could  befall  the  murderer  of  Uriah  ?  David  feels  within  him  that  destitution
of  the  Divine  presence  of  which  the  absence  of  the  ark  is  but  an  outward  type  "  (B.
Williams).

"  Pure  from  the  blood  of  Saul  in  vain,
He  dares  not  to  the  charge  reply ;
Uriah's  doth  the  charge  maintain,

Uriah's  doth  against  him  cry.
Let  Shimei  curse :  the  rod  he  bears

For  sins  which  mercy  had  forgiven;
And  in  the  wrongs  of  men  reveres
The  awful  righteousness  of  Heaven."

(0.  Wesley.)

4.  Eeverential ;  looking  devoutly  (as  others  did  not)  beyond  Shimei  to  the  All-seeinc;,
All-holy,  and  Almighty  One,  by  whom  he  was  permitted  to  be  an  instrument  of  retri-
bution, and  even  employed  as  such,  although  not  thereby  exonerated  from  guilt  (ch.
xix.  18 — 20).  "  Abishai  looked  only  to  the  stone  (as  it  were),  an  instrument ;  but
David  looked  higher,  to  the  hand  that  was  the  supreme  caster,  and  chastiser  of  him,
as  all  the  godly  do  (Gen.  1.  20;  Job  i.  21) ;  which  is  the  ground  of  their  patience  under
sufferings  "  (Guild).  His  vision  of  the  supreme  Judge  fills  him  with  holy  awe  and
lowly  penitence;  bis  conscious  offences  against  God  make  him  reluctant  to  punish
offences  against  himself;  his  dependence  upon  mercy  disposes  him  to  show  mercy
(Matt.  V.  44: ;  vi.  14, 15 ;  Rom.  xii.  19 — 21).  5.  Submissive ;  humbly  accepting  the
cliastisement  of  God;  and  deeming  this  to  be  his  proper  business  now,  rather  than
seeking  to  execute  justice  on  another  (Micah  vii.  9).  "  Behold,  here  am  I,  let  him  do
to  me  as  seemeth  good  to  him  "  (ch.  xv.  26).  "  The  ways  of  Providence  interlace,  not
only  in  capacity,  but  in  retribution ;  one  thing  is  set  over  against  another.  Yet  the
payment  comes,  not  in  the  manner  nor  at  the  time  we  might  expect,  it  seems  not  in
the  connection  we  think  due ;  but  it  comes,  like  doom.  Call  Absalom  thankless,  Shimei
brutal,  etc.  All  these  things  read  half  a  riddle,  unless  we  own  that  God,  in  whose
counsels  these  are  all  as  instruments  in  the  hand  of  a  man  of  war,  is  just.  He  gave
us  wine,  let  us  take  also  the  gall  from  his  hands.  If  it  is  not  due  to  us  now,  nor  for
this,  it  was  for  something  else  at  some  other  time."  6.  Palliative.  "  Behold,  my  son
seeketh  my  life,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  He  makes  light  of  present  wrongs  by  comparing  them
with  other  and  greater.  "  It  is  the  advantage  of  great  crosses  that  they  swallow  up
the  less."  7.  Hopeful.  "  It  may  be  that  Jehovah  will  look  upon  my  guilt  [tears],"
etc.  (ver.  12).  "  This  consciousness  of  guilt  also  excited  the  assurance  that  the  Lord
would  look  upon  his  sin.  When  God  looks  upon  the  guilt  of  a  humble  sinner  he  will
also,  as  a  just  and  merciful  God,  avert  the  evil  and  change  the  suffering  into  a  blessing.
David  founded  upon  this  the  hope  that  the  Lord  would  repay  him  with  good  for  the
curses  with  which  Shimei  pursued  him "  (Keil).  "  Ziba's  gifts  did  more  harm  than
Shimei's  curses ;  for  those  betrayed  him  into  an  act  of  injustice,  but  these  proved  his
patience  "  (T.  Fuller).  They  also  had  the  effect  of  making  him  more  humble,  pure,
prayerful,  and  filling  him  with  new  confidence  and  joy  in  God  (Ps,  cix.  30,  31).  "A
curse  is  like  a  cloud,  it  passes,"    "  All  things  work  together  for  good,"  etc.


412  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvi.  1— 2a

"liOfd,  I  adore  thy  righteong  will ;
Through  every  instrument  of  ill

My  Father's  goodness  see ;
Accept  the  complicated  wrong
Of  Shimei's  hand  and  Sbimei's  tongnA
As  kind  rebukes  from  thee."

(0.  Wesley.)

Rbmaskb.  L  The  best  of  men  have  been  maligned ;  of  the  Son  of  God  bimself  U
was  said,  "  He  hath  a  devil."  Can  we  expect  to  escape  insult  and  provocation  ?  2.  Th«
maledictions  of  the  wicked  can  do  us  no  harm  unless  we  suffer  ourselves  to  imbiba
their  spirit.    "No  man  is  ever  really  hurt  by  anyone  but  himself "  (Ohrysostom),

3.  When  reviled  of  men,  instead  of  considering  how  little  we  have  deserved  their  dis-
pleasure, we  should  rather  consider  how  much  we  have  deserved  the  displeasure  of  God.

4.  We  should  also  consider  how  little,  in  comparison  with  God,  do  We  endure  at  their
hands!  5.  "Bless,  and  curse  not"  (Prov.  xxv.  21,  22;  xvi.  32),  6.  Imitate  "the
meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ "  (2  Cor.  x.  1).  7.  So  what  is  meant  for  evil  will
turn  to  good. — ^D.

Vers.  9, 10. — (Bahdeim.)  The  zeal  of  AUshai.  {tteferences :  1  Chron.  ii.  6 ;  1  Sam.
xvi.  6;  ch.  ii.  18;  x.  14;  xxi.  17;  xxiii.  18;  1  Chron.  xviii.  12.)  Of  the  three  sods
of  Zeruiah  (ch.  v.  39),  the  youngest,  Asabel,  was  slain  in  early  life  (ch.  ii.  23) ;  the
oldest,  Joab,  was  now  present  (ver.  10), "  little  trusting  the  revolution  which  a  capricious
stripling  (lilse  the  Stuart  Monmouth)  was  to  lead ; "  the  second,  Abishai,  was  one  of
the  earliest,  bravest,  and  most  faithful  of  David's  supporters.  As  on  a  former  occasion,
when  he  sought  to  destroy  Saul  with  a  stroke,  so  now  his  thoughtless,  headstrong,  and
undevout  impulses  needed  to  be  checked.  "  The  characteristic  trait  of  his  nature  was
a  blunt,  impetuous  ferocity."    His  passionate  emotion  was —

I.  Naturally  excited  by  the  conduct  of  Shimei;  and  was,  in  some  respects,
commendable;  inasmuch  as  it  showed:  1.  An  ardent  affection  toward  the  king,  his
"  lord  ;  "  like  that  of  James  and  John  toward  Jesus  (Luke  ix.  64),  and  of  Peter  and
the  other  disciples  (Luke  xxiL  49 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  51).  The  zeal  of  the  Lord's  enemies
against  him  calls  forth  the  zeal  of  his  friends  on  his  behalf,  2.  A  burning  indignation
against  wrong-doing.  "  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  evil."  3.  A  vehement  desire  for
the  triumph  of  justice.  He  doubtless  felt  that  the  offender  deserved  to  die;  and  was
eager  to  "  take  off  his  head,"  in  order  to  the  vindication  of  the  royal  honour,  the  main-
tenance of  tlie  Divine  Law,  and  the  promotion  of  the  public  good.  He  thus  displayed
sonv.'thingofthe  zeal  of  Phinebas  (Numb.  XXV.  13;  Deut.  xxxiii.  9)  and  of  Elijah  (1  Kings
xviii.  40 ;  2  Kings  i,  10) ;  without,  however,  being  justified  therein  by  the  same  necessity
and  authority,  or  imbued  with  the  same  simple,  pare,  and  lofty  spirit.  It  is  difficult  to
indulge  in  resentment,  even  when  proper  to  do  soj  without  sin  (John  ii.  17 ;  Eph.  iv.  26).

II.  Wbonolt  indulged.  "Let  me  go  over,"  eto.  This  request  was  marked  by:
1.  Inconsideration  and  want  of  judgment.  It  is  doubtful  whether  his  attempt,  if
permitted)  would  have  succeeded,  for  Shimei  was  hardly  likely  to  be  without  defenders
(ch.  xix.  17) ;  it  could  scarcely  fail  to  hinder  the  king's  flight  and  imperil  his  safety ;
and  its  success  would  have  effected  no  useful  purpose  at  such  a  crisis.  Zeal  is  often
blind  and  misguided  (Kom.  x.  2;  Phil.  iii.  5;  Acts  xvii.  6)  as  to  the  right  end,  the
proper  means,  and  the  suitrible  time,  "  Zeal  without  knowledge  is  as  wild-fire  in  a
fool's  hand."  2.  Vindietiveness ;  siich  as  frequently  mingles  with  deserved  indignation
toward  evil-doers ;  is  bitter  (Jas.  iii.  14)  and  violent ;  and  makes  him  who  entertains
it  partaker  of  the  evil  which  he  condemns.  "  The  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  right-
eousness of  God."  3.  Presumption  and  vain-glory ;  not  altogether  unlike  that  of  Saul
(ch.  xxi.  2)  and  of  Jehu  (2  Kings  x.  16).  How  often  do  men  feel  confident  of  the
rectitude  of  their  course,  although  acting  contrary  to  the  will  of  God!  and  how  often,
whilst  apparently  full  of  zeal  for  public  justice  and  "  the  glory  of  God,"  are  they  leally
full  of  (iride  and  self-will !

"True  Zeal  Is  merciful  and  mild.
Can  pity  and  forbear ;
The  false  is  headstrong,  fierce,  and  wild^
And  breathes  revenge  and  war."


<aj.  x«n.  1-23,]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  418

m.  EiaHTLY  REPROVED.  " Whfit  lidve  I  to  4o  with  you,"  etc.?  The  spirit  of
Abiahai  and  Joab  (who,  perhaps,  joined  in  the  request)  was  different  from  that  uf  David ;
which,  in  its  sdf-Cpntrol,  patience,  and  forbearance,  displayed  the  highest  heroism,  and
foreshadowed  the  meekness  of  Christ,  "  True  Christian  zeal  is  no  other  than  the  flame
of  love.  This  is  the  nature,  the  inmost  essence  of  it "  (Wesley),  What  is  contrary  to
it  should  be  rebuked  by :  1,  The  indication  of  the  wU  of  God  (ver,  10).  2.  The  exem-
plification of  a  spirit  of  submission  (John  xviii,  11)  and  charity,  3.  The  assiwanoe
of  the  blessing  with  whiqh  it  wUl  be  fiillowud  (ver,  12),'  "  So  the  travellers  went  on.
The  roads  diverged.  The  curses  died  away.  The  stoni'S  fell  short  of  their  aim.  The
evening  closed  on  that  long  day  of  weariness  and  sorrowrr-tbe  dreariest  day  that  David  had
ever  known ;  and  he  and  the  partners  Qf  his  exile  rested  for  the  night "  (Pliiniptre).v^D.

Vers.  15 — 19. — (Jerusalem.)  An  inconsistent  frien<i.  "  Is  this  thy  kindness  to
thy  friend?"  (ver,  17;  ch,  xv,  37),  On  his  unresisted  and  triumphant  entrance  into
Jerusalem,  Absalpni  was  met  by  Hushai  with  the  exolaro»tion,  "  Long  live  the  king  1 "
(1  Sam.  X.  24:).  Such  a  display  of  loyalty  to  himself  on  the  part  of  "  David's  friend  "
(companion,  favourite)  appeared  to  him  so  inconsistent  that  he  asked,  in  ironical
astonishment,  "  Is  this,"  etc.  ?  "  One  might  have  said  to  him, '  Is  this  thy  duty  to  thy
father  ? ' "  (Patrick),  But  Hushai'a  answer  was,  in  effect,  that  (being  bound  to  prefer  the
public  good  before  his  own  private  Qbligations  or  affections)  he  could  do  no  other  than
abide  with  him  whom  Jehovah  and  the  people  had  chosen  king,  and  would  as  gladly
and  faithfully  serve  the  son  as  he  had  served  the  father,  Although  proceeding  from
a  good  motive  and  serving  its  special  purpose,  it  was  marked  by  flattery  and  dissimula-
tion; and  these,  in  common  with  other  sins,  are  certainly  inconsistent  with  the  proper
character  of  a  "  friend  of  Crod  "  and  of  Christ  (1  Sam.  xviii.  4).  The  question  may  be
regarded  (in  the  latter  application)  as  expressive  of —

I.  Bbooonized  obligation.  (Prov.  xviii,  24 ;  Job  vi.  14.)  "  Absalom  had  not  so
little  sense  as  not  to  consider  that  no  man  ought  to  forsake  a  friend  in  his  distress."
If  kindness  (love,  gratitude,  faithfulness,  useful  service)  he  due  to  others,  how  much
more  to  him  who  said,  "I  have  called' you  friends"  (John  xv.  15)1  What  does  his
friendship  require  ?  To  be  with  himf  to  follow  him,  to  share  his  sufferings  5  to  "  walk
as  he  walked  "  (1  John  ii.  6),  without  guile,  in  truth,  purity,  self-denial,  etc.  5  to  be
separate  from  "the  evil  that  js  in  the  world,"  to  confess  his  Name  before  men,  to  seek
his  honour,  to  aid  his  friends,  and  to  promote  the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes.

II.  SuBPRlsiNa  INCONSXSTENOT ;  too  ofteu  observed  (1  Sam.  xxix.  1^-11)  in  those
who  are  his  real  or  supposed  friends:  1.  When  they  exhibit  indifference  to  his
transcendent  claims.  8.  Wbeu  they  refuse  to  bear  "  the  cross."  3.  When  they  love
"  the  friendship  of  the  world  "  (Jas.  iv.  4).  4.  When  they  solace  themselves  with  his
friendship  in  secret,  but  shrink  from  confessing  him  openly.  5.  When  they  profess
that  they  know  him,  but  "  in  works  deny  him."  6,  When  they  employ  deception  and
othe-  "  carnal  weapons "  (2  Cor.  x.  4)  in  his  behalf.  7.  When  they  honour  success
irrespective  of  the  means  by  which  it  is  attained.  8.  When  they  neglect  and  despise
those  whom  he  lovea,  9.  When  they  are  zealous  for  him  in  some  things,  but  not  in
others  of  gieater  moment.  10.  When  they  are  much  concerned  for  their  own  safety
and  advantage,  and  little  concerned  for  his  glory  and  the  welfare  of  mankind.  Alas!
how  often  is  he  "  wounded  in  the  hotise  of  his  friends  "  I

m,  Seabohinq  ikquiry.  Is  there  not  ground  for  it  in  the  conduct  and  speech  of
many?  Is  the  answer  which  may  be  given  to  it  satisfactory  ?  Will  good  intentions
and  beneficent  ends  justify  unrighteous  means  (Rom.  iii.  8)?  Should  the  answer
satisfy  others  and  even  ourselves,  will  it  satisfy  him  ''who  searcheth  the  heart"?
"  Search  me,  0  God,"  etc  (Ps.  oxxxix.  23).

lY.  Desebvep  rbpboach  ;  which  the  enemies  (and  not  merely  the  friends)  of  Christ
are  ready  to  utter,  and  an  enlightened  conscience  confirms.  *'  As  many  as  I  love  I
rebuke,"  etc.  (Rev.  iii,  10).  But  he  rebukes  that  he  may  restore.  "  When  thou  hast
driven  him  away  and  lost  him,  to  whom  wilt  thou  then  fly  ?  and  where  wilt  thou  find  a
friend  ?  Without  a  friend,  life  is  unenjoyed  j  and  unless  Jesus  be  thy  chosen  Friend,
infinitely  loved  and  preferred  above  all  others,  life  will  be  to  thee  a  scene  of  desolation
and  distress.  Of  all  that  are  dear  to  thee,  then,  let  Jesus  be  the  peculiar  and  eupeme
Object  of  thjf  love  "  (A  Kempis, '  Of  the  Friendship  of  Jesus  ').^P,


414  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvi.  1—23.

Vers.  5 — 13. — Shimei'g  curses.  There  are  peculiar  bitterness  and  moral  peril  in
troubles  which  spring  from,  or  are  mingled  with,  human  malevolence.  Such  was
David's  a£Biction  at  this  time.  Absalom's  unnatural  conduct,  Ahithophel's  faithless-
ness, and  Shimei's  cursing  rendered  his  misfortunes  much  harder  to  bear  than  similar
misfortunes  coming  from  the  ordinary  vicissitudes  of  human  life.

L  Shiuei's  oubsino.  A  striking  picture  here :  David,  in  the  midst  of  his  people  and
servants,  including  bis  famous  "Ironsides,"  marching  along  the  ravine;  and  from  a
town  on  the  heights,  this  fierce  Benjamite  rushing  forth,  cursing  and  throwing  stones
as  he  comes ;  and  then,  moving  along  the  ridge  which  overlooked  the  line  of  march,
keeping  pace  with  the  king  and  his  company,  vomiting  forth  his  rage  in  bitter  taunts
and  reproaches,  and  casting  down  stones  and  dust ;  his  fury  increased  by  the  calmness
with  which  those  below  marched  on,  heedless  of  his  impotent  rage.  It  was  an  outburst
of  feelings  long  pent  up  which  dared  not  express  themselves  until  David  seemed  to
have  fallen  from  his  throne  beyond  recovery.  Shimei  was  a  relative  of  Saul,  and  choso
to  regard  David  as  the  author  of  that  king's  downfall,  and  of  the  humiliation  of  his
house,  and  chargeable  with  all  the  bloodshed  that  had  accompanied  these  changes.
And  now,  in  his  view,  the  Divine  retribution  has  at  length  visited  David  for  his  usur-
pation of  the  throne,  and  the  "  bloody  "  measures  by  which  he  had  reached  it ;  and  he
triumphs  over  the  fallen  monarch  with  bitter  resentment  and  scorn,  and  unmeasured
invective,  unsoftened  by  the  spectacle  of  humiliation  and  grief  which  preseuted  itself
to  his  view.  In  his  passion,  like  most  angry  people,  he  is  not  scrupulous  in  adherence
to  the  truth.  David  was  not  guilty  of  wantonly  shedding  blood  to  reach  the  throne ;
he  had  spared  Saul  again  and  again  when  he  might  have  slain  him ;  and  he  had
punished  with  death  one  who  professed  to  have  killed  him,  and  others  who  had
treacherously  murdered  his  son.  Nor  was  it  nearer  the  truth  to  call  David  a  "man  of
Belial  "  (a  worthless,  wicked  man).  But  Shimei  cursed  the  more  freely  because  that
was  the  only  way  by  which  he  could  vent  his  malice :  he  was  powerless  to  do  anything
else.  Yet  he  showed  some  courage,  or  at  least  recklessness,  in  so  freely  reviling  one
who,  though  fallen,  was  surrounded  by  brave  warriors,  any  one  of  whom  could  so  easily
have  effectually  silenced  him  (as  Abishai  desired  to  do),  if  permitted  by  their  king.
Violent  anger  is,  however,  often  as  regardless  of  prudence  as  of  truth.  Its  courage  is  as
that  of  a  maniac.

II.  David's  meek  bndubanck  of  it.  He  doubtless  felt  it  to  be  annoying  and
humiliating  to  be  thus  bespattered  in  the  presence  of  his  friends,  and  trampled  on  so
savagely  by  so  contemptible  a  foe.  To  be  falsely  charged  with  crimes  he  had  carefully
avoided  was  no  small  addition  to  his  already  too  heavy  affliction.  A  very  natural  and
justifiable  resentment  would  prompt  him  to  permit  the  swift  punishment  that  Abishai
begged  to  be  allowed  to  inflict.  But  he  restrained  such  feelings,  and  meekly  endured
the  insults  heaped  upon  him.  His  words  reveal  the  secret  of  his  meekness  1.  Ha
recognized  the  infliction  as  from  Ood.  With  the  freedom  which  the  sacred  write™
employ  when  speaking  even  of  human  wickedness  as  it  fulfils  Divine  purposes,  lie
declares  that  G(jd  had  bidden  Shimei  to  curse  him  (ver.  10),  and  no  one  must  forbid
him.  Besides  bis  general  faith  in  God  as  universal  and  rightful  Buler,  just  and  good,
the  memory  of  his  own  ill  desert  doubtless  aided  him,  and  the  conviction  that  God  was
chastising  him  for  his  sins.  Contrition  prompted  and  nourished  submission.  He  no
longer  saw  in  Shimei  the  cruel  and  vindictive  slanderer,  but  the  rod  in  the  hand  of  his
righteous  yet  merciful  God.  To  his  tormentor  he  would  not  have  submitted,  but  to
his  heavenly  Guide  and  Friend  he  could  and  would.  And  evermore  the  best  remedy
for  impatience  and  resentment  under  afflictions  and  provocations  is  the  recognition  of
our  Father  in  heaven  as  ordering  and  appointing  all ;  and  the  exercise  towards  him  of
confidence  and  love,  humility  and  self-surrender.  Thus  Job  discerned,  behind  and
above  Saheans  and  Chal Jeans,  lightnings  and  tempest;  and  would  have  discerned
behind  and  above  Satan,  if  he  could  have  known  him  as  his  accuser  and  the  prompter
and  mediate  cause  of  his  calamities, — the  Lord ;  and  therefore  could  say,  "  The  Lord
gave,"  etc.  (Job  i.  21).  Thus  also  One  who  was  greater  than  Job  or  David  could  say,
"The  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it?"  (John  xviii.  11).
8.  3%e  thought  of  the  greater  trouble  of  his  son's  conduct  helped  to  reconcile  him  to  tht
lesser  trouble  of  Shimei's.  (Ver.  11.)  What  was  chiefly  burdening  and  paining  his  heart
is  shown  in  these  words.    The  ravings  of  "this  Benjamite"  wag  a  small  matter  in


OH.  XVI.  1—23.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  415

comparison.  3.  TheTwpe  that  Qqd  would  rega/rd  him  with  pity  soothed  him.  (Ver.  12.)
He  felt  that  he  was  in  a  condition  fitted  to  awaken  the  Divine  compassion,  and  hoped
it  would  be  exercised  towards  him.  In  like  manner,  we  may  yet  more  confidently  be
assured  that  he  who  chastises  pities  us,  as  a  father  the  children  he  is  correcting  (Ps.
ciii.  13).  4.  He  trusted  that  Ood  would  render  him  good  in  place  of  the  evil  he  was
suffering.  (Ver.  12.)  Not  that  he  thought  he  deserved  it,  or  that  his  sufferings  gave
him  a  claim  on  God  for  it ;  but,  confiding  in  the  mercy  which  had  pardoned  him,  he
could  hope  for  it.  Shimei  might  curse,  but  if  God  would  bless  (Ps.  cix.  28),  all  would
be  well.  So  may  we  be  sure  that  all  that  God  appoints  us  to  endure  from  men  or  from
circumstances  and  events,  he  will  cause  to  issue  in  a  thousandfold  more  of  blessing,  if
we  trust  and  serve  him,  and  resign  ourselves  to  his  will  (see  further  in  homily  on  ch.
XV.  25,  26).

In  conclusion :  1.  In  Shimei  we  see  an  example  to  he  carefully  avoided.  Let  any
who  permit  themselves  outbursts  of  passionate  anger  and  railing,  see  here  what  a  repul-
sive spectacle  they  present  to  others,  and  how  sad  a  spectacle  to  him  whom  they  call  their
Master.  Let  all  give  heed  to  St.  Paul's  injunctions  in  Bph.  iv.  31,  32.  2.  In  David's
meek  endurance  we  see  an  example  to  be  dosely  imitated ;  yea,  by  Christians  exceeded.
For  we  have  a  still  better  Example,  corresponding  to  a  higher  Law  than  David  knew
(see  1  Pet.  ii.  23 ;  Matt.  v.  44,  46 ;  1  Pet.  iiL  9).— G.  W.

Ver.  17. — UnfaitTiful  friends.  Bad  men  may  and  often  do  see  and  reprove  in  others
the  baseness  they  are  themselves  practising,  and  thus  unconsciously  condemn  them-
selves. Absalom  reproves  his  father's  friend  Hushai  for  supposed  unkindness  and
unfaithfulness  to  him,  while  he  himself,  not  merely  a  friend,  but  a  fondly  loved  son,
was  usurping  his  father's  throne,  and  ready  to  take  away  his  life  (see  ch.  xvii.  2,  4).
Nevertheless,  the  sentiment  which  underlies  his  remonstrance  is  just,  and  Hushai
would  have  deserved  severe  rebuke  if  he  bad  really  been  guilty  of  the  conduct  he  was
charged  with.  It  was  a  time  for  David's  friends  to  prove  themselves  to  be  friends
indeed ;  and  to  desert  him  at  such  a  time  (as  Ahithophel  did)  would  have  been  per-
fidious in  the  extreme.  Hushai,  however,  was  serving  him  by  obeying  his  directions
and  promoting  his  interests.  Whether  the  deception  he  practised  on  Absalom  was
justifiable  is  another  question,  depending  for  its  solution  on  the  answer  to  be  given  to
the  larger  question  whether  and  how  far  belligerents  are  bound  by  the  ordinary  laws
of  truth  and  righteousness.  The  remonstrance  of  Absalom  is  suitable  to  be  addressed
to  any  who  are  acting  in  a  manner  contrary  to  the  duties  of  friendship.  As  one  and
another  instance  of  unfaithfulness  or  unkindness  occurs,  the  question  might  well  be
put  to  those  guilty  of  them,  "  Is  this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend  ?  "  The  force  of  the
remonstrance  would  be  proportionate  to  the  degree  of  friendship  which  had  existed,  the
benefits  received,  the  professions  made,  etc. ;  and  also  the  degree  of  flagrant  violation  of
the  laws  of  friendship  which  each  act  exhibited.  And  if  to  the  obligations  of  friend-
ship are  to  be  added  those  of  some  other  relationship,  as  here  that  of  subject  and
servant  of  a  sovereign,  the  guilt  of  unfaithfulness  is  increased,  and  remonstrance  may
well  be  more  severe.  The  words  are  very  suitable  to  be  addressed  to  professed  friends
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  act  a  faithless  and  disloyal  part  towards  him.

I,  Christ  is  oub  royal  Friend.  King,  and  yet  Friend ;  Friend,  and  yet  King.
The  claims  of  each  relation  to  us  strengthen  those  of  the  other.  Although  he  is  so
glorious  a  King,  he  stoops  to  be  and  act  the  part  of  a  Friend  to  the  meanest  and  most
sinful  of  his  subjects.  1.  Be  Jills  this  position  towards  them ;  (1)  By  his  self-sacrificing
services  on  their  behalf  (John  xv.  13).  (2)  By  admitting  them  to  the  closest  and
most  confidential  intimacy  of  which  each  is  capable  (John  xv.  15).  (3)  By  the  great-
ness and  abundance  of  the  benefits  he  confers  on  them.  2.  And  they  on  their  part
take  the  position  of  friends  to  him  :  (1)  By  their  acceptance  of  his  friendship.  (2)  By
their  vows  of  eternal  love,  loyalty,  and  service  to  him.  The  relation  of  sovereign  and
subject  is,  in  the  best  Christians,  more  and  more  lost  in,  though  not  destroyed  by,  that
of  friend  and  friend.  A  love  boundless  in  its  promptings  and  requirements  overflows
and  obliterates  the  limits  of  mere  law.

II.  To   ACT   AN   UNFRIENDLY    PART    TOWARDS    HIM  18    DESERVING    OP    THE    SEVBEBST

REBUKE.  "Is  this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend?"  1.  Conduct  to  which  the  words  are
applicable.    (I)  Desertion  of  Christ  in  times  of  difficulty.    "  Why  wentest  thou  not


418


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvii.  1—29.


with  thy  friend?"  (comp.  Heb.  xiii.  13);  "Let  us  go  forth  unto  him  without  the
camp,  bearing  his  reproach."  (2)  Mornl  cowardice  in  respect  to  him.  The  words
might  well  have  been  addressed  to  Peter  when  denying  his  Lord  and  Friend — were
virtually  addressed  to  him  when  "  the  Lord  turned  and  looked  "  upon  him  (Luke  xxii.
61).  It  would  be  well  if  they  could  ever  be  heard  by  us  whenever,  from  Tear  of  mm,
we  are  silent  when  we  ought  to  speak  for  Christ,  inactive  when  we  should  act  for  him.
(3)  Parsimony  in  gifts  and  services  for  the  promotion  of  his  cause.  (4)  Failure  in  duties
of  love  to  his  friends  and  representatives — our  fellow-Christians,  especially  the  p(X>r
and  suffering.  A  timely  reproach,  reaching  the  heart,  might  prevent  more  terrible
words  at  the  day  of  judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  41 — 45),  (5)  Any  act  whatever  of  incon-
sistency with  our  position  and  professions  as  disciples  of  Christ.  2.  Their  peculiar
force.  Arising  from  the  words,  "  thy  Friend."  (1)  Who  lias  proved  himself  a  Friend
indeed.  (2)  Whom  thou  hast  often  addressed  and  rejoiced  in  as  such.  (3)  Whom
thou  hast  often  been  glad  to  appeal  to  in  that  character  for  help  and  deliverance.  (4)
To  whom  thou  hast  many  times  vowed  eternal  friendship,  and  fidelity  unto  death.
The  reproach,  thus  viewed,  is  adapted  to  break  the  offender's  heart,  producing  the  deepest
shame  and  self-humiliation,  and  leading  to  the  most  earnest  penitence  and  prayers  for
forgiveness.  3.  From  what  quarter  the  remonsfrance  might  come.  (1)  From  a  man's
own  conscience  and  heart.  It  is  w  ell  when  these  are  sufficiently  loyal  to  Christ  to  speedily
address  the  offender  after  this  manner.  (2)  From  other  friends  of  Christ.  Christians
should  he  sufficiently  faithful  to  their  brethren  and  their  Lord  to  lovingly  reprove
eerioua  inconsistencies.  (3)  From  the  enemies  of  Christ.  As  by  David's  enemy  the
words  were  originally  spoken.  Those  who  are  not  themselves  Christ's  disciples  are
often  quick  to  detect  the  faults  of  those  who  are,  and  to  taunt  them  with  them.  They
Bometime*  thus  render  good  service  to  Christians.     Fas  est  et  aib  hoste  tioceri.-^,  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  XVII.


Ver.  1. — let  me  now  choose  out  twelve
thousand  men.  The  advice  of  Ahithophel
was  such  as  would  have  made  success  almost
certain.  The  rebellion  had  taken  David  by
surprise,  and  he  was  quite  unprepared  to
resist  the  large  forces  which  Absalom  had
gathered  round  him.  But  the  better  part  of
the  nation  disapproved  of  the  enterprise,
especially  wheu  they  perceived  that  David's
life  was  in  danger;  and  consequently  his
fojloweri,  in  oourse  of  time,  would  increase.
Moieovei,  tiie  day  had  been  one  of  extreme
mo^al  and  mental  trial  to  Dayld.  Upon  the
sudden  news  of  Absalom's  approach,  he  had
to  arrange  for  the  flight  of  his  wives  and
children ;  to  provide  supplies  for  their  wants,
and  fot  those  of  their  attendants  on  the
march;  to  give  orders  to  his  officers,  and
take  means  to  prevent  their  flight  degene-
rating into  a  panic.  Then,  with  covered  bead
and  feet  unshod,  he  had  descended  into  the
Valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  slowly  traversed
the  Mount  of  Olives ;  thence,  in  deep  distress,
he  had  advanced  to  the  way  of  the  wilder-
ness towards  Jericho,  and  there  had  been
assailed  by  Shimei  with  bitter  reviliugs.
His  progress  after  this  was  unimpeded,  and
at  AySphim  he  and  the  other  fugitives  had
needful  rest  and  refreshment.  As  Bahuriin
was  about  four  miles  from  Jerusalem,  this
c^avanserai  a  little  further  on  was  probably


about  six  miles  from  the  city,  and  about  half-
way towards  the  fords  of  the  Jordan.  The
march  was  probably  continued  at  sunset,  and
the  fords  reached  before  midnight ;  and  there
David  halted,  waiting  for  the  arrival  of
Jonathau  and  Ahimaaz,  and  making  pre-
parations for  the  passage.  Now,  if  Aiitho-
phel's  advice  had  been  followed,  he  would
have  reached  the  fords  as  quickly  as  the
joung  men  did ;  for  they  lost  time  at  Bahu-
rim.  Upon  this  David  "had  not  calculated,
but  supposed  that  anyhow  he  should  have
the  interval  wnn  by  Ahimaaz's  fleetness.
With  twelve  thousand  picked  troops  unen-
cumbered with  baggage,  Ahithophel  would
thus  have  found  Uavid  still  on  the  west  of
the  Jordan,  and  though  Joab  and  Abishai
would  have  done  all  that  brave  men  could,
yet  they  would  scarcely  have  been  in  a
position  to  make  a  long  defence.  And  the
command  was  to  "  smite  the  king  only."  A
panic  was  inevitable,  and  confusion  among
David's  followers,  who  had  women  and
children  to  defend ;  and  in  the  midst  of  it
Ahithophel  would  direct  his  main  attack  on
the  part  where  David  was,  and  single  him
out  for  slaughter.  When  this  was  done  all
would  be  accomplished ;  for  Absalom  would
become  king  by  right  of  succession.  Even
Joab  and  the  Gibborim  would  acknowledge
him,  and  the  whole  nation  be  at  peace.

Ver.  3. — The  man  whom  thou  seekest  is  si
if  all  retvrsed;  Hebrew,  at  the  reiurif  qf  tjte


OH.  XVII.  1—29.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


417


tiohole  is  fhe  man  irhom  thou  seelceit.  Both
the  amendjuHnts  of  tlie  text  and  the  various
translations  offered  are  innumerable,  but
nothing  is  really  more  satisfactory  than  the
literal  rendering  of  the  words,  virtually  given
us  in  the  Authorized  Version.  Naturally,
Ahithophel  did  not  wish  to  parade  David's
death  too  openly.  In  his  heart  Absalom
must  have  known  that  the  safe  possession  of
the  kingdom  could  be  assured  him  only  by
his  father's  death,  but  yet  he  might  have
shrunk  from  publicly  avowing  this,  ■  and
liaving  it  talked  of  before  his  courtiers  as  a
settled  purpose.  One  reason  why  he  adopted
the  counsel  of  Husliai  may  have  been  his
reluctance  to  commit  parricide  ;  for  plainly
the  one  main  purpose  of  Ahithopliel  was
David's  death.  This  thorough  traitor  may
have  seen  even  a  tremor  of  alarm  in  Absa-
lom's countenance' when  he  spake  out  his
purpose  so  frankly  of  "smiting  the  king
only,"  and  may  have  felt  that,  slumbering  in
the  bosom  of  the  son,  was  something  of  that
generous  spirit  which  had  made  the  father
condemn  the  Amalekite  to  death  for  boasting
that  he  had  slain  Saul.  At  all  events,  he
was  unwilling  to  dilate  upon  so  ghastly  a
theme,  and  this  general  reference  to  David,
as  the  man  whom  Absalom  sought,  without
dwelling  upon  the  subject,  is  in  far  better
taste  than  the  coarse  open  villainy  so  unre-
servedly expressed  in  ver.  2.  The  reading,
however,  of  the  Septnagint  has  many  fol-
lowers: "And  I  -mil  bring  back  all  the
people  to  thee  as  a  bride  returns  to  her
husband,  excepting  the  life  of  the  one  man
thou  seekest;  and  for  all  the  people  there
shall  be  peace."  Ahithophel  was  bad  enough,
but  scarcely  so  brutal  as  to  compare  to  a
bridal  procession  the  sad  return  of  David's
mourning  friends  and  companions-in-arms
weeping  round  the  corpse  of  their  master
murdered  at  the  bidding  of  his  own  son.

Ver.  4. — ^All  the  elders  of  Israel.  Their
presence  seems  to  show  that  Absalom  pro-
fessed to  act  in  an  orderly  and  constitutional
manner,  and  with  the  advice  of  those  in
authority.  It  was  possibly  this  wish  to  keep
up  appearances  which  made  him  command
Hushai  to  be  summoned,  as  he  was  one  whose
advice  would  certainly  have  been  asked  had
matters  gone  on  in  their  ordinary  channel.
So  again  in  vers.  14, 15,  Absalom  acts  only
with  the  popular  consent.  Very  probably
the  royal  power  was  gradually  superseding
that  of  the  tribal  authorities,  and  this  may
have  made  David  unpopular  with  many  of
the  great  nobles.  Absalom  would  thus  gain
many  adherents  by  associating  "elders"  and
"  men  of  Israel "  with  him  in  his  councils.

Ver.  7. — And  Hnshai  said.  Hushai  gives
his  advice  with  much  Oriental  exaggeration,
such  as  oup;ht  to  have  put  Absalom  on  his
guard.    His  main  points  are  that  David  was

II.  SAMUEL.


too  practised  a  soldier  to  let  himself  be  sur-
prised. In  his  adventures  with  Saul  he  and
his  men  had  been  trained  to  hold  large
bodies  of  pursuers  at  bay,  and  evade  them.
The  men,  too,  who  were  with  him  were  war-
riors of  desperate  valour,  whose  first  thought
would  be  the  king's  personal  safety,  and  to
ensure  this  they  would  conceal  him  in  some
pit,  some  cave  or  ravine,  safe  and  inaccessible
by  nature;  or  in  some  place  (omit  the  in-
serted word  "other"), that  is,  in  some  camp-
ing-place, made  strong  with  ramparts,  so  as
to  resist  the  first  attack.  "To  smite  the
king  only  "  is,  therefore,  an  impossibility ;
and  if  the  attack  fail,  and  David's  mightiea,
in  their  irritation,  slaughter  a  large  number
of  their  assailants,  and  a  panic  be  the  result,
men  will  hesitate  before  tliey  attack  such
redoubtable  champions  a  second  time.  A
check  is  fatal  to  a  rebellion,  and  Absalom
was  staking  his  chance  on  one  hasty  en-
counter. Better  leave  the  decision  to  all
Israel.  Their  hearts  were  with  Absalom,
and,  when  there  has  been  time  for  them  to
gather  in  their  thousands,  success  is  certain.
■Their  numbers  will  be  countless  as  the  sands
on  tlie  shore,  or  as  the  dew  upon  the  grass;
while  David  and  his  heroes  will  shrink  to  so
small  a  body  as  to  be  scarcely  able  to  man
the  walls  of  one  small  city.  And  fighting
there  will  be  none ;  for  the  myriads  of  Israel
will  drag  city  and  fugitives  with  ropes  down
into  the  nearest  torrent-bed,  where  the  next
floods  will  wash  all  away.  There  was  more
in  this  than  an  appeal  to  Absalom's  vanity.
If  all  Israel  did  take  bis  side,  then  David's
cause  would  soon  be  hopeless,  and  there
would  be  no  need  of  parricide.  David's
death  would  be  the  act  of  Israel,  and  not  of
Absalom.  Evidently  Absalom  believed  that
all  Israel  was  on  his  side,  and  his  success
hitherto  had  been  so  rapid  as  almost  to
justify  the  assumption.  'X'o  us  this  success
is  almost  unaccountable,  but  it  suggests  that
there  were  great  faults  in  David's  adminis-
tration. Yet  even  so  we  wonder  at  the
existence  of  such  general  dissatisfaction.
At  this  time.  A  wrong  translation.  The
Hebrew  is,  Ahithophel' t  counsel  this  time  w
not  good,  whereas  last  time,  what  he  advised
about  the  concubines  was  good.

Ver.  9. — ^When  some  of  them  be  over-
thrown at  the  first ;  Hebrew,  in  the  falling
on  them;  that  is,  at  the  first  onslaught  of
David's  champions.  Even  though  over-
powered finally  by  force  of  numbers,  they
are  sure  to  m^e  a  large  slaughter  at  first,
which  may  easily  lead  to  a  panic.

Ver.  11. — And  that  thou  go  to  battle  in
thine  own  person;  literally,  and  that  thy
preeence  go  to  the  battle.  The  versions  have
preserved  a  much  better  reading,  "And
that  thy  presence  go  in  the  midst  of  them."

Ver.  12. — In  some  place ;  Hebrew,  t'n  one
2  E


il8


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xvn.  1—29.


lit  ike  places;  one  of  the  fortified  camps
uln  ady  described  in  ver.  9.

Ver.  13. — The  river.  The  word  does  not
signify  a  river,  but  a  ravine  or  gorge  worn
away  by  the  action  of  a  torrent.  Such
ravines  are  common  in  Palestine,  where  tlie
streams  rush  along  with  rebistless  fury  after
the  rains,  but  in  summer  are  dry  (Job  vi.
17) ;  and  their  desolate  beds,  boidered  by
precipitous  cliffs,  are  described  by  Isaiah  as
favourite  places  for  the  cruel  rites  of  Moloch
(Isa.  Ivil.  5).  Dragged  to  the  edge  of  one
of  these  gorges,  the  city,  with  its  few  de-
fenders, would  topple  over,  and  in  the  next
rainy  season  be  entirely  swept  away.

Ver.  11. — The  oonnsel  of  Hushai'is  better.
It  seemed  safer.  Nothing  in  it  was  left  to
chance,  and  Absalom,  already  at  the  head  of
such  numbers  as  to  be  able  to  select  from
tlicm  twelve  thousand  picked  men,  saw  him-
self, in  fancy,  marching  forward  with  all
I-rael  at  his  feet.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he
did  advance  with  so  large  an  army  that
David  was  saved  only  by  the  skilful  strategy
of  Joab.  Like  otlier  king-makers,  Ahithophel
bad  put  himself  too  forward.  He  asked  for
twelve  thousand  men  to  be  placed  under  his
command,  that  he  might  smite  David,  and
bo  be,  not  only  Absalom's  counsellor,  but
also  bis  commander-in-chief.  Amasa  and
the  other  commanders  would  be  displeased
at  this,  and  Absalom  would  feel  that  iie  wag
himself  placed  in  a  very  secondary  position.
Ahithophel  may  have  a*ked  for  the  command
solely  because  no  one's  presence  would  so
ensure  success  as  his  own,  but  he  wounded
the  vanity  both  of  Absalom  and  Amasa,  and
made  them  reudy  to  listen  to  any  other
advice  that  might  be  offered.  The  Lord  had
appointed ;  literally,  and  Jehovah  bad  com-
manded to  bring  to  nought,  ete.  So  plain  did
it  seem  to  the  writer  that  Absalom's  success
depended  upon  rapid  action,  that  nothing  less
than  the  direct  interference  of  the  Divine
providence  could  account  for  the  in&tuatiou
of  Absalom  and  his  counsellors.

Ver.  16. — Lodge  not  this  night  in  the
plains  (at  the  fords)  of  the  wilderness.  The
plan  of  Ahithophel  made  David's  position
so  dangerous,  that  he  must  hesitate  no
longer,  lest,  on  second  thoughts,  Absalom
should  still  adopt  it.  Hushai  had  frustrated
it  for  the  present;  but  Ahithophel  might
urge  it  again,  and  get  the  necessary  per-
mission ;  and  then  David  and  all  the  people
that  were  with  him  would  be  swallowed  up,
that  is,  destroyed  utterly,  and  with  ease.

Ver.  17. — Stayed  by  En-rogel.  The  two
youths  were  posted  at  Bn-rogel,  that  is,  the
"Fuller's  spring," near  JeruBalem.(Josh  xv.
7 ;  1  Kings  i.  9),  and  probably  the  place
BOW  known  as  "  Job's  Well,"  situated  at  the
point  where  the  valleys  of  Jehoshaphat  and
Biaaom  meet.    They  were  placed    there


because,  though  they  would  have  been  ad-
mitted into  the  city,  they  would  scarcely
have  been  allowed  to  leave  it.  Instead  ol
wench — a  term  less  disrespectful  when  the
Authorized  Version  was  made  than  it  is  now
— theHebrew  has  the  maidservant.  Probably
the  maid  is  meant  whose  usual  duty  it  was
to  fetch  water  for  domestic  purposes,  and
thus  her  journey  to  the  well  would  excite
no  suspicion.

Ver.  18. — A  lad  saw  them.  Probably
Absalom  had  sent  out  spies  to  watoh  the
route  which  David  had  taken,  to  prevent  any
friends  joining  him  from  the  city,  who  would
give  him  informafinn  as  to  the  progress  of
events  there.  The  word  "  lad  "  does  not  mean
a  boy;  more  probably  he  was  one  of  the  young
men  who  formed  Absalom's  body-guard,  like
the  ten  " lads,"  translated  "young  men,"  in
oh.  xviii.  15,  who  bare  Joab's  armour.  It
would  be  his  duty  to  seize  tliem,  but  when
he  tried  to  approach  them,  they  fled,  and
made  their  way  at  full  speed  to  Baburim,
where  they  were  saved  by  the  shrewdness
and  fidelity  of  a  woman.  Two  such  fleet
runners  would  liave  had  no  difiSculty  in  out-
stripp^g  a  boy,  but  one  of  Absalom's  young
mer  would  have  roused  the  neighbourhood
to  join  in  the  pursuit.  The  well  in  his  court
>eaily  signifies  a  cistern  for  storing  rain-
water; but  it  was  at  that  time  dry,  and
served  as  a  convenient  hiding-place  for  the
two  messengers.

Ver.  19. — ^A  covering ;  Hebrew,  the  cover ;
that  is,  the  usual  cover  of  the  cistern,  which
had  been  token  off  to  let  the  young  men
descend  into  it.  Over  it  she  qiread,  not
ground  oom,  but  brayed  or  peeled  corn  (see
Prov.  xxvii.  22),  probably  barley-groats.
She  was  probably  busy  in  removing  the
husks  of  the  barley  with  a  pestle  in  a  mortar
when  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz  sought  refuge
with  her;  and  thus  her  whole  proceeding
was  so  natural  as  to  excite  no  suspicions.

Vei.  20. — ^Ihey  be  gone  over  the  Urook  of
water.  The  word  michxd,  translated  "brook,"
does  not  occur  elsewhere,  and  probably  it
was  a  local  name  for  some  stream  near  Ba-
burim. It  was,  we  may  suppose,  in  the
right  direction,  but  when  the  pursuers  had
followed  for  some  time,  and  caught  no
glimpse  of  the  runners,  knowing  their  swift-
ness of  foot,  they  concluded  that  they  had
outstripped  them,  and,  giving  up  the  chase
as  hopeless,  returned  tu  Jerusalem.  It  was
only  when  she  had  seen  them  far  on  their
way  back  that  she  removed  the  cover  and
allowed  the  young  priests  to  resume  theii
journey.  The  delay  would  have  been  fatal
to  David  if  vigorous  counsel  had  been
followed  at  Jerusalem;  as  it  was,  they
reached  David's  camp  without  farther  inci-
dent, and  acquainted  him  with  Ahithophel'i
plan ;  and  the  king  at  once  Mcognized  hi*


CH.  xvn.  1— 29.]         THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


419


danger,  and  without  more  delay,  commenced
at  once  the  passage  of  the  Jordan,  and  carried
it  out  eo  skilfully  and  rapidly,  that  by  the
morning  every  one  of  his  company  was  safe
on  the  other  side.

Yer.  23. — Ahithophel . . .  hanged  himself.
There  is  an  old  fancy,  put  down  by  Thenius
as  one  of  the  cuiiosities  of  interpretation,
that  Ahithophel  died  of  a  quinsy;  for  the
word  might  mean  "  was  strangled  or  choked."
But  the  act  seems  mentioned  as  a  proof  of
Ahithophel's  unerring  judgment.  Indigna-
tion at  Absalom's  folly,  and  at  the  slight
cast  upon  himself,  is  not  a  sufficient  reason
for  so  violent  a  deed.  He  must  have  fore-
seen the  certain  ruin  of  the  conspiracy  if
David  was  allowed  time ;  and  he  knew  that
upon  its  failure  would  follow  his  own  punish-
ment. It  is  proof  also  that  he  was  a  fierce
and  ill-tempered  man,  and  animated  for
some  reason  or  other  with  a  malignant  hatred
of  David.  The  parallel  between  Ahithophel
and  the  traitor  Judas  must  strike  every  one.

Ver.  24. — Then  (Hebrew,  and)  Savid  came
to  Mahanaim.  (On  Mahanaim,  see  note  on
oh.  ii.  8.)  It  was  now  a  fortified  city,  with
walls  and  gates  (ch.  xviii.  21),  and  its
strength  of  position,  which  had  made  it
a  safe  capital  for  Ishbosheth,  who  had
probably  added  to  its  defences,  made  it  also
a  safe  retreat  for  David  while  gathering  his
forces.  As  it  was  only  about  fifty  miles
distant  from  the  fords  of  the  Jordan,  David
had  not  retreated  far;  and,  meanwhile,
Absalom  was  wasting  time  in  gathering  "  all
the  men  of  Israel"  for  the  attack.  During
this  interval  Absalom  was  anointed  king
(ch.  xix.  10)  by  the  priests,  with  all  due
solemnity.

Ver.  25. — ^Ithra  an  Israelite.  In  1  Ohron.
ii.  17  he  is  called  "  Jether  the  Ishmeelite."
The  first  name  is  the  same,  Ithra  being  the
emphatic  form  of  Jether ;  and  as  it  is  difficult
to  find  a  reason  for  mentioning  so  ordinary
a  fact  as  that  his  father  was  an  Israelite,  we
may  conclude  that  "Ishmeelite"  ia  the
correct  reading.  Bishop  Wordsworth,  how-
ever, suggests  that  "Israelite"  was  in  contrast
to  "  Judiahite ; "  but  this  distinction  did  not
come  into  use  until  after  the  disruption  of
the  kingdom.  The  Vatican  text  of  the  Sep-
tuagint  has  "  Jezreelite,"  which  is  probably
a  conjecture  to  get  rid  of  the  obvious  error
of  calling  him  an  Israelite.  Amasa  was  an
illegitimate  son,  which  confirms  the  reading
"  Ishmeelite"  in  1  Chron.  ii.  17,  as  a  marriage
between  Abigail  and  a  foreigner  would  be
sure  to  be  opposed  by  all  the  members  of
Jesse's  family.  Nahasb.  Jewish  interpre-
ters regard  Nahash  (ei^uivalent  to  "  serpent")
as  another  name  for  Jesse,  quoting  in  proof,
"Out  of  the  root  of  Nahash  (the  serpent)
shall  come  forth  the  basilisk"  (Isa.  xiv.  29),
which  in  the  Ohaldee  Paraphrase  is  ex-


plained as  meaninisf,  "  out  of  the  root  of  Jesse
shall  come  forth  the  Messiah."  This  conceit
would  scarcely  have  deserved  mention,  ha.i
it  not  found  a  place  in  the  margin  of  the
Authorized  Version.  Some  few  commenta-
tors regard  Xahash  as  a  woman's  name,  and
think  that  she  was  a  wife  of  Jesse,  and
mother  of  Abigail  and  Zeruiab,  but  not  of
David.  But  Nahash  is  so  constantly  a
man's  name  that  it  is  easier  to  believe  that
Nahash  was  the  first  husband  of  David's
mother,  and  Abigail  and  Zeruiah  his  half-
sisters,  not  on  the  father's,  but  on  the
mother's  side.  Joab  and  his  brothers  are
always  described  as  sons  of  Zeruiah,  both
to  mark  their  relationship  to  David,  and
also  because  the  rank  was  on  her  side.
Amasa  was  probably  the  Amasai  mentioned
in  1  Chron.  xii.  18  as  bringing  a  powerful
reinforcement  to  David  while  at  Ziklag;
but  the  ambition  of  supplanting  Joab  made
him  now  forget  David's  long  friendship.

Ver.  27. — Shobi.  It  is  eviilent  that  the
most  powerful  chieftains  in  Gilead  were  on
David's  side,  and  supported  him  with  men
as  well  as  with  provisions.  Adherents,  too,
would  constantly  cross  the  Jordan,  and
gather  round  the  old  king;  and  thus,  when
Absalom  arrived,  he  found  himself  in  face  of
an  army  estimated  at  about  twenty  thousand
men.  Among  these  chiefs  it  is  interesting
to  find  Shobi,  son  of  Nahash,  the  Ammonite
king,  and  David's  ficiend  (ch.  x.  2).  When
Hanun,  the  elder  son,  on  succeeding  to  the
throne,  brought  ruin  upon  himself  by  his
misconduct  to  David's  ambassadors,  Shobi
apparently  remained  faithful  to  David,  and
received  the  grant  of  a  district  in  Gilead,
where  he  settled  with  his  followers.  Some,
with  less  probability,  suppose  that  he  had
withdrawn  to  Gilead  in  the  lifetime  of  his
father,  to  be  out  of  Hanun's  way.  Maohir
was  the  generous  man  who  had  given  the
crippled  son  of  Jonathan  a  refuge  (ch.  ix.
4);  and  David's  honourable  treatment  of
Mephibosheth  may  have  won  his  patron's
heart.  Of  Barzillai,  and  his  abode,  Bogelim,
nothing  more  is  known  than  what  is  said
here,  and  in  the  very  interesting  narrative
in  ch.  xix.  31,  eto.  David's  lasting  gratitude
to  him  is  shown  by  his  care  for  his  sons  (sea
1  Kings  iL  7).  A  clan  of  priests  called
themselves  "  the  children  of  Barzillai,"  and
claimed  to  be  the  descendants  of  his  daughter.
They  could  not,  however,  produce  their
genealogy,  and  were  therefore  degraded
from  the  priestly  ofBce  (Ezra  IL  61—63).
Their  claim,  nevertheless,  is  a  proof  that
Barzillai  was  a  little  king  in  Gilead,  when
thus  a  priestly  race  thought  their  alliance
with  him  so  honourable  as  to  make  them
forget  that  they  were  of  the  lineage  of
Aoion.

Ver.  28.— Beds.    These  would  be  for  th«


420


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xvii.  1— 29,


w^>meii  and  children,  and  were  Bcaroely  more
than  rugs  and  email  carpets.  Basons ;  pots
of  metal  for  cooking,  while  the  earthenware
would  be  vesselB  for  holding  their  food.
Parched  (com)  .  .  .  and  parched  (pulse) ;  He-
brew, kali  .  .  .  and  kali.  The  word  includes
all  kinds  of  parched  grain.  The  Septuagiut
and  Syiiac  rightly  omit  it  in  the  second
place,  at  it  is  probably  a  mere  error  of  some
ancient  copyist;  but  for  what  word  it  has
been  Buhstitnted  we  have  no  means  of  ascer-
taining.

Ver.  29.— Sheep.  This  is  the  only  kind
of  flesh  food  mentioned.  The  change  in  the
meaning  of  the  word  "  meat,"  which  still  in
America  is  used  simply  for  "food,"  as  in
the  Authorized  Veision,  bean  witness  to


the  great  change  in  onr  diet  whioh  haa
taken  place  in  recent  times.  Cheese  of  kina.
The  word  occurs  only  here,  but  the  Syriao
and  the  Targum  both  support  the  rendering
of  the  Authorized  Version.  The  Bedawecu,
after  removing  the  butter,  make  a  kind  of
cheese  from  the  remaining  mUk.  It  is  as
hard  as  the  clieese  made  from  skimmed
milk  in  Dorsetshire,  but  wholesome.  It
must,  however,  be  soaked  before  eating,  or
softened  with  butter.  Oenerally  in  the
Bast,  cow's  milk  is  regarded  as  coarse,  and
camel's  milk  is  used  for  drinking,  while  that
of  sheep  and  goats,  and  cheese  made  from
it,  holds  the  next  place  in  general  estimation.
It  is  curious  that  "butter"  literally]
"oheeseof  Une."


HOMILETICS.

Vera.  1 — ^14. — Confltding  counsels.  The  facts  are:  1.  Ahithophel,  In  advising
Absalom,  suggests  that  he  himself  should  fall  upon  D.avid  by  night,  when  weary,  with
twelve  thousand  select  men,  and  urges  that  by  so  doing  a  final  blow  will  be  so  struck
as  to  secure  the  "fealty  of  all  Israel.  2.  The  suggestion  is  pleasing  to  Absalom,  but  he,
before  deciding,  wishes  to  have  the  counsel  of  Hushai.  3.  On  being  called  to  give
counsel,  Hushai  expresses  distrust  of  the  counsel  of  Abithophel,  and  assigns  as  reasons
(1)  the  known  valour  and  caution  of  David;  (2)  the  possibility  of  a  panic  among  the
troops  of  Absalom  on  a  slight  reverse  at  the  outset ;  (3)  the  natural  apprehension  of
the  people  on  approaching  for  ■  attack  one  so  famed  for  courage  and  strategy.  4.  As
a  counter-proposal,  he  counsels  (1)  a  gathering  of  the  entire  forces  of  Israel ;  (2)  the
personal  leadership  of  Absalom ;  and  points  out  the  certainty  of  success  whether  by
attack  in  the  open  country  or  by  an  assault  on  a  city.  5.  Absalom  and  his  people
decide  to  reject  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  and  adopt  that  of  Hushai,  being  overruled
in  this  by  the  will  of  God.  The  bold  assumption  of  regal  powers  by  publicly  taking
possession  of  the  king's  harem  was  only  a  formal  act,  which  necessitated  other  measures
if  the  authority  thus  usurped  was  to  be  maintained.  The  existence  of  so  valiant  and
able  a  man  as  David,  and  the  attachment  to  him  of  a  select  body-guard,  were  facts
whioh  could  not  but  weigh  heavily  on  the  mind  of  one  who  knew  how  his  father,  in
the  days  of  Saul,  defended  himself  amidst  rocks  and  caves  against  a  vindictive  and
powerful  enemy.  Hence  the  natural  coherence  of  the  narrative  with  which  this
chapter  opens,  and  the  account  of  Absalom's  conduct  referred  to  in  the  previous  chapter.
In  considering  the  coniUcting  counsels  brought  out  by  the  first  act  of  Absalom,  we  may
notice  several  truths  bearing  widely  on  human  affairs.

I.  Positions  in  life  abb  entered  upon  which  kender  men  vest  dependent  on
•THE  SUPEKIOE  JUDGMENT  OF  OTHERS.  Absalom  had  aspired  to  a  position  of  power,  and
on  reaching  it  found  that  his  difficulties  were  not  materially  diminished.  The  presence
in  the  country  of  such  a  man  as  David,  with  such  a  body-gnard,  was  a  fact  of  serious
moment,  and  the  well-known  hesitancy  of  the  populace  as  long  as  there  are  chances  of
vicissitude  had  to  be  provided  a^'ainst.  His  early  habits  of  life  and  his  natural  gifts
by  no  means  qualified  him  to  meet  emergencies  of  this  character ;  and  hence  he  found
himself,  on  usurping  the  throne,  dependent  on  men  of  larger  experience  than  himself.
It  was  not  preference  but  necessity  which  led  him  to  seek  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel
and  Hushai.  Occasionally  there  are  men  in  similar  positions  of  usurped  authority  who
by  nature  and  experience  can  dispense  with  the  advice  of  others,  but  it  is  more  often
not  so.  Young  men  ( ntoring  on  public  life  need  more  wisdom  than  can  be  gathered
from  their  own  personal  experience,  and  they  will  do  well  to  consult  the  vfise  who  have
written  or  may  speak.  In  any  position  of  difficulty,  when  embarrassed  by  dangers  we
cannot  escape,  whether  in  professions,  commerce,  education,  morals,  or  religion,  we  need
pat  hesitate  to  act  even  as  did  wicked  Absalom  in  this  particular — seek  out  the  most


ea.  xvit.  1—29.]        The  SECOItD  BOOK  OP  SAMtJEL.  421

accredited  guides  and  advisers.  If  it  is  permitted  to  learn  from  an  enemy,  it  is  certainly-
allowable  for  the  good  to  extract  wisdom  from  the  actions  of  the  bad.  The  "  children
of  light "  are  advised  to  learn  lessons  from  the  conduct  of  the  "  children  of  this  world  "
(Luke  ivL  8).  We  may,  like  Absalom,  though  not  with  his  evil  intent,  enter  on
positions  by  our  free  choice,  for  meeting  the  di65culties  of  which  we  are  personally  ill
prepared ;  or  we  may,  like  Joseph,  Moses,  and  Paul,  be  forced  into  positions  of  delicacy
and  peril.  In  either  case  we  shall  require  more  than  our  own  sagacity ;  and  no  mere
pride  should  deter  us  from  seeking  help  of  others.  Possibly  ours  may  be  a  case  in
which  no  human  adviser  is  available.  Be  it  soj  Joseph,  Moses,  and  Paul  sought
counsel  of  God,  and  they  found,  as  we  shall,  that  he  direoteth  the  way  of  those  who
acknowledge  him  (Prov.  iii.  6).  There  are  many  advisers,  many  professing  to  know
what  is  best.  Let  us  ponder  the  path  of  our  feet,  that  all  our  ways  may  be  established.
The  good  may  adopt  the  policy  of  Absalom,  while  shunning  his  principles.

II.  Q-EBAT   P0WBE8    BEING    COBBBSPONDINQ    DISGEAOB    WHEN    EMPLOYED    IN    DIRECT

ANTAGONISM  TO  God's  GBA0IOU8  DBBIGN8  FOR  MANKIND.  Ahithophel  was  Unquestion-
ably a  man  of  great  ability.  There  is  in  human  nature  a  profound  respect  for  power  of
intellect.  Men  feel  instinctively  that  it  is  a  gift  of  God,  and  carries  with  it  the  key  to
unlock  many  of  the  mysteries  that  lie  hidden  in  nature.  It  rests  with  the  moral  dis-
position as  to  the  application  of  these  powers.  The  true  order  is  for  them  to  run  in  the
line  of  Qfld's  great  purpose  of  mercy  to  mankind,  as  a  co-operating  force  to  bring  about
the  redemption  of  the  world  from  the  evils  incident  to  the  existence  of  sin.  Thus  it  is
that  the  highest  honours  are  won.  But  Ahithophel  brought  on  himself  everlasting
disgrace  in  that  he  laid  all  his  native  talents,  all  his  acquired  experience,  all  his
personal  influence,  at  the  service  of  one  who  sought  to  set  aside  the  Lord's  anointed.
He  must  have  known  all  David's  antecedents.  He  had  taken  "  sweet  counsel "  with
him  (Ps.  Iv.  14).  His  deliberate  counsel  now,  to  select  choice  men  who  should  fall  on
the  weary  king  in  the  dead  of  night,  and,  in  the  panic,  slay  him  alone  so  as  to  secure
ultimately  the  allegiance  of  those  not  slain,  was  crafty,  bold,  and  cruel  in  the  extreme.
Humanly  speaking,  it  meant  success  to  the  vices  of  Absalom,  and  ruin  to  the  holy  cause
embodied  in  the  Lord's  anointed.  The  treachery  to  a  former  friend  counts  for  much ;
the  inhumanity  counts  for  more ;  but  the  crowning  crime  is  war  upon  God's  revealed
method  for  bringing  on  that  glorious  time  when  righteousness  shall  be  established  in
the  earth,  and  all  men  shall  be  blessed  (Ps.  Ixxii.).  The  same  plain  issue  is  involved
in  the  antagonism  of  men  now  to  the  appointed  order  of  providence  and  grace.  God  has
a  kingdom,  ruled  by  the  Anointed  One,  and  designed  to  bring  peace  and  joy  and
holiness  to  all  mankind.  Gigantic  intellectual  powers  are  now  running  along  a  line  in
direct  antagonism  to  it.  The  practical  issue  of  their  success  would  be  moral  and
spiritual  ruin  to  man.  The  more  their  strength  and  enrichment  by  learning,  culture,
and  experience,  command  respect,  the  deeper  the  disgrace  and  the  more  dreadful  their
doom  tor  daring  to  seek  to  destroy  the  authority  of  Christ's  blessed  yoke  (Matt.  xi.
28 — 30 ;  cf.  Ps.  ii.).  The  daring  deeds  of  the  Hebrew  secular  plane  are  being  repeated
in  the  deeds  of  the  modern  spiritual  plane.

III.  There  are  emergencies  in  the  history  op  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth

DEMANDING    UNUSUAL  EFFORTS   ON  THE  PART  OF  THE   FAITHFUL.      To  Ordinary  human

view  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  represented  by  the  cause  of  David,  was  now  in  great  peril.
The  most  sagacious  counsel  of  the  age  had  been  given ;  an  eager  young  prince,  proud  of
the  wisdom  of  the  counsellor,  was  intent  on  action,  and  a  hesitant  people  were  waiting
for  the  turn  of  the  balance.  Hushai  had,  with  remarkable  foresight  and  courage,  though
doubtless  under  unconscious  diirection  from  above,  placed  himself  in  a  position  to  meet
the  emergency  ;  and  now  came  the  call  for  him  to  put  forth  his  strength.  Absalom  little
knew  what  he  was  doing  when  he  called  on  Hushai  to  speak  on  the  question  at  issue.
The  venerable  man,  strong  as  he  was  in  his  own  secret  and  in  the  help  of  God,  could
not  but  realize  the  immense  responsibility  now  devolving  upon  him.  A  false  step,
hesitancy,  inappropriate  suggestions,  and  feeble  arguments,  would  be  disastrous  to  the
dearest  of  interests.  In  that  critical  hour  it  was  as  though  the  fate  of  Israel  and
Israel's  banished  lung,  and  of  the  blessed  world-wide  purpose  they  were  working  out,
rested  entirely  on  his  judgment  and  skill.  Angels  could  not  but  hearken  with  intense
interest  to  his  words,  and  watch  their  gradual  effect  on  the  mind  of  the  rebel  son
Corresponding  occasions,  varying  in  circumstance  and  magnitude,  though  Tiitually  one


422  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xvn.  1— 29.

in  principle,  have  occurred,  and  will  perhaps  occur  again.  The  most  conspicuous  and,
in  some  respects,  of  course,  the  unparalleled,  instance  was  that  of  our  Saviour  when  the
"  gates  of  hell "  had  taken  counsel  to  virtually  prevent  the  salvation  of  the  world  by  the
only  method  approved  of  God.  Of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him.  All  depended
on  what  he  would  do.  The  fate  of  the  world  rested  with  himself.  In  Caleb  and
Joshua,  in  Athanasius  contra  mimdwn,  in  the  leaders  of  the  Reformation,  in  the  noble
men  and  women  who  suffered  martyrdom  in  Madagascar,  and  in  many  private  instances
in  which  family  religioiia  interests  have  been  at  stake,  we  may  see  emergencies  demand-
ing of  the  faithful  the  exercise  of  the  highest  qualities.

IV.  Undisoiplinbd  minds  abb  influbnobd  bt  what  woeks  on  teeib  susobpti-
BiLiTiES.  Hushai  displayed  his  sagacity  and  skill  by  adapting  his  argument  to  his
man.  ^  He  wisely  did  not  controvert  the  particular  advice  of  Ahithophel,  but  so  far
complimented  him  and  conciliated  Absalom  by  simply  saying  that,  though  good,  it  was
not  so  just  now  (ver.  7).  And  while  tacitly  recognizing  the  valour  of  the  twelve
thousand,  he  suggested  that  there  was  special  danger  in  attacking  men  "  chafed  in  their
minds."  His  line  of  argument  was  to  work  upon  Absalom's/ears,  vanity,  and  suspicion*.
David  and  his  men  were  not  ordinary  men ;  they  were  bold,  desperate,  watchful,  and
gifted  in  strategy,  and  the  possibility  of  a  reverse  would  produce  a  panic  among
Absalom's  followers.  Thus  fear  is  awakened.  The  whole  of  the  forces  of  Israel  should
be  gathered,  and  Absalom  himself  should  set  out  at  the  head  of  an  imposing  army,  and
BO  concentrate  enthusiasm  around  his  own  person,  and  gain  the  renown  of  being
conqueror  of  the  mighty  one.  Thus  vanity  is  aroused.  No  one  else  should  take  the
lead,  but  the  prince  himself  should,  by  muntaining  a  personal  influence  and  winning
a  victory,  keep  power  in  his  own  hand,  and  so  prevent  the  uprising  of  a  powerful  rival.
Thus  suspicions  are  awakened.  Hushai  was  a  good  rhetorician  in  assailing  the  will
through  a  graphic  description  of  details,  which  in  their  effect  could  not  but  call  forth
fear,  vanity,  and  suspicion — ^those  prompters  of  the  wiU.  All  men,  but  mostly  the
undisciplined  in  mind,  are  liable  to  be  influenced  to  action  by  such  appeals.  This
method  explains  how  masses  of  men  are  often  swayed  by  a  clever  presentation  of  facts
blended  with  possibilities.  There  is  a  legitimate  use  of  this  method  in  seeking  to  win
men  over  to  action  in  harmony  with  the  gospel.  The  Word  of  God  is  not  handled
deceitfully  (2  Cor.  iv.  2)  when  we  set  forth  facts  and  possibilities  to  awaken  godly  fear
and  prompt  to  repentance ;  for  this  is  only  part  of  the  function  of  the  teacher  and
preacher.  Men  may  be  caught  by  such  guile  in  order  to  be  trained  in  the  knowledge  of
the  truth.

V.  ThEKB    18    AS    UNTBAOBABLB    ACTION    OF    GoD    IN     THE    MINDS    OP    MEN.      The

explanation  given  of  the  superiority  of  Hushai's  counsel  in  its  influence  over  Absalom
is  that  it  was  the  determination  of  God  to  defeat  the  good  counsel  of  Ahithophel  (ver.
14).  Unquestionably  his  counsel  was  the  best  for  Absalom's  purpose.  But  tiie  wise
man  is  not  to  glory  in  his  wisdom ;  all  hearts  are  naked  and  open  to  him  who  brings  to
nought  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  and  the  understanding  of  the  prudent  (Ps.  xxxiii.  10;
Isa.  viii.  10 ;  1  Cor.  i.  19 ;  ii.  6).  All  through  Hebrew  and  Christian  history  there  are
evidences  of  God's  action  on  the  minds  of  men,  sometimes  causing  them  blindness,
sometimes  inspiring  with  unusual  courage  and  wisdom,  and  sometimes  filling  them
with  dread  (John  xii.  40;  Luke  xxi.  15;  Dent.  ii.  25  ;  Ps.  is.  20).  This  direct  action
of  God  on  the  human  mind  is  involved  in  any  just  conception  of  his  freedom  as  an
Infinite  Spirit,  is  in  harmony  with  our  action  on  one  another,  is  essential  to  moral
government,  is  implied  in  the  work  of  regeneration,  is  the  ground  of  faith  in  prayer,  and
is  a  basis  of  our  belief  that  he  will  in  due  time  defeat  the  wiles  of  the  devil  and  bring
all  things  into  subjection  to  himself.  We  ought  to  lay  hold  of  this  truth  with  all
firmness,  and  carry  on  Christian  work  in  the  assurance  that  greater  is  he  that  is  for  us
than  all  who  can  be  against  us,  and  that  he  has  ways  cf  reaching  men  of  which  we
have  no  visible  trace.

Vers.  15—29. — The  facts  are :  1.  Hushai,  having  informed  Zadok  and  Abiathar  of
his  counsel,  urges  them  to  send  quickly  to  David,  advising  him  to  flee  at  once  beyond
the  river.  2.  Their  two  sons,  staying  out  of  the  city  in  order  to  be  of  service  as
occasion  required,  are  informed  by  a  girl  of  the  duty  required,  and  at  once  go  on  their
errand.    S.  In  spite  of  being  recognized  by  an  enemy  who  told  Absalom,  they  go  on


OH.  xvn.  1— 29.]         THE  SECOTJD  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  423


their  way,  and  take  refuge  in  a  well  at  Bahurim,  where  they  are  seceted  by  the  woman
of  the  house.  4.  The  pursuers,  being  deceived  by  the  woman,  return  to  Jerusalem,
while  the  two  young  men  escape  anrl  tell  all  to  David,  who  at  once,  before  the  morning
dawns,  passes  with  all  his  men  over  Jordan.  5.  Ahithophel,  seeing  that  bis  counsel  is
not  followed,  goes  home,  arranges  his  affairs,  and  destroys  himself.  6.  David  passing
on  to  Mahanaim,  Absalom  also  crosses  the  Jordan  with  his  forces,  making  Amasa  chief
captain  in  place  of  Joab.  7.  On  David's  arrival  with  his  men  at  Mahanaim,  hungry,
thirsty,  and  weary,  he  receives  gifts  of  food  and  clothing  from  Shobi,  Machir,  and
Baizillai.

Division  of  labour  in  doing  good.  From  vers.  15 — ^22  we  have  a  record  of  the  course
adopted  by  the  secret  friends  of  David  after  that  Absalom  had  heard  the  counsel  of
Ahithophel  and  Hushai.  Jerusalem  was  the  scene  of  an  evil  and  a  good  combination  ;
and  as  the  drift  of  Scripture  is  to  record  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  purposes  in
the  history  of  the  Hebrew  people,  we  have  here  a  more  detailed  record  of  the  individuals
and  work  of  the  good  combination  than  of  the  evil.  The  work  these  four  faithful  ones
had  in  hand  was  very  clearly  defined  and  most  persistently  pursued.  With  a  wisdom
and  skill  highly  creditable  to  all  concerned,  the  perilous  yet  immensely  important
service  was  carried  out  on  the  principle  of  the  division  of  labour,  which  obtains  in
modem  times  in  the  best-conducted  spheres  of  activity.  Although  we  may  not  see
here  parallels  to  all  the  work  we  have  to  do  for  Christ,  we  may  notice  features  which
are  also  found  in  well-directed  Christian  co-operation,  and  which  it  behoves  us  to
reproduce  in  all  we  do.

I.  There  is  scope  fob  vaeibtt  in  the  natdbb  op  the  woek  to  be  done.  The
work  to  be  done,  stated  in  general  terras,  was  to  advance  the  interests  of  the  anointed
king.  The  circumstances  in  which  this  general  aim  was  to  be  carried  out  necessitated
varied  conduct  and  action,  both  of  which  must  be  included  in  the  service  rendered,
since  conduct  often  produces  great  effects.  There  was  obviously  scope  for  influences
around  the  person  of  Absalom — subtle  assaults  on  the  very  seat  of  mischief  and  wrong ;
for  reticent  watchfulness  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  any  movements  adverse  to
David ;  for  fleet  runners  to  convey  to  him  tidings  of  importance,  and  for  assistance  to
them  when  engaged  in  their  perilous  undertaking.  The  work  of  Hushai  in  the  counsel
chamber,  of  Zadok  and  Abiathar  in  the  centre  of  public  influence  and  information,  of
their  sons  outside  the  city,  of  the  wench  passing  unsuspected  for  a  country  walk,  and
of  the  hospitable  housewife  of  Bahurim,  was  in  each  case  different,  but  all  parts  of  one
service.  We  are  engaged  in  advancing  the  interests  of  the  Anointed  One  against  the
combinations  of  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places,  and,  while  the  service  is  one,  there
is  great  variety  in  the  nature  of  the  work  to  be  done.  There  is  scope  for  wise,  shrewd
men,  who  know  how  to  confront  and  confound  the  enemy  in  high  places ;  for  quiet,
consistent  characters,  watching  with  patient  concern  over  the  holiest  of  functions,  and
eager  to  use  any  new  light  that  may  hasten  on  the  triumph  of  the  King  of  Zion ;  for
vigorous  young  men,  true  as  steel,  accustomed  to  hardness,  prepared  to  enter  on
dangerous  work  in  missionary  lands,  or  among  the  snares  and  evils  of  our  modern
civilization;  little  ones,  acting  as  links  in  the  great  chain  of  moral  influence;  and
sympathetic  helpers,  who  can  feed  the  hungry,  shelter  the  oppressed  and  fearful,  and
frustrate  the  designs  of  the  cruel.  The  Christian  Church  is  recognizing  more  than  ever
this  division  of  labour,  and  each  one  who  does  a  part  towards  brin'jing  on  the  triumph
of  Christ  is  an  important  worker  in  the  most  blessed  of  all  undertakings.

II.  There  is  scope  fob  vabiety  in  the  qualities  employed.  Id  the  service
rendered  in  and  near  Jerusalem  we  see  room  for  the  exercise  of  discrimination  of  human
'  character,  prudence  in  adoption  of  methods,  a  shrewd  consideration  of  the  assailable  points
in  the  enemy's  position  (see  previous  homily,  division  IV.),  courage,  self-possession  in
counteracting  the  influence  of  the  most  powerful  of  antagonists,  reticence  in  council,  and
fidelity  in  redeeming  pledges  made  (ch.  xv.  35),  promptitude  in  action,  and  ingenuity
in  rendering  aid  in  times  of  danger.  The  interests  of  David  were  promoted  by  a  few
persons,  but  the  promotion  of  them  called  forth  very  diverse  moral  and  intellectual
qualities.  On  a  small  scale  we  see  here  a  picture  of  what  is  true  of  the  promotion  of  the
interests  of  the  Eternal  King  of  Zion.  The  work  is  so  wide  and  comflicated,  and  the
agencies  so  numerous,  that  there  is  not  a  native  talent,  not  an  acquired  gift,  not  a  shade


424  tHE  SECOiTt)  BOOK  Of  SAMWEL.         [ch.  ivn.  1— 2a

of  good  influence,  but  it  may  find  scope  in  his  Name.  It  will  be  found  that,  as  In
building  a  temple,  all  the  powers  of  body  and  mind  find  scope,  and  all  the  influences  of
sun  and  air  are  requisite,  so,  in  raising  up  the  vast  superstructure  of  Christ's  kingdom,
there  is  room  for  the  constant  exercise  of  all  the  qualities  possessed  by  humankind  not
under  the  domination  of  sin.  The  wisdom  of  the  wise,  the  sanctity  of  the  holy,  the
enthusiasm  of  the  young,  the  gentleness  of  the  maid,  and  the  pity  and  sympathy  of
the  faithful  villager,  all  can  be  used  up  as  occasion  offers.

III.  God  raises  up  instbumbnts  fob  this  sbbvicb  as  ocoabion  reqtjibbs.  Was
it  necessary  that  the  powerful  influence  of  Ahithophel  should  be  counteracted?  A
Hushai  is  raised  up.  Must  discreet  and  influential  men  be  retained  on  David's  side  ?
Zadok  and  Abiathar  are  forthcoming.  Are  links  of  communication  necessary  between
the  friends  of  the  king  and  himself?  The  two  young  men  have  their  hearts  inclined
aright.  Are  the  spies  of  the  enemy  to  be  eluded  ?  A  girl  is  found  to  carry  a  message,
and  a  kindly  woman  to  offer  shelter.  The  solution  of  these  facts  is  assuredly  indicated
in  the  assertion  that  God  had  "  appointed  to  defeat  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel."  He
raises  up  his  servants  to  do  his  will,  little  as  they  know  the  working  of  his  mighty
power  within  them.  So  it  has  always  been,  and  will  be  in  the  future.  Abraham  was
raised  up  to  lay  the  foundation  of  national  life  for  Israel ;  Moses  to  lead  the  people  to
the  promised  land ;  Elijah  and  seven  thousand  to  protest  against  the  worship  of  Baal ;
the  Uttle  girl  to  speak  in  the  house  of  Naanian  the  Syrian ;  Nehemiah  and  his  ooadjutors
to  restore  the  walls  of  the  city ;  apostles  endovfed  "  with  power  from  on  high  "  to
inaugurate  the  new  order  of  things ;  and  Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  as  one  "  bom
out  of  due  time."  We  need  never  fear  but  that,  in  answer  to  prayer,  God  will  ever  do
these  things  for  his  people.  There  will  be  wise  men,  saintly  men,  men  of  vigour  and
enterprise,  maidens  to  win  their  way  for  Christ,  and  kindly  souls  to  feed  the  hungry
and  shelter  the  distressed.

General  lessons.  1.  In  all  our  Christian  organizations  we  should  strive  to  be
influenced  by  the  remembrance  that  the  enterprise  is  one  with  that  of  other  organiza-
tions ;  that  the  interests  at  stake  are  most  momentous ;  and  that  every  power  and
faculty  and  influence  of  the  community  of  the  faithful  should  find  some  scope  for
exercise.  2.  Personally  we  should  cultivate  our  best  talents  with  a  view  to  lay  them
at  the  service  of  our  Eternal  King.  3.  We  should  take  heed  and  never  despise  services
which  seem  inferior  to  our  own,  or  the  full  bearing  of  which  we  cannot  at  the  time
trace.    4.  We  should  be  patient,  and  allow  time  for  influences  to  operate.

Tfie  end  of  the  wicked.  The  course  run  by  Ahithophel  was  very  wicked.  It
combined  some  of  the  basest  crimes  of  which  human  nature  is  capable,  the  more  base
because  of  the  intelligence  and  former  professions  of  the  man.  His  name  is  the  symbol
of  craftiness,  cunning,  faithlessness,  cruelty,  pride  of  intellect,  and  ambition.  Every
reader  of  the  narrative  feels  that  he  was  most  justly  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the  living,
and  is  not  much  surprised  that  he  should  be  out  off  by  his  own  hand.  The  end  seems
in  some  dreadful  sense  natural  and  befitting.  But  while  that  is,  perhaps,  the  sponta-
neous judgment  of  men  because  of  what  may  be  termed  his  exaggerated  vilfeness,  yet,
looking  at  the  facts  in  the  light  of  Scripture,  we  really  see  here,  in  very  dark  colours,
what  is  virtually  the  end  of  all  who  are  guilty  of  treason  against  Christ,  the  Anointed
One,  and  seek  to  frustrate  his  righteous  purposes  in  the  world.  Observe  that  in
antagonism  to  Christ —

1.  Thbbe  IB  AN  ANOINTED  KiNO  OPPOSED.  Ahithophcl's  Crime  lay  chiefly  in  being
in  antagonism  to  one  whom  God  had  anointed  to  be  king  over  Israel.  The  qualities
of  craft  and  cunning  and  cruelty  were  incidents  of  the  antagonism.  The  essence  of  his
guilt  lay  in  the  fact  of  sotting  himself  against  the  Lord  and  his  anointed.  And  those
who  persist  in  a  sinful  life  and  will  not,  because  of  the  love  of  their  own  way,  bow  to
the  yoke  of  Christ  (Matt.  xii.  28 — 30),  are  as  truly  guilty  of  rebellion.  In  so  far  as
they  thus  seek  to  dispense  with  his  authority,  they  are  guilty  of  high  treason.  To  say
that  there  is  no  intention  to  do  so  counts  for  nothing  in  a  matter  of  resistance  to  his
authority.  The  facts  of  life  are  the  tests  of  loyalty.  The  position  of  an  impenitent
■inner  is  one  of  enmity  against  God.  This  the  Apostle  Paul  declares,  and  it  is  the
admission  of  all  who  awake  to  a  sense  of  their  state  and  cry  for  mercy.  The  tendency
to  tone  down  resistance  to  Christ's  personal  authority  over  the  entire  life  is  dangerous.


ett.  tvn.  i— 2&:]         THE  SECOiTr)  BOOK  OP  SAMtfiL.  4^S

II.  There  is  inoratitudb  and  cedbltt  in  the  resibtancb  to  Christ.  We  can
easily  see  the  ingratitude  and  cruelty  of  Ahithophel.  He  had  been  cared  for  by  the
king,  and  blessed  with  many  favours  (Ps.  Iv.  13).  And  yet  what  David  had  been  and
done  lor  this  man  was  as  nothing  compared  with  what  Christ,  our  anointed  King,  has
been  and  has  done  for  men  who  rebel  against  his  authority.  He  has  loved  them ;
suffered  and  died  for  them  ;  he  has  crowned  their  lives  with  loving-kindness,  and  even
conferred  on  them  the  very  powers  which  they  refuse  to  submit  to  his  governance.  If
Christ  was  once  wounded  in  the  house  of  his  friends  by  their  rejection  of  him,  he
surely  feels  the  paiu  of  beholding  the  ingratitude  of  those  who  say  in  their  hearts,  "  We
will  not  have  him  to  reign  over  us."  There  is  positive  cruelty  in  deliberately  rejecting
One  who  so  'enderly  loves  and  has  suffered  so  much  for  those  who  scorn  him.  The  appeal
of  the  prophet  to  heaven  and  earth  as  to  whether  there  could  be  found  any  parallel  to
Israel's  crime  (Isa.  i.  2 — i)  certainly  applies  in  the  instance  of  those  who  enjoy  clearer
light  and  listen  to  more  earnest  exhortations,  and  yet  rebel  against  him  who  has
brought  them  up.

III.  There  is  no  palliation  of  the  chime.  No  ingenuity  can  find  an  excuse  for
Ahithophel.  As  to  the  character  and  qualities  of  the  two,  he  knew  that  Absalom  was
not  to  be  thought  of  for  a  moment  in  comparison  with  David.  As  to  the  administration
of  government,  no  good  could  possibly  come  from  exchanging  a  wise,  generous  king  for
a  vain  and  selfish  young  man.  Beason  and  good  sense  and  policy  alike  condemn  the
deed  of  Ahithophel.  And  those  who  reject  the  Son  of  Gud  are  without  excuse.  No
other  authority  can  compare  with  his  in  wisdom,  goodness,  or  range  of  beneficence.
No  single  fault  can  be  found  with  his  holy  administration.  No  policy  so  sotm  I  as  the
policy  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  and  the  submission  demanded  (Matt.  xii.  28).
The  extreme  evil  as  well  as  foUy  of  the  sin  of  rebellion  should  be  insisted  on  with
all  urgency.

IV.  There  is  an  end  of  disappointment  and  doom.  Ahithophel  came  to  his
violent  end  with  pride  mortified  and  prestige  gone.  The  cause  in  which  he  had>so
wickedly  embarked  was  seen  to  be  hopelessly  lost  by  the  adoption  of  the  counsel  of
Hushai.  Nor  was  he  free  from  the  terrors  of  an  evil  conscience.  The  suicide  was
an  incident  only — the  result  of  the  interaction  of  these  causes.  The  actual  inner  facts
of  his  end  find  a  counterpart  in  the  experience  of  aU  who  die  in  rebellion  against  Christ
They  cease  to  be  the  great  ones,  and  are  classed  among  those  of  whom  the  obscurity
of  "I  never  knew  thee"  is  true  (Matt.  vii.  23).  Whatever  social  prestige  they  had  in
the  conventional  hfe  of  this  world,  they  lose  it  all  where  only  the  obedient  and  faithful
are  recognized  as  blessed  of  the  Father,  and  are  as  kings  and  priests  unto  God  for  ever
(Rev.  i.  5,  6).  They  become  aware  of  the  presence  of  a  conscience  which  is  as  a  worm
that  dieth  not,  and  as  a  fire  that  is  not  quenched.  There  is  no  hiding  these  great  facta
concerning  the  end  of  the  wicked.    They  are  declared  in  the  Word  of  God.

Sympathy  in  the  day  of  adversity.  The  brief  record  of  the  kindness  of  Shobi,  Machir,
and  Barzillai  is  refreshing  after  the  previous  account  of  the  devices  of  the  wicked  against
the  life  and  authority  of  David.  The  conduct  of  these  men,  and  the  reference  to  it  in
the  sacred  record,  bring  under  our  notice  the  subject  of  sympathy  in  the  day  of
adversity.    Consider,  then—

L  The  charactebistics  op  true  sympathy.  So  far  as  the  conduct  of  these  three
men  reveals  the  characteristics  of  true  sympathy,  they  are  seen  to  be  these.  1.  It  is
spmtaneous.  As  soon  as  David's  trouble  was  known,  their  hearts  went  forth  towards
him ;  they  took  to  themselves  his  sorrows.  There  was  no  effort  ah  extra  to  produce
it,  and  no  inward  process  of  reasoning  to  call  forth  deeds  which  would  have  the
semblance  of  coming  from  deep  compassion  and  sincere  regard.  It  was  natural  to  the
men  and  the  circumstances.  That  had  been  the  character  of  David's  sympathy  for
those  in  trouble  when  he  was  in  prosperity  (1  Sam.  xxix.  21 — 24 ;  ch.  i.  11, 12, 19—27).
It  was  pre-eminently  so  with  Christ  in  all  his  relations  to  sorrow  and  need.  It  is  a  tes*
by  which  we  can  estimate  our  own  and  others'  professions.  2.  It  is  practical.  It  d..i
not  spend  itself  in  mere  feeling  cherished  or  word  spoken,  but  found  expression  n
abundant  provision  for  David's  wants  (ver.  28).  The  measure  of  the  feeling  can  be  se©u
in  an  estimate  of  the  pains  and  toil  required  to  bring  so  great  an  amount  of  food  ad«i
comforts  to  David's  camp.    Our  Saviour,  during  his  earthly  life,  left  ua  an  example  VI


426  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  [oh.  xvn.  1—29.

this.  His  sympathy  produced  food  for  five  thousand.  The  whole  of  his  life  and
Buflferings  were  the  cost  by  which  he  procured  for  us  the  hlessings  of  salvation.  In  this
he  is  infinitely  removed  from  poets  who  feel  and  think,  and  philosophers  who  discuss
the  causes  and  relations  of  things.  3.  It  is  timely.  The  gifts  of  these  men  came  just
in  the  hour  of  extreme  need.  There  is  a  sympathy  which  is  always  too  late.  Bight
feeling  is  not  always  attended  by  prompt  action.  A  ready  will  and  quick  intelligence
are  the  proper  attendants  on  genuine  sympathy.  The  good  Samaritan  passed  by  the
scene  of  sorrow  just  at  the  right  time,  and  he  acted  at  once.  Bib  dat  qm  cito  dat.
Christian  people  should  cultivate  promptitude.  It  may  save  many  a  poor  soul  from
crushing  sorrows.  4.  It  is  discriminating.  These  generous  men  evidently  studied  the
case  of  David's  need,  and  brought  just  the  things  in  variety  that  were  most  serviceable
to  a  large  company  of  hungry  and  weary  travellers.  David's  heart  must  have  been
deeply  affected  by  observing  the  care  with  which  their  sympathy  had  expressed  itself.
Much  of  the  value  of  acts  of  kindness  lies  in  this.  A  blind,  blundering  sympathy  is
valuable  because  it  reveals  a  communion  of  spirit  when  the  heart  is  sad ;  but  its  value
is  in  the  lowest  scale.  Judgment  should  guide  the  expression  of  feeling  if  we  would
make  the  most  of  it  and  secure  the  highest  good  of  those  for  whom  it  is  cherished.
5.  It  is  courageous.  Considering  that  David  was  a  fugitive,  and  that  to  all  appearances
his  friends  would  be  regarded  as  the  foes  of  the  new  power  rising  in  Israel,  it  required
some  courage  in  these  men  to  identify  themselves  in  this  practical  way  with  the
unfortunate  king.  Herein  lies  much  of  the  virtue  of  their  conduct.  It  does  require
considerable  courage  to  manifest  sympathy  with  the  fallen,  the  shunned,  the  outcast.
Our  Saviour's  sympathy  was  of  this  kind,  and  it  was  one  of  tiie  things  that  led  to  his
own  rejection  of  men  and  his  cruel  death  (Matt.  ix.  10, 11 ;  xi.  19 ;  Luke  xv.  1,  2).
There  is  abundant  scope  for  this  virtue.

II.  Its  place  in  the  workino  out  of  God's  purposes.  The  sorrows  of  David
were  for  purposes  of  discipline — to  chastise  and  train  his  spirit  so  that  it  might  be  more
fully  purged  from  the  evil  taint  of  his  terrible  sin  (ch.  xii.  7 — 12),  and  be  more  fitted
to  perform  his  part  as  a  servant  of  God  in  raising  the  religious  tone  of  the  nation,  and,
indeed,  of  the  whole  world.  But  God  is  very  pitiful  even  in  his  anger.  "  He  knoweth
our  frame."  He  will  not  "  always  chide."  The  rough  wind  is  "  stayed  in  the  day  of  his
ea«t  wind."  With  the  wound  he  sends  the  bahn.  He  raises  up  instrumentalities  to
cause  his  people  to  feel  that  there  is  a  hand  to  heal  as  well  as  to  smite.  And  the
appearance  of  these  men,  with  their  considerate  provision  for  his  wants,  was  a  means  of
revealing  the  goodness  of  Qtoi,  and  of  assuring  David  that  his  compassion  was  not
clean  gone  for  ever.  All  true  sympathy  in  our  adversity  is  a  revelation.  It  brings
hope  and  courage  to  the  crushed  spirit,  and  strengthens  faith  in  the  love  which  never
fails,  even  in  the  darkest  hour.  The  storm  and  sunshine  are  alike  God's  servants  :  they
"  work  together  "  under  his  direction  to  sweeten  life  and  endow  it  with  freshness  and
beauty  of  eternal  spring.

III.  Its  recognition  by  God.  The  sacred  historian  was  doubtless  guided  by  a
principle  of  selection  when  he  inserted  the  names  of  these  three  men  in  a  book  that  is
to  abide  through  all  time.  It  was  the  wiU  of  God  that  reference  should  be  made  to
their  conduct.  Thus  has  God  expressed  approval  of  their  regard  for  his  anointed.  In
the  same  way  our  Saviour  gave  honour  to  the  sympathy  of  the  woman  who  poured  on
him  the  box  of  ointment,  by  declaring  that  what  she  had  done  should  be  told  in  all  the
world  for  a  memorial  of  her  (Matt.  xxvi.  13).  The  sympathy  of  David  for  the  poor  is
in  like  manner  divinely  recognized.  The  Bible  is  a  book  of  instances  for  mankind.
Other  deeds  of  sympathy  were  performed  which  have  left  only  the  trace  which  belongs
to  all  good  deeds,  namely,  in  the  higher  and  gentler  tone  given  to  the  world's  general
life  :  these  are  referred  to  in  order  to  encourage  all  in  the  same  cause  of  comforting  and
helping  the  needy  in  their  season  of  sorrow.

General  lessons.  1.  In  the  friendships  and  kindnesses  of  one  part  of  our  life  we
are  sowing  the  seeds  which  may  return  to  us  in  their  own  kind  when  later  on  we  may
experience  trouble  (cf.  ch.  x.  1 ;  xii.  27),  and  hence  we  should  be  encouraged  to  do  good
to  all  men,  "  especially  to  the  household  of  faith."  Q.  In  our  acts  of  sympathy  we  are
to  remember  that  they  reach  beyond  the  individual — they  are  helpful  in  masking  out
God's  gracious  purposes  toward  mankind.  3.  Christ  has  given  encouragement  to  acts
of  kindness  done  to  the  poor  and  needy,  and  conferred  great  honour  upon  them  in  that


OH,  xvn.  1— 29.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  427

he  regards  them  as  done  to  himself  (Matt.  xxv.  34 — 40).  4.  While  we  should  not
cramp  and  weaken  our  generous  impulses  by  over-much  introspection  and  supervision,
yet  we  oi^ht  to  be  careful  tliat  the  forms  they  assume  are  such  as  will  moat  surely
benefit  those  concerned  in  them.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS

Vers.  1 — 14. — (Jerusalem.)  The  council-chamher  of  Absalom.  "  And  Jehovah
had  appointed,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  The  success  of  the  rebellion  seemed  well-nigh  complete.
Absalom  occupied  the  capital;  was  proclaimed  by  "all  Israel;"  supported  by  the
wisest  statesman,  and,  apparently,  by  "  the  king's  friend  "  and  the  high  priests ;  held
his  council  (ch.  xvi.  20) ;  and  took  possession  of  the  harem,  "  the  first  decided  act  of
sovereignty  (subsequently  he  was  also  solemnly  anointed,  ch.  xix.  10,  probably  by
Zadok  and  Abiathar).  "  Absalom's  next  step  was  to  endeavour  his  father's  destruction,
in  the  conviction  that  his  own  throne  would  never  be  secure  so  long  as  he  lived.
The  son  had  no  relentings.  He  had  knowingly  subjected  himself  to  the  inevitable
necessity  of  taking  his  father's  life,  and  he  only  desired  to  learn  how  that  object  might
be  most  efiectually  secured.  A  council  was  held  on  this  question,  and  it  is  the  first
cabinet  anmcU  to  which  history  admits  us.  It  was  doubtless  conducted  in  the  same
form  as  other  royal  councils;  and,  from  the  instance  before  us,  it  appears  that  the
members  who  had  anything  to  suggest,  or  rather  such  as  the  king  called  upon  for
their  opinion,  described  the  course  they  thought  best  suited  to  the  circumstances"
(Kitto, '  Daily  Bible  lUust.').  It  was  the  turning-point  of  the  revolt  (Ps.  xcii.  7 — 9) ;
and  in  it  we  see —

L  A  BBNOWNED  oouNSELLOB  Urging  promptitude  with  oracular  wisdom.  "And
Ahithophel  said,"  etc.  (vers.  1 — 5 ;  ch.  xv.  31) ;  "  this  night"  (ch.  xvi.  14 ;  vers.  2,  16) ;
instant  action  being,  in  his  view,  necessary  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  death  ot'
David  and  the  success  of  the  revolution.  His  counsel  was  the  result  of  an  unerrins;
judgment,  expressed  with  the  utmost  confidence,  and  thoroughly  adapted  (ver.  14,
"  good  coimsel ")  to  effect  its  end.  It  was  worthy  of  his  great  reputation.  Extraordi  nary
human  wisdom  is  sometimes:  1.  Employed  against  the  servants  of  Ood  and  against
his  kingdom,  of  which  they  are  the  most  conspicuous  representatives.  "  This  wisdom
descendeth  not  from  above,"  etc.  (Jas.  iii.  15).  2.  Stimulated,  in  its  exercise,  by
personal  hatred  toward  them.  "I  will  smite  the  king  only"  (perhaps  exulting  in  the
prospect  of  inflicting  vengeance  with  his  own  hand).  8.  E'raught  with  deadly  peril  to
them  (ver.  4).  David  himself,  as  he  came  "  wearied  and  weak-handed  "  to  the  plain  of  the
Jordan  and  rested  there,  knew  not  yet  his  imminent  danger  and  "  marvellous  escape  "
(1  Sam.  xxiii.  24 — 28).  "  But  a  higher  power  than  the  wisdom  of  the  renowned
Gilonite  guided  events."  The  Lord  is  the  Defence  of  his  people ;  and  his  promise  con-
cerning his  Church  is  that  "  the  gates  (counsels)  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it."

II.  A  BivAL  OBATOB  advising  delay  with  plausible  arguments.  "  And  Hushai  said,"
etc.  (vers.  7 — 13).  "He  was  not  a  member  of  the  council;  but  he  had  been  well
received  by  Absalom,  whose  greater  treachery  against  his  father  made  him  give  ready
credence  to  the  pretended  treachery  of  his  father's  friend.  It  was  at  Absalom's  sugges-
tion that  he  was  called  in,  and,  being  informed  of  the  course  Ahithophel  had  advised,
he  saw  at  once  the  danger  that  this  course  threatened  to  David ;  and,  in  fulfllihent  of
his  mission  to  defeat  this  man's  counsel,  be  advanced  divers  reasons  against  it,  all
tending  to  delay"  (Kitto).  "It  would  not  only  ward  off  David's  present  danger,  but
would  also,  as  Tacitus  observes,  give  ill  men  time  to  repent,  and  the  good  to  unite  "
(Delany).  His  counsel  was  the  result  of  a  profound  acquaintance  with  human  nature,
and  given  with  a  persuasive  eloquence  equal  to  his  wisdom.  Advice  favourable  to  God's
servants:  1.  Is  often  given  in  unlikely  places,  among  their  adveisaries  and  by  persons
unsuspected  of  sympathy  with  them  (Acts  v.  38).  2.  Derives  its  power  from  the
seyish  dispositions  of  the  ungodly  themselves :  their  fears  (vers.  8 — 10)  and  their  vain-
glory (vers.  11 — 14).  Hushai's  speech  was  "  full  of  a  certain  kind  of  boasting  which
pleased  the  younger  men  "  (Olericus).  3.  Succeeds  far  beyond  what  might  h»Te  been
naturally  expected,  in  making  wisdom  appear  foolishness  (vers.  4, 14).


m  TfiE  SilCOND  SOOK  OB*  SAMtTSL         ton.  xvn.  1—29.

"His  tongae
Dropp'd  manna,  and  oonld  make  the  woise  appear
The  better  reason,  to  perplex  and  dash
Maturest  counsels."

(Milton.)

nL  An  infatuated  ububpeb  adopting  a  policy  fatal  to  his  own  designs.  His
decision  was  the  result  of :  1.  His  misjudgment  of  the  effect  of  delay  upon  the  nation ;
for  he  did  not  consider  that  "  only  the  discontented  part  of  the  people  formed  the  kernel
of  the  insurrection,  that  no  small  portion  still  remained  true  to  David,  and  that  another
part,  now  for  the  moment  fallen  away,  would  return  after  the  first  fit  of  revolution  had
passed "  (Erdmann).  2.  His  over-confidence  in  his  power  and  success.  3.  His  love  of
personal  display  (his  ruling  passion).  "  The  new-made  king  gave  the  preference  to  a
proposal  which  promised  Mm,  at  any  rate  for  a  few  days,  the  enjoyment  of  complete
repose  and  the  gratifications  of  his  high  position"  (Ewald).  4.  But  herein  the  sacred
historian  indicates  (what  so  often  appears  in  the  Books  of  Samuel)  the  overruling
providence  of  Ood  (1  Sam.  ii.  1 — 10;  ix.  1 — 25;  xxxi.  7 — 10;  oh.  i.  19)  which:
(1)  Pervades  all 'thoughts  and  actions  of  men ;  all  places  and' events.  In  the  council-
chamber  of  Absalom,  where  there  seemed  to  be  nothing  but  godless  ambition,  political
wisdom,  and  "  the  strife  of  tongues,"  there  was  an  unseen  presence,  observing,  directing,
controlling  aU.  "  The  king's  heart,"  etc.  (Prov.  xxi.  1).  (2)  Employs  (without
approving)  the  cunning  craftiness  of  some  men  to  check  and  punish  that  of  others.
(3)  "  Permits  evil  to  work  out  its  own  consequences,  and  the  wicked  to  entangle  them-
selves in  their  own  snares,  that  he  may  reveal  his  justice  and  holiuess  in  the  self-con-
demnation and  self-destruction  of  the  power  of  evil "  (ver.  23 ;  ch.  xviH.  7, 14).
"  When  Gk)d  is  contriving  misfortunes  for  man,  he  first  deprives  him  of  his  reason  "
(Euripides); — D.

Vers.  15 — 22. — SligU  services :  a  sermon  to  yotmg  persons.  "  And  a  wench  [the
maidservant]  went  and  told  them,  and  they  went  and  told  King  David"  (ver.  17).  The
people  of  Israel  were  divided  into  two  parties — the  good  and  the  bad;  the  servants  of
King  David,  who  had  been  driven  away  from  Jerusalem,  and  the  servants  of  Absalom,
who  had  taken  possession  of  the  city  and  were  now  intent  upon  his  destruction.  The
world  is  also  divided  into  two  parties,  consisting  of  those  who  are  for  Christ  and  those
who  are  against  him.  And  the  slight  but  useful  services  rendered  to  David  illustrate
similar  services  to  Christ.  1.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  le  on  the  right  side — to  be  a  servant
of  "  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  Outside  the  city,  two  young  men,  Jonathan
and  Ahimaaz,  hiding  themselves  at  En-rogel  (the  Puller's  Fountain),  and  waiting
to  carry  news  to  the  king ;  inside  the  city,  their  fathers  (the  high  priests  Abiathar  and
Zadok)  and  Hushai  (the  king's  friend),  preparing  to  send  it :  these  were  "  faithful
among  the  faithless  found."  2.  One  who  cannot  do  much  can  yet  do  something  for  bis
lord  and  master.  If  he  cannot  lead  an  army  or  give  counsel  in  "  the  assembly  of  the
elders,"  he  can  at  least  carry  a  message,  like  the  brave  Jonathan  (1  Kings  i.  42)  and
the  swift-footed  Ahimaaz  (oh.  xviil.  23) ;  or,  like  the  trusty  maidservant  of  one  of  the
high  priests,  who  (as  though  going  to  the  well  for  water)  conveyed  intelligence  to  them
without  suspicion.  She  could  perform  this  service  even  more  effectively  than  others  in
a  higher  station  (2  Kings  v.  2).  The  servant  who  has  only  "one  talent"  must  not
"hide  it  in  the  earth"  (Matt.  xxv.  25).  Consider  what  you  can  do  for  Christ.  3.
Small  services  may  display  great  principles  and  qualities :  love,  obedience,  diligence,
veracity,  fearlessness,  faithfulness,  self-control,  self-denial,  and  sell-sacrifice.  "  He  that
is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,"  etc.  (Luke  xvi.  10).  4.  Eardly  any  service  can  le
performed  without  difficulty  and  danger.  "  And  a  lad  [probably  on  the  watch]  saw
them,"  and  gave  information;  so  that  they  were  closely  pursued  by  Absalom's  servants
(soldiers)  as  far  as  Bahurim  (ch.  xvi.  6).  It  was  a  race  for  life.  5.  The  servant  who
does  his  best  will  seldom  fail  to  obtain  opportune  help.  "  And  the  woman  took  and
.spread  the  covering  over  the  well's  mouth,"  etc.  (vers.  19,  20).  "It  was  not  the  first
nor  yet  the  last  time  that  an  Israelitish  woman  wrought  deliverance  for  her  people"
CBdersheim).  Her  motive  was  good ;  not  her  equivocation  and  deceit.  Many  circum-
stances and  casual  events,  under  the  ordering  of  Divine  providence,  conduce  to  the
«t.fety  and  success  of  a  faithful  seivant.    6.  There  is  as  mrich  need  of  smaU  service*  at


CH.  XVII.  1—29.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  429

great;  and  such  services  have  frequently  important  issues;  it  may  be  escape  from
death.  The  message  of  Hushai,  carried  by  the  maidservant  and  communicated  by  the
young  men,  contributed  to  the  security  and  welfare  of  the  king,  "  and  all  the  people
that  were  with  him "  (ver.  22).  "  In  this  information  sent  to  him  so  opportunely,
David  believed  that  he  had  reason  to  recognize  a  new  sign  that  the  Lord  still  thought
of  him  in  love  and  cared  for  his  deliverance  "  (Krummacher).

"  Like  the  coolness  of  snow  on  a  harvest  day
Is  a  faithful  messenger  to  them  that  send  him :
He  re&esheth  the  soul  of  his  master."

(Prov.  XXV.  13.)

7.  They  are  twrdy  noticed,  and  will  be  abundantly  recompensed.  "  And  the  king  said.
He  is  a  good  man,"  etc.  (ch.  xviii  27).  "  And  whosoever  shall  give  to  drink,"  etc.
(Matt  X.  42).— D.

Vers.  21,  22. — Davids  escape  across  the  Jordan.  "  And  they  passed  over  Jordan,"
etc.  (ver.  22).  Leaving  Bahurim  behind  them,  David  and  his  company  pursued  their
rough  and  dreary  way  along  the  \\'ilderness  of  Judah  until  they  descended  into  the  plain
of  the  Jordan ;  and  there  in  some  place  (Ayephim,  equivalent  to  "  weary,"  Authorized
Version ;  "  The  Traveller's  Beat")  at  an  easy  distance  from  the  ford  of  the  river  (opposite
Jericho,  and  near  Gilgal,  ch.  xix.  15)  they  rested  at  nightfall.  "  Amongst  the  thickets
of  the  Jordan  the  asses  of  Ziba  were  unladen,  and  the  weary  travellers  refreshed  them-
selves, and  waited  for  tidings  from  Jerusalem"  (ch.  xv.  28,  36;  xvL  14;  ver.  16).
David  had  been  uncertain  whether  to  cross  the  river;  but  during  the  night  the
messengers  arrived,  saying,  ''  Arise,"  etc. ;  the  encampment  was  broken  up,  and  "  by
the  morning  light  there  lacked  not  one  of  them  that  was  not  gone  over  Jordan."  TTiat
night  was  another  memorable  one  (1  Sam.  xix.  8 — 18).  "  It  has  been  conjectured  with
much  probability  that  as  the  first  sleep  of  that  evening  was  commemorated  in  the  fourth
psalm,  so  in  the  third  is  expressed  the  feeling  of  David's  thankfulness  at  the  final  close
of  those  twenty-four  hours,  of  which  every  detail  has  been  handed  down,  as  if  with  the
consciousness  of  their  importance  at  the  time  "  (Stanley).     Ps.  iv.  '  An  Even-song' —

"  In  peace  will  I  lay  me  down  and  straightway  sleep ;
For  thou,  Jehovah,  alone  wilt  make  me  to  dwell  securely."

(P«.  iv.  8.)
Ps.  iii.  (see  inscription),  •  A  Morning  Prayer  * —

**  I  laid  me  down  and  slept ;
I  awaked,  for  Jehovah  subtaineth  me."

(Ps.  ffl.  5.)

What  b  brilliant  light  do  these  psalms  cast  upon  the  inner  life  of  David  I  Consider  him
at  this  time  as —

I.  Beset  by  ferocious  foes;  nun^erous,  powerful,  and  crafty  (ch.  xv.  12,  13;
xvi.  15;  vers.  1—3);  seeking  to  take  away  his  crown,  his  honour,  and  his  life;  by
fraud,  treachery,  and  violence.  His  trouble  represents  that  of  the  persecuted  and
afflicted  servant  of  God  in  every  age.  1.  The  feeling  of  trouble  is  usually  intensified
with  the  approach  of  night,  the  season  of  peril  and  emblem  of  distress.  2.  The  good
man  in  trouble  seeks  relief  in  God  (Ps.  cxxi.  4);  whilst  acknowledging  his  sins,  he  is
conscious  of  sincerity,  trusts  in  Divine  mercy,  and  derives  from  his  experience  of  former
mercies  an  argument  for  his  prayer.  3.  He  regards  his  adversaries  in  no  vindictive
spirit;  and,  although  he  desires  their  overthrow  as  the  enemies  of  God,  still  more
he  desires  their  conversion.  "  The  address  is  directed  to  the  aristocratic  party,  whosa
tool  Absalom  had  become"  (Delitzsch).

"When  I  cry,  answer  me,  0  God  of  my  righteousness.
Who  hast  made  room  for  me  in  straitntss;
Be  merciful  unto  me,  and  liear  my  prayer  1

Ye  eons  of  men  I  how  long  shall  my  glory  become  shame?
How  long  will  ye  love  vanity,  will  ye  seek  after  lies?"  etc.

(Pb.  iv  1-5.)


430  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xvn.  1—29.

II.  Aided  by  faithful  friends,  who  sympathize  with  him,  strive  to  defeat  his
enemies,  give  him  useful  counsel,  and  share  his  dangers  (oh.  xv.  15, 21, 23 ;  vers.  7,  15,
17).  1.  A  time  of  adversity  tests  the  fidelity  of  friends ;  and  manifests  it,  as  the  night
brings  out  the  stars  that  were  unseen  by  day.  2.  It  also  makes  their  aid  pecaliarly
precious  ;  and  is  a  sign  of  the  favour  of  the  Eternal  Friend.  3.  When  friends  begin  to
de? pond  in  a  time  of  trouble,  it  is  the  part  of  a  good  man,  "  strong  in  faith,"  to  encourage
them,  by  directing  their  thoughts  to  the  Divine  Source  of  consolation,  his  own  "  exceed-
ing joy."

"Many  say,  Who  will  show  us  good?
Lift  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance  upon  ns,  O  Jehovah  I
Thou  hast  put  gladness  into  my  heart
More  than  when  their  com  and  wine  abound,"  eto;

(Ps.  iv.  6— S.)

III.  Delivered  by  Divine  favour  ;  shown  in  his  preservation,  the  salutary  warning
received  during  the  night,  the  safe  i  assage  of  the  Jordan,  so  that  "  by  the  morning
light,"  etc.  (ver.  22),  ar.d  the  complete  defeat  of  Ahithophel's  counsel  (vers.  14).  1.  In
their  .hostility  to  the  good,  wicked  men  rely  on  their  own  wisdom  and  strength  alone,
ignoring  God ;  but  "  the  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  ii.  9).
2.  Often  when  a  good  man  is  despised  as  one  abandoned  of  God,  he  is  taken  into  closer
fellowship  with  him  and  more  signally  protected  and  delivered.  3.  In  the  morning
light  of  every  day  he  perceives  fresh  tokens  of  Divine  favour.  Whilst  God  "  giveth
songs  in  the  night"  (Job  xxxv.  10),  "his  mercies  are  new  every  morning"  (Lam.  iii.
23  i  Ps.  T.  i  XXX.  5 ;  cxliii.  8).

"Jehovah,  how  many  are  mine  adversaries!
Many  rise  up  against  me,
Many  say  of  my  soul,
There  is  no  help  for  him  in  God.
But  thou,  Jehovah,  art  a  Shied  about  me,
My  Glory  and  the  Lifter-up  of  my  liead.
I'ory  to  Jehovah  with  my  voice,
And  he  answereth  me  from  his  holy  mountain,"  etc.

(Ps.  Hi.  1—6.)

rV.  Incited  to  victorious  confidence  ;  by  the  contemplation  of  what  God  is  to
him  and  has  done  for  him  (Gen.  xv.  1);  as,  having  now  escaped  his  most  immediate
peril,  he  travels  on  "  by  the  morning  light "  toward  Mahanaim  (ver.  24).  Troubles  do
not  always  "  pass  away  wich  light."  Enemies  still  threaten  (Ps.  iii.  1),  and  with  each
returning  day  the  servant  of  God  has  to  begin  the  conflict  afresh  (ch.  v.  22,  23).  But :
1.  Even'when  most  formidable,  they  do  not  terrify  him  whose  hope  is  in  Jehovah.  2.
They  are  regarded  as  if  already  overthrown.    3.  And  to  Jehovah  alone  is  the  victory

it.  gP.Tl  VlWi  -

*  I  will  not  be  afraid  of  ten  thousands  of  the  people
Who  have  set  themselves  against  me  round  about.
Arise,  O  Jehovah  1    Help  me,  O  my  God  I
For  thou  smitest  all  mine  enemies  on  the  cheek.
Thou  breakest  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly.

To  Jehovah  belongeth  the  victory  I
Upon  thy  people  be  my  blessing  I "
*^  (Ps.  iii.  7-0.)

To  the  period  of  David's  exile  beyond  Jordan  have  been  also  referred  many  other
psalms :  I's.  Ixi.,  Ixii.,  Ixiii.  (see  inscription), cxliii.  (Septuagint,  "  when  his  son  pursued
liiui  "),  xxvi.,  xxvii.,  xxviii.,  etc.  "  A  man  who  can,  like  David,  aniidst  the  first  mutter-
incs  of  an  unexpected  storm  display  such  lofty  composure  and  submission,  and  then
amidst  its  fiercest  outbursts  sing  hymns  like  the  third  and  fourth  psalms,  penetrated
with  the  purest  trust  in  God,  is  already  raised  in  an  eminent  degree  above  human  weak-
m  ss  and  frailty,  and,  whatever  be  his  outward  fate,  he  can  only  quit  this  life  as  one  of
God's  victors  "  (Bwald).— D.

Ver.  23.— (GiLOH.)    The  suicide  of  Ahithophd.    Displeased  with  the  decision  of  the


OH.  xvn.  1— 29.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  431

council  (ver.  14),  Ahithophel  left  the  city  and  returned  to  his  own  house,  whence  he
had  been  summoned  the  ilay  before  (ch.  xv.  12).  While  Ahimaaz  and  Jonathan  hurried
eastward  toward  the  Jorrlan  with  their  message  (the  decision  of  the  council  being  as  yet
unknown  publicly,  or  its  reversal  feared),  the  renowned  counsellor  rode  southward
toward  Giloh,  brooding  over  what  might  have  been  (ver.  2)  and  what  would  be;  the
shadows  of  night  thickening  around  him  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  1 — 10) ;  and  the  same  night

Sor  soon  afierwards)  "his  lamp  was  put  out  in  darkness"  (Prov,  xiii.  9).  "With  the
leliberate  cynicism  of  a  man  who  had  lost  all  faith,  he  committed  that  rare  crime  in
Israel,  suicide  "  (Edersheim).  "  He  was  probably  not  the  first  man  who  hanged  himself,
but  he  bears  the  unenviable  distinction  of  being  the  first  whose  handling  himself  is
recorded;  and  society  would  have  little  reason  to  complain  if  all  who  have  since
sentenced  themselves  to  this  doom  were  as  worthy  of  it  as  this  father  of  self-suspenders."
(Kitto).  "  So  perished  the  great  Machiavelli  of  that  age,  the  very  wisest  of  the  very  wise
men  of  this  world ! "  (Delany).     We  have  here —

I.  A  DISAPPOINTED  POLITICIAN.  Like  many  other  eminent  politicians,  he  was
destitute  of  religious  principles ;  set  his  heart  upon  the  world,  and  had  "  his  portion  in
this  life  "  (Ps.  xvii.  14) ;  was  proud  of  his  own  wisdom,  ambitious  of  wealth,  fame,
honour,  and  power,  and  hostile  to  godliness  and  godly  men ;  the  leading  mind  of  the
ungodly  party  in  Israel.  "He  had  no  regard  either  to  the  ways  of  God  or  the
laws  of  God.  Providence  made  no  part  of  his  plan.  He  considered  with  great  sagacity
how  he  was  to  act;  but  he  never  considered  how  God  would  act;  and  therefore
all  his  wise  designs  must  have  been  very  defective.  The  rich  man  said, '  I  shall  want
room  for  my  stores,'  etc  But  the  Gospel  calls  him  a  fool,  for  not  considering  that
God  might  call  him  out  of  the  world  that  night,  and  that  then  all  his  schemes  of
happiness  and  prosperity  would  die  with  him.  Such  is  he  who  is  wise  without  God ;
and  such  was  this  Ahithophel"  (Jones  of  Nayland).  We  now  see  him  under  the
influence  of:  1.  Wounded  pride,  frustrated  ambition,  and,  probably,  ungratified  malice
(ver.  1).  The  rejection  of  his  counsel  was  regarded  by  him  as  a  personal  affront,  and
a  fatal  blow  to  his  position  and  prospects ;  for  "  he  had  been  impelled  by  nothing  else
than  a  mad  ambition,  so  that  life  itself  became  insupportable  when  the  attainment
of  the  position  he  had  hankered  after  proved  insufiBcient  to  satisfy  his  desires  "  (Bwald).
He  W011I4  be  revenged  on  Absalom  himself,  by  leaving  him  to  pursue  his  own  course.
2.  Unavoidahle  fear  of  the  disgrace,  infamy,  and  punishment  that  awaited  him.  For,
by  the  adoption  of  Hushai's  counsel,  he  foresaw  that  all  was  lost,  and  that  David
would  live  and  reign.  Although  he  had  the  "  Eoman  "  courage  (or  rather,  cowardice
and  impatience)  to  face  death,  he  had  not  courage  enough  to  face  disaster.

**  He's  not  valiant  that  dares  die ;
But  he  that  boldly  beais  calamity,"

8.  Bitter  remorse,  desperation,  and  despair.  "  Perhaps  he  now  began  to  see  for  the
first  time  that,  as  he  had  been  against  God,  God  was  against  him,  and,  according  to
the  prayer  of  David,  was  turning  his  counsel  into  foolfshness.  Under  this  calarmty,
what  had  he  to  support  him  ?  Nothing  but  that  policy  of  a  wicked  man  which  never
supported  anybody  long.  In  the  trouble  of  a  righteous  man  there  is  hope ;  but  in  the
trouble  of  the  wicked  there  is  none.  And,  for  a  man  like  him,  there  is  no  refuge  but
in  despair  "  (Ps.  vii.  15, 16).

11.  A  DBLIBEBATB  OBIMB.  "And  put  his  household  in  Order,"  etc. ;  i.e.  "he  settled
his  affairs,  he  made  his  will,  as  a  person  of  sound  mind  and  memory ;  as  he  would  have
done  if  death  had  been  coming  upon  him  in  a  natural  way."  He  did  not  commit  the
deed  in  an  outburst  of  passion,  but  with  deliberation  and  forethought.  Suicide  is  often
due  to  insanity,  and  without  blame  (except  in  so  far  as  it  is  induced  by  previous
misconduct);  but  in  his  case  there  is  no  indication  of  it;  nor  was  there  the  same
justification  or  the  same  extenuation  of  guilt  as  in  other  cases  (Judg.  xvi.  30 ;  1  Sam.
xxxi.  4,  5).  Whatever  may  have  been  the  measure  of  his  culpability,  suicide  is  a
crime :  1.  Against  a  man  himself;  a  violation  of  the  law  of  self-preservation  written
upon  his  nature.  2.  Against  society.  "Nor  can  any  case  be  put  which  is  not
concluded  under  sin  by  the  peculiar  injury  or  general  mischief"  (Paley, ' Sermons ').
8.  Against  Ood,  who  has  "fixed  his  canon  'gainst  self-slaughter"  (Exod.  xi.  13)'


432  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvn.  1— 29.

who  haB  committed  life  to  men  as  a  trust ;  and  whose  will  in  relation  to  it  is  intimated
in  various  ways.  "  In  every  society  where  the  Christian  and  old  Pythagorean  idea
of  life,  as  a  talent  and  a  trust,  is  unknown  or  forgotten, and  where  its  value  is  measured
by  enjoyment,  suicide  will  be  likely  to  become  common"  (Thirlwall,  'Letters  to  a
Friend ').  It  is  "  a  coinplioation  ol  ingratitude,  contempt  of  the  Lord's  gift  of  life,
defiance,  impatience,  pride,  rebellion,  and  infidelity  "  (Scott ;  Wardlaw,  '  Sys.  Theol.').
"What  a  mixture  do  we  find  liere  of  wisdom  and  madness!"  (Hall).  "Thus  he
displayed  the  miserable  inlatuation  of  worldly  policy"  (Wordsworth).  Under  the
light  which  the  gospel  sheds  upon  the  present  and  the  future,  the  act  of  the  self-
destroyer  is  rendered  peculiarly  criminal  and  awful.

III.  A  DHEADFUii  RETRIBUTION.  (Oh.  xii.  10 — 12.)  The  course  of  sin  on  which  he
1  ad  entered  was  attended  (as  it  ever  is  in  others)  by  most  baneful  effects  on  himself,
and  ended  in  deslruction;  the  culmination  at  once  of  his  sin  and  of  his  punish uent.
He  became :  1.  His  own  tormentor ;  rushing  against  impassable  barriers,  and  bringing
upon  himself  irreparable  misery.  2.  His  own  tempter ;  being  urged  onward  by  inward
impulses  to  further  transgression.  3.  His  own  executioner;  inflicting  with  bis  own
hand  the  extreme  penalty  of  the  law;  a  retribution  more  dreadful  than  when  inflicted
by  the  direct  stroke  of  Heaven  (ch.  vi.  6 — 8)  or  the  hands  of  other  men  (ch.  iv.  12;
X Viii.  7,  14).  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  (Prov.  xiv.  32).  "  Thus  it  falleth  out  that
wicked  counsel  doth  chiefly  redound  to  the  hurt  of  the  author  thereof"  (Willet).  Like
Judas,  Ahithophel  went  to  "his  own  place"  (Acts  i.  25).

IV.  An  admonitory  end  ;  the  consideration  of  iirhich  should  lead  to :  1.  The
conviction  of  the  enormous  evil  of  suicide;  which  may  exert  a  preserving  influence
in  an  hour  of  temptation.  2.  The  abhorrence  of  the  principles  which  induce  its
conjmission,  and  ihs  avoiding  of  every  sinful  way.  The  sinner  is  a  self-destroyer
(Hob.  xiii.  y).  3.  Tue  cherishing,  with  renewed  earnestness,  of  the  opposite  principles
of  humility,  faith,  patience,  godliness,  uprightness,  charily,  etc.  "  If  tlie  affections  are
violently  set  upon  anything  in  this  world,  whether  fame,  wealth,  or  pleasure,  and  are
disappointed,  then  life  become  s  insupportable.  Therefore,  the  moral  is  this  :  '  Set  your
atfection  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth.'" — D.

Vers.  24— 29.— (Mahanaim.)  Hosidtality.  Shobi  (ch.  i.  1—4;  xii.  26—31);
Maohir  (ch.  ix.  4);  Barzillai  (ch.  xix.  31 — 40).  On  hearing  of  the  arrival  of  David  at
Mahanaim,  these  three  men  came  with  one  accord,  bringing  presents,  and  "  provided  the
king  of  sustenance  while  he  lay  "  there  (ch.  xix.  32).  "  We  are  inclined  to  regard  them
as  representative  men :  Shobi,  of  the  extreme  border-inhabitants,  or  rather  foreign
tributaries;  Machir,  of  the  former  adherents  of  Saul;  and  Barzillai,  of  the  wealthy
landowners  generally  "  (Bdersheim).  Whilst  acting,  specially,  from  feelings  of  loyalty,
gratitude,  and  affectionate  regard,  they  displayed  a  hospitality  snch  as  is  often  enjoined
(Lev.  XXV.  35 ;  Isa.  Iviii.  7 ;  Luke  xiv.  13 ;  Bom.  xii.  13),  but  frequently  omitted  (Heb.
xiii.  2).  It  was :  1.  Much  needed  by  David  and  his  followers,  "  who  were  like  a  band
of  beggars  or  marauders"  (Delitzsch),  driven  from  their  hom§,  in  a  comparatively
strange  land  (Ps.  Ixi.  2),  beset  by  hostile  forces  (ver.  25),  in  want  of  shelter,  rest,  and
provision  (ver.  29).  "The  Son  of  man  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head"  (Luke  ix.  58);
and  in  his  "  brethren  "  he  is  often  persecuted  and  in  want  of  all  things  (Matt.  xxv.  35 ;
Gal.  vi.  10;  1  Tim.  v.  10;  3  John  5,  6).  2.  Admirably  exemplified.  (1)  Spontane-
ously, without  being  solicited.  (2)  Promptly,  without  delay.  (3)  Cordially,  with
sympathy  and  pity ;  for  they  said,  "  The  people  have  become  hungry,  and  weary,  and
thirsty  in  the  wilderness."  (4)  Considerately ;  those  things  which  were  most  necessary
and  agreeable  being  supplied.  (5)  Generously;  according  to  ability,  and  "without
grudging"  (1  Pet.  iv.  9).  (6)  Disinterestedly,  unselfishly,  with  self  denial  and  at  no
little  risk.  (7)  Perseverinjly ;  not  (as  in  another  familiar  instance)  for  three  days
(Acts  xxviii.  7),  but  for  nearly  as  many  months.  It  not  unfrequently  happens  that
the  poor  and  the  stranger  receive  the  most  hospitable  treatment  from  those  on  whom
they  have  the  least  claim.  3.  Eminently  helpful,  comforting  and  encouraging ;  a  sign
of  the  Divine  care  for  him  (Gen.  xxxii.  2)— a  proof  that  he  was  not  forsaken  by  all  th/
people,  and  an  influence  adapted  to  gather  others  around  him.  "The  faithfulness
of  human  love,  strengthening  in  need  and  cheering  in  misfortune  is  not  only  the  copy,
but  alao  the  means  and  instrument  of  the  faithfulness  of  the  Divine  love,  granted


OH.  xvn.  1— 29.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  43S


to  those  who  how  humbly  beneath  God's  hand  and  wholly  trust  him "  (Erdmann).
4.  Abundantly  requited.  Those  who  exercise  it  "are  blessed  in  their  doing "  (Jas.  i-
25) ;  and  receive  unexpected  honour  and  benefit  from  their  guests  (ch.  xix.  33,  38,
39 ;  Gren.  xviii. ;  Acts  xxviii.  8)  and  from  the  Lord  himself  (Heb.  vi.  10 ;  Matt.  xxv.
34).— D.

Ver.  23. — SuMde.  Such  was  the  end  of  the  great  counsellor  of  the  age,  who  was
regarded  as  an  "oracle  of  God"  (ch.  xvi.  23).  Astute  as  he  was,  he  was  evidently
unprincipled.  His  desertion  of  David  for  Absalom,  and  the  advice  he  gave  the  latter,
show  this.  His  wisdom  did  not  avail  for  his  own  good.  He  died  "  as  a  fool  dieth,"  and
by  his  own  hand.  Yet  there  was  a  thoughtfulness  and  deliberateness  about  the  deed
such  as  was  in  a  certain  keeping  with  his  intellectual  ability.  It  is  not  difficult
to  account  for  the  desperate  course  he  took.  He  was  mortified  that  Absalom,  for  whom
he  had  incurred  so  much  guilt,  and  made  so  great  sacrifices,  and  who  knew  and  revered
his  wisdom  (oh.  xvi.  23),  should  have  rejected  his  counsel  for  thai  of  Hushai ;  and,
because  of  his  confidence  in  the  wisdom  of  his  own  advice,  he  felt  sure  that  David
would  be  victorious,  and  be  himself,  not  only  disgraced  and  ruined,  but  executed  as  a
traitor.  Bather  than  face  this  prospect,  he  hanged  himself.  Seif-murder  is  not  an
agreeable  subject,  yet  it  may  be  salutary  occasionally  to  reflect  upon  it.  Many  do  put
an  end  to  their  own  lives ;  and  doubtless  many  others  are  more  or  less  tempted  to  do
so.  It  may  be  hoped  that  consideration  of  the  matter  may  fortify  the  minda  of  some
against  the  first  approaches  of  such  temptation.

I.  The  causes  of  buioide.  1.  Mental  deromgement  is  doubtless  a  common  cause.
Kot  so  common  as  we  might  infer  from  the  verdicts  of  coroners'  juries,  anxious  to
relieve  surviving  relatives  from  the  pains  and  penalties  in&icted  by  antiquated  civil  and
ecclesiastical  laws ;  yet  still  the  most  common  cause.  It  is  virtually  the  same  thing  to
say  that  disease  of  the  brain  is  the  common  cause.  This  is  often  hereditary,  or  it  may
be  induced  by  overwork,  or  by  excessive  indulgence  of  the  appetites  and  passions,  or
by  the  pressure  of  worldly  anxieties.  Insanity  relieves  of  the  guilt  of  self-murder;
nevertheless,  where  the  insanity  is  the  result  of  habits  which  are  sinful,  the  guilt
of  these  remains ;  and,  if  the  probable  issue  of  them  was  foreseen,  the  sinner  cannot
free  himself  altogether  from  tile  guilt  which  attaches  to  the  act  of  self-destruction.
2.  The  pressure  or  dread  of  troubles  often  leads  to  this  crime.  Not  only  as  they  produce
insanity,  but  as  they  operate  on  a  sane  mind.  Intense  pain,  great  misfortunes,  disgrace,
or  the  dread  of  it,  fear  of  destitution,  etc.  Instances :  Saul  and  his  armour-bearer
^1  Sam.  xxxi.  4,  5) ;  Zimri  (1  Kings  xvi.  18) ;  Aliithophel ;  and  the  Fhilippian  jailor
(Acts  xvi.  27).    3.  Remorse  and  despair.    Judas  (Matt,  xxvii.  5).

n.  Its  sin  and  roLLY.  1.  It  is  contrary  to  nature.  The  love  of  life  is  one  of  the
strongest  principles  implanted  in  us  by  our  Creator.  "Self-preservation  is  the  first
law  of  nature."  The  natural  conscience,  which  teaches  the  criminality  of  taking  the  life
of  another,  equally  teaches  that  of  taking  our  own.  We  may  for  adequate  reasons,  in
serving  God  or  men,  expose  our  lives  to  peril ;  but  we  must  not  ourselves  extinguish
them,  and  thus  cut  short  our  opportunities  of  service.  2.  It  is  da/ring  impiety  towards
Ood.  It  is  a  cowardly  abandonment  of  our  trust;  an  act  of  rebellion  against  him  who
has  assigned  us  our  post  and  work ;  a  contemptuous  casting  away  as  worthless,  or  worse,
of  God's  precious  gift.  It  springs  from  distrust  of  God,  discontent  with  his  appoint-
ments, a  proud  refusal  to  serve  him  unless  under  such  conditions  as  are  agreeable
to  ourselves.  3.  It  is  a  serious  injustice  to  our  friends  and  society.  Our  life  is  given
us  for  the  sake  of  others  as  well  as  ourselves.  To  abandon  it  is  to  rob  and  injure  them.
It  is  vain  to  say  we  can  no  longer  be  of  service  to  them.  Under  the  worst  circumstances
a  man  can  set  an  example  of  patience  and  submission  such  as  is  much  needed  in  this
world  of  suffering.  And  if  he  have  become  a  burden  to  others,  in  bearing  the  burden
they  may  be  enriched  and  blessed.  4.  It  is  in  direct  opposition  to  the  revealed  will  of
Qod.  No  distinct  prohibition  can,  indeed,  be  quoted,  unless  it  is  included  in  the
command,  "  Thou  skalt  do  no  murder ; "  which  is  doubtful.  But  it  is  entirely  opposed
to  all  the  precepts  of  Scripture  which  enjoin  patient  endurance  of  trials,  and  that  to
the  end ;  and  to  the  examples  of  such  endurance  which  are  set  before  us,  especially
that  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  instances  in  Holy  Writ  of  fleeing  from  suffering  by
'ushing  out  of  the  world,  are  all  those  of  either  wicked  or  deranged  persons.  5.  It  is  a
II.  SAltUl!*.  3  f


484  THE  SKCOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvu.  1— 29.

de^erate  plwnge  into  worse  miseries  them  can  he  experienced  in  this  life.  The  self-
miwlerer  rushes  red-handed  into  the  presence  of  the  awful  Judge,  depriving  himself  of
mil  possibility  of  repentance.

UL  Pbebebvatites  aoainst  this  dreadful  sin.  In  this  case  emphatically
"  prevention  is  better  than  cure" — preservation,  that  is,  from  that  condition  of  mind
from  which  suicide  springs.  And  this  is  to  be  found  in  vital  godliness  in  all  its
branches.  In  particular :  1.  Constant  faith  in  Qod.  Confidence  that  he  is,  and  that
he  is  the  Rewarder  of  those  who  seek  him,  however  he  may  tiy  them.  Unbounded
trust  in  his  goodness  and  wisdom,  as  exercised  in  respect  to  ourselves.  Earnest  and
cheerful  service  of  him  under  whatever  conditions  he  may  place  us.  Profound  sub-
mission to  his  will.  Dread  of  bis  displeasure.  2.  Moderation  in  respect  to  worldly
things.  In  our  estimates  of  their  worth,  and  of  the  evil  of  being  deprived  of  them ;  in
the  pursuit  of  them ;  in  their  enjoyment ;  in  sorrow  at  their  departure.  Habitual  self-
control.  Intempei^ance  partakes  of  the  guilt  of  suicide.  3.  Prayer.  Habitual.
Special  when  cares  and  temptations  press  with  special  weight.  "  Casting  all  your  care
upon  him ;  for  he  careth  far  yon  "  (1  Pet.  v.  7 ;  comp.  Ps.  Iv.  22).  "  In  nothing  be
anxious,  but  in  everything  by  prayer,"  etc.  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7,  Revised  Version).  "  The
peace  of  God  "  thus  obtained  will  best  "  guard  "  the  heart  and  the  thoughts  against  all
that  tends  to  despondency.  4.  The  communion  of  saints.  Christian  society ;  social
worship ;  visitation  of  the  Christian  poor,  whose  privations  and  sufferings  will  often
make  our  own  seem  small,  whose  cheerfulness  and  resignation  will  shame  our  discon-
tent and  impatience,  and  assist  us  to  a  better  mind.  5.  Prompt  and  resolute  rejection,
with  loathing,  of  every  thought  of  this  as  a  possible  way  out  of  trouble.  Probably
many  persons  of  a  nervous  and  desponding  temper  are  visited  with  such  thoughts.  Let
them  be  instantly  dismissed,  lest  they  grow  in  frequency  and  power,  and  in  a  weak
moment  produce  the  corresponding  deed.

In  conclusion,  all  sia  is  of  the  nature  of  suicide.  He  who  impenitently  persists  in  it
destroys  the  life  of  his  own  soul.  All  they  that  hate  the  Divine  wisdom  and  forsake
its  ways  "love  death  "  (Prov.  viii.  36).— (J.  W.

Vers.  27 — ^29. — Bullies  for  the  kin^s  wrmy.  Mahanaim  is  memorable  in  the  history
of  .Jacob;  derived,  indeed,  its  name  from  the  circumstance  that  there  "the  angels  of
God  met  him  "  (Gen.  xzxii.  1)  on  his  way  back  to  the  promised  land,  and  just  before
his  interview  with  Esau,  about  whose  present  disposition  towards  him  he  was  doubtful.
In  our  text  also  we  read  of  veritable  angels  (messengers)  of  God,  though  human,
coming  to  the  same  place  to  succour  and  encourage  another  of  his  servants  when  in
circumstances  of  great  difficulty.  David  had  with  him  a  large  company  of  friends  and
subjects,  who  remained  faithful  while  so  many  were  faithless;  but  their  very  number
was  an  embarrassment,  and  they  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood  "  hungry,  and  weary,
and  thirsty."  Very  welcome,  therefore,  were  the  supplies  which  these  chieftains
brought  for  their  relief,  and  which  the  historian  enumerates  with  so  much  evident
pleasure.  They  thus  cheered  the  heart  of  David,  contributed  very  materially  to  his
final  victory  over  his  rebellious  son  and  subjects,  and  obtained  for  themselves  a  good
name.  In  the  Christian  warfare  against  error  and  sin  there  is  room  and  need  for  this
kind  of  service.  The  progress  of  the  spiritual  cause  depends  no  little  on  the  material
aids.  As  soldiers  must  eat  and  drink  in  Order  that  they  may  fight,  so  Christian
ministers  and  missionaries,  however  spiritual  and  holy  and  disinterested,  cannot  preach
and  teach  unless  they  are  fed  and  clothed,  and  their  work  facilitated  by  various
appliances  which  are'only  to  be  obtained  and  maintained  by  money  or  money's  worth.
It  is  only  in  exceptional  cases  that  competent  labourers  are  able  to  support  themselves
by  the  labour  of  their  hands  or  from  their  private  fortunes.  Hence  the  absolute
necessity  that  Christians  should  furnish  material  supplies,  and  the  certainty  that  the
progress  of  the  Christian  cause  in  the  world  will  be  greatly  hindered  if,  through  indiffer-
ence or  avarice,  such  supplies  are  scantily  furnished.  In  our  time  the  duty  of  furnish-
ing them  more  abundantly  needs  to  be  pressed  on  the  attention  of  the  disciples  of
Christ  with  much  urgency.  The  world  is  almost  everywhere  open  to  the  missionary ;
devoted  men  and  women  offer  themselyes,  ready  to  go  anywhere  to  make  Christ  known  ;
but  In  many  instances  they  cannot  be  sent  forth  for  want  of  the  means  of  sending  and
sustkining  them.    That  the  ability  of  Christ's  servants  in  this  direction  is  being


OH.  xvn.  1— 29.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  43«

employed  to  tbe  utmost  is,  incredible  in  view  of  the  lavish  expenditure  of  many  of
them  on  worldly  display  and  luxury.  The  disposition  is  wanting ;  and  this  in  part
because  a  conviction  has  not  yet  been  awakened  in  their  hearts  of  the  necessity  and
worth  of  pecuniary  supplies,  and  the  imperative  duty  and  high  honour  of  furnishing  them.
Such  a  conviction  may  be  promoted  by  due  attention  to  the  following  considerations.

I.  The  obligations  of  all  Cheistianb  in  respect  to  the  promotion  of  the
KINGDOM  OP  God  w  the  world  are  the  bame.  The  character,  the  toils,  the  self-
denying  endurance  of  hardships  and  privations,  of  many  missionaries  and  other  ministers
of  the  gospel,  awaken  admiration  and  applause.  But,  amongst  those  who  applaud,  the
feeling  is  often  wanting  that  they  are  themselves  as  really  and  truly  bound  to  devoted
service  of  Christ  as  the  men  whom  they  admire.  1.  Objects  of  the  same  Divine  love,
redeemed  by  the  same  precious  blood,  called  by  the  same  grace,  partakers  of  the  t^ame
privileges  and  hopes,  they  ought  to  cherish  a  like  ardent  love  to  Christ,  and  with  a  like
zeal  seek  to  fulfil  the  purposes  for  which  he  lived  and  died.  2.  They  are  equally
"stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God"  (1  Pet.  iv.  10;  1  Chron.  xxix.  14,  16).  3.
They  are  equally  bound  to  love  their  feliow-men,  and  seek  their  good  to  the  utmost  of
their  power

II.  The  neobssitt  of  material  supplies  affords  to  all  thb  opportdnitt  of

BEING  PARTNERS   WITH  THB    NOBLEST   WORKERS    IN    SUSTAINING  AND   EXTENDING  THB

kingdom  OF  God.  The  good  women  who  ministered  to  our  Lord  of  their  substance
(Luke  viii.  2,  3)  became  thus  partakers  in  his  work.  The  Philippians  who  showed
hospitality  to  St.  Paul  when  amongst  them  (Acts  xvi.  15),  or  sent  gifts  to  him  after-
wards (Phil.  iv.  14 — 16),  are  recognized  by  him  as  having  "  fellowship  "  ft)artnership)
with  him,  "  in  furtherance  of  the  gospel "  (Phil.  i.  6,  7,  Eevised  Version).  St.  John
describes  those  who  were  hospitable  to  evangelists  as  their  "fellow-helpers  to  the
truth "  (3  John  8).  In  like  manner,  all  who  subscribe  of  their  money  towards  the
support  of  Christian  ministries  and  missions,  have  the  honour  of  being  fellow-workers
with  those  who  give  the  ablest  personal  service.  This  was  recognized  by  the  lad  who
hastened  to  a  missionary  meeting,  and  being  asked  the  reason  of  his  eagerness,
replied,  "  I  have  a  share  in  the  concern."  Bible,  missionary,  and  other  societies  have,
by  awakening  such  thoughts  and  feelings,  done  much  to  enlarge  and  elevate  the  minds
of  the  myriads  of  their  supporters  in  every  part  of  Christendom.

III.  Giving  exercises  the  same  Christian  vietues  as  personal  service.  For
right  and  sufficient  contribution  of  substance,  as  for  right  preaching  and  teaching,
are  required :  1.  Faith  and  love.  2.  Conscientiousness.  3.  Self-denial.  Indeed,  all
Christian  principles  and  affections  are  brought  into  play  in  the  course  of  earnest  service
of  either  kind.  Both  are  processes  of  education  of  the  Christian  soul,  by  which  the
lessons  of  Christ  are  more  thoroughly  learnt.

IV.  It  is  EQUALLY  ACCEPTABLE  TO  GoD.  St.  Paul  calls  the  present  he  had  received
from  the  Philippians  "an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing
to  God "  (Phil.  iv.  18 ;  see  also  Heb.  xiii.  16).  Right  motives  are,  of  course,  pre-
supposed ;  but,  when  these  are  present,  both  kinds  of  service  are  equally  acceptable.
"  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  shall  receive  a  prophet's
reward  "  (Matt.  x.  41).

V.  It  shall  obtain  a  similar  recompense.  In :  1,  The  consciousness  of  Divine
approval.  2.  The  pleasure  of  serving  Christ.  3.  The  Jot/ of  doing  the  highest  and  most
enduring  good  to  men.  4.  77ie  rewards  of  the  last  day.  The  expressed  approval  of
Christ.  Admission  to  "the  joy  of  the  Lord "  (Matt.  xxv.  21,  23).  Participation  with
Christ  and  the  saints  in  the  joy  of  final  and  complete  victory  over  the  powers  of  evil.
Every  true-hearted  sharer  in  the  work  and  conflict  shall  share  in  the  gladness  of  the
triumph,  when  not  only  the  sower  and  the  reaper  (John  iv.  36),  but  those  who  have
furnished  them  with  needful  support,  shall  "  rejoice  together."

Finally,  we  must  not  think  of  workers  and  givers  as  two  distinct  classes  of  persons,
having  no  part  in  each  other's  functions.  All  Christians  can  and  ought  to  render
personal  service  as  well  as  contributions.  There  is  need  and  room  for  all  to  labour  as
well  as  give.  In  maintaining  Church-life,  in  teaching  the  ignorant,  in  seeking  ami
saving  the  lost,  in  comforting  the  sorrowful,  etc.,  there  is  scope  for  the  talents  of  all
No  one  can  by  his  gifts  purchase  freedom  from  such  services.  We  must  gire  •ccount
of  every  talent  committed  to  us. — Q.  W.


436


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xvin.  1— 33.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVIIL


Ver.  1. — And  David  numbered.  The  verb
really  means  that  he  organized  his  army,
and  arranged  it  in  companies  and  divisions.
As  Absalom  gathered  all  Israel  to  him,  there
would  be  some  delay ;  and  David,  like  a  wise
general,  made  use  of  it  for  training  the
brave  but  undisciplined  men  who  had  joined
him,  chiefly  from  GUead.  Besides  these,  he
kad  with  him  numerous  veterans,  whose
skill  and  experience  would  be  Invaluable  in
such  service.  The  result  was  that  when  the
rebels  came  to  close  quarters,  they  had  a
vast  body  of  men,  but  David  a  disciplined
force,  which,  under  skilful  generalship,  scat-
tered Absalom's  raw  levies  with  ease.  The
arrangement  into  thousands  and  hundreds
was  in  accordance  with  the  civil  divisions
(Exod.  xviii.  25),  both  being,  in  fact,  dic-
tated by  nature  as  multiples  of  our  hands.

Ver.  2. — A  third  part.  Armies  are  usually
divided  into  three  divisions :  a  centre  and  two
wings  when  drawn  up  for  battle ;  a  van,  the
main  body,  and  a  rearguard  when  on  the
maish.  But  the  Israelites  had  no  settled
rule  upon  the  point,  and,  when  occasion
required,  Joab  divided  his  aimy  into  two
parts  (oh.  x.  9,  10).  The  reason  of  the
threefold  division  in  this  case  was  that  Ittai
had  brought  his  clan,  or  taf,  with  him,  and
as  these  would  certainly  not  have  fought
under  an  Israelite  leader,  nor  the  Israelites
under  Ittai,  David  placed  all  foreigners
under  his  command,  while  he  gave  his  own
nephews  the  command  of  the  native  troops.
He  thus  avoided  all  jealousies;  and  Ittai's
men,  honoured  by  being  made  a  distinct
portion  of  the  army,  would  feel  their  re-
putation at  stake,  and  would  rival  the
Israelites  in  valour.  •

Ver.  3. — It  is  better  that  thou  succour  us
out  of  the  city.  David  thought  it  to  be  his
duty  to  go  out  with  the  men  who  were  risk-
ing their  lives  in  his  cause,  but  tliey  felt  not
only  how  painful  it  would  be  for  a  father  to
fight  agaiust  his  son;  but  also  that  there
would  certainly  be  a  picked  body  of  men  who
would  try  to  bring  the  battle  to  a  rapid  end
by  slaying  David.  But  while  they  partly
urge  personal  considerations,  their  chief
argument  is  that  David  would  be  of  more
use  i^  posted  with  a  body  of  troops  at  the
city,  he  held  himself  in  reserve  to  succour
any  division  that  miglit  be  in  danger.  And
David,  seeing  how  earnest  their  wish  was,
yielded  to  this  representation,  feeling  that
it  would  give  steadiness  to  his  men  V.  they
Icnew  that  so  experienced  a  general  was
vatehing  the  fight,  and  was  ready  to  succour
lien»  if  they  needed  aid.    Aj  the  people  say


that  it  wonld  not  matter  "  if  half  of  va  die,"
and  that  David  "  is  worth  ten  thousand  of
us,"  Ewald  draws  the  reasonable  conclusion
that  their  whole  number  was  about  twenty
thousand  men.  The  Hebrew  literally  is,
"  For  now  ('oitaA)  as  us  are  ten  thousand,"
which  might  mean, "  There  are  ten  thousanii
such  as  we  are,  but  no  one  like  thee."  But
the  Septuagiut  and  Vulgate  read,  "But  thou
(fltldli)  art  as  ten  thousand  of  us."  The
Syriao,  however,  like  the  Hebrew,  reads
«  now."

Ver.  5. — All  the  people  heard.  The  king
spake  so  earnestly  and  strongly  to  the
generals  that  the  words  ran  &om  rank  to
rank  as  they  marched  forward.  So  in  ver.
12  the  man  says  to  Joab,  "In  our  hearing
the  kiug  charged  thee  and  Abishai,"  etc.
It  does  not  follow  that  each  one  heard  the
sound  of  the  king's  voice,  but  only  that  the
command  was  given  publicly  again  and
again,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  army.

Ver.  6. — The  wood  of  Ephraim.    There  ia
a  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the  locality  thus
described.    It  might  mean  the  large  forest
tract  in  the  highlands  of  Ephraim ;  but  if
so,  the  battle  must  have  been  fought  on  the
west  of  the  Jordan,  whereas  the  general
tenor  of  the  narrative  makes  it  plain  that
it  took  place  on  the  eastern  side,  near  Maha-
naim.    It  ia  true  that  no  wood  of  Ephraim
is  ever  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  Bible  as
situated  in  Gilead,  and  those  who  cannot
believe  in  such  a  wood  except  within  the
borders  of  the  tribe,  argue  that,  after  the
three  divisions  had  marched  out  to  battle,
there  was  long  skirmishing,  in  which  Absa-
lom drew  David's  men  across  the  Jordan,  and
there  gave  battle.    But  Absalom's  army  was
evidently  surprised,  and  as  we  are  told  that
"  he  pitched  in  the  land  of  Gilead  "  (ch.  xvii.
26),  for  liim  to  have  retired  would  have  been
a  confession  of  weakness ;  and  Joab,  after  see-
ing him  cross  the  Jordan,  would  not  have  fol-
lowed him,  but  let  this  retrograde  movement
have  its  effect  upon  his  followers.    Such  a
movement  is  absolutely  incredible  on  the  part
of  an  army  at  least  three  times  as  numerous
as  those  whom  they  attacked,  and  confident
of  victory.    Moreover,  armies  in  those  days
were  not  composed  of  men  receiving  pay,
and  bound  to  remain  with  their  colours,  but
of  yeomen  unwillirig  to  be  kept  long  absent
from    their   farms,    and   liable,    therefore,
rapidly  to  melt  away.    A  quick  decision
was  plainly  necessary  for  Absalom,  while
David  could  aflbrd  to  wait.    But  besides
this,  when  his  forces  moved  out  of  Maha-
uaim,  David  took  his  post  at  the  gate  with
the  reserves,  and  he  was  still  there,  sitting
"between  the  two  gates,"  wh^u  newt  w«f


flfi.  iVin.  1— 38.]       TflE  SECOND  BOOiS;  OF  SAMtJEL


431


brought  him  of  the  victory  (ver.  24).  The
only  real  aTgnment  in  suppoit  of  the  view
that  the  battle  was  fought  on  the  west  of  the
Jordan  is  that  "  Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  way  of
the  plain"  (ver.  23),  Hebrew,  the  hikkar —
a  name  specially  given  to  the  valley  of  the
Jordan  near  Jericho.  But  then  Cushi
must  also  have  run  through  the  same
valley,  and  it  is  evident  that  his  route  was
in  this  very  respect  difierent  from  that
taken  by  Ahimaaz.  Beally,  hikkar,  which
in  Hebrew  means  "circuit,"  may  be  used
of  the  country  round  any  city,  and  is  applied
in  Neh.  xii.  28  to  the  environs  of  Jerusalem.
Here  the  meaning  probably  is  that,  while
the  Oushite  took  the  route  back  over  the
battle-field  through  the  wood,  Ahimaaz
went  to  the  left  of  it,  over  the  more  level
ground,  nearer  the  Jordan.  And  though
the  name  is  chiefly  used  of  that  part  near
Jericho,  it  was  probably  applied  popularly
to  every  stretch  of  level  ground  near  the
river.  This  argument,  therefore,  is  incon-
clusive ;  while,  on  the  other  side,  it  ia  plain
that  David's  army  returned  that  same  day
to  Mahanaim,  that  they  knew  at  once  of  his
distress,  and  that  they  were  beginning  to
steal  away  home  when  Joab  made  David
come  forth  to  thank  them,  and  encourage
them  to  remain  with  him.  The  most  pro-
bable explanation  of  the  difScuIty  is  that
"  the  wood  of  Ephraim "  was  so  called  be-
cause it  was  the  spot  where  Jephthah  de-
feated the  Ephraimites  when  they  invaded
Gilead  to  punish  him  for  daring  to  go  to  war
without  their  consent,  they  being  tlien  the
dominant  tribe,  to  whose  arbitrament  be-
longed all  imperial  matters  (Judg.  xii.  4 — 6).

Ver.  8. — The  battle  was  there  scattered.
The  word  in  the  Hebrew  is  a  noun,  which
the  Massorites  have  changed  into  a  parti-
ciple. But  the  noun  is  right :  "  The  battle
became  a  scattering,"  that  is,  it  was  a  series
of  disconnected  encounters,  in  which  David's
three  divisions  attacked  and  routed  Absa-
lom's men,  while  still  on  the  march,  without
giving  them  an  opportunity  of  collecting  and
forming  in  order  of  battle.  And  the  wood
devoured  more  people  that  day:  than  the
sword  devoured.  The  woodland  was  diffi-
oult,  full  of  gorges  and  bogs  and  steep
defiles  leading  down  to  the  Jordan,  and
the  fugitives  easily  lost  their  way  in  it,
and  wandered  about  till  they  were  hope-
lessly entangled  in  thicket  and  morass.

Ver.  9. — Absalom  met  the  servants  of
Savid.  The  verb  means  that  he  came  upon
them  by  chance.  Evidently  in  the  intri-
cacies of  the  forest,  Absalom  had  lost  his
way,  and,  finding  himself  suddenly  in  danger
of  being  captured  by  some  of  David's  men,
he  urged  his  mule  through  a  thicket,  as  the
open  ground  was  blocked  by  his  pursuers.
Bat  in  the  attempt  his  heaid  was  jammed


between  the  boughs  of  a  great  terebinth,
and  the  mule,  struggling  onward,  left  him
hanging  in  mid-air.  Nothing  is  said  about
his  hair  having  caused  the  accident,  and
apparently  it  was  his  neck  which  became
fixed.  Probably,  too,  he  was  half  stunned
by  the  blow,  and  choked  by  the  pressure ;
and  then  his  hair  would  make  it  very  diffi-
cult for  him  to  extricate  himself.  And  so,
after  one  or  two  eiforts,  in  which  he  would
be  in  danger  of  dislocating  his  neck,  he
would  remain  suspended  to  await  his  fate.
Now,  this  adventure  makes  the  whole  affair
perfectly  plain.  Absalom  was  riding  his
mule,  evidently  unprepared  for  battle.  The
chariot  and  hoises,  with  fifty  men  as  his
budy-guard,  used  by  him  at  Jerusalem  (ch.
XV.  1),  are  nowhere  near  him.  Chariots,  of
course,  would  have  been  useless  on  such
rough  ground,  but  Absidom  would  have  had
a  picked  body  of  young  men  round  him  in
the  battle ;  and  mules  were  only  for  use  on
the  march,  and  were  sent  into  the  rear  when
the  fighting  began.  But  the  last  thing  that
Absalom  expected  was  that  he  should  be
attacked  on  the  march.  He  was  advancing
with  an  army  infinitely  more  numerous  than
that  of  David,  and  assumed  that  David
would  wait  at  Mahanaim,  and,  if  he  fought
at  all,  would  fight  under  its  walls.  His
defeat  he  regarded  as  certain,  and  then  the
vain-glorious  prince  and  all  Israel  would
drag  the  city  into  the  nearest  ravine,  In
this  over-confidence  he  was  riding  in  ad-
vance of  his  array,  which  was  struggling  on
over  most  difficult  ground.  For  "rising
as  the  country  does  suddenly  from  the  deep
valley  of  the  Jordan,  it  is  naturally  along
its  whole  western  border  deeply  furrowed
by  the  many  streams  which  drain  the  dis-
trict ;  and  our  ride,"  saya  Canon  Tristram,
"  was  up  and  down  concealed  glens,  which
we  only  perceived  when  on  their  brink,  and
mounting  from  which  on  the  other  side,  a
short  canter  soon  brought  us  to  the  edge  of
the  next"  (Tristram,  p.  462).  Struggling
along  over  such  ground,  Absalom's  men  were
not  merely  tired  and  weary,  but  liad  lost
all  order,  and  "become  a  scattering,"  and
probably  Absalom  had  cantered  on  in  order
to  find  some  suitable  spot  for  re-forming
them.  Suddenly  he  sees  at  a  little  distance
before  him_  one  of  the  three  detachments
of  David's  army,  which  had  marched  out  a
few  miles  from  Mahanaim,  and  posted  them-
selves on  some  fit  spot  to  attack  the  rebels
on  their  march.  Apparently  they  caught
no  glimpse  of  him,  but  he  immediately
became  aware  of  the  tactics  of  the  king's
generals,  and  discerned  the  extreme  danger
of  his  position.  Everything  depended  upcin
celerity.  If  he  could  warn  his  men,  the
foremost  would  halt  until  the  others  came
up,  and  a  sufBcient  force  be  gathered  t«


4dd


THte  SECONt)  BOOK  OJ*  SaMXJeL.        ["h.  xvm.  1-33.


resist  Joab's  onslaught.  There  was  no
cowardice  on  his  part,  but  simply  the  dis-
charge of  his  duty  as  a  generaL  He  turns
his  mule  round,  and  dashes  away  in  order
to  halt  and  form  his  men,  keeping  to  the
wood  that  he  may  not  be  seen.  In  his  great
haste  he  is  not  careful  in  picking  his  route,
and  possibly  bis  mule  was  stubborn,  and
swerved ;  and  so,  in  attempting  to  force  his
way  through  the  thicket,  ha  is  stunned  by
a  blow  from  a  branch  of  s  terebinth  tree,
and  so  entangled  in  its  boughs  that  he  can-
not free  himself;  and  as  none  of  David's
men  had  seen  him,  he  might  have  hung
there  to  be  the  prey  of  the  vultures,  and
only  his  riderless  mule  have  been  left  to
bear  witness  to  his  having  met  with  some
disaster.  Meanwhile  his  followers  struggle
on,  until  they  come  upon  David's  men,  who
put  them  to  the  sword.  There  is  no  battle,
but  the  three  divisions,  advancing  in  order,
make  merciless  slaughter  of  their  opponents.
For  some  time  Absalom's  forces,  extended
over  many  miles  of  march,  do  not  even  learn
what  is  going  on  in  their  front,  and  twenty
thousand  men  had  fallen  before,  becoming
aware  of  their  defeat,  they  fly  in  wild  con-
fusion, to  lose  more  men  in  their  panic  than
had  fallen  in  fighting.  Their  loss  would
even  have  been  greater  had  not  Joab  stopped
the  pursuit  upon  Absalom's  death.  But
where  was  Amasa,  and  what  was  he  doing  ?
He  had  led  his  troops  miserably,  had  taken
no  precautions  against  surprise,  and  did
nothing  to  rally  them.  Had  Absalom  got
back  in  safety  to  the  van,  he  might  have
saved  his  men  from  so  disastrous  a  defeat ;
but  Amasa,  doubtless  a  brave  soldier,  proved
himself  quite  incompetent  to  the  duties  of
a  commander-in-chief,  and  no  match  for  the
sagacious  Joab.

Ver.  11. — ^A  girdle.  This  was  an  impor-
tant article  of  dress  (Ezek.  xxiii.  15),  and
was  often  richly  embroidered.  Absalom's
death  was  well  deserved,  and  there  can  be
little  doubt  that,  if  he  had  gained  the  victory,
lie  would  have  massacred  David  and  all  his
family.  The  dishonour  done  to  his  father
at  Jerusalem  was  even  intended  by  Ahitho-
phel  to  render  all  reconciliation  impossible.
But  Joab  was  disobeying  the  king's  express
orders,  and  as  Absalom  was  incapable  of
making  resistance,  he  ought  to  Iiave  taken
him  prisoner,  and  left  it  to  David  to  decide
what  his  punishment  should  be.

Ver.  12. — Though  I  should  reoeiTe.  The
Hebrew  text  expresses  the  horror  of  the
man  at  Joab's  proposal  much  more  vividly
than  the  tame  correction  of  the  Massorites
admitted  into  the  Authorized  Version:  "And
I,  no  I  weighing  in  my  palm  a  thousand
of  silver,  I  would  not  put  forth  my  hand
against  the  son  of  the  king."

Ver.  13.— Against  min*  own  life.    Again


the  K'tib  is  better :  "  Or  had  I  wrought  per-
fidiously against  his  life— and  nothing  ii
hidden  from  the  king — so  wouldst  thou
have  set  thyself  against  me."  Not  only
was  the  man  faithful  to  the  king,  but  he
was  perfectly  aware  of  Joab's  unscrupulous
character.  If  only  Absalom  were  put  out
of  the  way,  Joab  would  have  readily  con-
sented to  the  execution  of  the  unimportant
person  who  had  been  the  means  of  gratify-
ing his  wish.

Ver.  14. — Three  darts ;  Hebrew,  three
ilavet  (see  ch.  xxiii.  21).  The  weapons  of
the  ancients  were  of  a  very  inferior  kind,
and  stakes  sharpened  at  the  end  and  hard-
ened in  the  fire  were  used  by  the  infantry,
until  the  increasing  cheapness  of  iron  made
it  possible  to  supply  them  with  pikes.  Joab's
act  was  not  one  of  intentional  cruelty,  but,
picking  up  the  first  weapons  that  came  to
hand,  he  hurried  away  to  kill  his  victim.
His  thrusts  with  these  pointed  sticks  were
brutal,  and  inflicted  mortal  wounds ;  but  as
they  were  not  immediately  fatal,  Joab's
armour-bearers,  who  had  followed  him,  and
who  had  with  them  Joab's  own  better
weapons,  were  called  upon  to  put  an  end
to  Absalom's  sufierings.  His  heart  does
not  mean  that  organ  anatomically,  but  the
middle  of  his  body.  So  at  the  end  of  the
verse,  in  the  midst  of  the  oak,  is,  in  the
Hebrew,  tn  the  heart  of  the  terebinth.

Ver.  16. — Joab  blew  the  trumpet.  Stem
and  unscrupulous  as  he  was,  yet  Joab  is
always  statesmanlike.  He  had  slain  Absa-
lom more  for  public  than  for  private  reasons,
though  he  may  have  grimly  remembered  his
own  blazing  barley-field.  But  the  rebellion
being  now  crushed,  further  slaughter  was
impolitic,  and  would  only  cause  sullen  dis-
pleasure. The  people,  at  the  end  of  the
verse,  are  those  under  Joab's  command,  and
a  translation  proposed  by  some,  "Joab
wished  to  spare  the  people,"  is  to  be  rejected.

Ver.  17. — ^A  great  pit ;  Hebrew,  the  great
pit;  as  though  there  was  some  great  hollow
or  well-known  depression  in  the  wood,  into
which  they  cast  Absalom's  dead  body,  and
raised  a  cairn  over  it.  Such  calms  were
nsed  as  memorials  of  any  event  deemed
worthy  of  lasting  remembrance,  but  the
similar  caim  piled  over  the  dead  body  of
Achan  (Josh.  vii.  26)  makes  it  probable
that  the  act  was  also  intended  as  a  sign  of
condemnation  of  Absalom's  conduct.  All
Israel  fied  every  one  to  his  tent.  The  Israel-
ites were  still  a  pastoral  people,  with  tents
for  their  abodes,  though  houses  were  gradu-
ally taking  their  place.  The  cry, "  To  your
tents,  O  Israeli"  (1  Kings  xii.  16),  meant,
«  GrO  away  to  your  homes  I "  and  not "  Gather
for  war  I "  It  is  remarkable  how  constantly
Absalom's  followers  are  described  as
"Israel,"  while  the  loyal  men  are  "David'l


<m.  ivm.  1— 3S0       THE  SECOND  SOOK  Of  SAMtJEL.


439


Bervanta."  Absalom's  wa»  evidently  the
popular  cause,  and,  besides  Uriah's  murder,
there  must  have  been  political  reasong  for
discontent  at  work  to  make  David's  govern-
ment so  distasteful,

Ver.lS. — ^Absalom . . .  had  taken  and  reared
np  .for  himself  a  pillar.  In  contrast  with
the  heap  of  stones  cast  over  his  dishonoured
body,  the  narrator  calls  attention  to  the
costly  memorial  erected  by  Absalom  in  his
lifetime.  The  three  unnamed  ions  men-
tioned in  ch.  ziv.  27  seem  to  have  died  in
their  infancy,  and  probably  also  their
mother;  and  Absalom,  instead  of  taking
other  wives  to  bear  him  sons,  which  would
have  been  in  unison  with  the  feelings  of  the
time,  manifested  his  grief  by  raising  this
monument.  We  hare  no  reason  for  suppos-
ing that  it  was  the  result  of  vanity  and
ostentation.  Ostentatious  he  was,  and  mag-
nificent, but  hii  not  marrying  again  is  a
sign  of  gennine  sorrow.  The  king's  dale  is
"the  Valley  of  Shaveh,"  mentioned  in  Oen.
xiv.  17 ;  but  whether  it  was  near  Jerusalem,
as  Josephus  asserts,  or  near  Sodom,  ii  un-
certain. The  pillar  was  probably  an  obelisk,
or  possibly  a  pyramid,  and  certainly  was
not  the  Ionic  column  of  Boman  workman-
ship shown  in  the  Middle  Ages  and  at  the
present  time  as  "Absalom's  grave."  This
is  in  the  Kidron  valley,  about  two  furlongs
from  Jerusalem.  Absalom's  place ;  literuUy,
Absalom' »  hand  ;  that  is,  memorial  (see  note
on  1  Sam.  xv.  12).

Ver.  21. — Cnshi  This  is  not  a  proper
name,  but  signifies  that  he  was  an  Ethi-
opian, that  is,  a  negro  slave  in  Joab's  service.
Joab  was  unwilling  to  expose  Ahimaaz  to
the  king's  displeasure,  and  we  gather  fi:om
ver.  27  that  the  sending  of  a  person  of  low
rank  would  be  understood  to  signify  evil
tidings.  The  bearer  of  good  news  received
a  present,  and  therefore  the  passing  over
all  Joab's  personal  friends  to  send  a  slave
was  proof  that  the  message  was  not  expected
to  bring  the  bearer  honour  or  reward.  And
Joab  was  quite  right  in  supposing  that
David  would  be  more  displeased  at  his  son's
death  than  pleased  at  the  victory,

Ver.  22.— Seeing . . .  thou  hast  no  tidings
ready.  This  was  not  true ;  there  were  most
important  tidings  ready.  But  it  is  the  trans-
lation which  is  in  fault.  What  Joab  said
is,  "  Seeing  thou  hast  no  tidings  that  find,"
that  is,  no  message  that  will  find  for  thee
the  king's  favour  and  a  reward.

Ver.  23. — ^Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  way  of  the
plain ;  Hebrew,  the  kikkar,  or  Jordan  valley.
The  battle,  as  we  saw  in  ver.  6,  was  fought
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river,  and  Absa-
lom's army,  in  their  flight,  would  endeavour
toreach  the  fords  of  the  Jordan  (comp.  Judg.
xii.  5) ;  and  probably  Joab  had  pursued  them
for  some  distance  before  the  man  found  in


the  thicket  the  body  of  the  unfortunate  Absa-
lom. The  large  slaughter  of  twenty  thousand
men  (ver.  7)  proves  that  the  defeated  rebels
were  vigorously  followed.  In  carrying  the
news  the  negro  evidently  went  back  by  the
route  which  the  troops  had  followed ;  while
Ahimaaz,  using  his  more  developed  intellect,
took  B  longer  course  to  the  west,  but  one
that  avoided  the  tangles  and  the  deep  de-
files of  the  forest.  Strictly,  the  Kikkar,  as
we  have  seen,  was  the  name  of  the  Jordan
valley  near  Jericho;  but  it  was  probably
applicable  also  to  the  same  sort  of  formation
further  north.  On  approaching  Mahanaim,
Ahimaaz  would  strike  inland,  and  the  two
routes  would  join  one  another;  and  one
reason  which  made  Ahimaaz  go  more  to  the
west  was  that  he  did  not  wish  the  Gusi.  te  to
know  that  he  had  a  rival.  He  would  thus
go  at  a  steady  pace,  picking  his  way  through
the  forest,  while  Ahimaaz  was  using  his
utmost  speed.

Ver.  24. — David  sat  between  the  two
gtttes.  The  gateway  was  in  a  tower  in  the
city  walls,  and  David  was  sitting  in  the
space  between  the  inner  and  outer  gates.
Over  this  space  was  a  chamber,  mentioned
in  ver.  33,  while  the  sentinel  was  posted
upon  the  front  wall  over  the  outer  gate.

Ver.  25. — ^If  he  be  alone.  In  case  of
defeat  there  would  have  been  a  crowd  of
runaways  in  eager  flight.  And  when  soon
afterwards  a  second  courier  is  seen,  as  he  also
is  alone,  and  comes  by  a  different  route,  his
appearance  only  suggests  the  idea  of  com-
pleter tidings.  And  quickly  the  foremost  is
recognized  by  his  running  as  the  son  of  the
high  priest,  and  David  is  then  assured  that
all  has  gone  well,  because  Joab  would  not
have  sent  a  man  of  such  rank  to  be  the
bearer  of  bad  news.  The  word  good  may
also  mean  that  Ahimaaz  was  too  brave  a
man  to  have  fled  from  the  battle,  and  must,
therefore,  have  come  on  an  errand  from  Joab.

Ver.  28.— And  said  unto  the  king.  All  is
well;  Hebrew,  Peace.  This  was  the  ordi-
nary salutation  among  the  Israelites,  but  its
hurried  exclamation  on  the  part  of  the
breathless  runner  was  probably  intended  to
convey  the  idea  given  in  the  Authorized
Version.  Hath  delivered  up  the  men,  etc ;
Hebrew,  hath  hedged,  or  shut  in  (see  upon
this  expression  the  note  on  1  Sam.  xvii.  46,
and  comp.  Ps.  xxxi.  8).  Both  there  and  in
ch.  xxii.  20  prosperity  is  compared  to  the
being  in  a  broad  place,  where  there  is  free-
dom to  act  (see  also  note  on  ch.  xiii.  2).

Ver.  29.— Is  the  young  man  Absalom  safe  ?
literally,  Is  there  peace  to  the  lad  Absalom  ?
Was  this  mere  love  for  the  handsome  but
rebellious  son,  whose  image  comes  back  to
the  father  as  he  was  when  just  reaching
manhood?  Certainly  not.  David  was
thinking  of  the  ominous  words,  "  The  sword


na


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.       [ch.  xviu.  1— 33.


shall  never  depart  from  thine  house  "  (oh.
xii.  10),  The  sword  had  devoured  one  son ;
■was  it  now  to  olaim  another?  And  then  ?
and  then?  Where  would  it  stop?  And
Ahimaaz  saw  the  king's  distress,  and  gave
an  evasive  answer.  He  understood  now
Joab's  unwillingness  to  let  him  carry  suoli
painful  tidings,  and  was  glad  tliat  this  part
of  the  news  had  been  entrusted  to  the
Cushite.  When  Joah  sent  the  king's  ser-
vant, and  (me)  thy  servant.  This  distinction
is  strange,  and  probably  one  of  these  phrases
has  crept  in  from  the  margin.  But  if  the
Ethiopian  was  technically  "the  king's
slave,"  and  Ahimaaz  "  thy  slave "  (by  cour-
tesy), we  might  imagine  that  negro  attend-
auts  already  formed  part  of  the  state  of
kings.  It  was  long  afterwards  that  Ebed-
melech  was  a  Cushite  in  the  service  of  Zedo'
kiah  (Jer.  xxxviii.  7).

Ver.  31. — Tidings,  etc.  The  literal  mean-
ing is  more  fit  for  the  mouth  of  a  slave.
"Let  my  lord  the  king  learn  the  tidings
that  Jehovali  hath  judged  (and  delivered)
thee  this  day  from  the  hand,"  etc. ,  that  is,
God,  litting  aa  Judge  at  the  assize  of  battle ;


hath  given  sentence  for  thee,  and  pro-
nounced thy  acquittaL  The  same  phrase
occurs  in  ver.  19.

Ver.  82.— Is  the  young  man,  etc.  ?  Alarm
for  Absalom  is  the  dominant  feeling  in
David's  mind ;  and  as  Gushi  had  been  sent
for  (he  very  purpose,  he  ait  once  communicates
the  news  to  him  in  words  that  leave  no
doubt  of  his  meaning.

Ver.  33. — ^The  king  was  much  moved.  The
Hebrew  word  properly  refers  to  agitation  of
body.  A  violent  trembling  seized  the  king,
and,  rising,  he  went  up  to  the  guard-cham-
ber over  the  two  gates,  that  he  might  give
free  course  to  his  lamentation.  The  whole  is
told  so  vividly  that  we  can  scarcely  doulit
that  we  have  here  the  words  of  one  who  wa«
present  at  this  pathetic  scene,  who  saw  the
tremor  which  shook  David's  body,  and
watched  him  as  he  crept  slowly  up  the
stairs,  uttering  words  of  intense  sorrow.
And  it  was  conscience  which  smote  him ;
for  his  ovm  "  sin  had  found  him  out."  la
Ps.  xxxviii.  and  xl.  he  haS  made  the  confes-
sion that  it  was  his  own  iniquity  which  was
now  surging  over  his  head.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 18. — ^The  facts  are :  1.  David,  refreshed  by  the  aid  sent  him,  sets  himself
to  the  work  of  organizing  his  followers,  and  divides  them  into  three  corps,  under  Joab,
Ab'shai,  and  Ittai  respectively.  '^.  On  his  proposing  to  head  the  force,  the  people  urge
him  to  desist  from  doing  so,  pointing  out  that,  in  case  of  a  conflict,  the  enemy  would  be
sure  to  make  an  endeavour  to  kill  him  rather  than  to  fight  a  regular  battle.  3.  The
king  yields  to  their  persuasions,  and,  as  they  suggest,  abides  by  the  city  to  render  succour
if  required.  4.  Having  seen  his  men  march  out,  he  lays  strict  injunction  on  his
captains,  in  the  hearing  of  their  forces,  to  deal  gently  with  Absalom  for  his  sake.  5.
A  severe  battle  takes  place,  in  which  the  followers  of  Absalom  are  defeated  with  great
slaughter.  6.  Absalom,  in  riding  through  a  wood,  is  entangled  in  the  branches  by
his  head,  and,  while  hanging  there,  is  seen  by  a  man  who  reports  the  fact  to
Joab.  7.  On  being  reproached  for  not  slaying  Absalom,  the  man  reminds  Joab  of  the
solemn  injunction  of  the  king,  and  that  he  was  restrained  by  that,  as  also  by  the  fear
of  being  discovered  should  he  attempt  the  deed  in  secrecy.  8.  Joab  in  a  rage  takes
three  darts,  and  thrusts  them  through  the  heart  of  Absalom,  and  his  armour-bearers
also  join  in  the  infliction  of  wounds  on  his  body.  9.  Joab  thereupon  recalls  the  people
from  the  pursuit,  and  causes  Absalom  to  be  buried  in  a  pit  and  covered  by  a  heap  of
stones,  the  only  monument  in  his  memory  being  the  pillar  which  he  himself  had  erected
during  his  lifetime.  10.  On  the  death  and  burial  of  Absalom  becoming  known,  his
forces  are  dispersed,  each  man  fleeing  to  his  tent.

2%e  discharge  <^ painful  obligations.  The  hasty  flight  of  David  from  Jerusalem  was
not  the  result  of  cowardice,  but  of  prudence  and  of  spiritual  penetration.  He  thought
it  possible  that  a  movement  which  had  won  over  so  able  a  man  as  Ahithophel,  and
which  had  developed  so  secretly,  might  issue  in  a  sudden  rising  which  would  involve
the  city  in  bloodshed.  Moreover,  with  the  keen  spirilual  insight  which  ever  character-
ized him,  he  could  not  but  see  in  this  rebellion  the  chastising  hand  beforo  which  it
became  him  in  his  lifelong  penitence,  mingled  with  sincere  trust,  to  bow.  But  now
that  Jerusalem  was  safe  from  bloodshed,  and  the  sanctuary  of  God  was  undefiled,  and
his  faithful  adherents  were  refreshed  and  in  personal  safety,  the  time  had  come  to
consider  his  position  and  devise  such  measures  as  Providence  might  render  possible;  aad


Cti.  iviii.  1-33.]       tHE  SECONt)  BOOK  OJ*  SAMtlEL.  441

he  tlius  at  once  found  himself  face  to  face  with  the  unwelcome  necessity  of  waging  war
against  his  own  son.  We  may,  then,  take  this  as  illustrating  the  obligations  under
which  good  men  sometimes  find  themselves  to  pursue  a  course  most  distressing  to
their  feelings.

L   As  A  MATTER  OF  FACT,  OBLIGATIONS  INVOLVING   MOOH  PAIN   IN   THEIB  BISCHARGB
DO  ABISB  SOME  TIME  OB  OTHEB  IS  THE   COURSE  OF  A  GOOD   MAN'S  LIFE.      OuT  entire  life

is  a  continuous  duty.  Obligations  attend  us  every  day.  Eight  action  means  fulfilment
of  purposes,  obeying  laws,  harmony  with  moral  necessity.  The  pressure  is  incessant,
and  ordinarily  is,  for  the  Christian,  a  not-unwelcome  yoke.  But_  now  and  then  duty
is  in  forms  requiring  all  the  resources  of  a  strong  will,  and  in  a  direction  against  some
of  the  most  cherished  feelings  of  the  heart.  David  was  bound  to  care  for  the  kingdom
over  which  he  had  been  appointed  by  God.  The  validity  of  his  anointing  was  still
unrevoked  by  him  who  ordained  it.  It  was,  therefore,  due  to  himself,  his  kingdom,
and. his  God  that  he  should  take  means  to  put  down  the  usurpation  of  his  own  son.
Paternal  feeling  might  be  pained,  but  the  obligation  was  imperative.  The  Church
furnishes  many  such  instances.  The  most  tender  of  ties  have  been  severed  in  order
to  be  true  to  Christ's  commands.  The  doing  of  his  work  in  the  world  often  costs  much
pain  because  of  its  apparent  antagonism  to  those  best  loved.  Peter  did  not  exercise
discipline  in  the  early  Church  without  anguish  of  spirit  (Acts  v.  1 — 5).  The  reproofs
of  the  Apostle  Paul  were  with  much  sorrow  of  heart.  Letters  are  daily  written  with
tears.  Parents  daily  have  to  resist  the  self-will  of  sons  and  daughters,  and  they  mourn
the  sad  necessity.     Fidelity  to  right  is,  in  many  instances,  a  secret  martyrdom.

II.  In  the  mental  conflict  incident  to  the  discharge  of  dutt,  the  sense
OF  eight  rises  above  personal  considerations,  llie  whole  history  of  David  proves
that  when,  at  Mahanaim,  he  began  to  collect  his  thoughts  and  consider  the  path  of
wisdom,  a  most  painful  conflict  must  have  arisen  in  his  mind  as  to  the  course  to  be
taken.  The  clearer  the  conviction  that,  as  God's  anointed,  he  was  bound  to  put  down
the  force  that  was  driving  him  from  the  throne,  the  sharper  the  pang  awakened  by  the
thought  of  raising  the  sword  against  his  own  child.  The  battle  had  to  be  fought  out
within  his  own  nature  before  it  was  transferred  to  the  open  field.  The  human  spirit
is  the  arena  of  great  struggles  and  victories,  before  men  see  visible  triumphs.  The
dreadful  disaster  had  for  a  time  taken  away  David's  strength ;  the  pains  of  hell  got
hold  of  him :  he  was  poor,  weak,  and  forlorn.  But  now  the  recollection  of  duty  to
God  and  man  brought  back  his  old  courage  and  resolution ;  and  the  calm  and  sol>er  way
in  which  he  began  to  marshal  his  forces  showed  that  help  had  come  from  God  to
subordinate  the  anguish  of  his  heart  to  the  sense  of  duty.  Providence  seems  to  work
along  these  lines  in  the  training  of  the  best  men.  Character  is  strengthened  by  the
triumph  of  conscientious  regard  for  the  will  of  God  over  the  strivings  of  personal  con-
siderations. If  to  fight  against  a  son,  to  face  the  possibility  of  much  slaughter,  and  to
see  a  prosperous  reign  darkened  by  civil  war,  were  evils  endured  by  David  in  order
to  carry  out  the  kingly  purposes  of  his  anointing,  how  does  it  become  Christians,  in
carrying  out  the  purposes  of  their  special  anointing,  to  bring  every  thought,  desire,  and
preference  into  subjection?    Christ  has  left  us  the  noblest  example  of  tUs.

III.  A  resolve  to  subordinate  personal  considerations  to  a  sense  of  duty
being  taken,  a  good  man  will  devise  means  of  meeting  difficulties  and
SECURING  THE  END  IN  VIEW.  The  season  of  mental  conflict  being  passed,  and  stern
duty  being  accepted,  David  proves  his  courage  and  sagacity  by  his  calm  determination,
his  collection  of  resources,  his  estimate  of  his  numerical  strength,  his  dispositions  for
meeting  difBoulties  and  accomplishing  the  end  in  view,  his  preparedness  to  incur
personal  risks,  his  acceptance  of  good  and  generous  counsel,  and  his  precautions  against
disaster  at  the  outset  (vers.  1—5).  The  king's  soul  was  evidently  sustained  by  the
assurance  often  expressed  in  the  Psalms  that  the  Lord  was  his  Salvation ;  and  this,
instead  of  encouraging  neglect  and  carelessness,  stimulated,  as  it  always  dues,  energy
to  work  along  the  lines  of  the  Divine  purpose.  The  emotions  of  the  fifither  are  kept
under  by  prompt  and  energetic  application  of  all  the  powers  of  body  and  mind  to  the
performance  of  kingly  duty.  Our  faith  in  God  and  in  the  realization  of  his  purpose
will  appear  in  the  zeal  with  which  we  work  to  bring  that  purpose  to  pass.

IV.  In  suBOBDiNATiNa  febsonal  considebations  to  a  sense  of  duty,  a  good  man

WELL  NBVEBTEELE88  CHEBISH  BENmiENTS  NATUBAIi   TO    HIB    BEIiATIOHaHm.      Davjd


442  TSfi  SECOND  BOOK  Of  SAMtJEL.       [<«■  *«a.  1-33.

suppressed  the  pain  of  making  war  on  liis  son  because  it  was  right  so  to  do;  but  that
did  not  imply  the  uprooting  from  his  heart  of  those  feelings  of  tenderness  and  com-
passion and  yearning  sorrow  which  are  proper  to  a  father,  even  for  a  prodigal  son.  He
did  not  waver  in  his  kingly  design  to  subdue  rebellion,  nor  did  he  show  a  wicked
leniency  towards  an  evil  life  in  the  son,  when  he,  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  army,
enjoined  on  Joab  to  "  deal  gently  with  the  young  man  Absalom."  The  rebel  was  his
own  child,  and  a  pious  heart  coidd  not  but  wish  to  have  opportunity  once  more  to  pour
upon  that  child  the  full  force  of  its  sorrowful  love,  in  hopes  of  winning  him  over  to
a  sense  of  his  guilt.  No  feeling  so  natural  as  the  wish  that  a  prodigal  may  not  be  cut
off  by  unpitying  hands  in  the  midst  of  his  sins.  The  legal  question  as  to  what  would
have  to  be  done  with  a  captured  rebel  was  not  yet  for  decision.  Sanctified  human
nature  simply  yearned  to  save  the  sinner  from  men  as  cruel  as  the  grave.  Knowing
the  character  of  Joab,  and  being  a  stranger  to  mere  personal  revenge,  David  urged  upon
him,  as  a  strong  restraint,  consideration  for  himself  as  king  and  father.  There  are  many
Christian  parents  to-day  who  feel  for  their  erring  ones  just  as  David  did  for  his,
•Ithoogh,  like  him,  they  are  obliged,  out  of  regard  to  their  families  and  themselves,  to
pursae  a  line  of  rigid  duty.  Hope  of  salvation  never  dies  from  a  parent's  heart.
Beautifully  does  this  adumbrate  the  compassion  of  God  towards  his  prodigals  I  "  Deal
gently  with  him"  seems  to  be  the  message  sent  forth  to  the  forces  which  work  out  the
king's  purposes  in  the  discipline  of  life.  "  Do  not  crush  him  "  is  the  spirit  of  God's
government.    How  much  we  each  owe  to  that  I

y.   ThEBB  ABE  PBOyiDENTIAL  ENCOnBAGEUENTS  TO  THE  SnBOBDINATION  OF  FEB80KAL

OONBIDEBATIONB  TO  A.  SENSE  OF  DUTT.  David  was  helped  in  his  mental  conflict  by
reflection  on  the  past  and  present.  He  was  so  far  spared  by  God.  Sympathetic  friends
had  brought  him  aid  when  in  great  distress.  His  own  followers  were  intelligently
loyal  (ver.  3),  and  were  obviously  strong  in  their  confidence  in  the  justice  of  his  cause.
This  kind  of  external  support  is  of  great  service  when  a  man  Is  passing  through
a  straggle  as  to  whether  he  can  perform  a  painful  duty.  Generally  when  God  assigns
duties  involving  pain  in  the  performance,  provision  is  made  for  encouragement.
When  our  Saviour  required  his  apostles  to  renounce  all  and  to  look  on  to  persecution
like  tfaa.t  which  he  was  suffering  from,  he  cheered  them  by  the  promise  of  the
Comforter,  and  a  peace  which  the  world  could  not  give.  The  Resurrection  made  them
strong  to  endure  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  to  subordinate  love  of  home,  friends,  and
country  to  the  obligation  of  fighting  against  evil  in  the  world.

Gknebal  lessons.  1.  In  the  time  of  disaster  it  behoves  us,  when  occasion  arises
for  reflection  on  the  situation,  to  avail  ourselves  with  vigour  of  the  resources  for
recovering  our  position  which  God  places  around  us.  2.  One  of  the  best  preservatives
from  utter  despondency  is  a  remembrance  that  God  has  a  work  for  us  to  accomplish  in
life,  and  hence,  the  more  clearly  this  is  kept  in  view,  the  more  readily  shall  we  be  able
to  face  disagreeable  duties.  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  citizens  to  take  precautions  for  the
safety  of  those  in  high  positions,  since  the  welfare  of  the  state  is  involved  in  their
lives.  4.  One  of  the  elements  of  a  perfect  moral  character  to  be  attained  to  is  the
balance  between  the  most  rigid  justice  and  the  cherishing  of  feelings  free  from  the
taint  of  personal  revenge.  5.  As  in  the  state  we  ought  to  do  things  for  the  "  king's
sake  "  which  do  not  involve  a  breach  of  morality,  so  in  the  Church  there  are  things
we  should  do  for  Christ's  sake,  which  would  not  be  done  did  we  simply  follow  out
the  bare  tendencies  of  our  imperfect  nature  and  conform  to  the  usages  of  society.

A  revelation  of  sin  and  its  issue.  The  remarkable  space  given  in  the  sacred  history
to  the  life  and  conduct  of  Absalom  in  their  relation  to  David  may  arouse  the  question
as  to  the  reason.  It  is  not  easy  to  assign  all  the  reasons  that  may  have  operated  in
the  mind  of  the  inspired  collector  of  the  annals  of  Israel  to  give  such  prommence  to
these  details;  but  we  may  be  safe  in  saying  that  it  was  the  Divine  will  to  set  forth,
for  the  instruction  of  all  ages,  the  discipline  of  the  "man  after  God's  own  heart,  and
also,  for  the  same  object,  the  development  and  issue  of  sin  in  a  conspicuous  instance.
Men  learn  a  lesson  written  out  in  large  bold  characters;  and  herein  lies  most  of  the
teaching  value  of  the  Old  Testament  histories.  We  may,  then,  trace  here,  m  a  concrete
instance  and  striking  form,  illustrations  of  what  all  sin  more  or  less  is  and  involves,
though  tfa*  particular  forma  it  wsumes  may  vary.


0H.xv«.l-a3j        tHE  SECOiJt)  BOOK  OJ"  SAMtTEL.  443

I.  AlIKN ATION  OF  HEART  AND  LOSS  OP  THE  GENUINE  FEELING  OP  BONSHTP.      Absalom

had  known  a  time  when,  in  the  asseitiun  within  his  own  spirit  of  self-hood,  he  virtu-
ally ceased  to  be  a  true  son.  This  was  his  fall.  The  old  child-affection  became
weak ;  an  aversion  sprang  up ;  father  was  no  longer  regarded  as  a  father  should  be,
and  child  ceased  to  be  genuine  child.  This  was  the  secret  of  all.  It  was  a  sort--  of
moral  death.  The  schism  was  more  than  political.  Virtually  he  had  said,  "  I  will
be  free  and  do  as  I  wish."  This  is  also  the  essence  of  our  sin  against  God.  Adam  lost
somehow  the  sonship  feeling.  Self-will  asserted  its  power.  God  became  one,  and  he
another.  Union  was  gone.  This  is  our  Saviour's  teaching  in  the  parable  of  the
prodigal  son.  The  young  man  was  weary  of  his  father,  and  wanted  to  do  as  he  liked
away  from  him.  If  we  examine  our  hearts,  it  will  be  found  to  be  the  same  with  our-
selves. Sin  is,  negatively,  destitution  of  the  sonship  feeling ;  positively,  the  assertion
of  self-hood  as  against  God.  In  this  lies  its  desperate  evil,  its  incurable  vice,  its  secret
of  doom.

n.  A  PEEVEESION  OF  GIFTS.  As  soou  as  Absalom's  heart  was  gone,  he  began  to  use
up  his  beauty,  his  eloquence,  his  scheming,  eveiy  faculty  of  his  nature,  to  render
him.self  happy  in  his  self-hood,  and  to  be  able  to  dispense  with  his  father's  favour.  In
human  nature  all  gifts  flow  in  the  line  of  one  master-feeling.  Hence  when  the
dominant  feeling  is  alienation  from  God,  the  entire  man  goes  away,  and  all  powers
are  made  subservient  to  self  as  against  the  rightful  dominion  of  God.  The  prodigal
son  used  his  patrimony  away  from  his  father.  Sinners  use  up  their  patrimony  for  self,
and  not  in  harmony  with  God.    Kindness  is  abused.

III.  A  BESOLVB  TO  GET  BID  OP  AUTHOKITY.  For  a  time  Absalom  simply  cherished
the  fteling  of  alienation  and  knew  the  misery  of  a  lost  love.  But  evil  is  a  force,  and
we  cannot  remain  as  we  are  when  it  once  enters  the  soul.  The  wretchedness  of  a  lost
love  put  him  on  the  way  to  get  rid  of  the  authority  which  existed  in  spite  of  his  loss
of  loving  delight  in  it.  Thought  begets  thought,  and  so  in  due  time  positive  rebellion
arose.  The  royal  father  must  be  formally  dethroned.  There  is  a  corresponding  phase
in  the  life  of  many  a  sinner.  It  is  misery  to  be  loveless  and  to  know  at  the  same  time
that  God  lives.  Hence,  thoughts  flow  in  suggesting  how,  by  what  scepticism,  or
^sbelief,  or  defiance,  or  desperation  in  vice,  he  can  be  dislodged  from  the  conscience.
Possibly  the  war  becomes  violent.  No  more  welcome  thought  to  some  men  than  that
God  is  not.     Lost  love  means  in  the  end  antagonism.

IV.  There  is  fob  a  while  an  appeabanoe  of  success.  Unhappy  Absalom  found
abettors  and  flatterers.  His  independent  spirit  accorded  with  the  temper  of  others.
His  endeavours  to  live  without  his  father's  love  and  blessing  seemed  most  successful,
for  never  did  men  make  so  much  of  him  as  now  when  he  has  shaken  off  the  yoke  of
dependence  and  has  gone  in  for  a  free  life.  His  "  strength  was  firm."  The  aim  of  his
ambition  seemed  within  reach.  Wise  and  astute  men  encouraged  and  helped  him  and
forces  were  placed  at  his  disposal.  So  all  seems  to  go  well  for  a  while  with  those  who
are  alienated  from  God  the  Father.  No  visible  punishment  comes  on  them.  They  are
free  from  restraints  to  which  once  they  submitted.  They  "  become  as  gods,  knowing
good  and  evil.  Others,  some  of  them  wise  and  learned  and  astute,  encourage  them  in
their  mode  of  hfe  and  join  in  their  aims.  The  forces  of  wit,  learning,  science,  worldlv
sagacity,  combine  to  enable  them  to  put  down  the  authority  to  which  they  ousht  to
•ubmit.    These  are  the  wicked  who  prosper  in  the  world.

V.  TmiBE  AEE  THE  BEGINNINGS  OP  BBVEESE.  Absalom  finds  his  forccs  Scattered  bv
a  force  the  stren<ith  of  which  he  did  not  expect  to  meet.  The  mighty  array  of  power
on  his  side  receives  a  check  (vers  6-8).  He  has  to  learn  that  the  authority  despised
can  make  itself  felt.  And  m  the  course  of  Providence  there  are  times  when  events
remind  sinners  that  God  still  rules  over  forces  which  they  cannot  resist,  that  powers
are  at  work  before  which  they  have  to  bow.  Sickness,  bereavement,  adverse  conditions
.JT  !T  .T^^"^  ^P^'"'  P'^^'Ss  of  conscience,  and  personal  wretchedness,  come
IrJ^itT"  *^P™"'^  *"*y  "^  wit  leaming,  jovial  companionship,  and  stoutnes-
of  will,  as  the  rebel  army  was  beaten  down  in  the  wood  of  Ephraim     Wicked  mm

nZhS  r    T  °I  t^*^"f  ^''^  ^;ff «  "  fell«  o^  them.    The  conscience  sees,  as  w,  b
pr^hets  eye,  the  dark  shadows  of  the  future  in  passing  events.

thlt  ^^^''Jt'-l  «™  ?ASTEN  iiESTBuoTioN.     The  pride  of  Absalom's  person  wai
the  means  of  hastemng  hu  death.    The  hair  which  had  been  so  much  admired,  whicfc


m  TAB  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUSL.       ton.  ivta  1—38.

he  covmted  as  a  treasure,  and  made  him  coDspicuons  In  Israel,  now  combined  with
the  silent  forces  that  ran  through  the  forest  trees  to  bring  him  into  the  judgment  for
which  his  course  of  rebellion  had  been  preparing  him.  When  God's  time  has  come,  he
has  many  instruments  for  effecting  his  purpose.  The  best  gifts  of  sinful  men  some-
times get  so  entangled  with  the  stable  order  of  nature  as  to  prematurely  bring  their
life  to  an  end.  There  are  always  "  branches  "  stretching  out  in  the  natnral  order  of
things,  forming  objects  against  which  the  powers  and  possessions  of  men  run,  to  their
detriment  and  speedy  death.  The  young  man's  natural  vigour,  of  which  he  is  prond,
may  run  against  a  resisting  force  which  shatters  it  in  proportion  to  its  strength.
Brilliant  intellects,  in  their  defiance  of  Grod,  have,  in  modern  times,  become  so  absorbed
in  literary  work  bearing  on  their  infidelity,  as  to  be  caught  early  in  the  arms  of  death.
Of  how  many  may  it  be  said  that  their  beauty  has  been  their  destruction !

VII.  Theib  memobt  is  destined  to  be  UNHONonBBD.  Absalom,  proud  of  his  name
and  ambitious  of  posthumous  fame,  erected  a  memorial  pillar  for  himself — a  mournful
premonition,  as  it  were,  of  his  miserable  end.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  mortify-
ing to  him,  had  he  known  it,  than  to  be  cut  down  from  a  tree  like  a  common  felon  and
be  buried  as  a  dog.  The  wicked  are  cut  off;  their  memorial  perishes.  It  may  be  that
men  who  die  in  sin  have  reared  to  their  memory  tablets  or  monuments  of  marble  or  brass;
but  the  truth  remains  that  they  shall  have  no  everlasting  memorial  in  the  assembly  of
the  upright  in  the  new  Jerusalem.  Earthly  monuments  are  perishable.  It  is  said  of
those  who  are  so  unfortunate  and  guilty  as  to  die  in  a  state  of  alienation  from  God,  that
their  name  shall  "  rot "  (Prov.  x.  7).  The  only  enduring  order  of  things  is  that  of  the
kingdom  of  God :  it  "cannot  be  shaken,"  and  a  place  in  that  kingdom  alone  can  ensure
a  perpetual  memorial.  Those  who  are  true  sons,  who  have  recovered  the  lest  feeling  of
love,  shall  shine  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Father,  and  shall  be  heirs  with  Christ  of  his  glory
and  joy.    The  wicked  shall  go  into  "  outer  darkness."

Genebal  lessons.  1.  The  attention  of  all,  especially  of  the  young,  should  be  called
to  tbe  fact  that  the  right  feeling  of  sonship  is  that  of  loving  submission,  and  that  the
loss  of  this  towards  earthly  parents  is  really  the  fruit  of  a  loss  of  the  filial  feeling  towards
the  heavenly  Father.  2.  If  we  would  form  right  notions  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  the  need
and  nature  of  atonement,  and  the  punishment  awarded  to  sin  in  Scripture,  we  must  pay
due  regard  to  what  sin  is  in  its  essence — the  assertion  of  self  against  God.  3.  We  see
here  the  real  nature  of  the  change  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  adoption  into  the
redeemed  family  of  God — ^a  radical  change  of  the  governing  feeling  of  the  heart  in  relation
to  God.  Regeneration  is  the  inner  antecedent  of  the  conversion  of  the  entire  man.  4.
Young  men  may  take  warning  against  the  terrible  power  of  evil  when  once  they  break
the  bonds  of  love  to  parents,  and  in  this  first  and  chief  sin  they  have  the  germ  of
unspeakable  crimes  and  woes.  5.  Let  those  who  in  the  height  of  sinful  prosperity
imagine  that  all  is  going  well,  remember  that,  though  they  thus  rejoice,  yet  for  all  these
things  God  will  bring  them  into  judgment  (Bccles.  xi.  9).  6.  Both  the  righteous  and  the
wicked  may  accept  it  as  a  certainty  that,  in  some  way  or  other,  the  very  inanimate
creation  wiU  sooner  or  later  be  subservient  to  the  ends  of  justice.  7.  The.  best  monu-
ment we  can  rear  to  ourselves,  or  that  others  can  raise  to  our  memory,  is  that  blessed
memory  of  the  just  which  rests  on  a  life  of  love  to  earthly  parents  and  righteous  ful-
filment of  all  the  obligations  we  owe  to  God  and  man.

Tlie  place  of  principles  in  conduct.  The  controversy  between  the  "  certain  man  "  and
Joab  near  the  oak  where  Absalom  was  hanging  was  natural,  and  sprang  from  diversity  of
views,  which  took  their  shape  in  each  case  from  the  character  of  the  individuals.  The
man  was  an  ordinary  loyal  subject  of  David's,  simple  in  life  and  thought,  goveroed,  as
such  men  generally  are,  by  a  few  great  first  principles  of  conduct.  Joab  was  an  astute
man  of  the  world,  true  to  David  for  reasons  of  a  compound  nature,  entertaining  such
views  of  duty  and  life  as  generally  sway  the  minds  of  men  of  the  world,  who  regard
present  facts  in  the  light  of  an  unsentimental  expediency.  Bach  one  was  true  to
himself,  and  the  discussion  raised  was  well  sustained  on  each  side  by  reasons  cogent  to
the  men  themselves  who  expressed  them,  but  of  no  force  beyond  the  individual  to  con-
vert the  other  to  his  view.    We  see,  then —

I.  That  life  mat  in  different  men  be  conducted  on  different  and  totally
IBIBOONOILABLS  FBIN0IFLE8.    Here  was  a  simple  countryman  unwilling  to  touch  th9


OH.  xvm.  1— 83.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL  ■*«

life  of  Absalom,  wlely  because  of  the  king's  commandment  (vers.  5,  12,  13).  Tha
question  of  the  prudence  or  imprudence  of  the  act  was  not  for  a  moment  entertained.
Obedience  to  the  royal  authority  was  the  prime  duty.  This  belief  was  the  govern-
ing rule  of  conduct.  No  imaginary  advantage  to  Israel,  no  example  or  persuasion  of  a
great  general,  could  turn  the  man  from  this  fixed  principle.  On  the  other  hand,  Joab
swept  aside  aU  such  forceful  pressure  of  supreme  obligation  to  the  royal  will,  because  his
conduct  was  governed,  in  this  case  at  least,  by  a  worldly  wisdom,  a  consideration  of
what  seemed  to  himself  to  be  the  best  thing  to  do — a  policy  of  expediency.  There  was
a  general  admission  of  the  existence  and  value  of  what  the  countryman  regarded  as
primary  principles  of  conduct  on  the  part  of  subjects ;  but  theory  was  good  for  theorists,
and  Joab  was  a  man  of  deeds  when  matters  were  urgent !  1'hese  zn«u  certainly  repre-
sent two  classes — those  who  accept  first  principles  of  obligation,  primary  conceptions
of  duty  as  lying  at  the  very  basis  of  society  and  of  the  individual  life ;  and  those  who,
while  formally  admitting  the  existence  and  jiropriety  of  such  principles,  nevertheless
set  th'  m  aside  whenever,  for  prudential  reasons,  they  think  it  well  to  do  so.  There
are  such  primary  principles :  in  government,  the  law  of  the  ruler  is  supreme  ;  in  the
family,  e,g.,  the  expressed-  will  of  the  father  is  binding ;  in  matters  of  religion,  e.g.,
God  prohibits  unholiness  of  feeling,  malice,  cruelty,  and  commands  men  to  repent,
■  believe,  and  in  all  things  do  justly,  irrespective  of  consequences.  There  are  men  who  do
base  their  action  on  these  principles.  But  there  are  men  who,  like  Joab,  break  the  law
of  their  land,  and  set  aside  supreme  authority  for  reasons  of  their  own;  there  are
children  who  violate  the  fundamental  principle  of  domestic  order,  because  their  judg-
ment goes  against  their  parents ;  there  are  men  of  the  world  who  dare  to  disobey  the
Eternal  King's  commandment  in  relation  to  repentance,  faith,  and  unswerving  righteous-
ness of  life,  for  rea.sous  which  seem  to  them  sufficient  at  the  time.  Do  all  Christians
follow  out  the  regal  commands  as  to  righteousness  in  all  things?  Is  there  not  too
much  expediency  in  Christian  conduct  (cf.  Matt,  vi.)  ?

II.  Conduct  based  on  prompt  recoonition  of  first  pbutoiples  is  more  likely

TO  CHARACTERIZE  DNSOPHISTICATED  MEN  THAN  MEN  IMMERSED  IN  THE  PUBLIC  AFFAIRS.

This  plain  countryman  simply  tollowed  the  order  of  the  king  because  the  king's  will  to
him  WHS  sacred.  He  was  not  learned  in  casuistry,  not  versed  in  diplomacy,  not  skilled
in  keeping  the  letter  and  violating  the  spirit  of  the  Law.  He  was  amazed  that  any  one
should  think  of  deviating  from  a  command  so  plain.  Its  justice  or  injustice,  its  prudence
or  imprudence,  were  no  matters  for  him  to  settle.  Law  was  binding.  The  king  must
be  obeyed.  This  was  the  instinct  of  a  guileless  nature.  The  force  of  the  principle  of
obedience  to  the  authority  of  God's  anointed  was  recognized,  because  his  spirit  was
politically  and  morally  sound  and  pure.  Joab  was  a  man  of  the  world,  a  man  of  many
designs  and  combinations  of  thought,  a  man  whose  purity  and  guilelessness  were  gone.
In  the  struggle  of  high  and  low  principles  within  his  nature,  pure  principle  was  deprived
of  its  native  force.  Our  Saviour,  in  reference  to  much  higher  matters,  points  out  th  s
difference  of  conduct  proceeding  from  difference  of  character,  when  he  thanks  his  Father
that  "these  things,"  which  were  hidden  from  the  "  wise  and  pnidcnt,"  were  "  revealed
unto  babes"  (Matt.  xi.  25,  26).  We  must  become  as  little  children — guileless,  unso-
phisticated, quick  to  act  on  primary  principles  apart  from  the  warping  influences  ol
worldly  prudence,  if  we  would  enter  his  kingdom  and  be  as  he  was.  There  may  he  '
advantages  in  being  versed  in  affairs,  familiar  with  the  tricks  and  ways  of  men,  and
lamed  for  astuteness  and  such-like  qualities;  bnt  on  the  whole,  in  matters  of  pure  right
and  strict  adherence  to  clear  duty  to  God  and  man,  the  guileless  man  is  most  likely  to"be
the_  most  dependable.  Moral  intuitions  are  swift  in  the  pure-hearted,  and  to  debate
their  applicability  is  at  once  to  weaken  their  force.

III.  ClBOUMSTANCRS    MAY    ARISE   IN  WHICH  DEVIATION    FROM    PRIMARY   PRINCIPLES
MAY  AT  FIRST   APPEAR   MOST   CONFORMABLE   TO   REASON.      On  the  fac6  of  it  mOSt   men

would  have  said  that  Joab  was  justified  in  setting  aside  conscientious  scruples  about  the
sacredness  of  the  royal  command.  The  rebel  deserved  death,  the  only  place  of  restraint
for  him  was  the  grave,  the  king's  paternal  feelings  were  a  danger  to  the  state.  Providence
had  evidently  put  Absalom's  lifeiin  the  hands  of  Joab,  and  the  king  would  be  sure  to
condone  the  deed, — all  this  might  be  said  with  force.  So  may  it  be  argued  still.
Immediate  repentance  may  be  right ;  but  surely  a  man  whose  livelihood  is  at  stake  may
^  o^utiouf,  i^)d  not  by  «  suddepi  chauge  of  life  brfn^  himsejf  aijd  family  into  poverty !


446  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [<»•  xviu.  1— 33.

"Love  your  enemies"  is  a  Divine  command;  but  we  are  not  so  good  as  was  he  who
gave  the  command,  and  so  he  will  condone  our  cherishing  some  hatred !  Be  truthful
in  word  and  deed  is  the  meaning  to  us  all  of  Christ's  life ;  but  the  pressure  of  businese
and  the  difficulties  of  diplomacy  in  national  affairs  are  such  that  we  cannot  take  this
grand  law  of  life  into  dll  departments  of  actiyity  I  Thus  by  arguments  apparently  con-
clusive the  "  commandments  of  God  "  are  "  made  of  none  effect."

IV.  The  trdb  interests  of  ail  lie  in  adherbncb  to  primaet  prinoiples.  Joab,
by  his  deviation  from  the  king's  command,  while  seeming  to  secure  an  advantage  to
the  state,  was  really  sowing  the  seed  of  rebellion;  for  it  set  aside  the  supreme  law,  and
its  natural  tendency  was  to  weaken  the  royal  authority  throughout  Israel.  To  gain  a
temporary  advantage  at  the  cost  of  damaging  the  force  of  a  cardinal  truth  is  no  real  gain
in  the  end,  for  the  consequences  of  such  an  injury  are  incalculable.  Once  impair  the
supremacy  of  right  principles  in  the  national  or  individual  mind,  and  you  have  prepared
the  way  for  all  kinds  of  degeneracy.  Grod  never  departs  from  right,  and  his  ways
always  come  out  rifht.  Moral  principles  are  as  rigid  in  their  demand  for  implicit  and
full  recognition  as  any  laws  of  physics,  and  they  vindicate  their  neglect  with  as  absolute
a  certainty.  Christ  has  made  it  clear  that  strict  and  severe  adherence  to  his  authority
alune  will  issue  well.  The  sermon  on  the  mount  is  a  statement  of  unconditioned
practical  truth.  The  Church  of  Christ  would  have  done  more  for  the  world  had  this
sermon  been  more  recognized,  apart  from  the  limitations  of  accommodating  rules  of
interpretation.

Vers.  19 — 33. — The  facts  are :  1.  Ahimaaz  being  eager  to  convey  tidings  of  victoiy  to
the  king,  is  denied  permission  by  Joab,  who,  however,  sends  Cushi.  2.  Persisting  in  his
desire  to  run  after  Cushi,  Joab  at  last  allows  him  to  go.  3.  The  watchman  at  the  gate
(if  the  city  reports  to  the  king  that  a  runner  is  in  sight,  followed  by  another,  whereupon
David  takes  courage,  and  hopes  for  good  news.  4.  On  Abimaaz  being  the  first  to
arrive,  he  briefly  announces  that  all  is  well,  and  then  prostrates  himself  before  the
king,  and  blesses  God  for  having  brought  victory  to  the  king's  cause.  5.  David,  in
bis  deep  concern  for  Absalom,  inquires  after  his  safety,  and  receives  from  Ahimaaz  an
evasive  reply.  6.  Just  then  Cushi  comes  in  and  announces  tidings  of  victory,  and,  in
answer  to  the  question  as  to  Absalom's  safety,  bluntly  makes  known  the  fact  of  his
death.  7.  The  king,  overwhelmed  with  anguish,  enters  his  chamber,  and  there  pours
out  his  soul  in  a  most  pathetic  lamentation.

The  relation  "f  character  to  work.  The  work  recently  accomplished  by  Joab  now
gave  rise  to  another,  which  included  dements  of  good  and  evil.  He  was  keen  enough
to  see  that  the  communication  of  the  fact  of  victory  would  be  most  welcome  to  David,
but  that  a  statement  of  the  particulars  would  be  most  distressing;  and,  therefore,
with  his  usual  practical  sagacity,  he  sought  out  for  the  work  of  conveying  tidings  to  the
king  a  man  whose  character  would  fit  him  for  dealing  with  the  evil  side  of  the  message
very  much  as  he  himself  would.

I.  In    OAKBYINO   on    human    AFFAIBS    there    are    occasions    EEQUIRINa    THE    PEB-

FOBMANOE  OF  DISAGREEABLE  WORK.  It  was  a  pleasant  thing  to  have  to  announce  to
David  a  great  victory  over  his  foes,  but  far  from  pleasant  to  have  to  tell  him  what  had
become  of  his  son,  and  who  had  slain  him.  On  a  former  occasion,  when  evil  tidings,
blended  with  news  of  the  fall  of  a  foe,  was  brought  to  him,  it  went  ill  with  the  bearer
(ch.  i.  13—16).  In  this  case  the  disagreeable  work  arose  out  of  the  wrong  deeds  of  Joab.
One  evil  created  another.  Disobedience  to  absolute  authority  cannot  but  bring  the
transgressor  into  an  awkward  position  and  impose  unpleasant  obligations.  The  flow  of
human  life  is  a  flow  of  work.  In  consequence  of  transgression  against  God,  and  violation
of  social  order,  an  immense  amount  of  annoying  work  has  to  be  done.  The  sons  of
Jacob,  after  the  sale  of  their  brother,  found  difficult  work  on  their  hands.  The  imperfect
life  in  the  Church  creates  the  necessity  of  doing  things  that  pain  the  tender  heart,  and
which  is  more  adapted  to  rough  and  hard  men.  Evil  deeds  create  duties  which  always
carry  with  them  more  or  less  of  pain  and  sorrow.

II.  There  ib  a  natural  affinity  between  cbetain  ohabaoters  and  disa-
OREBABLE  FORMS  OF  WORK.  The  reasons  for  Joab's  rejection  of  Ahimaaz  were  probably
these :  fear  lest  he  should  so  state  the  facts  as  to  prejudice  David  against  himself,  and


OH.  xvm.  1— 33.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  01'  SAMUEL.  447

belief  that  his  nature  was  too  tender  and  sympathetic  for  what  he  regarded  as  the
proper  delivery  of  the  dark  side  of  the  message.  Joab  was  a  hard  and  blunt  man,  and
he  wanted  such  a  man  for  a  work  which,  because  disagreeable,  had  better  be  got  rid  of
as  quickly  as  possible.  If  David  should  be  angry  with  the  Cushite,  and  slay  him,  Joab
would  not  care  for  that,  provided,  in  the  blunt  and  straight  announcement  of  Absalom's
death,  no  tenderness  was  displayed  and  no  effort  made  to  compromise  himself.  Such
men  as  he  scorn  tenderness  as  weakness.  They  abhor  what  they  term  "  sentiment."
Joab's  character  fitted  him  to  send  the  painful  tidings  so  bluntly  and  unfeelingly
announced  by  Cushi  (vers.  31,  32).  As  a  rule,  character  finds  work  in  affinity  with
itself,  and  Joab  was  right  in  the  adaptation  he  sought  for  his  purpose.  As  character  is
often  a  prophecy  of  work  that  will  be  done  when  occasion  arises,  so  work  done  is  often
a  revelation  of  character.  Not  any  one  can  be  a  hangman.  Not  any  one  can  be  a
consoler  of  the  sick  and  dying.  Even  in  the  Christian  Church  there  are  kinds  of  work
for  which  a  peculiar  firmness  and  almost  severity  of  character  is  most  suited.  Only  an
Ambrose  could  overawe  an  emperor.  On  the  other  hand,  most  departments  of  Church
work  give  scope  for  men  of  the  Ahimaaz  stamp  rather  than  that  of  Cushi.

nL   An  INJURED  CONSCIENCE   BEADUiT   ADAPTS    ITSELF    TO    PAINFUL   WOBK   IBSUINQ

OUT  OF  FORMER  VIOLENCE  TO  ITSELF.  Joab  had  doDc  violencc  to  his  conscience  in
positive  disobedience  to  the  king's  commands  (vers.  12 — 14).  As  every  wrong  to
conscience  renders  its  testimony  for  right  the  feebler,  it  was  comparatively  easy  to
firame  a  blunt,  unsympathizin>!  message  for  the  Cushite  to  deliver  to  the  king.  There
was  as  real  disregard  for  David's  feelings  in  the  framing  of  the  hard,  unfeeling  message
as  in  setting  aside  his  command  to  spare  the  life  of  Absalom.  Thus  it  is  seen  that  the
human  conscience  has  the  wonderful  and  terrible  power  of  adapting  itself  to  the
environment  produced  by  its  own  abuse,  and  so  of  being  continuously  afiected  for  evil.
A  "  seared  conscience  "  is  another  expression  for  the  gradual  deterioration  of  sensibility
produced  by  the  enforced  habit  of  accommodating  itself  to  deeds  which  are  the  natural
outcome  of  former  misdeeds.

Sympathetic  enthusiasm.  The  son  of  Zadbk  espoused  the  cause  of  David  (ch.  xv.
27,  36)  in  spite  of  the  attractions  for  young  men  of  Absalom's  manners  (ch.  xv.  1 — 6).
It  was  a  noble  thing  for  this  young  man  to  hold  to  a  right  cause  in  the  day  of  adver-
sity, and  to  place  the  fleetness  of  his  feet  and  the  vigilance  of  his  ears  and  eyes  at  the
command  of  the  exile.  The  zeal  with  which  he  offered  his  services  to  Joab  to  convey
the  news  of  success  to  the  king,  was  in  keeping  with  his  past  reputation,  and,  as  the
sequel  shows,  was  blended  with  a  tender  regaid  for  the  king's  feelings.  In  contrast
witli  the  action  of  Joab  and  his  servant  Cushi  in  relation  to  David,  that  of  Ahimaaz  is
an  instructive  example  of  the  elements  that  enter  into  a  commendable,  sympathetic
enthusiasm.

I.  A  JUST  AND  GOOD  CAUSE.  There  may  be  great  enthusiasm,  but  it  may  be  wicked
because  manifested  in  an  evil  cause.  It  was  to  the  honour  of  the  son  of  Zadok  that  all
the  force  of  his  nature  was  devoted  to  the  righteous  claims  of  the  Lord's  anointed.  He
had  identified  himself  with  the  servant  of  Jehovah  in  the  day  of  trouble.  In  the  great
conflict  of  his  age  he  was  on  the  right  side.  This  is  the  primary  consideration  with  us
alUn  the  exercise  of  our  powers,  whether  the  questions  at  issue  be  political,  social,  or
religious.  We  can  take  no  credit  for  enthusiasm,  and  indeed  it  will  be  otherwise  our
sin,  unless  we  take  pains  to  see  that  we  side  with  what  is  essentially  just  and  good.
Energy  spent  in  advocacy  or  encouragement  of  a  party,  a  movement,  a  system,  a  belief]
or  a  practice,  is  not  of  moral  worth  apart  from  conscientious  motive.  Especially  in  the
supreme  question  of  every  age,  the  claims  of  Christ  as  against  the  demand  on  our

submission  and  service  of  lower  and  often  unholy  claims,  the  question  comes On  which

side  are  we?    Are  we  with  the  rightful  Kins  or  with  his  adversaries  ?

II.  Entire  self-devotion.  Ahimaaz  had  deliberately  identified  the  whole  interests
of  his  life  With  the  cause  of  the  exiled  king.  He  was  not  a  mere  observer  of  the  con-
flict. His  very  hfe  had  been  at  stake  when  he  entered  into  the  compact  (ch.  xv.
27.  33)  and  sought  out  the  banished  monarch.  He  had  gone  out  to  fight  the  battl«^
with  Joab,  and  was  most  eager  to  render  the  choicest  service  on  the  close  of  tne  day  ol
victory.  Enthusiasm  which  consists  of  approval  and  delight  in  the  season  of  prosperity
or  in  verbal  admiration,  is  of  no  substantial  worth.    The  men  who  crossed  hill  and  dnl


448  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.       [ch.  xvm.  1— 33.

and  lake  because  of  the  bread  tbey  ate  (John  yl.  24 — 27)  were  not  the  whole-hearted
disciples  Christ  cared  to  have.    Christ  would  have  the  entire  life  (Luke  ix.  59 — 62).

IIL  Pbompt  action  in  embbgbncies.  The  reality  of  this  young  man's  enthusiasm
appeared  in  his  ready  otlur  of  the  special  powers  with  which  he  was  endowed  to  the
urgency  of  the  hoar.  He  laid  his  best  and  most  cultivated  gifts  at  the  service  of  his  king
just  when  they  were  mo»t  required.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  entire  absorption  In  Christ's
work  that  there  is  not  only  the  primal  and  unreserved  surrender  of  life  and  all  its
interests  to  him  and  bis  kingdom,  but  also,  as  time  passes  on,  a  quick  perception  of
entire  work  is  needed,  and  an  Instant  readiness  to  use  any  aptitude  possessed  for  doing
the  work.  "  Here  am  I ;  send  me,"  is  the  feeling  of  true  enthusiasm  when  any  emergency
arises.  There  are  beautiful  instances  of  the  free  and  prompt  devotion  of  special  gifts
to  the  service  of  Christ  when  occasions  suddenly  arise  requiring  them.  Are  men  smitten
with  plague  or  sword  ?  Nurses  skilled  in  care  of  the  sick  are  at  hand.  Does  calamity
come  on  a  house  or  village  ?    There  are  eager  feet  swift  to  carry  gospel  consolations.

IV.  True  stkpatht  atnoiNO  action.  It  was  the  deep  and  genuine  sympathy  of
Ahimaaz  with  what  he  knew  were  the  most  tender  and  sacred  feelings  of  the  king's
heart  that  made  him  eager  to  go,  and  both  gladden  him  with  news  of  Ood's  deliverance,
and  at  the  same  time  gently  break  the  news  of  his  personal  loss.  This  gave  extra
speed  to  his  fleet  steps,  and  this  explains  his  reference  to  God's  goodness  (ver.  28),  and
^o  his  evident  desire  to  prepare  the  king  for  sad  tidings  (ver.  29).  He  felt  too  much
for  that  noble,  generous  heart  to  blurt  out  the  intelligence  which  he  knew  would  crush
it.  There  is  great  value  in  a  servant  who  understands  and  appreciates  the  most  tender
and  cherished  feelings  of  his  master.  This  sympathy  is  a  discriminating  guide  to  words
and  actions.  It  is  this  intense  sympathy  with  the  heart  of  Christ,  this  power  to
enter  more  than  others  do  into  the  very  passion  of  the  Redeemer  for  saving  men,  that
accounts  for  the  remarkable  zeal  and  discriminating  conduct  in  doing  religious  work
which  have  characterized  some  of  the  noblest  Christians.  The  nearer  we  get  to  the
heart  of  Christ,  the  more  truevfiU  our  enthusiasm  be.  The  natural  gifts  and  aptitudes
of  body  and  mind  then  turn  with  zest  to  all  wise  devices  for  advancing  the  interests
most  dear  to  him.

MisceUanieB.  In  connection  with  the  main  event  referred  to  in  the  narrative,  there
are  incidents  and  statements  which  suggest  a  variety  of  truths  bearing  more  or  less  on
ordinary  life  or  finding  their  parallels  therein.    Briefly  stated,  these  are  as  follows.

I.  Eager  men  awaiting  great  issues.  David  and  his  followers  at  the  gate  of
Mahanaim,  looking;  out  for  news  of  the  issue  of  the  conflict  then  being  carried  &n,
sensible  that  interests  more  precious  than  life  were  involved,  are  but  types  of  men  still
intent  on  learning  the  issue  of  undertakings  in  which  they  have  embarked  or  in  which
they  have  an  inexpressible  interest.  The  disciples  once  awaited  a  wonderful  issue
when  Christ  was,  during  bis  trial  and  death,  in  conflict  with  powers  of  darkness.  For
forty  days  before  Pentecost,  men  and  women  waited  for  signs  of  a  great  event.  Often
has  the  Church,  in  seasons  of  peril,  waited  in  agony  dming  the  crisis.  Men  engaged  in
ordinary  business  know  what  it  is  to  look  out  for  the  issue  of  great  ventures ;  and  in
private  religious  experience  there  are  times  when  the  soul  waits  and  watches  more  than
those  who  watch  for  the  morning.  What  great  and  momentous  issues  are  being
wrought  out  every  day  in  this  world  for  some  of  our  fellow-creatures  I

II.  Qualified  optimism.  "  All  is  well,"  said  Ahimaaz,  to  break  the  painful  suspense
of  the  watchers,  and  bring  early  consolation  to  the  king's  heart.  The  words  are  few,
but  wonderful.  Taken  in  their  strict  sense,  they  meant  to  David  more  thau  could
ever  be  expressed.  Happy,  indeeil,  is  the  man  of  whom  and  to  whom  these  words  can
be  unconditionally  spoken.  "  All "  is  the  term  of  widest  range  in  human  language ;  and
"  well "  is  the  greatest  and  best  afSrmation  that  can  ever  be  made.  In  David's  circum-
stances the  phrase  at  least  meant  that  his  cause  was  triumphant,  that  God  had  come  to
bis  help.  Ahimaaz  was  not  insincere  in  saying  what  he  did,  knowing  all  the  time  that
one  event  of  the  day  would  be  most  distressing  to  David.  His  optimism  was  qualified
by  a  reservation,  as  is  common  in  human  life.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  every  good
is  qualified  by  a  shade  of  ill.  Even  so  great  a  boon  as  redemption  bears  on  it  the  dark
shadow  of  a  Suffering  One.  The  greatest  victory  of  things  is  announced  amidst  the
W^it  of  widows  and  orphans.    The  possession  of  great  wealth  brings  with  it  carking


OH.  xvin.  1—33.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  MS

oarea.  Perhaps,  in  the  final  issue  of  all  events,  wlien  Christ  shall  have  put  down  all
authority  and  power  (1  Our.  xv.  27),  and  the  universe  has  gained  its  moral  equilibrium
after  the  long  struggle  between  good  and  evil,  it  may  be  true  in  an  absolutenense  that
"  all  ia  well;  "  but  till  then  our  optimism  must  be  qualified.

III.  A  PIOUS  paeent'b  absorbing  thought.  David  did  not  lose  his  character  of  parent
in  his  character  as  king.  As  the  anointed  one  he  was  intent  on  seeing  his  authority
iuly  established,  but  as  a  father  he  was  anxious  for  the  safety  of  his  rebellious  son.  By
no  process  could  he  divest  himself  of  his  parental  relation — dim  shadow  is  this  of  the
fatherly  relation  which  permeates  all  God's  regal  relations  to  mankind !  No  one  as  he
could  pity  the  erring  youth.  He  still  yearned  to  have  opportunity  of  bringing  some
influence  to  bear  on  his  ungrateful  heart.  The  direst  thought  to  him  was  the  possibility
of  life  being  cut  short  before  such  opportunity  arose.  "Is  the  young  man  safe?"
I'his  question  has  deep  significance  to  multitudes  as  they  think  of  their  children  out  on
the  wide  world,  exposed  to  its  deadly  ills.  It  comes  in  the  morning  with  the  light  of
day ;  it  intrudes  amidst  the  busy  thoughts  of  daily  business ;  and  it  is  often  the  last
thought  when  sleep  quiets  the  heart.  It  is  also  a  question,  in  its  spiritual  application,
above  all  questions  of  health  and  secular  prosperity.  To  be  "  safe  "  in  Christ  is  the
prime  concern  i  for  usefulness  to  others  and  growth  in  moral  good  ara  then  ensured,
while  at  the  same  time  the  dreadful  guilt  of  the  past  is  covered.

The  great  lammiation.  On  hearing  of  the  death  of  his  son,  David  retired  into
secrecy  and  poured  out  his  soul  in  perhaps  the  most  touching  language  to  be  found
in  the  Bible.  The  strength  and  depth  of  feeling  expressed  were  evidently  in  propor-
tion to  the  interest  which  all  along  he  had  cherished  in  this  abandoned  child.  Some
writers^  have  reproached  David  for  yielding  to  what  is  termed  "  weakness  "  for  a  son
whose  just  punishment  ought  to  have  been  accepted  with  a  calm  acquiescence.  But  the
criticism  on  his  conduct  is  not  really  justified  when  all  the  facts  are  considered.  .  He
was  a  man  constitutionally  of  strong,  generous  feelings^kindly  and  tender  in  his
bearing  toward  others.  A  father  cannot  forget  that  he  is  a  father ;  and  the  more
holy  and  generous  his  nature,  the  more  powerfully  will  the  fatherly  feeling  assert  itself.
Aiseen  incur  Saviour's  case,  when  he  wept  over  Jerusalem  already  doomed  because
of  sin  against  him,  equal  to,  yea,  worse  even  than,  that  of  Absalom,  the  natural
(eeliijgs  of  the  heart  may  flow  forth  in  most  touching  strains,  while  there  ia  in  the
soul  a  most  perfect  accord  with  the  righteous  judgment  of  God.  Nowhere  does  Scrip-
ture require  men  to  suppress  natvu-al  sentiments,  or,  in  other  words,  require  us  to  cease
to  be  true  human  beings  when  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  appalling  jud<'-
ments  of  God.  Moreover,  it  is  given  to  all  parents  to  cherish  hope  of  the  must  prodigal
of  sons  while  life  continues,  and  David's  personal  experience  of  the  mercy  of  God  was
such  as  certainly  warranted  his  cherishing  hope  of  the  renewal  and  salvation  of  even
this  wicked  son;  and  if  such  a  long-cherished  hope  was  suddenly  crushed,  and  that
too,  when  care  had  been  taken  to  prevent  its  being  crushed  (ver.  5),  surely  it  was  no
sm  for  lum,  but  an  acceptable  deed  in  the  sight  of  God,  when  he  vented  his  grief  that
nuw  all  hope  of  such  a  change  was  gone.  'J'here  is  no  complaint  asjainst  the  wisdom
and  justice  of  God,  no  trace  of  a  spirit  of  discontent  with  the  administration  of  Divine
love;  It  was  pure  sorrow  for  a  ruined  life.  David's  humanity  was  not  lost  in  his
kingly  office.  The  love  of  a  father's  heart  is  not  eradicated  by  a  son's  ingratitude.  The
parable  of  the  prodigal  son  is  evidence  of  this  and  also  of  its  Divine  counterpart.  And
in  the  case  of  David,  the  remembrance  of  his  own  sad  faU  having  possibly  exercised  a
detrimental  influence  over  Absalom,  just  in  the  most  critical  period  of  his  life  could
not  but  render  botli  just  and  natural  this  great  lamentation.  Taking,  then,  this  view  of
David's  conduct,  we  briefly  notice  the  following  truths.

I.  Religion  intensifies  and  purifies  natural  affeotioh.  Had  not  David  been
a  very  devout  man,  he  would  not  have  felt  such  deep  sorrow  over  the  death  of  Absalom
Religion  makes  a  father  a  true  father;  it  renders  love  of  offspring  a  more  sacred  thino-
This  follows  from  the  more  general  truth  that  religion  restores  man  to  his  normal  state'
Such  affection  has  no  relation  to  the  sin  of  the  child,  except,  perhaps,  that  the  sin
observed  tends  to  render  the  affection  more  yearning  and  pitiful,

II.  We  ABE  justified  in  cherishing  hope  while  life  lasts.  David  did  and  had
good  reasons  for  it.    The  gospel  encourages  it ;  the  revelation  of  the  Father's  great  love


450  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xvin.  1—33.

to  the  "  greatest  of  sinners  "  justifies  it.  Man  is  not  a  judge  of  what  may  be  done
either  by  the  most  guilty  or  for  them.  That  many  for  whom  parents  pray  and  strive
do,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  perish  in  their  sins,  is  no  reason  against  hope  while  life  con-
tinues.   Thousands  have  been  brought  to  God  in  the  eleventh  hour.

III.  The    death    op    OFFSPEINO    PBBSUMABLT    reckless    and    mPBNITENT    IS   THE

GREATEST  OF  PARENTAL  TROUBLES.  To  die  is  the  commou  lot,  and  natural  affection,
though  strong  and  pure,  does  not  face  death  without  consolations.  But  when  death
means  the  passage  into  eternity  of  a  soul  laden  with  guilt,  and  that  soul  once  the  object
of  delight  and  occasion  of  fondest  hopes,  then  the  most  terrible  of  woes  comes  on  a
pious  parent's  heart.  The  "  Redeemer's  tears  over  lost  souls,"  on  which  Howe  has  so
wonderfully  dwelt,  are  best  anderstood  by  those  who,  like  David,  have  wept  over  sons
cut  off  in  their  sins.

IV.  One  op  the  bitteebst  nroEBDiENTS  in  borrow  over  the  lost  is  that  op

REFLECTION  ON  PERSONAL  CONTRIBUTION  TOWARD  BRINGING  ON  THAT  CONDITION.      Davld

could  not  but  think  of  the  effect  on  his  son's  views  of  life  and  tendencies  of  heart  pro-
duced by  his  own  great  sin,  and  the  months  of  alienation  from  God  which  ensued.
How  far  parents  are  answerable  for  the  character  and  destiny  of  their  children  is  a  grave
question,  but  unquestionably  a  bad  example  in  their  early  years  cannot  -but  tell  per-
niciously on  their  future,  and  woe  cannot  but  come  on  the  father  in  darkest  form  when
he  connects  his  own  misconduct  with  the  hopeless  death  of  his  offspring.  What
manner  of  persons  ought  parents  to  be?  Who  knows  what  a  turn  a  single  lapse  into
sin  may  give  to  a  youth's  destiny  ?

V.  In  THE  PUREST   HUMAN  LOVE  WE   SEE  A  SHADOW  OP  God'S  GREAT  LOVE.      David's

lamentation,  Jeremiah's  wail  over  a  ruined  people  (Jer.  ix.  1,  2),  the  Apostle  Paul's
anguish  on  account  of  his  brethren  (Eom.  ix.  1 — 3),  and  especially  the  Saviour's  sorrow
over  Jerusalem  (Matt,  xxiii.  34 — 38),  set  forth,  so  far  as  we  can  know  of  such  a
mystery,  the  sorrowful  feeling  of  the  eternal  Father  (John  xiv.  7 — 9)  towards  those
who  live  and  die  in  sin.  God's  great  love  for  us  has  been  seen  in  this,  that,  while  we
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us  (Bom.  vi.  6 — 10).  He  actually  did  what  David
longed  to  do  for  Absalom.  Bedemption  in  Christ  embodies  the  best  and  noblest  of  all
feelings,  and  transcends  the  human  ideaL

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vera.  1 — 8. — (Mahanaim.)  DavicPs  victory  over  his  reheUioat  subjects.  Having
found  refuge  in  the  fortified  city  of  Mahanaim  (ch.  ii.  8),  and  recruited  their
exhausted  energies,  David  and  those  who  were  with  him  prepared  for  the  conflict
which  now  seemed  inevitable.  Meanwhile  (during  several  weeks)  Absalom  collected
a  great  army  (ch.  xvii.  11),  appointed  Amasa  captain,  crossed  the  Jordan,  and
encamped  in  the  land  of  Gilead  (ch.  xvii.  24 — 27).  Here,  "in  the  wood  of  Bphraim"
(ver.  6 ;  Judg.  xii.  4),  he  was  met  by  the  forces  of  David,  and  the  issue  was  quickly
decided.  "  The  traveller  who  only  knows  Palestine  to  the  west  of  the  Jordan,  can
form  no  idea  of  the  luxuriance  of  the  hillsides  of  Gilead.  Here  we  crossed  sparkling
rivulets,  where  the  sunlight  glinted  through  the  foliage  of  handsome  oak,  terebinth,
and  carob  trees,  and  traversed  glades  seldom  disturbed  by  the  foot  of  man,  which  led
into  the  oeep  solitudes  of  the  lorest.  In  one  of  these  Absalom  met  his  end;  and  one
could  well  understand,  as  one  came  suddenly  Uijon  the  brink  of  some  rock  or  gorge,
why  possibly,  in  headlong  and  disastrous  flight,  so  many  of  the  combatants  on  that
fatal  day  should  have  been  numbered  among  the  missing,  that  it  was  said  the  wood
devoured  more  than  the  sword"  (Oliphant).  Attention  is  especially  directed  to  David,
concerning  whom  observe—

I.  The  renewed  energy  op  his  charaotbe.  After  his  deep  humiliation,  the  old
king  is  himself  again.  His  youth  is  "  renewed  like  the  eagle's.  Passive  submisbion
is  succeeded  by  active  exertion,  to  which  he  is  urged  by  inward  impulses  and  new
circumstances.  There  is  a  time  to  pray,  and  a  time  to  work.  1.  He  actively  musters
his  friends  around  him ;  and  constantly  attracts  and  receives  reinforcements  from  the
people  who  dwell  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan  (ch.  xvii.  27 — ^29;  Ps.  xxvii.;  xxviii.;
ex.  3).     2.  He  skilfully  organizes  bis  forces,  appointing  captains  of  thousands  and


OH.  xvm.  1— 33,]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  461

captains  of  hundreds,  and  afranging  them  in  three  divisions  under  Joab,  Abishai,  and
Ittai  (oh.  XV.  19—22),  well  knowing  the  worth  of  able  leaders  and  of  strict  order
and  discipline  (oh.  viii.  15—18).  3.  He  courageously  purposes  to  go  forth  himself  into
the  conflict  (ch.  xxi.  17),  and  is  prevented  from  doing  so  only  by  their  considerate
determination  (ver.  4).  "  Those  who  engage  others  in  arduous  and  perilous  attempts
must  be  willing  to  take  their  fdll  share  of  hardship;  but  true  courage  and  firmness  of
mind  are  very  different  from  rashness  and  obstinacy,  and  wise  men  are  always  most
ready  to  listen  to  prudent  counsel,  even  from  their  inferiors"  (Scott).  4.  He  specially
charges  them  to  do  his  son  no  harm.  "  Gently  for  me  with  the  young  man  Absalom  "
(ver.  5) ;  "  Beware,  whoever  it  be,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  A  general  and  intense  feeling  of
resentment  is  naturally  felt  against  him ;  and  none  are  concerned  about  his  welfare,
save  his  father,  whom  he  has  chiefly  wronged.  "  See  what  a  thing  a  godly  father's
affection  is  to  his  child.  No  undutifulness,  no  practice  on  a  child's  part,  no,  nor  death
itself,  can  divide  between  him  and  his  child.  What  though  Absalom  can  forget  David,
yet  David  cannot  forget  him;  what  though  he  be  a  very  ungracious  imp,  yet  'he
is  my  child,  my  child,'  saith  David,  '  I  cannot  but  love  him ; '  and,  indeed,  he  over-
loves  him ;  which  I  do  not  commend,  but  only  observe,  to  note  the  strength  of  parents'
love,  if  it  be  natural — a  love  indeed  as  strong  as  death.  Is  the  love  of  an  earthly  father
so  great?  What,  then,  is  the  affection  of  our  heavenly  Father  towards  us?"  (R.
Harris:  1610).

II.  The  ardent  attachment  of  his  followees  ;  in  contrast  with  the  disaffection
and  hostility  of  others.  1.  They  offer  themselves  willingly  to  his  service,  and  readily
risk  their  lives  for  bis  sake.  2.  They  set  an  inestimable  value  on  his  life  in  comparison
with  their  own.  "  Thou  art  worth  ten  thousand  of  us "  (ver.  3).  How  much  often
depends  on  one  maul  The  safety,  unity,  religion,  prosperity,  of  a  whole  nation.  Both
patriotism  and  piety  require  the  utmost  cave  for  his  preservation.  3.  They  see  the
peculiar  peril  to  which  he  is  exposed,  and  seek  to  guard  him  against  it.  "They  will
pay  no  attention  to  us,"  etc.  Of  Washington,  one  of  his  officers  wrote,  "  Our  army
love  their  general  very  much ;  but  they  have  one  complaint  against  him,  which  is  the
very  little  care  he  takes  of  himself."  4.  They  deem  it  expedient  to  provide,  in  case  of
need,  for  receiving  his  aid.  "  It  is  better  that  thou  succour  us  out  of  the  city,"  Their
proposal  is  prudent,  courteous,  and  honourable.  Whilst  he  waits  in  the  city  with  the
"reserves," he  still  commands  them,  prays  for  them,  and  co-operates  with  them.  They
go  forth  under  his  sanction  (ver.  4),  are  animated  on  the  battle-field  by  the  remembrance
of  him,  and  look  forward  to  his  approval  as  their  recompense  (ch.  xix.  3).  Such  devo-
tion is  rare,  not  merely  towards  an  earthly  commander,  but  even  on  the  part  of  those
who  war  a  spiritual  warfare  towards  the  heavenly  Leader  and  "  Captain  of  their
salvation."

III.  The  signal  oveethrow  of  his  adversaries  (vers.  7,  8) ;  which  is  accom-
plished by  the  valour,  discipline,  and  devotion  of  his  "  servants,"  and  chiefly :  1.  By
the  interposition  of  Divine  providence  (vers.  28,  31).  "  The  race  is  not  to  the  swift,
nor  the  battle  to  the  strong  "  (Ecoles.  ix.  11).  •'  Providence  is  "  by  no  means  "  always
on  the  side  of  big  battalions."  2.  In  retribution  upon  the  disobedient  and  ungodly,
over  whom  mercy  lingers  long,  but  not  for  ever,  and  who,  though  used  as  instruments
of  chastising  others,  are  themselves  ultimately  broken  in  pieces.  3.  For  the  deliverance
of  the  faithful,  the  restoration  of  the  "Lord's  anointed,"  and  the  maintenance  of  the
theocracy.  4.  As  a  preparation  for,  and  a  foreshadowing  of,  the  nobler  victories  of  the
King  Messiah.  It  was  another  of  the  decisive  battles  of  the  world.  "  The  contest  was
of  short  duration.  The  victors  were  soon  vanquished.  The  storm  was  like  a  whirlwind
and  like  a  whirlwind  it  passed  away,  leaving  the  enemies  of  God  imder  the  foot  of  the
Messiah.  To  the  depth  of  David's  fall,  to  the  height  of  his  exaltation,  there  is  but  one
parallel.  We  sie  it  in  the  Pass  on,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  two
Davids  fell  in  a  manner  alike  mysterious  to  their  astonished  friends.  The  two  Davids
rose  again  in  a  manner  alike  terrible  to  their  astonished  foes  "  (M.  Hill, '  The  Typical
Testimony  to  the  Messiah '). — ^D.

Vers.  »— 14.— (The  wood  of  Ephbaim.)  A  faithful  soldier.  "Though  I  should
receive  [literally,  'weigh']  a  thousand  pieces  of  silver  in  mine  hand,  yet  would  I  not
put  forth  mine  hand  against  the  king's  son"  (ver.  12).    While  pursuing  the  enemy,  •


152  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEU        [oh.  xvul  1— 33.

brave  soldier  came  upon  their  leader,  suspended  from  "  the  entangled  branches  of  the
great  terebinth,"  in  which  his  head  was  fastened  so  that  he  could  not  extricate
himself.  He  forthwith  reported  what  he  had  seen  to  Joab,  who  asked  him  why  he
had  not  despatched  him,  and  said  that  he  would  have  given  iiim  ten  pieces  of  silver  and
a  military  girdle  for  doing  so.  A  less  scrupulous  man  might  have  sought  even  yet  to
secure  the  reward.  But  he  replied  that  nothing  would  induce  him  to  disobey  the  king.
"  So  genuine  was  the  reverence  with  which  the  loyalty  of  even  a  common  soldier  then
invested  the  royal  dignity "  (Bwald).  His  fidelity  may  serve  to  illustrate  that  of  "  a
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ "  (2  Tim.  ii.'  3),  as  it  appears  in —

I.  His  ebspeot  foe  the  King's  commandment;  which,  unlike  that  of  an  earthly
ruler,  is  always  wise,  just,  and  good.  1.  He  reverences  the  authority  by  which  it  is
given,  as  rightful,  all-powerful,  supreme.  2.  He  regards  it  as  obligatory  on  each  and
all  to  whom  it  is  given  (ver.  12).  3.  He  remembers  it  constantly  in  the  absence  as
well  as  the  presence  of  the  King,  from  whom  "  there  is  no  matter  hid  "  (ver.  13).  4.  He
is  resolved  on  performing  it  with  all  his  might.  "  Thou  hast  commanded  us  to  keep
thy  precepts  diligently  "  (Ps.  cxix.  4, 11, 106).

IL  HiB  HBJECTioN  OF  STEONO  TEMPTATION.  He  will  not  disobey  the  Order  received,
though  urged  to  do  so  by ;  1.  The  impulse  of  resentment  against  the  common  enemy.
2.  The  plea  of  expediency,  or  what  may  seem  to  be  for  the  common  good.  3.  The
approval  of  a  (ellow-soldier,  or  the  sanction  of  any  "captain"  inferior  to  the  King.  4.
The  promise  of  reward.'certain,  immediate,  and  great.  "  The  Law  of  thy  mouth  is  better
imto  me  than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver  "  (Ps.  cxix.  72,  31,  36).

III.  His  eebukb  of  anothee's  peesumption.  Joab  must  have  felt  himself  reproved
by  this  faithful  and  honest  soldier ;  though  he  turned  away  contemptuously,  recklessly,
and  presumptuously  to  do  the  deprecated  deed.  A  dutiful  soldier  may  and  ought  to  rebuke
the  undutifulness  of  another  by :  1.  Reminding  him  of  the  word  which  has  been  spoken
by  the  King.  2.  Avowing  his  own  determination  to  obey  It  in  spite  of  all  inducements
to  the  contrary.  3.  Predicting  the  certainty  of  the  King  s  displeasure,  which  outweighs
all  present  gain  (Prov.  xvi.  14 ;  xix.  12).  "  What  is  a  man  profited,"  etc. ?  "In  the
King's  favour  is  life."  4.  Intiniating  the  unreliability  of  one  who  favours  disobedience
and  presumes  on  impunity.  "  Thou  thyself  wouldest  have  set  thyself  against  me ; "
leaving  me  alone  to  bear  the  blame  and  suffer  the  penalty.  "  He  must  be  a  very  bad
man  who  is  not  attracted  to  whRt  is  good  by  the  good  example  of  his  subordinat  '"
(S.  Schmid).  "  Then  shall  I  not  be  ashamed  when  I  have  respect  to  all  thy  command-
ments" (Ps.  cxix.  6,  29,  51,  53).— D.

Vers.  14 — 18. — (The  wood  of  Ephbaim.)  The  end  of  Alsalom.  After  a  long
course  of  flagrant  and  persistent  wickedness,  Absalom  (at  the  age  of  twenty-seven)
met  his  deserved  doom.  There  is  not  in  all  history  a  more  signal  instance  of  retribu-
tion. In  it  we  see  punishment  following  crime,  in  the  way  of  natural  consequence,  and
corresponding  with  it  in  the  manner  of  its  infliction.     The  sinner  reaps  as  he  sows.

"  But  Justice  hastes  t'  avenge  each  impious  deed :
Some  in  day's  clear  and  open  light ;
Some  in  the  .dusky  evening's  twilight  shade;
Or,  by  delay  more  furious  made.
Some  in  the  dreary  gloom  of  night."

(^schylns.)
Absalom  was —

I.  Aeebsted  bt  Divine  justice,  in  the  peeveesitt  of  his  way.  (Vers.  9, 10.)
When  the  battle  went  against  him  he  souglit  to  escape.  Possibly  he  met  with  some
of  David's  soldiers,  who  durst  not  "  touch"  him  (ver.  12);  "but  though  they  let  him
go,  yet  God  met  with  him,  and  put  a  stop  to  his  flight "  (Patrick).  His  eagerness  and
impetuosity,  his  tall  form,  his  long  hair,  "  the  king's  mule "  on  which  he  lode,  all  con-
tributed to  the  result.  Entangled  by  the  tresses  of  his  hair,  and  fastened  by  his  neck
in  a  forked  bough,  he  was  left  hanging  "  between  heaven  and  earth  "  (Dent.  xxi.  23) ;
"  rejected  as  a  traitor  by  both."  None  of  his  companions  in  crime  remained  with  him,
but  all  left  him  alone  to  his  fate.  "A  man  whom  the  Divine  vengeance  is  pursuing
does  not  escape"  (S.  Schmid).     Insensate  trees,  dumb  animals,  apparently  tiivial  and


Oil.  xvin.  1-330        '-i-'^E  SECOND  DOOK  0^  SaMuEL.  463

accidental  oiroumstaaces,  the  devices  and  efforts  of  the  transgressor,  are  so  ordered  th.it
he  shall  not  go  unpunished  (Prov.  xi.  19,  31;  xiii.  21;  xxii.  5;  xxviii.  17,  18).

II.  Executed  bt  human  violence,  similar  to  his  own.  (Vers.  14, 15.)  As  he
had  slain  Amnon  (eh.  xiii.  28,  29),  so  was  he  slain  by  Joab.  "  He  that  was  a  solicitor
for  the  king's  favour  (oh.  xiv.  1,  2,  33)  is  his  executioner  against  the  king's  charge "
(Hall);  influenced  partly  by  zeal  for  the  king's  interest  and  the  public  gooii,  partly
by  revenge  for  private  injury  (oh.  xiv.  30),  and  jealousy  for  his  own  position  (ch.  iii.  27  ;
xix.  10).  He  shared  the  resentment  felt  by  his  men  against  Absalom ;  was  an  instru-
ment by  which  the  wrath  of  Heaven  was  inflicted  ;  and  perhaps  deemed  himself  justified
in  becouiing  such,  because  of  the  excessive  fondness  and  blamable  weakness  of  David
toward  his  son;  but  herein  he  punished  disobedience  by  disobedience,  exhibited  a
pitiless  severity  and  daring  presumption,  incurred  the  king's  displeasure  (ch.  xix.  13),
involved  himself  in  deeper  crime  (1  Kings  ii.  5),  and  ultimately  in  a  violent  death
(1  Kings  ii.  32).

III.  Buried  m  a  shameful  geavb,  in  contrast  with  the  splendid  monument  which
"  in  his  lifetime  he  had  taken  and  reared  up  for  himself,"  etc.  (ver.  18).  "  He  had
thought  that  he  would  be  there,  some  time  or  other,  buried  as  king ;  but  he  is  now
buried  as  an  outlawed  evil-doer,  as  an  outcast  from  among  men.  Till  this  hour  that
grave  speaks  to  us  with  a  loud  awakening  voice.  Violations  of  the  commandment,
'Honour  tliy  father  and  thy  mother,' for  the  most  part,  indeed,  escape  the  judgment
of  human  authorities ;  hut  the  Almighty  has  reserved  it  to  himself  to  inflict  punish-
ment with  his  own  hand,  and  for  the  most  part  even  on  this  side  eternity,  as  he  has
promised  for  this  world  also  a  gracious  reward  to  those  who  keep  it  holy,  according  to
the  promise  annexed  to  the  commandment, '  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee ' "  (Krum-
macher).  "The  great  pit  in  the  wood,"  with  "a  very  great  heap  of  stones  laid  upou
him" — this  was  the  end  of  his  ambitious  career  (Deut.  xxi.  22,  23;  Josh.  vii.  26;
viii.  29).  The  site  both  of  his  grave  and  of  the  "  marble  pillar  in  the  king's  dale,
two  furlongs  distant  from  Jerusalem  "(Josephus),  has  been  forages  unknown;  and  even
the  monolith  in  the  valley  of  the  Kidron  (probably  of  the  Herodian  age,  but  associated
with  his  name)  is  "unto  this  day"  regarded  with  scorn  by  the  passi/r-by,  as  he  casts
another  stone,  and  mutters  a  curse  upon  his  memory.  "  Shame  shall  be  the  promotion
of  fools"  (Prov.  iii.  35;  xxx.  17).  "Hear  this,  ye  glorious  fools,  that  care  not  to  per-
petuate any  memory  of  yourselves  to  the  world,  but  of  ill-deserving  greatness.  The
best  of  this  affectation  is  vanity;  the  worst  infamy  and  dishonour ;  whereas  the  memory
of  the  just  shall  be  blessed,  and,  if  his  humility  shall  refuse  an  epitaph  and  choose  to
hide  himself  under  the  bare  earth,  God  himself  shall  engrave  his  name  upon  the  nillar
of  eternity"  (Hall).— D.  ^

Ver.  18. — (The  king's  dale.)  Posthumous  fame.  "  Absalom's  place  "  (literally,
"  hand,"  equivalent  to  "monument,"  or  "memorial,"  1  Sam.  xv.  12).  To  live  in  the
memory  of  men  after  death  is,  in  a  sense,  to  be  immortal  on  earth  (ch.  vii.  9>  Of  this
earthly  immortality  observe  that :  1.  It  is  an  object  of  natural  and  legitimate  desire.
To  be  wholly  forgotten  as  soon  as  we  are  laid  in  the  dtist  is  a  prospect  from  which  we
instinctively  turn  away  with  aversion,  as  from  death  itself.  The  natural  love  of  life,
of  reputation,  of  power,  of  pre-eminence,  implies  the  desire  of  their  continuance,  in  so
far  as  it  is  possible,  not  merely  of  exerting  a  continued  influence  (as  every  one  must
do),  but  also  of  having  one's  name  kept  in  continued  remembrance;  and  this  desire
exists  in  those  who  have  little  or  no  knowledge  of  personal  immortality.  It  is  well
that  men's  thoughts  should  extend  beyond  the  narrow  span  of  their  own  lifetime.  But
the  memory  of  themselves  which  they  wish  to  be  perpetuated  should  not  be  of  their
shming  qualities  and  extraordinary  achievements,  but  of  their  genuine  faith,  their  holy
character,  and  their  beneficent  deeds,  as  an  incentive  to  the  like  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  7;  Prov
xiii.  2ii ;  Heb.  xi.  4) ;  for  such  a  wish  alone  is  of  any  moral  worth.  2.  TKe  desire  of  it
often  leads  to  mistaken  and  unworthy  endeavours  in  order  to  its  attainment.  Absalom
"had  taken  and  reared  up  for  himself  the  pillar,"  etc.  Imbued  with  seffish  and  vam-
glonous  ambition,  he  imagined  that  the  sight  of  it  would  call  forth  the  admiration  of
posterity.  In  the  same  sjiirit  he  subsequently  made  his  attempt  upon  the  throne  So
others  have  reai-ed  imposing  monuments,  built  huge  pyramids  and  palaces,  fought  great
battles,  and  rushed  into  daring  enterprises,  heedless  of  the  rectitude  of  their  conduct  w


*54  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        t™- *^™- 1— 33.

the  welfare  of  mankind  (Gen.  xL  4;  Ezek.  xxix.  3;  Dan.  iv.  30).  "Their  inward
thought  is,"  etc.  (Ps.  xlix.  11—13).  The  character  of  their  aim  determines  the  nature
of  their  efforts;  and  only  those  efforts  which  proceed  from  a  right  spirit  ensure  an
enduring  and  honourable  "  name."  3.  2%e  result  of  such  endeavours  is  shame  and  ever-
lasting contempt,  instead  of  immortal  honour  and  glory.  "Absalom's  hand,"  which  was
intended  to  indicate  to  future  generations  his  magnificence,  indicated  only  his  ignominy.
E  i  en  that  at  length  perished  (Ps.  ix.  6 ;  Prov.  x.  7).  And  his  memory  remains  as  a
-olemn  warniug  against  transgression.  "In  what  different  lights,  in  what  different
aspects  of  character,  the  human  beings  of  past  time  are  presented  to  our  thoughts  I  How
iuany  of  them  are  there  that  an  odious  and  horrid  character  rests  upon !  They  seem  to
bear  eternal  curses  on  their  heads.  A  vindictive  ray  of  Heaven's  lightning  seems  con-
tinually darting  down  upon  them.  They  appear  as  the  special  points  of  communication
and  attraction  between  a  wicked  world  and  the  Divine  vengeance "  (J.  Foster).  But
"the  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  remembrance"  (Ps.  cxiL  6;  Matt.  xxvL  13;
Acts  I.  4;  2  Pet.  i.  15).— D.

Ver.  29. — (Mahanaim.)  "  Is  the  young  man  .  ,  .  safe  f  "  Youth  is  a  season  of
intense  activity,  favourable  opportunities,  and  glowing  promise.

"  The  passion,  which  in  youth
Drives  fast  downhill,  means  that  the  impulse  gained
Should  speed  us  up  the  hill  that's  opposite."

(Sir  H.  Taylor.)
This  question  is  specially  suggestive  of —

I.  Danger.  No  soldier  on  the  battle-field,  no  traveller  on  "  dark  mountains,"  no
ship  on  a  tempesluous  sea,  is  exposed  to  greater  peril  than  a  young  man.  Of  what?
Not  so  much  of  physical  suffering  and  death,  as  of  sin — the  only  real  evil,  and  one
which  involves  the  loss  of  his  highest  life  (Matt.  x.  28).  From  what?  Chiefly  from
himself — his  "own  heart"  (Jer.  xvii.  9);  inexperience;  susceptibility  to  impressioos ;
personal  endowments  (ch.  xiv.  25);  "youthful  lusts"  (2  Tim.  ii.  22),  the  love  of
pleasure,  excitement,  "  name  and  fame  ; "  impatience  of  control,  self-confidence,  rash-
ness, and  presumption.  Also  from  false  friends  (ch.  xiii.  3),  rather  than  open  enemies ;
sceptical  and  sensuous  literature;  "the  defilements  [miasma]  of  the  age"  (2  Pet.  ii.
20) ;  and  the  peculiar  temptations  of  the  place,  the  occupation,  and  the  society  with
which  he  is  connected.    "  Rejoice,  O  young  man,"  etc.  (Eooles.  xi.  9).

II.  Safett.  " To  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed."  "Wherewithal,  etc.?  By
taking  heed  thereto  according  to  thy  Word  "  (Ps.  cxix.  9).  The  most  essential  thing
is  a  right  state  of  heart ;  its  supreme  affection  set  on  God,  its  ruling  purpose  directed
to  the  doing  of  his  will  (Prov.  iv.  23),  its  varied  powers  "  united  to  fear  his  Name  "
(Ps.  Ixxxvi.  11 ;  Prov.  i.  7).  There  is  also  need  of  watchfulness  (1  Cor.  xvi.  31),
keeping  out  of  the  way  of  temptation,  trusting  in  God  to  be  kept  by  him,  unceasing
prayer,  association  with  good  men,  the  cultivation  of  proper  habits,  profitable  reading,
seasonable  recreation,  useful  employment,  and  advancement  toward  the  true  end  of
life.     "  If  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  stumble,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  i.  10,  11).

III.  Anxiety;  on  the  part  of  parents,  instructors,  Christian  friends;  arising  from
sincere  affection,  a  clear  perception  of  his  danger,  and  an  ardent  desire  for  his  welfare  ;
expressed  in  fervent  prayer,  appropriate  endeavour  (ver.  5),  and  frequent  inquiries
(ver.  32).  Alas !  that  a  young  man  for  whom  others  are  so  tenderly  concerned  should
recklessly  and  wilfully  "  lose  himself  and  become  castaway  " ! — D.

Ver.  33. — (Mahakaim.)  DavicFs  lament  over  Absalom.  "  Would  that  I  had  died
in  thy  stead,  0  Absalom !  my  son  1  my  son  I "  In  a  little  court  between  the  inner  and
the  outer  'gate  of  the  fortified  city  wall,  where  (in  the  early  morning)  he  stood  and
watched  his  brave  soldiers  going  forth  to  battle  (ver.  4),  sits  the  aged  king  at  eventide
(ch.  xix.  3,  7),  awaiting  tidings  from  the  battle-field.  The  watchman,  "from  the  roof
of  the  gate  at  the  wall,"  calls  out  to  him  that  he  descries,  first  one  man  "runnin<'
alone "  (not  vrith  others,  as  in  flight,  ver.  25),  then  another,  and,  as  the  foremost
approaches  nearer,  says  that  he  thinks  his  running  is  like  that  of  the  swift-footed
Ahimaaz  (ch.  xvii.  17).     On  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  victory  ("  Peace  1"),  the  first


66.  xvm.  1— d3.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtTBlk  455

words  of  David  (like  his  last,  ver.  5)  are  of  Absalom ;  "  Is  there  peace  (shalom)  to  [Is
it  well  with]  the  young  man  Absalom  ? "  and,  perceiTing  his  deep  concern,  Abimaaz
dares  not  reveal  the  whole  truth  (ver.  20).  Again,  tha  king  makes  the  same  inquiry
of  the  Cushite,  who  (with  less  sympathy,  but  greater  fidelity)  utters  the  wish  that
as  the  young  man,  so  might  all  the  king's  enemies  be  1  "  And  the  king  was  much
moved  (greatly  agitated  with  grief),  and  went  up  to  the  upper  chamber  of  the  gate,
and  wept;  and  thus  ha  said,  as  he  walked  (to  and  {ro}t  My  w>n  Absalom  I  my  son  I
my  sou  AbsalomI"  flta

*  Is  it  so  far  from  thee
Thou  oanst  no  longer  aea

In  the  chamber  over  the  gate
That  old  man  desolate,
Weeping  and  wailing  sore
For  hi4  son  who  is  no  moret

'O  Absalom,  my  sonl'

"Somewhere  at  every  hour
The  watchman  on  the  tower
Looks  forth,  and  sees  the  fle*t
Approach  of  hurrying  feet
Of  messengers,  that  beai
The  tidings  of  despair.

'  O  Absalom,  my  Mai '

*  That  'tis  a  common  grief
Bringeth  but  slight  relief;
Ours  is  the  bitterest  loss.
Ours  is  the  heaviest  cross ;
And  for  ever  the  cry  will  be,

'  Would  God  I  had  died  for  tbea,
O  Absalom,  my  son  1' "

(Longfenow.)

*  Absalom  afflicted  his  fether  more  by  his  death  than  by  his  life  "  (Augustine).  Thl»
expression  of  intense  and  absorbing  grief  (in  which  all  joy  of  victory  is  swallowed  up,
ch.  six.  2)  is  indicative  of —

I.  Parentai.  ArFBOTiON  from  which  it  springs.  Five  times  the  afflicted  father  cries,
"  My  sou  1 "  {B'ni) ;  thrice,  "  Absalom  1 "  A  father's  love  (especially  in  such  a  fervid
soul  as  David's)  is :  1.  The  natural,  instinctive,  spontaneous  effect  of  the  relationship
which  subsists  between  him  and  his  child.  It  is  the  closest  relationship  of  life,  and  is
mercifully  joined  by  the  Creator  and  Father  of  all  with  a  great  and  peculiar  affectum ;
which,  nevertheless  (whilst  it  is  intensified  and  exalted  by  a  proper  appreciation  of  its
object,  as  "  the  offspring  of  God  ")  requires  to  be  regulated  by  intelligence  and  piety.
2.  Deeply  rooted,  enduring,  indestructible.  It  is  not  eradicated  by  a  son's  estrange-
ment (Luke  XV.  12),  wilfulness,  manifold  transgressions,  or  even  open  rebellion.  It
makes  large  allowances, has  much  patience  and  forbearance;  "believeth  all  things,"  etc.
(1  Cor.  xiii.  ?)_,  "covereth  all  sins  "  (Prov.  x.  12).  It  feels  persuaded  that  he  has
"  some  good  thing  in  him,"  and  cannot  endure  the  thought  of  his  entire  abandonment,
"  Not  only  the  question  itself  (ver.  29),  but  the  very  terms  of  it,  breathe  the  tenderness
of  David's  feelings,  Absalom  is  'the  youth,'  as  if  his  youth  were  a  fuD  excuse  for  his
conduct "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  3.  Pitiful,  sympathetic,  self-sacrificing  (Ps.  ciii.
13).  "  My  son,  my  beloved,  my  beautiful  Absalom  I  miserably  slain,  and  now  lying
dead  I    Would  that  I  had  died  for  thee  I "  (cb.  xxiv.  17 ;  Exod  xxsiL  32  ;  BoBi.  ix.  S>

"  Thon  seest  the  braided  roots  that  bind

Ton  towering  cedar  to  the  rock ;
Thon  aeest  the  clinging  ivy  twined

As  if  to  spurn  the  whirlwind's  shock  |->
Poor  emblems  of  the  strings  that  tie

Hii  ofbpring  to  a  parent's  heart ;
Vor  those  will,  mouldering,  yield  and  die.

But  these  can  never,  never  part."


ISS  tfiE  SEcONt)  BOOfc  Ot*  SAMtJEti.        [oh.  tvin.  i-AJ.


n.  DisAPi'oiNTBD  EXPECTATION  AND  HOPE.  All  tbrougli  the  oouTse  pursued  by
Absalom,  Dayid  doubtless  cherished  the  hope  that :  1.  He  might  see  the  error  of  his
way,  and,  constrained  by  hia  father's  affection,  repent  of  his  sins.  He  may  have
supposed  him  penitent  at  the  time  of  his  return  (ch.  xiv.  23),  and  that  his  reconcilia-
tion (oh.  xiv.  B3)  would  be  followed  by  filial  love  and  obedience.  2.  He  might  fulfil
the  anticipations  formed  at  his  birth,  strengthened  by  the  brilliant  promise  of  hia  early
youth,  and  apparently  justified  by  his  more  recent  diligence  and  religious  zeal  (oh.  xv.
'1,  S).  The  love  of  a  parent  often  blinds  him  to  the  many  defects  and  malicious  designs
ul  his  son.  Until  this  moment  David  hoped  (ver.  5)  that :  3.  His  life,  at  least,  might
i>u  spared  and  his  destruction  averted.  All  is  suddenly  extinguished;  his  "sun  is  gone
down  while  it  was  yet  day ; "  and  the  remembrance  of  its  brightness  remains  only  to
deepen  the  gloom  of  the  succeeding  night.

III.  Personal  compunction.  Had  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  overtaken
Absalom  because  he  had  "  risen  up  against  him  "  (ver.  31)  ?  Was  David  himself,  then,
I'lameless?  He  could  not  but  remember  that:  1.  He  had  despised  the  commandment
0  the  Lord,  and  rebelled  against  the  Divine  King  of  Israel.  2.  He  had  contributed  by
his  own  conduct  to  the  misconduct  of  his  son.  "  The  worst  ingredient  in  this  cup  of
anguish  would  be,  I  think,  the  consciousness  in  David's  heart  that,  if  he  had  himself
been  all  he  ought  to  have  been,  his  son  might  not  thus  have  perished"  (W.  M.  Taylor).

3,  He  was  now  suffering  the  chastisement  of  Heaven,  of  which  his  son's  death  was  a
part.  "  Absalom's  sin  and  shame  had  two  sides — there  was  in  it  the  curse  that  David's
sin  brought  on  David's  house  (ch.  xii.  10),  the  misdeed  of  the  father's  that  is  visited  on
the  children  (Exod.  xx.  5) ;  and  not  less,  Absalom's  own  wickedness  and  recklessness,
which  made  him  the  bearer  of  the  family  curse.  David  louks  at  Absalom's  deed  not
on  the  latter  side,  but  on  the  former  (for  his  own  guilt  seems  to  him  so  great,  that  he
looks  little  at  Absalom's) ;  hence  his  deep,  boundless  compassion  for  his  misguided  son  "
(Kurtz).  "  The  heart-broken  cry,  '  Would  God  I  had  died  for  thee  I '  was  not  only  the
ut'erance  of  self-sacrificing  love,  but  the  confession  that  he  himself  deserved  the  punish-
ment which  fell  upon  another  "  (Kirkpatrick).

IV.  Ibreparable  loss  and  separation.  "As  that  yoimg  man  is;"  his  life  "as
water  spilt  upon  the  ground,"  etc.  No  cries  nor  tears  can  restore  him  to  his  father  or
"  the  land  of  the  Uving  "  (1  Sara.  xxv.  29 ;  ch.  iv.  11 ;  Ps.  xxvi.  9 ;  xlix.  8).  What-
ever David  may  have  thought  of  his  condition  in  Sheol,  no  parent  can  contemplate  the
death  of  a  rebellious  and  impenitent  son  without  heart-rending  grief,  arising  from  the
fear  of  his  exclusion  from  the  presence  of  God,  sharing  the  doom  of  the  Lord's  enemies,
and  endless  separation  from  the  fellowship  of  saints.  "  All  hope  abandon,  ye  who  enter
here! "  (Dante,  'Inferno,'  iii.).

Bemares.  1.  It  is  possible,  under  circumstances  most  favourable  to  goodness,  to
become  exceedingly  bad.  2.  One  of  the  greatest  evils  in  the  world  is  that  of  dis-
obedience to  parents  (2  Tim.  iii.  3).  3.  The  love  of  an  earthly  parent  trward  his
children  is  a  shadow  of  the  eternal  Father's  love  to  men.  "  He  is  affected  with  fatherly
love  towards,  the  whole  human  race.  Inasmuch  as  we  are  men,  we  must  be  deai  to
God,  and  our  salvation  must  be  precious  in  his  sight "  (Calvin,  on  Ezek.  xviii.  4).

4.  The  Divine  sorrow  over  men  when  they  fall  into  sin  and  ruin,  as  revealed  in  the
holy  tears  of  Jesus,  indicates  their  final  state  in  "  the  world  of  infinite  mourning." — D.

Ver.  3. — Tlie  surpassing  worth  of  Christ,  "Thou  art  worth  ten  thousand  of  us."
The  doctrine  that  all  men  are  equal  is  true  in  some  important  respects,  but  its  applica-
tion and  use  are  very  limited.  It  is  equally  true  that  all  men  are  unequal,  that  no
man  is  of  exactly  the  same  weight  and  worth  as  any  other  man.  Men  differ  infinitely
in  body  and  mind,  in  intelligence  and  goodness,  in  position  and  influence,  in  their
value  to  society;  and  so  in  the  degrees  of  their  responsibility  to  God.  In  domestic
and  social,  civic,  national,  and  Church  life,  one  man  is  often  worth  many  others.
David's  "people"  felt  this  now  that  they  were  going  forth  to  meet  the  forces  of
Absalom  in  battle;  and  they  give  as  a  reason  why  he  should  be  content  to  remain  in
the  city  instead  of  exposing  himself  to  the  dangers  of  the  battle-field,  that  he  was
worth  ten  thousand  of  them ;  that  it  was  better  that  ten  thousand  of  them  should  be
slain  than  he,  though  he  was  unly  one.  This  sentiment  underlies  and  justi/ies  the
^  tiirul  feeling  of  loyalty  to  a  sovereign,  the  willingness  to  protect  him  at  the  cost  of


6a.  iVm.  1— S3.]        THE  SECONI)  BOOK  Ot  SAMtJfiL.  41^

many  lives.  In  personal  worth  he  may  not  be  equal  to  many  a  single  soldier  or  sub-
ject ;  but  he  represents  the  state ;  in  his  life  may  be  involved  the  welfare  of  a  nation,
to  protect  which  it  is  worth  while  for  many  to  die.  Such  thoughts  might  well  console
the  private  soldier  dying  in  obscurity  on  the  field  or  in  hospital.  His  king,  his  country,
is  worth  a  multitude  of  such  as  he.  His  life  is  worthily  sacrificed  for  them.  The
same  sentiment  is  applicable  to  the  commanders  of  an  army  in  contrast  with  common
soldiers ;  to  great  statesmen  and  other  leaders  of  men  in  contrast  with  the  multitude.
It  is  no  disparagement  of  these  to  say  that  it  would  require  many  of  them  to  equal
in  value  to  society  one  of  those ;  and  that,  if  necessary,  it  would  be  better  that  the
many  should  die  rather  than  the  one.  We  may  use  the  words  emphatically  in  refer-
ence to  our  great  King  and  Captain,  the  Lord  Jesug  Christ.  True,  he  is  no  longer  in
personal  peril  from  his  enemies.  "  He  lives  beyond  their  utmost  rage  "  (Watts).  But
his  cause,  influence,  hold  of  mankind,  place  in  their  esteem  and  affection,  in  a  word,
his  kingdom,  may  be  endangered;  and  his  true  disciples  will  be  ready  to  die  in
thousands  rather  than  he  should  in  these  respects  perish  or  even  sufifer  loss.  And  the
justification  of  their  feeling  is  that  be,  personally  and  in  his  cause,  "is  worth  ten
thousand  of  them."

I.  The  suepassinq  worth  of  Christ.  1.  In  personal  excellence.  It  is  well  when
the  monarch  of  a  country  is  disti.iguished  for  mental  and  moral  endowments.  Even
when  the  personality  of  the  ruler  is  of  less  account  in  the  actual  government,  it  adds
much  to  the  welfare  of  the  state  that  he  is  noble  in  the  qualities  of  his  mind  and'heart.
This  has  been  made  manifest  in  the  long  reign  of  our  beloved  and  honoured  queen.
Where  the  power  of  government  is  very  largely  trusted  to  the  will  of  the  sovereign,
it  is  of  incalculable  importance  that  he  should  be  both  wise  and  good.  David's  kingdom
sprang  very  mainly  from,  and  was  maintained  by,  his  personal  qualities.  And  this  is
more  emphatically  true  of  his  great  Son  Jesus.  He  is  "  chiefest  among  ten  thousand,"
chiefest  among  and  above  all  creation.  The  perfections  of  God  and  the  perfections
of  man  are  combined  in  this  one  glorious  Person.  In  himself  he  is  worthy  of  the
utmost  love  and  self-devotion.  2.  In  position  and  dignity.  As  "  King  of  kings  and
Lord  of  lords ;  "  "  Lord  of  all ;  "  King  of  souls ;  "  Head  of  the  Church ; "  "  Head  over
all  things."  These  are  not  empty  titles  ;  but  represent  facts,  actual  glory  and  power.
To  serve  such  a  King  may  well  be  esteemed  the  highest  possible  honour  j  to  die  for
him,  a  great  glory.  3.  In  relation  to  the  good  of  men.  Who  shall  say  how  much
Christ  is  "  worth  "  in  this  view  ?  of  how  much  value  his  work  for  and  amongst  men  V
how  essentially  their  welfare  in  time  and  in  eternity  is  bound  up  with  his  unchanging
iSxistence  and  power,  and  the  manifestation  of  himself  in  the  world  through  his  Church  ?
Every  believer  experiences  his  preciousness  (1  Pet.  ii.  7),  and  desires  that  all  should
have  a  like  experience,  through  a  "  like  precious  faith  "  (2  Pet.  i.  1) ;  and  to  keep  him
living  in  the  memory  of  men,  and  secure  the  wider  exercise  of  his  saving  power,  would
cheerfully  sacrifice  himself.  We  are  insignificant,  and  if  we  die  it  matters  little;  but
for  him  to  perish  from  the  life  of  men,  or  become  feeble  in  his  infiuence  among  them,
would  be  disastrous  indeed.  4.  In  power  to  succour  and  aid  his  servants.  David  was
requested  to  remain  in  the  city  with  the  reserves,  that,  if  it  were  required,  he  might
send  them  to  the  succour  of  those  fighting  in  the  field.  Our  Lord  can,  "  out  of  the
city  "  in  which  he  dwells,  aid  his  servants  in  more  efiectual  manner.  Not  only  has  he
numberless  reserves  eager  to  do  his  bidding,  but  he  is  able  to  gather  around  him,  from
the  very  ranks  of  his  foes,  fresh  hosts  to  fight  his  battles.  And,  beyond  all  this,  he
can  himself  be — yea,  he  is — with  his  people  everywhere  and  evermore,  to  inspirit  them
by  his  presence,  and  render  them  victorious.  Who  of  them,  what  "  ten  thousand  "  of
them,  could  fill  his  place  ?  5.  In  power  to  reward  those  who  die  in  his  service.  Earthly
rulers  are  powerless  to  recompense  the  soldiers  who  are  slain  in  fighting  their  battles.
Not  so  our  great  King.  He  is  able  to  promise  eternal  life  and  glory  to  his  faithful
followers ;  and  what  he  promises  he  performs  (see  Mark  viii.  35 ;  John  xii.  25).

II.  The  effect  which  contemplation  of  the  shrpassinq  worth  of  Chbikt
BHOULD  HAVE  UPON  US.  1.  Satisfaction  that  he  lives  safe  above  all  the  hostility  of  hit
enemies.  Lives,  not  in  heaven  only,  but  on  earth  in  spirit  and  power,  working  in  and
with  his  people  and  confirming  his  Word  (John  xiv.  19;  Mark  xvi.  20).  Human
leaders  and  teachers  die,  but  "Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  fo-
ever"  (HeL).  xiii.  8).  -  That  One  of  so  much  worth  to  men,  and  so  needful  to  thein


459  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xviii.  1—33.

should  be  thus  iinmortal  and  immutable,  is  matter  for  joy  and  thankfulness.  He  needs
not,  like  David,  the  plans  and  efforts  of  his  servants  to  preserve  him ;  but  we  ean  and
should  rejoice  that  he  lives  and  reigns,  and  "  must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies
under  his  feet"  (1  Cor.  xv.  25).  2.  Devoted  loyalty  to  him  even  unto  death.  The
readiness  with  which  David's  friends  hazarded  and  gave  up  their  lives  for  him,  nay,
the  similar  devotedness  of  many  a  common  soldier,  may  well  put  most  Christians  to
the  blush.  3.  Contentment  in  view  of  the  enormous  sacrifice  of  human  lives  which  has
heen  made/or  his  sake.  It  is  not  waste;  the  willing  deaths  of  maityrs,  missionaries.
Christian  workers  of  all  giades,  have  not  been  unreasonable.  He  and  his  cause  are
worthy  of  It  all.  4.  Conjfidence  in  respect  to  ultimate  victory  over  all  his  foes.  With
such  a  King  and  Captain,  final  defeat  is  impossible.  5.  Assurance  of  ample  recompense
for  whatever  we  lose,  were  it  life  itself,  in  his  service.  6.  Conc^n  to  be  on  the  side  of
Christ  rather  than  of  a  multitude  in  opposition  to  him.  We  are  tempted  to  follow  the
crowd,  and  (with  or  without  thinking)  to  esteem  that  to  be  the  right  course  which
the  greater  number  pursue.  But  truth  goes  not  necessarily,  or  even  ordinarily,  with
the  njajority.  With  the  one  Person,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  are  truth,  safety,  victory,
ultimate  gain.  His  judgment  is  worth  more  than  that  of  "  ten  thousand"  others;  his
favour  of  infinitely  more  value  than  theirs.  If  adherence  to  him  were  to  lead  to  the
separation  from  us  of  all  besides,  and  we  were  to  find  ourselves  alone,  we  might  say
aftpr  his  manner,  "I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Master  is  with  me"  (John  xvi.  32).
— G.W.

Ver.  13. — Dealing  falsely  against  ow  lives.  "  I  should  have  wrought  falsehood
against  my  own  life."  Another  reading,  preferred  by  the  Old  Testament  Revisers,
substitutes  "  his  "  for  "  my  own ; "  but  they  place  in  the  margin  that  adopted  in  the
Authorized  Version.  Taking  the  passage,  then,  as  it  stands  in  the  Authorized  Version,
the  meaning  of  the  speaker  is  that  if  he  had  slain  Absalom,  he  would  have  brought  death
upon  himself,  since  the  king  would  have  been  made  acquainted  with  the  deed,  and  would
have  sentenced  him  to  death.  The  form  of  the  expression  is  worthy  of  notice.  Doing
what  would  have  cost  him  his  life  is  called  -woMng  falsehood  against  it.  A  man's  life
is  entrusted  to  him  to  guard  and  nourish.  When  he  does  this,  he  acts  truly  towards
it ;  when  he  does  what  injures  or  destroys  his  life,  he  acts  falsely  towards  it ;  he
violates  his  trust.  Every  man  virtually  professes  to  be  concerned  for  the  safety  and
well-being  of  his  life ;  when  he  does  what  endangers  or  terminates  it,  he  may  be  said  to
deal  falsely  with  it,  to  act  treacherously  towards  it.  This  is  the  case  with  those  who
put  themselves  to  death,  or  shorten  their  days  by  intemperance  or  licentiousness ;  or
who,  by  crime,  bring  themselves  to  the  gallows  (see  homily  on  ch.  xvii.  23).  But  we
may  take  the  words  as  suggesting  that  there  are  persons  who  work  falsehood  a^jainst
their  lives  in  the  higher  sense,  as  beings  immortal,  and  capable  of  that  life  which  is  life
indeed, — the  life  everlasting.

I.  How  DO  MEN  COMMIT  Tffls  SIN?  1.  By  taking  the  course  which  surely  leads
to  death.  In  violating  the  laws  of  Grod  they  bring  on  themselves  the  sentence  of  death,
and  sf  parate  themselves  from  God,  in  whose  favour  is  life.  2.  By  reusing  the  new  life
which  is  prof  ered  them  in  the  gospel.  Life  under  the  Law  having  become  impossible
through  sin,  God  has  interposed  with  another  method  of  imparting  life.  His  Son  came
to  be  our  Life.  He  died  that  we  might  live.  He  lives  evermore  to  bestow  life  on  all
who  believe  on  him.  "He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,"  etc.  (1  John  v.  12);  "He
that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,"  etc.  (John  iii.  36).  To  reject  him  is  to
reject  life.  It  is  to  deal  falsely  with  our  own  lives,  our  own  souls.  3.  By  neglecting
the  means  hy  which  the  life  of  the  soul  is  preserved  and  nourished.  Reading  of  the
Word,  meditation,  prayer,  watchfulness,  ordinances  of  public  worship,  union  and  com-
munion with  Christians,  etc.,  whatever  is  intended  and  adapted  to  keep  the  soul  in
vital  union  with  him  who  is  "  the  Life  "  (John  xiv.  6).

II.  Its  unnatdbalness  and  wickedness.  The  man  implied  that  to  deal  falsely
with  his  own  life  was  a  thing  utterly  inadmissible.  So  it  ought  to  be  in  respect  to  the
life  of  the  souh  For :  \.  It  is  the  life  which  is  concerned.  It  is  not  a  mere  question  of
more  or  less  health,  comfort,  or  other  subordinate  good.  "  It  is  not  a  vain  thing  for
you,  because  il;  is  your  life  "  (Deut.  zxxii.  47).  2.  It  is  the  most  precious  kind  of  life.
T7nsj^ak«bly  mor»  important  than  the  life  of  the  body,  or  even  of  the  mind,  or  of  any


OH.  xvin.  1~33.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  459

of  the  principles  and  affections  which  relate  us  to  the  family  or  society.  Because  of  (1)
its  nature,  (2)  its  blessedness,  (3)  its  duration.  3.  It  is  our  own  life.  Which  should
be  specially  dear  to  us,  and  has  been  specially  entrusted  to  us  :  which  we  aie  therefore
especially  bound  to  care  for  and  conserve.  4.  To  imperil  or  sacrifice  it  is  to  deal  falsely
against  it  and  against  Ood.  We  are  under  a  covenant  to  care  for  it.  Nature  binds
us,  and  Scripture,  and  perhaps  religious  vows,  voluntarily  made  and  often  repeated.

5.  Stick  a  course  will  bring  upon  us  the  Divine  displeasure.  We  shall  not  only  lose
our  souls,  but  shall  find  ourselves  involved  in  awful  penalties  for  doing  so ;  not  only
shall  we  fail  of  "  eternal  life,"  but  shall  "  go  away  into,  eternal  punishtnent "  (Matt.
XXV.  46);  The  words  maybe  a  safeguard  against  temptation.  "In  doing  this  thing
I  should  deal  falsely  against  my  own  life." — G.  W.

Ver.  13. — The  omniscience  of  our  King.  "  There  is  no  matter  hid  from  the  king."
This  is  given,  by  the  man  who  informed  Joab  that  Absalom  was  hanging  Iq  an  oak,  as
a  reason  why  he  might  have  been  sure  of  death  himself  if  he  had  killed  Absalom.  It
shows  how  well  inlormed  David  was  understood  to  be  of  all  that  took  place  amongst
his  subjects.  Snch  an  impression  respecting  governors  and  magistrates  in  geneial  as
this  man  had  respecting  David,  would  go  far  to  extinguish  crime.  The  assertion  here
made  as  to  King  David's  knowledge  may  be  made  absolutely,  and  without  exception,
in  reference  to  our  great  King.

L  The  omnisoibnob  of  Chbist.  This  is  claimed  for  and  by  him  in  Holy  Scripture
(see  John  ii.  24,  25 ;  Rev.  ii.  23 ;  and  the  repeated  declarations  in  the  letters  to  the
seven  Churches,  Rev,  ii.  and  iii.,  as  to  his  acquaintance  with  their  works  and  condition.
Also  John  X.  14,  15).  1.  The  sources  of  his  knowledge.  His  own  essential  Divine
faculty  of  knowing.  Hedoesnotdepend,  like  ordinary  rulers,  on  informants.  His  "eyes
are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good  "  (Prov.  xv.  3).  2.  The  exten  t  of  his
knowledge.  He  knows,  not  only  the  actions  of  men,  but  their  hearts ;  all  thoughts,
emotions,  motives,  plans,  purposes;  all  movements  and  events  that  can  affect  his
kingdom.  His  enemies  take  counsel  against  him  under  his  very  eyes.  3.  2'he  impos-
sibility of  concealing  anything  from  him.  "There  is  no  matter  hid  from  the  King."
Nothing  can  hide  aught  from  him.  Not  physical  darkness  ;  not  distance ;  not  efforts
at  concealment ;  no  hypocrisy ;  no  simulation  or  dissimulation ;  no  excuses,  contra-
dictions, or  evasions.  The  assertions  in  Ps.  cxxxix. ;  Job  xxxiv.  21,  22 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19 ;
Heb.  iv.  13,  are  as  applicable  to  the  Son  as  to  the  Father.

II.  The  effect  which  the  knowledge  of  the  omniscience  of  Chbist  bhotjld
HAVE  UPON  us.  1.  To  confirm  ow  confidence  in  his  fitness  to  be  King.  Rule  over
such  a  kingdom  as  his — extending  over  numbers  so  vast,  and  reaching  to  the  inmost
souls  of  his  subjects — requires  omniscience  as  one  of  the  attributes  of  the  Ruler.
2.  To  deter  us  from  wrong-doing.  As  a  similar  knowledge  deterred  this  Israelite  from
slaying  the  king's  son.  3.  To  assure  us  that  Judgment  will  fall  on  the  guilty,  and  only
on  them ;  and  on  each  according  to  the  Tneasure  of  his  guiltiness.  For  want  of  better
knowledge  in  human  rulers  and  magistrates,  some  innocent  persons  suffer  as  guilty,  and
many  guilty  ones  escape  punishment.  4.  To  encourage  us  in  all  that  is  good.  Christ's
perfect  knowledge  of  us  is  a  great  comfort  for  Christians  who  are  unknown  or  unac-
knowledged amongst  men ;  for  the  maligned  and  misunderstood ;  for  workers  in
obscurity  ;  for  such  as  do  good  quietly  and  secretly.  "  Lord,  thou  kuoweat  all  things ;
thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee"  (John  xxi.  17).  "Thy  Father" — thy  Redeemer  and
Lord — "  which  seeth  in  secret  shall  recompense  thee  "  (Matt.  vi.  4,  Revised  Version).
"  Who  will  both  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  make  manifest  the
counsels  of  the  hearts;  and  then  shall  each  man  have  hi?  praise  from  God  "  (1  Cor.  iv.

6,  Ei;vised  Version).

"Men  heed  thee,  love  thee,  praise  thee  not
The  Master  praises :  what  are  men  ?  "

5.  To  comfort  us  in  aU  troubles.  "  Thou  hast  seen  my  affliction ;  thou  hast  known
my  soul  in  adversities  "  (Ps.  xxxi.  7,  Revised  Version).  A  special  comfort  for  those
whose  troubles  are  too  peculiar  or  too  sacred  to  communicate  to  others.  Though  our
King  be  so  exalted,  he  interests  himself  in  each  one  of  his  subjects,  even  the  leapt,
knows  all  that  pains  them,  and  sympathizes  with  them  in  all. — G.  W,


m  tflE  SECOlTD  BOOtt  OP  SAlitTTEL.        (m.  xvm.  1-S3.

Ver.  18. — Aisalom's  monument.  The  contrast  between  ver.  17  and  ver.  18  is  touch-
ing. Absalom,  whose  three  sons  (ch.  xiv.  27)  were  dead,  desirous  that  his  name
should  not  therefore  die,  erected  a  monument  to  perpetuate  it,  probably  connecting
with  it  a  tomb  in  which  he  purposed  that  his  body  should  lie,  and  in  which  possibly  he
may  have  placed  the  remains  of  his  deceased  children.  But  he  was  buried  in  another
sepulchre,  and  had  another  monument  reared  to  his  memory.  A  pit  in  the  forest  of
Ephraim  became  his  grave,  and  "  a  very  great  heap  of  stones  "  his  memorial.  The
contrast  appears  more  marked  in  the  original  than  in  our  version.  The  same  Hebrew
word  is  translated  "  laid"  in  ver.  17,  and  "reared"  in  ver.  18.  "They  took  Absalom
.  . .  and  raised  a  very  great  heap  of  stones  upon  him . .  .  Absalom  in  his  lifetime  had
taken  and  raised  up  for  himself  a  pillar,"  etc.  The  desire  to  have  our  name  perpetuated
is  natural,  and  in  some  becomes  a  passion.  It  is  one  of  the  pleasures  parents  have,
that,  when  they  are  gone,  their  children  (especially  their  sons)  will  keep  their  names  in
the  memory  of  men.  Failing  this,  the  hope  of  a  tombstone  to  fulfil  in  some  measure
the  same  purpose  may  give  satisfaction ;  it  is  only  a  very  few  who  can  hope  for  a
"pillar"  as  a  monument.  But,  after  all,  these  are  poor  memorials,  and  they  may
preserve  a  very  undesirable  memory  of  a  deceased  person.  There  are  better  methods
of  ensuring  that  we  shall  not  be  soon  forgotten  amongst  men,  and,  at  the  same  time,
that  the  image  thus  perpetuated  shall  be  both  desirable  and  usefij.  These  methods,
moreover,  are  open  to  the  multitude  who  cannot  hope  for  either  pillar  or  tombstone  to
commemorate  them.    "  The  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  remembrance  "  (Ps.  cxii.  6).

I.  How  TO  BUILD  MONUMENTS  TO  ouB  MBMOBT.  1.  By  eminent  piety  and  hoUness.
"  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed ;  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot  "  (Prov.
X.  7).  2.  By  the  faithful  discharge  of  private  and  public  duties.  3.  By  zeal  for  the
spiritual  good  of  others.  Instructing  them  ourselves.  Providing  for  their  instruction.
Those  who  have  wealth  may  erect  a  house  of  prayer,  which  will  be  a  better  monument
than  a  pillar.  The  childless  man  may  thus  have  spiritual  children  that  shall  per-
petuate his  memory  and  good  influence.  Loving  work  amongst  the  young  is  likely
to  be  most  successful,  both  in  respect  to  their  good  and  the  long  perpetuation  of  our
memory.  Our  name  will  be  written  on  their  hearts,  and  repeated  by  them  with  grati-
tude in  their  conversation  and  in  their  thanksgivings  to  God.  4.  By  large  general
benevolence.  Devotedness  in  the  relief  of  suffering  and  the  promotion  in  other  ways  of
the  good  of  others.  Some  secure  a  lasting  name  by  building,  enlarging,  or  endowing
hospitals,  almshouses,  or  schools.  But  little  acts  of  kindness,  especially  if  they  become
the  habit  of  a  life,  may  secure  even  a  warmer  place  in  the  memory  and  affection  of  those
whom  we  benefit.

II.  The  MONUMENTS  THUS  BHECTBD.  It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  these
will  be :  1.  Souls  saved  or  greatly  profited.  2.  Happiness  produced  or  increased.
3.  Orateful  remembrance  and  mention  of  us.  By  those  we  have  benefited.  By  all
acquainted  with  our  lives  who  rightly  estimate  goodness  and  benevolence.  4.  In  the
case  of  some,  religious  and  philanthropic  institutions  and  agencies,  which  they  have
founded  or  greatly  strengthened,  and  with,  which  their  names  will  continue  to  he
associated.

III.  The  supekioeity  of  buoh  monuments.  In  comparison  with  pillars,  etc.,
erected  to  our  memory.  1.  In  their  nature.  Memorials  of  stone  bear  no  comparison
with  those  written  on  the  hearts,  and  in  the  characters  and  happiness,  of  men ;  or
indissolubly  associated  with  permanent  agencies  for  their  well-being.  2.  In  their
fruitfulness.  The  good  done  reproduces  itself ;  the  memory  of  the  doer,  thus  perpe-
tuated, more  surely  excites  to  imitation  of  his  character  and  works.  3.  In  their
duration.  The  less  durable  of  such  memorials  will  outlast  any  material  monument ;
the  spiritual  ones  will  survive  the  last  fires,  and  be  everlasting.

To  conclude :  1.  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  reflect  that  shortly  all  that  will  remain  of  us
in  this  world  will  he  our  memorials.  We  ourselves  must  soon  be  gone,  be  we  princes
or  peasants,  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  ignorant.  The  only  advantage  of  the  rich  over  the
poor  is  that  of  more  costly  monuments.  But  the  choicest  monuments  may  be  secured
by  the  poor  as  well  as  the  rich.  2.  The  securing  for  ourselves  a  lasting  name  amongst
men  ought  iiot  to  be  the  chief  motive,  nor  one  of  the  chirf  motives,  of  our  conduct.  It
should  hardly  be  a  motive  at  all.  '  Of  Christian  conduct  and  works,  it  cannot  be  a
main  motive ;  for  a  life  so  produced  is  not  Christian.    To  act  in  order  to  "  have  glory


CH.  XVIII.  1—33,]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  461

of  men "  (Matt.  vi.  2)  after  our  death  differs  not  In  principle  from  seeking  to  have
such  glory  now.  Had  Mary  (Matt.  xxvi.  6 — 13)  lavished  her  precious  ointment  on  our
Lord  in  order  that  she  might  he  memoiable  to  all  ages,  he  would  not  have  commended
her.  Our  chief  motives  should  be  love  to  God  and  Ohrist  and  men,  the  desire  to  be
approved  of  God,  and  to  have  our  names  recorded  indelibly  in  the  book  of  life  (PhiU
iv.  3 ;  Rev.  iii.  5).  3.  An  enduring  name  may  he  obtained  by  ill'doivg  as  well  as  by  well-
.doing.  The  name  of  Judas  will  last  as  long  as  that  of  Mary,  and  bo  perpetuated  by
the  same  means.  And  the  memory  of  a  good  man's  failings  may  be  as  enduring  us
that  of  his  virtues.  4.  The  grand  instance  of  a  Name  after  death  synonymous  with  all
that  is  great  and  good  in  the  highest  sense  and  degree,  without  any  admixture  of  evil,
and  productive  of  the  highest  and  most  lasting  good  in  others,  is  that  of  our  blessed
Lord.— G.  W.

Ver.  27. — A  good  messenger  of  good  news.  "He  is  a  good  man,  and  cometh  with
good  tidings."  Underlying  this  phrase  is  probably  the  feeling  that  there  is  a  con-
gruity  between  good  tidings  and  a  good  man.  David  may  have  thought  that  such  »
messenger  as  Ahimaaz  would  not  have  been  sent  with  bad  news  ;  and,  indeed,  Joab  was
unwilling  that  he  should  run  with  the  news,  because  he  knew  how  grievous  part  of  it
would  be  to  David.  It  may  be  permissible  to  take  these  words  as  applicable  to  the
proclaimers  of  the  heavenly  good  news — the  gospel  of  God.  It  should  be  true  of
every  Christian  minister  and  teacher,  yea,  of  every  Christian,  that  "  he  is  a  good  man,
and  cometh  with  good  tidings."  We  are  the  more  readily  led  to  such  an  accommodation
of  the  words,  because  the  terms  used  throughout>this  section  of  the  narrative  are  in  the
Septnagint  identical  with  those  («i>a77^Aio,  eva.yyeli.iCa)  with  which  we  are  so  familiar  in
the  New  Testament.

I.  There  aeb  good  tidings  to  be  proclaimed.  Christianity  is  pre-eminently
"gospel"  (equivalent  to  "  good  news"),  and  is  often  called  by  this  name.  It  is  good
tidings  from  the  region  and  the  Person  from  whence  we  might  reasonably  expect  bad;
and  about  the  Being  and  the  things  which  are  of  most  importance  to  us.  It  declares  to
us  the  love  of  God  to  sinful  men.  It  announces  the  coming  and  the  work  of  a  Divine
Saviour ;  the  reign  of  a  Divine  King ;  an  all-su£Boient  propitiation  for  sin  ;  a  full  and
free  redemption;  an  almighty,  most  loving  and  ever-abiding  Oomforter-and  Helper.  It
proclaims  pardon  for  the  guilty,  cleansing  for  the  impure,  life  for  the  dead,  comfort  for
the  sad  and  sorrowful,  Divine  righteousness  for  the  unrighteous.  Divine  strength  for  the
weak,  peace  and  joy  on  earth,  perfection  alike  of  holiness  and  happiness  in  heaven.  It
offers  all  these  blessings  on  the  simple  condition  of  "  repentance  toward  God,  and
faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Acts  xx.  21).

II.  These  good  tidings  abb  committed  to  good  men  to  make  known.  Only
good  men,  real  Christians,  have  a  Divine  commission  to  engage  in  this  work.  God  does
not  need  the  services  of  his  enemies  in  the  work  of  turning  enemies  into  friends  and
ministering  to  their  good.  No  unconverted  man,  no  one  that  is  carnal,  worldly,  unholy,
can  he  a  true  Christian  preacher  or  teacher.  1.  Only  good  men  really  know  the  gospel.
(Hee  1  Cor.  ii.  14  ;  Matt.  xi.  25.)  We  need  to  be  "  taught  of  God  "  (John  vi.  45)  in
order  to  our  real  reception  and  understanding  of  Christian  truth.  2.  Only  good  men  can
rightly  make  it  hiiown.  We  cannot  teach  what  we  do  not  know ;  we  cannot  teach
aright  that  with  which  we  are  out  of  harmony  and  sympathy.  The  work  of  teaching
the  gospel  requires  love  to  God,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  truth,  to  the  souls  of
men ;  sympathy  with  the  mind  and  heait  and  purposes  of  God  as  revealed  in  the
gospel ;  a  character  consistent  with  it,  and  adapted  to  illustrate  and  recommend  it ;
and  the  earnest  and  believing  prayerfulness  which  secures  the  Divine  aid  and  blessing.
"  But  unto  the  wicked  God  saith,  What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes,  or  that
thou  shouldest  take  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth  ?  "  (Ps.  I.  16).

III.  Good  men  should  make  known  the  good  tidings  zealously.  All  Christians
should  do  this  according  to  the  measure  of  their  abilities  and  opportunities.  They
should  be  incited  to  do  this  by  :  1.  The  nature  of  the  tidings.  With  which  only
intense  earnestness  in  the  messenger  is  in  harmony.  2.  Their  personal  obligations  to
the  redeeming  love  which  they  announce.  3.  The  unspeakable  blessings  they  have
received  through  the  knowledge  of  them.    4.  The  commands  of  their  Lord.    5.  Th*

.nalttrai  impulses  of  the  Christian  heart.    Which  are  the  promptings  of  the  Holy  Ghoit.


462  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xvm.  1— 33.

6.  The  good  they  can  thus  confer  on  their  fellow-men.  Orooi  of  the  most  important
and  lasting  kind,  and  of  which  they  are  most  of  all  in  need.

IV.  Those  who  make  known  the  good  tidings  onaHX  uobe  and  uobk  to
BECOME  GOOD.  The  work  of  learning  and  teaching  the  gospel  ought  to  greatly  benefit
the  teachers.  It  is  adapted  to  do  so,  on  account  of:  1.  17ie  nature  of  the  gospel.  Its
every  truth  is  sanctifying.  2.  The  special  character  of  the  work.  It  exercises  and  trains
every  Christian  virtue.  It  brings  into  close  communion  with  the  infinitely  Grood,  who  is
also  the  Inspirer  of  all  good  in  his  creatures.  3.  The  regard  for  consistency  which  the
worker  is  likely  to  cherish.  4.  His  desire  for  success  in  his  work.  This  will  increase  his
desire  and  endeavour  after  greater  personal  consecration  and  holiness.  6.  The  concern
which  he  will  feel  to  he  accepted  of  Qod.  "  Lest  that  by  any  means,  when  I  have
preached  to  others,  I  my.self  should  be  a  castaway  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).

in  conclusion:  1.  The  subject  appeals  to  all  who  have  pa/rt  in  the  teaching  of
Christianity.  Not  only  preachers,  but  parents  and  other  teachers  of  the  young,
d' strict  visitors,  etc.  2.  Some  need  to  be  reminded  that  the  Christian  religion  is  not  all
of  the  nature  of  good  tidings  to  each  one  to  whom,  it  comes.  If  it  says,  "  He  that
believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,"  it  says  also,  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be
damned  "  (Mark  xvi.  16).  If  of  the  righteous  it  declares,  "  It  shall  be  weU  with  him,"
it  also  says,  "  Woe  unto  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  ill  with  him  1 "  (Isa.  iii.  10,  11).  But
its  tiiiings  of  evil,  as  well  as  of  good,  need  good  men  to  bear  them  properly.  It  needs
frtith  and  faithfulness  toward  &od,  tender  love  and  pity  toward  men,  to  utter  them
aright,  and  with  probability  of  success. — G.  W.

Ver.  29. — Concern  for  the  welfare  of  young  men.  "  Is  the  young  man  Absalom
safe  ? "  or,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  "  Is  it  well  with  the  young  man  Absalom  ?  "
The  inquiry  reveals  what  was  on  David's  heart  equally  with,  if  not  more  than,  the
welfare  of  the  state  and  the  continuance  of  his  own  reign.  While  Absalom  had
accepted  with  approval  plans  for  accomplishing  his  father's  death,  David  was  more
solicitous  for  the  preservation  of  Absalom's  life  than  his  own;  and  now  that  the  victory
of  his  forces  is  announced,  he  cannot  rejoice  at  the  tidings  until  he  knows  whether  his
son  still  lives ;  and  when  he  learns  that  he  is  dead,  his  grief  quite  overwhelms  his  joy,
and  bursts  all  bounds.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  worthless  sons,  who  have  lost  all
affection  and  dutifulnpss  towards  their  parents,  to  have  parental  love  still  lavished  and
wasted  upon  them.  The  reprobate  is  not  unfrequently  the  favourite.  The  inquiry  of
David  is  one  that  may  be,  and  often  is,  put  respecting  young  men,  with  reference  to
various  kinds  of  well-being.  Is  it  well  with  him  ?  Is  he  in  health?  Is  he  getting  on
in  business,  etc.  ?  It  may  well  be  directed  towards  welfare  of  a  more  essential  kind —
Is  it  well  with  him  morally,  spiritually,  and  with  reference  to  eternity  ?

I.  When  is  rr  well  with  TonNO  men?  1.  What  they  have  become  decided
Christians.  When  of  their  own  free  choice  they  have  accepted  Christ  as  their  Saviour
and  Lord,  aad  manfully  owned  him  before  men.  It  cannot  be  really  well  with  those
who  are  without  Christ,  living  in  rebellion  towards  their  heavenly  Father,  and  walking
in  the  way  that  leads  to  destruction.  2.  WTien  living  lives  of  watchfulness  and  prayer.
Sensible  of  the  perils  to  which  they  are  exposed,  guarding  against  temptation,  and  ever
imploring  Divine  protection  and  help.  In  such  a  world  as  this,  it  cannot  be  well  for
the  young  and  inexperienced  to  be  unaware  of  their  dangers,  or  heedless  respecting
them.  3.  Wlien  carrying  Christian  principles  into  consistent  practice  in  every  depart-
ment of  their  lives.  4.  When  earnestly  devoting  themselves  to  works  of  piety  and
benevolence.  To  do  this  is  well,  not  only  for  those  whose  good  they  may  be  seeking,
but  for  themselves.  It  is  a  safeguard  and  an  education.  Let  young  men  (young
women  too)  thus  live,  and :  (1)  It  is  well  with  them  whatever  their  position  in  life.
Such  living  is  well-being,  (2)  It  is  likely  to  be  well  with  them  in  their  relations  to
others.  They  will  secure  esteem,  affection,  friendships  that  are  worth  having,  and
great  influence  for.  good  in  the  Church  and  the  world.  (3)  It  will  probably  be  well  with
ihem  as  to  worldly  success  and  comfort.  (4)  Persevering  in  such  a  course,  it  will  be
well  with  them  throughout  this  life  and  for  ever.  Such  a  youth  will  lead  on  to  an
honourable  and  happy  manhood ;  such  a  life  on  earth  to  a  glorious  and  blissful  lite  in
heaven.  '

II.  The  conoebn  which  is  felt  in  besfeot  to  the  Chbistian  welfabe  of


OH.  xvin.  1—33.]        THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  463

TOUNO  MEN.  1.  By  their  Christian  parents.  Natural  affection  and  religious  faith
combine  to  produce  an  anxiety  wMcn  young  people  can  very  partially  understand.
The  happiness  of  parents  is  bound  up  with  that  of  their  children.  Christians  "  live  "
(1  Thess.  iii.  8)  when  their  sons  and  daughters  live  to  Christ,  and  "  stand  fast "  in
him.  Their  anxiety  on  their  account  is  greatly  intensified  when  they  have  left  home
for  new  scenes  and  associations,  involving  new  perils  to  character,  without  the  preser-
vative influence  of  home  and  known  friends.  2.  Ministers  and  Churches  ought  to  he
more  concerned  about  the  spiritual  welfare  of  young  men  than  they  always  are.  Their
mission  is  to  care  for  souls ;  and  no  soxils  are  more  interesting,  more  exposed  to  danger,
more  needing  and  ready  to  appreciate  sympathy  and  friendly  ofSces,  than  thpse  of  the
young.  ■  J^one  are  of  so  much  value  for  the  advancement  of  religion  at  home  and
abroad.  And  of  the  young,  none  so  need  guidance  and  wise  influence  as  young  men  ;
young  women  are  drawn  to  Christ  more  readily,  and  are  usually  exposed  to  less
powerful  temptations.  Measures  for  the  good  of  young  men  should  occupy  a  prominent
place  in  the  agencies  of  every  congregation.  3.  Christian  citizens  may  well  cherish  a
like  concern.  For  on  the  direction  that  the  youth  of  a  country  take  depends  to  a  large
extent  the  welfare  of  the  state.  If  the  young  could  but  be  generally  brought  under
the  power  of  godliness,  with  its  accompanying  intelligence,  purity,  uprightness,  and
benevolence,  a  new  era  of  national  glory  and  happiness  would  have  commenced.  Is  it
well  with  the  young,  especially  with  young  men  ?  should,  then,  be  a  common  inquiry
from  all  good  men  and  women ;  and  should  be  accompanied  with  such  practical  proofs
of  interest  in  the  inquiry  as  are  possible.  There  are  few  Christians  who  could  not  do
something  to  bring  Christian  influences  to  bear  upon  the  young  men  they  know,  and  to
shield  them  from  the  opposite  influences,  which  are  so  numerous  and  powerful.

Finally,  young  men  should  be  concerned  for  their  own  best  interests.  Because  it  is
right;  because  the  practices  of  godliness  and  virtue  bring  solid  happiness;  because  thus
they  will  make  the  most  of  their  lives ;  and  because  of  the  concern  which  those  who
love  them  feel  on  their  account.  Let  them,  when  tempted  to  neglect  or  forsake  that
which  is  good,  or  practise  wickedness,  remember  the  counsels  and  prayers  of  their
fathers  and  mothers,  and  the  pain  they  will  inflict  on  them  if  they  go  wrong. — G.  W.

Ver.  33. — A  father's  anguish  at  his  son's  death.  The  stroke  which  David  feared  fell
upon  him  at  last.  Id.  spite  of  all  his  desire  to  save  his  rebellious  son,  and  bis  com-
mands to  each  of  the  generals  to  "  deal  gently  "  with  him  for  his  sake,  he  htid  been
slain.  When  the  father  learnt  the  unwelcome  truth  from  "  the  Cushite "  (Revised
Version),  he  was  overwhelmed  with  grief;  and  retiring  to  "  the  chamber  over  the  gate  "
he  burst  out  in  the  pathetic  lamentation,  "  0  my  son  Absalom  1 "  etc.,  and  continued
crying  with  a  loud  voice,  "0  my  son  Absalom  1  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  sonl  "  (ch.
xix.  4).  These  loud  demonstrations  of  grief  were  in  a  high  degree  impolitic,  as  Joab
soon  convinced  him  (ch.  xix.  5 — 8),  but  they  were  the  natural  outburst  of  his  tender
heart  and  his  unquenchable  love  for  his  worthless  son.  He  had  grieved  sorely  in  the
expectation  of  the  death  of  his  infant  child  (ch.  xii.  16,  21,  22);  much  more  must  he
grieve  over  this  young  man,  on  whom  his  heart  had  been  set  for  so  many  years,  and
for  whom  he  had  done  and  borne  so  much.  Moreover,  Absalom  had  died  suddenly,  and
by  violence,  and  in  sinful  war  against  his  father — unrepentant,  unforgiven.  David
might  even,  in  his  passionate  grief,  reflect  on  himself  as  the  occasion,  however  inno-
cently, of  his  death,  since  it  arose  from  the  measures  he  had  taken  in  defence  of  him-
self and  his  throne.  Still  more  biLter  would  be  the  reflection  that,  by  his  foolish
fondness,  his  evil  example,  his  laxity  of  discipline,  his  refraining  from  merited  punish-
ment of  his  son's  earlier  sins  and  crimes,  and  his  neglect  to  crush  his  treasonable
practices  ai  their  commencement,  he  had  greatly  contributed  to  the  formation  of  his  evil
character,  and  to  his  untimely  and  miserable  end.

I.  The  soreow  of  parents  bbkbft  of  geown-up  children.  It  is  composed  of
various  elements.  1.  Sorrow  of  natural  affection.  Which  cannot  always  give  account
of  itself,  but  is  implanted  by  the  Creator  for  most  important  purposes,  is  increased  by
years  of  exercise  and  mutual  endearments  and  services,  and  often  survives  when  these
have  ceased,  and  parental  love  is  requited  with  ingratitude,  neglect,  injury,  or  deadly
hostility,  2.  Sorrow  of  disappointed  hope.  Parents  picture  to  themselves  a  career
of  prosperity  and  honourable  activity  for  their  children,  and  tiy  to  ensure  it  by  the


464


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[cH.  XIX,  1 — 43,


education  and  start  in  life  which  they  give  them.  Or  they  may  have  looked  to  their
son  to  be  the  prop  of  their  own  old  age.  How  can  they  but  sorrow  bitterly  when  all
their  hopes  are  scattered  by  death  f  3.  Their  sorrow  may  he  increased  by  painful
fears.  It  may  be  a  sorrow  uncheered  by  hope,  because  over  the  death  of  one  who  lived
and  died  in  sin.  4.  Self-reproach  may,  us  in  the  case  of  David,  accompany  and
embitter  the  grief  .  The  highest  parental  duties — those  which  have  respect  to  the  soula
of  children — may  have  been  neglected.  ,  The  home  may  have  been,  through  parental
indifference  and  worldliness,  if  no  worse,  a  quite  unfit  place  of  preparation  for  holy
service  on  earth  or  entrance  into  heaven.  The  sorrow  arising  from  the  consciousness
of  this  cannot  be  assuaged  by  remembrance  of  the  education  given  to  pre^re  for  this
world's  business,  or  the  accomplishments  imparted  to  render  life  refined  and  agreeable.
5.  The  sorrows  of  bereaved  parents  are  increased  arid  from  time  to  time  renewed  by
observing  the  happiness  of  other  parents  whose  children  are  continued  to  them,  and  are
Uving  in  habits  of  piety,  rectitude,  and  benevolence.

II.  CoNBOLATioNB  FOB  8TJCH  SORROW.  These  are  to  be  found  in :  1.  Profound  sub-
mission to  the  will  of  Ood.  The  death  we  mouru,  however  it  comes,  was  his  doing  who
has  the  right  to  dispose  of  us  and  ours  according  to  his  pleasure;  and  who  is  infinite  in
wisdom  and  goodness — "  our  Father."  "  Thou  didst  it "  (Ps.  xxxix.  9) ;  "  The  Lord
gave,  and  the  Loid  hath  taken  away  "  (Job  i.  21).  2.  Assurance  of  his  fatherly  com-
passion. That  he  sympathizes  while  he  chastises  (Ps.  ciii.  13).  3.  A  good  conscience,
Happy  the  fathers,  the  motliers,  who  have  the  consoling  reflection  that  they  did  their
best  to  fit  their  departed  children  for  this  world  or  the  next.  4.  In  the  case  of  the
death  of  godly  children,  the  assurance  of  their  blessed  existence  and  happy  commence-
ment of  nobler  careers  than  those  cut  short  by  death.  The  assurance  also  of  future
reunion  where  "  there  shall  be  no  more  death  "  (Piev.  xxi.  4).

In  conclusion  :  1.  Let  parents  think  of  their  children  as  mortal;  and  bo  concernrJ
so  to  train  and  influence  them  as  to  fit  them  for  both  living  and  dying.  2.  Lei
children  live  in  view  of  a  posHhly  early  death.  Seek  safety  in  Christ.  Let  life  be  a
constant  following  of  him.  Dread  to  have  life  shortened  and  death  made  terrible  by
sins  and  vices.  Let  your  parents  have  the  consolation  of  knowing,  should  you  die
young,  that  you  are  "not  lost,  but  gone  before." — Gr.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTBE  XIX.


Ver.  2. — The  victory  (Hebrew,  the  ealva-
tiony  that  day  was  turned  into  mourning.
Naturally,  the  people  did  not  understand  the
poignant  emotions  caused  by  the  activity  of
David's  conscience,  and  were  pained  at  this
seeming  ingratitude  to  them  for  their  brave
exertions  in  his  behalf,  and  at  what  they
must  have  regarded  as  indifference  to  the
welfare  of  the  nation.  Nor  would  it  be  easy
for  ns  to  understand  his  conduct  during
the  flight  from  Jerusalem,  and  in  bearing
Shimei's  imprecations  so  tamely,  did  we  not
find  in  the  psalms  written  at  this  time  that
David  was  suffering  extreme  and  even  ex-
cessive self-iepioaoh  and  mental  anguish  at
his  past  sin.  It  was  a  relief  to  bear  Shimei's
rudeness,  for  God  might  remember  it  for
good.  Backed  thus  with  telf-reproaoh,he  had
urged  upon  his  generals  to  spare  the  young
man  (ch.  xviii.  5),  whose  sin  was  part  of  a
web  which  he  had  himself  begun  to  spin,  and
in  terror  he  waited  for  the  result.  Mentally
it  would  have  been  better  for  him  if  he  had
gone  to  the  battle  instead  of  sitting  in  gloomy


ielf-reproach  between  the  gates.  His  eager
inquiries,  "  Is  the  lad  safe  ?  "  meant — Has  the
hand  of  justice  again  smitten  me?  and  when
he  found  that  a  second  blow  had  fallen,  his
self-cnntrol  gave  way.  Joab,  more  states-
manlike, and  with  his  personal  feelings  un-
moved, notices  the  fresh  wrong  that  David
is  committing,  and  is  vexed  at  seeing  his
brave  warriors  slink  into  Mahanaim  ashamed,
instead  of  being  welcomed  with  deserved
praise.  But  their  conduct  in  being  so  de-
pressed-at  David's  sorrow  is  a  proof  of  their
affection  for  him,  and  it  was  plainly  his  duty
to  master  his  feelings,  and  to  think  of  making
a  due  return  for  the  great  service  they  had
rendered  him.  The  Hebrew  word  "salva-
tion," that  is,  deliverance,  gives  the  better
side  of  the  idea,  while  "  victory  "  is  a  coarser
word,  taken  from  the  language  of  a  people
whose  trade  was  war.

Ver.  5. — And  Joab  .  ,  .  said.  Joab's
speech  puts  the  alternative  in  a  very  incisive
and  even  rude  way  before  tlie  king.  But
what  he  says  is  true,  namely,  that  Absalom's
success  would  inevitably  have  been  followed
by  the  massacre,  not  only  of  David  bimiel4


08.  XIX.  1—43.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


46S


but  of  Mb  bods  and  dc^ugbtere,  and  of  ih^
women  who  had  aooomp»nied  him  in  his
flight.  Nor  would  it  have  stopped  there,
but  the  ofQcers  of  his  oonit,  the  oaptaina  of
hig  army,  his  mighties,  and  all  who  had  Jong
caied  for  and  loved  biro  would  have  been
put  to  the  gword.  It  was  this  horrible  cer-
tainty, accurding  to  Oriental  usage,  which
madi^  Absalom's  rebellion  sp  abominable,
and  which  steiled  the  heart  of  Joab  against
him  when  be  saw  bim  banging  in  the  trf  e.
He  regarded  bim  as  a  fratriciile  and  parrioide,
who  had  plotted  murder  on  a  large  scale;
and  Joab  was  not  made  milder  by  the
thought  that  this  would  have  inolnded
himself  and  the  heroes  who  had  made
David's  throne  so  great.  With  stem  good
sense  he,  tberefore,  bids  the  king  suppress
his  more  pergonal  feelings,  and  leave  the
oliamber  in  which  he  bad  concealed  himself,
to  go  forth  and  "  speak  to  the  heart  of  bis
Burvants,"  that  is,  thank  and  praise  them  in
a  friendly  manner,  For  otherwise  they
would  disperse  and  leave  bim;  and  this
would  be  followed  by  the  uprise  of  some
other  claimai  it  of  the  thrune^some  relative,
perhaps,  of  Saul,  backed  by  the  tribes  of
Benjamin  and  Epbraim ;  and  David,  aban^.
doned  by  the  nation,  would  fall  an  easy
victim,  with  all  his  family,  of  this  second
rebellion,  Absalom's  rapid  suoooas  proved
that  Pavid  had  many  enemies,  and  without
great  prudence  bo  might  be  left  at  Mahanaim
as  powerless  as  Ishbpsheth  had  bet^n.  The
long  delay  between  the  death  of  this  puppet-
king  and  David's  appointment  to  be  sovereign
of  all  Israel  was  probably  owing  to  the  same
want  of  enthusiasm  for  Pavid  which  had
made  the  nation  transfer  its  allegianpe  so
lightly  to  the  liandsome  Absalom.  But  with
all  bis  good  sense  Joab  was  coarse  and  rude.
Ha  was,  moreover,  utterly  incapable  of
understanding  David's  real  feelings.  He
saw  only  »  father  giving  way  to  an  exag-
gerated loss  for  a  handsome  but  worthless
son.  David  really  was  condemning  himoolf
for  having  brought  lust  and  murder  into  bis
own  house  by  abominable  sin.

Ver.  S.^^All  the  people  came  before  the
king.  Probably  they  passed  in  review  be.
fore  him,  and  received  his  thanks.  By  thus
acting  in  accordance  with  Joab's  wise  counsel,
Diiyid  probably  saved  the  nation  from  years
of  anurohy,  and  a  fresh  eivil  war.  For  Israel
had  fled  every  man  to  his  tent ;  Hebrew,  and
Igrael,  that  is,  Absalom's  partisans, ^eci  each
man  to  hii  Unt — to  bis  home.  The  Autho-
rised Version  confounds  Israel  with  Davi'l's
soldiers,  but  qonsistently  throughout  the
narrative  ''  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel
are  after  Absalom"  (qh.  iv.  13;  and  see
xvi.  15, 18;  svii.  14,  15,  24,  26;  xviii.  6, 7,
16,  17),

y«r.  10,^AbsAlain>  whom  wa  i^noint^d


over  us,  It  is  evident  from  these  words  that
there  had  been  some  solemn  anointing  and
appointment  of  Absalom,  and  this  accounts
for  the  manner  in  which  his  partisans  are
always  described  as  "  Israel,"  while  David's
men  are  simply ''his  seivants."  With  this
anointment  there  must  also  have  been  a
formal  renunciation  of  David's  rule,  and,
being  thus  dethroned,  he  does  not  attempt  to
return  until  the  nation  summons  bim  back.
As  the  flight  of  Pavid  narrated  in  oh.  jvi.
was  extremely  hurried,  the  conspirators  must
have  kept  their  counsel  well,  and  whatever
rumoui'B  reached  him  apparently  he  disre-
gardid,  But  meanwhile  representatives  of
the  tribes  secretly  convened  at  Hebron  had
claimed  to  act  in  the  name  of  Israel,  anil,
chosen  a  new  king.  The  words  certainly
imply  that,  had  Absalom  lived,  the  Israelites
would  have  oonsidered  themselves  bound  to
obey  bim.

Ver.  11. — ^Savid  sent  to  Zadok  and  to
Ahiathar.  The  two  high  priests  bad  re-
mained behind  at  Jerusalem,  to  watch  over
David's  interests,  and  he  now,  by  a  mes.
Sanger,  probably  Ahimaaz  or  Jonathan,  urges
them  to  quicken  the  proceedings  of  his  own'
tribe.  We  may  feel  quite  sure  that  there
was  discussion  in  Judah  as  well  as  in  the
other  tribes;  but  the  rebellion  bad  begun  at
Hebron,  and  probably  many  of  the  leading
chiefs  wero  deeply  implicated  in  Absalom's
proceedings.  Probably  they  now  regretted
it,  but  bung  back  through  fear  of  punish-
ment. It  was  politic,  therefore,  to  assure
them  of  Pavid's  kindly  feelings,  and  that
overtures  on  their  side  would  bo  readily
received,  and  the  past  forgiven,

Ver,  12.-^lly  bones ;  Hebrew,  my  bona
and  my  flesh,  so  nearly  related  as  to  be  pari
of  my  own  self  (Gen.  ii.  23).

Ver.  IS,— Of  my  bone,  and  of  my  flesh  j
Hebrew,  art  thou  not  my  bone  and  my  flesh  i
— a  most  near  and  dear  relative.  It  is  diffiouit
to  understand  why  in  the  Authorized  Ver-
sion this  common  metrtphnr  in  the  Hebrew
has  been  bo  meddled  with.  Ewald  thinks
that  this  purposed  degradation  of  Joah  and
the  substitution  of  Amaaa  in  his  stead  was
a  wise  and  politic  act.  It  was  to  some  extent
just,  for  Joab  was  a  man  stained  with  many
murdeis;  but  politic  it  was  not.  Passing
over  the  fact  that  Amasa  had  actually  taken
the  conimand  of  the  rebel  army,  he  was  an
ambitious  and  sulflsh  man,  and  could  lay  no
claim  to_  that  sturdy  fidelity  which  had
characterised  Joab  throughout  his  long  ser-
vice. For  all  he  hstd  done  had  been  for
David's  good,  and  his  advice,  however
roughly  given,had  averted  grave  misfortunes.
Joab's  murder  of  Absalom  was  an  act  of
wilful  disobedience;  but  Pavid  had  used
Joab  for  a  far  meaner  murder,  committed,  not
for  reasoi(g  o^  statesmanship,  but  for  purpose*

2  H


466


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[cH.  XIX.  1 — 43.


of  lust.  The  guilt  of  slaying  Absalom  was
as  nothing  compared  widi  that  of  slaying
Uriah,  nor  was  it  so  base  as  the  assassination
of  Abner,  whicli  David  had  tolerated,  though
made  angry  by  it.  The  dismissal  of  Joab
could  have  been  effected  only  by  putting  him
to  death,  and  this  certainly  he  did  not  de-
serve at  David's  bauds;  and  the  attempt,
unless  carried  out  secretly,  would  have  led
to  tumult  and  insurrection.  Joab,  too,  was
a  far  more  skilful  general  than  Amasa,  who,
with  larger  forces,  had  just  suffered  a  disas-
trous defeat;  and  if  Joab  was  removed
secretly,  his  brother  Abishai  remained  to
avenge  him.  David  was,  in  fact,  blinded
by  love  for  tlie  son  whom  for  so  many
years  he  had  treated  with  coldness.  There
was  a  strong  reaction  now  in  the  father's
mind,  and  under  its  influence  he  was  pre-
pared to  sacrifice  the  nephew  who  had  been
faithful  to  him  and  saved  him,  for  the
nephew  who  had  joined  in  Absalom's  re-
bellion. But  possibly  it  had  an  immediate
good  effect,  as  Amasa,  assured  of  forgiveness
and  promotion,  now  took  David's  side.

Ver.  14. — And  he  bowed,  etc.  It  was
not  Amasa,  but  David,  who  made  all  the
members  of  his  tribe  unanimous  in  his  recall.
And  not  only  were  the  high  priests  active
in  his  cause,  but  David,  we  may  feel  sure,
sent  numerous  messages  to  all  the  more
powerful  men,  assuring  them  of  forgiveness
and  favour.  In  his  general  policy  he  was
right.  After  the  solemn  anointing  of
Absalom,  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  wait
until  some  equally  public  and  national  act
authorized  his  resumption  of  the  royal
power;  and  delay  was  dangerous.  Every
day  now  spent  at  Mahanaim  might  give  the
opportunity  for  fresh  troubles.

Ver.  15. — Gilgal.  As  Gilgal  lay  upon  the
west  bank  of  the  Jordan  (Josh.  v.  9),  near
Jericho  and  the  fords,  it  was  a  convenient
place  for  the  elders  of  Judah  to  await  there
the  king.  During  the  crossing,  two  interest-
ing events  happened — the  meeting  of  Shimei
and  David,  and  the  leave-taking  of  Barzillai
the  Gileadite.  Shortly  afterwards  came  the
apology  of  Mephibosheth,  but  it  is  uncertain^
whether  he  was  among  those  who  had  come
to  Gilgal  to  welcome  the  king.

Ver.  16. — Shimei  the  son  of  Gera.  The
fact  that  he  came  attended  by  a  thousand
men  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  is  a  proof,  not
only  that  he  was  a  person  of  influence,  but
that  he  had  exerted  himself  to  bring  over
his  tribesmen  to  David's  aide.  His  adher-
ence was,  therefore,  of  importance.  Ziba
had  always  professed  allegiance  to  David,
and  as  he  virtually  represented  the  house  of
Saul,  his  presence  was  also  valuable,  even  if
prompted  by  the  desire  to  keep  Mephibo-
ahetk  s  land.  For  though  Absalom  seemed
to  b*  tk*  nation'!  ohsioa,  yet  there  would


be  many  legitimists  who  would  consider  that
the  crown  belonged  to  Saul's  heirs,  and  who
would  watch  the  course  of  events  for  any
opportunity  favourable  to  their  views.
David's  victory  ruined  their  hopes,  and  the
public  acts  of  Shimei  and  Ziba  removed  all
fear  of  public  disturbance  on  the  part  of
Saul's  friends.

Ver.  17. — They  went  over  Jordan  before
the  king.  This  might  mean  that,  in  bringing
the  king  across,  Shimei  and  the  Benjamites
led  the  way.  But,  first,  the  verb,  which  is
a  rare  one,  means  that  they  dashed  through
the  river  impetuously ;  and  secondly,  before
the  king,  means  "in  the  king's  presence."
While  the  tribe  of  Judah  remained  on  the
left  bank  to  receive  the  king  on  his  landing,
Shimei  and  Ziba  sought  tavour  by  a  show
of  excessive  zeal,  and  forded  the  Jordan,  so
as  to  be  the  first  to  welcome  him  (see  ver.
20).

Ver.  18. — ^And  there  went  over  a  ferry-
boat; more  correctly,  and  the  ferry-boat  kept
crossing,  went  backwards  and  forwards  to
bring  the  king's  household  over.  Shimei
.  .  .  fell  down  before  the  Mng,  as  he  was
come  over  Jordan.  If  this  translation  were
right,  instead  of  fording  the  river,  Shimei
would  have  waited  on  the  western  bank.
Some  commentators  do  take  this  view,  but
it  is  contradicted  by  the  latter  part  of  ver.
17.  Eeally  the  Hebrew  words  signjfy  no
more  than  "at  his  crossing  the  Jordan,"
that  is,  at  some  time  or  other  during  the
passage.  Shimei's  course  was  not  only  the
boldest,  but  also  the  wisest.  For,  in  the  first
place,  his  prompt  surrender  would  commend
itself  to  David's  generosity ;  and,  secondly,
had  Abishai's  counsel  been  taken,  it  would
have  offended  the  thousand  Benjamites  who
formed  his  escort,  and  also  all  the  warriors
present  there  ftom  Israel  (see  ver.  40).
Trouble  and  discontent  would  certainly  have
followed  upon  any  attempt  on  David's  part
to  punish  any  of  his  enemies,  and  there
might  even  have  been  armed  resistance  to
his  crossing.

Ver.  20.— The  first ...  of  all  the  house  of
Joseph.  Shimei,  who  was  a  Benjamite,
could  not  have  thus  claimed  to  be  the
representative  of  the  northern  tribes,  had  he
remained  on  the  western  bank,  where  "  half
the  people  of  Israel"  were  assembled.
Strictly, "  the  house  of  Joseph  "  signified  the
tribe  of  Ephraim  (Judg.  i.  22,  35;  and
comp.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  67),  and  in  this  sense
Shimei  did  not  belong  to  it.  But  Ephraim
claimed  »  supremacy  over  all  Israel;  and
one  cause  of  the  opposition  to  David  certainly
was  the  transference  of  the  leadership  to
the  tribe  of  Judah.  Even  the  long  reign  of
Solomon  failed  to  weld  the  tribes  together,
and  as  soon  as  the  reins  of  power  fell  into
th«  weak  hands  of  Behoboam,  an  Ephraimita,


OH.  XIX.  1—43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


467


Jeroboam,  whom  Solomon  had  made  "  rulur
ovei  all  the  charge  of  the  bouse  of  Joseph  "
(1  Kings  xi.  28),  quickly  wrested  the  ten
tribes  from  him.  In  Amos  v.  6  "  the
house  of  Joseph  "  signifies  all  the  northern
tribes,  for  the  reason  given  in  1  Chron.  y.  1,
2 ;  and  such  is  its  sense  here.  And  Shimei
compressed  many  powerful  arguments  in
the  phrase.  For  as  a  Benjamite  he  offered
David  the  allegiance  of  the  tribe  which  had
given  Israel  its  first  king;  while,  as  an
Israelite,  he  professed  also  to  represent  the
leading  house  of  Ephraim,  and  all  the
northern  tribes  which  usually  followed  its
bidding.

Ver.  22. — ^Te  sons  of  Zemiah  .  .  .  adver-
Baries  nnto  me ;  literally,  that  ye  be  to  me  for
a  Satan;  rendered  "adversary"  in  Numb.
xxli.  22,  but  by  Ewald  in  this  place
"tempter."  It  probably  means  "one  who
would  do  me  harm."  Though  David  speaks
of  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  in  the  plural  (as  in
cb.  xvi.  10),  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose
that  Joab  shared  in  Abishai's  impetuosity.
Indifierent  as  he  was  to  the  shedding  of
blood,  he  was  too  prudent  and  politic  to  put
the  people  out  of  temper  by  an  execution
on  the  diiiy  of  David's  return.  In  Israel . .  ,
over  Israel.  There  is  much  force  in  this
repetition.  A  short  time  before  Israel  had
been  for  Absalom,  but  now,  by  Shimei's
submission,  and  that  of  the  large  body  of.
Benjamites  with  him,  David  felt  that  once
again  he  was  king  over  the  whole  people.

Yer.  23. — The  king  sware  onto  him.
David's  magnanimity  was  not  the  result
merely  of  policy,  but  also  of  joyful  feeling
at  seeing  all  the  tribes  so  readily  welcome
him  back  to  the  throne.  But  in  spite  of  his
oath,  he  orders  Solomon  to  execute  him,
regarding  wbat  he  had  done  as  a  sin  past
forgiveness.  In  so  doing  we  can  liardly
acquit  David  of  breaking  his  oath,  even
granting  that  Shimei's  repentance  was  in-
sincere, and  that  the  motive  of  his  actions
was  the  desire  simply  to  save  his  life.  But
we  must  remember  that  our  Lord  described
his  injunction,  "  that  ye  love  one  another,"
as  "  a  new  commandment "  (John  xiii.  34) ;
and  the  utmost  that  can  be  said  in  David's
favour  is  tliat  his  character  was  generous
and  full  of  chivalry.  A  half-excuse  may  be
found  for  his  order  in  the  supposition  that
Shimei  was  an  inveterate  conspirator,  and
dangerous  to  Solomon's  peace.  This  view
seems  confirmed  by  the  command  given  to
Shimei  to  build  a  house  at  Jerusalem  (1
Kings  ii.  36),  where  he  would  always  be
under  surveillance.  But  had  not  David
himself  praised  the  man  who  "  sweareth  to
his  own  hurt,  and  changeth  not "  (Ps.  xv.  4)  ?

Yer.  24. — Uephibosheth.  The  meeting  of
David  and  Mephibosheth  possibly  took
place  at  Jerusalem  (see  on  ver.  25),  and.  if


so,  the  order  of  events  Is  not  chronological
Ziba  certainly  came  to  the  Jordan  fords,
and  the  narrative  may  have  been  introduced
here  to  complete  the  account  of  his  doings.
In  neglecting  his  person  and  his  dress,
Mephibosheth  was  showing  signs  of  heart-
felt sorrow,  and  as  he  thus  mourned  during
Absalom's  tenure  of  power,  it  exposed  liim
to  the  usurper's  displeasure,.!,  and  was  a
public  avowal  that  bis  sympathies  were
with  David.  And  his  treatment  was  un-
just ;  but  David  was  in  a  strait.  Ziba  had
been  actively  useful  to  him  in  his  flight,
and  had  also  aided  greatly  in  his  recalL
It  was,  probably,  even  owing  to  his  influence
that  Shimei  came  with  a  thousand  men  of
Benjamin.  He  deserved,  therefore,  a  reward,
but  not  at  his  master's  cost.  His  heard;
Hebrew,  the  upper  lip  (see  Lev.  xiii.  45;
Ezek.  xxiv.  17,  22).

Yer.  25. — When  he  was  oome  to  Jerusalem
to  meet  the  king.  This  certainly  looks  as
if  the  meeting  took  place  at  Jerusalem,  and
apparently  when  David  had  reached  the
royal  palace  (see  ver.  30).  But  what,  then,
is  meant  in  ver.  24  by  his  "  going  down "
to  meet  the  king?  If,  too,  he  had  been  at
Jerusalem  all  the  while,  how  could  he  oome
there?  Some,  therefore,  translate,  "Then
Jerusalem  came  to  meet  the  king " — a  pos-
sible, but  not  a  natural,  rendering,  nor  one
that  agrees  with  ver.  30.  Others  consider  that
he  had  withdrawn  to  his  house  in  the  high-
lands of  Benjamin  at  Gibeah  of  Saul ;  but
David  had  given  these  lands  to  Ziba,  and
the  crippled  Mephibosheth  would  have  met
with  rough  treatment  had  he  endeavoured
to  contest  the  ownership.  The  Arabic
Version  reads,  "when  he  came  from  Jeru-
salem ; "  but  it  is  not  confirmed  by  any  trust-
worthy authorities.  The  view  of  Kimchi  is
probably  right,  that  Mephibosheth  did  go
down  to  the  Jordan  fords  to  meet  David,
and  certainly  his  duty  required  of  him  no
less.  He  had  been  slandered  and  ill  used,
but  the  king  believed  him  to  be  guilty,  and
regarded  him  with  displeasure.  To  have
remained,  therefore,  at  home  when  all  Judah
and  half  Israel  had  gone  to  welcome  David
back,  would  have  been  culpable  remissness.
And  though  he  was  lame,  yet  the  ride  was
not  so  long  as  to  be  very  fatiguing.  But  he
did  not  rush  through  the  river,  as  Shimei
and  his  thousand  men  had  done ;  and  when
David  had  crossed,  there  was  too  much
going  on  for  him  to  get  an  audience.  He
followed,  therefore,  in  David's  suite ;  but  in
Jerusalem  the  meeting  actually  took  place.
Thus  the  verses  briefly  record  different
facts:  ver.  24  that  MephibosUetii  went
with  the  vast  crowd  to  welcome  the  king
baok ;  vei.  25  that  in  due  time,  in  Jerusalem,
the  explanation  was  given,  and  Mephibo-
sheth restored  to  &voui.


468


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  XIX.  1 — 43,


Ver.  26. — ^Thy  serrant  said,  I  will  saddle
me  an  ass.  This  would  mean,  "  Tliy  servant
purposed,  said  within  himself,  that  he  would
saddle  an  ass,  not  by  his  own  hands,  but  by
those  of  his  servants."  All  the  versions,
however,  except  the  CJhaldee,  read,  "Thy
servant  said  to  him,  Saddle  me  an  ass.
"With  this  agrees  the  narrative  in  ch.  xvi.  1.
Mephibosheth  ordered  Ziba  to  saddle  for
him  an  ass,  and  one  for  an  attendant,  and  to
put  hastily  together  a  supply  of  food  for  the
journey.  And  Ziba  does  so ;  but  \vhen  every-
tliing  is  ready,  he  leaves  his  master  in  the
lurch,  and  carries  all  away  to  David,  to
whom  he  falsely  represents  Mephibosheth
as  a  traitor.  In  the  words  that  follow,  he
unreservedly  submits  himself  to  David,  on
the  ground  that,  tliough  innocent  in  this
affair,  yet  that,  as  a  member  of  a  dethroned
dynasty,  his  life  was  i'orfeit  (comp.  eh.  xxi.
7),  and  that,  in  permitting  him  to  live,  and
plaoin"  him  among  his  friends,  the  king  had
done  him  an  act  of  grace.

Ver.  29. — ^Thon  and  Ziba  divide  the  land.
Two  yiews  are  taken  of  this  decision — the
one,  that  it  was  a  complete  reversal  of  the
command  in  ch.  xvi.  4,  placing  matters  upon
the  old  footing,  by  which  Ziba  was  to  have
half  the  produce  for  cultivating  the  estate ;
the  other,  and  apparently  the  most  correct
view,  is  that  Ziba  was  now  made  actual
owner  of  half  the  land,  and  Mephibosheth,
instead  of  a  half,  would  henceforth  have
only  a  quarter  of  the  crops.  The  decision
was  not  equitable,  and  David  speaks  in  a
curt  and  hurried  manner,  as  though  vexed
with  himself  for  what  he  was  doing.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  Ziba's  treachery  had  been
most  useful  to  David.  Besides  the  pleasure
at  the  time  of  fiuding  one  man  faithful,
when  "all  men  were  liars"  (Ps.  oxvi.  11),
Ziba  had  been  most  active  in  bringing  over
the  tribe  of  Benjamin  to  David's  side ;  and
though  his  motives  were  selfish  and  venal,
yet,  as  the  king  reaped  the  benefit  of  his
conduct,  he  was  bound  not  to  leave  him
without  reward.

Ver.  30. — ^Ye^  let  him  take  all.  These
wordsbetray  a  feeling  of  resentment.  Though
outwardly  they  profess  to  regard  the  loss  of
the  property  with  indifference,  as  compared
with  the  joy  of  the  king's  return,  yet  this
sort  of  "  I  don't  care  "  answer  usually  covers
anger.  Blunt's  arguments  ('  Undesigned
Coincidences,'  p.  157,  etc.),  to  show  that
Mephibosheth  really  was  a  traitor,  are  in-
genious, but  not  convincing.

Ver.  31. — Barzillai.  Barzillai  was  so
wealthy  a  man  that,  with  some  help  from
others,  he  had  provided  the  king  "of  susten-
ance," or,  in  more  modem  English,  "  with
sustenance,"  while  his  army  lay  encamped  at
Mahanaim ;  and  now,  though  he  was  eighty
years  of  age,  he  wished  to  attend  the  king


in  person  until  he  reached  the  other  side  of
Jordan.

Ver.  33.— And  I  will  feed  thee.  This  ig
the  same  verb  as  that  nsed  in  ver.  32,  and
translated  "  to  provide  of  sustenance."

Ver.  37. — That  I  may  die  in  mine  own
city, ...  by  the  grave  of  my  father  and  of  my
mother.  The  inserted  words,  "and  be  buried,"
are  very  matter-of-fact  and  commonplace.
What  Barzillai  wished  was  that,  when  death
overtook  him,  it  should  find  him  in  the  old
abode  of  his  family,  where  his  father  and
mother  had  died,  and  where  their  tombs
were.  This  regard  for  the  family  sepulchre
was  hereditary  among  the  Israelites,  who
followed  in  it  the  example  of  their  forefather
(see  Gen.  xlix.  29 — 31).  Chimham.  David
remembered  BarziUai's  kindness  to  the  last,
and  on  his  dying  bed  specially  commended
Ohimham  and  his  brothers  to  the  care  of
Solomon.  It\  Jer,  xli,  17  we  read  of  "  the
habitation  of  Chimham,  which  is  by  Bethle-
hem," whence  it  has  been  supposed  that
David  also  endowed  the  son  of  Barzillai
with  land  near  his  own  city.  Stanley
('Jewish  Church,'  ii,  201)  considers  that
this  was «  caravanserai  founded  by  Chimham
for  the  hospitable  lodging  of  travellers  on
their  way  to  Egypt,  and  that  Mary  and
Joseph  found  shelter  there.  It  lay  to  the
south  of  Bethlehem ;  but  there  is  nothing
more  than  the  name  to  connect  it  with  the
son  of  Barzillai.  In  ver.  40  he  is  called  in
the  Hebrew  Ghimhan.

Ver.  40.— Half  the  people  of  Israel.  The
northern  tribes  had  been  the  first  to  debate
the  question  of  the  king's  recall  (ver.  9),
while  the  men  of  Judah  hung  back.  But
at  the  instigation  of  the  high  priests  and  of
Amasa,  who  was  actually  in  command,  they
determined  upon  David's  restoration,  and
acted  so  promptly  and  so  independently  of
the  rest  of  Israel  that,  when  tiiey  reached
Gilgal,  only  the  delegates  of  a  few  tribes
were  in  time  to  join  them.  As  we  read  in
ver.  41  of  "all  the  men  of  Israel,"  it  is
evident  that  the  rest  had  rapidly  followed.
It  would  have  been  well  if  the  tribe  of
Judah  had  informed  the  rest  of  their  pur-
pose, as  the  bringing  of  David  back  would
then  have  been  ihe  act  of  all  Israel;  but
tribal  jealousies  were  the  cause  of  Israel'e
weakness  throughout  the  time  of  the  judges,
and  broke  out  into  open  disunion  upon  the
death  of  Solomon.

Ver,  41.-.-'Why  have  onr  brethren  the  men
of  Judah  stolen  thee  away  1  Why,  that  is,
have  they  acted  by  stealth  and  without  our
concurrence  1  As  they  were  discussing  the
matter,  their  decision  should  have  been
awaited,  and  David  should  not  have  crossed
until  formally  invited  so  to  do.  'i?he  half
of  Israel  consistedv  probably,  of  the  trana-
Jordanio  tiibes,  upon  whom  those  on  thf


CH.  XIX.  1—43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


469


west  of  the  river  looked  contemptnonely ,  and
of  Shimei  and  his  Benjamites,  and  a  few
more  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.  The
trali8*Joidanic  tribes  are  probably  those
described  in  ver.  39  as  "the  people  who
went  with  David  over  Jordan ; "  for  certainly
a  powerful  body  of  tlie  men  who  had  de-
feated Absalom  would  escort  David  back  to
Jerusalem,  to  overawe  the  malcontents  and
prevent  any  opposition  to  his  return.

Ver.  42. — The  king  is  near  of  kin  to  us.
The  pronouns  are  singular  throughout:
"  He  is  near  of  kin  to  me.  Why  art  thou
angry?  Have  I  eaten  ...  I  have  ten  parts
.  .  .  Why  didst  thou  despise  me?"  and  so
everywhere.  This  is  much  more  piquant ;
but  such  personifloation  is  contrary  to  the
genius  of  our  language.  Have  I  eaten,  etc.  ?
Saul  had  boasted  of  enriching  the  Ben-
jamites  (1  Sara.  xxii.  7),  but  pro'bably  the
speaker  intended  only  to  protest  the  purity
of  his  motives.

Ver.  43. — I  have  ten  parts  in  the  king.
One  tribe  disappears,  which  certainly  was
not  Benjamin ;  nor  was  this  warlike  state
thus  early  awed  into  obedience  to  Judah.
In  1  Kings  xi.  31,  35,  again,  we  have  ten
tribes  given  to  Jeroboam,  and  here,  also,  not
only  must  Benjamin  be  counted,  but  be
included  in  the  tribes  rent  from  the  house
of  David.  The  tribe  that  had  disappeared
was  that  of  Simeon,  partly  lost  among  the
desert  races  south  of  the  Negeb,  and  partly
absorbed  by  Judah.  Its  position  always
made  it  unimportant,  and  no  trace  can  be
found  of  its  taking  any  part  in  the  political
life  of  Israel.  Some  strangers  from  Simeon
sro  mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xv.  9  as  coming  to


the  great  gathering  of  Judah  and  Benjamin
at  Jerusalem  after  Asa  had  defeated  Zerah
the  Ethiopian ;  and  Josiah  carried  ont  his
reformation  in  Simeon  as  well  as  in  Manas-
seh,  Ephraim,  and  Naphtali  (2  Ohron,  xxxiv.
6).  But  it  never  seems  to  have  emerged
from  a  state  of  semi-barbarism,  and  no  town
can  be  found  within  its  territories.  We
must,  therefore,  omit  Simeon,  and  of  course
the  Levites,  who  took  no  part  in  politics,
and  thus  we  have  Judah  standing  alone,  and
all  the  rest  determined  to  resist  any  attempt
on  its  part  to  establish  a  hegemony,  and
restless  even  at  having  to  endure  the  more
ancient  claims  of  Ephraim  to  be  the  leading
tribe.  By  ihe  ten  parts  wliich  they  claim  in
the  king,  they  meant  that,  as  king,  he  be-
longed equally  to  all,  and  not  to  his  own
tribe  only.  In  this  they  were  expressing  a
sound  view  of  the  royal  position.  The  next
words,  literally,  are,  "  And  also  in  David  I
am  more  than  thou ; "  to  which  the  Septua-
gint  adds,  "  And  I  am  the  firstborn  rather
than  thou."  This  is  in  accordance  with
1  Chron.  v.  1,  and  states  an  important  claim
always  made  by  Ephraim  ;  whereas  the
Hebrew,  "  I  in  Daviii  am  more  than  thou,"
is  unintelligible.  Except  upon  the  score
of  numbers  already  stated,  the  right  of  each
tribe  in  David  wiis  equal.  Why  then,  eto.  ?
rather.  Why  hast  thou  despised  me?  Wat
not  my  word  the  first  for  bringing  back  the
kingi  (see  ver.  9,  and  note  on  ver.  40;.
Were  fiercer.  While  the  Israelites  debated
the  matter  calmly,  the  men  of  Judah  met
their  complaint  with  harsh  and  bitter  re-
joinders. This  explains  the  feud  which
followed.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 15. — ^The  facts  are:  1.  In  consequence  of  David's  sorrowful  Isolation,  the

people  mourn  and  betake  themselves  to  the  city  ashamed  and  discoiiraged.  2.  Joab,
being  informed  of  the  fact,  enters  the  king's  house,  and  sharply  rebukes  him  for  his  con-
duct, charging  him  with  disregarding  the  sacrifices  his  people  had  made,  and  caring  more
for  his  rebellious  son  than  for  his  attached  friends.  3.  Joab  then  advises  him  at  once
to  arise  and  go  forth  to  encourage  the  people,  pointing  out  that  otherwise  the  greatest
trial  of  his  life  will  be  sure  to  come  in  the  alienation  of  his  subjects.  4.  The  king
thereupon  sits  in  the  <;ate  of  the  city,  and  all  the  people  come  to  him.  6.  Meanwhile,
during  David's  sojourn  at  Mahanaim,  the  people  of  Israel  are  at  variance  as  to  the
course  to  be  pursued  with  reference  to  bringing  him  back  to  rule  over  them,  and  it  is
urged  that,  under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  something  should  be  done  in  that
direction.  6.  David,  hearing  of  the  intentions  of  Israel,  sends  to  Zadok  and  Abiathar  to
suggest  to  the  elders  of  Judah  the  impropriety  of  their  being  forestalled  in  the  move-
ment by  their  brethren  of  Israel.  7.  He  also  instructs  them  to  inform  Amasa  of  his
purpose  to  displace  Joab  in  his  favour.  8.  The  heart  of  the  people  of  Judah  being
entirely  won,  they  send  unto  him  a  message  that  he  should  return,  and  the  king  acting
upon  it,  they  meet  him  at  Gilgal  to  conduct  him  over  Jordan.

SoUtarinest  in  religious  experience.    The  isolation  of  David  from  his  people  during
this  absorption  in  what  appeared  to  be  a  domestic  sorrow  caused  pain  to  his  stauncLcsi


m  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL  [iffl.  xn..  1—43.


friends,  was  very  near  imperilling  his  influence  as  sovereign,  and  gave  some  ostensibls
ground  for  the  ungracious  remonstrance  of  Joab.  But  the  fact  is,  David  was  true  to
himself  as  a  man  of  deepest  piety,  and  the  people  were  unable  to  enter  into  the  actual
struggle  through  which  he  was  passing.  Like  One  greater,  he  "  trod  the  wine-presv
alone."  It  was  not  mere  natural  affection  for  a  son,  it  was  not  pain  that  a  son  had
been  ungrateful,  that  crushed  him  and  rendered  him  for  the  time  forgetful  of  the  claims
of  his  people  and  the  duties  of  his  office.  The  key  to  the  whole  is  to  be  sought  in  the
prediction  of  Nathan  (oh.  xii.  9 — 12),  the  fulfilment  of  this  in  its  severest  form  in  the
tragedy  of  the  life  just  ended,  and  the  keen  perception  of  this  in  relation  to  his  own
dreadful  sin.  His  distinct  recognition  of  the  chastising  hand  of  God  (ch.  xv.  24 — 30)
when,  with  bare  feet  and  broken  heart,  he  passed  in  silence  and  tears  over  Mount  Olivet,
was  now  repeated  with,  of  course,  the  fuller  and  more  overwhelming  anguish  attendant
on  the  ruin  of  a  life,  yea,  of  a  soul,  as  he  felt,  through  his  own  great  sin.  Joab  and  the
people  never,  perhaps,  knew  of  Nathan's  declaration.  It  was  always  a  latent  element
in  David's  restored  life  of  piety ;  but  now  it  was  the  crushing  force  before  which  he
could  not  hold  up.  He  saw,  as  he  believed,  how  his  spiritual  degeneracy,  during  those
dark  months  of  horrible  sin  and  guilt,  had  acted  perniciously  on  the  spirit  of  his  son ;
and  he  could  not  but  feel  that,  in  the  temporal  and  spiritual  destruction  of  his  son,  he
was  now  reaping  just  what  he  had  sown.  Yet  all  this  he  had  to  bear  alone  1  No  one
could  share  the  dreadful  secret ;  and  in  proportion  as  he  saw  what  was  involved  in  a
ruined  soul,  so  would  be  the  uttemess  of  his  anguish.  No  wonder  if  in  his  solitary
experience  he  forgot  all  earthly  things,  and  gave  himself  up  to  the  bitterness  of  his  grief.

I.  There  are  crises  in  spiritual  experience.  David  was  a  man  of  many  crises.
The  history  and  the  Psalms  reveal  them.  His  call  to  kingship  by  Samuel  meant  an
unrecorded  experience  of  a  most  extraordinary  kind.  His  anguish  in  exile  when
pursued  by  Saul  put  his  faith  to  a  terrible  test.  His  sad  fall  was  a  descent  into  a  pit
of  horrors.  The  tremendous  conflict  involved  in  his  restoration  is  indicated  in  the
fifty-first  psalm,  and  now,  when  the  judgment  of  God  for  bis  sin  falls  in  heaviest  form,
he  descends  into  the  depths  (Ps.  cxxx.)  further,  perhaps,  than  was  ever  known  by  any
other  man.  We  see  similar  crises  in  the  lives  of  some  others.  Jacob  knew  the  desola-
tion of  Bethel  and  the  pains  of  the  wrestling  with  the  angel.  Paul  was  dumb  and  blind
before  God  till  prayer  brought  him  forth  to  light  and  peace;  and  he  later  on  had
experiences  of  things  which  it  was  "not  lawful"  to  utter.  Most  men  whose  religion
has  depths  have  known  times  when  anguish  before  God  has  shut  out  all  thought  and
care  of  earthly  things.  Some  have  seasons  of  temptation  equal  to  that  of  Bunyan'a
Pilgrim  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death.  As  a  rule,  religious  life  ie  a  steady
growth,  but  there  are  checks  and  disasters  when  the  question  of  life  itself  is  at  stake.
We  can  understand  David's  experience  in  the  case  before  us  without  having  recourse
to  the  hypothesis  of  a  weak  mind  overborne  by  natural  sorrow  for  the  death  of  a
favourite  son.

II.  Crises  in  rbligioits  expbeibnob  are  often  most  absobbinq.  David  was  so
absorbed  in  the  spiritual  anguish  springing  from  a  religious  view  of  the  ruin  of
Absalom  in  connection  with  his  own  great  sin,  as  practically  to  forget  that  he  was  a
king,  and  that  a  nation  needed  his  guidance.  The  narrative  is  true  to  the  spiritual
facts  that  may  be  traced  by  a  comparison  of  this  event  with  the  king's  previous  conduct.
The  intensity  of  his  nature,  as  revealed  in  the  strong  and  passionate  utterances  of  the
psalms,  whether  in  joy  or  sorrow,  would  add  to  the  tendency  to  yield  himself  utterly  to
this  greatest  of  all  the  calamities  consequent  on  his  sin.  The  passion  with  which  he
once  pleaded  for  Bathsheba's  child  (ch.  xii.  16 — 20)  was  an  instance  of  the  same  kind,
only  less  than  this,  because  here  the  trouble  was  the  more  serious  in  so  far  as  the
moral  and  bodily  ruin  of  a  son  was  a  greater  consequence  of  his  sin.  All  who  have
entered  into  the  solitariness  of  the  great  crises  in  the  soul's  career  know  how  at  such
times  all  earthly  things  seem  to  vanish  into  insignificance;  and  it  is  with  extreme
difficulty  that  ordinary  and  necessary  duties  can  be  attended  to.  Men  have  been
known  to  forget  to  take  food,  and  to  isolate  themselves  from  their  friends.  And  no
wonder,  wh«n  the  soul  sees  its  45ins  in  the  nwful  light  of  God's  judgments,  or  is  made  to
feel  the  consequences  to  others  of  its  jast  deeds.  Peter  did  not  associate  freely  with
friends  that  night  on  which  he  "  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."

III.  Thebe  are  qualifying  oiboumstanoes  that  detebmine  the  deobes  or


CH.  xtx.  1—43.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  01?  SAMUEL.  4tl

ABSORPTION  IN  THE  S0BB0W8  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  EXPEBIBNOB.  Davidnevet  felt  anything
like  this.  Bat  the  reason  is  plain.  Never  before  did  he  see  a  connection  between  his
own  past  conduct  and  so  awful  an  event.  The  special  elements  contributing  to  his  self-
absorbing  misery  were  a  vivid  remembrance  of  his  dreadful  sin  in  the  case  of  Bath-
sheba  and  Uriah ;  a  spiritual  appreciation  of  the  awful  issue  of  his  son's  life ;  a  deep
conviction  that  that  issue  was,  in  the  judgment  of  God,  in  some  way  connected  with  his
own  sin ;  a  contrast,  inevitable  in  the  association  of  ideas,  of  the  end  of  Absalom  with
the  hopes  once  cherished  concerning  him ;  a  reflection,  which  could  not  but  occasionally
force  itself  in  (oh.  xii.  13),  that  he  only  was  forgiven  and  saved ;  a  feeling  that  no  one
on  earth  could  enter  into  his  sorrows  and  afford  him  consolation.  AH  thi.se  circumstances
gained  force  by  the  fact  that  constitutionally  he  always  felt  strongly,  and  religiously
his  superior  spiritual  discernment  rendered  sin  and  its  effects  the  more  terrible.  So  in
our  own  experience  there  will  be,  perhaps,  specialities  which  may  render  our  absorption
much  more  absolute  than  is  that  of  others.  The  natural  mental  and  moral  texture
of  our  nature,  the  conditions  under  which  our  sins  were  committed,  the  consequences
which  we  can  trace  from  our  former  sins,  the  vividness  with  which  an  ideal  past  is  con-
trasted with  present  facts,  the  relative  clearness  of  our  spiritual  perceptions  and  tondtr-
ness  of  our  susceptibilities,  and  degree  of  homage  paid  to  the  majesty  of  God's  holy
Law, — all  these  may  qualify  the  self-surrender  to  the  experience  of  the  time.  We  can-
not expect  cold  and  stolid  men  to  bear  the  same  troubles  in  the  same  way  as  do  men
of  quick  and  highly  developed  spiritual  sensibilities.

IV.  The  borrows  of  such  crises  cannot  be  shared.  A  community  of  experience
is  necessary  to  the  creation  of  a  sympathy  coextensive  with  the  depth  of  the  sorrow.
There  were  parents  in  Israel  and  Judah  who  had  lost  sons,  and  they  would  be  able  to
enter  into  David's  grief  to  that  extent,  and  he  could  so  far  speak  to  them  of  his  trouble.
There  were  sinful  men  at  Mahanaim  who  knew  what  trouble  of  conscience  was,  and  who
might  afford  comfort  to  their  neighbours  when  mourning  over  their  guilt ;  but  there
was  no  man  in  all  the  world  who  had  sinned  as  David  had,  and  no  one  in  the  world,
perhaps,  who  now  saw  what  an  unutterably  awful  thing  sin  in  general  was,  and  espe-
cially his  sin.  To  no  one  except  Nathan,  who  probably  kept  aloof  from  him,  had
the  connection  of  David's  sin  with  this  judgment  on  it  been  known.  Consequently,
David  felt  shut  up  to  his  own  anguish.  "  Of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him."
The  transaction  was  between  himself  and  God.  He  knew  that  the  people  did  not  under-
stand him,  and  he  could  not  explain  himself  to  them.  So  is  it  with  all  our  deepest
experiences  before  God.  We  see  our  sins  set  in  the  light  of  his  countenance,  and  no
one  can  share  the  experience  involved  therein.  Reversing  the  picture,  it  may  be  said
that  there  are  also  seasons  of  blessedness  in  the  course  of  life  when  the  "joy  is
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,"  and  which  can  never  be  fully  told  or  even  understood.

General  lessons.  1.  Let  us  remember  that  there  are  daily  some  persons  passing
through  fearful  crises  in  their  religious  life,  and  that  it  is  possible  to  help  all  such
by  our  prayers.  2.  We  should  be  very  considerate  of  others  who  may  appear  to  be
unduly  cast  down,  as  there  may  be  circumstances  which,  if  known,  would  strengthen
our  pity.  3.  It  is  very  possible  for  us  to  misjudge  others  in  the  conduct  they  adopt,
and  make  our  own  contracted  experience  a  standard  of  judgment.  4.  We  may  expect
that  those  who  are  utterly  broken  down  in  spirit  will  be  called  out  of  their  self-
absorption  by  the  voice  of  Providence.  5.  It  is  a  comfort  to  us  all  to  know  that  God
understands  our  real  thoughts  and  feelings,  and  that  we  have  a  High  Priest  who  is
touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  he  having  entered^  into  deeper  depths  of  sorrow
than  we  can  ever  know.

The  remoter  consequences  of  sin.  The  narrative  sets  forth  the  action  of  Joab  to  arouse
the  king  from  his  self-absorption,  and  the  changed  attitude  of  the  people  towards  him,
as  also  the  measures  taken  by  David  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation  between  himself
and  the  entire  nation.  The  great  judgment  on  David's  sin  was  now  passed.  Nathan's
words  had  been  fearfully  fulfilled,  but  in  what  followed  we  see  also  some  of  the  remoter
consequences  of  the  sin.  Thus  Joab's  rough  treatment  and  unbecoming  familiarity  in
the  discharge  of  an  honest  duty  were  connected  with  the  fact  that  David  had  put
himself  in  Joab's  power  by  making  him  privy  and  accessory  to  the  death  of  Uriah,
The  people  were  now  almost  alienated  because  of  the  absorption  of  the  king  in  sorrow^


4t2  Tflte  SECOlsrt)  6OOK  OJ*  SAMUEL.  fcH.  xix.  1— 43.

which  would  not  have  happened  but  for  the  sin  which  created  the  sorrow.  The
question  of  the  precedence  of  Judah  in  the  matter  of  his  restoration  was  the  distinct
formulation  of  a  jealousy  and  sectional  interest  which  subsequently  resulted  in  •
Bchism  of  the  kingdom,  and  this  question  would  not  have  arisen  but  for  the  chastise-
ment for  sin  in  the  form  of  a  son's  rebellion.  Likewise  the  ultimate  death  of  Amasa
came  through  David's  having,  probably  because  Joab  had  been  insulting  and  because  a
complete  amnesty  was  deemed  desirable,  displaced  Joab  in  his  favour.  These  bitter
streams  all  flowed  into  the  remoter  ramifications  of  life  from  the  fountain  of  trouble
opened  by  the  fall  of  David.    Hereon  we  may  observe —

I.  The  foegivbkbss  of  bin  mat  coexist  with  the  onward  flow  oir  some  of
ITS  CONSEQUENCES.  There  is  a  certainty  that  David's  great  guilt  was  covered  (ch.  xii.
13).  The  prayer  of  the  fifty-first  psalm  had  been  fully  answered,  and  privately  he  had
been  able  to  rejoice  again  in  the  God  of  his  salvation.  But  we  have  in  this  history  the
spectacle  of  a  pardoned,  reconciled  man,  confident  in  his  personal  salvation,  and  the
onward  flow  of  a  stream  of  social  and  material  evils  which,  so  far  at  least  as  they  were
related  to  him,  sprang  from  his  sin.  The  prediction  of  Nathan  did  not  establish  an
arbitrary  relation  between  his  conduct  to  Bathsheba  and  Uriah,  and  the  whole  mental
and  moral  condition  implied  therein,  and  the  rebellion  of  Absalom  and  the  perplexities
of  the  situation  after  its  suppression.  There  was  an  organic  connection  between  the
spiritual  fall  and  the  civil  troubles.  The  spiritual  element  in  us  is  the  centre  of  our
composite  nature.  A  change  for  the  worse  in  it  radiates  through  the  entire  being,  and
as  the  outward  relations  are  affected  by  the  condition  and  direction  taken  by  our  various
powers,  so  the  inmost  change  is  the  spring  of  manifold  and  ever-flowing  consequencea
The  deteriorated  influence  on  others,  consequent  on  a  period  of  spiritual  declension
cannot  but  act  dynamically  as  a  wave  long  after  we  have  by  repentance  and  faith
been  restored  to  God.  The  personal  condemnation  is  gone,  but  the  injury  done  on
society  is  not  gone.  The  intricate  mass  of  material  and  social  evils  now  afflicting  the
world  is  the  outcome  of  deviation  from  the  perfect  will  of  God,  and  though  some  who
thus  deviated  are  now  blessed  in  heaven,  the  quota  they  contributed  by  their  former  sins
is  still  somewhere  in  the  timgled  mass.

II.  Sin  is  a  disturber  of  many  belations.  David's  sin  affected  his  relation  to
God  and  to  his  own  family  and  people.  It  touched  his  personal  influence  among  friends,
his  administration,  and  indirectly,  through  the  rebellion,  the  lives  and  dearest  interests
of  multitudes.  The  distress  and  uncertainty  at  Mahanaim  after  the  defeat  of  Absalom
and  the  hesitancy  of  the  tribes  to  welcome  him  back,  were  traceable  to  what  he  had
formerly  done.  Who  can  describe  the  manifold  disturbances  in  the  order  of  things
produced  in  our  world  by  the  sin  of  Adam  ?  The  ramifications  of  the  wave  of  dis-
turbance created  by  any  one  sin  are  more  than  can  be  numbered.  It  is  in  the  more
conspicuous  acts  of  transgression  that  we  get  visible  traces  of  a  wiilespread  disturbance
similar  to  what  is  caused  by  every  inconspicuous  net.  A  rebellious  son  in  a  home,  a
dishonest  deed  in  business,  a  vicious  habit.^these  reveal  a  manifest  seiies  of  troubles  in
private,  social,  and  public  connections.  No  sinner  sins  to  himself.  Moral  evil  gives
colour  and  form  to  all  things.  It  infuses  an  element  of  defect,  if  not  of  positive  evil,
into  every  bodily,  mental,  and  moral  relation  sustained  by  the  siiming  man.

III.  The  distdkbakce  caused  by  sin  flows  on  into  the  remote  future.  The
great  moral  shuck  involved  in  David's  great  sin  produced  effects  which  for  years  flowed
on,  and  which,  in  fact,  are  flowing,  on  nnw.  The  great  storm  in  mid-ocean  sends  the
under  swell  into  far-distaot  bays,  and  long  alter  quietude  has  been  restored  at  the
centre  the  sullen  roll  falls  on  the  beach.  The  whole  subsequent  course  of  Hebrew
history  was  modified  by  the  deed  of  evil  done  in  secret.  In  .so  far  as  the  power  of
David  over  the  world  is  less,  and  different  in  kind,  from  what  it  would  have  undoubtedly
been  had  he  kept  himself  pure,  so  far  his  sin  is  still  at  work  Shaping  the  destinies
of  men.  We  can  never  call  back  the  waves  of  pernicious  influence  we  send  forth  in  a
single  sinful  act  or  feeling.  It  is  the  law  of  the  universe  that  they  go  on.  The
supposed  counteraction  of  them  by  subsequent  repentance  and  amendment  only  means
thiit  we  modify  the  influence  previously  sent  forth, — we  make  the  world  somewhat
better  than  it  would  have  been  had  the  sinful  influence  gone  out  alone.  We  cannot
annihilate  it  any  more  than  we  can  annihilate  force.  The  future  is  the  svm  of  all  the
influences  of  the  past.


ett.  XIX.  1—43.]  TfiE  SECOND  BOOK  Ot*  SAMtJEL.  4?3

IV.   The  MANlrOLD  and  ever-flowing  CON8BQOBNCB8  OP   SIN  ABE  NOT  ADEQUATELY

RECOONizED  BY  MANKIND.  David  recognized  the  rebellion  and  death  of  Absalom  and
the  associated  civil  inconveniences  as  being  in  some  way  connected  with  his  sin;  but
even  he  did  not  see,  when  at  Mahanaim,  that  the  subsequent  death  of  Amasa  and  the
schism  of  the  two  kingdoms  were  also  a  consequence  of  his  conduct,  and  therefore  of
his  sin.  His  own  people  probably  did  not  even  connect  the  troubles  of  the  times  with
his  sin,  but  rather  with  what  they  regarded  us  a  foolish  over-fondness  for  a  favourite
son.  In  our  life  we  do  not  sufficiently  connect  our  bodily  and  mental  imperfections
with  the  sina  of  others  in  the  past,  or,  in-  some  cases,  especially  with  our  own  sins.
I'olitioal  bodies  and  publicists  fail  to  recognize  the  spiritual  origin  of  vast  and  compli-
cated social  troubles.  The  Bible  in  this  respect  is  the  most  statesmanlike  and
philosophical  of  all  books,  in  that  it  gives  prominence  to  sin  as  the  determining  factor
in  all  our  material  and  social  troubles.    A  spiritual  mind  discerns  the  spiritual  causes.

Vers.  16 — 30. — ^The  facts  are :  1.  Shimei,  with  a  considerable  Benjamite  following,
including  Ziba  and  his  household,  joins  the  men  of  Judah  to  meet  David  at  the  Jordan.
2.  Previous  to  the  king  being  ferried  over,  Shimei  falls  down  before  him,  confesses  his
past  sins,  and  pleads  for  mercy,  and  urges  as  evidence  of  sincerity  that  he  is  the  first  t'o
come  and  bid  the  king  welcome.  3.  On  Abishai  expressing  his  feeling  that  Shimei
should  rather  be  put  to  death  for  his  evil  deeds,  David  resents  the  suggestion,  and  in
honour  of  the  day  of  his  restoration  declares  to  Shimei  that  his  life  shall  be  spared.
Mephibosheth  also  comes,  with  his  person  uncared  for,  to  welcome  the  king  at
Jerusalem,  and  on  being  asked  why  he  had  not  gone  out  with  him  into  exile,  explains
that  it  was  owing  to  the  deception  of  his  servant  Ziba.  5.  Placing  himself  and  all  iia
interests  entirely  at  the  king's  disposal,  admitting  that  all  his  rights  and  privileges
were,  according  to  political  custom,  of  pure  clemency,  he  is  told  that  he  need  not  enter
further  into  the  question,  but  that  he  and  Ziba  should  divide  the  land  between  them.

The  influence  of  superior  minds.  The  section  now  under  notice  cannot  be  separated  in
import  from  the  preceding  words  (vers.  14, 15),  which  relate  that  David  bowed  the  heart
of  all  the  men  of  Judah  so  that  they  came  to  conduct  him  over  Jordan.  The  particular
instances  of  Shimei  and  Mephibosheth  are  special  illustrations  of  the  general  truth
expressed  in  David's  buwing  the  hearts  of  men.  The  mighty  power  of  the  king's  words
and  methods  gathered  around  him  the  most  bitter  of  foes  and  the  most  lonely  and  help-
less of  his  friends.  The  facts  bring  out  into  view  the  influence  which  a  superior
mind  exercises  over  others ;  and  on  the  nature  and  conditions  of  this  influence  we  may,
by  the  help  of  the  narrative  in  addition  to  broad  facts  in  human  life,  make  a  few
observations,  noting —

I.  The  natdbal  basis.  The  bowing  of  the  hearts  of  all  the  people  indicates  the
swaying  of  an  influence  of  an  unusual  kind.  Whatever  the  means  and  whatever  aids
to  this  end  came  from  the  sudden  transition  uf  public  feeling  produced  by  Absalom's
death,  the  fact  I'emains  that  there  was  in  David's  nature  as  a  man  something  which
when  aroused,  gave  him  a  mi-ntal  and  nioral  power  over  others.  Intellectually  and
morally  he  was  a  bom  king  of  men.  If  '*  king  "  =  kbnig  =  himnen,  "  to  be  able,"  then
he,  by  virtue  of  his  nature,  was  king— was  above  others,  and  there  went  forth  a  spell
which  all  recognized.  Apart  from  special  endowments,  he  was  the  superior  man  of  the
age.  There  were  elements  in  him  which,  under  evil  disposition,  would  render  hiiu
most  capable  of  leading  people  captive  in  evil  ways,  and  which,  under  a  good  disposition,
did  lay  hold  of  them  lor  their  good.  The  history  of  mankind  and  the  observation  ol'
daily  life  reveal  the  domination  of  one  mind  over  others.  The  influence  of  mind  is  thi;
most  subtle  and  mighty  thing  we  know.  Millions  sometimes  submit  to  its  spell.  It  is
the  proud  prerogative  of  the  select  few  to  bow  down  the  hearts  of  their  fellows.  All
attempts  to  explain  the  fact  by  psychological  analysis  are  insufficient.  No  analysis  can
get  at  the  mysterious  nature  of  the  impact  of  one  spirit  on  another :  yet  we  know  that
the  reality  has  its  root  in  the  peculiar  constitution  of  the  individual.  This  applies
to  preacher,  statesman,  philosopher,  poet,  king.  The  Apostle  Paul's  power  was  in  its
basis  a  constitutional  power.    Grace  is  grafted  on  n^itare,  not  a  force  apart  from  natui  c.

II.  Acquired  increment.  The  native  qualities  of  David  determined  the  fact  and  the
kind  of  hii  superior  influence  over  other  minds,  though  not  its  moral  direction.    But  hio


474  THE  SECOND  SOOK  OS*  SAMUEL.  [oa.  iti.  1—43.

education  and  experience  in  the  gradual  exercise  of  his  powers  iu  lower  spheres  ot
activity  contributed  to  the  mature  form  and  range  of  his  influence.  The  conqueror  of
lion  and  giant  became,  by  an  educational  process,  a  conqueror  of  the  heaits  of  men.
The  development  of  natural  powers,  whether  of  oratory,  administration,  will-force,  moral
suasion,  or  the  more  nameless  thing  which  goes  out  from  one's  personal  presence,  is
another  way  of  saying  that  we  have  added  to  the  store  of  influfnoe  which  lay  in  the
mental  constitution  from  the  first.  The  difiference  in  the  degree  to  which  some  men
acquire  this  increment  accounts,  in  large  measure,  for  their  ascendancy  over  the  equally
gifted.  Perhaps  this  is  the  meaning  of  those  who  regard  genius  as  a  name  for  great
powers  duly  developed  by  continuous  exercise.

III.  Spibitual  endowment.  In  the  case  of  David  we  must  recognize  this  element  in
his  superior  power  over  the  hearts  of  good  and  bad.  Grace  in  him  had  perfected  and
beautified  a  fine  nature.  The  spiritual  is  always  the  most  subtle  and  subduing  influence
over  men,  when  brought  fairly  into  play.  In  spite  of  sin,  men  acknowledge  the  spell.
The  anointing  by  Samuel  in  the  name  of  God  was  more  than  a  formal  act.  David
was  indeed  the  Lord's  anointed.  Hence  all  the  natural  and  acquired  qualities  received
an  elevation  and  a  tone  which,  when  the  dire  evils  of  the  great  fall  were  not  at  work
on  him,  gave  to  his  words,  his  counsels,  his  movements,  and  commands  a  charm  and
force  over  men  of  most  diverse  temperament  and  character.  In  this  he  was  like  the
apostles  when  they  stood  before  men.  We  occasionally  see  now  how  ^reatly  the  power
of  certain  minds  is  increased  over  others  when  they  have  the  natural  and  acquired  gifts
baptized  with  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  A  consecrated  heart  and  intellect  gains
influence  by  its  consecration.  There  are  men  who  by  oratory  have  bowed  the  hearts  of
thousands ;  but  when  such  men  have  became  true  Christians,  the  bowing  of  the  hearts
under  their  words  is  a  much  more  thorough  and  enduring  victory.  "  Covet  earnestly
the  best  gifts"  (1  Cor.  xii.  31).

IV.  CiRonMSTANTiAL  AIDS.  The  circumstanccs  of  the  time  gave  advantage  to  David
in  the  exercise  of  his  ordinary  powers.  His  friends  had  mourned  his  sorrowful  isolation ;
his  enemies  had  felt  that,  by  defeat,  they  had  placed  themselves  in  an  awkward  position  ;
his  being  aroused  from  his  self-absorbing  grief  led  him  to  calmly  review  the  position  of
advantage  in  which  now  the  goodness  of  God  had  placed  him  ;  the  reflection  that  now
a  supreme  eflbrt  was  needed  if  he  was  to  prevent  the  alienation  of  friends  and  follow  up
the  fruits  of  victory  so  as  to  save  the  nation  from  anarchy,  drew  forth  his  entire  soul
into  sympathy  with  the  purpose  of  God  in  making  him  king ;  and,  as  a  consequence,  he
so  infused  into  his  conversation  with  the  people  of  Mahanaim,  and  into  his  messages  to
the  elders  of  Judah,  the  whole  power  of  his  nature  that  he  bowed  the  hearts  of  all.
Events  had  prepared  the  minds  of  the  people  to  receive  the  influence  giing  forth  from
his  very  soul.  The  narrative  evidently  implies  that  there  was  some  unusual  persuasive-
ness in  his  manner  and  langu£^e,  and  it  reached  even  to  Shimei  and  Mephibosheth,  who
certainly  were  rendered  more  accessible  to  his  influence  by  the  change  in  affairs.  Seasons
of  excitement  and  public  interest  are  favourable  to  the  putting  forth  of  the  influence
which  superior  minds  can  exercise.  The  Day  of  Pentecost  was  a  time  which  brought
aid  to  the  efforts  of  the  apostles.  A  grave  responsibility  rests  on  gifted  men  to  use
their  influence  under  such  favouring  circumstances  as  occasionally  occur  in  human  affairs.

General  lesshns.  1.  It  behoves  us  not  to  allow  our  gifts  to  be  long  unused,  by
reason  of  absorption  in  purely  personal  interests.  2.  It  is  a  scripturally  enforced  duty
that  we  stir  up  the  gifts  that  may  he  in  us.  3.  Among  the  various  powers  that  may  be
exercised  in  the  world,  we  should  especially  desire  and  seek  that  of  bowing  down  the
hearts  of  men  to  the  interests  of  God's  kingdom.  4.  We  may  rest  assured  that,  if  we
use  our  powers  to  the  utmost  in  a  good  cause  and  in  dependence  on  God,  we  shall
overcome  many  an  obstacle  and  win  over  even  adverse  hearts.

Soyal  demency.  The  sudden  collapse  of  the  rebellion  placed  David  in  a  position
of  advantage,  and  yet  of  difficulty.  He  was  not  the  man  to  care  for  sovereignty  over
a  disunited  people,  and  the  attitude  of  those  who  had  been  in  rebellion  was  not  quite
certain.  Those  who  do  wrong  are  suspicious  of  those  against  whom  the  wrong  has
been  done  when  power  comes  into  their  hands.  It  was,  therefore,  the  policy  of  David
to  convince  them  that  they  need  not  be  under  any  apprehension  of  his  using  the
recovered  power  to  punish  them.    This  was  the  evident  meaning  of  the  deputation  o(


ea.  m.  1— 48.'j         THE  SECuMf)  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  •i?S

the  high  priests  to  the  men  of  .Tudah,  and  the  reason  of  the  promotion  of  Amasa
(together  with  his  reasonahle  desire  to  express  his  sense  of  Joab's  dangerous  liberty  in
disobeying  a  positive  public  command).  The  noble-hearted  king  felt  the  importance
of  the  restoration  of  peace  and  unity  so  deeply,  and  was  so  sensible  of  the  mercy  of
God  in  answering  his  desire  when  in  anguish  (ch.  xt.  25,  26),  that,  on  this  occasion  of
joy,  sobered  though  it  was  by  thoughts  of  chsistisement  just  past,  he  cannot  but  grant
an  amnesty  to  all  his  foes.  In  the  exercise  of  this  royal  clemency  we  see  set  forth  the
following  truths.

I.  The  influence  on  men  of  all  conditions  of  a  tide  of  success.  The  turn
of  the  tide  had  come  for  David,  and  with  it  men  good  and  bad,  great  and  small,  through-
out the  land  began  to  consider  how  they  had  better  comport  themselves  under  the  new
circumstances.  Israel  hastened  to  indicate  readiness  (ver.  11).  Judah  w^s  waiting  for
some  encouragement  to  yield  (vers.  12 — 14),  and  receiving  it,  hasted  to  be  first  at  Jordan
(vers.  15,  41).  And  such  representative  men  as  Shimei  and  Ziba  show  eaiemess  to
find  favour  with  the  victorious  monarch.  Probably  only  an  active  section  of  the  less
thoughtful  people  had  really  rejected  David;  the  great  mass  were  won  over  to  the
winning  side  because  it  was  the  winning  side,  and,  now  that  David  was  returning  to
power,  they,  and  also  the  real  leaders  of  the  rebellion,  move  on  with  the  tide.  Success
has  a  great  charm  for  some  minds.  The  day  of  prosperity  draws  out  many  friends.
In  national  and  religious  affairs  multitudes  are  influenced,  not  by  a  calm  and  inde-
pendent consideration  of  the  merits  of  the  question  or  system,  but  by  the  fact  that  there
is  a  semblance  of  prosperity.  Men  are  not  without  reason  spoken  of  as  a  "  iiock ;  "  they
are  disposed  to  go  in  with  the  rest.    This  is  not  the  highest  type  of  humanity.

II.  Doubtful  loyalty  in  the  relationships  of  life.  The  real  friends  of  Absa-
lom and  such  men  as  Shimei  fell  in  with  the  change  in  public  opinion,  and  professed,
the  latter  most  eagerly  and  humbly,  to  welcome  the  king  back.  Allegiance  is  a  matter
of  degrees,  and  springs  from  mixed  motives.  David  had  to  feel  for  the  rest  of  his  days
that  policy  governed  the  loyalty  of  some  of  his  people.  In  national  life  there  are  many
causes  of  imsteadiness  of  loyal  attachment  to  the  head  of  the  state — some  lying  in  the
seat  of  authority,  and  some  in  ignorance,  prejudice,  or  occasionally  the  convictions  of
the  people.  Every  bond  of  union  between  moral  beings  implies  a  loyalty  more  or  less
tleflned  to  persons  and  interests.  Master  and  servant,, husband  and  wife,  partners  in
business  and  government,  teachers  and  pupils,  create,  by  the  relation  formed,  a  demand
for  loyalty  the  one  to  the  other  and  to  the  common  interests  professedly  sought  by  the
union.  The  fellowship  of  the  saints  in  Church  life  especially  creates  scope  for  mutual
loyalty  and  common  loyalty  to  Christ.  We  may  see  many  things  in  one,  for  all  truth
is  related;  and  therefore,  in  the  doubtful  loyalty  of  men  in  David's  time,  with  its
necessary  weakness  to  the  national  life,  and  injury  to  the  highest  interests  of  the  king-
dom, we  see  the  evil  brought  on  the  world  by  defective  loyalty  in  the  various  relation-
ships men  enter  into ;  and  especially  do  we  see  the  pernicious  effect  of  defective  loyalty
of  professing  Christians  to  the  Church  and  to  Christ.  The  practical  bearings  of  this
are  very  many  and  very  wide.

III.  Indications  of  an  uneasy  oonscibngb.  The  moral  value  of  actions  is  not  to
be  seen  by  looking  at  them  simply  as  actions;  their  form  may  be  perfect,  their  real
value  is  seen  in  their  connections.  It  was  a  beautiful  action  to  hasten  over  Jordan  and
be  first  to  bid  the  king  welcome ;  the  most  devoted  of  his  friends  could  not  do  more ;
but  for  Shimei  to  do  it,  after  his  conduct  towards  David,  took  away  from  the  deed  the
flow  of  its  natural  beauty.  The  act  was  evidence  of  an  uneasy  conscience  conjoined
with  a  cowardly,  time-serving  policy.  That  he  was  truly  penitent  is  not  admissible
from  the  tenor  of  his  words — they  sound  hollow.  It  is  not  the  custom  of  the  true
penitent  to  refer  to  his  good  deeds  in  proof  of  penitence  (ver.  20).  Nor,  perhaps,  was
Ziba  without  a  restless  conscience  in  thus  seeking  early  to  court  the  favour  of  the  king,
who  would  soon  learn  the  facts  concerning  his  former  deception  (ch.  xvi.  1 — 4).  We
here  see  that  conscience  is  alive,  even  in  very  base  men ;  that  it  is  quiescent  and  seemingly
at  ease  when  either  possibility  of  exposure  or  punishment  is  far  off;  that  it  is  neverthe-
less sensitive  to  any  change  in  events  which  tend  to  hasten  exposure  or  punishment ;
that  its  greatest  dread  is  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  supreme  power;  and  that,  instead
of  elevating  the  man,  and  prompting  to  renovation,  it  rather  drags  him  down  to  the  low
and  plausible  means  of  avoiding  what  it  knows  is  deserved.    Let  the  religious  teacher


4?e  THE  SECOND  B006  OF  SaMUEL.  [cu.  xis.  1—43,


see  how  this  action  of  conscience  is  verified  in  the  case  of  many  who  have  rejected
Christ,  the  Lord's  Anointed.  Once  let  them  know  that  he  is  coming  into  his  kingdom,
and  uneasiness  will  appear.

IV.  'I'uii  INFLUENCE  IN  LIFE  OP  DOMiNATiNO  IDEAS.  The  son  of  Zerulah  (ver.  21)
wished  to  slay  Shlmei  at  once,  and,  had  he  done  so,  many  would  have  said  that  the
wicked  man  reaped  the  desert  of  his  crimes.  The  anointed  of  the  Lord  desired  that
the  man  should  not  die,  and  many  doubtless  thought  that  the  clemency  was  ill-judged.
But  the  reason  of  the  totally  diverse  desires  and  judgments  was  that  the  two  men
were  on  that  day  governed  by  totally  diverse  ideas.  Abishai  was  the  hard,  stern  soldier,
ruled  in  this  instance  by  the  sentiment  of  rigid  discipline,  and  acting  in  all  things
under  the  idea  of  power ;  whereas  David  was  the  wise,  generous  king,  ruled  by  the
sentiment  of  love  for  his  people,  and  acting  in  this  instance  under  the  idea  of  kingly
grace.  The  one  saw  no  reason  in  the  event  of  the  day  for  sparing  an  unworthy  life ;
the  other  saw  that  kingly  grace  found  befitting  exercise  when  prosperity  and  joy  were
returning  to  all.  The  ideas  that  ruled  the  one  life  left  no  room  for  variation ;  those
that  ruled  the  other  required  variation.  It  is  an  important  inquiry  to  what  extent
men's  lives  are  ruled  by  a  few  leading  ideas,  and  what  is  the  relation  of  these  ideas  to
the  impulses  and  dispositions  that  seem  to  lie  next  to  the  will.  The  Christian  man
has  certain  clear  and  definite  conceptions  concerning  God,  Christ,  himself,  the  relation
of  the  present  to  the  future,  which  mark  him  off  from  the  non-Christian  man,  and  these
form  the  intellectual  elements  that  determine  all  his  conduct  toward  God  and  man.
Men  of  diverse  ages  differ  much  in  the  general  conceptions  they  entertain  on  the  details
of  life,  and  lience  we  get  differences  in  the  degree  of  conforooity  of  conduct  to  an  absolute
standard  of  morality.  In  so  far  as  we  can  procure  unity  of  perception  and  unity  of
disposition,  so  far  do  we  lay  the  basis  for  harmony  of  conduct  and  the  welfare  of  civil
society.  Hence  the  radical  and  yet  progressive  work  of  true  Cliristiaiiity :  it  will  bring
"eye  to  eye"  and  heart  to  heart,  and  so  establish  peace  for  evermore.  Hence  als  i
the  importance  of  instilling,  in  young  and  old  such  views  as  shall,  by  their  range  and
controlling  influence  over  the  mind,  practically  determine  conduct  along  the  Christian
line.

V.  The  PATIENT  WAITINO  OP  THE  DECEIVED  AND  OPPRESSED.  The  personal
appearance  of  Mephibo-sheth  when  he  came  to  welcome  David  to  Jerusalem  was  indi-
cative of  trouble  and  sorrow  arising  from  neglect  and  poverty,  and  possibly  real  grief,
experienced  during  the  time  of  the  rebellion.  The  conduct  of  Ziba  and  the  loss  of
David's  table  (ch.  ix.  9 — 13 ;  xvi.  1 — 4)  account  for  his  poverty,  and  it  is  not  likely
that  such  a  man  as  Absalom  would  make  ample  provision  for  one  of  the  house  of  Saul.
There  is  no  trace  of  Mephibosheth  having  by  treasonous  means  done  wrong  to  David,
though  it  is  possible  that,  in  real  Oriental  manner,  he,  like  the  sons  of  Zadok,  may  have
assumed  an  outward  prudential  appearance  of  fidelity  to  the  cause  of  Absalom.  He
was  a  helpless  man,  deceived  and  oppressed,  and  placed,  by  reason  of  his  physical
infirmity,  in  such  a  position  as  not  to  be  able  to  extricate  himself  from  trouble.  His
only  chance  was  to  wait  and  cherish  hope  that  the  generous  king,  who  had  so  bounti-
fully befriended  him  for  his  father's  sake,  would  return  to  power.  A  fair  illustration
is  this  of  the  patient  waiting  of  men  suffering  from  craft  and  wrong.  The  African
race  in  slavery,  deceived  and  robbed  of  their  patrimony  by  men  more  strong  and  crafty,
waited  and  hoped  almost  against  hope  for  the  day  of  freedom.  Their  only  hope  was
in  the  rise  of  the  beneficent  kingly  power  of  the  Lord's  Anointed,  and  it  did  come.
Others,  such  as  the  Waldenses  and  Malagasy,  wronged  and  oppressed,  waited  for  the
coming  of  the  better  day,  and  it  did  come.  Many  a  soul,  deceived  by  the  cunning  craft
of  the  father  of  lies,  and  robbed  of  moral  and  material  wealth,  has  known  the  pains  of
poverty  of  spirit,  and  waited  for  the  king's  gracious  restoration.  The  Apostle  Paul
tells  us,  too,  of  the  "whole  creation,"  afliicted  with  the  ills  consequent  on  the  great
rulellion  against  God,  travailing  in  pain,  and  waiting  for  a  better  time  (Rom.  viii.
18 — 22).  It  is  the  joy  of  the  preacher  to  be  able  to  announce  "  the  acceptable  year  of
the  Lord  "  to  all  who  mourn.    They  shall  not  wait  in  vain  (Isa.  Ixi.  1 — 4).

VI.  A  PRACTICAL  VIEW  OF  THE  ANOMALIES  OF  LIFE.  The  position  in  which  David
found  himself  when,  on  heaiinj:  the  Story  of  Mephibosheth  and  observing  his  distressed
circumstances,  he  had  to  decide  with  respect  to  the  property  at  stake,  was  one  of  extreme

ilicacy  and  difficulty.    In  all  good  faith  he  had  handed  over  the  property  to  Ziba,  and


CH.  XIX.  1—43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  477

Ziba  had  befriended  his  friends  in  a  time  of  need  (oh.  xvi.  1,  8),  and  had  been  foremost
to  welcome  himself  back  (oh.  xix.  17).  The  kindness  of  the  man  in  the  hour  of  need
was  a  set-off  to  his  deceit.  On  the  other  bacd,  the  forfeiture  of  the  property  of  Mephi-
bosheth  by  royal  decree  was  based  on  false  information ;  and  being  a  member  of  a  royal
house,  and  not  proved  tp  have  been  openly  disloyal,  he  certainly  had  a  claim  to  resto-
ration to  rights.  The  brevity  of  the  narrative  leaves  the  actual  decision  of  David  in
some  obscurity  (ver.  29).  But  the  sense  seems  to  be  that  David  solved  the  difficulty
by  restoiing  the  old  relatiopa  as  a  matter  of  practice  (ch.  ix,  9 — 11),  without  formally
revoking  the  legal  right  of  Ziba.  As  formerly,  so  now,  the  two  families  were  to  live  on
the  produce  of  the  soil,  aud  in  this  there  was  great  consideration,  for  Mepbibosheth  was
physically  incapable  of  looking  after  his  own  affairs.  The  example  of  David,  as  a
matter  of  procedure,  is  worthy  pf  attention.  Life  is  crowded  with  rlifBcultiPs  analogous
to  this,  Claims  and  counter-claims  force  themselves  on  our  attention.  Wrongs  have
to  be  righted  and  merits  ^ave  to  be  considered  in  alleviation  of  judgment.  The  prin-
ciple on  which  David  acted  was  a  sound  one,  and  can  be  used  by  us  in  all  things,
namely,  to  dcaj  with  anomalies  practically,  not  merely  speculatively,  and  to  aim  at  a
restoration  of  things  to  their  natural  basis.  To  bring  men  and  things  back  to  nature,  so
far  as  circumstances  admit,  is  a  safe  and  prudent  rule.  The  old  relationship  of  Ziba  to
Mepbibosheth  (ch.  ix,  Z^^i),  and  the  incapacity  of  the  latter,  rendered  it  most  unwise
to  cut  the  knot  of  present  complications  by  having  recourse  to  the  practical  division
indicated  in  ch.  ix.  9 — 12.  There  is  a  natural  basis,  if  vre  will  only  take  pains  to  find
it,  in  our  modern  complications.

General  lessons,  1,  We  should  see  in  the  returning  success  of  the  servant  of
God  after  a  season  of  severe  chastisement  a  token  of  our  joyous  return  to  the  possession
of  privilege  when  we  have  been  duly  exercised  by  the  chastisement  of  Providence
(Heb,  xii.  5-^^7).  2,  Success  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  less  real  because  imperfect  and
weak  men  crowd  in  with  it,  though  we  ought  to  separate  their  attachment  from  the
elements  of  endurance  in  the  success,  3,  In  selecting  friends  we  should  not  place
much  reliance  on  those  most. eager  jn  their  expression  of  interest,  Words  are  to  be
tested  by  deeds,  4,  It  is  incumbent  on  all  Christians  to  purge-  from  their  relation-
ships, whether  of  master,  servant,  professor  of  religion,  member  of  Church,  or  subject  of
the  realm,  every  trace  of  doubtful  loyalty,  5,  The  profession  of  interest  in  religion  is
to  be  carefolly  weighed,  seeing  that  an  uneasy  conscience  will  often  prompt  to  a  formal
profession  when  there  is  not  sincere  love  and  faith.  6.  It  will  be  a  great  gain  to  the
Church  if  we  can  instil  into  the  minds  of  the  young  the  most  cardinal  principles  of
Christianity,  which,  by  their  dominating  power,  will  expel  inferior  views  and  lead  to
right  iiotion.  7.  We  may  encourage  ihe  poor  and  oppressed  to  take  heart  from  seeing
how  in  the  course  of  history  God  does  vindicate  the  needy.  The  great  vindications
will  be  when  the  King  of  kings  comes  to  judgment.

Vers.  31-^43.-"The  facts  are :  1,  Bareillai,  having  provided  sustenance  for  Davicl
while  he  was  at  Mahanaim,  and  accompanying  him  over  Jordan,  is  entreated  to  go
and  live  with  him  at  Jerusalem.  2.  Barzillai,  having  no  relish  for  the  kind  of  life
which  he  thought  prevailed  at  court,  pleads  age  and  infirmity  and  a  fear  of  being
an  incumbrance  to  David,  as  a  r'  a?Qn  for  not  complying  with  his  request,  but  asks
that  his  own  son  Chimham  may  be  permitted  to  go,  3.  David  consents,  promises
to  do  for  Barzillai  ajl  that  he  may  require,  kisses  and  blesses  him,  and,  while  the  good
old  man  returns  home,  David  passes  on  to  Gilgal,  conducted  by  all  the  people  of  Judah
and  half  the  peoplq  of  Israel,  _  4.  The  men  of  Israel  protest  against  what  they  conceive
to  be  the  stealthy  way  in  which  the  men  of  judah  forestalled  them  in  bringing  back
the  king,  5,  The  men  of  Judah  asgign,  as  the  explanation  of  their  conduct,  that
they  were  not  mercenary,  but  that  their  near  kinship  was  the  clue  to  their  zeal,
6.  The  controversy  waxes  strong  on  the  men  of  Israel  asserting  in  their  rejoinder  that,
being  ten  tribes,  tney  had  more  right  in  the  king  than  bad  Judah.

A  hemti/ul  old  age.  line  scene  described  by  the  historian  of  the  parting  of  Barzillai
and  David,  is  pne  of  the  most  touching  to  be  found  in  Old  Testament  story ;  f>nd  the
two  elements  which  chiefly  oontribute  to  its  interest  are— 'the  return  of  the  banished
l;ing  to  his  beloved  pity  and  bis  throne  ^t  the  close  of  a  most  anxiop  season ;  ^n^


178  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  six.  1— la


the  Ijeautiful  character  of  the  venerable  man  who  had  befriended  him  in  his  misfor-
tunes, and  now,  with  a  consciousness  that  his  own  earthly  course  is  nearly  run,  bids
him  an  affectionate  farewell.  There  are  many  venerable  saints  referred  to  in  the
Bible — from  the  time  of  Enoch  to  the  beloved  exile  of  Patmos— and  they  all  convey
to  us  a  certain  common  instruction  concerning  life  and  its  destiny,  blended  with  what
is  peculiar  to  each ;  but  we  shall  here  confine  attention  to  those  features  of  a  beautiful
old  age  which  are  specially  brought  out  in  the  description  given  of  Bai  zillai.

I.  Old  age  itself  natceally  awakens  a  tender  intebest.  This  is  the  natural
basis  of  all  our  regard  for  the  aged,  and  is  an  element  entering  into  the  beauty  which
in  some  cases  we  recognize.  In  every  age  and  clime,  and  among  all  except  the  most
savage,  age  has  won  respect  and  developed  tender  feelings  in  the  younger.  We  regard
it  as  a  8i°:n  of  moral  debasement  when  men  fail  to  cherish  tender  consideration  for  the
aged.  The  reasons  that  account  for  our  best  feelings  are  not  always  definite,  and  in
this  case  they  are  certainly  very  subtle — being  hidden  away  in  the  thoughts  and
sentiments  that  grow  with  our  growth.  If  we  seek  the  analysis  of  our  sentiment
towards  age,  we  shall  find  these  items :  a  sense  of  our  inferiority  in  all  that  makes  up
the  deepest  experiences  of  life ;  a  conviction  that  the  venerable  form  is  the  symbol  of
many  a  veiled  sorrow  and  buried  hope ;  a  perception  of  traces  of  unrecorded  conflicts ;
a  feeling  of  sympathy  with  increasing  infirmities;  a  remembrance  of  the  fleeting
character  of  the  best  and  most  vigorous  manhood ;  and  a  reflection  that  a  responsible
being  is  getting  near  to  the  eternal  world.  In  the  presence  of  age  we  cannot  but  feel
that  to  live  is  a  grave  and  solemn  business.

II.  Old  age  exhibits  a  special  beauty  whbbb  it  is  pbevadbd  bt  kindly  feel-
ings AND  earnest  piety.  Sometimes  we  meet  with  old  age  rendered  hard,  bitter,
venomed,  and  remorseful,  and,  while  our  hearts  are  touched  with  tender  interest,  we
feel  that  we  can  only  pity — there  is  no  admiration,  because  there  is  no  moral,  and
probably  no  physical,  beauty.  In  Barzillai  we  see  all  the  natural,  physical  beauties  of
age  crowned  by  virtues  of  the  most  attractive  kind.  His  generous  provision  for  the
king  when  in  need,  and  his  making  an  effort  to  see  him  happily  on  his  way  home,
revealed  kindliness.  His  desire  to  share  in  such  valued  society  so  far  as  strength
permitted,  his  right  esiimate  of  what  befits  the  closing  days  of  life,  and  his  quiet  con-
tent with  the  comforts  and  joys  of  home,  show  his  wisdom.  His  anxiety  not  to  be  a
burden  to  the  king  amidst  the  duties  and  cares  of  government,  and  his  request  for  a
favour  to  his  son  (1  Kings  ii.  7),  prove  his  considerateness.  His  wish  to  live  and  die  and
be  buried  among  the  kindred  whom  he  had  loved  so  long,  was  evidence  of  his  domestic
affection.  His  having  befriended,  honoured,  and  loved  the  banished  king  when  appear-
ances were  against  him,  and  his  being  privileged  to  take  so  tender  a  leave  of  the  Lord's
anointed,  was  a  sign  of  distinguished  loyalty.  His  obvious  faith  in  the  right  cause
when  the  rebellion  was  at  its  height,  his  bold  identification  of  his  interests  with  those
of  the  Lord's  afflicted  servant,  his  doing  all  for  the  right  cause  without  any  idea  of
compensation,  was  proof  of  deep^iefy.  Thus  the  beauty  of  old  age  lies  much  in  years
being  crowned  with  kindliness  of  disposition,  wisdom  of  conduct,  consideration  of  feel-
ing, deep  affection  for  one's  own  people,  faithfulness  in  the  relationships  of  life,  and
calm  and  strong  piety.    How  lovely  is  old  age  when  so  adorned !

III.  An  old  age  thus  beautified  ib  very  helpful  to  others.  Barzillai  was
helpful  to  David  in  his  trials  and  triumphs;  but  it  was  not  the  mere  food  (ch.  xvii.
28,  29)  which  he,  with  others,  brought  that  gave  strength  to  David's  heart  and  raised
his  hope  in  God.  The  hoary  head,  crowned  with  the  glory  of  true  goodness,  was  more
to  David  than  all  the  material  supplies.  To  have  the  friendship  and  the  kindly  atten-
tions of  a  venerable  man  of  God,  was  to  the  king  a  real  spring  of  new  life  and  vigour.
The  vain  and  trifling  young  man  might  go  off  to  take  sides  with  rebellion,  but  age,  with
its  wisdom,  its  deep  experience,  its  large-heartedness  and  settled  piety,  was  with  him.
As  cold  water  to  a  thirsty  soul  was  the  loyalty  and  affection  of  so  honoured  a  man.  It
is  a  blessing  and  real  help  to  have  the  favour  and  sympathy  of  men  who  have  had
large  experience  in  life,  and  have  won  for  themselves  imperishable  honours ;  and,  though
the  infirmities  of  age  may  seem  to  set  a  narrow  limit  to  the  usefulness  of  the  aged,  yet
their  moral  power  is  very  great.  Their  influence  is  quiet,  but  real  and  pervadmg.  The
tone  they  impart  to  home  affects  the  world  outside,  and  their  known  interest  in  Christ'i
servants  and  the  work  they  are  doing,  is  power  and  cheer  to  many  a  heart.


CH.  XIX.  1-43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  479

IV.   A    BEAUTIFUL    OLD    AGE    IS    AN    ABIDINO    CHARM    IN    THE    MEMOBY.      David   and

Barzillai  never  met  again  on  earth.  Their  parting  partook  of  all  the  sweet  tenderness
of  a  final  severance.  Before  David  had  finished  his  career,  the  venerahle  man  had
p  )ssed  away  to  his  blessed  reward  (1  Kings  ii.  7).  But  it  could  not  but  be,  as  was
evident  from  his  eharge  to  Solomon,  that  throughout  his  life  David  cherished  the
memory  of  the  good  old  man,  and  found  amid  the  cares  and  sorrows  of  life  much  com-
fort therein.  The  vision  of  that  bent  form,  laden  with  precious  fruits  of  a  long  and
godly  experience,  bending  before  him  and  bidding  him  Grod-speed  in  his  high  vocation,
would  often  rise  up  and  again  cheer  his  spirit.  The  dead  yet  speak  to  us.  Our  memo-
ries retain  the  cherislned  form  and  words  and  tender  embraces  of  venerable  saints,  and,
as  we  think  of  their  faith  and  hope  and  triumph  over  the  world,  we  take  fresh  courage
find  struggle  on.    Thank  God  for  aged  Christians  living  or  departed !

General  lessons.  1.  We  see  how  wondrously  God  does,  in  his  kind  providence,
sweeten  the  bitters  of  life  by  friendships  which  would  not  have  been  formed  but  for  the
trouble,  2.  There  is  great  blessedness  in  being  enabled  to  render  encouragement  to
God's  servants  when  they  are  engaged  in  arduous  and  perplexing  service,  and  this  form
of  usefulness  may  be  sought  by  all,  especially  by  the  aged.  3.  We  should,  in  our  own
lives  and  in  others,  look  for  an  advance  of  moral  powers  proportionate  to  the  advance
of  age.  4.  We  should  covet  the  honour  of  bringing  our  ripest  and  best  attainments
and  placing  them  at  the  service  of  Christ.

The  uses  wnd  perils  of  rivalry.  It  was  natural  that,  at  first,  there  should  be  some
hesitation  in  at  least  the  leaders  of  the  people,  both  in  Judah  and  Israel,  in  making
overtures  to  David  and  in  sending  deputations  to  welcome  him  back.  Israel,  however,
overcame  this  feeling  first,  and  David,  reasonably  anxious  that  Judah,  so  near  to  him,
should  not  be  outdone,  took  means  to  inform  them  of  what  was  in  contemplation,  and
urged  that  they  certainly  need  not  hesitate,  seeing  that  his  promotion  of  Amasa  was
proof  of  his  unchanged  feelings  of  interest  in  them  (ch.  xix.  11 — 13).  Influenced  by
desire  not  to  be  outdone  in  expressions  of  loyalty,  they  were  first  at  Jordan,  and
carried  off  the  honour  of  accompanying  the  king  to  Jerusalem.  There  is  no  evidence
that  David  wished  Judah  to  steal  a  march  on  Israel,  and  so  embitter  the  feeling
between  them.  Probably  he  thought  that  a  conference  would  take  place  for  joint
action.  His  sole  anxiety  was  that  Judah  should-  not  be  tardy  in  indicating  restored
allegiance  and  taking  measures  for  showing  it.  For  reasons  not  stated,  Judab  acted
alone,  much  to  the  chagrin  of  Israel,  and  hence  the  controversy  (vers.  41 — 43)  as  to
the  relative  right  to  manifest  special  interest  in  the  king.  It  was  a  rivalry  in  good
works,  not  unmixed  with  questionable  feelings.     Rivalry  has  its  uses  and  its  dangers.

I.  It  tends  to  stimulate  action  and  develop  latent  powers.  The  thought
that  Israel  might  reach  Jordan  first,  and  so  get  the  honour  of  showing  attachment  to
the  king,  stirred  up  zeal  in  Judah,  and  drew  forth  whatever  feeling  of  loyalty  was  latent
in  the  commimity ;  and  the  fact  that  Judah  outstripped  Israel  roused  the  heart  of
Israel  to  give  verbal  evidence  of  strong  attachment  to  the  king.  This  rivalry  in
accomplishing  a  common  work  enters  into  all  life ;  it  seems  to  have  its  roots  deep-down
in  our  nature.  It  is  associated  with  the  conviction  that  duties  have  to  be  attended  to,
and  that  our  honour  is  concerned  in  attending  to  them,  at  least  as  well  as  other  people.
Thus  it  is  a  side  issue  of  the  action  of  conscience,  though  it  may  easily  develop
unworthy  feelings  which  will  render  its  connection  with  conscience  very  obscure.
Leaving  out  the  question  of  improper  feelings  for  the  present,  it  doubtless  does  develop
our  powers,  and  even  draws  out  latent  forces,  the  existence  of  which  had  not  been
known.  By  the  parallel  action  of  the  rivals  much  mutual  instruction  is  gained  as  to
methods  of  work,  and  weakness  and  strength  of  character,  which  instruction  being
applied,  renders  effort  more  successful.

II.  It  tends  to  keep  the  ideal  of  duty  more  oonspiouously  before  the  minp.
The  suggestion  that  Israel  was  about  to  welcome  the  king  at  once  set  before  Judah  in
striking  form  the  highest  ideal  of  allegiance.  Any  thoughts  concerning  it  hitherto
cherished  now  were  cleared  of  obscurity,  and  the  duty  was  manifest.  Rivalry  among
pupils,  workmen,  statesmen,  and  literary  men  necessarily  causes  all  who  enter  into  it
to  direct  their  attention  from  their  own  achievements  as  adeqi^ate,  to  the  ideal  towardp
whidi  all  are  striving.    This  constant  presence  of  a  lofty  ideal  is  a  great  gain  t(


<t<^0  THE   SECOND   BOOK   OF  SAMUEU  [ch.  iix.  1— 4a

humanity.  It  is  the  absence  of  ideals  which  marlts  off  the  beast  from  man.  When
we  are  expected  to  provoke  one  another  to  love  and  good  works,  we  at  onoe  think  of  the
standard  after  which  we  are,  as  Christians,  bound  to  strive  (Phil.  iii.  12 — 14).  The  fact
that  others  surpass  us  is  a  reminder  of  the  vows  we  have  taken,  and  so,  setting  the
"  mark  "  before  us  afresh,  we  press  forward  with  renewed  zeal.  The  healthful  effect  on
us  of  the  presence  of  a  superior  Christian  is  well  known.  The  sight  of  holy  men  and
women  devoting  their  energies  to  the  service  of  Christ  in  the  world  rebukes  sloth,
points  to  "  what  manner  of  persons  "  we  ought  to  be,  and  so,  by  rendering  the  ideal
more  real  to  the  mind,  enable  us  to  be  more  faithful  to  our  Lord.

III.  T^EKB  IS,  HOWKVEK,  A  RISK  OF  LOSING  SIGHT  OP  BHOAD   PBIN0IPLB8,  AND  BBINO

ABSORBED  IN  SIDE  ISSUES.  Judali  and  Israel  were  right  in  provoking  to  loyalty  and
reassertion  of  allegiance,  and  so  far  as  they  purely  followed  out  the  first  impulse  of
rivalry  all  was  well ;  but  the  ideal  before  them  became  obscured  as  soon  as  they  began
to  dispute  on  a  matter  of  detail  as  to  precedence,  and  personal  motive.  The  question  as
to  whether  the  motive  of  Judah  was  pare  arose  out  of  the  zeal  of  Judah  on  the  one  side
and  the  zeal  of  Israel  on  the  other.  Probably  Judah  did  design  to  outwit  Israel.  The
secrecy  was  not  purely  for  the  sake  of  loyalty  to  David,  but  to  gratify  pride  in  being
first.  It  was  not  an  open  competition.  Thus,  by  the  minor  feelings  of  the  rivalry
being  allowed  to  gain  ascendancy,  there  arose  an  issue  which  exposed  a  wholesome
rivalry  to  the  danger  of  being  the  occasion  of  sowing  the  seeds  of  permanent  mischief.
Here  lies  the  great  danger  of  rivalry  in  deeds  and  enterprises  perfectly  good  in  them-
selves. Especially  is  there  a  great  risk  in  the  matter  of  the  competition  of  denomina-
tions and  religious  parties.  Work  is  done,  perhaps,  to  outstrip  others,  to  gain  notoriety,
to  gratify  a  love  of  pre-eminence,  and  also,  in  the  heat  of  zeal,  motives  are  impugned,
and  time  and  strength  spent  in  mutual  recriminations  which  bad  better  be  spent  in
rendering  service  to  Christ.

IV.  RiVALBY    BRINGS    FORTH    ITS    WORST    FRUIT    WHEN    IT    ISSUES  IN   PERMANBNTLT

DEBASED  FEELINGS  AND  MUTUAL  ESTRANGEMENT.  We  See  in  this  Controversy  the
beginning  of  an  unholy  feeling  of  jealousy  and  ill  will,  which,  we  know,  issued  at  last
in  positive  aversion  and  enmity.  They  were  one  people,  the  people  of  God,  called  to
do  a  good  and  holy  work  in  the  world,  and  held  under  the  government  of  God's
anointed.  This  consideration  ought  to  have  been  uppermost  in  all  times  of  effort  and
of  difficulty.  For  one  to  seek  to  gratify  pride  at  the  cost  of  another  was  base ;  for
the  other  to  cherish  bilterness  of  spirit  was  wrong;  for  both  to  weaken,  by  fierce
controversy,  the  brotherly  sentiment,  and  to  create  separate  interests,  instead  of  being
one  in  devotion  to  their  king  and  country,  was  a  moral  debasement  from  which  they
never  recovered.  To  do  Christian  work  well  in  rivalry  requires  watchfulness  over
motives,  generous  consideration  of  others,  and  delight  in  what  they  accomplish  for  the
Master'g  sake,  and  a  conscientious  maintenance  of  the  honour  and  glory  of  Christ  above
all  the  petty  considerations  of  personal  or  denominational  interest.  The  mutual
estrangement  of  Christians  is  a  great  calamity.  It  has  its  root  in  the  inferior  feelings
which  have  been  allowed  to  mingle  with  genuine  zeal  for  the  kingdom  of  God;  and  the
removal  of  it  is  to  be  sought  in  deep  searching  of  heart,  and  a  return  to  the  simplicity
of  entire  consecration  to  Christ's  service.

General  lessonb.  1.  The  holy  rivalry  of  the  primitive  Christians  (John  xx.  1 — 4)
to  be  first  at  the  sepulchre  should  be  preferred  as  a  model,  both  as  to  aim  and  spirit,  to
that  of  Judah  and  Israel.  2.  The  temptation. to  indulge  in  a  feeline  of  personal  pride
should  be  met  by  a  reflection  on  the  serious  evils  that  may  issue  from  even  one  departure
from  purity.  3.  In  all  our  Christian  enterprises  it  should  be  our  endeavour  to  keep
Christ  and  his  honour  clearly  in  view,  and  get  inspiration  from  the  zeal  of  others,  not
simply  to  outstrip  them,  but  to  bring  more  glory  to  him  than  auy  one  else  can,
4.  In  our  efforts  we  should  remember  that  we  are  all  equally  "  kin  "  to  Christ,  and  a  e
equally  dear  to  his  heart.  5-  In  our  estimate  of  Churches  we  are  to  give  more  weight
to  spiritual  qualities  than  to  numbers.  6.  If  on  our  guard  against  lurking  evils,  we
may  frequently  ask  ourselves  how  we  can  more  perfectly  prove  our  fiidelity  to  our  li«rd
«n4  (^vance  (l^e  hopour  of  hi^  Naqie.


OH.  XIX.  1—43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  481


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES.

Vers.  1—8. — (Mahanaim.)  Immoderate  grief.  This  interview  between  David  and
Joab  throws  light  upon  the  character  of  both,  and  the  relations  subsisting  between
them.  1.  The  lest  of  men  are  by  no  means  .perfect.  David's  grief,  although  natural,
and,  in  some  respects,  commendable,~was  unseasonable,  excessive,  and  injurious;  and
exposed  him  to  just  reproof.  2.  The  worst  of  men  are  not  altogether  bad,  but  often
exhibit  admirable  qualities.  When  Joab  put  Absalom  to  death  against  the  king's  order
he  was  actuated  partly  by  regard  for  the  king's  interest  and  the  national  welfare,  "  loyal
disobedience;"  .he  was  also  desirous  of  preventing  unnecessary  slaughter  (ch.  xviii.
16),  and  showed  a  thoughtful  concern  for  Ahimaaz  (ch.  xviii.  19,  20,  22) ;  and  now,
although  his  bearing  toward  the  king  was  harsh  and  cruel  (ch.  iii.  24),  he  was  fully
justified  in  expostulating  with  him  (as  on  another  occasion,  ch.  xxiv.  3).  3.  The  worst
of  men  are  often  intimately  associated  with  the  best  of  men,  and  render  them
invaluable  services;  but  their  association  is  usually  uncongenial,  and  productive  of
trouble  and  mischief  (oh.  iii.  39).  By  his  great  abilities  Joab  made  himself  necessary
to  David,  and  became  confirmed  in  his  high  position  (1  Chron.  xi.  6);  and  by  his
complicity  "  in  the  matter  of  Uriah,"  he  gained  a  despotic  influence  over  him ;  hence
his  daring  disobedience  and  overbearing  attitude,  and  when  the  king,  resenting  his
conduct,  seeks  to  replace  him  as  cnptain  of  the  host,  he  strikes  down  his  rival,  then
"calmly  takes  upon  himself  to  execute  the  commission  with  which  Amasa  had  been
charged ;  and  this  done,  '  he  returns  to  Jerusalem,  unto  the  king,'  and  once  more  he  is
'  over  all  the  host  of  Israel ' "  (Blunt, '  Coincidences ').    David's  inordinate  grief  was —

I.  Beally  eepbehensiblb.  "And  the  king  covered  his  face,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  It
was  connected  (as  cause  or  eifeot)  with:  1.  The  lack  of  due  consideration  of  the  moral
canses  of  the  event  which  he  mourned  over,  and  which  was  their  natural  and  deserved
consequence;  and  of  the  salutary  influence  which  that  event  would  have  upon  the
nation.  In  surrendering  himself  to  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  his  son,  he  was  in  some
measure  blind  to  the  justice  of  his  doom.  2.  The  absence  of  humble  siibmission  to  the
Divine  will,  such  as  he  had  previously  displayed  in  "the  day  of  his  calamity"  (ch.  xii.
20 ;  XV.  26  ;  xvi.  10).  3.  The  feeling  of  bitter  resentment  against  those  who  had  despised
his  commandment  and  disappointed  his  hopes.  He  would  at  first,  perhaps,  blame  all
his  "  servants ;  "  and,  when  he  was  informed  (ch.  xviii.  13)  of  the  circumstances  under
which  Absalom  came  to  his  end,  would  naturally  rciiard  the  conduct  of  his  executioners
in  its  darkest  aspect.  "  To  understand  this  passionate  utterance  of  anguish,  we  must
bear  in  mind  not  only  the  excessive  tenderness,  or  rather  weakness,  of  David's  paternal
affection  toward  his  son,  but  also  his  anger  that  Joab  and  his  generals  should  have  paid
so  little  regard  to  his  command  to  deal  gently  with  Absalom.  With  the  king's  excitable
temperament,  this  entirely  prevented  him  from  taking  a  just  and  correct  view  of  the
crime  of  his  rebel  son,  which  merited  death,  and  of  the  penal  justice  of  God,  which  had
been  manifested  in  his  destruction  "  (Keil).  4.  The  neglect  of  urgent  duties:  thanks-
giving to  God  for  victory,  the  commendation  of  his  faithful  soldiers,  the  adoption  of
proper  measures  to  confirm  their  attachment  and  secure  peace  and  unity,  the  subordi-
nation of  private  grief  to  the  public  weal.  "  The  deliverance  that  day  was  turned  into
mourning  unto  all  the  people,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  "  Their  hearty  participation  in  the  sorrow
of  their  beloved  king,  for  whom  they  had  perilled  their  lives,  soon  changed  to  gloomy
dissatisfaction  at  the  fact  that  the  king,  absorbed  in  private  grief,  did  not  deign  to
bestow  a  look  upon  them  "  (Brdmann).

II.  EuDBLY  KEPKOVED.  '  And  Joab  came  into  the  house  of  the  king,"  etc.  (vers.
6 — 7).  His  reproof  (ch.  xii.  1)  was :  1.  Unfeeling,  hard-hearted,  pitiless.  He  had  no
respect  whatever  for  the  natural  feelings  of  the  father;  no  sympathy  with  David's
intense  and  peculiar  emotion.  2.  Unscrupulous  and  reckless;  whilst  declaring  the
truth  in  part  (ver.  5),  and  as  it  appeared  on  the  surface,  casting  unjust  reproaches  on
the  king  for  his  heartless  selfishness,  ingratitude,  and  hatred  (ver.  6).  3.  Unlecoming
the  relation  of  a  subject  to  his  sovereign;  in  language  and  manner,  as  well  as  iu
substance.  4.  United,  nevertheless,  with  wise  counsel  and  solemn  warning.  "  And
now  arise,  go  forth,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  No  doubt  David  felt  greatly  hurt;  and  "the
immediate  effect  of,  his  indignation  was  a  solemn  vow  to  supersede  Joab  by  Amasa;

II.  8AMU£I..  2  I


482  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xix.  1— 43.

and  in  this  was  laid  the  lasting  breach  hetween  himself  and  his  nephew,  which  neither
the  one  nor  the  other  ever  forgave"  (Stanley).  But,  convinced  that  he  had  given
occasion  for  reproof,  he  now  patiently  submitted  to  it  (Ps.  cxli.  5).  "Hard  natures  and
harsh  words  have  their  u.«es  in  life  after  all "  (Scott).  "  The  undisciplined  word  of
Joab  became  a  means  of  discipline  to  David,  and  the  king  turned  from  the  destructive
path  into  which  unbridled  feeling  had  led  him."

III.  Ebadilt  kestbainbd  and  laid  aside,  "  And  the  king  arose,"  etc.  (ver.  8).
"  He  was  stung  into  action,  and  immediately  roused  himself  to  the  discharge  of  his
royal  duties."  Would  we  overcome  immoderate  grief?  We  must :  1.  Listen  to  the
admonitions  of  truth,  however  disagreeable;  and  learn  the  evil  of  indulging  it.
2.  Beceive  the  consoling  assurances  of  Heaven,  and  pray  for  needful  strength.  S.
Bepress  it  with  prompt  and  determined  effort.  4.  Devote  ourselves  with  diligence  to
necessary  and  useful  activities.

"  Heaven  hath  assigned
Two  sovereign  remedies  for  human  grief :
Beligion,  surest,  firmest,  first,  and  best.
Strength  to  the  weak,  and  to  the  wounded,  balm ;
And  itrenuoui  action  next."

(Boathey.)

Ordinary  grief  must  be  restrained  within  due  bounds.  But  there  is  a  sorrow— tender,
hope'ul,  godly  sorrow  for  sin,  to  which  we  may  freely  and  fully  surrender  ourselves;
for  it  always  conducts  to  greater  purity,  strength,  and  joy. — ^D.

Ver.  15. — David^s  return  to  Jerusalem.  "  And  David  returned,  and  came  to  the
Jordan"  (the  eastern  bank;  while  Judah  came  to  Gilgal,  joined  by  Shimei  and  Ziba;
and  a  ferry-boat  was  passing  to  and  fro  to  carry  over  the  king's  household,  ver.  18) ;
crossed  over  (to  the  western  bank,  conducted  by  Judah  and  ha!/  the  people  of  Israel,
vers.  39,  40) ;  came  to  Gilgal  (where  all  the  men  of  Israel  met  him,  and  a  new  conten-
tion arose,  ver.  41 ;  ch.  xxi.  1) ;  and  finally  (conducted  by  the  men  of  Judah)  to
Jerusalem  (ch.  xxi.  3).  The  return  of  David,  like  his  flight,  is  described  minutely  and
graphically.  As  he  had  been  called  to  the  throne  by  the  voice  of  the  people  (ch.  v.
1 — 3),  so  he  desired  to  return  to  it,  not  by  force,  but  by  their  free  consent ;  and  would
take  no  active  measures  for  his  restoration  until  he  should  receive  some  intimation
thereof.  "  Our  Lord  Jesus  will  rule  only  in  those  that  invite  him  to  the  throne  in  their
hearts,  and  not  till  he  is  invited.  He  first  bows  the  heart,  and  makes  it  willing  in  the
day  of  his  power,  then  rules  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies  (Ps.  ex.  2,  3)  "  (Matthew
Henry).  David's  restoration  was  distinguished  by :  1.  The  returning  allegiance  of  the
rehellious.  (Vers.  9, 10.)  "All  the  tribes  of /sraeZ"  (except  Judah).  Popular  revolutions
are  usually  followed  by  speedy  reactions.  Convinced  of  their  error,  ingratitude,  and
injustice  by  their  defeat,  remembering  the  great  services  which  David  had  rendered  on
their  behalf,  and  considering  the  present  condition  of  affairs,  "all  the  people"  manifest
a  disposition  to  "  bring  the  king  back ; "  and  this  gratifying  intelligence  is  reported  to
him  while  waiting  at  Mahanaim.  2.  The  decisive  action  of  the  dilatory.  (Vers.  11 — ^15.)
"  The  men  of  Judah,"  who,  since  the  rebellion  arose  in  their  territory,  feared  the  king*!
displeasure,  or  proudly  held  aloof  in  continued  disaffection  under  Amasa.  But  when
assured  of  his  regard,  reminded  of  their  kinship,  and  nrged  to  activity,  they  are  at  once
"drawn"  unto  him  "as  one  man;"  send  the  message,  "Eetum,"  etc.;  and  come  to
conduct  him  across  the  Jordan.  Judah  is  again  to  the  front.  David's  appeal  was
conciliatory,  and  seems  wise  and  just  (though  some  think  otherwise),  however  disastrous
its  ultimate  effect.  3.  The  humble  submission  of  the  guUty.  (Vers.  16 — 23.)  Shimei,
with  a  thousand  men  of  Benjamin,  and  Ziba,"  etc.  "  They  went  eagerly  [prosperously,
Hebrew,  tzalachj  over  the  Jordan  in  the  presence  of  the  king  "  (ver.  17) ;  and  "  Shimei
fell  down  before  the  king  in  his  crossing  over  (abar)  the  Jordan  "  (while  the  transit
was  going  on).  "  With  a  self-control  rare  in  Western  no  less  than  Eastern  history,
every  step  in  his  progress  waa  marked  by  forgiveness"  (Maclear).  4.  The  Joyful
welcome  (f  the  suspected^  (Vers.  24 — 30.)  The  innocent  Mephibosheth,  the  grandJson  of
Savi,  now  vindicated  and  restored  to  "  all  that  he  most  cared  for — the  king's  favour,  hi»
old  place  at  the  king's  table,  and  the  formal  recognition  of  his  owneiship"  vt  the


OH.  xa.  1—43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  483

inheritance.  6.  Hie  friendly  greeting  of  the/aithfid.  (Vers.  31 — 39).  Barzillai,  an  aged
and  "very  great  man,"  representative  of  the  trans-Jordanie  inhabitants;  testifying  his
devotion  to  the  king  in  prosperity,  whom  he  had  aided  in  adversity,  and  receiving  his
grateful  benediction.  How  different  is  it  with  David  now  from  what  it  had  been  at
his  former  crossing  (ch.  xvit.  22)  I  "  This  passage  of  the  Jordan  was  the  most
memorable  one  since  the  days  of  Joshua."  6.  7%e  zealous  emulation  of  the  tribes.  (Vers.
40 — 43.)  Their  strife  for  pie-eminence ;  "  Ephraim  envying  Judah,  and  Judah  vexing
Bphraim  "  (Isa.  xi.  13),  leading  to  a  fresh  revolt,  which,  however,  is  speedily  overcome.
David's  troubles,  so  incessant,  so  varied,  so  great,  "  from  his  youth  "  (ver.  7),  are  not
yet  ended  ;  but  they  are  all  ordered  by  the  hand  of  God  for  his  good.  "  Sanctified
affliction  is  spiritual  promotion."  7.  The  complete  establishment  of  the  kingdom.
(Ch.  XX.  3,  22 — 26.)  He  sees  again  the  habitation  of  the  Lord  (oh.  xv.  25),  and  rules
over  a  peaceful  and  united  nation.  His  return  is  like  the  commencement  of  a  new
reign  (ver.  22).  "  The  remainder  of  David's  life — a  period  probably  of  about  ten  years
— flowed  on,  so  far  as  we  can  gather,  in  a  blight  calm,  and  an  undisturbed  course
of  improvements  "  (Ewald). — ^D.

Vers.  16 — 23. — (The  Jordan.)  The  pardon  of  Shimei.  The  conduct  of  Shimei
towards  David  in  fais  flight  (ch.  xvi.  5)  was  base  and  iniquitous.  "  The  wheel  turns
round  once  more  ;  Absalom  is  cast  down  and  David  returns  in  peace.  Shimei  suits  his
behaviour  to  the  occasion,  and  is  the  first  man,  also,  who  hastes  to  greet  him ;  and  had
the  wheel  tinned  round  a  hundred  times,  Shimei,  I  dare  say,  in  every  period  of  its
rotation  would  have  been  uppermost "  (Sterne).  But  he  may  have  been  actuated  by
something  better  than  selfish  and  time-serving  policy ;  at  least,  the  history  affords  no
intimation  that  his  repentance  was  insincere  and  hypocritical.  And  he  was  forgiven
by  David  (of  whose  clemency  he  had  been  persuaded)^

I.  On  the  confession  op  wrono-doino  (vers.  19,  20)  with :  1.  Deep  ahafement.
He  "  fell  down  before  the  king."  2.  Free,  full,  unqualified,  and  open  sdf-condemna-
tion,  "Thy  servant  did  perversely,"  and  "doth  know  that  I  have  sinned."  3.
Fervent  petition  for  mercy.  "  Let  not  my  lord  impute  iniquity  unto  me,"  etc.  4.
Professed  devotion  and  zealous  endeavour  to  repair  the  wrong  which  had  been  done.
"  And  behold  I  am  come  the  first  this  day,"  etc.  He  had  brought  with  him  a  thousand
men  of  Benjamin,  to  do  honour  to  the  king  whom  he  had  formerly  despised ;  perhaps,
also,  to  show  the  value  of  his  reconciliation  and  services  (which  were  really  important
at  such  a  time,  in  the  light  of  subsequent  events,  ch.  xx.  1).  Confession  must  precede
the  assurance  of  forgiveness;  and,  when  made  in  a  becoming  manner,  should  be
graciously  treated  (Luke  xvii.  3,  4).    God  alone  knows  the  heart.

II.  Against  the  demand  fob  punishment  (vers.  21,  22) ;  in  which  Abishai  dis-
played, as  before  (oh.  xvi.  9) :  1.  An  impulse  of  natural  vengeance  toward  the  evil-
doer ;  unaltered  by  change  of  circumstances,  unsoothed  by  Shimei's  repentance.  2.  A
desire  for  the  rigorous  execution  of  the  Law,  according  to  which  the  traitor  and
blasphemer  should  suffer  death  "  without  mercy."  Its  stern  and  relentless  require-
ments, unmodified  by  its  deeper  and  more  merciful  principles,  are  represented  in  "  the
sons  of  Zeruiah."  3.  A  spirit  of  reckless  imprzidence ;  not  less  injurious  to  the  king's
interests  on  "this  day  "  of  his  triumphant  return  than  it  was  on  the  day  of  his  perilous
flight.  4.  An  assumption  of  unjustifiable  authority,  and  interference  with  the  king's
rights  and  privileges,  feelings  and  purposes ;  incurring  a  repetition  of  the  rebuke,
"  What  have  I  to  do  with  you,"  etc.  ?  "  Ye  will  be  an  adversary  [satan,  Numb.  xxii.
22;  1  Chron.  xxi,  I]  to  me;"  hindering  the  exercise  of  mercy  and  the  joy  of  my
return  (1  Sanr..  xi.  12, 18).  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  "  (Matt.  xvi.  23).  "  Our  best
friends  must  be  considered  as  adversaries  when  they  would. persuade  us  to  act  contrary
to  our  conscience  and  our  duty  "  (Scott).

III.  With  the  assurance  of  mercy.  "  Thou  shalt  not  die  "  (ver.  23 ;  ch.  xii.  13).
"  And  the  king  sware  unto  him."  Prom :  1.  An  impulse  of  personal  feeling  of  the
noblest  nature ;  by  which  (regarding  Shimei's  offence  as  a  personal  one)  he  was  raised
above  the  level  of  "  the  Law,"  and  anticipated  the  forgiving  spirit  of  a  higher  dispensa-
tion. 2.  A  sense  of  the  exceeding  mercy  of  God  toward  himself;  by  which  he  was
disposed  to  show  mercy  toward  others.  3.  A  perception  of  the  wisest  pdicy  to  be
adopted  on  such  an  extraordinary  "  day  "  as  that  of  his  restoration  to  the  throne.


I8i  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xix.  1— 4a

"  Shall  there  any  man  be  put  to  death  this  day  in  Israel  ?  For  do  I  not  know  that  I
am  this  day  king  over  Israel  ?  "  (It  is  noticeable  how  frequently  he  is  designated
"  the  king  in  this  chapter.)  4.  An  exercise  of  the  royaZ  ^erofl'aWwe  of  pardon.  This
prerogative,  indeed  (though  prompted  by  a  generous  impulse),  he  no  doubt  stretched
beyond  due  bounds.  Hence,  reflecting  on  the  matter  at  the  close  of  his  life  (during
which  he  kept  faithfully  to  his  oath),  he  committed  (not  from  a  feeling  of  personal
revenge,  but  of  sacred  duty)  the  vindication  of  the  Law  to  his  successor  (1  Kings  ii.
8,  9).  "It  can  be  explained  only  from  the  fact  that  David  distinguished  between  his
own  personal  interest  and  motive,  which  led  him  to  pardon  Shimei,  without  taking  the
theocratic-legal  standpoint  and  the  theocratic  interests  of  the  kingdom,  of  which
Solomon  was  the  representative,  and  so  held  himself  bound  on  theocratic-political
grounds  to  commit  to  his  successor  the  execution  of  the  legal  prescription  which  he  had
passed  over"  (Erdmann).

Behabes.  1.  In  showing  mercy  to  private  as  well  as  public  offenders,  due  regard
must  be  paid  to  the  claims  of  public  justice.  2.  It  is  better  to  err  on  the  side  of  too
much  mercy  than  too  much  severity.  3.  How  vast  is  the  mercy  of  God  toward  men,
in  him  whom  he  has  "  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  aud  a  Saviour,"  etc.  (Acts  v.  31)  1  4.
Those  who  have  received  mercy  must  live  in  the  sphere  of  mercy  nnd  obedience,  other-
wise mercy  ceases  to  be  of  any  avail  (1  Kings  ii.  42 — 46 ;  Matt,  xviii.  32 — 35). — D.

Vers.  24 — 30. — (The  Jordan.)  The  vindication  of  Mephibosheth.  "  He  hath  slan-
dered thy  servant  unto  my  lord  the  king  "  (ver.  27).  The  lame  son  of  Jonathan  come»
upon  the  scene  once  more  before  his  final  disappearance.  During  the  rebellion  he
seems  to  have  continued  at  Jerusalem ;  and  a  strange  spectacle  he  must  have  presented
there,  with  his  neglected  person  and  mournful  countenance.  On  hearing  that  the  king
was  returning,  he  set  out/;oOT  Jerusalem  (Hebrew,  to;  or  "Jerusalem  came,"  Keil)to
meet  him.  But  he  had  been  preceded  by  Ziba,  who  was  present,  when,  in  answer  to  the
inquiry,  "  Wherefore,"  etc.,  he  said,  "  My  lord,  0  king,  my  servant  deceived  me,"  etc.
(ch.  xvi.  1 — 4).  1.  Tlie  unfortunate  and  helpless  are  commonly  made  the  victims  of  a
slanderous  tongue.  Others  may  not  escape  its  venom;  but  these  become  its  ready
prey.  Ziba  knew  that  he  could  not  be  pursued  and  punished ;  and  destroyed  the
reputation  of  his  master  with  the  king  for  the  sake  of  his  own  profit.  2.  The  voice  of
slander  is  put  to  silence  in  the  presence  of  honesty  and  truth.  Already,  before  Mephi-
bosheth spoke,  his  appearance  must  have  borne  witness  to  bis  innocence.  His  expla-
nation of  his  conduct,  the  tone  of  his  defence,  and  the  silence  of  his  accuser,  would
hardly  fail  to  convince  the  king  that,  whatever  may  have  been  the  designs  of  others
concerning  the  house  of  Saul  (ch.  xvL  5),  the  son  of  his  friend  Jonathan  was  not
implicated  therein.  Slander  may  remain  long  unchallenged ;  but  it  is  sure  to  be
ultimately  put  to  shame.  3.  No  vindication  from  slander  is  able  to  do  away  with  all
its  mischievous  effects.  The  property  of  which  Mephibosheth  had  been  deprived  might
be  restored  in  whole  or  in  part ;  but  the  feelings  and  actions  induced  in  others  could
not  be  obliterated.  "  Eeluctant  to  think  that  he  had  been  too  hasty ;  having  a  royal
aversion  to  admit  that  he  couLI  err  and  had  been  duped;  and  being,  in  his  present
humour  of  overlookin;j  and  pardoning  everything,  indisposed  to  the  task  of  calling  to
account  a  man  of  such  influence  as  Ziba,  who  had  been  forward  in  his  cause  when
many  tried  friends  forsook  him,  the  king's  answer  was  something  less  than  generous
and  much  less  than  kind  to  the  son  of  Jonathan  "  (Kitto).  4.  Notwithstanding  the
wrong  which  he  suffers,  a  man  of.  humble  and  grateful  heart  still  possesses  abundant
satisfaction.  Seeking  no  revenge,  acknowledging  his  dependence  even  for  life,  thank-
ful for  the  kindness  formerly  shown  toward  him,  and  foregoing  every  claim  (vers.  27,
28),  he  is  little  concerned  about  worldly  possi  ssioiis  in  comparison  with  the  honour  and
welfare  of  his  lord,  and  finds  his  chief  delight  in  "  the  king's  favour."  "  True  to  his
Boble  saintly  nature,  all  that  he  desires  is  to  love  and  to  be  loved  again"  (Flumptre).
"  Let  him  also  take  all,"  etc.  (ver.  30).

"  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  the  evil-doera,
Be  not  envious  against  the  workers  of  iniquity,  .  .  .

The  meek  shall  inherit  the  land,
And  shall  delight  themselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace,"  ete.

(Pb.  xxxvii.  1 — 11.)


OH.  XIX.  1-43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK   OF  SAMtJEL.  485

Vers.  31 — iO.— (The  Jordan.)  Old  BarziTlai.  "How  long  have  I  to  live?"
(ver.  34).  Barzillai  dwelt  at  Rogelim  (his  own  city,  ver.  37),  in  Gilead,  where,
amidst  tho  rich  highland  pastures,  diligently  superintending  his  flocks  and  herds,  he
spent  his  days  in  peace.  He  enjoyed  "  the  blessing  of  the  Old  Testament " — prosperity ;
and  was  "a  very  great  [wealthy]  man."  Like  Machir  ben-AmmieKch.  ix.  4),  he  was
loyal,  hospitable,  and  generous  (ch.  xvii.  28).  One  of  his  sons  (1  Kings  ii.  7),  named
Chimham,  accompanied  him  to  do  honour  to  the  king  at  his  restoration.  He  was  an
octogenarian,  his  memory  reaching  back  to  the  appointment  of  the  first  King  of  Israel,
and  Saul's  brilliant  exploit  on  behalf  of  Jabesh-G-ilead  (1  Sam.  xi.  11).  Of  his  genuine
piety,  his  answer  to  the  Jjing's  invitation,  "  Come  over  with  me,  and  I  will  provide
(ver.  82)  for  thee  in  Jerusalem,"  leaves  no  room  for  doubt.  "  May  we  not  legitimately
infer  that  his  conduct  was  influenced,  not  merely  by  loyalty  to  his  earthly  sovereign,
but  by  the  recognition  of  the  higher  spiritual  truths,  and  the  hope  for  Israel  and  the
world,  symbolized  by  the  reign  of  David  ?"  (Bdersheim).  More  especially,  he  fur-
nishes a  picture  of  a  leautifid  old  age  (1  Sam.  xil.  2).  To  every  one,  if  he  should  live
long  enough,  old  age  will  come,  with  impaired  powers  of  judgment,  sensibility,  and
activity  (Eccles.  xii.  1) ;  but  whether  it  will  be  honourable,  useful,  and  happy  depends
on  the  course  previously  pursued  and  the  character  possessed.  "  Clearness  and  quick-
ness of  intellect  are  gone  ;  all  taste  for  the  pleasures  and  delights  of  sense  is  gone;
ambition  is  dead;  capacity  of  change  is  departed.  What  is  left?  The  old  man  lives
in  the  past  and  in  the  future.  The  early  child-love  for  the  father  and  mother  who
hung  over  his  cradle  eighty  years  ago  remains  fresh.  He  cannot '  hear  any  more  the
voice  of  singing  men  and  singing  women ; '  but  he  can  hear,  stealing  through  almost  a
century,  the  old  tones,  thin  and  ghostlike,  of  the  dear  ones  whom  he  first  learnt  to
love.  The  furthest  past  is  fresh  and  vivid,  and  in  memory  of  it  is  half  his  life.  Also
he  looks  forward  familiarly  and  calmly  to  the  very  near  end,  and  thinks  much  of
death.  That  thought  keeps  house  with  him  now,  and  is  nearer  to  him  than  the  world
of  living  men  is.  Thus  one-half  of  his  life  is  memory,  and  the  other  half  is  hope ;  and
all  his  hopes  are  now  reduced  to  one — the  hope  to  die,  and  then  to  be  laid  down  and  go
to  sleep  again  beside  his  father  and  mother.  And  so  he  returns  to  his  city,  and  passes
out  of  our  sight "  (Maclaren).    Notice —

I.  His  CLBAK  KKCOGNITION  OF  THE  NBABNKSS  OF  HIS  APPEOACHING  END.    "  HoW  many

are  the  days  of  the  years  of  my  life  ?  "  etc.  (vers.  34,  35 ;  Gen.  xlvii.  9).  Many  an  old
man  considers  not  that  he  is  old,  and  must  shortly  leave  the  world ;  he  rather  strives
to  keep  both  his  age  and  his  departure  out  of  sight.  But  such  a  man  as  Barzillai  is
accustomed  to  reflect  on  his  actual  condition,  deems  himself  a  "  stranger  and  pilgrim
on  the  earth  "  (Heb.  xi.  13 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  15) ;  and  feels  certain  that  a  few  more  steps
will  bring  him  to  the  end  of  his  journey.  He  also  understands  what  is  possible  and
becoming  during  his  brief  continuance,  and  acts  accordingly.  "  Can  anything  be  more
amiable  than  these  simple  and  sensible  words  ?  What  a  cheerful  and  peaceful  spirit  do
they  breathe  I  and  how  does  he  put  to  shame  very  many  old  men  of  our  day,  who,  the
more  the  years  perform  their  dismantling  work  upon  them,  are  so  much  the  more
zealously  bent  on  concealing  the  decay  of  their  strength  behind  the  glittering  surround-
ings of  vain  dignities,  titles,  and  high  alliances ! "  (Krummacher).  "  Usually  the  nearer
men  approach  to  the  earth,  they  are  more  earthly  minded;  and,  which  is  strange  to
amazement,  at  the  sunset  of  life  are  providing  for  a  long  day  "  (W.  Bates).

II.  His  CHEERFTTIi  RESIGNATION  UNDER  THE  INFIRMITIES  OF  ADVANCED  AGE.    He  UtterS

no  complaint  (such  as  is  too  common  with  others)  at  the  failure  of  his  mental  and  bodily
powers,  the  loss  of  earthly  pleasures  formerly  possessed,  his  incapacity  for  new  enter-
Mises  and  excitements,  which,  at  an  earlier  age,  might  have  been  suitable  and  desirable.
His  language  is  singularly  free  from  fretfulness,  disappointment,  and  discontent.  He
perceives  and  acquiesces  with  a  "glad  contentment"  in  the  wiU  of  God,  who  "  hath
made  everything  beautiful  in  its  season  "  (Eccles.  iii.  11),  and,  although  deprived  of
some  enjoyments,  he  is  not  destitute  of  others  of  a  higher  order.  "  It  is  this,  the
tasteless  meats,  the  deafness  to  the  singing  men  and  singing  women,  the  apathy  to
common  pleasures,  for  which  old  age  is  pitied  and  deplored ;  but  this  is  God's  mercy,
it  is  not  his  vengeance  ;  he  deadens  the  keenness  of  our  bodily  senses  only  to  guide  us
to  immortality ;  we  are  disgusted  with  the  pleasures  of  youth,  we  deride  the  objects  of
manly  ambition,  we  are  wearied  with  one  worldly  trifle  or  another,  that  our  thoughts


488  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [en.  xix.  1— 43.

may  centre  at  last  In  God"  (Sydney  Smith,  «0n  the  Pleasures  of  Old  Age').  "Old
age  may  be  not  only  venerable,  but  beantifij,  and  the  object  of  reverence  untinctiu-ed
oy  conipa&siou.  Xbe  intellect,  the  emotions,  the  affections  (the  best  of  them)  all  alive,
— it  19  the  passions  and  appetites  only  that  are  dead ;  and  who  that  is  wise  and  has  felt
the  plague  of  them,  does  not,  with  the  aged  Cephalus,  in  Plato's  '  Bepublic,'  account  a
serene  frsedom  from  their  clamorous  importunities  a  compensation  for  the  loss  of  their
tumultuous  pleasures  ?  "  ('  SeL  from  the  Correspondence  of  R.  E.  H.  Grreyson,  Esq.').

III.  His  C0UBTE0U8  refusal  of  the  pkofff.b  of  eabthly  favours.  What  can
even  a  monarch  give  him  now  ?  The  society,  the  pleasures,  the  honours,  of  a  court ;
enlarged  influence,  increased  responsibility,  more  abundant  wealth.  Is  it  worth  while
for  their  sake  to  be  transplanted  to  a  new  soil  from  the  place  where  he  has  been  so  long
growing ;  and  when  he  must  so  soon  be  removed  from  the  world  altogether  ?  If  he
had  been  a  sensual,  ambitious,  or  avaricious  man,  the  craving  for  such  things  would
have  remained,  and  led  him  (like  others)  to  grasp  at  their  possession,  though  no  longer
able  to  enjoy  them  or  employ  them  aright.  "What  so  distressing  as  to  see  the
withered  face  of  old  age  dull  and  dead  to  every  consideration  of  eternity,  and  kindling
with  life  only  at  the  mention  of  earthly  vanities  ?  "  (Blaikie).  He  declines  them,  not
because  they  are  sinful  and  worthless  in  themselves,  but  because  they  are  unsuitable
to  him.  His  heart  is  set  on  other  pleasures ;  his  immediate  duties  are  determined  and
sufficient  for  his  strength.  He  will  not  take  new  burdens  on  himself,  nor  be  a  burden
to  others.  He  will  accompany  the  kiug  "a  little  way,"  to  show  his  loyal  devotion,
and  then  return  (2  Kiogs  iv.  13).  "  With  all  the  dignity  of  self-respect,  with  the
courtesy  of  a  true  gentleman,  undervaluing  not  the  king's  offers,  but  his  own  service  to
him,  with  the  prudent  love  of  a  father  for  the  son  whom  he  recommends  to  his  kind-
ness, having  outlived  nothing  really  belonging  to  the  true  character  of  the  life  of  man,
he  returned  with  the  royal  kiss  and  blessing,  master  of  his  own  will,  to  his  own  place  "
(W.  Eomanis).

IV.  His  cheeished  remembrance  of  parents  and  the  familiar  scenes  or  his
EARLY  DAYS.  "  Let  thy  servant,  I  pray  thee,  turn  back,"  jetc.  (ver.  37).  His  thoughts
turn  back  to  his  native  place,  his  childhood,  his  father  and  his  mother,  whom  he  must
have  loved  and  honoured  (Exod.  xx.  12) ;  and  the  memory  of  whom,  tender,  affectionate,
and  reverent,  is  a  fountain  of  pure  and  undying  joy  in  his  breast.  How  much  does  the
happiness  of  old  age  depend  upon  its  memories  1  Whilst  in  one  case  old  age  is
tormented  by  the  recollection  of  "  the  pleasures  of  sin,"  in  another  it  is  gladdened  by
the  recollection  of  the  practice  of  piety ;  and  such  lecollectious  mingle  with  and,  ia
great  measure,  determine  ita  anticipations.

"Son  of  Jesse,  let  me  go;

Why  should  princely  honours  stay  mef
VThere  the  streams  of  Gilead  flow,
Where  the  light  first  met  mine  eyei
Thither  would  I  turn  and  die ;
Where  my  parents'  ashes  lie,
King  of  leiael  I  bid  them  lay  me."

(Sigonmey.)

V.  H»  oonbtant  desirb  for  rest  in  Mb  "long  home  "  (Eccles.  xii.  5),  "  the  house
of  eternity."  It  is  now  a  pervadiog  and  increasing  feeling.  He  longs  for  repose  in  the
sacred  spot  where  his  parents  lie,  as  a  pilgrim  longs  for  home.  The  grave  for  him  has
no  terrors.  "  He  looks  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations,"  etc.  (Heb.  xi.  10,  16) ;  and
desires  to  be  "  gathered  with  his  fathers,"  and  to  be  for  ever  at  rest  in  God  (1  Sam.
XXV.  1 ;  ch.  vii.  12 ;  Ps.  xlix.  15  ;  Prov.  xiv.  32 ;  Dan.  xiL  13).  "  Lord,  now  lettest
thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace"  (Luke  ii.  29).  "  A  man  should  still  be  bound  for
home  as  you  see  all  creatures  be.  Let  a  bird  be  far  from  the  nest,  and  it  grow  towavda
night,  she  will  home  even  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.  Every  poor  beast,  and  every
.,reature,  though  the  entertainment  be  but  slender  at  home,  yet  if  you  let  it  slip  loose,
it  will  home  as  fast  as  it  can.  Everything  tends  ti  its  place;  there  is  its  safety,  there
is  its  rest,  there  it  is  preserved,  there  it  is  quiet.  Now,  since  it  is  so  with  every
creature,  why  should  it  not  be  so  with  us  ?  Why  should  not  we  be  for  our  home  ?
This  is  not  our  home)  here  is  not  our  rest.    That  is  our  home  where  our  chief  friendf


CH  XIX.  1—43.]  TKE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  487

be,  where  our  Father  God  is,  where  our  Husband  Christ  is,  where  our  chief  kiudred  and
acquaintance  be,  all  the  prophets  and  apostles  and  martyrs  of  God  departed  are ;  that
is  cur  home,  and  thither  should  we  go  "  (R.  Harris).  "  I  am  now  passing  through  the
latest  stage  of  my  pilgrimage  on  earth.  My  sun  is  speedily  going  down ;  but  ere  it
wholly  disappear,  its  parting  beams  stream  sweetly  forth  upon  the  face  of  all  things,
and  cover  all  the.  horizon  with  a  blaze  of  glory.  My  Father's  house  shines  bright
before  my  eyes.  Its  opening  door  invites  me  onward,  and  fills  me  with  an  earnest
longing  to  be  safe  at  home.  My  richest  treasures  and  my  dearest  hopes  are  all  packed
up  and  gone  before,  while  my  whole  soul  is  on  the  wing  to  follow  after  "  (W.  Gilpin).
VI.  His  CONSIDERATE  REGARD  for  the  Welfare  of  those  who  survive  him.  "Let  thy
servant  Chimham  go  over,"  etc.  (vers.  38,  40).  He  is  not  wholly  absorbed  in  thoughts
of  past  time  or  of  his  final  rest ;  but  is  interested  in  the  younger  man  now  present  with
him,  and  sympathizes  with  his  enjoyments  and  aspirations.  He  remembers  his  own
youth.  What  he  declines  for  himself,  he  seeks  and  obtains  for  his  son  (Jer.  xli.  17).
"  When  the  king  could  not  persuade  the  father,  he  gladly  accepts  the  charge  of  his
son.  He  seems  to  feel  as  if  the  care  of  this  young  man  would  bring  comfort  to  his
heart,  which  was  still  bleeding  for  the  loss  of  Absalom.  It  was  not  in  lightness  that
he  made  the  request,  and  when  on  his  death-bed  he  remembered  it  and  charged  Solomon
to  show  kindness  to  the  son  for  the  sake  of  what  his  father  had  done  for  him  when  he
fled  from  the  face  of  Absalom.  In  Barzillai  we  have  (1)  a  man  who  knows  that  he  is
'  old,  but  is  not  distressed  by  the  thought  of  it ;  (2)  who  is  rich,  but  is  satisfied  with
his  natural  possessions ;  (3)  of  long  experience,  who  has  kept  up  his  love  of  simple
pleasures ;  (4)  and  is  attached  to  the  past,  but  does  not  distrust  the  future  "  (John  Ker).
"  It  is  a  very  reasonable  conjecture  of  Grotius,  that  David,  having  a  patrimony  in  the
field  of  Bethlehem,  the  place  of  his  nativity,  bestowed  it  on  Barzillai's  son ;  and  from
thence  this  place  took  the  name  of  Chimham,  which  remained  unto  the  days  of
Jeremiah  "  (Patrick).  His  descendants  continue  for  ages  to  partake  of  the  fruit  of  his
piety  and  beneficence,  to  perpetuate  his  name  and  honour  his  memory  (Ezra  ii.  61 ;
Neh.  viL  63 ;  Ps.  ciL  28).— D.

Ver.  6. — Loving  enemies  and  hating  friends.  "  Thou  lovest  thine  enemies,  and
hatest  thy  friends."  Joab's  remonstrance  with  David  was  rude,  and  in  the  language
of  exaggeration  ;  yet  in  substance  it  was  wise,  as  the  issue  proved.  The  king's  lamen-
tations did  show  excessive  love  for  his  deceased  son,  who  had  been  his  deadly  enemy ;
and  his  abandonment  of  himself  to  grief  when  he  ought  to  have  been  thanking  his
brave  friends  as  they  returned  from  the  battle,  and  congratulating  them  on  the  victory
they  had  won  for  him,  did  indicate  a  present  insensibility  to  their  services  and  claims
which  might  easily  be  construed  as  enmity.  It  is,  however,  no  unusual  thing  for  men
to  love  their  enemies  and  hate  their  friends ;  or  at  least,  by  their  conduct,  to  give  good
reason  for  others  to  charge  them  with  doing  so.

I.  Those  do  so  who  love  error  and  hate  the  truth.  For  truth  is  one  of  our
best  friends,  error  one  of  our  worst  enemies.  Moral  and  religious  truth  especially  is
life,  health,  guidance,  happiness,  to  the  soul ;  it  leads  to  God  and  goodness  and  heaven.
But  error  in  such  matters  is  death,  disease,  delusion ;  producing  false  peace  and  leading
to  destruction.  Yet  men  often  love  the  errors  which  favour  what  they  are  inclined
to,  and  hate  the  truth  which  shows  them  their  duties,  sins,  and  dangers.  They  "love
darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil"  (John  iii.  19).  "  Fools  hate
knowledge  "  (ProT.  i.  22).  Hence  they  love  false  teachers  and  hate  the  true.  "  I  hate
him,"  said  Ahab  of  Mioaiah,  "  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  good  concerning  me,  but  evU  "
(1  Kings  xxii.  8).

II.  Those  who  love  their  lower  bather  than  their  higher  self.  Our  lower
nature  is  good  in  itself,  but  is  very  prone  to  run  to  excess,  and  become  evil.  Then,
from  a  friend,  it  is  transformed  into  an  enemy.  Our  higher  nature  is  a  friend,  espe-
cially when  informed  and  directed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Man's  worth  and  blessedness
depend  on  his  obeying  the  latter  and  subduing  the  former.  Too  often,  however,  he
takes  the  opposite  course,  yielding  himself  to  the  government  of  the  flesh,  and  resisting
the  promptings  of  the  spirit.

III.  Those  who  love  the  wicked  and  hate  tee  good.  Associating  with  the
former  and  finding  pleasure  in  their  practices,  but  avoiding  the  society  of  the  latter ;


488  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xix.  1— 4a

loving  flattirers,  and  hating  faitliful  reprovers  and  advisers.  Ungodly  and  unholy
men  are  necessarily,  though  it  may  be  unconsciously  and  unintentionally,  the  enemies
of  the  souls  of  those  whom  they  influence,  whether  by  conveisation  or  example ;  and
the  more  attractive  they  are,  so  much  the  more  dangerous.  "  Evil  company  doth
corrupt  good  manners"  (1  Cor.  xv.  33,  Revised  Version).

IV.  Those  who  delight  in  bad  books,  and  dislike  and  neolect  good  ones.
Good  books  are  good  friends,  promoting  in  us  that  which  is  good.  The  Bible  is  the
best  of  books.'  Bad  books,  books  which  suggest  and  foster  evil,  arc  enemies;  and  the
more  they  interest  their  readers,  the  more  they  injuie  them.  Yet  many-deliglit  in
them,  and  dislike  the  bouks  which  would  profit  them.

V.  Those,  in  a  word,  who  love,  if  not  Satan,  his  ways,  and  live  in  bnmitt
WITH  God  and  Christ.  Satan  is  our  chief  enemy,  the  head  and  ruler  of  all  other
spiritual  foes.  He  seeks  our  ruin  by  manifold  devices,  and,  so  that  we  serve  him,  is
quite  content  that  we  should  do  so  in  the  fashion  we  most  approve.  We  may  join
which  company  of  his  servants — the  coarser  or  the  more  refined,  the  open  or  the  secret
— we  may  prefer.  But  to  follow  him  in  any  way  is,  in  effect,  to  love  our  worst  enemy,
Christ,  on  the  other  hand,  and  God  in  him,  is  our  best  Friend,  who  loves  us  most  truly
and  most  wisely,  who  has  made  greater  sacrifices  for  us  than  any  other  can  make,  who
has  done  for  us  what  no  other  can  do,  who  proffers  us  blessings  beyond  the  power  of
any  other  to  confer,  who  exalts  those  who  love  him  to  a  position  of  honour  and  happi-
ness to  which  no  other  can  raise  their  friends,  and  lives  on  to  bless  them  when  others
die  and  pass  away.  To  reject  him,  to  refuse  him  the  love,  allegiance,  and  obedience
which  he  claims,  is,  in  effect,  to  hate  the  Friend  who  is  most  of  all  needed  by  us,  and
most  worthy  to  be  loved  with  all  the  power  of  loving  which  our  hearts  possess.

Let  those  to  whom  these  representations  apply  reflect  on  the  sin  and  folly  of  which
they  are  guilty ;  the  incalculable  good  they  are  losing ;  the  incalculable  evils  they  are
choosing.    Their  eyes  will  at  length  be  opened ;  may  it  be  in  time  1 — G.  W.

Ver.  9. — Late  reflection  and  appreciation.  The  rebels  against  King  David  having
been  defeated,  and  their  chosen  leader  slain,  they  bethink  themselves  of  their  position
and  of  the  claims  of  their  injured  sovereign ;  and  begin  to  stir  up  each  other  to  obtain
his  return  and  reinstatement.  Their  words  are  obviously  true ;  but  the  facts  they  now
recognize  were  as  truly  facts  when  they  rose  in  rebellion.  It  was  only  their  feeling
with  respect  to  them  that  had  changed.  So  it  is  commonly.  Under  the  excitement
of  sinful  feeling,  the  most  obvious  truths  are  forgotten  and  neglected.  Well  is  it  when
there  is  a  reawakening  to  their  significance,  and  a  consequent  return  to  the  path  of
duty.  Especially  desirable  is  it  that  all  who  are  living  without  any  due  feeling  of  the
claims  of  their  great  King  should  become  sensible  of  them,  and  begin  to  render  them
a  practical  recognition.

I.  The  actual  and  abiding  claims  of  Christ  to  be  accemed  akd  obeyed  ,a«
King,  1.  His  nature.  Divine  and  human;  including  all  qualiSiLations  for  "rule.
2.  His  Divine  appointment.  Signified  in  manifoM  ways.  3.  The  deliverance  he  has
wrought.  It  is  here  said  of  David,  "  The  king  saved  us,"  etc.  Our  Lord  has  saved  us
in  a  mor?  marvellous  way,  from  enemies  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  heathen  that
harassed  Israel.  He  has  conquered,  in  personal  conflict  and  through  suffering  unto
death,  Satan,  the  world,  sin,  and  death.  He  has  thus  "  saved  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our
enemies,"  including  those  that,  like  the  Philistines  in  relation  to  Israel,  are  nearest  to
us  and  most  ready  and  able  to  harass  us — our  own  special  besetting  sins.  True,  the
deliverance  is  not  yet  completely  accomplished  in  actual  experience ;  but  it  is  assured,
and  as  really  ours,  if  we  are  Christ's,  as  if  we  were  already  perfectly  freed  from  all
tvil.

II.  The  insensibility  to  these  claims  which  commonly  peevaHiS.  Looking
at  the  lives  of  most  men,  even  where  Christ  is  made  known,  it  is  painfully  manifest
that  they  have  no  due  sense  of  his  rights  and  their  duty  to  him;  for  they  do  not
submit  their  minds,  hearts,  and  lives  to  his  government.  1.  Causes  of  such  insensi-
hiUty.  (I)  A  depraved  nature,  whose  spiritual  sensibilities  are  further  suppressed  and
beuuniV)ed  by  the  practice  of  sin.  (2)  Absorption  in  worldly  pursuits.  Leaving  no
opportunity  for  higher  matters  to  attract  attention,  no  time  to  think  of  them.  (3)
Unconcern  as  to  the  enemies  from  whom  Christ  delivers.    No  conviction  of  un ;  no


OH.  XIX.  1—43.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  488

sense  of  the  evil  of  it;  no  desire  for  rescue  from  its  guilt  or  power.  The  Deliverer,
therefore,  excites  no  real  interest.  (4)  Familiarity  with  the  truth.  The  habit  of
hearing,  or  reading,  or  even  repeating  it,  without  accepting  it ;  or  of  assenting  to  it
without  really  believing  it;  or  of  accepting  (in  a  sense)  the  atonement,  and  relying  on
Jesui  for  pardon,  without  receiving  him  as  King.  The  process  also  of  indulging  feeling
and  sentiment  about  Christ,  without  rendering  obedience ;  and  of  resisting  the  feelings
which  prompt  to  obedience,  thus  resisting  and  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  this  way
the  gospel  becomes  a  means  of  hardening  the  he»rt  against  ilself.  (5)  The  attractions
of  some  pretender  to  the  throne.  As  Absalom  "  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel "
(ch.  XT.  6)  by  his  youth,  beauty,  activity,  assiduous  attentions,  insinuating  address,
and  hints  as  to  the  defects  of  his  father's  government,  and  the  improvements  which  he
would  make  if  he  were  in  power ;  so  the  hearts  of  many  are  withdrawn  from  the  Lord
Jesus  by  the  attractions  of  some  newly  revived  system  of  error  in  philosophy  or
religion,  or  anti-religion,  of  which  the  novelty  (to  them)  is  charming,  and  the  repre-
sentations of  human  nature  more  flattering,  and  the  demands  less  exacting.  The  old
king  comes  to  be  regnrded  and  treated  as  worn-out,  quite  unsuited  to  the  needs  of  an
enlightened  and  scientific  age ;  and  the  young  pretenders  are  welcomed,  one  by  one
class,  and  another  by  another,  with  shouts  of  joy  and  pssans  of  anticipated  victory.
2.  Effects  of  such  insensibility.  (1)  Negatively,  in  the  prevention  of  faith  and  love,
loyal  obedience  and  active  service.  (2)  Positively,  by  leading  to  disaffection  and  active
rebellion ;  as  in  the  case  of  Israel  and  David.

III.  The  happy  awakening  which  is  often  experienced.  As  in  the  case  of  the
Israelites  in  respect  to  David.  This  may  be  produced :  1.  By  calamity.  As  tne
Israelites  were  awakened  by  defeat  and  disaster.  Troubles  stir  the  conscience,  lead
the  soul  to  look  around  for  support,  throw  an  unusual  light  on  objects,  reveal  the
vanity  of  cherished  dependencies,  prepare  for  due  appreciation  of  those  which  are
solid  and  satisfying ;  and  so  lead  to  a  right  appreciation  of  Christ.  2.  By  impressive
presentation  of  forgotten  facts.  As  by  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  each  other,  reminding
of  their  obligations  to  David,  and  the  ill  requital  he  had  received  from  them.  It  may
be  a  sermon  heard  with  unaccustomed  interest,  or  some  part  of  the  Holy  Book  read
with  a  new  perception  of  the  significance  and  importance  of  its  teaching,  or  the  appeals
of  a  friend,  or  the  statements  of  a  tract,  or  words  of  parents  or  teachers  long  ago,
recurring  with  new  power  to  the  mind;  whatever  it  be  tlat  stirs  the  heart  to  con-
sideration and  renders  it  sensible  of  the  rights  and  worth  of  Christ,  blessed  are  the
means,  blessed  the  moment  when  such  efiects  are  produced.  3.  Always  by  the  enlight-
ening and  convincing  Spirit.  Whose  work  it  is  to  reveal  and  glorify  the  Si^n  of  God
(John  xvi.  14).

IV.  The  change  procuoed  by  this  awakening.  Similar  to  that  in  the  text.
1.  In  conduct.  (1)  Return  to  allegiance,  loyalty,  and  service  to  the  rightful  Sovereign.
(2)  Incitement  of  others  to  return.  2.  In  position.  The  returning  rebels  are  accepted,
and  restored  to  the  privileges  of  faithful  subjects.  Not  because  the  heavenly  King  is^
like  David,  dependent  on  his  subjects,  needing  them  as  much  as  they  him,  but  of  pure
grace.  However  long  they  may  have  been  insensible  and  rebellious,  on  coming  to  a
sense  of  their  duty,  and  seeking  forgiveness,  they  are  pardoned  and  restored  to  favour.

Lastly,  the  awakening  may  come  too  late,  producing  terror  and.  remorse,  but  not
repentance,  and  importunate  prayers  which  are  unavailing  (see  Luke  liii.  24 — 28).
■— G.  W.

Vers.  24 — 30. — Inability  hindering  desired  service.  Although  some  are  disposed  to
accept  Ziba's  account  of  his  master's  conduct  (ch.  xvi.  3)  rather  than  Mephibosheths
own,  as  given  in  these  verses,  there  seems  to  be  no  just  reason  to  doubt  his  truth  and
sincerity.  He  did  not  go  with  David  because,  owing  to  his  lameness  and  the  treachery
and  cunning  of  Ziba,  he  was  unable  to  do  so.  The  narrative  suggests  such  thoughts  as
follow.

I.  Inability  debars  many  Christians  frou  some  demonstrations  of  lovk  and
LOYALTY  TO  THEIR  KiNO  WHICH  THEY  WOULD  FAIN  MAKE.  Indeed,  every  one,  hoW'
ever  strong  in  some  respects,  is  weak  in  others.  The  inability  may  be  in  body  or
mind,  in  understanding,  or  heart,  or  speech,  or  in  purse ;  but  to  its  extent  it  disables
from  forms  of  service  which  others  can  adopt.    We  can  only  serve  Christ  with  the


490  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xrx.  1—43.

faculties  and  powers  we  have.  To  attempt  what  we  cannot  accomplish  is  to  be  hin-
drances rather  than  helps.

II.  Inability  in  some  kbspeots  will  not  prevent  the  tkue-hbabtbd  from  MAKma

SUCH  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  LOVE  AND  LOYALTY  AS  AEE  WITHIN  THEIR  POWEB.      If  Mephi-

bosheth  could  not  follow  David  in  his  exile,  or  take  part  in  the  contest,  he  could  mourn
for  him,  and  exhibit  signs  of  mourning ;  and  this  he  did.  He  thus  showed  a  courage  as
great  as,  or  greater  than,  that  of  those  who  took  part  in  the  war.  In  like  manner,  every
one,  however  feeble,  poor,  or  obscure, may  do  something  for  Christ;  and,  if  his  heart  be
right,  he  will.  He  who  cannot  preach  can  speak  to  a  neighbour.  He  who  cannot  say
much  for  Christ  can  bring  others  where  they  can  hear  oi'  him,  or  give  them  an  instruc-
tive book  or  tract.  He  who  cannot  give  much  money  towards  the  evangelization  ol
the  worli  can  give  a  little,  and  at  least  can  pray.  He  who  cannot  found  a  hospital
can  visit  the  sick  poor.  All  have  some  power,  and,  according  to  the  measure  of  their
power,  are  responsible.  All  who  love  their  King  will  employ  such  ability  as  they  have
in  serving  him.  And  the  service  is  accepted  by  him  which  comes  from  a  true  heart
and  is  according  to  the  ability  possessed.  Work  or  gift  for  Christ  is  valued  by  him,
not  for  its  quantity,  or  even  quality  of  the  material,  or  merely  mental  kind,  but  for  the
love  to  him  which  it  expresses;  and  many  a  man  who  wins  the  plaudits  of  men  for  his
talents,. his  outward  success  in  religious  work,  or  his  large  gifts  for  its  snstentation,  is
less  pleasing  to  Christ  than  some  poor  and  humble  friend  of  his  who  can  give  and  do
but  little,  but  thinks  much  of  him,  mourns  in  secret  the  dishonour  done  to  him,  and
prays  without  ceasing  for  his  triumph.  Ziba's  handsome  and  timely  presents  were
really  of  far  less  worth  than  helpless  Mephibosheth's  mourning  and  self-neglect.

HI.  Inability  is  liable  to  be  misunderstood  and  misrbpeesented.  Not  only
by  the  malicious  or  designing,  as  here,  but  by  the  inconsiderate.  Men  judge  of  others
by  their  own  peculiar  standards.  If  truly  zealous  in  a  good  cause,  they  show  their  zeal
in  the  way  most  natural  and  available  to  themselves,  and  are  ready  to  condemn  as
lukewarm  those  who  do  not  adopt  their  methods,  though  these  may  with  equal  zeal
seek  the  same  ends  by  the  means  natural  and  available  to  them.  Even  David  judged
harshly  and  unjustly  of  Mephibosheth.  It  was,  in  truth,  unreasonable  to  expect  his
lame  friend  to  accompany  him.  He  could  only  have  been  a  burden.  It  was  absurdly
imjust  to  accept  Ziba's  insinuation  that  his  master  was  hoping  to  be  placed  on  the
vacant  throne.  But  judgments  equally  unjust  are  constantly  being  pronounced  upon
zealous  servants  of  Christ,  whose  only  fault  is  that  they  are  not  of  the  same  order  of
mind,  or  cannot  practise  the  same  bustling  activity  as  their  accusers,  or  have  not  equal
incomes,  or  equal  physical  strength  or  energy,  or  do  not  care  to  exhibit  their  "  zeal  for
the  Lord  "  (2  Kings  x.  16)  in  the  same  manner  or  to  secure  similar  results.  Happily,
the  King  knows  h^  servants  better  than  they  know  each  other.

IV.  Inability  is  often  associated  with  qualities  that  reconcilb  to  the
DISADVANTAGES  WHICH  BELONG  TO  IT.  Mephiboshcth  was  enabled  to  bear  meekly
what  he  had  to  endure,  because  he  was  humble,  thankful,  sincerely  and  disinterestedly
devoted  to  the  king,  and  ready  to  submit  without  murmuring  to  his  will.  Similar
qualities  are  of  great  value  to  those  servants  of  our  Lord  who  are  deficient  in  some
endowments  or  possessions  by  which  others  are  equipped  for  Christian  service.  1.
Thankfulness  for,  and  contentment  with,  the  powers  and  opportunities  granted  So  them,
and  the  hind  a/nd  measure  of  $u,ccess  accorded  to  them.  2,  Hwmility  a/rising  from  the
consciousness  of  their  defects  or  wiworthiness.  3.  Absence  of  envy  of  those  who  are
more  abundantly  favoured  in  respect  to  talents  or  success,  4.  Consaousness  of  sincere
devotion  to  the  King,  however  men  may  reflect  on  them.  5.  Joy  that,  hy  whomsoever  and
in  whatever  way,  the  King's  cause  is  triumphing.  Such  qualities  are  frequently  found
associated  with  deficient  abilities,  and  go  far  to  compensate  those  who  possess  them  for
the  lack  of  power,  or  obvious  efficiency,  or  appreciation  of  them  and  their  work,  which
may  be  their  lot.     Let  the  less  liberally  endowed  cultivate  them.

V.  Inability  will  at  length  be  explained  and  justified.  When  the  King
comes  back,  all  his  servants  will  receive  commendation  and  reward,  not  according  to
their  several  abilities,  but  according  to  their  fidelity.  Mistakes  will  be  rectified,  ui^ust
judgments  reversed.  Many  a  plaudit  will  be  hushed ;  many  an  inflated  reputation  will
collapse;  many  •  brave-looking  building  will  be  reduced  to  a  mass  of  rubbish  by  the
searching  fires,  and  the  builder  put  to  shame,  if  not  utterly  rejected  (1  C!or.  iii.  12 — 16)^


CH.  XX.  1—26.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


491


On  the  other  hand,  many  an  obscure  and  perhaps  disregarded  servant  of  Christ  will
find  himself  unexpectedly  applauded  and  exalted.  "  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee,"  etc.  ?
(Matt.  xxT.  37).

Wherefore :  1.  "  Judge  nothing  lefore  the  time  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  5).  2.  Let  Ghristians  of
limited  pmoers  and  opportunities  he  encouraged  to  do  their  ieft.  Their  Lord  appreciates
their  spirit  and  services,  though  men  may  mistake  and  misjudge ;  and  he  will  pass  a
juster  judgment  than  David  did  (ver.  29)  in  the  case  of  Mephibosheth. — G.  W.

Ver.  35. — The  privations  of  old  age.  Barzillai  graphically  depicts  these  as  experi-
enced by  himself.  All  old  men  have  not  exactly  the  same  experience ;  but  all  who
live  to  a  great  age  must  expect  a  similar  diminution  of  their  powers.

L  The  pbitations  op  the  aged.  1.  Enfeebled  or  annihilated  powers.  Blunted  or
extinct  senses ;  dulness  or  loss  of  sight,  hearing,  taste,  smelling ;  feebleness  of  body
and  mind.  Consequent  inability  for  active  employments.  Loss  of  the  pleasures  which
the  exercise  of  vigorous  faculties  confers.  2.  Increasing  dependence  on  others.  Possibly,
unlike  Barzillai,  for  the  means  of  subsistence ;  certainly  for  much  besides.  Hence  the
old  man  is  apt  to  become,  and  feel  himself  to  be,  "  a  burden,"  putting  the  kindness  and
patience  of  others  to  a  severe  test.  The  discomfort  arising  from  such  dependence  is
often  very  great.  3.  The  sense  of  loneliness.  Sometimes  the  aged  survive  all  who
have  loved  and  cared  for  them,  and,  if  not,  they  commonly  feel  themselves  cut  off  from
the  interests  and  pleasures  of  the  new  generation.

II.  How  THKSB  PRIVATIONS  SHOITLD  BE  BORNE.  1.  With  cheerful  Submission  and
patience.  Eemembering  that  the  orderof  nature  which  brings  such  ills  to  the  aged,  and
the  circumstances  which  occasion  their  own  particular  troubles,  are  the  appointment  of
the  infinitely  wise  and  good  Creator  and  Father.  Eecalling  also  their  many  years  of
vigorous  faculty  and  lively  enjoyment,  and  cherishing  a  gratitude  which  will  suppress
discontent.  2.  With  thankfulness  for  what  remains.  The  love  and  care  which  provide
for,  or  minister  to,  their  needs  and  alleviate  their  troubles.  Above  all,  the  unchanging
love  of  God  and  the  Redeemer,  and  the  spiritual  blessings  hence  enjoyed.  3.  With
watchfulness  against  the  temptations  incident  to  old  age.    Such  as  those  to  fretfulness,

.irritability,  impatience,  envy  of  the  young,  and  needless  interference  with  their  enjoy-
ments. The  revival  with  new  power  of  old  sinful  propensities,  ill  tempers,  and  bad
habits.  4.  With  joyful  hope.  Of  speedy  deliverance  from  all  hurdens  and  troubles,
and  the  lecommencement  of  life  with  renewed  and  perfected  energies.  Nothing  can
keep  the  aged  Christian  long  out  of  heaven.

III.  How  OTHERS  SHOULD  REGARD  THEM.  1.  With  rcspectful  tendemcss,  sympathy,
and  readiness  to  alleviate  them.  2.  With  diminished  desire  for  the  great  prolongation
of  their  own  lives.  3.  With  steadfast  aim  and  endeavour  so  to  live  that,  if  old  age  come,
it  may  not  he  oppressed  with  the  needless  hv/rdens  and  anxieties  which  a  godless  life  leadi
to.  Let  the  young  keep  in  mind  the  admonition,  "Bemember  now  thy  Creator  in  the
days  of  thy  youth,  while  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the  years  draw  nigh^  when  thou
thalt  e»j,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them  "  (Eccles.  zii.  1). — G.  Wj


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEH  XX.


Ver.  I. — There  happened  to  he  there  a
man  of  Belial.  The  fierce  words  of  the
men  of  Judah  led  to  evil  results.  It  was
a  time  when  all  wise  and  thoughtful  per-
sons would  have  laboured  for  peace,  and
tried  to  soothe  and  appease  the  angry
passions  fomented  by  the  late  war.  Instead
of  this,  the  men  of  Judah  irritated  the
Israelites  with  insult  and  contumely,  and
the  day.  Intended  as  one  of  rejoicing  and  of
the  restoration  of  David  to  his  throne  by
common  consent,  saw  the  lebelliou  break


forth  afresh.  Among  those  who  had  taken
part  in  the  discussion  with  Judah  was
Sheba,  a  man  of  Belial,  that  is,  a  worthless
fellow,  hut  possibly  possessed  of  rank  and
influence;  for,  according  to  many  commen-
tators, hen-Bichri  does  not  mean  the  son
of  Bichri,  but "  a  descendant  of  Becher,"  the
second  son  of  Benjamin  (Gen.  xlvi.  21),  and
possibly  the  representative  of  the  mish-
pachah  descemled  from  him.  But  it  ii
remarkable  that  this  son  of  Benjamin  dis-
appears from  the  genealogies,  and  that  no
mishpachafa  of  Bichrites  is  mentioned  either
in  Xumb,  xxvi.  SS  or  in  I  Chron,  viiL  1.    In


♦92


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  ioa.  xx.  1— 2e.


both  places  Ashbel,  who  ia  ennmerated  as
the  third  son  in  Gen.  xlvi.  21,  takes  the
second  place.  We  must  be  content,  there-
fore, to  leave  this  matter  in  uncertainty;
but  evidently  Sheba  had  come  with  Shimei
nod  Ziba  to  welcome  David  back,  and,  with
the  rest  of  the  thousand  Benjamites,  had
rushed  with  loud  cries  of  welcome  across
the  Jordan,  and,  but  for  this  altercation,
would  have  remained  faithful.  But  tribal
jealousies  were  always  ready  to  break  forth,
and  were  a  permanent  source  of  weakness ;
and  now,  stung  by  some  jibe  at  Benjamin,
Sheba  gave  orders  to  a  trumpeter  to  give
the  signal  for  the  breaking  up  of  the  meet-
ing, and,  as  is  commonly  the  case  in  large
and  excited  gatherings,  the  crowd  obeyed
the  unauthorized  dictation  of  one  man.  His
words  are  contemptuous  enough.  David  is
no  king,  but  a  private  person^  and  the  son,
not  of  a  great  chief,  but  of  Jesse  merely,  a
yeoman  of  Bethlehem.  Every  mam  to  his
tents.  "  To  his  tent"  meant  "to  his  home"
(see  oh.  xviii.  17).  But  this  withdrawal
home  signified  the  rejection  of  David's
government.  Almost  the  same  words  are
used  in  1  Kings  xii.  16.

Ver.  2. — So  every  man  of  Israel,  etc.;
literally,  so  all  the  men  of  Israel  went  up
from  after  David  after  Sheba.  They  had
come  down  to  Jordan  to  bring  the  king  back
in  triumph,  but,  on  finding  that  the  men  of
Judah  had  forestalled  them,  they  had  a
quarrel,  and  as  no  one  endeavoured  to
allay  it  and  mediate  between  them,  it  ended
in  open  revolt,  and  they  transferred  their
allegiance  to  the  worthless  Sheba.  Nothing
could  more  clearly  prove  the  want  of  co-
hesion among  the  tribes,  and  how  little
Saul  and  David  had  done  to  knit  them  to-
gether. We  need  not,  therefore,  seek  for
any'  deep  reasons  of  state,  or  for  proofs  of
failure  in  David's  government,  to  account
for  the  rapid  success  of  Absalom's  rebellion.
Israel  was  »  confused  mass  of  discordant
elements,  kept  in  a  state  of  repulsion  by  the
sturdy  independence  of  the  tribes  and  their
jealousy  one  of  another.  Even  David's
victories  had  failed  to  infuse  into  them  any
feeling  of  national  unity,  nor  did  the  long
glory  of  Solomon's  reign  and  the  magni-
ficence of  the  temple  succeed  better.  The
kings  were  not  as  yet  much  more  than  the
judges  had  been — leaders  in  war,  but  with
little  authority  in  times  of  peace.  What  is
so  extraordinary  is  that  David  had  lost  the
allegiance  of  his  own  tribe;  and  it  now,  on
returning  to  its  duty,  spoiled  by  its  violence
the  whole  matter.  The  day  must  have  been
a  great  disappointment  to  David.  He  was
to  have  gone  back  conducted  gloriously  by
all  the  tribes  of  Israel ;  but  he  had  fancied
tliat  Judah  was  holding  back,  and  grieving
over  Absalom.    He  had  secret  dealing  there-


fore with  it,  in  order  that  the  day  might  not
be  marred  by  its  absence.  It  came,  but  only
to  do  mischief ;  and  David  went  home  with
only  its  escort,  and  with  all  the  rest  in  open
rebellion.

Ver.  3. — ^They  were  shut  up.  We  are  not
to  conclude  that  aU  widows  had  to  live  in
seclusion,  but  only  that  those  women  who
belonged  to  tlie  royal  harem,  but  had  been
taken  by  another,  were  not  allowed  to  return
to  it,  but  condemned  to  a  sort  of  imprison-
ment, living  in  widowhood.  This  is  ex-
plained by  the  Chaldee  as  lasting  only
during  David's  life,  its  rendering  being, "  in
widowhood  while  their  husband  was  alive."

Ver.  4. — Then  said  the  king  to  Amasa.
David  thus  takes  the  first  step  towards  de-
priving Joab  of  the  command  (see  ch.  xix.
13).  This  was  a  most  unwise  step,  however
guilty  Joab  may  have  been  in  slaying  Absa-
lom. With  all  his  faults,  Joab  had  always
been  faithful  to  David,  and  it  was  chiefly
bis  skill  in  war  and  statesmanlike  qualities
which  had  raised  the  kingdom  to  a  position
of  great  power.  Just  now,  too,  he  had
crushed  with  smaller  forces  a  rebellion  in
which  Amasa  had  taken  the  lead.  To  cast
him  off  and  put  Amasa  in  his  place  might
please  conspirators,  and  reconcile  them  to
their  defeat,  but  it  would  certainly  offend
all  those  who  had  been  faithful  to  David  in
his  troubles.  Throughout  David  acts  as
one  whose  affections  were  stronger  than  his
sense  of  duty,  and  his  conduct  goes  far  to
justify  Joab's  complaint,  "  This  day  I  per-
ceive, that  if  Absalom  had  lived,  and  all  we
had  died  this  day,  theil  it  had  pleased  thee
well "  (oh.  xix.  6).  If  David,  in  the  adminis-
tration of  his  kingdom,  acted  with  as  little
forethought  as  in  the  slight  he  oast  upon
the  ten  tribes  in  negotiating  with  Judah  to
be  the  first  to  restore  him,  as  it  had  been
the  first  tribe  to  rebel,  instead  of  waiting  for
the  rest,  and  doing  his  best  to  make  the  day
of  his  return  one  of  general  concord  and
good  will ;  or  with  as  little  justice  as  in  the
matter  of  Ziba  and  Mephibosheth ;  or  with
.  as  little  tact  and  good  sense  as  in  substi-
tuting at  the  end  of  a  revolt  the  rebel
general  for  the  brave  soldier  who  had
"saved  his  life,  and  the  lives  of  his  sons
and  of  his  daughters,  and  the  lives  of  his
wives  and  of  his  concubines  "  (ch.  xix  5) ; —
we  cannot  wonder  that  he  had  failed  to
secure  the  allegiance  of  a  race  so  self-willed
and  stubborn  as  the  Israelites.  One  cannot
help  half  suspecting  that  Joab  had  used  the
power  he  had  gained  over  the  king  by  the
part  he  had  taken  in  the  mnrder  of  Uriah
tyrannically,  and  for  omel  purposes,  and
that  David  groaned  under  the  burden.  But
if  so,  it  was  hia  own  sin  that  was  finding
him  out.

Ver.  5. — ^Ee  tarried  longer  than  the  sat


OH.  XX.  1—26.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


493


time.  But  not  longer  than  was  to  be  ex-
pected. For  the  appointment  was  so  sur-
prising that  everybody  must  have  been
agape  with  astonishment.  They  wonld
natnrally  have  expected  that  Amasa  would
be  punished.  Instead  of  this,  be  is  com-
missioned to  gather  the  militia  in  David's
name.  And  men  would  hesitate  about
joining  such  a  leader.  Was  he  really  loyal  ?
or  would  he  embark  them  in  a  new  rebellion  ?
And  what  would  Joab  do?  He  was  not  a
man  likely  to  bear  such  a  slight  tamely,  and
David  ought  to  have  foreseen  that  he  was
■owing  for  himself  a  crop  of  discord  and
enmity.

Yer.  6. — David  said  to  Abishai.  David
thus  gives  the  command  to  the  younger
brother,  and  we  find  in  ver.  7  that  even
"Joab's  men,"  his  own  special  troop,  were
placed  under  Abishai's  command.  There
seems  always  to  have  been  a  firm  friend-
ship between  the  brothers,  and  at  first  Joab
acquiesces.  The  king  was,  in  fact,  in  so
grim  a  humour  that  he  probably  felt  that
he  had  better  keep  with  his  men,  who  would
protect  him,  instead  of  remaining  at  Jeru-
salem, where  he  would"  be  in  David's  power.
When  Amasa  joined  them,  Abishai  would
have  to  resign  to  him  the  command;  and
David  proDably  expected  that,  after  a  suo-
oesst'ul  campaign,  and  with  the  aid  of  the
men  of  Judah,  who  were  rebels  like  himself,
Amaea  would  be  able  to  crush  Joab.  But
Joab  did  not  intend  to  wait  for  this;  and
immediately  on  meeting  his  rival  he
murders  him,  and  assumes  the  command.
Thy  lord's  servants.  These  are  the  men
enumerated  in  ver.  7,  and  formed  David's
usual  military  attendants,  When  war  broke
out,  they  were  reinforced  by  a  levy  of  the
people.  And  escape  us.  The  meaning  of
the  Hebrew  is  uncertain.  It  may  signify,
"and  withdraw  himself  from  our  eyes,"
which  gives  the  sense  of  the  Authorized
Version,  and  is  supported  by  tbe  Vulgate.
The  Septuagint  renders,  "and  overshadow
our  eyes,"  which  might  have  the  same
meaning,  but,  as  others  think,  may  signify,
"and  cause  us  anxiety."  Many  modern
commentators  render,  "and  pluck  out  our
eye;"  that  is,  I'.o  us  painful  damage.  Either
this  or  the  Authorized  Version  gives  a  good
sense,  and,  anyhow,  rapid  action  was  ne-
cessury,  or  Sheba's  revolt  might  become
dangerous.

Ver.  7. — There  went  out  after  him — that
is,  under  Abishai's  command  (comp.  ver.
2) — Joab's  men.  The  men  who  formed  his
regular  attendants,  and  to  whose  number
belonged  the  ten  armour-bearers  who  slew
Absalom  (ch.  xviii.  15).  Joab  retained  their
command,  and  probably  they  would  not  have
served  under  any  other  person.  It  is  evident
from  the  enumeration  in  this  verse  that  the


"men  of  Judah,"  after  escorting  David  to
Jerusalem,  had  all  dispersed  to  their  own
homes.

Ver.  8. — The  great  stone  which  is  in
Oibeon.  Gibeon  is  situated  in  the  moun-
tains of  Ephraim,  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,
north-west  of  Jerusalem.  The  great  stone
was  probably  some  isolated  rock  well  known
in  the  neighbourhood.  Amasa  went  before
them;  Hebrew,  Amasa  came  before  them;
that  is,  came  in  view  with  the  levy  of  men
he  had  raised  in  Judah.  And  Joab's  gar-
ment, etc. ;  more  correctly,  and  Joab  wai
girded  with  his  military  coat  as  his  garment,
and  over  it  was  the  strap  of  his  sword  in  its
sheath,  and  i<  (masculine,  equivalent  to  "  the
sheath  ")  came  out,  and  it  (feminine,  equiva-
lent to  "the  sword")  fell.  This  change  of
gender  is  very  harsh,  and  has  caused  the
Authorized  Version  to  apply  the  masculine
verb  to  Joab,  and  translate,  and  as  he  went
forth  it  fell ;  but  a  very  slight  change,  sup-
ported by  the  Septuagint,  gives  us  a  more
satisfactory  sense,  namely,  and  it  (the  sword)
came  out  and  fell.  It  is  generally  assumed
that  all  this  was  arranged  beforehand  on
Joab's  part,  who  had  so  placed  his  sword
that  he  could  shake  it  out  of  the  sheath.
More  probably  it  was  an  accident,  of  which
he  took  instant  advantage.  He  had  felt
that  his  position  was  insecure,  and  that  if
David  had  the  support  of  Amasa,  and  a
powerful  band  of  the  men  of  Judah  at
Jerusalem,  he  would  prob.ibly  order  his
execution  for  slaying  Absalom ;  and  Amasa
would  carry  out  the  command  willingly
enough,  as  he  thereby  would  secure  the
high  position  offered  him.  We  know  David's
feelings  towards  Joab  from  his  dying  com-
mand to  Solomon  (1  Kings  ii.  5),  end  pro-
bably he  had  given  various  indications  of
his  deep  seated  resentment.  Joab,  therefore,
determiued  to  stop  Amasa's  growth  in  power,
and  also  to  give  David  a  rough  lesson.
And  this  accident  gave  liim  an  early  oppor-
tunity, which  he  used  with  ruthless  energy.

Ver.  10. — In  the  fifth  rib ;  in  the  abdomen
(see  note  on  ch.  ii.  28).  He  strnok  him  not
again.  When  his  sword  fell  out  of  its
sheath,  Joab  picked  it  up  with  his  left  hand,
which  was  not  the  hand  for  action,  and  as
he  could  not  put  it  into  its  place  without
taking  it  into  his  right  hand,  his  continuing
to  hold  it  while  he  took  his  cousin's  beard
in  his  right  hand  and  kii^sed  him,  was  too
natural  to  awaken  any  suspicion.  But  hold-
ing down  Amasa's  head,  he  struck  him  with
his  left  hand  so  fiercely  that  no  second  blow
was  necessary;  and  then  continued  his
march  forward  as  if  what  had  occurred  was
a  matter  of  little  importance.

Ver.  11.— One  of  Joab's  men.  Joab  left
one  of  his  personal  followers  to  prevent  any
halt  of  the  people  round  Amasa's  body,  and


494


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[CH.  XX,  1—26,


to  suggest  that  he  was  a  traitor.  For  he
was  to  say  to  them  as  they  came  up,  not
only  that "  whosoever  had  pleasure  iu  Joab,"
but  also  that  "  all  who  were  for  David,  were
to  go  after  Joab."  All  loyal  men  were  to
regard  him  as  captain  of  the  host,  and  to
disobey  him  would  be  rebellion.  Naturally
they  would  conclude  from  this  that  Amasa
had  not  really  been  true  to  David,  and  that
his  death  was  the  punishment  inflicted  on
him  for  his  past  guilt.

Ver.  12. — He  removed  Amasa.  The  ad-
monition to  move  on  failed ;  for  the  sight
was  terrible  and  tragic,  and  all  as  they  came
along  stopped  to  see  what  had  happened,
and  inquire  the  cause  (comp.  ch.  ii.  23).
The  man,  therefore,  had  the  corpse  carried
out  of  the  way,  and  threw  over  it  a  cloth,
really  a  coat — the  loose  upper  mantle  worn
over  the  tunic  (see  note  on  beged,  1  Sam.  six.
13).  Whereupon  the  people  renewed  their
march,  most  of  them  not  knowing  what  had
occurred,  and  the  rest  urged  to  it  by  the
warning  voice  of  Joab's  servitor.

"Ver.  14. — And  he  wont  through,  etc.  It
was  not  Joab,  but  Sheba,  who,  by  David's
prompt  action,  was  compelled  to  make  a
rapid  retreat,  seeking  help  in  vain  from  tribe
after  tribe,  but  rejected  of  all,  and  unable  to
make  any  defence  until  he  had  reached  the
extieme  north  of  the  land  of  Israel.  TTnto
Abel,  and  to  Beth-H aaohah.  The  conjunc-
tion probably  ought  to  be  omitted,  as  the
proper  name  of  the  place  is  Abel-beth-
Maachah,  and  it  is  so  given  in  ver.  15  (see
below),  and  in  1  Kings  xv.  20 ;  2  Kings  xv.
29.  It  is  the  place  called  Abel-Maim,  the
"water-meadow,"  in  2  Chron.  xvi.  4 — an
dbel  being  a  place  where  the  grass  grows
rankly  from  the  abundance  of  springs.  It
thus  forms  part  of  the  name  of  various
places,  as  Abel-Mizraim  (Gen.  1.  11),  Abel-
Meholah  (1  Kings  iv.  12),  etc.  Abel-beth-
Maachah  was  a  fortress  in  the  most  northerly
part  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  and  is  identi-
fied with  the  modern  village  of  Abel,  a  few
miles  above  Lake  Huleh,  the  ancient "  Waters
of  Merom."  And  all  the  Berites.  No  place
or  people  of  this  name  can  be  found,  but
Jerome,  when  translating  the  Vulgate,  had
before  him  a  different  reading,  which  seems
clearly  right,  "  And  all  the  chosen  men  of
war  were  gathered  togetiier,  and  went  after
him."

Ver.  15. — It  stood  in  the  trench.  This  is
a  literal  translation,  and  yet  gives  a  wrong
sense.  The  Hebrew  "  stood  "  means  "  rose
up  to,"  "  stood  level  with ; "  and  the  "trench"
is  what  in  modern  fortifications  is  called
"the  glacis,"  and  includes  the  enter  wall
of  defence.  The  Bevised  Version  renders,
"  it  stood  against  the  rampart."  The  usual
way  of  capturing  cities  in  ancient  times
vras  to  cast  up  a  bank  or  mound  of  earth


against  them  (Isa.  xxix.  3;  xxxvli.  33;  Jer.
vi.  6);  and  Joab's  work  had  advanced  so
far  as  to  be  level  with  the  outer  line  of
defence.  The  name  of  the  city  in  the
Hebrew  is  not  Abel  of  Beth-Uaachah,  but
Abel-beth-Maaehah.  Battered.  This  is  a
word  taken  from  Koman  warfare.  The
Hebrew  says,  "And  all  the  people  that
were  with  Joab  were  destroying  the  wall  to
make  it  fall,"  most  probably  by  undermin-
ing it  £wald  even  asserts  that  this  is  the
meaning  of  the  verb,  and  translates,  "  were
digging  pits  under  the  waU."  The  Revised
Version  adopts  this  for  the  margin,  where
it  gives  "undermined."  The  Septuagint
and  Chaldee  have  a  different  and  probable
reading,  "And  all  Joab's  people  were  de-
vising (contriving)  means  to  throw  down
the  wall."  This  would  be  the  next  opera-
tion after  the  mound  had  been  carried  up
to  a  level  with  it.

Ver.  18. — They  were  wont  to  speak,  etc.
The  Hebrew  literally  is,  they  used  to  say  in
old  time.  They  shaU  surely  ask  at  Abel ;  and
to  they  finished  (the  matter).  But  of  these
words  two  completely  distinct  interpreta-
tions are  given.  The  Jewish  Targura
records  the  one:  "Eemember  now  that
which  is  written  in  the  book  of  the  Law,
to  ask  a  city  concerning  peace  at  the  first.
Hast  thou  done  so,  to  ask  of  Abel  if  they
will  make  peace?"  The  woman,  that  is,
was  referring  to  the  command  in  Dent.  xx.
10,  not  to  besiege  a  city  until  peace  had
been  offered  to  the  inhabitants  on  condition
of  their  paying  tribute.  When  a  city  was
captured  the  lot  of  the  inhabitants,  as  the
woman  declares  in  ver.  19,  was  utter  destruc-
tion ;  and  the  Law  mercifully  gave  them  the
chance  of  escaping  such  a  fate.  Joab  had
not  complied  with  this  enactment,  but  had
assumed  that  the  people  would  support
Sheba,  and  was  proceeding  to  the  last  ex-
tremity without  consulting  them.  This
interpretation  gives  an  excellent  sense,  but
cannot  be  wrung  out  of  the  present  Hebrew
text  without  violence.  The  other  interpre-
tation is  that  of  the  Authorized  Version,
that  the  woman  was  commending  her  words
to  Joab,  by  reminding  him  that  Abel  had
been  famed  in  early  times  for  its  wisdom,  and
had  probably  been  the  seat  of  an  oracle  in
the  old  Oanaauite  times.  When,  therefore,
people  had  carried  their  dispute  to  Abel,
both  sides  were  content  to  abide  by  the
answer  given  them,  and  so  the  controversy
was  ended.  Literally,  these  words  muan,
"  they  shall  surely  inquire  at  Abel,"  the
verb  being  that  specially  used  of  inquiring
of  God.

Ver.  19. — ^I  tun  one  of  them  that  are,  etc.
The  Authorized  Version  translates  in  tiiia
way,  because,  while  "  I "  is  singular, "  peace-
able" and  "faithful"  are  pluraL     Beally


OH.  XX.  1—26.]


THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


495


this  construction  ehowa  tbat  the  woman
speaks  in  the  name  of  the  city,  and  conse-
quently the  Authorized  Version,  while  pre-
serving the  grammar,  loses  the  sense.  It
should  be  translated,  we  are  peaoeaile,  faith-
ful people  in  Israel.  A  city  and  a  mother;
that  is,  a  mother-city,  a  metlopDlis,  the
chief  town  of  that  district.

Ver.  21. — The  matter  is  not  so.  It  seems
from  this  verse  that  the  citizens  did  not
quite  understand  why  Joab  attacked  them,
Sheba  had  tlirown  himself  into  the  city,
and  Joab,  in  hot  pursuit,  finding  the  gate
closed — a  measure  of  ordinary  precaution
upon  the  approach  of  a  body  of  men — at
once  blockaded  the  town,  and  began  to  cast
up  the  mount.  At  all  events,  they  were
ready  to  come  to  terms  now,  and  would
probably  hare  given  up  Sheba  at  first,  if
Joab  had  demanded  his  surrender.  A  man
of  Hoimt  Ephiaim.  Sheba  was  a  Benjamite,
but  the  hills  of  Ephraim  extended  into  the
territory  of  Benjamin,  and  retained  their
name  (see  1  Sam.  i.  1).  Over  the  wall;
Hebrew,  through  the  waU,  being  the  word
rendered  "at"  a  window  in  Gen.  xxvi.  8.
It  probably  means  through  one  of  the
apertures  made  for  the  archers.

Ver.  22. — In  her  wisdom;  that  is,  vrith
her  wise  counsel.  The  story  in  Eccles.  iz.
13 — 15  probably  refers  to  this  narrative.
They  retired ;  Hebrew,  Siey  dispersed  them-
selves each  to  his  tent;  that  is,  his  home.
This  refers  to  Amasa's  levies,  who  were  glad
to  depart,  and  whom  Joab  did  not  want  at
Jerusalem.  He  took  thither  with  him  all
those  mentioned  in  ver.  7.  Incensed  as
David  must  have  been  at  the  murder  of
Amasa  following  so  quickly  upon  that  of
Absalom,  yet  that  very  act  proved  Joab's
determination,  and  left  the  king  powerless.
He  must  have  felt,  too,  that  Joab  was  indis-
pensable for  the  maintenance  of  peace  and
order  in  his  dominions,  and  that  he  was  at
the  least  faithful  to  himself,

Ver.  23.— Now  Joab,  etc.  With  this  list
of  his  chief  ofScers,  the  narrator  closes  the
history  of  David's  reign ;  for  the  remaining
four  chapters  form  a  kind  of  appendix.  A
similar  list  closes  ch.  viii.,  where,  too,  there
is  a  break  in  the  history,  the  previous  narra-
tive having  been  a  summary  of  the  rapid
rise  of  David's  empire.  In  this  section,  ch.
ix. — XX.,  we  have  a  more  full  and  detailed
account  of  David's  wars,  leading  on  to  his
crime  and  its  punishment.  Th»  rest  of
David's  life  we  may  trust  was  calm  and
uneventful,  but  it  was  the  life  of  a  sorrow^
stricken  man ;  and  the  sword  again  woke  up
against  his  family  when  his  end  was  ap-
proaching, and  filled  his  dying  hours  with
grief  and  trouble.  This  list  is  much  later
in  date  than  that  previously  given,  though
'  most  <rf  the  officers  are  the  same.  Cherethites.


This  is  a  correction  of  the  Massorites  to
make  the  passage  agree  with  ch.  viii.  18.
The  K'tib  has  cari,  a  word  which  occurs  in
2  Kings  xi.  4,  19,  where  in  the  Authorized
Version  it  is  translated  "  captains,"  but  in
the  Revised  Version  Carites,  which  here
appear;^  only  in  the  margin.  But  there  is
no  reason  why  the  place  of  the  Cherethites
should  not  have  been  taken  by  Oarian  mer-
cenaries later  on  in  David's  reign,  thougli
really  we  know  too  little  about  such  matters
to  be  able  to  form  a  judgmeut.  Some  com-
mentators translate  cari  "  digger,"  and
suppose  that  it  means  executioner;  but  why
a  digger  should  have  such  a  meaning  is  in-
explicable. It  may  be  inteiesting  to  add
that  the  Cariaos  were  famous  in  old  times
as  mercenaries  During  the  reign  of  Manas-
seh,  Fsammeticbus  won  the  throne  of  all
Egypt  by  the  aid  of  Oarians,  and  from  that
period  they  took  a  leading  part  in  all
Egyptian  wars.  The  age  of  David  is  much
more  antique,  but  as  there  was  constant
communication  between  PhoeniciB  and  Asia
Minor  and  Greece,  there  is  nothing  impro-
bable in  David  taking  Carians  into  his  service
in  place  of  the  Piiilistiue  Cherethites.  His
connection  with  them  would  soon  cease  after
he  left  Ziklag.

Ver.  24. — Adoram  was  over  the  tribute.
This  was  a  new  ofScer,  and  a  new  thing.
For  the  Hebrew  word  mas  does  not  mean
"  tribute,"  but ' '  forced  labour."  This  was  one
of  the  most  oppressive  exactions  of  old  time,
and  it  continued  to  be  practised  in  Europe
throughout  the  Middle  Ages  until  it  was
abolished  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury by  the  French  Revolution,  except  in
Russia,  where  the  serf's  were  freed  from  it  by
the  late  emperor  Alexander  II.  Neverthe-
less, it  was  probably  made  almost  necessary
at  first  by  the  absence  of  money.  As  there
was  no  money  for  the  payment  of  taxes,  the
dues  of  the  king  or  lord  could  only  bo
rendered  by  personal  service.  Yet  even  sc
it  was  exceedingly  liable  to  be  abused,  and
the  people  might  be  taken  from  their  own
homes  and  fields  just  when  their  presenne
there  was  most  needed.  One  most  painful
result  was  that  the  women  had  to  endure,
upon  the  farm  and  among  the  cattle,  a
drudgery  to  which  they  were  nnsuited.  We
gather  from  this  passage  that  it  was  David
who  began  this  practice  in  Israel,  exacting
probably  only  from  the  descendants  of  the
Canaanites  (who,  nevertheless,  formed  a  con-
siderable portion  of  the  inhabitants  of  Pales-
tine) forced  labour  employed  in  preparing
for  the  building  of  the  temple,  and  in  the
fortifications  of  his  fenced  cities.  Under
Solomon  it  seems  to  have  been  extended  to
other  classes  (1  Kings  T.  13,  11;  but  see  i
Kings  ix.  20 — 22),  and  reduced  to  a  system,
whidi  pressed  lo  hearUy  upon  the  peoplt'


49S


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[oh.  XX.  1 — 26,


that  it  was  the  principal  cause  of  the  revolt
of  the  ten  tribes  from  Behoboam  (1  Kings
zii.  4).  Unless  the  Israelites  had  themselves
suffered  severely  from  this  exaction,  they
would  not  have  been  driven  into  rebellion
by  sympathy  with  the  remains  of  the  native
races.  Subsequently  we  find  Jeremiah  ac-
cusing Jehoiakim  of  employing  forced  labour
(Jer.  xxii.  13),  but  the  severity  with  which
he  condemned  it  suggests  that  it  had  then
ceased  to  be  customary.  Adoram.  His  ap-
pointment to  this  ofBce  was  probubly  at  a
late  period  in  IJavid's  reign,  as  he  continued
to  hold  the  office  under  Solomon  (1  Kings
iv.  6 ;  V.  14,  where  he  ii  called  Adoniram),
and  even  down  to  the  beginning  of  Eeho-
boam's  reign  (1  Kings  xii.  18).  We  there
read  that  he  paid  the  penalty  of  his  hateful
office  with  his  life.  In  2  Ohron.  x.  18  he  is
called  Hadoram.

Ver.  25.— Shova.  He  is  called  Seraidh  in
ch.  viii.  17.

Ver.  26.— Ira  .  .  .  was  a  chief  ruler;
Hebrew,  cohen,  priest,  minister  (see  on  tliis
term,  ch.  viii.  18).  We  there  find  David's
sons  holding  this  confidential  office ;  but  the
feuds  which  resulted  from  David's  sia  iiad
destroyed  the  concord  of  the  family,  and  the
usefulness  of  David's  children.  In  their
degradation  from  this  office  we  see  also  a
preparation  for  their  being  set  aside  from  the
succession,  and  the  throne  given  to  Solomon.

Additioiial  Note.

With  this  chapter  ends  the  second  section
of  David's  history ;  for,  as  we  have  already
seen,  the  last  four  chapters  are  not  arranged
in  chronological  order,  but  form  an  appendix
remarkable  both  for  the  singularly  varied
nature  of  its  contents,  and  also  for  its  omis-
sions. The  Second  Book  of  Samuel  is  so
thoroughly  a  history  of  David,  that  we
should  naturally  have  expected  some  account
of  his  latter  years,  and  of  his  manner  of
government  after  his  return  to  power.  But
such  details  would  have  been  interesting
politically  rather  than  spiritually,  and  the
two  narratives  which  have  gone  before  are
complete  each  in  itself;  and  in  eaiih  David
is  regarded  from  an  entirely  distincl;  point  of
view.  In  the  first  eight  chapters  we  have
the  history  of  David  as  the  theocratic  king.
As  such  he  takes  the  heathen  for  his  inhe-
ritance, and  founds  an  empire.  Even  more
remarkable  are  the  alterations  he  makes
in  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  To  the  old
Lovitical  sacrifices  he  added  a  far  more
spiritual  service  of  psalms  and  minstrelsy,
without  which  Judaism  would  have  been
unable  to  develop  the  evangelical  realities
which  lay  embedded  in  its  ritual  and  legal
ordinances.  And  it  is  important  to  notice
that  his  service  of  saored  song  is  called


"  prophecy "- (1  Ohron.  xxT.  1 — 3),  from
which  we  learn  two  things.  The  first  that
David's  service  was  essentially  the  same
as  that  established  by  Samuel  at  Bamah,
There,  too,  we  read  of  the  company  of  the
prophets  prophesying  (1  Sam.xix.  20),  their
service  undoubtedly  being  one  of  minstrelsy
(1  Sam.  X.  5,  10,  11);  and  without  Samuel's
authority  David  would  scarcely  have  ven-
tured upon  so  great  an  innovation.  Even
so,  this  consecration  of  music  by  Samuel,
and  David's  ordinance  whereby  there  was
established  a  daily  service,  morning  and
evening,  of  thanksgiving  and  praise  (1
Chron.  xxlii.  30;  Neh.  xii.  24),  is  a  most
remarkable  step  forward;  and  by  it  the
service  of  God  ceased  to  be  mere  ritual,  and
became  "a  reasonable  service"  (Bom.  xii.
1),  such  as  was  repeatedly  commended  by
St.  Paul  to  the  members  of  the  Christian
Church  (Col.  iii.  16,  etc.).  But  secondly,  it
drew  the  minds  of  the  people  to  the  evan-
gelic meaning  of  the  Levitical  ordinances.
To  this  day  hymns  form  a  most  important
part  of  our  solemn  services,  and  seem  espe-
cially adapted  to  draw  out  the  inner  and
deeper  meaning  of  rites  and  doctrines.  They
did  not,  indeed,  begin  with  David.  There
are  psalms  older  than  his  reign;  but  this
consecration  of  them  to  the  public  daily
service  of  God  led  to  an  outburst  of  Divine
psalmody  which  raised  the  minds  of  the
people  above  the  material  and  grosser
elements  of  their  worship,  and  taught  them
the  true  nature  of  God,  and  made  them
ascribe  to  him  high  and  spiiitual  attributes
in  wonderful  contrast  with  the  grovelling
frivolities  of  heathenism.  The  Levitical
worship  was  necessarily  typical :  in  the
psalms  the  people  learneid  that  God  desireth
not  sacrifice,  but  the  offering  of  a  broken
and  contrite  heart.  Even  prophecy,  in  its
sense  of  speaking  for  God,  would  scarcely
have  reached  the  high  eminence  of  future
days  but  for  the  psalms.  For  only  in  a
nation  deeply  imbued  with  poetry  and  song
could  an  Isaiah  have  arisen,  capable  of
giving  in  so  perfect  an  outward  form  the
mysteries  of  Christ's  incarnation,  his  vi-
carious sacrifice,  and  universal  kingdom.

In  the  second  section,  neither  the  theo-
cratic nor  the  prophetic  element  is  in  the
forefront.  It  is  the  history  of  a  fearful  sin,
and  of  its  stern  punisliment.  The  sinner
is  the  theocratic  king:  the  punishment
is  the  pollution  of  his  house  by  incest
and  murder;  the  ruin  of  the  glory  of  his
realm,  the  rending  asunder  of  his.  empire,
begun  in  his  days  and  consummated  in
those  of  his  grandson ;  his  own  disgrace  and
flight;  and  his  sorrowful  return  to  his
throne,  impotent  to  avenge  either  the  murder
of  his  son  or  that  of  the  man  whom  he  had
chosen  in  the  hope  that  he  would  releaie


OH.  XX.  1—26.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


497


him  from  the  steni  grip  of  the  ruthlesa
Jo«b.  The  moral  leesouB  of  this  sad  stoiy  are
beyond  number.  We  see  the  saint  changed
into  a  sinner.  No  privileges  eare  him
from  hateful  crime;  no  repentance  from
draining  the  last  dregs  of  the  bitter  cup  of
retribution.  But  never  was  the  power  of
repentance  in  cleansing  the  heart  and
giving  peace  to  the  conscience  more  clearly
shown;  and  the  psalms  written  by  David
as  a  penitent,  and  during  his  flight  from
Absalom,  are  the  most  spiritual  and  choice
and  edifying  of  the  whole  Psalter.  Without
them  the  depths  of  self-abasement  would
have  been  left  without  inspired  expression.
The  sinner  in  his  greatest  need,  when  crushed
with  the  conviction  of  sin,  when  earnestly
longing  for  forgiveness,  when  thirsting  for
the  restored  presence  of  Ood  within  his  soul,
and  when  feeling  that,  vile  as  he  was,  yet
that  he  was  not  shut  out  from  mercy,  but
that  access  to  Ood's  presence  was  still  per'
mitted  him; — at  all  such  times,  he  would
have  gone  to  his  Bible,  and  it  would  have
been  silent.  These  psalms  are  still  the
sinner's  comfort,  and  give  him  the  words
which  best  express  what  is  present  in  his
heart.  Without  them  the  Jewish  Church
would  never  have  reached  that  fervid  purity
of  spiritual  feeling  which  so  animated  the
prophets;  and  even  the  Christian  Church
-would  possibly  have  stopped  short  of  that
iOll  doctrine  of  repentance  which  she  now
holds.  It  is,  indeed,  the  Christian's  privi-
lege to  unite  the  doctrine  of  repentance
with  the  thouglit  of  all  that  Christ  has  done
and  suffered  for  us,  and  so  to  understand
why  repentance  avails  to  cleanse  the  heart ;
but  even  with  this  knowledge  no  Christian


writer  has  ever  reached  so  high  a  level  of
spirituality  as  David,  though  we  may  thank-
fully acknowledge  that  many  of  oar  best
hymns  do  not  fall  far  short  of  it.

It  is  easy,  then,  to  see  that  these  two
histories  are  not  only  of  primary  importance,
but  that  no  narrative  after  the  time  of  the
Exodus  equals  them  in  valud.  They  form
the  very  kernel  of  the  Book  of  the  Earlier
Prophets,  giving  us,  in  the  first,  the  true
meaning  and  spiritual  import  of  the  settle-
ment of  Israel  in  Palestine;  and  setting
before  us,  in  the  second,  the  nature  of  re-
pentance, and  so  preparing  the  way  for  the
revelation  of  the  gospel  of  pardon  and  peace.

They  are  followed  by  an  appendix  con-
taining several  narratives  recorded  appa-
rently for  their  intrinsic  value.  Commen-
tators have  endeavoured  to  trace  a  connection
between  them,  but  their  arguments  are  far-
fetched, and  their  conclusions  unsatisfactory.
It  is  better  to  regard  them  as  separate  and
complete,  each  one  in  itself.  They  are  six
in  number:  (1)  the  visitation  of  famine
because  of  Saul's  cruelty  to  the  Gibeonites ;
(2)  some  incidunts  in  the  war  with  the
Philistines,  illustrating  the  heroic  character
of  David's  worthies;  (3)  David's  psalm  of
deliverance;  (4)  David's  last  words;  (.1)
a  list  of  the  Gibborim,  with  special  records
of  acts  of  bravery  and  devotion ;  (6)  the
visitation  of  pestilence  because  of  David's
numbering  the  people.  The  third  and  fourth
sections  especially  are  of  the  highest  in-
terest; while  the  second  makes  it  plain
that  David's  bravery  in  encountering  the
giant  of  Gath  lit  up  an  equally  bright  flume
of  patriotic  heroism  in  the  armies  of  Israel.


EOMILETICa

Vers.  1 — 13. — ^The  facts  are :  1,  Among  the  men  who  discuss  the  question  of  priority
with  Judah  is  a  worthless  man  named  8heba,  and  he  raises  the  cry  of  revolt  against
David,  and  the  men  of  Israel  follow  him,  while  those  of  Judah  cleave  to  the  king.
2.  David  enters  his  house  and  makes  anaugement  for  the  sustenance  of  his  concubines,
who  henceforth  live  in  virtual  widowhood.  3.  David,  observing  that  Amasa  was  tardy
in  executing  his  orders  to  gather  the  men  of  Judah,  directs  Abishai  to  go  out  with  Joab's
men  in  pursuit  of  Sheha.  4.  While  they  are  obeying  the  king's  orders,  Amasa  joins
them  at  Gibeon;  whereupon  Joab,  under  pretext  of  saluting  Amasa  and  inquiring
concerning  his  health,  smites  him,  while  off  his  guard,  unto  death.  5.  WhUe  the
pursuit  after  Sheba  continues,  one  of  Joab's  partisans  calls  upon  the  people  to  show
their  prelerence  for  Joab  and  David  by  following  after  Joab,  which  they  do  when  the
bleeding  corpse  is  no  longer  on  the  road  to  arrest  their  progress.

Man's  revolt  against  Christ.  The  hot  controversy  between  the  men  of  Israel  and
Judah  issued  in  more  than  words.  The  discussion  took  its  rise  in  a  pretended  interest
in  the  restoration  of  David  to  the  throne,  but,  becoming  mixed  up  vvith  personal
matters,  it  first  developed  an  alienation  of  one  part  of  the  nation  from  another;  and
then  the  more  humiliated  section  turned  their  alienation  from  their  brethren  into  the
more  dangerous  form  of  revolt  against  the  authority  of  the  kini;  whom  those  brethren
claimed  as  specially  theirs  (ch.  xix.  42,  43).    There  is  always  in  human  society  soma

n.  SAMUBIi.  2  K


498  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xx.  1—26.

restless,  imscrupulouB  spirit  ready  to  take  advantage  of  divergent  sentiments,  and
form  them  into  expressions  of  positive  opinion  and  antagonistic  action.  The  man  of
Belial  used  up  the  elements  of  discord  for  securing  what,  at  first,  was  not  contemplated
— namely,  an  open  repudiation  of  the  right  of  David  to  exercise  kingly  authority  over
the  people.  In  this  revolt  against  David,  the  Lord's  anointed,  we  have  an  illustration
of  the  nature  and  some  of  the  causes  and  pleas  of  man's  revolt  against  Christ.

L  Man's  revolt  aoai»8t  Cebist  consists  bssbntiallt  of  a  eejbction  of  a
DiviNB  CLAIM.  Sheba  not  only  would  not  have  David  as  his  king,  but  he  distinctly
indicates  as  chief  reason  his  rejection  of  the  Divine  claim  of  David  to  the  throne,  and
which  the  nation  had  previously  recognized.  In  speaking  contemptuously  of  him  as
the  "  son  of  Jesse,"  he  clearly  ignores  the  selection  and  anointing  of  him  by  Samuel
in  the  name  of  God.  David  is  not  the  Lord's  anointed ;  only  Jesse's  son — a  mere  man,
to  be  treated  as  any  other  man.  The  people  also  who  followed  Sheba  did  so  on  this
basis — that  whatever  may  have  been  once,  there  was  now  in  David  no  more  right  than
in  any  other  man ;  he  was  not  endowed  with  Divine  authority.  This  is  exactly  the
case  with  modern  infidelity — men  will  not  submit  to  Christ.  They  repudiate  aU
claim  to  Divine  authority.  To  them  he  is  a  mere  man — possessing  no  eternal  and
unchallengeable  right  to  demand  the  obedience  of  all  men  to  his  yoke.  He  is  the
Nazarene,  the  carpenter's  Son,  not  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  anointed  of  God  to  be
FriDce  and  Saviovu'.  It  is  a  simple  matter  of  choice  whether  they  shall  accept  his
testimony  and  do  what  he,  declares  is  right.  This  spirit  of  revolt  against  the  Divine  in
Christ  is  the  essence  of  every  form  of  modern  infidelity,  be  it  scientific  rejection  of  the
supernatural  or  pure  agnosticism.  Once  recognize  him  as  the  anointed  Lord  of  all,
all  forms  of  submission  to  his  teaching  and  will  follow;  once  reject  him  in  this  respect,
and  high  treason  is  the  practical  issue.

II.   A    REJECTION    OP    ChBIST's    DiVDJB   CLAIM    PKOOEBDB    FROM    UNBELIEF    Uf    Qod'b

6ELF-BEVKLATI0N  TO  MAN.  If  ever  Sheba  was  a  believer  in  Samuel's  mission,  he  had
certainly  ceased  to  be  so  now,  or  else  had  come  to  believe  that  revelation  had  ceased.
No  one  could  hold  to  the. Divine  appointment  of  Moses  and  of  Samuel  to  gradually  unfol  I
the  purpose  of  God  to  Israel,  and  at  the  same  time  logically  refuse  to  submit  to  David
as  king,  unless  he  could  show  that  God  had  set  up  another.  This  revolt,  therefore,  was
the  expression  of  a  practical  unbelief  in  the  fact  of  a  revelation  of  God  to  the  Jewish
people.  In  like  manner,  when  we  look  into  the  reason  for  the  rejection  of  the  Divine
claim  of  Christ,  it  is  to  be  found  in  a  prior  assumption,  namely,  that  a  self-revelation
of  God  to  mankind  by  special  means  distinct  from  natural  law,  though  not  in  contra-
vention of  it,  is  a  fiction.  With  a  dogmatism  evidently  based  on  ignorance,  the  super-
natural is  said  to  be  impossible,  i.e.  we  know  so  well  the  constitution  of  all  things,  and
the  only  possible  relation  of  God  to  all  things,  that  we  can  affirm  that  no  such  a  Divine
Lord  and  King  as  Christ  is  said  to  be,  could  be  a  reality.  He  was  simply  a  much-mis-
understood man.  It  is  obvious  that,  as  Sheba's  unbelief  in  Samuel's  mission  was  no
credit  to  his  memory  or  historic  knowledge  (1  Sam.  xvL  13),  so  the  unbelief  in  God's
self-revelation  to  man  is  no  credit  to  man's  humility  or  judgment.

in.   EeVOLT  AGAINST  CHRIST'S  CLAIMS  THUS  ORIGINATING  IS  SUSTAINED  BY  VARIOUS

FLEAS.  Sheba's  unbelief  was  in  the  background,  his  pleas  were  in  firont.  He  could  not
have  gained  so  many  over  to  his  side  by  any  enunciation  of  abstract  views  as  to  the
reality  or  continuance  of  a  revelation  of  God's  purpose.  Men  are  influenced  in  action
by  more  superficial  and  concrete  forms  of  thought.  The  mistakes  of  David's  govern-
ment, his  reputed  partiality  to  the  son  whom  he  fought  against,  his  errors  of  conduct
in  the  case  of  Bathsheba,  his  apparent  preference  for  Judah,  and  the  apprehension  that
Judah  would  gain  an  ascendency  in  public  affairs, — these  pleas  would  give  an  appearance
of  public  reason  for  the  conduct  pursued.  Nor  did  he  or  his  followers  care  to  consider
that  incidents  in  a  fallible  life  do  not  annihilate  a  Divine  purpose  running  through  that
life.  We  find  the  same  course  adopted  in  relation  to  the  authority  of  Christ.  Though
none  can  convict  him  of  sin,  advantage  is  taken  of  the  mistakes  of  the  Church,  tha
seemingly  tardy  progress  of  Christianity,  the  peculiar  structure  of  Old  Testament
history,  and  what  seem  to  be  occasional  discrepancies  in  the  gospel  record,  and,  in  fact,
anything  that  can  be  construed  into  a  weakness,  in  order  to  justify  a  total  rejection  of
Christ's  supreme  authority.  An  ingenious  mind,  bent  on  resisting  the  holy  Saviour,
will  never  lack  plausible  reasons  for  open  revolt.


CH.  XX.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  499

IV.  Revolt  against  Chbist  la  a  ooubse  op  oonduot  devoid  of  posittvk  eeoula-
TiVB  PRiNOiPLB.  Sheba's  principles,  so  far  as  he  had  any,  were  negative.  There  wa»
nothing  in  his  words  or  deeds  that  indicated  any  definite  principle  on  which  the  state
was  to  be  governed.  Hitherto  the  theocratic  principle,  enunciated  and  enforced  by
Samuel,  regulated  the  setting  up  and  setting  aside  of  rulers.  The  spiritual  interests  of
the  nation  were  the  prime  concern.  Now,  Divine  authority  being  ignored,  there  was  no
principle  to  determine  the  destiny  of  the  people.  The  conflicting  whims  and  passions
of  men  were  to  contend  for  supremacy,  and  the  grand  purpose  for  which  the  nation  had
been  hitherto  supposed  to  exist  in  relation  to  Messiah  and  the  world  was  lost  to  view.
In  the  same  way,  the  course  of  human  affairs,  without  Christ,  is  aimless,  chaotic.
Infidelity  and  agnosticism  rest  on  negations.  Individual  life  is  as  a  ship  without  a
helm.

General  lessons.  1.  There  is  always  in  human  nature  a  latent  tendency  to  rest-
lessness imder  authority,  and  we  should  both  be  on  our  guard  against;  this  in  our  own
lives,  and  also  avoid  whatever  may  develop  it  in  others.  2.  The  quarrels  and  disputes
of  Christian  men  on  matters  of  government  and  precedence  may  generate,  by  degrees,
feelings  of  aUenation  from  religion.  3.  In  this  life  we  should  not  be  suiprised  if,  like
David,  we  find  the  pathway  of  returning  prosperity  shaded  by  some  transient  clouds.
4.  The  zeal  of  crowds  in  a  bad  cause  is  more  due  to  the  influence  of  clever  and  restless
leaders  than  to  any  profound  convictions  or  intelligent  views  in  the  people  themselves.

Unsanctifled  power.  We  pass  over  David's  provision  for  his  concubines,  simply
noting  how  wise  and  considerate  he  was  in  thus  cutting  himself  free  from  old  associa-
tions full  of  reminiscences  of  sorrow,  and  at  the  same  time  doing  no  injustice  to  any
one  concerned.  The  chief  figure  in  the  narrative  before  us  is  Joab,  who  here  stands
out  as  a  strong  man  bent  on  a  definite  purpose,  and  able  to  carry  out  his  will  in  spite
of  moral,  social,  and  loyal  considerations.  AH  the  other  men  referred  to  are  as  pigmies
beside  him,  and  the  orders  even  of  the  king  are  so  far  bent  to  his  will  that  he  becomes
practically  master  of  the  situation.  Begarding  him  as  an  illustration  of  unsanctifled
power,  we  notice —

I.  GrBEAT  abilities.  Joab  was  a  man  of  great  natural  abilities.  This  is  obvious
throughout  his  career.  There  was  not  one  in  the  army  to  compare  with  him.  Great
natural  abilities  are  the  base  of  power  among  men.  In  some  men  they  are  purely
intellectual,  in  others  they  are  those  of  will.  For  influencing  action  and  obtaining  an
ascendency  over  multitudes,  will-force  must  be  strong.  This  partly  accounts  for  success
in  commerce,  in  statesmanship,  in  Church  government,  in  popular  movements.

II.  Stbono  passions.  Passions  are  not  abilities ;  they  are  rather  the  flre  that  feeds
the  energy  of  the  will.  Joab  was  a  man  whose  passions  were  very  strong,  though  not
boisterous  and  impulsive.  His  jealousy  and  hatred  of  Amasa,  who  had  been  appointed
to  supersede  him  in  command,  were  intense.  These,  blended  with  contempt  for  his
inferiority,  disgust  at  David's  choice,  and  a  lofty  pride  which  would  not  deign  to
remonstrate  with  the  king,  t>rmed  such  a  strenuous  force  on  the  naturally  powerful
will,  that  to  kill  his  rival  was  a  decision  which  no  ordinary  obstacles  could  hinder
in  accomplishment.  When  unholy  passions,  deliberately  cherished,  concentrate  on  a
powerful  will,  there  results  one  of  the  most  formidable  instances  of  unsanctifled  power.
Such  men  are  to  be  dreaded.  They  cannot  but  make  a  great  impression  on  weaker
natures,  and  bend  them  to  their  own  designs.  They  are  illustrations  of  what  woe  comes
,to  mankind  when  distinguished  powers,  incorporated  in  the'constitution  of  man,  receive
a  bent  of  evil  rather  than  of  good.  A  being  who  becomes  a  Miltonic  Satan  might  be
a  real  archangel.     It  is  the  spirit  that  makes  the  one  or  the  other.

III.  A  DBEAD  6E0BET.  To  many  the  bearing  of  Joab  toward  the  authority  of  David
in  this  matter  of  Amasa  may  be  an  enigma,  seeing  that  he  raised  no  revolt,  but  was
rather  zealous  for  the  king.  But  that  which  made  Joab  so  terrible  an  example  of
unsanctifled  power  was  his  possession  of  the  dreadful  secret  of  Uriah's  death  (ch.  xi.
14 — 2S).  He  knew  too  much  of  David's  former  guilt;  and  so  all  his  great  natural
abilities  were  concentrated  in  holding  a  firm  grip  on  the  king's  public  reputation.  It
is  true,  David  had  found  forgiveness  with  GM,  and  was  a  new  man ;  but  he  knew  that
Joab  had  him  in  his  power  in  matters  that  came  nearest  to  a  man's  life,  and  Joab
perfectly  understood  that  David  dared  not  do  what  otherwise  he  would  doubtless  have


BOO  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ou.  xx.  1—26.

done.  This  possesBion  of  secret  knowledge  concerning  others  always  gives  increased
power.  Whoever  knows  of  the  financial  weakness  of  a  commercial  firm,  or  the  private
dehnquencies  of  individuals,  or  of  original  social  inferiority  of  persons  aiming  to  figure
in  society,  if  it  he  known  that  he  knows,  holds  a  power  over  these  parties  which  they
dread,  and  which,  if  he  be  unholy,  he  can  use  in  most  painful  form.  Those  are  to
be  pitied  indeed  who  have  caused  their  failings  and  sins  to  become  the  secret  of  unholy
men.

IV.  Familiahitt  with  suFPEKiNa.  Bad  as  great  power  is  in  a  man  of  strong;
passions  and  possessed  of  special  knowledge,  it  is  a  more  terrible  thing  when  the  moral
sensibilities  have  been  blunted  by  familiarity  with  sufferings.  Joab  had  seen  many  a
man  dying  in  agonies.  War  does  not  improve  the  feelings  of  men.  It  was  with  no
compunctions  of  conscience,  as  fiir  as  we  can  see,  that  he  slew  Amasa.  What  was  a
bleeding  corpse  to  the  man  who  had  smitten  many  a  hero,  and  who  now  was  governed
by  jealousy,  hatred,  contempt,  and  pride  ?  It  is  this  loss  of  moral  sensibility  which
has  made  such  men  as  Napoleon  I.  so  terrible  a  scourge.  There  are  other  men  of,
perhaps,  equally  gtpong  will,  but  their  moral  susceptibilities  restrain  them  from  briitaliiy.

V.  Clbaklt  defined  pdbposb.  Joab  knew  what  he  intended  to  dn.  The  narrative
shows  that  he  watched  for  opportunity.  He  did  not  wish  to  encourage  revolt  against
royal  authority,  but  he  did  wish  and  purpose  to  avenge  his  displacement  from  supreme
command  by  the  death  of  his  rival,  to  prove  his  power  to  David  by  actually  assuming
the  leadership  and  suppressing  the  revolt,  and  to  vindicate  before  the  people  his
superiority  in.  the  state.  Purpose,  clearly  defined,  is  a  practical  addition  to  power.  It
avoids  waste  of  energy,  and  converts  subsidiary  appliances  into  instruments  of  great
significance.  By  such  purpose  the  whole  nature  of  the  man  and  all  his  strong  and
unhallowed  passions  are  condensed  and  concentrated  into  one  channel.

General  lessons.  1.  We  see  the  supreme  importance  of  prayer  fur  the  converting
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  men  of  great  natural  powers  may  have  tliem  governed
by  a  principle  according  to  the  will  of  God.  2.  The  appearance  of  unhallowed  feelings
in  the  heart  should  be  at  once  an  occasion  of  prayer  and  self-control,  as  they  will  be  sure
to  combine  to  influence  us  to  deeds  of  wrong.  3.  There  is  more  real  honou  in  being
a  man  of  lowly  abilities,  but  under  the  sway  of  holy  dispositions,  than  in  possessing  the
highest  powers  destitute  of  such  a  disposition.  4.  If  we  can  only  secure  progress  in
life  or  continued  possession  of  privileges  by  using -abilities  wickedly,  it  is  infinitely
better  to  lose  all  than  thus  sink  deeper  in  moral  and  spiritual  degradation.  5.  According
to  our  abilities  will  be  the  account  we  shall  have  to  give  unto  God.

Vers.  14 — 26. — The  causes  and  remedies  of  religious  strife.  The  facts  are :  1.  Joab
and  his  forces,  pursuing  Sheba  till  they  came  upon  him  in  the  city  of  Abel,  lay  siege
to  it.  2.  A  wise  woman  of  the  city  remonstrates  with  Joab  for  attacking  the  city,  and
refers  to  the  fact  that  when  Sheba  with  his  armed  followers  threw  themselves  into  the
city,  the  people  felt  sure  that  when  the  pursuing  foes  came  up  they  would  open
negotiations  with  the  authorities,  and  so  bring  the  conflict  to  an  end.  3.  Urging  the
impolicy  and  wrong  of  seeking  to  destroy  a  part  of  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord — a  city
which  was  as  a  mother  in  Israel — she  obtains  from  Joab  a  disclaimer,  and  a  declaration
that  it  was  only  the  rebel  and  traitor  Sheba  thst  he  was  fightin^:  against.  4.  The  wise
woman,  conferring  with  the  inhabitants,  secures  that  the  head  of  Sheba  be  thrown  over
the  wall  to  Joab,  who  then  retires  with  his  men  to  Jerusalem.  5.  A  reorganizaticn  of
the  officers  of  state  is  made,  and  Joab  regains  his  former  position  as  head  of  the  army.
The  patriotism  of  Joab  and  a  rough  kind  of  fidelity  to  David  manifested  itself  in  his
prompt  and  eager  pursuit  of  the  rebel  force  till  it  took  refuge  in  a  city  and  began  to
act  on  the  defensive.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  inhabitants  had  formally  identified
themselves  with  the  cause  of  Sheba,  though  probably  there  as  elsewhere  some  dis-
affected^ men  of  Belial  were  to  be  found.  It  is  not  always  within  the  competence  of  a
city  to  prevent  an  armed  force  entering  within  its  walls  and  virtually  tturning  its  resources
against  pursuers.  The  conflict  between  the  opposing  forces  was  becoming  desperate,
and  threatened,  if  persisted  in,  to  result  in  the  destruction  of  the  city.  The  horrors
and  wasting  issues  of  civil  war  were  impending.  At  this  juncture,  the  more  peaceably
inclined  portion  of  the  inhabitants,  encouraged  by  a  woman  who  had  gained  reputation
for  ffi.«dom,  were  anxious  to  avoid  the  calamities  of  continued  Btrife,  and  probably


OH.  XX.  1- 26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  801

having  in  mind  the  old  law  of  Deut.  xx.  11, 12,  remonstrated  with  Joab  because  he
had  not  sought  to  come  to  terms  before  having  recourse  to  arms.  And  here  we  see  a
fact  embodying  a  principle,  namely,  that  a  people  of  one  nation,  speech,  religion,
and  covenant  relation  to  Gkid,  pause  while  engaged  in  a  ruinous  strife,  and  that  it  is
pre-eminently  desirable  and  right  on  occasions  of  strife  to  seek  some  basis  of  recon-
ciliation.

I.  The  true  condition  ov  the  pkofbssbd  bbbvantb  of  Christ  is  that  or  uniti
ASS  CONCORD.  The  strife  between  Joab's  forces  and  the  people  of  this  city  was
unnaturaL  They  were  brethren,  the  chosen  race,  called  and  separated  from  all  nations
to  work  out  a  blessed  purpose  in  which  all  men  were  concerned.  Unity  and  concord
became  them.  How  good  and  beautiful  a  thing  for  them  to  dwell  in  harmony  I  The
siege  of  Abel  was  a  sign  of  an  abnormal  state  of  things.  This  is  just  what  is  taught  in
the  New  Testament.  Christ's  disciples  are  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people,  called  to
show  forth  the  glory  of  God  and  to  bless  mankind,  and  in  his  last  most  solemn  dis-
courses and  great  prayer  he  sets  forth  their  unity  and  concord  as  the  only  state  befitting
them,  and  congruous  with  his  spirit  (Johu  xiv. — ivii.).

II.  The  breaking  out  or  belioious  strife  is  proddotive  or  serious  mischief,

AND  threatens  THE   ChURCH   AND  THE   WORLD   WITH   GREAT  CALAMITIES.        The   fact

of  the  strife  is  itself  an  evil,  and  indicates  the  presence  somewhere  of  a  mind  alien  to
the  mind  of  Christ ;  but  also  it  generates  evils  of  varied  form,  and  intensifies  their  action
in  proportion  as  the  spirit  of  strife  is  intense.  Leaving  out  of  view  just  now  the  revolt
of  Siieba  against  the  lawful  authority  of  David — regarding  him  in  that  respect  as  a
type  of  the  men  who  reject  the  authority  of  Christ — we  see  that  there  existed  a  strife
between  men  who  had  not  rejected  David's  authority.  Joab  was  contending  against
the  whole  city  of  Abel  as  though  it  were  hostile  to  him,  and  many  in  the  city  were  con-
tending against  him  as  though  he  were  an  enemy.  The  evils  of  this  were  obvious:
bad  feelings  were  engendered  and  strengthened  the  longer  the  siege  continued,  desolation
and  anguish  were  being  brought  on  many  homes,  the  city  as  a  centre  of  influence — a
mother  of  children — was  having  its  power  for  good  out  off,  and  the  one  kingdom  to  which
all  belonged  was  being  checked  in  its  progress.  That  was  the  belief  of  the  wise  woman
and  her  friends,  and  it  was  in  accordance  with  facts.  Precisely  the  same  evils  atteml
bnr  more  modern  strifes.  When  subjects  of  the  same  Lord  are  engaged  in  conflict,
whatever  the  passing  occasion,  there  is  not  only  a  dire  evil  in  the  fact  itself,  but
inevitably  bitter  unhallowed  feelings  find  scope,  many  a  Christian  heart  and  home  are
made  desolate  and  sad,  Churches  and  organizations  that  should  embody  in  themselves
all  the  kindly  fostering  influences  of  mothers  have  their  proper  spiritual  influence
weakened,  and  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  love,  peace,  and  righteousness  receives  a
check.  "  The  inheritance  of  the  Lord "  is  laid  waste.  "  The  boar  out  of  the  wood
doth  waste  it"  (Ps.  Ixxx.  13).

IIL  The  causes  of  religious  strife  mat  lib  in  mutual  misundbrstandisg
AND  NEGLECT  OF  PRIMARY  OBLIGATIONS.  Joab  fought  against  this  oity  on  the  supposi-
tion that  it  was  in  sympathy  with  Sheba ;  and  the  people  themselves  for  a  while  weie
constrained  by  his  assaults  to  assume  a  defensive  attitude.  Had  he  at  flrst,  in  accord-
ance with  Deut.  xx.  11, 12,  sought  an  interview  with  the  elders,  and  had  they  been
willing,  in  the  spirit  of  that  ancient  rule,  to  receive  his  communications,  the  strife  had
earlier  come  to  a  close,  and  brethren  would  have  been  one.  The  beginnings  of  strife  are
very  subtle,  and  it  is  hard  to  unravel  the  true  causes  from  among  the  intricate  thoughts
and  feelings  of  the  human  mind  ;  and  the  incidents  which  occasion  the  appearance  of
strife  may  be  as  far  beyond  the  control  of  communities  as  was  the  sudden  throwing  of
an  armed  force  by  Sheba  into  this  unguarded  city.  But  most  often  strife  is  kept  up
through  mutual  misunderstandings.  Opinions  are  supposed  to  be  held  which,  if  fairly
looked  at  in  an  early  stage,  would  not  be  ascribed,  and  motives  are  imagined  which
would  disappear  on  closer  acquaintance.  Perhaps  it  is  inevitable  that,  differently
constituted  and  educated  as  men  are,  judgments  must  differ  as  to  the  form  of  express-
ing truth  and  doing  Christian  work;  but  these  need  not  cause  actual  strife,  if
formed  in  a  prayerful  loving  spirit,  and  all  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  especially  may
much  contention  be  avoided  if  men  will  but  discharge  the  primary  obligation  laid
down  in  tba  ancient  law  (John  xv.  12 ;  Matt.  v.  44),  of  loving  and  praying  for  ou«
Another,  and  being  fr«nk  and  generous  in  intercourse  (Matt,  xviii.  16, 16),


502  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xx.  1—26

IV.  It  18  THE  DUTY  OF  PERSONS  OF  BEFtTTED  WISDOM  TO  BRING  ALL  THEIB  INFLTJ-
ENCB   TO  BEAR   ON    THE    PROMOTION   OP   PEACE   AND   HARMONY.        The   "  wise    Woman  "

and  those  of  her  mind  in  the  city  were  but  discharging  a  duty  they  owed  to  their  city,
their  king,  and  the  kingdom,  when,  amidst  the  discords  of  the  time,  they  brought
their  superior  intelligence  to  bear  on  a  solution  of  the  difficulties  of  the  case.  They
evidently  saw  that,  if  more  light  were  thrown  upon  the  affair,  and  proper  kindly
influences  were  brought  to  bear  on  Joab,  those  would  become  friends  who  now  were  in
the  unnatural  position  of  enemies.  The  leaders  of  opinion  in  the  city  showed  their
good  feeling  in  being  willing  to  come  to  terms,  and  their  discretion  in  availing  them-
selves of  the  superior  gifts  and  qualities  of  this  "wise  woman."  The  proper  place  of
intelligence  and  wisdom  is  at  the  head  of  movements  in  the  direction  of  concord.  A
serious  injury  is  inflicted  on  the  Church  in  seasons  of  trial  and  conflict  when  men  of
character  and  repute  keep  in  the  background,  and  leave  the  conduct  of  affairs  to
inferior  minds.  Acquired  reputation  is  a  precious  gift  that  should  be  cheerfully  laid  at
the  service  of  the  Church,  especially  in  seasons  of  sorrow.  The  soothing,  healing  power
of  the  noblest  minds  is  a  great  blessing.

V.  The  occasion  of  strife  being  ascertained,  every  effort  should  be  madb
TO  PUT  it  away.  The  occasion  of  the  strife  in  this  instance  was  the  presence  within
the  city  of  a  rebel  and  a  traitor.  Had  it  not  been  for  Sheba  entering  the  city,  Joab  and
the  people  would  not  have  so  misunderstood  each  other  as  to  come  to  actual  conflict.
Mutual  inquiry  and  explanations  revealed  the  fact  that  he  was  the  occasion  of  trouble ;
and  therefore  the  citizens  devised  means  of  getting  rid  of  him  in  accordance  with  the  rude
and  swift  justice  of  those  times.  If  in  our  religious  strifes,  whether  as  between  com-
munities or  within  separate  organizations,  we,  in  our  desire  for  peace,  search  out  some
removable  occasion  of  them,  it  then  becomes  an  imperative  duty  that  we  not  only  wish
to  see  the  occasion  removed,  but  that  we  make  vigorous  efforts,  thdugh  full  of  pain  and
sorrow,  to  put  them  away.  What  the  disturbing  cause  may  be — evil-minded  men,
or  narrow  ideas  of  our  own,  or  unhallowed  feeling,  or  an  exacting  temper,  or  undue
pressure  of  the  influence  of  the  world — can  only  be  found  out  by  conscientious  rigorous
search ;  and,  when  found  out,  it  will  probably  demand  a  very  high  and  holy  resolve  to
cast  it  away.  Probably  one  chief  reason  why  there  is  not  more  peace  and  harmony
among  Christians  is  that  they  have  not  the  heart  to  jio  deep  down  into  the  moral
causes  of  strife,  and  less  heart  to  cut  off  those  causes  when  discovered.  It  takes  very
much  grace  to  be  a  thoroughgoing  Christian.

General  lessons.  1.  Communities  and  individuals  should  watch  carefully  against
the  intrusion  within  themselves  of  whatever  may  brina  on  a  disruption  of  our  peaceable
relations  to  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  2.  It  is  possible  to  imagine  others  to  be  hostile
in  feeling  to  us,  when,  on  full  inquiry,  it  may  turn  out  that  they  have  been  misjudged ;
and  hence  we  should  be  careful  not  to  be  rash  in  iniputing  motives  to  persons  who  are
casually  placed  in  circumstances  of  seeming  antagonism.  3.  The  influence  of  cities  in  a
nation  and  of  Christian  communities  in  the  world  being  maternal  in  character,  their
purity,  peacefiilness,  and  power  should  be  most  jealously  guarded.  4.  The  influence  of
woman  in  promoting  peace  in  the  Church  of  God  is  worthy  of  the  consideration  of  all,
seeing  that  it  is  often  under-estimated,  and  that  its  power  is  of  the  most  subtle  and
persuasive  kind.  6.  We  see  in  the  removal  of  Sbeba,  the  occasion  of  the  trouble  in  the
earthly  kingdom,  and  the  subsequent  harmony  of  the  chosen  nation  during  the  reign  of
David,  a  foreshadowing  of  the  final  removal  of  the  great  spirit  of  discord  from  the  Church
of  God,  and  the  consequent  peace  and  unity  of  the  redeemed.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOSa
Vers.  1 — 3. — (Qiloal.)    2%«  insurrection  of  Sheba.

"We  have  no  part  in  David,
And  ne  have  no  inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jesse;
Every  man  to  bis  tents,  O  Israel  1 "

(Ver.  1 ;  1  Kings  xlL  16.)

Before  the  restoration  of  David  was  completed,  a  new  rebellion  broke  out.    The  peopla


e».  s».  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  603

were  still  disquieted,  like  the  sea  after  a  storm ;  the  independent  action  of  Judah  in
conducting  the  king  over  the  Jordan  aroused  the  jealousy  of  the  other  tribes ;  at  Gilgal
(1  Sam.  xL  15 ;  xiii.  8 — 10 ;  xv.  12, 13),  where  the  representatives  of  the  latter  assembled
and  met  the  king,  a  fierce  altercation  ensued  (cb.  xix.  40 — 13) ;  and  shortly  afterwards
the  trumpet  was  blown  by  Sheba  the  Bichrite  (Gen.  xlvi.  21).  "  He  who  lately  (witb
the  rest  of  Israel)  claimed  ten  parts  in  David  as  king,  disclaims  and  disowns  him  now,
as  having  no  part  in  him  at  all.  David  before  had  raised  his  hand  against  a  faithful
Bubject,  Uriah,  and  therefore  now  a  faithless  subject  raises  his  hand  against  him ;  as
a  man  sinneth,  so  ofttimes  he  is  punished.  And  as  bees,  when  they  are  once  up  in  a
•warm,  are  ready  to  light  upon  every  bough,  so  the  Israelites,  being  stirred  up  by  the
late  rebellion  of  Absalom,  are  apt  here  also  to  follow  Sheba ;  especially  finding  nothing
but  clemency,  and  David's  passing  by  their  former  revolt "  (Guild).  Concerning  this
insurrection,  observe  that  (like  others  which  have  since  occurred) —

I.  It  abose  odt  of  an  evil  disposition  indulqed  by  the  people.  They  were :  1.
Discontented  with  the  government  of  David ;  the  restlessness,  lawlessness,  and  ungoflli-
ness  which  they  displayed  in  joining  Absalom's  revolt  were  only  partially  corrected  by
recent  chastisement  (ch.  xix.  9,  10) ;  their  complaint  to  the  king  conceraing  the  conduct
of  "  the  men  of  Judah  "  (ver.  41)  was  due  more  to  regard  for  their  ovm  honour  than  zeal
for  his ;  and  was  an  indirect  expression  of  their  dissatisfaction  at  the  disrespect  which
he  had  shown  toward  them,  for  "  very  probably  it  had  been  learned  that  he  had  a  hand
in  the  movement."  2.  Contentious  in  their  treatment  of  their  "brethren;"  ready  to
find  occasion  of  offence  "  because  of  envy  "  and  ill  will ;  their  anger  being  increased  by
the  proud  and  contemptuous  bearing  of  the  latter.  Whatever  may  have  been  the
motives  of  the  men  of  Judah  in  their  recent  action,  they  were  now  as  blamahle  as  the
men  of  Israel ;  each  party  sought  to  exalt  itself  and  depreciate  the  other ;  and  "  the
words  of  the  men  of  Judah  were  more  violent  than  the  words  of  the  men  of  Israel"
(ver.  43).  "  Grievous  words  stir  up  anger "  (Prov.  xv.  1,  18 ;  xxv.  15 ;  xxix.  22).
How  differently  had  Gideon  spoken  to  the  men  of  Ephraim  under  similar  circumstances
(Judg.  viii.  1 — 3)  1  3.  Self-blinded.  Indifferent  to  their  true  interests,  without  proper
self-control,  liable  to  surrender  themselves  to  the  guidance  of  an  ambitious  leader,  and
prepared  for  open  rebellion.  Having  violated  the  sidrit  of  unity,  they  were  ready  to
destroy  the  formal  union  of  the  tribes,  which  it  had  cost  so  much  to  bring  about,  and
on  which  their  strength  and  prosperity  so  much  depended.  "Where  jealousy  and
faction  are,  there  is  confusion  and  every  vile  deed  "  (Jas.  iii.  16 ;  iv.  1,  11).

II.  It  was  instigated  by  a  worthless  leader.  "  A  man  of  Belial,  a  Benjamite  "
(like  Shimei,  ch.  xvi.  11);  "a  man  of  the  mountains  of  Ephraim"  (ver.  21);  who
probably  took  an  active  part  in  the  late  rebellion,  and  had  numerous  dependents.  "  He
was  one  of  the  great  rogues  of  the  high  nobility,  who  had  a  large  retinue  among  the
people,  and  consideration  or  name,  as  Cataline  at  Rome  "  (Luther).  1.  The  worst  (as
well  as  the  best)  elements  of  a  people  find  their  chief  embodiment  in  some  one  man,
who  is  the  product  of  the  prevailing  spirit  of  his  time,  and  adapted  to  be  its  leader.

"  Avarice,  envy,  pride.
Three  fatal  sparks,  have  set  the  hearts  of  all
On  fire."

(Dante.)

In  his  selfish  ambition,  Sheba  sought  for  himself  individually' what  the  men  of  Israel
Bought  for  themselves  as  a  whole.  2.  Such  a  man  clearly  perceives  the  popular  feeling
and  tendency,  with  which  he  sympathizes,  and  finds  therein  his  opportunity  lnr
effecting  his  own  purposes.  The  design  of  Sheba  was,  doubtless,  to  become  head  of
a  new  combination  of  the  northern  tribes.  3.  He  seizes  a  suitable  moment  for  rais  ng
bis  seditious  cry;  and,  instead  of  quenching  the  sparks  of  discord,  kindles  them  into
•  blaze.  "They  claim  David  as  their  own.  Let  them  have  him.  We  disclaim  hiui
altogether.  The  son  of  Jesse  1  Let  every  man  cast  off  his  yoke,  return  liome,  and
unite  with  me  in  securing  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  I "  What  at  another  time
would  have  been  without  effect,  is  now  irresistible  with  the  people.  Nothing  is  more
unstable  than  a  multitude ;  one  day  crying,  "  Hosannal "  another,  "  Not  this  Man,  but
Barabbas ! "
m.  It  attained  a  danqeboub  magnitude.    "  And  all  the  men  of  Israel  went  up


604  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xx.  1—26.

from  after  David,  and  followed  Sheba  the  son  of  Biohri "  (rer.  2)  ;  "  Now  will  Sheba
do  us  moie  harm  thau  Absalom "  (ver.  6).  The  insurrection:  ].  Was  joiued  in  by
great  numbers  of  the  people.  2.  Spread  over  the  greater  portion  of  the  country.  "  He
went  through  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,"  rousing  them  to  action,  and  gaining  possession
of  the  fortified  cities.  3.  Threatened  to  produce  a  permanent  disruption  of  the  kingdom.
"  It  was,  in  fact,  all  but  an  anticipation  of  the  revolt  of  Jeroboam.  It  was  not,  as  in  the
case  of  Absalom,  a  mere  conflict  between  two  factions  in  the  court  of  Judah,  but
a  struggle  arising  out  of  that  conflict,  on  the  part  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  to  recover
its  lost  ascendency "  (Stanley).  With  what  anxieties  must  it  have  filled  the  mind  of
the  restored  monarch  I  And  how  must  it  have  led  him  to  feel  his  dependence  upon
God]  The  influence  for  evil  which  one  bad  man  sometimes  exerts  is  enormous  (Ecclea.
ix.  18).  It  is,  nevertheless,  limited ;  and,  though  it  prevail  for  a  season,  it  is  at  length
"brought  to  nought"  (Ps.  xxxvii.  12,  20,  35 — tO).

IV.  It  endbd  in  utteb  discompitubb.  The  first  act  of  David,  on  arriving  at
Jerusalem,  attended  by  the  men  of  Judah,  who  "  clave  unto  the  king  "  (after  setting  his
house  in  order,  ver.  3),  was  to  adopt  energetic  measures  to  put  down  the  insurrection ;
and  these  succeeded  (though  in  a  different  manner  from  what  he  expected).  1.  Many
who  at  first  followed  Sheba  deserted  him  when  they  had  tiine  for  reflection  and  saw  the
approach  of  the  king's  army ;  so  that  he  found  it  necessary  to  seek  safety  in  the  far
north.  2.  He  was  beheaded  by  those  among  whom  he  sought  refuge ;  and  "  rewarded
according  to  his  wickedness  "  (oh.  iii.  39).  "  Evil  pursueth  sinners  "  (Prov.  xiii.  21 ;
XL  19).  3.  All  the  people  returned  to  their  allegiance.  "  While  to  men's  eyes  the
co-operation  of  many  evil  powers  seems  to  endanger  the  kingdom  of  God  to  the  utmost,
and  its  affairs  appear  to  be  confused  and  disturbed  in  the  unhappiest  fashion,  the
wonderful  working  of  the  living  God  reveals  itself  most  gloriously  in  the  unravelment
of  the  worst  entanglements,  and  in  the  introduction  of  new  and  unexpected  triumphs
for  his  government "  (Erdmann). — D.

Vers.  4 — 13. — (Gibbon.)  The  mwrder  of  Amasa.  "  And  Amasa  took  no  heed  to
the  sword  that  was  in  Joab's  hand  "  (ver.  10).  Amasa  (son  of  Abigail,  David's  sister,
and  Jelher  an  Ishmaelite,  and  first  cousin  of  Joab,  ch.  xvii.  25)  joined  Absalom  in  his
rebellion;  and  must  have  been  a  man  of  great  ability,  courage,  and  influence,  from  the
fact  that  he  was  appointed  by  him  "  captain  of  the  host  instead  of  Joab,"  and  afterwards
promised  by  David  the  same  post  (ch.  xix.  13).  This  promise  "involved  no  injustice
to  Joab  himself,  for  he  had  long  been  notorious  for  too  great  severity  in  war,  and  had
just  acted  with  such  direct  disobedience  to  the  royal  command  in  Absalom's  case,  that
it  was  impossible  to  overlook  his  offence  without  endangering  the  royal  prerogative  "
(Ewald).  Whilst  it  was  adapted  to  conciliate  the  men  of  Judah,  it  was,  nevertheless,
certain  to  give  offence  to  Joab  and  cause  future  trouble.  It  does  not  appear  that  he
was  formally  replaced  by  Amasa;  but  the  commission  given  to  the  latter  (ver.  4)
"  was  intended  as  the  commencement  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise "  (Keil).  And
when  he  exhibited  undue  delay  in  its  fulfilment  (ver.  5),  David,  "wishing  to  have
nothing  to  do  with  Joab,"  sent  Abishai  to  pursue  after  Sheba  (ver.  6).  "  And  there
went  out  after  him  Joab's  men"  (ver.  7)  under  Joab  (who  deemed  himself  still
commander-in-chief).  At  "  the  great  stone  which  is  in  Gibeon"  (ch.  ii.  13;  xxi.  1;
1  Chron.  xxi.  29)  he  met  Amasa  returning  with  his  military  levies,  and  on  saluting
him  with  the  kiss  of  peace,  dealt  him  his  death-blow  (vers.  8 — 10) ;  passed  on,  followed
(after  a  brief  hesitation  at  the  spectacle  of  their  murdered  captain)  by  "  all  the  people ; "
finished  the  war,  and  returned  to  Jerusalem.  In  this  tragedy  notice :  1.  The  clanger
•/  holding  a  responsible  position  hy  one  who  is  ill  quailed  for  it  through  want  of
natural  ability,  proper  antecedents,  timely  appointment,  public  confidence,  adequate
zeal  and  energy.  "  The  cause  of  Amasa's  delay  is  not  stated.  It  may  have  been  the
unwillingness  of  the  men  of  Judah  to  place  themselves  under  the  orders  of  Amasa
(contrast  vers.  13  and  14),  or  it  may  have  been  caused  by  a  wavering  or  hesitation  in  the
loyalty  of  Amasa  himself.  This  last  is  evidently  insinuated  in  ver.  11,  and  no  doubt  this
was  the  pretext,  whether  grounded  in  fact  or  not,  by  which  Joab  justified  the  murder  of
Amasa  before  David  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  2.  T?ie  Umdency  of  repeated  crimes  to
induce  more  daring  criminality.  This  was  Joab's  third  murder  (ch.  iii.  27 ;  xviii.  14),
in  addition  to  his  complicity  in  the  death  of  Uriah;  less  excusable,  more  guileful,


CH.  XX.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  60F

malicious,  and  reckless  than  any  other ;  his  motive  being  jealousy  of  a  rival.  "  No  lift
is  safe  that  stands  in  his  way,  but  from  policy  he  never  sacrifices  the  most  insignificant
life  without  a  purpose  "  (oh.  ii.  27—30 ;  xviii.  16 ;  xx.  20).  "  By  degrees  men  grow
more  and  more  bold  and  unfeeling  in  the  commission  of  crimes  of  every  Itind;  untii
they  vindicate  and  glory  in  their  villainies ;  and  when  such  daring  offenders  ar«
actuated  by  ambition  or  revenge,  they  will  not  be  restrained  by  the  ties  of  relationship
or  friendship;  nay,  they  will  employ  the  guise  and  language  of  love  to  obtain  the
opportunity  of  perpetrating  the  most  atrocious  murders.  The  beginninj;  of  evil  should
therefore  m  everything  be  decisively  resisted  "  (Scott).  3.  The  infliction  of  deserved
ptmiahment  by  an  unauthorized  and  wicked  hand.  "  Amasa  is  innocent  of  the  crime
of  seeking  Joab's  place,  for  which  he  is  murdered  by  him,  yet  he  is  guilty  before  God
for  bis  siding  with  Absalom.  Whereupon  we  collect  that  ofttimes  men  suffer  inno-
cently for  some  crimes  that  are  laid  to  their  charge,  and  in  respect  of  the  persons  who
•re  the  pursuers ;  yet  in  God's  judgment  they  are  justly  punished  for  other  sins,
wherein  either  they  have  been  spared  or  else  have  not  been  noted  to  the  world ;  and
as  many  at  the  hour  of  their  death  and  execution,  publicly  have  acknowledged  "
(Guild).  4.  The  commission  of  a  great  crime  by  one  who  possesses  great  abilities  and
renders  great  public  s&rvices.  Alas !  that  a  man  of  such  military  skill,  practical  sagacity,
and  tried  fidelity  as  Joab  (now  far  advanced  in  life),  should  have  been  so  "  hardened  by
the  deoeitfulness  of  sin" !  Once  more  he  saved  the  monarchy ;  and  once  more  David
was  compelled  to  bear  with  him  (ch.  iii.  39 ;  xix.  13).  "  He  probably  fdt  obliged  to
show  some  indulgence  to  a  man  who  was  indispensable  to  him  as  a  soldier,  and  who,
notwithstanding  his  culpable  ferocity,  never  lost  sight  of  his  master's  interests."  His
indulgence  was  doubtless  also  due,  in  part,  to  the  consciousness  of  his  own  sin  (Ps.  li.
3),  which  made  him  unwilling  to  inflict  the  penalty  of  the  law  on  one  who  had  been
his  partner  in  guilt.  But  at  length  judgment  overtakes  the  transgressor ;  the  Law  is
vindicated ;  and  the  ways  of  God  to  men  are  justified  (1  Kings  ii.  5,  6,  28 — 35).  Near
the  very  spot  where  his  crowning  act  of  perfidy  was  perpetrated,  Joab  received  his
death-blow  from  the  hand  of  Benaiah  (1  Chrou.  xvi.  39), — D.

Vers.  15 — 22. — (Abel-beth-Maaoah.)  A  peacemaher.  "  Then  cried  a  wise  woman
out  of  the  city.  Hear  1  hear  I  "  (ver.  16).  1.  Hard  pressed  by  the  forces  of  Joab,  Sheba
threw  himself  into  the  fortified  city  of  Abel-beth-Maachah  (in  the  north-west  extremity
of  Palestine).  The  feelings  of  its  inhabitants  toward  him  are  not  stated.  But  Joab
soon  appeared  ;  and,  without  entering  into  any  negotiations  with  them,  made  prepara-
tions for  attack.  "Taking  advantage  of  an  oblong  knoll  of  natural  rock  that  rises
above  the  surrounding  plain,  the  original  inhabitants  r^sed  a  high  mound  sufficiently
large  for  the  city.  With  a  deep  trench  and  strong  wall  it  must  have  been  almost
impregnable.  The  besiegers  cast  up  a  mount  against  the  city,  'and  it  stood  in  the
trench ' "  etc.  (Thomson, '  The  Land  and  the  Book ').    A  deadly  conflict  was  imminent.

2.  At  this  juncture  a  wise  woman  presented  herself  at  the  wall ;  and,  having  obtained
a  hearing,  sought  to  make  peace ;  nor  was  her  endeavour  fruitless.  "  There  was  a  little
city,"  etc.  (Eccles.  ix.  14, 15).  "  Wisdom  is  better  than  strength.  Wisdom  is  better
than  weapons  of  war ;  but  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good  "  (Eccles.  ix.  16,  18).  As
one  bad  man  exposed  the  city  to  destruction,  so  one  good  woman  efiected  its  deliverance.

3.  There  is  often  much  need  of  a  pea^maker  to  heal  the  strife  that  arises  between
individuals,  families,  cities,  Churches,  and  nations.  Regarded  as  an  example  to  others,
this  "  wise  woman  "  of  Abel —

L  Possessed  an  excellent  spirit;  observant,  prudent,  sagacious,  peaceful,  faithful,
just,  and  benevolent.  Hence  she  was  prompted  to  go  of  her  own  accord,  individually
and  independently,  to  "seek  peace,  and  pursue  it"  (1  Pet.  iii.  11;  Ps.  xxxi v.  12-^-16 ;
Gen.  xiii.  8, 9).  1.  Being  grieved  at  the  sight  of  strife  between  brethren,  and  the  prospect
of  the  miseries  which  they  were  about  to  inflict  on  each  other.  2,  Being  desirom  of
preventing  the  evil  which  threatened  them,  and  promoting  their  welfare.  Her  chief
concern  was  about  her  own  city,  which  was  likely  to  be  the  greater  suflerer;  but  she
was  also  (like  Joab,  ver.  20)  concerned  about  others,  and  the  general  good  of  Israel,  in
which  Abel  was  "  a  mother-city,"  a  part  of  "the  inheritance  of  Jehovah  "  (ver.  19).  3.
Having/artA  in  the  common  sense  of  men,  their  regard  for  their  own  interest  (when  they
saw  it,  not  blinded  by  prejudice),  their  love  of  justice,  their  generally  good  intentions


608  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [cfl.  xx.  1—26.

(when  not  under  the  influence  of  wralh  and  revenge),  and  their  susceptibility  to  the
power  of  persuasion.  4.  Being  determined  to  make  every  possible  effort  and  sacrifice,  and
undergo  any  personal  risk  and  suffering  for  the  sake  of  peace.  She  was  doubtless  will-
ing (as  others  have  been)  to  lay  down  her  own  life  if  thereby  the  lives  of  others  might
be  spared.  "  Peacemakers  are  fire-quenchers,  who,  although  they  may  with  plying  of
engines  and  much  ado,  rescue  a  pile  of  buildings  from  the  flames,  yet  their  eyes  will
be  sure  to  smart  with  the  smoke  "  (E.  Harris).

II.  Adopted  an  admirable  method  ;  thereby  justifying  the  "  wisdom  "  with  which
she  was  credited.  Perceiving  that  there  was  some  misunderstanding  between  the  con-
tending parties,  her  aim  was  to  clear  it  up;  if  there  were  any  real  cause  of  contention,
to  remove  it;  and  thus  dispose  them  to  peace.  This  she  endeavoured  to  effect  by:  I.
Seizing  the  opportune  moment  for  interposition  ;  promptly  availing  herself  of  the  pause
before  the  attack.  Instead  of  "  battered  the  wall "  (Authorized  Version),  read,  "  were
devising  to  throw  down  the  wall."  There  is  generally  such  a  time  for  the  work  of  a
peacemaker,  which,  if  it  be  neglected,  may  be  afterwards  too  late.  2.  Making  use  of  cour-
teous, gentle,  reasonable,  and  impressive  speech.  "  Hear  the  words  of  thine  handmaid."
Like  the  woman  of  Tekoah  (ch.  xiv.  4),  she  was  a  mistress  in  the  art  of  persuasion.
"  The  tongue  of  the  wise  is  health  "  (Prov.  xii.  18) ;  "  a  tree  of  life  "  (Prov.  xv.  4 ;  x.  20 ;
xviii.  21).  3.  Ascertaining  the  nature  of  the  misunderstanding,  and  the  occasion  of
complaint;  and,  for  this  purpose,  going  directly  and  separately  to  the  persons  con-
cerned, and  learning  it  from  their  own  lips.  She  knew  the  sentiments  of  her  people,
especially  that  they  felt  aggrieved  that  no  communications  should  have  been  made  to
them  by  Joab,  and  suspected  his  destructive  and  merciless  designs.  And  now  she
Bought  to  discover  what  were  his  real  thoughts  and  purposes  in  relation  to  them.  How
much  mischief  would  be  prevented  if  contending  parties  would  only  be  at  pains  to
understand  one  another  I  4.  Removing  aU  misconception,  and  producing  the  conviction
in  each  party  of  the  just  aims  and  good  intentions  of  the  other.  To  Joab  she  said,
"  You  evidently  deem  this  city  deficient  in  good  sense ;  whereas  it  has  been  always
noted  for  its  wisdom  and  conciliatory  disposition  and  counsel.  You  think  the  penple
contentious  and  rebellious;  I  assure  you  in  their  name  that  we  are  amouo;  the  most
peaceable  and  faithful  in  Israel.  Yet,  without  any  communication  with  us,  so  as  to
ascertain  our  feelings,  and  without  any  reasonable  cause,  you  are  about  to  give  an
important  city  of  Israel  to  the  devouring  sword.  Why  will  you  bring  to  ruin  what
belongs  to  the  Lord?"  On  the  other  band,  from  his  reply,  it  was  made  apparent  that
he  was  not  desirous  of  their  destrnction  (as  they  supposed),  but  only  sought  to  inflict
a  just  punishment  on  a  notorious  traitor  in  their  midst,  and  was  under  the  necessity
(if,  as  he  had  supposed,  they  harboured  him,  participated  with  him  in  rebellion,  and
resolved  to  defend  him  to  the  utmost)  of  making  an  attack  upon  them  for  that  purpose.
"  Far  be  it,  far  be  it  fi:om  me  .  .  .  The  matter  is  not  so,"  etc.  (vers.  20,  21).  Mis-
understanding was  now  at  an  end,  but  a  real  occasion  of  difference  remained.  6.
Obtaining  needftd  concessions  on  both  sides.  "Deliver  him  only,  and  I  will  depart  from
the  city  .  .  .  Behold,  his  head  shall  be  thrown  to  thee  through  the  wall."  If  (as  is
doubtful)  the  people  had  (from  whatever  reason)  at  first  shown  favour  to  the  cause  of
Sheba,  they  were  now  persuaded  by  her  to  do  otherwise,  "and  so  they  ended  the
matter."  6.  Bequiring  no  sacrifice  of  principle;  but  only  urging  a  course  conformable
to  "goodness,  righteousness,  and  truth,"  and  consistent  with  professed  obedience  to  the
will  of  the  Lord.  "  The  jusl  punishment  of  one  atrocious  criminal  is  frequently  mercy
to  great  numbers"  (Scott).  "Follow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness"  (Heb.  xii.  14 ;
Eom.  xiv.  19 ;  Jas.  iii.  17, 18).

III.  AoHlEVBD  AN  EMINENT  TBiuMPH — the  triumph  of  peace.  "  And  he  blew  the
trumpet"  (yer.  22)  summoning  to  peace,  as  Sheba  had  blown  it  summoning  to  war
(ver.  1).  It  was  a  victory  over  error,  distrust,  wilfulness,  wrath,  injustice,  rebellion ;
and  one  by  which :  1.  An  immense  evil  was  prevented.  2.  The  general  good  was  pro-
moted. 8.  The  Divine  kingdom  (as  represented  in  the  government  of  David)  was
confirmed.  4.  The  peacemaker's  joy  was  fulfilled.  The  wise  woman  accomplished  what
she  had  set  her  heart  upon ;  and  in  blessing  others  was  herself  blessed.  "  Blessed  are
the  peacemakers,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  9).  "  Of  the  following  thingn,"  said  a  Jewish  rabbi,
"  men  reap  the  fruits  both  in  the  present  and  the  future  life — honouring  &ther  aiul
mother,  bratowing  benefits,  and  making  peace  between  men."


CH.  XX.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  8AMTJEL.  807

Bemares.  1.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  estimate  too  highly  the  worth  oJ  peace  among
men.  2.  Those  who  would  make  peace  between  others  must  themselves  be  at  peace
with  God,  with  their  own  hearts,  and  with  their  neighbours.  The  peacemaker  must
not  be  a  peacebreaker.  3.  The  greatest  Peacemaker  the  world  has  ever  seen  is  Jesus
Christ,  who  is  "  our  Peace  "  (Eph.  ii.  14).  4.  In  proportion  as  we  partake  of  his  spirit
we  shall  endeavour  to  heal  all  imholy  strife  and  promote  "  peace  on  earth." — ^D.

Vers.  1,  2. — Departure  from  and  adherence  to  Christ.  A  sudden  change  in  the
aspect  of  affairs.  The  occasion  was  a  fierce  dispute  between  the  Israelites  and  the  men
of  Judah  as  to  the  right  of  the  latter  to  go  so  far  towards  the  restoration  of  the  king
without  consulting  the  former.  The  causes,  however,  are  to  be  found  partly  in  eld
jealousies  between  the  tribes;  partly  in  the  unallayed  resentment  of  the  Benjamites  on
account  of  the  setting  aside  of  the  house  of  Saul  from  the  royalty,  and  its  transfer  to
the  tribe  of  Judah ;  partly  in  the  excitement  of  men's  minds  by  the  rebellion  under
Absalom,  and  its  suppression.  A  spark  only  was  wanted  to  produce  another  desolating
flame,  and  that  was  supplied  by  the  sudden  summons  of  Sheba  to  the  men  of  Israel.
Hence  another  insurrection,  which  seems  to  have  been  begun  without  consideration,  and
which  was  brought  to  an  end  speedily  and  ignominiously.  The  men  of  Israel  followed
Sheba ;  but  those  of  Judah  "  clave  unto  their  king,"  and  conducted  him  "  from  Jordan
even  to  Jerusalem."  The  division  thus  for  the  time  produced  has  its  counterpart  in
the  spiritual  sphere.  It  may  serve  to  illustrate  especially  the  more  open  and  manifest
departures  from  the  Divine  King  which  at  times  occur,  under,  perhaps,  some  leader,
and  the  steadfast  adherence  to  him  of  his  friends,  which,  at  such  times,  becomes  more
pronounced  and  manifest.

L  The  nature  and  causes  or  defection  from  Christ.  1.  Its  nature.  It  is  the
casting  off  of  his  rule  over  mind,  heart,  life.  It  may  be  secret  or  it  may  be  open,  and
may  be  with  or  without  emphatic  declaration,  with  or  without  open  adherence  to  a
leader  of  rebellion  against  him.  But  it  ought  not  to  he  confounded  with  separation
from  a  particular  Church,  or  renunciation  of  a  particular  humanly  constructed  creed.
We  do  wrong  if  we  condemn  any  oue  as  having  departed  from  Christ  because  he  has
departed  from  us.  There  is  room  for  great  variety  of  conception  and  expression  as  to
Christian  truth,  and  of  modes  of  sincerely  and  truly  serving  Christ;  and  he  recognizes,
as  loyal  subjects  of  his,  many  in  all  Churches,  and  not  a  few  outside  all  Churches.  At
the  same  time,  it  must  be,  and  ought  to  be,  distinctly  maintained  that  to  reject  his
supreme  authority  in  matters  of  belief  and  practice,  to  think  and  express  our  thoughts
without  regard  to  his  teaching,  to  feel  and  act  without  recognition  of  his  commands,  is
to  reject  him ;  to  openly  declare  that  we  no  longer  recognize  his  authority  is  open
rebellion  against  him.  2.  Its  causes.  (1)  Original  unreality  in  professed  adherence  to
Christ.  The  religion  of  many  is  hereditary  and  traditional,  and  therefore  only  formal.
They  have  experienced  no  radical  change  of  heart.  They  are  without  true  faith  and
love,  "They  have  no  root,"  and  so  "  in  time  of  temptation  fall  away"  (Luke  viii.  13).
(2)  Dislike  of  the  government  and  laws  of  Christ.  Their  holiness,  the  extent  of  their
requirements,  their  unbending  nature,  the  restraints  they  impose.  Pride  revolts  against
them,  and  self-will,  and  carnality  in  general ;  and  the  propounders  of  religions  that  are
more  indulgent  to  the  lower  nature  are  eagerly  listened  to  and  accepted.  (3)  Super-
ficial feeling  as  to  the  need  of  Christ.  He  is  not  felt  to  be  indispensable  to  the  soul ;
to  part  from  him  is  not  felt  to  involve  very  serious  loss.  (4)  Neglect  of  devotion.  It
is  by  habits  of  prayer  and  other  spiritual  exercises  that  the  soul  is  kept  in  communion
with  Christ,  and  his  Spirit  received,  through  whose  influences  faith,  love,  and  obedience
are  maintained  in  vigour.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  spiritual,  and  can  be  realized  only
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (5)  Dissatisfaction  with  the  results  of  serving
Christ.  A  superficial  religion  must  be  unsatisfactory;  and  when  the  vanity  of  its
exercises  and  fruits  is  felt,  no  wonder  if  it  should  be  given  up  altogether.  To  experi-
ence the  substantial  blessedness  of  serving  Christ,  we  must  commit  ourselves  to  him
heartily  and  wholly.  Then  we  shall  know  too  well  his  precionsness  to  heed  those  who
would  entice  us  to  forsake  him.  (6)  The  influence  of  others.  The  men  of  Israel  would
not  have  deserted  David  when  they  did,  if  Sheba  had  not  blown  his  trumpet  and
■ummoued  them  to  follow  him.  In  like  manner,  the  latent  disloyalty  of  men  to  Christ
may  remain  concealed,  and  they  may  appear  to  be,  and  regard  themselves  as  being,  his


508  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMtlBL.  l<m.xx.l—Z6.

gix)d  subjects,  until  some  bolder  spirit  heads  a  revolt,  and  "  draws  away  disciples  after
him  "  (Acts  xx.  30).  Or  the  pernicious  influence  may  come  from  inconsistent  Christiana,
unworthy  ministers  of  religion,  or  corrupt  Churches.  Men  do  not  sufBciently  distinguish
between  Christ  and  his  professed  representatives,  and  find  in  the  evil  discerned  in  them
an  excuse  for  deserting  him.  (7)  Disbelief  of  Christ's  power,  or  will,  to  execute  justice
on  those  who  are  unfaithful  to  him.  Did  men  realize  the  tremendous  issues  involved
in  cleaving  to  or  rejecting  Christ,  they  would  not  so  loosely  hold  their  religion  or  so
readily  abandon  it.  Did  they  seriously  regard  his  picture  of  the  doom  of  those  who
will  not  have  him  for  their  King  (Luke  xix.  27)  as  representing  an  awful  reality,  they
would  be  more  concerned  to  escape  it.

II.  Bbasonb  which  induce  the  paithful  to  oleavb  to  THEiK  Kino,  whoeveb
MAY  DB8BET  HIM.  1.  Faith  in  his  Divine  authority.  That  he  is  King  by  Divine  right,
and  must  and  will  reign,  and  make  all  his  foes  his  footstool  (Ps.  ii. ;  ex.  1 ;  1  Cor.
XV.  25).  2.  Love  to  him.  Originating  in  gratitude  for  his  redeeming  love,  becoming
attachment  to  him  from  discernment  and  approval  of  his  infinite  excellences,  and
to  his  government  and  laws,  because  the  renewed  heart  is  in  harmony  with  them.
3.  Experience  of  the  blessings  of  his  reign.  In  the  heart,  the  home,  the  people  who
truly  serve  him.  Hence,  intense  satisfaction  with  his  service.  4.  Hope  of  a  yet  happier
experience  whe/n  his  reign  is  fully  established  and  perfected.  Hope,  as  the  "  anchor  of
the  Boul,  both  sure  and  steadfast"  (Heb.  vi.  19),  keeps  the  soul  steadfast  when  storms
of  temptation  arise.  To  give  up  Christ  would  be,  it  is  felt,  to  give  up  hope  of  glory  in
his  "  everlasting  kingdom "  (2  Pet.  i.  11).  5.  Perception  of  the  worthlessness  of  his
rivals.  Observe  the  contrast  presented  between  Sheba  and  David — the  one  "  a  man  of
Belial"  (worthlessness),  the  other  "their  king."  Similarly,  when  "many  of  Christ's
disciples  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  him,"  and  he,  turning  to  the  twelve,
asked,  "Will  ye  also  go  away?"  Peter  exclaimed,  "Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go?  thou
hast  the  words  of  eternal  life.  And  we  believe  and  are  sure  that  thou  art  the  Christ,
the  Son  of  the  living  God  "  (John  vi.  66—69).  And  still  we  may  ask,  "To  whom  shall
we  go?"  Where  shall  we  find  one  to  take  the  place  of  Christ?  Who  has  equal  claims
on  our  confidence  and  affection  ?  Who  can  confer  equal  benefits?  Not  the  irreligious
multitude,  whether  of  the  coarser  or  the  more  refined  sort.  Not  the  leaders  of  sceptical
thought,  some  of  whom  simply  ignore  all  that  renders  Christ  precious  to  the  Christian ;
others  maintain  that  nothing  can  be  kni)wn  of  God,  and  that  all  that  is  believed  respecting
him  and  his  relation  to  men  belongs  to  the  region  of  imagination,  not  of  truth;  and
others  firoffer  a  religion  without  a  God.  The  Christian  sees  that  all  who  would  tempt
him  to  forsake  his  Lord  can  offer  him  as  substitutes  only  "  vain  things,  which  cannot
profit  nor  deliver "  (1  Sam.  xii.  21).  6.  Expectation  of  the  coming  of  Christ.  The
account  to  be  then  rendered,  the  judgments  to  be  pronounced,  the  rewards  and  punish-
ments to  be  distributed.  The  certainty  that  "  he,"  and  only  he,  "  that  shall  endure
unto  the  end  shall  be  saved  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  13).  For  these  reasons,  and  such  as  these,
some  of  which  are  felt  most  by  one,  and  some  by  another ;  whilst  many  may  follow
this  or  that  pretender.  Christians  who  are  really  such  will  "  cleave  unto  their  King."
— G.W.

Ver.  19. — Peaceableness  and  faithfulness.  "  I  am  one  of  them  that  are  peaceable
and  faithful  in  Israel."  The  wise  woman  probably  spoke  in  these  words,  not  so  much
for  herself,  as  for  the  inhabitants  of  her  town,  which  Juab  was  besieging.  Hence  the
adjectives  are  plural.  She  pleads  the  peacefulness  and  fidelity  of  the  people  as  a  reason
for  sparing  them.  It  was  no  fault  of  theirs  that  a  traitor  had  taken  refuge  amongst
them.  Joab  acknowledges  the  force  of  her  plea,  and  promises  to  depart  if  Sheba  were
delivered  up  to  him — a  promise  which  he  fulfilled  when  the  head  of  the  traitor  had  been
flung  to  him  over  the  wall.  The  qualities  here  mentioned  are  of  inestimable  value ;  in
an  individual  in  relation  to  his  neighbours,  fellow-citizens,  and  fellow-Christians ;  in  a
family  as  between  its  members,  and  in  relation  to  other  families ;  in  a  town,  between
its  inhabitants, and  in  respect  to  other  towns;  in  a  country,  between  the  various  classes
of  the  people,  between  the  people  and  their  rulers,  and  in  relation  to  other  countries ;
and  in  a  Church,  as  between  its  members,  and  in  its  relations  with  other  Churches  and
with  the  community  at  large.  They  are  the  subject  of  many  Scripture  injunctions  and
promises.    They  are  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  essential  paits  of  the  charactei  of  a  Christian}


OH.  XX.  1—26.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  509

the  natural  product  of  the  gospel  in  those  who  really  helieve  it.  "  The  kingdom  of
God  is  righteousness  and  peace  "  (Bom.  xiv.  17) ;  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,
piace,  long-suffering,  kindness,  goodness,  faithfulness,  meekness "  (Gal.  v.  22,  Bevised
Version);  "Love  truth  and  peace"  (Zech,  viiii  19,  Bevised  Version).

I.  Pkaobableness.  This  Christian  virtue  is  very  frequently  inculcated  in  the
Scriptures,  especially  the  New  Testament.  1.  Its  nature.  It  consists  in  a  dispositiou
to  live  in  harmony  and  friendliness  with  alL  It  shows  itself  by  courtesy  and  kindness ;
by  avoidance  of  contention  and  quarrels ;  by  carefulness  not  to  give  just  or  needless
provocation  to  others ;  by  meek  endurance  of  provocation  and  even  injustice  from  other*;
by  readiness  to  give  and  receive  explanation  and  apology ;  by  quiet,  unobtrusive  per-
formance of  one's  own  duties,  and  abstinence  from  intermeddling  with  other  people's
business ;  by  overlooking  small  offences,  and  readiness  to  forgive  greater.  2.  Its  sources.
In  some  it  is  a  natural  disposition.  As  a  Christian  virtue  it  springs  from :  (1)  Christian
love — love  to  Christian  brethren  as  such,  and  love  to  all.  This  prompts  those  in
whom  it  reigns  to  seek  the  happiness  of  others,  and  to  put  the  most  charitable  con-
struction on  their  conduct.  It  also  subdues  the  irascible' dispositions,  and  the  selfish-
ness which  so  readily  leads  to  alienation  and  contention.  (2)  Christian  humility.
"By  pride  cometh  contention"  (Prov.  xiii.  10).  The  proud  exaggerate  their  own
claims,  expect  too  much  firom  others,  resent  slight  offences,  insist  on  unreasonable
reparation.  But  the  humble  avoid,  without  effort,  such  occasions  of  strife.  Thus  love
and  humility  promote  peace ;  and  all  the  influences  and  motives  which  produce  and
foster  the  former  are  equally  favourable  to  the  latter.  3.  Its  benefits.  (1)  To  the
peaceable  themselves.  It  is  itself  happiness.  It  secures  the  good  will  of  others,  the
enjoyment  of  which  is  happiness.  It  is  a  frame  of  mind  favourable  to  the  cultivation
and  growth  of  all  Christian  virtues ;  and  to  all  those  devout  exercises  by  which  those
are  nourished  and  the  favour  of  God  realized.  (2)  To  society.  The  absence  of  the
annoyance  and  disconifirt  which  the  contentious  occasion.  The  enjoyment  of  quietness
and  rest.  The  peaceable  are  also  peacemakers,  and  promote  a  pacific  disposition  in
others.     If  all  men  were  peaceable,  wars,  small  and  great  alike,  would  cease.

II.  Faithfulness.  "Faithful,"  on  the  lips  of  the  wise  woman,  probably  meant
"loyal "  to  the  king.  It  might  well  include  also  uprightness  in  generaL  "  We  are  a
people  not  only  peaceful,  but  (as  the  word  is)  reliable,  trustworthy.  We  are  honest,
just,  steadily  occupied  with  a  faithful  discharge  of  our  duties,  at  once  to  God,  to  each
other,  and  to  the  state."  Fidelity  must  be  associated  with  peaceableness  to  form  a
noble  Christian  character;  fidelity  to  Christ  and  God,  to  conscience  and  conviction,  to
truth  and  duty,  to  promises  and  engagements;  fidelity  to  those  to  whom  we  are
variously  related  in  family,  social,  ecclesiastical,  and  national  life.  This  gives  strength
to  the  character,  as  gentleness  and  peacefulness  give  beauty.  The  two  qualities  are  not
incompatible,  but  mutually  helpful.  A  peaceful  spirit  prevents  fidelity  from  becoming
harsh,  censorious,  meddlesome,  fierce.  Fidelity  prevents  peacefulness  from  becomiUi^
an  immoral  weakness,  which  disregards  justice  and  truth,  is  ever  making  unworthy
compromisei,  and  would  rather  sacrifice  the  highest  principles  than  run  the  risk  of
arousing  the  passions  of  men  by  asserting  and  defending  them.  Only  "the  wisdom
that  is  from  above,"  which  "is  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  be  entreated,
full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  variance,  without  hypuciisy"  (Jas.  iii,  17,
Revised  Version);  in  other  words,  the  leaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit, — can  enable  us  to  give
to  each  oi  these  virtues,  peacefulness  and  faithfulness,  its  due  place. — G.  W.

Ver.  19. — Seeking  to  destroy  Oocfs  inheritance.  "Why  wilt  thou  swallow  up  the
inheritance  of  the  Lord?"  The  nation  of  Israel  was  called  the  "  inheritance  "  of  God,
because  specially  chosen  and  set  apart  for  himself,  and  therefore  specially  valued  and
cared  for  (see  Dent.  iv.  20;  ix.  26,  29).  The  "wise  woman,"  in  remonstrating  with
Joab  against  his  assault  on  Abel,  applies  the  term  to  that  part  of  the  people  which
dwelt  there.  It  was  an  assertion  of  their  right,  as  belonging  to  the  chosen  people,  to  be
protected,  not  destroyed.  The  corresponding  word  in  the  New  Testament  is  used  ol
the  everlasting  possession  which  Chriitians  will  inherit,  not  of  Christiana  themselves
(unless  Eph.  i.  18  be  an  exception).  But  the  idea  is  presented  in  other  words  (see
1  Pet.  ii.  9,  "  a  people  for  God's  own  possession,"  Revised  Version) ;  and  the  remon-
strance might  be  appropriately  addressed  to  any  who  seek  to  destroy  the  Church  of  God


610  THE  SECOND   BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xi.  1—26.

I.  Chbistians  abb  the  Lord's  inhbeitanoe.  That  part  of  mankind  which  is
specially  hb.  1.  Which  he  has  peculiarly  appropriated.  All  the  world  is  his ;  but,
while  he  has  left  the  larger  portion  of  it  for  a  time  comparatively  waste,  he  has  in
a  special  manner  claimed  and  separated  this  for  himself.  2.  For  which  he  specially
cares,  bestowing  upon  it  peculiar  culture,  watching  over  it  with  special  interest.  3,
From  which  he  expects  and  receives  special  returns.  Of  thought,  love,  confidence,  praise,
"  fruits  of  righteousness  "  (Phil.  i.  11),  glory  (Matt.  v.  16).  The  words,  "  inheritance  of
the  Lord,"  may  be  applied  to  the  whole  Church ;  or  (according  to  the  analogy  of  the
text)  to  any  part  of  it,  any  Christian  society ;  or  to  individual  Christians.  And  it  is
fitted  to  awaken  in  them  reflections  as  to  the  degree  in  which  they  are  worthy  of  the
name,  and  to  encourage  the  sincere  to  expect  the  special  protection  and  blessing  of  God.

II.  There  are  attempts  to  destroy  God's  inhekitauob.  Some  are  wrongly
charged  with  such  attempts.  Joab  declared  truly  that  his  aim  was  not  to  "  swallow  up
or  destroy  "  (ver.  20).  He  only  wished  to  punish  a  traitor,  by  doing  which  he  would
serve  instead  of  injuring  "  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord."  In  like  manner,  men  who
endeavour  to  purify  the  ChurcTi  from  error  and  sinful  practices  may  be  wrongly  charged
with  seeking  to  destroy  what  their  desire  is  to  conserve.  Reformers  are  often  regarded
as  destructives.  Such,  however,  do  need  to  be  cautioned  lest  anythins;  in  their  spirit
or  measures  should  injure  what  is  good  more  than  coirect  what  is  evil.  Some,  again,
injure  God's  inheritance  without  deliberate  intention.  Unworthy  ministers  of  religion,
hypocrites,  and  inconsistent  Christians  are  of  this  class.  But  others  are  chargeable  with
endeavouring  to  destroy  God's  inheritance.  1.  Such  as  attempt  to  destroy  faith  in  the
great  Christian  verities.  Could  they  succeed,  there  woxdd  be  no  Christiauity,  no  Church,
no  "  inheritance  of  the  Lord,"  left  in  the  world.  2.  Persecutors  of  Christians  in  general,
or  of  particular  sections  of  them.  Various  bodies  of  Christians  have  in  turn  sought  not
to  convince  (which  is  light),  but  to  root  out,  their  fellow-Christians,  employing  the  civil
power,  if  that  were  at  their  command,  or,  if  not,  using  their  wealth  or  social  influence
to  oppress  or  entice  in  order  to  suppress.

III.  The  expostulation  op  the  text  mat  bb  justlt  addressed  to  those  who
MAKE  SUCH  ATTEMPTS.  "  Why  wilt  thou  swallow  up,"  etc.  ?  The  words  may  be  used
to  urge  consideration  of:  1.  The  reasons  and  motives  which  prompt  the  attempts.  Such
as :  (1)  Hatred  of  piety  and  holiness.  I'his  often  impels  infldels  in  their  assaults  on  the
faith  of  Christians ;  but  many  who  are  called  Christians,  if  they  examined  tliemselves,
would  flnd  that  it  was  also  the  motive  of  their  endeavours  to  suppress  Christians  more
in  earnest  than  themselves.  (2)  Love  of  domination.  (3)  Pride  of  superiority,  real  or
supposed.  (4)  Indignation  at  faithful  testimony  or  reproof.  (5)  Inability  to  discern
the  marks  of  God's  true  people.  The  external  being  regarded  to  the  exclusion  of
the  internal  and  spiritual ;  the  essential  qualities  being  overlooked  because  dissociated
from  certain  over-estimated  accidentals.  A  blindness  produced  by  a  narrow  education,
or  exclusive  intercourse  with  one  kind  of  Christians.  (6)  Unholy  zeal,  such  as  actuated
St.  Paul  before  his  conversion  (Acts  xxvi.  9;  Phil.  iii.  6;  comp.  John  xvi.  2).  The
assailants  of  the  Church  or  any  part  or  member  of  it  may  well  be  urged  to  pause  aud
consider  their  real  spirit  and  motives ;  and  whether  these  will  bear  reflection,  or  'are
capable  of  justification.  2.  The  impiety  and  unrighteousness  of  such  attempts.  The
wise  woman  suggests  to  Joab,  by  the  words  she  uses,  that  he  would  be  guilty  of  these
sins  if  he  persisted  in  his  assault  on  the  town.  So  those  who  assail  the  Church  of  God:
(1)  Sin  against  God.  Whose  inheritance  they  are  invading.  So  far  as  they  succeed,
they  lessen  God's  part  in  society  and  its  affairs;  they  injure  those  who  are  precious  in
his  sight  ("He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye,"  Zech.  ii.  8 ;  comp.
Acts  ix.  4;  Bom.  iv.  15,  20;  1  Cor.  viii.  12).  The  friends  of  God  should  shrink  from
any  conduct  which  tends  to  lessen  the  testimony  for  him  in  the  world,  and  cripple  those
who  are  desirous  of  promoting  his  kingdom  according  to  their  lights.  (2)  They  violate
the  rights  of  Christians.  Every  part  of  the  Christian  community  is  entitled  to  liberty
of  profession  and  "  prophesying  "  (see  Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor's  treatise  on  this  subject).
And  to  sympathy  and  all  possible  help  from  the  rest.  All  good  citizens  are  entitled
to  the  protection  of  the  state,  'and  cannot  be  justly  persecuted  by  it  on  account  of
their  religion.  3.  Their  futility.  "The  inheritance  of  the  Lord"  cannot  be  really
"swallowed  up,"  although  certain  portions  of  it  may  for  a  time  be  injured.  "Upon
this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church ;  and  the  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it "


OH.  XXI.  1 — 22.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


611


(Matt.  xvi.  18).  4.  The  retribution  which  will  surely  follow  them.  Christians  who,  in
their  blindness,  make  them  in  any  degree,  receive  loss  and  injury  thereby  in  their  own
souls  and  in  their  influence  for  good ;  the  enemies  of  God  will  find  that  he  is  too
mighty  for  them.  He  will  "  plead  his  own  cause  "  (Pb.  Ixxiv.  22),  and  *'  avenge  his
elect"  (Luke  xviiL  7).— Q.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXI.


Ver.  1. — There  was  a  famine  in  the  days
of  Savid;  Hebre\r,  and  there  vms.  There
is  an  entire  absence  of  any  mark  of  time  to
show  in  what  part  of  David's  reign  this
famine  took  place.  It  does  not  even  follow,
from  the  mention  of  Mephibosheth's  name,
that  it  must  have  happened  at  a  time  subse-
quent to  the  sending  for  that  prince  from
Maehir's  house;  for  it  may  have  been  the
search  after  the  descendants  of  Saul  which
made  David  remember  the  son  of  his  old
friend.  The  burial,  however,  of  the  bones
of  Saul  and  Jonathan  as  an  act  of  respect
to  the  slaughtered  king  makes  it  probable
that  the  narrative  belongs  to  the  early  part
of  David's  reign,  as  also  does  the  apparent
fact  that  the  seven  victims  were  all  young
and  unmarried.  Mephibosheth,  we  read,  had
a  young  son  when  David  sent  for  him.  Now,
bo  was  five  years  old  when  his  father  was
slain  (oh.  iv.  4),  and  thus  at  the  end  of
David's  reign  of  seven  years  and  a  half  at
Hebron,  he  would  be  twelve  and  a  half
years  of  age.  The  famine  lasted  three  years,
and  if  David  had  been  king  four  or  five
years  whou  the  famine  began,  Mephibosheth,
at  the  age  of  twenty,  might  well  have  a
"  young  son  "  in  a  country  where  men  marry
early.  We  cannot  believe  that  the  famine
occurred  long  after  David  had  been  king
of  all  Israel,  because  manifestly  it  would
have  been  unjust  and  even  monstrous  to

gunish  a  nation  for  the  sins  of  a  king  who
ad  long  passed  away.  The  sins  of  its
rulers  are  visited  upon  a  nation  constantly
through  a  long  series  of  years,  but  it  is  al-
ways in  the  way  of  natural  development.
A  statesman  may  put  a  nation  upon  a  wrong
track,  and  may  involve  it  in  serious  difficul-
ties, and  even  in  irretrievable  disaster,  unless
some  one  be  raised  up  able  to  make  it  retrace
its  steps  and  regain  the  rightful  direction.
But  this  famine  was  a  direct  interference
of  Providence,  and  to  justify  it  the  sin  must
be  still  fresh  in  the  national  remembrance.
Had  it  been  an  old  crime  long  ago  forgotten,
instead  of  leading  men  to  repentance,  this
long  and  terrible  punishment  wonld  have
hardened  men's  hearts,  and  made  them
regard  the  Deity  as  vindictive.  It  is  even
probable  that  the  sin  was  still  being  com-
mitted ;  for  though  commenced  and  approved
by  Saul,  hia  oppression  and  purpose  of  gra-


dually destroying  the  native  races  was  too
much  in  accord  with  men's  usual  way  of  act-
ing not  to  be  continued,  unless  stopped  by  the
justice  of  the  ruler.  We  all  know  how  the
Ked  Indian,  the  Bushman,  the  Maori,  and
the  Australian  disappear  before  thu  advance
of  the  white  man.  It  needs  only  apathy  on
the  part  of  the  government,  and  rougher
methods  for  clearing  them  off  are  practised
than  men  would  care  to  own.  So  with
Gibeonites  and  Perizzites  and  other  native
races,  a  similar  process  would  be  going  on.
The  lands  they  held,  their  little  villages,
their  pastures,  and  above  all  their  strong-
holds, would  be  coveted  by  the  dominant
race,  and  encroachments  would  lead  to  quar-
rels, in  which  the  natives  would  find  any
resistance  on  their  part  punished  as  rebellion.
Even  David  seized  the  hill-fortress  of  Jebus
for  his  capital,  though  he  still  left  Arannah
the  nominal  title  of  king  (ch.  zziv.  23).  Saul
had  lent  all  the  weight  of  the  royal  authority
to  the  extermination  of  the  natives,  and  this
chapter  records  the  Divine  condemnation  of
wrong  done  by  the  dominantrace  to  the  abori-
gines. It  remains  to  this  day  the  charter  for
their  protection,  and  not  only  forbids  their
extinction,  but  requires  that  they  shall  be
treated  with  fair  and  even  justice,  and  their
rights  respected  and  maintained.  It  has  been
objected  that  the  execution  of  Saul's  seven
sons  was  a  political  crime  committed  to
render  David's  throne  secure.  If  at  all
to  his  advantage,  it  was  so  only  to  a  very
slight  extent.  The  sons  of  Bizpah  oould
never  have  become  pretenders  to  the  throne ;
nor  were  the  sons  of  Merab  likely  to  be
much  more  dangerous.  In  a  few  years  they
would  have  married,  and  formed  other  ties,
and  been  merged  in  tbe  general  population.
Mephibosheth  was  the  heir  of  Saol,  and
David  protected  him  and  Micha  his  son.
It  was  quite  in  the  spirit  of  the  times  to
visit  upon  Saul's  house  the  sins  of  ite  chief.
The  principle  was  the  same  as  when  all
Israel  stoned  Achan,  his  sons  and  his  daugh-
ters, his  oxen  and  his  asses,  his  sheep  and  his
tent,  for  bringing  iniquity  upon  the  people
(Josh.  vii.  24,  25).  We  keep  chiefly  in  view
the  doctrine  of  personal  responsibility;  in
the  Old  Testament  the  other  doctrine  of  the
collective  responsibility  of  a  family,  a  eity,
a  nation,  was  made  the  more  prominent.
It  was  the  Prophet  Ezekiel  who  in  oh.  xviiL
stated  clearly  and  with  Divine  fore*  that


512


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


[of.  XXL  1—22,


"  the  soni  that  sinnoth  it  shall  die ; "  but  that
the  sinner's  son,  if  he  walk  in  Ood's  statutes,
shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of  his  father ;
he  shall  surely  live.  But  the  collective
responsibility  enacted  in  the  second  com-
mandment is  still  God's  law.  In  the  philo-
aophio  jargon  of  our  times  the  two  factors
which  form  human  character  and  decide
our  fortunes  are  "  heredity  and  environ-
ment." Heredity  was  the  prevailing  senti-
ment in  David's  days ;  and  it  seemed  right
to  the  Gibeonites  that  the  sons  of  the  man
who  had  slaughtered  them  should  die  for
their  father's  sins;  and  it  seemed  just  to
David  also.  But  he  spared  the  heir  to  Saul's
throne.  There  is  no  adequate  reason  for
supposing  that  David  was  influenced  by
political  motives,  and  the  more  important
lesson  of  the  narrative  is  the  emphatic  con-
demnation given  in  it  of  wrong  and  cruelty
to  aboriginal  tribes.  David  inquired  of  the
lord ;  Hebrew,  Daeid  eought  the  faee  of
Jehovah.  The  phrase  is  remarkable,  and
not  found  elsewhere  in  Samuel.  Probably
it  means  that  he  went,  to  Gibeon  to  pray
in  the  sanctuary,  and  consult  God  by  Urim
and  Thummlm.  His  bloody  house.  The
Hebrew  means  "  the  house  on  which  rested
the  guilt  of  murder."'

Ver.  2. — Saul  songht  to  slay  them  in  his
zeal.  We  gather  from  various  incidental
circumstances  that  Saul,  in  some  part  of  his
reign,  manifested  great  zeal  in  an  attempt  to
carry  out  literally  the  enactments  of  the
Levitical  Law ;  but  he  seems  to  have  done
80  with  the  same  ferocity  as  that  which  he
displayed  in  slaughtering  the  priests  at
Xob  with  their  wives  and  children.  Thus
he  had  put  to  death  wizards  and  all  who
dealt  with  familiar  spirits  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  9),
in  accordance  with  Exod.  xzii.  18  and
Lev.  zx.  6.  In  the  same  way  he  seems  to
have  tried  to  exterminate  the  aboriginal
inhabitants  of  Palestine,  in  accordance  with
Deut.  vii.  2,  and  had  especially  massacred
a  large  number  of  Gibtonites,  in  violation
of  the  covenant  made  with  them  by  Jodhua
and  all  Israel  (Josh.  ix.  3,  15—27).  And  as
he  would  thus  acquire  'fields  and  vine-
yards" robbed  from  them  to  give  to  his
captains,  his  conduct  was  probably  popular,
and  the  cause  of  a  general  system  of  wrong
and  oppression  practised  upon  all  the  natives.
It  had  thus  become  a  national  sin,  and  as
such  was  punished  by  a  national  calamity.
Amorites ;  that  is  highlanders,  mountaineers.
Strictly  they  were  Hivites  (Josh.  ix.  7).

Yer.  3. — Wherewith  shalll  make  the  atone-
ment, etc.?  Literally  the  verb  means  to
"  cover  up,"  the  idea  being  that  of  a  veil
drawn  over  the  offence  to  conceal  it  by  means
of  a  gift  or  offering.  Thence  gradually  it
attained  to  its  religious  idea  of  an  expiation.

Ver.  4. — Ke  silver  nor  gold.    It  is  a  com-


mon practice  in  most  semi-civilized  nation!
for  a  fine  to  be  accepted  as  compensation  for
the  shedding  of  blood.  As  no  distinction
was  drawn  between  murder  and  homicide,
and  as  the  nearest  relative  was  bound  in
every  case  to  revenge  the  blood  shed,  the
custom  of  receiving  a  money  compensation
gradually  grew  up  to  prevent  the  tribe  or
nation  being  torn  to  pieces  by  interminable
revenge.  The  Arabs  still  retain  this  usage,
but  it  was  forbidden  by  the  Levitical  Law
(Numb.  XXXV.  31),  and  rightly  so,  because
a  distinction  was  there  made  between  mur-
der and  accidental  bloodshed,  and  precau-
tions taken  for  the  rescue  of  one  who  had
not  acted  with  malice.  Neither  for  ns  shalt
thou  kiU  any  man  in  Israel.  The  sing^ar
is  used  at  the  beginning  of  their  answer,  in
the  same  way  as  in  ch.  xix.  42,  43.  Lite-
rally their  words  are,  It  is  not  to  me  a  matter
of  sUver  and  gold  with  Saul  and  hii  haute,
nor  it  it  for  u»  to  put  to  death  any  one  in
Israel ;  that  is,  "  We  refuse  a  money  com-
pensation, and  it  is  beyond  our  power  to
exact  the  blood-penalty  which  would  gratify
our  anger."  They  make  it  quite  plain  that
they  do  want  blood,  while  the  Authorized
Version  makes  them  say  that  they  do  not.
The  Eevised  Version  more  correctly  trans-
lates, "  Keither  is  it  for  us  to  put  any  man
to  death  in  Israel. "

Ver.  5. — The  man  that  consumed  ns,  etc.
The  strong  language  of  this  verse  makes  it
plain  that  Saul  had  been  guilty,  not  merely
of  some  one  great  act  of  cruelty,  but  of  a
long  series  of  barbarities  intended  to  bring
about  their  utter  extirpation.

Ver.  6. — ^We  wiU  hang  them.  The  pun-
ishment indicated  here  really  was  impale-
ment, but  in  Numb.  xxv.  4,  where  the  same
verb  is  used,  we  find  that  the  criminals  were
put  to  death  first,  and  that  the  impalement
was  for  the  purpose  of  exposing  their  bodieai
to  view,  like  the  practice  a  century  ago  of
gibbeting.  But  the  Gibeonites  were  pro-
bably very  barbarous,  and,  when  David  had
delivered  the  seven  lads  into  their  hands,
would  perhaps  wreak  upon  them  a  cruel
vengeance.  Seven  were  chosen,  because  it
is  the  perfect  number,  with  many  religioiio
associations ;  and  unto  the  Lord  means  "  pub-
licly." So  among  the  Romans  sub  Jove
meant  "in  the  open  air"  (comp.  Numb.
xxv.  4  ),  In  Oibeah.  This  was  Saul's  native
place  and  home,  and  was  selected. by  the
Gibeonites  as  the  spot  where  the  bodies
should  be  exposed,  to  add  to  the  humiliation
and  shame  of  the  fallen  dynasty.  Saul,
whom  the  Lord  did  choose.  If  this  reading
is  correct,  the  phrase  can  only  be  used  as  a
taunt.  But  in  ver.  9  we  find  bahar,  "  on  the
hill,"  instead  of  hehir,  "  chosen,"  and  the
right  rending  probably  is,  "in  Gibeah,  on
the  hiU  of  Jehovah."


OH.  XXL  1—22.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


613


Ver.  8. — ^Hichal.  It  was  Merab  who
became  the  wife  of  Adriel  the  Meholathite
(1  8am.  XTiii.  19).  Miohal  was  ohildless
(see  oh.  vi.  23).  Whom  she  brought  up
for.  This  is  one  of  the  many  oases  of  un-
trnstworthineBs  in  the  renderings  of  the
Authorized  Version.  We  have  noticed  a  very
flagrant  instance  before  in  eh.  v.  21.  The
object  of  these  mistranslations  is  always  the
same,  namely,  to  remove  some  verbal  discre-
pancy in  the  Hebrew  text.  The  Hebrew
says  here  "five  sons  of  Michal,  whom  she
bare  to  Adriel ; "  but  Michal  never  bore  a
cliild,  therefore  something  mnst  be  snbsti-
tuted  which  will  save  the  Hebrew  from  this
verbal  inaccnraoy,  and  Michal  must  be  re-
presented as  having  taken  Merab's  place
(perhaps  at  her  death),  and  been  foster-
mother  to  her  children.  This  explanation
is,  it  is  true,  taken  &om  the  Jewish  Targum;
but  the  Targum  never  professes  to  be  an
exapt  translation,  and  constantly  perverts
the  meaning  of  the  plainest  passages  for
preconceived  reasons.

Ver.  9. — ^The  beginning  of  barley  harvest.
The  barley  became  ripe  in  April,  about
the  time  of  the  Passover  (Deut.  xvi.  9).  The
wheat  was  not  ripe  till  Pentecost.

Ver.  10. — ^Bizpah  .  .  .  took  saokoloth,
and  spread  it  for  her  upon  the  rook ;  rather,
against  the  roch,  so  as  to  form  a  little  hut
or  shelter  to  protect  her  from  the  glaring
blaze  of  the  sunshine.  The  word  "upon"
has  led  many  commentators  to  suppose  that
she  used  it  as  a  bed ;  but  this  is  not  the
meaning  of  the  Hebrew,  though  given  by
the  Vulgate.  The  sackcloth  was  the  loose
wrapper  or  cloak  which  formed  the  outer
dress  of  mourners.  As  reganls  the  bodies
of  those  crucified  or  impaled,  the  Law  re-
quired that  they  should  be  taken  down
and  buried  that  same  evening  (Deut.  xxi.  23).
Here  they  remained  exposed  for  six  nionths,
as  a  grim  trophy  of  (iibeonite  vengeance.
TTntil  water  dropped  upon  them  out  of  heaven ;
Hebrew,  was  poured  upon  them;  until  copi-
ous and  heavy  rains  came.  The  outpour-
ing of  these  rains  would  put  an  end  to  the
famine,  and  be  regarded  as  a  proof  thiit  the
wrath  of  Heaven  was  appeased.  There  is  no
rcasoji  for  supposing  that  tliese  rains  came
before  the  usual  period,  in  autumn,  which
was  about  the  middle  of  October.  Thus,
for  six  months,  with  no  other  protection
than  her  mantle  of  sackcloth  hung  against
the  rock,  this  noljle  woman  watched  the
decaying  bodies  of  lier  loved  ones,  until  at
last  her  devoted  conduct  touched  David's
heart,  and  their  remains  were  honourably
interred.

Ver.  12. — The  street  of  Beth-shan;  He-
brew, the  broad  place,  or  square,  just  inside
the  gate,  where  the  citizens  met  for  busi-
ness.   It  was  upon  the  wall  of  this  square

II.  SAMUEL


that  the  Philistines  had  hanged  the  bodies
of  Saul  and  of  his  sons  (I  Sam.  xxxi.  12).
The  men  of  Jabesh-Gilead ;  Hebrew,  the
lords  or  owners  of  Jabesh-Gilead.  The
phrase  occurs  also  in  1  Sam.  xxili.  II,  12  of
the  citizens  of  Keilah,  and  is  found  also  in
the  Books  of  Joshua  and  Judges.  (For  thb
brave  exploit  of  these  men  in  rescuing  the
bodies  of  their  king  and  his  sons,  see  1  Sam.
xxxi.  11 — 13 ;  and  for  David's  generous  ap-
proval, ch.  il  5.)

Ver.  14. — The  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan.
The  Septuagint  adds,  "and  the  bones  of
them  that  were  hanged."  As  it  is  expressly
said  in  ver.  13  that  these  bones  were  col-
lected, we  cannot  doubt  but  that  the  remains
of  the  seven  grandsons  were  interred  with
those  of  Saul  aud  Jonathan,  in  the  tomb  of
Kish,  their  common  ancestor.  But  whether
the  Septuagint  has  preserved  words  that
have  dropped  out  of  the  Hebrew  text,  or  has
added  them  to  make  the  tact  plain,  is  more
than  we  can  answer.  Zelah,  Nothing  more
is  known  of  this  place  than  that  it  was  in
the  tribe  of  Benjamin.

Ver.  15. — ^Moreover.  A  new  narrative
begins  here,  and  the  heroic  acts  related  in
It  are  taken  probably  from  some  record  of
the  martial  deeds  of  David  and  his  mightles.
We  have  already  seen  that  the  Book  of  Jasher
(oh.  1.  18)  was  a  national  anthology,  full  of
balladsand  songs  in  praise  of  gloriousexploits
of  Israel's  worthies.  The  source  of  the  nar-
ratives recorded  here  apparently  wa.-)  a  his-
tory in  prose,  and  commenced,  perhaps,  with
David's  own  achievement  in  slaying  Goliath
— a  deed  which  called  forth  the  heroism  of
the  nation,  and  was  emulated  by  other
brave  men.  These  extracts  were  probably
given  for  their  own  sake,  and  are  repeated
in  1  Chron.  xx.  4 — 8,  where  they  are  placed
immediately  after  the  capture  of  Eabbiih ;
but  they  here  form  an  appropriate  intro-
duction to  the  psalm  of  thanksgiving  in
ch.  xxli.  It  was  usual  in  Hebrew,  in
making  quotations,  to  leave  them  without
any  attempt  at  adapting  them  to  their  new
place;  and  thus  the  "moreover"  and  "yet
again,"  which  referred  to  some  previous
narrative  in  the  history,  are  left  unchanged.

Ver.  16. — Ishbi-benob.  The  Hebrew  has
Ishbo-benob,  whioli  Gesenius  interprets  as
meaning  "  dweller  upon  the  height."  But
surely  the  man's  name  would  not  be
Hebrew;  he  was  a  IJapliah,  and  we  shall  not
be  able  to  explain  his  name  until  we  know
the  language  of  the  Kephaim.  Of  the  sons
of  the  giant ;  Hebrew,  of  the  children  of  the
Baphah;  that  is,  he  belonged  to  the  race
of  the  Rephaim,  the  word  not  signifying
"  sons,"  but  the  members  of  a  stock.  It  is
translated  "  children  "  in  Numb.  xiii.  22,  28,
etc.  (For  the  Kephaim,  see  note  on  oh.  v.
18.)  "The  Baphah  "  may  be  the  mythic  pro-

2  L


614


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


[oh.  XXI.  1—22.


genitor  of  the  Bephaim,  but  more  probably
it  is  simply  the  singular  of  "  Bephaim,"  and
"children  of  the  Raphah"  a  more  poetio
way  of  describing  the  race.  Three  hundred
shekels.  It  weighed,  therefore,  about  eight
pounds ;  the  spear-head  of  Goliath  was  just
twice  as  heavy  (1  Sam.  xvii.  7).  Girded  with
a  new.  The  Vulgate  supplies  "sword,"
which  the  Authorized  Version  has  adopted.
The  Septuagint  reads  a  "mace"  instead  of
"  new; "  others  think  that  he  had  a  new
suit  of  armour.  If  the  narrator  had  thought
it  of  sufficient  importance  to  let  us  know
that  the  article  was  new,  he  would  scarcely
have  left  the  thing  itself  unspecified.  It  is
eviilent,  howeyer,  that  the  Septuagint  did
not  read  hadasha,  "new,"  but  the  name
of  some  strange  waiUke  instrument,  which
being  unknown  to  the  scribes,  they  substi*
tnted  for  it  a  word  which  they  did  know,
but  which  makes  no  sense.  We  cannot,
howeyer,  depend  upon  the  translation  of  the
Septuagint,  "  mace."  The  want  of  special
knowledge  on  the  part  of  the  translators  of
the  Septuagint,  thuugh  partly  accounted  for
by  the  long  absence  from  Palestine  of  its
authors,  and  their  having  to  depend  entirely
upon  such  knowledge  of  their  language  as
survived  at  Alexandria,  is  more  than  we
should  have  expected  or  can  quite  under-
stand. Here,  however,  there  is  nothing  re-
markable in  their  not  knowing  the  exact
meaning  of  this  curious  weapon  of  the  Ee-
pbaite ;  but  plainly  it  could  not  be  a  mace,
but  must  have  been  something  that  could  be
girt  upon  him.  The  Authorized  Version,
moreover,  gives  a  look  of  probability  to  the
insertion  of  "  sword,"  which  is  wanting  in
the  Hebrew;  for  it  does  not  connect  his
purpose  of  killing  David  with  the  hadasha.
The  Hebrew  is,  "And  Ishbo-benob,  who
was  a  Hephaite,  and  whose  spear  weighed
three  hundred  shekels,  and  who  was  girt  with
an  hadasha ;  and  he  thought  to  smite  David."

Ver.  17. — ^Ihe  men  of  Savid  sware  unto
him.  David's  men  were  specifically  the
mighties,  who  had  so  long  been  his  friends
and  companions.  They  now  bound  him  by
an  oath  never  again  to  fight  in  person,  lest
he  should  be  singled  out  for  combat  by
some  warrior  among  the  enemy  and  slain.
Ihe  light  of  Israel.  The  lamp  in  the
dwelling  was  the  proof  that  there  was  life
there,  and  so  it  became  the  symbol  of
prosperity.  In  Job  xviii.  5, 6  the  extinction
of  the  lamp  signitios  the  destruction  of  the
family.  Uav.d  was  evidently  now  king,
and  under  bim  Israel  was  advancing  to
freedom  and  empire.  His  death  would
have  plunged  the  nation  back  into  weak-
ness and  probable  ruin.

Ver.  J  8. — Gob.  In  the  parallel  passage
(1  Chron.  xx.  4)  this  place  is  called  Oezer,
and  the  Septuagint   has    6a(h.     It    was


probably  some  unimportant  spot,  except  aa
being  the  site  of  this  battle,  and  the  scribes,
knowing  nothing  about  it,  made  corrections
at  their  fancy.  Sibbeohai  the  Hnshathite.
The  name  is  spelt  in  the  same  way  in
1  Chron.  xi.  29  and  xz.  '4,  but  in  the  list  of
the  mighties  he  is  called  Mebunnai  (oh.  xxiii.
27).  In  1  Chron.  xxvii.  11  we  find  that
he  had  the  command  of  the  eighth  division
of  the  army,  consisting  of  twenty-four
thousand  men.  He  is  called  "the  Hu-
shathite,"  as  being  a  descendant  of  Hushah,
of  the  family  of  Judah,  in  1  Chron.  ir.  4.
Saph,  which  was  of  the  sons  of  the  giant ;
Hebrew,  of  the  Baphah.  He  is  called  Sippai
in  1  Chron.  xx.  4.

Ver,  19. — Elhanan  the  son  of  Jaare-
oregim,  a  Beth-lehemite,  slew  Goliath  the
Gittite.  The  words  "the  brother  of"  are
inserted  by  the  Authorized  Version  in  order
to  bring  this  place  into  verbal  agreement
with  1  Chron.  xx.  5,  where  we  read  that
"  Elhanan  the  son  of  Jair  slow  Lahmi
the  brother  of  Goliath  the  Gittite."  The
Jewish  Targum  had  the  same  reading  as
that  still  found  in  the  text,  but  regards
Klbanan,  "God  is  gracious,"  as  anotljer
name  for  David,  and,  instead  of  Jair  or  Jaare,
reads  Jesse.  Its  translation  is  as  follows :
"And  David  the  sou  of  Jesse,  the  weaver
of  veils  for  the  sanctuary,  who  was  of  Beth-
lehem, slew  Goliath  the  Gittite."  Possibly
the  Authorized  Version  is  right  in  con-
cluding that  the  present  text  is  a  corruption
of  that  in  1  Chron.  xx.  5.  For,  first,  the
repetition  of  oregim,  "weavers,"  is  sus-
picious, the  Hebrew  being,  not  "  weaver's
beam,"  but  the  plural  "weavers'  beam,"
metwr  oregim.  Next,  Jaare  is  a  transpo-
sition of  the  letters  of  Jair  (in  the  Hebrew)
made  probably  in  order  that  the  compound
Jaare-oregim  may  obey  the  rules  of  Hebrew
grammar.  More  important  ia  it  tc  notice
that  Lahmi  is  part  of  the  word  "Bethle-
hemite"  (Hebrew,  Beth-hcUlahmi),  and  might
thus  easily  suggest  to  the  eye  of  a  scribe  the
completion  of  so  well-known  a  word.  We
must  add  that  among  the  thirty  Gibborim
is  "  Elhanan  the  son  of  Dodo  of  Bethlehem."
Whoever  slew  Goliath's  brother  would  cer-
tainly attain  to  high  rank  among  the  heroes,
but  if  the  name  Jair  is  right,  the  Elhanan
there  spoken  of  is  not  the  person  who  slew
Lahmi.

Ver.  21. — Jonathan.  He  was  brother  to
the  subtle  Jonadab  who 'helped  Amnon  on
his  way  to  ruin'.  The  spelling  of  the  father's
name  shows  how  little  importance  we  can
place  on  the  Hebrew  text  in  the  matter  of
names.  He  is  called  here  in  the  Hebrew
Shimei,  which  the  Mussori  tes  have  changed
into  Shimeah.  In  ch.  xili.  3  we  have  Shimeah,
in  1  Sam.  xvi.  9  Shammah,  and  in  1  Chroa
iL  13  Shimma,


CH.  XXI.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  615

Ver.  22.— These  four  were  bom  to  the  j  personal  conflict,  though    the    Hebrew  in

giant;  Hebrew,  were  horn  to  the  Raphah;  ver.  17  would  admit  of  the  translation  that,

that  is,  belonged  to  the  race  of  the  Bephaim,  I  with  the  aid  of  Abishai,  David  himself  slew

who  seem  to  have  settled  in  Oath  in  large  '  Ishbi-benob.    But  the  glory  of  all  tliat  the

numbers,  and  to  have  been  a  fine  race  of  |  Gibborlm  did  belonged  aUo  to  David  their

men.   (Foi  their  antiquity,  see  Gen.  xiv.  5.)  king.

By  tlie  hasi  of  Savid.    Not  necessarily  in  '


HOMILETICa

Vers.  1 — 14. — A  ttory  of  deferred  retribution.  The  facti  are :  1.  A  famine  con-
tinuing for  three  years,  and  inquiry  being  made  of  the  Lord  by  David,  he  is  informed
that  it  was  in  consequence  of  Saul's  sin  in  slaying  the  Gibeonites.  2.  David,  asking
of  the  Gibeonites  what  he  shall  do  for  them  by  way  of  atonement  for  the  wrong  done,
is  informed  that  they  seek  not  gold  or  the  life  of  any  man  of  Israel,  but  require  that
seven  of  Saul's  family  should  be  put  to  death,  and  hung  up  in  Gibeah  of  Saul.  3.
David  at  once  yields  to  the  demand,  but  spares  Mephibosheth  in  consequence  of  the
special  bond  between  himself  and  Jonathan.  4.  On  the  seven  men  being  put  to
death,  Eizpah  spreads  out  sackcloth  on  a  rock,  and  keeps  watch  by  the  corpses  against
beasts  and  birds  of  prey  till  the  rain  falls.  5.  David  ia  told  of  the  deed  of  Eizpah,  and  he
soon  after  obtains  the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  from  Jabesh-Gilead,  and  causes  the
remains  of  the  seven  sons  to  be  collected,  and  has  the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan
interred  in  the  family  burying-place  in  Zelah  of  Benjamin.  We  assume  that  the
record  in  this  chapter  refers  to  an  earlier  period  in  the  life  of  David  than  does  the
narrative  in  the  few  preceding  chapters,  which  evidently  are  designed  to  set  forth  the
connection  of  David's  great  sin  with  its  punishment.  The  story  relates  the  incidents
connected  with  an  otherwise  unrecorded  sin  of  Saul's,  and  the  retribution  which  came
indue  course  upon  his  house.  The  varied  questions  and  topics  of  interest  and  difficulty
suggested  by  the  narrative  may  be  best  seen  and  considered  by  taking  them  in  their
natural  order.

I.  Pbovidbntial  calls  to  the  considebation  of  foeootten  sins.  Whatever
physical  account  may  be  possible  of  the  famine  referred  to,  looked  at  in  its  relation  to
God's  education  and  discipline  of  his  ancient  people,  it  is  here  to  be  viewed  as  a
providenlial  call  to  the  nation  to  reflect  on  sins  committed  during  the  reign  of  Saul.
The  conduct  of  Saul  was  a  most  scandalous  sin  (Josh.  ix.  8 — 17).  When  the  sin  was
committed  we  know  not ;  probably  in  the  latter  part  of  his  reign,  when  all  was  in
confusion.  His  family  were,  it  would  seem  from  vers.  1,  4 — 6,  implicated  in  the
deed.  It  is  obvious  that  the  nation  had  condoned  the  action  of  Saul,  and  for  some
years  subsequent  to  his  death  there  was  no  conscience  in  the  people  with  respect  to
tills  great  sin.  It  was  for  the  purpose  of  arousing  the  public  conscience  and  giving
occasion  for  bringing  this  sin  to  mind  that  the  famine  was  permitted  to  arise.  Even
though  the  famine  was  by  natural  causes,  yet  it  was  used  by  God  for  this  special
moral  end.  There  is  a  tendency  in  nations  especially  to  be  unmindful  of  their  sins,
and  individuals  also  are  liable  to  the  same  danger.  The  eager  rush  of  affairs  and
absorption  of  energy  in  new  lines  divert  attention  from  the  moral  character  of  acts.  The
forgotten  sins  of  men  are  countless.  But  God  does  not  forget,  and  now  and  then  events
arise — calamities,  personal  troubles,  and  disagreeable  consequences  of  former  deeds —
which  are  practically  God's  calls  to  us  to  remember  our  transgressions.  The  prophet  no
longer  proclaims,  but  God  reaches  the  conscience  in  manifold  ways,  and  to  many  an
easy-going  soul  the  words  will  come  some  day,  "  Son,  remember."

II.  The  connection  between  moral  and  physical  evil.  The  mention  of  famine
in  the  land,  and  the  public  sin  of  the  late  king  as  being  related  the  one  to  the  other,
establishes  in  this  instance,  on  the  authority  of  God,  the  close  connection  of  moral  and
physical  evil.  Whether  famines  do  not  ariie  where  there  is  no  special  moral  evil  of
which  they  are  the  chastisements  or  reminders,  is  not  the  question,  and  makes  no
difference  to  the  fact  in  this  case.  God  would  have  his  people  know  that  their  past
sins  were  now  bearing  fruit  in  physical  form.  Nor  is  there  anything  really  wonderful
or  excejitional  in  the  truth  here  established.    To  man,  physical  evil  is,  as  a  whole,  the


B18  THE  SECOXD  BOOK   OP  SAMUBL.  [en.  xxi.  1—22.


fruit  of  sin.  Maa's  moral  nature  is  in  contact  with  the  physical  order  by  means  of  a
material  vehicle,  and  as  his  moral  nature  is  supreme  and  cannot  but  affect,  by  its
deterioration  and  wrong  direction,  the  vehicle  by  which  it  acts,  so  the  lesser  must  be
disordered  by  the  dif order  of  the  greater.  The  miseries  of  human  life  would  not  have
come  had  man  kept  his  first  estate.  All  our  painful  struggles  in  commerce  and  war,
our  diseases  and  poverty,  are  the  outcome  of  a  heart  not  as  the  heart  of  God.  That
Sodorn  should  fall  under  fire,  that  Pharaoh  should  be  swept  into  the  sea,  that  Jerusalem
should  be  trodden  down,  were  but  physical  facts  consequent  on  sin,  bold  and  striking,
yet  not  different  in  essence  from  the  general  connection  of  sin  and  suffering.  Hence,
Christ's  mission  to  make  man's  physical  environment  for  ever  helpful  and  not  hurtful
to  him,  by  rendering  his  moral  nature  perfect,  and  therefore  his  whole  nature  in
perfect  adjustment  to  all  that  is.

III.  The  duty  oi'  sbakchino  out  the  moral  elements  connected  with  oub
PHYSICAL  TROUBLES.  The  famine  was  a  reality  in  the  experience  of  every  one ;  but
it  was  the  will  of  God  that  the  people  should  notice  its  connection  with  pational  sin.
They  must  consider  its  spiritual  bearings;  they  must  associate  their  difficulties  with
previous  conduct.  As  a  rule,  there  is  an  indisposition  to  do  this.  Physical  law,  fate,
chance,  almost  anything,  is  referred  to  as  being  occasion  or  cause  of  present  difficulties
and  sufferings,  rather  than  personal  sin.  Of  course,  individual  sin  is  not  the  cause  of
great  public  calamities,  and  not  immediately  of  private  sufferings.  Yet  we  ought,  as  a
matter  of  rigid  thought,  to  trace  back  the  physical  troubles  of  the  world,  so  far  as  man
is  sufferer,  to  the  moral  cause.  In  nations  troubles  are  referred  to  the  restlessness  of
other  nations,  or  ignorance  of  political  economy,  or  of  sanitary  laws,  or  decaying
commerce;  but  we  should  go  deeper,  and  see  what  pride  and  arrogance  and  defiant  tone
may  have  done  to  inflame  other  nations,  and  what  sinful  neglect  In  spending  money
on  wars  rather  than  on  instruction  of  the  people.  In  personal  life  we  should  search
and  see  to  what  extent  failures  in  business,  in  health,  and  enterprise  are  connected  with
persistent  violation  of  some  of  the  primary  laws  which  God  has  given  for  our  guidance.

IV.  MissiNO  CLUBS  TO  THE  SOLUTION  OF  DIFFICULTIES.  There  are  evident  difficulties
connected  with  this  narrative  which  press  upon  the  ordinary  reader  at  once.  Th«
demand  for  seven  lives,  and  tlie  yielding  to  the  demand,  both  perplex  us.  The  pressure
of  a  famine  on  a  whole  people,  and  the  use  of  that  famine  for  purposes  of  chastise-
ment for  a  sin  of  years  past,  do  not  lessen  the  perplexity.  Apart  from  this  narrative,  we
know  nothing  of  any  act  done  by  Saul  toward  the  Gibeonites.  Now,  if  instead  of  this
abrupt  declaration  of  the  existence  of  a  national  sin,  and  of  the  retribution  for  it  in  the
terrible  form  of  seven  deaths,  we  were  told  of  the  precise  circumstances  under  which
Saul  violated  the  national  compact  of  Josh.  ix.  15 — 17,  we  should  then  certainly  see
the  wisdom  and  appropriateness  of  the  famine  to  arouse  the  national  conscience,  and  the
justice  of  the  terrible  retribution  on  Saul's  family.  The  clue  here  missing  because  of
the  incompleteness  of  history  is  but  an  instance  of  what  constantly  occurs.  In  the
Bible  there  are  many  facts  which  doubtless  would  lose  all  their  strangeness  and  seem-
ing discrepancies  and  moral  difficulties  did  we  but  know  the  details  left  unrecorded.
Historians  arc  guided  by  this  remembrance  of  missing  clues  in  their  estimate  of  men
and  characters.  In  our  judgment  on  conduct  we  often  fail  or  are  in  suspense  because
a  clue  to  some  strange  feature  is  lacking.  Especially  are  we  at  present  lacking  the  cine
to  many  events  in  the  government  of  God.  When  we  know  more  perfectly,  we  si, all
see  that  to  be  just  which  is  now  perplexing,  and,  as  a  rule,  we  may  say  that  our
ignorance  of  hidden  facts  ought  to  count  in  our  judgments  on  revealed  truth  as  wiiuii
as  our  knowledge.

V.  God  has  in  beserve  agencies  for  brinqino  the  fact  of  sin  straight  home  to
THE  conscience.  The  famine  aroused  conscience.  The  men  of  Gibeon  were  God's  ageuts
in  bringing  all  the  facts  home  to  the  conscience  of  the  nation.  The  coMusion  and
change  of  government  in  the  last  days  of  Saul  and  early  years  of  David,  before  he  lei t
Hebron  to  be  king  over  the  entire  people,  wiU  explain  why  the  Gibeonites  did  not  press
their  suit  earlier.  Although  the  sin  was  so  grievous,  it  must  have  appeared  to  any  who
now  and  then  reflected  on  it  as  though  it  were  being  passed  by,  and  that  no  means  were
at  hand  to  bring  the  new  king  face  to  face  with  the  wrong  done.  But  at  the  proper
season  God  found  means  for  calling  forth  the  Gibeonites  to  declare  the  full  facts  and  ,o
bring  the  sin  home  to  the  national  conscience.    They  proved  what  the  famine  oi<ly


OT.  m.l— 22.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  617

Indicated.  According  to  Scripture,  all  sin  is  to  be  brought  home  to  the  sinner.  The
time  may  pass,  and  means  for  so  doing  may  seem  to  be  lacking;  but  the  universe  is
God's,  and  he  has  in  reserve  agencies  by  which  the  guilty  will  be  found  out  and  the
claims  of  a  violated  law  will  be  vindicated  (Eccles.  xi.  9).

VI.  Ths  PBiNOiPLE  OF  RETBiBUTioN  IN  HUMAN.  AFrAiRS.  The  charge  of  the
Gibeonites  against  the  house  of  Saul  was  that  he,  contrary  to  the  solemn  compact  with
Israel,  had  cruelly  slain  their  countrymen,  and  the  demand  was  that  for  this  wicked
violation  of  a  treaty  the  lives  of  his  sons  should  be  forfeited.  Here  was  an  appearance
of  hardship  on  the  sons ;  but,  had  we  the  missing  clue,  it  would  probably  appear  that
they  were  parties  to  the  deed.  The  deed,  however,  was  national,  being  wrought  by
the  representative  of  the  nation ;  and,  acting  on  the  usage  of  the  age  in  such  matters,
the  Gibeonites  demanded  that  the  lives  of  the  representatives  of  the  nation  of  that
date  should  be  sacrificed.  The  principle  was  that  of  lex  talionis — "  an  eye  for  an  eye."
We  are  not  called  upon  to  pronounce  a  harsh  judgment  on  their  demand.  It  may,
however,  be  said,  in  extenuation,  that  if  Saul  and  his  family  were  the  real  murderers  of
the  Gibeonites,  there  was  no  more  wrong  in  their  execution  than  in  the  execution  of
any  modern  murderer.  The  principle  on  which  the  claim  proceeded  was  that  of  all
criminal  law  in  relation  to  human  life.  The  Law  of  Moses  was  based  on  it.  "  An  eye
for  an  eye  "  (Exod.  xxi.  24)  is  but  a  statement  of  the  principle  that  runs  through  all
the  Mosaic  laws  (cf  Lev.  xxiv.  17 — 22).  Ox  for  ox,  sheep  for  sheep,  life  for  life, — this
was  the  form  of  the  old  jurisprudence.  It  is  also,  so  far  as  circumstances  permit,  the
principle  of  modern  law  and  modem  punishment.  According  to  a  man's  crime  bo  is
his  punishment.  With  us  the  loss  of  liberty  is  the  form  punishment  titkes,  but  its
degree  depends  on  the  degree  of  the  crime.  Proportion  is  kept  in  view  in  every
sentence.  The  words  of  our  Saviour  (Matt.  v.  38,  39)  are  not  intended  to  set  aside
the  administration  of  justice  by  the  state,  but  to  indicate  that  the  personal  feeling  of
his  followers  is  not  to  be  vindictive.  In  the  spiritual  kingdom  all  are  brethren  beloved,
and  love  is  to  be  the  dominant  feeling.  Moses  was  speaking  of  what  "judges,"
administrators  of  the  public  laws  of  the  state,  should  do  (Deut.  xix.  16 — 21),  and  in  the
discharge  of  official  duty  they  were  to  be  impartial,  and  not  pity  or  spare.  Christ
speaks  of  what  his  individual  followers  should  do  and  be  in  their  personal  relations  to
brethren  in  the  new  spiritual  kingdom ;  they  must  not  imagine,  with  the  Pharisees,
that  a  principle  of  action  designed  for  "judges"  in  a  state  is  to  be  transferred  to  their
private  relationships  in  his  kingdom.  Moses  distinguishes  between  the  rigid  execution
of  justice  on  crime  and  the  individual  cherishing  of  tender  and  pitiful  feelings  (Deut.
xix.  16 — 21 ;  cf.  Exod.  xxii.  21 — 27).  The  rules  for  a  state  are  not  to  be  confounded
with  rules  for  individual  life.

VII.  The  dub  maintenance  of  national  honour.  The  honour  of  Israel  was  at
stake  in  the  deed  of  SauL  Kings  comiiromise  the  nation.  David  was  quick  to  sea
that  the  wrong  done  in  cruelly  violating  a  national  treaty  must  be  atoned.  Apart
irom  the  form  of  atonement  in  this  case,  the  principle  recognized  is  most  important.
When  nations  lose  faith  in  nations,  trouble  must  come  in  terrible  form.  A  nation's
word  should  be  sacred,  and  in  relation  to  the  weakest  and  most  barbarous  as  to  the
mightiest  and  most  civilized.  The  methods  adopted  for  upholding  national  honour
will  vary  with  the  conceptions  of  what  that  honour  is.  To  keep  faith,  to  be  courteous
and  considerate  to  the  weak,  to  allow  of  no  unjust  concessions  to  the  great  because  they
ar€i  great,  and  to  promote  peace  and  righteousness  in  all  relationships, — this  is  that  in
which  honour  lies.  There  is  no  true  glory,  no  maintenance  of  honour,  in  creating  wars,
in  mere  military  triumphs,  or  in  vaunting  of  greatness.

VIII.  The  saoeedness  of  promises  made  by  belisious  men.  The  promites  made  to
the  Gibeonites  in  the  days  of  Joshua  differed  from  all  engagements  entered  into  by
other  people,  in  that  they  were  the  promises  of  the  chosen  race,  whose  conduct  towards
others  was  based  on  higher  principles.  David  felt  at  once  that  it  would  be  shocking  to
allow  heathen  men  to  imagine  that  the  servants  of  the  covenant-keeping  God  could
break  their  vows.  The  possession  of  a  religious  character  or  the  adoption  of  religious
professions  lends  a  special  sacredness  to  our  engagements.  It  is  no  wonderful  thing
if  one  who  believes  in  no  eternal  morality  easily  sets  aside  what  others  hold  to  be
binding  engagements;  and  a  careless  man  of  the  world,  whose  religion  is  only  a  name,
tnay  not  excite  surprise  if  he  sometimes  violates  his  word  or  does  a  mean  action.    But


518  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxi.  1— 22.

to  be  a  follower  of  Christ  lends  an  nnusual  sanctity  to  everything  in  life.  The  Apostle
Peter  has  suggested  "what  manner  of  persons"  we  ought  to  be  by  virtue  of  our  holy
profession,  and  our  Lord  himself  expects  more  of  his  followers  than  can  be  looked  for
from  others  (Matt.  v.  43 — 48).  We  should  not  forget  that  we  may  compromise  the
honour  of  our  Lord  in  our  words  and  deeds.

IX.  The  conflicting  op  public  obligations  with  pbivate  enoaoehents.  David,
acting  according  to  the  light  and  usage  of  the  age,  felt  bound  to  give  up  the  male
meiTibers  of  the  house  of  Saul ;  but  he  had  made  a  personal  promise  to  Jonathan  (1
Sam.  XX.  14 — 17 ;  xxiii.  16 — 18)  to  spare  the  members  of  his  house,  and  had  especially
taken  Mephiboshetb  under  his  care  out  of  love  for  his  father.  Here,  then,  was  a  con-
flict of  opposing  obligations.  The  solution  was  obvious.  He  had  kept  his  promise,
and  had  not,  as  kings  too  often  were  accustomed  to  do  with  the  families  of  rivals,  cut  off  the
liouse  of  Saul  on  ascending  the  throne.  If  he  gave  them  up  now  it  was  not  a  personal
act,  but  an  act  in  the  administration  of  law.  But,  further,  he  seems  to  have  regariied
the  oath  to  Jonathan  as  relating  to  his  own  immediate  descendants,  and  hence  he  spared
Mephiboshetb  in  order  to  keep  his  kingly  promiseiwhile  making  acknowledgment  for
the  sin  of  Saul.  Rulers  are  bound  to  be  true  to  national  obligations,  though  at  the  cost
of  much  feeling,  and  sometimes  it  will  require  more  than  mere  casuistry  to  be  true  to
private  sentiments  and  obligations  while  discharging  public  duties.  Self  is  never  to  be
degraded  in  public  affairs.  If  in  nation  or  Church  the  rulers  cannot  conscientiously
discharie  obligations  involved  in  the  office,  the  proper  alternative  is  to  vacate  the  office.

X.  'I  HE  HONOUB  DUB  TO  MOBTAL  REMAINS.  The  conduct  of  Eizpah  in  keeping  off
birds  and  beasts  of  prey  from  the  corpses,  and  of  David  in  collecting  the  bones  and
placing  the  remains  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  in  their  family  burying-place,  was  worthy  of
their  character;  it  indicated  a  refined  feeling,  a  reverence  for  the  dead,  a  deep  sense  of
the  sanctify  of  all  that  pertains  to  human  life  and  human  destiny.  The  mortal  remains
of  friend  and  foe  are  touchingly  suggestive  of  the  greatness  and  littleness  of  man,  ol  his
checkered  lot  on  earth,  and  the  strange  unknown  experience  on  which  his  higher  nature
enters  while  his  perishable  remains  abide  with  us.

Vers.  15 — 22. — The  difficulty  of  estahlishinq  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  world.  The
facts  are:  1.  In  one  of  his  wars  with  the  Philistines  David  waxes  faint  in  personal
conflict  with  a  <;iant,  and  is  succoured  by  the  intervention  of  Abishai.  2.  Observing
the  failing  strength  of  the  king,  his  people  deprecate  his  going  furth  with  them  to  battle,
lest  by  personal  failure  he  should  be  a  means  of  general  discouragement.  3.  On  each
(if  three  subsequent  occasions  of  battle,  a  Philistine  giant  is  slain  respectively  by
Sibbechai,  Elhanan,  and  Jonathan  son  of  Shimeah.  It  is  of  no  moment  as  to  what
precise  period  in  David's  life  the  battles  with  the  Philistines  belonged.  The  first
impression  on  reading  the  narrative  and,  at  the  same  timp,  remembering  the  promise
that  Israel  was  to  subdne  and  hold  the  land,  is  the  tediousness  of  the  process  by
which  the  complete  subjugation  of  the  heathen  was  effected,  and  the  imperfection  of
the  result  even  at  this  late  period  in  the  national  history.  Israel  all  along  had  repre-
sented the  principles  of  true  religion  as  against  idolatry,  and  the  special  object  of
David's  wars  was  to  render  the  cause  he  represented  triumphant  over  all  enemies,  and
so  establish  the  theocracy  on  an  enduring  basis.  The  difficulties  of  achieving  the  end
in  view  are  suggested  by  the  necessity  of  these  successive  conflicts  with  a  most  active
and  stubborn  foe.  In  general  outline  we  have  here  an  analogy  with  the  work  which
the  Christian  Church  has  in  hand,  and  the  difficulties  attending  its  speedy  and  com-
plete accomplishment.  The  difficulties  attending  the  subjugation  of  all  opposing  forces
to  the  kingilom  of  Christ,  and  so  permanently  establishing  a  reign  of  righteousness  in
the  earth,  may  be  indicated  as  follows.

1.  There  is  a  widespread  and  tenacious  pbeocoupation  by  evil.  The  Philistines
were  a  numerous  people,  spread  over  a  considerable  area  of  country,  bold,  resolute,
powerful,  and  therefore  very  tenacious  of  their  possessions  and  of  their  local  influence.
They  did  not  always  wait  to  be  subdued,  but  became  active  in  their  assaults  on  the
kingdom  ordained  of  God.  As  compared  with  them,  the  Israelites  were  not  so  hardy,  so
lesperate  in  fl  jhting,  and  so  strongly  influenced  by  the  thought  of  ancient  pre-emip^^  snce.
It  is  not  suiprising  that  the  conflict  should  extend  through  long  and  weary  years.  And
is  there  not  some  resemblance  here  to  modern  facts?    The  earth  is  preocoupio*  by


CH.  xxr.  1—22.]  THE   SECOND  BOOK   OF   SAMUEL.  510

forces  of  evil — numerous,  strong,  tenacious.  The  power  of  sin  has  laid  hold  of  every
form  of  human  activity,  and  has  entered  into  all  tlie  puhlic  ami  private  ramifications  of
life.  Our  preachers  at  home  and  missionaries  abroad  have  to  face  evils  hoary  with  age,
and  yet  strong  with  the  vigour  of  youth.  Nothing  is  more  conspicuous  to  Christian
workers  than  the  terrible  grip  with  which  sin  holds  the  human  soul  to  prevent  the
enthronement  there  of  the  King  of  righteousness.

II.  There  aee  makt  impeefbctions  inheiiitbd  with  the  woek  we  have  to  do.
David's  people  had  not  been  as  true  to  God  as  was  required  of  Israel  by  the  great  Law
laid  down  for  their  guidance;  and  much  of  this  imperfection  of  character  was  an
inheritance  from  the  generations  which  had  also  failed  to  fulfil  the  moral  conditions  of
conquest  as  laid  down  by  the  great  lawgiver  (Deut.  xxviii;  1,  7 — 10,  15,  25).  Because
Israel  of  the  past  had  not  been  fully  faithful,  Israel  of  David's  age  found  many  conquests
unachieved.  Failure  in  moral  character  ensured  to  posterity  an  inheritance  of  difficulty
and  sorrow.  The  work  which  a  thoroughly  righteous  people  could  have  accomplished
remains  unfinished,  with  the  additional  difficulties  created  by  unfaithfulness.  Unfortu-
nately, the  Christian  Church  has  too  closely  followed  the  example  of  ancient  Israel.  There
has  been,  in  ages  past,  sometimes  a  deviation  from  the  principles  laid  down  by  Christ  for
the  casting  out  of  sin  and  the  subjugation  of  the  world  to  himself,  and  sometimes  a  very
inefiBcient  application  of  his  instructions.  Instead  of  pure  truth,  love,  faith,  holiness  of
life,  prayer,  apd  unity  of  spirit,  there  has  been  a  blending  of  the  truth  with  human
errors,  and  a  manifestation  of  a  worldly,  time-serviiig  spirit.  This  age  inherits  not  only
the  honour  of  subduing  the  world  to  Christ,  but  the  results  of  the  imperfect  work  done
in  days  gone  by.  Our  own  spirit  is  not  so  pure  and  fit  as  it  otherwise  would  have
been ;  unfinished  undertakings  are  on  hand,  and  the  prejudice  created  by  the  sins  and
errors  of  the  Church  has  to  be  overcome  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  power  of  sin.

III.  TheEB  ABE  OCCASIONALLT  PRESENT  OIANT  FORMS  OP  EVIL  WHICH,  BESrDES  BEINO
ACTIVE    CAUSES,    TEND    ALSO    INDIBECTLT    TO    EMBAEEASS    THOSE    WHO    OPPOSE    THEM.

Philistine  giants  not  only  had  stout  arms  wherewith  to  slay,  but  their  proportions,
striking  on  the  senses  of  men,  had  the  effect  of  rendering  the  existing  means  of  resistance
and  attack  less  easily  available.  Giant  forms  excite  fear  and  awaken  self-distrust.  The
indirect  influence  on  good  men  of  great  evils  is  helpful  to  the  perpetuation  of  those  evils.
The  monstrous  forms  of  idolatry  in  vast  populations,  the  magnitude  of  the  influence
of  Mohammed,  the  terrible  hold  of  intemperance  on  multitudes,  and  the  greatness  of  evil
as  a  whole  in  the  world,  when  looked  at  with  ordinary  eyes,  at  once  bring  on  a  temporary
paralysis  of  energy.  Many  a  brave  heart  faints  in  contemplation  of  the  dreadful  forms
of  evil  that  afflict  the  world.  The  Apostle  Paul  felt  this  when  he  reminded  his  friends
to  "put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God"  (Eph.  vi.  11 — 13),  seeing  that  they  had  to  wrestle
■with  "  principalities  and  powers."

IV.  The  vaeiablb  chabactee  op  peopessino  Chbistians  iNJuaiotrsLT  apfbots  the
PEOGEESS  of  their  bntbepeise.  There  was  a  day  when  David,  fresh,  young,  pure,  full
of  faith  and  courage,  without  after-thoughts  concerning  himself,  could  calmly  face  and
slay  a  giant  (1  Sam.  xvii.  39 — 47).  But  David,  passing  the  meridian  of  life,  sensible  of
failing  powers,  and  moreover  not  free  from  the  remembrance  of  sad  departures  from  his
CJod,  could  not  perform  exploits  as  of  old,  and  was  even  in  need  of  succour  from  another
in  the  field.  A  true  picture  is  this  of  many  in  the  Christian  warfare.  They  do  not
retain  all  the  old  vigour.  The  freshness  and  power  of  godliness  fail.  Were  every  Chris-
tian to  grow  in  spiritual  strength  from  first  to  last,  were  the  spiritual  forces  in  our
religious  life  to  gain  momentum  the  longer  we  live,  and  none  to  become  weak,  what  a
mighty  army  would  the  Church  become!  The  difficulty  of  subduing  the  world  to
Christ  lies  very  much  in  the  variability  of  spritual  strength  in  those  who  form  the
Church,    Many  are  feeble  who  ought  to  be  strong.

V.  The  NEGATIVE  iNFLDENCB  OP  LEADBES  IS  wiDBSPEBAD.  The  Mends  of  David
were  wise  in  wishing  him  not  to  go  out  to  battle.  The  negative  effect  of  his  weakness
would  be  so  much  positive  advantage  to  the  Philistines.  If  he  could  no  longer  positively
inspire  by  his  courage  and  exploits,  that  very  circumstance  would  tell  against  the  cause
he  and  they  had  at  heart.  Leaders  have  great  power  by  virtue  of  their  position;
and  when,  by  any  failure  of  character,  or  wisdom,  or  knowledge,  any  inaptitude  for  the
special  circumstances  of  the  time,  they  dishearten  those  who  expect  example  and
gttidaiuM,  thej  leaXLj,  by  such  negation  of  good,  add  to  the  di£Sculties  of  th«  situation,


620  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [en.  xxi.  1— 22.

and  unwittingly  strengthen  the  position  of  evil  in  the  world.  It  wotild  form  an  instnio-
tive  study  to  trace  in  history  the  connection  of  the  slow  progress  of  Christianity  with  th«
negative  influence  of  its  leaders.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — ^14. — (Gibeon,  G-ibbah.)  Famine.  "  And  there  was  a  famine  in  the  daye  of
David  three  years,  year  after  year"  (ver.  1).  {Summary  of  the  remaining  portion  (or
appendix)  of  this  book :  1.  The  famine.  2.  Victorious  acts  in  wars  with  the  Philis-
tines (vers.  15 — 22).  3.  David's  song  of  tlianksgiving  (looMng  backward);  ch.  xxii.
4.  His  last  prophetic  words  (looking  forward) ;  ch.  xsiii.  1 — 7.  "  These  two  lyrical  and
prophetic  productions  of  David,  the  ripest  spiritual  fruit  of  his  life,  form  a  worthy
conclusion  to  his  reign  "  (Keil).  5.  List  of  his  heroes  (forming,  with  2,  an  historical
framework  for  3  and  4) ;  ch.  xxiii.  8 — 39.  6.  The  pestilence  (with  the  famine,  "  two
Divine  punishments  inflicted  upon  Israel,  with  the  expiation  of  the  sins  that  occasioned
them  ");  ch.  xxiv.]  This  famine  took  place  after  Mepbibosheth  was  brought  to  Jeru-
salem (ver.  7  ;  ch.  ix.) ;  and,  perhaps,  about  seventeen  years  after  the  death  of  Saul
(ch.  iv.  4 ;  Ix.  12).  It  is  mentioned  here  "  as  a  practical  illustration,  on  the  one  hand,
of  the  manner  in  which  Jehovah  visited  upon  the  house  of  Saul,  even  after  the  death  of
Saul  himself,  a  crime  which  had  been  committed  by  him ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
of  the  way  in  which,  even  in  such  a  case  as  this,  when  David  had  been  obliged  to
Bacrifice  the  descendants  of  Saul  to  ex|)iate  the  guilt  of  their  father,  he  showed  his
tenderness  towards  him  by  the  honourable  burial  of  their  bones."  After  long  prosperity
and  plenty  there  came  adversity  and  destitution.  No  rain  "  out  of  heaven  "  (ver.  10)
for  three  successive  years  1  What  a  sceue  of  general,  intense,  and  increasing  distress
must  have  been  witnessed  (Gen.  xii.  10 ;  xxvi.  1 ;  xlvii.  13  ;  Ruth  i.  1 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  6 ;
2  Kings  vi.  25 ;  xxv.  5 ;  Jer.  xiv.  1 — 10 ;  Acts  xi.  28).  Nor  has  it  been  unknown  in
modern  times.     Consider  it  (with  its  attendant  circumstances)  as —

I.  Calling  for  special  inquiry.  "  And  David  sought  the  face  of  Jehovah"  (ver.  1),
equivalent  to  "inquired  of  Jehovah"  (ch.  v.  19),  by  means  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim.
through  the  high  priest  (the  last  recorded  instance  of  this  method  of  ascertaining  the
Divine  will,  henceforth  more  fully  revealed  through  the  prophets);  urged  by  the  cry  of
distress,  i specially  among  "  the  poorest  sort  of  the  people  of  the  land"  (2  Kings  xxiv.
14),  on  wiiom  the  famine  pressed  with  peculiar  severity.  1.  The  misery  of  the  poor
»nd  afflicted  produces  in  every  faithful  ruler  and  in  every  right-hearted  man  a  feeling
of  compassionate  and  anxious  concern.  2.  Physical  calamities  are  often  due  to  moral
causes  ;  they  follow  human  disobedience  to  moral  laws ;  being  in  some  cases  manifestly
connected  with  such  disobedience  (as  when  famine  follows  desolating  wars,  agricultural
neglect,  etc.),  in  others,  however,  not  directly  and  apparently  so  connected.  This  con-
nection is  evident  (1)  from  the  common  convictions  of  men  who  instinctively  associate
calamity  with  crime  ;  (2)  from  the  plain  teachings  of  Scripture  (Deut.  xxviii.  15, 23, 24 ;
Ezek.  xiv.  21) ;  and  (3)  from  the  moral  government  of  the  living,  personal  God,  wherein
all  things  are  ordered  with  a  view  to  moral  ends.  8.  These  causes  should  be  diligently
searched  out,  by  proper  means — observation,  consideration,  prayer — in  order  to  their
removal.  "  It  is  not  superstition,  but  rather  the  highest  piety  and  the  highest  philo-
sophy, which  leads  a  people,  under  such  a  visitation  as  that  of  famine,  to  turn  to
Jehovah,  saying,  '  Show  us  wherefore  thou  oontendest  with  us ' "  (W.  M.  Taylor).  "  Let
us  search  and  try  our  ways,"  etc.  (Lam.  iii.  40 ;  1  Sam.  iv.  3).

II.  Leading  to  unexpected  discovert.  "  And  Jehovah  said  (through  the  oracle).
Concerning  Saul  and  concerning  the  blood-guilty  house,  because  he  slew  the  Gibeon-
Ites."  A  crime  which  had  been  committed,  not  recently,  but  twenty  or  even  thirty
years  before,  was  brought  to  remembrance,  and  set  before  the  national  conscience,
quickened  in  its  sensibility  by  the  experience  of  affliction.  "  David  must  hitherto  have
ruled  in  a  very  irreproachable  manner  to  render  it  necessary  to  go  further  back  to  find
a  cause  for  the  calamity"  (Ewald).  1.  Its  iniquity  was  great.  An  attempt  was  made
to  exterminate  (consume  and  destroy,  ver.  5)  a  poor,  dependent,  and  helpless  people;  ot
the  original  inhabitants  of  the  land  (ver.  2 ;  Josh.  ix.  S — ^27),  spared  by  solemn  oath,
devoted  to  th&  service  of  the  sanctuary  (now  at  Gibeon),  for  more  than  four  hundred


OH.  XXI.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  521

years  dwelling  peaceably  among  "  the  children  of  Israel  and  Judah  "  (Josh.  ix.  17 ;  ch.
iv.  3),  professing  the  same  faith,  and  guilty  of  no  offence  ;  many  of  them  being  ruth-
lessly slain,  others  escaping  by  flight.  2.  Its  effects  were  still  felt  by  the  "  hewers  of
wood  and  drawers  of  water"  (Nethinim,  bondmen),  who  survived,  in  bitter  grief,
popular  odium,  heavier  servitude.  Their  cries  "  entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of
sabaoth  "  (Jas.  v.  4).  3.  Its  guilt  was  unacknowledged  and  unexpiated ;  the  wrong  unre-
dressed, the  sin  unrepented  of,  and  even  ignored  and  well-nigh  forgotten.  *'  It  would
seem  that  Saul  viewed  their  possessions  with  a  covetous  eye,  as  aifording  him  the  meang
of  rewarding  his  adherents  (1  Sara.  xxii.  7)  and  of  enriching  his  family ;  and  hence,  on
some  pretence  or  other,  or  without  any  pretence,  he  slew  large  numbers  of  them,  and
doubtless  seized  their  possessions.  It  is  said  that  he  did  this  in  his  zeal  for  Israel  and
Judah,  and  this  cannot  be  explained  but  on  the  supposition  that  the  deed  was  done  in
order  to  give  the  tribes  possession  of  the  reserved  territories  of  the  Gibeonites.  And
there  is  no  doubt  this  would  be,  as  it  was  designed,  a  popular  and  acceptable  act
(Josh.  lie.  18).  Saul's  own  family  must  lave  been  active  in  this  cruel  wrong,  and
must  have  had  a  good  share  of  the  spoil ;  for  we  find  them  all,  when  reduced  to  a  pri-
vate station,  much  better  off  in  their  worlnly  circumstances  than  can  else  be  accounted
for"  (Kitto).  Here  lay  the  secret  of  the  famine,  which  was  interpreted  as  a  sign  of
Divine  wrath.

"  He  turneth  a  fruitful  land  into  a  ealt-marsh,
Because  of  the  wiolcedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein."

(Ps.  evil.  84.)

m.  Ihvolvino  impoetant  frinciples  ;  not  merely  that  sin  and  crime  are  followed
by  Divine  punishment,  and  the  wrongs  of  the  poor  and  needy  avenged  (1  Sam.  xxx.
15 — 17),  but  also  that,  men  are  dealt  with  by  God  (in  the  way  of  chastisement)  as
communities,  as  well  as  separate  souls  (Ezek.  xviii.  2 — 4).  1.  The  guilt  incurred  by
individuals  is  participated  in  by  the  natioE  to  which  they  belong  when  their  wrong-
doing is  connived  at,  profited  by,  and  not  repudiated;  and  especially  when  the  wrong-
doer is  its  recognized  representative.  2.  The  infliction  of  suffering  on  a  whole  nation,
on  account  of  the  sins  of  one  or  more  persons  therein,  is  often  oeedful  for  the  vindication
of  public  justice,  the  reparation  of  wrong-doing,  and  the  general  welfare.  3.  Although
a  nation  may  be  exempted  for  a  season,  through  the  forbearance  of  God,  from  the
chastisement  due  to  sin,  it  does  not  escape  altogether,  but  is  surely  called  to  account  in
this  world.  "  Nations  as  nations  will  have  no  existence  in  another  world,  and  therefore
they  must  look  for  retribution  in  this  "  (Wordsworth).  "  I  can  perceive  in  the  story
a  recognition  of  the  continuance  of  a  nation's  life,  of  its  obligations,  of  its  sins  from  age
to  age.  All  national  morality,  nay,  the  meaning  and  possibility  of  history,  depends
upon  this  truth,  the  sense  of  which  is,  I  fear,  very  weak  in  our  day  "  (Maurice).  "  Time
does  not  wear  out  the  guilt  of  sin,  nor  can  we  build  hopes  of  impunity  on  the  delay  of
judgments"  (Matthew  Henry).

IV.  Evoking  bbcoqnized  obligation.  "And  the  king  called  the  Gibeonites,  and
said  .  .  .  What  shall  I  do  for  you?  and  wherewith  shall  I  make  the  atonement
[expiation,  satisfaction,  means  of  reconciliation],  that  ye  may  bless  [and  no  more  curse]
the  inheritance  of  Jehovah  ?  "  (vers.  2,  3) ;  "  What  ye  say,  I  will  do  for  you  "  (ver.  5).
Whilst  acknowledging  the  national  wrong,  he  also  acknowledged  the  national  obligation,
and  expressed  his  purpose :  1.  To  redress  their  grievance,  satisfy  <AeiV  claim  for  justice,aaA
secure  t^eir  favour  and  intfrcession.  2.  To  respect  the.  justice  of  Qod  (by  whom  their
cause  was  manifestly  maintained),  so  that  prayer  might  he  heard,  and  the  famine
removed.  Unless  right  is  done,  prayer  is  vain  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18).  3.  And  to  do  whatever
might  he  possible  and  necessary  for  these  ends.  "  The  land  must  expiate  the  king's  wrong.
This  is  rooted  in  the  idea  of  the  snlidarity  of  the  people,  and  the  theocratic  king  as
representative  of  God's  people,  whence  comes  solidarity  of  guilt  between  king  and
people"  (Erdmann).    David  herein  acted  wisely  and  in  a  theocratic  spirit.

V.  Requiring  adequate  satisfaction.  (Vers.  7 — 9.)  The  expiation  was  made  by
the  crucifixion  of  the  two  sons  of  Rizpah  and  the  five  sons  of  Merab  (Hebrew,  Miohal),
"whom  she  bare  to  Adriel,"  according  to  the  demand  and  by  "the  hands  of  the
Gibeonites"  (ver.  9),  under  the  authority  and  sanction  of  the  king  (and  doubtless
with  the  approval  of  the  nation).     The  demand:   1.  Could  be  satisfied  with  nothing


522  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxi.  1— 22,

Aort  of  this.  "We  will  have  no  silver  nor  gold,"  etc.  (ver.  4);  no  private  com-
pensation could  atone  for  such  a  public  crime  and  wilful  sin  "  before  the  Lord,"  2.
Accorded  with  the  requirements  of  the  Law  (Gen.  iz.  5,  6 ;  Numb.  xxxv.  31) ;  or  at  least
with  the  custom  of  blood-vengeance,  and  the  then  prevalent  ideas  of  justice.  If  (as
is  probable,  ver.  1)  the  hands  of  the  sons  of  Saul  were  stained  with  blood,  the  Law
demanded  their  death ;  if  (as  may  have  been  the  case)  they  were  personally  guiltless,
they  suffered  from  their  intimate  relationship  to  the  murderer,  as  a  "  vicarious  sacrifice,"
and  for  the  benefit  of  the  nation.  "  To  understand  this  procedure,  we  must  bear  iii
mind  the  ancient  Oriental  ideas  of  the  solidarity  of  the  family,  strict  retaliation  and
blood-revenge — ideas  that,  with  some  limitation,  remained  in  force  in  the  legislation
of  the  old  covenant"  (Kurtz).  3.  Was  restricted  by  merciful  consideration  for  the
assuredly  innocent  and  steadfast  fidelity  to  a  solemn  engagement.  "And  the  king
spared  Mephibosheth,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  "  The  obscurities  of  this  narrative  probably  may
never  be  entirely  cleared  up.  One  thing,  however,  is  certain — these  seven  descendants
of  Saul  were  not  pretenders  to  the  crown ;  and  David  cannot  be  suspected  of  having
embraced  such  an  opportunity  to  put  them  out  of  the  way.  Neither  is  it  to  be  sup-
posed that  David  delivered  up  the  innocent  contrary  to  the  Law  (Deut.  xxiv.  16).
They  wore,  therefore,  delivered  up  to  the  avengers  of  blood  and  punished  with  death,
not  on  account  of  the  crimes  of  Saul,  but  for  the  murders  which  they  themselves,  with
the  connivance  of  Saul,  had  committed  on  the  Gibeonites,  and  for  which  they  had
hitherto  remained  unpunished  "  (Jahn,  '  Heb.  Com.,'  xxxii.).

VL  Affoeding  salutary  instruction  (whether  the  victims  be  regarded  as  having
actually  taken  part  in  the  crime  or  not).  "  As  seen  by  the  people,  the  execution  of
Saul's  sons  (who  were  not  charged  with  being  in  any  way  personally  accessory  to  their
father's  crime)  was  a  judicial  act  of  retribution ;  but  this  aspect  of  the  transaction  was
only  an  'accommodation'  to  the  current  ideas  of  the  age.  Viewed  in  its  essential
character  as  sanctioned  by  God,  it  was  a  didactic  act,  designed  to  teach  the  guilt  of  sin "'
(Kirkpatrick) ;  to  produce  repentance,  and  prevent  its  recurrence.  That  melancholy
spectacle  of  a  sevenfold  crucifixion  "  on  the  mountain  before  Jehovah,"  in  "  Gibeah  of
Saul"  (1  Sam.  x.  5;  xxii.  6),  declared:  1.  The  exceeding  culpability  of  unrighteous
zeal,  of  the  wanton  violation  of  sacred  pledges,  of  the  unjust  taking  away  of  human  life.
"  Let  us  here  learn  the  danger  of  trifling  with  oaths  and  solemn  engagements.  Pom-
hundred  years  had  elapsed  since  the  treaty  made  with  the  Gibeonites;  and  yet  in  the
sight  of  God  it  was  as  sacred  as  ever ;  so  that  he  w;ho  presumed  to  infringe  it  drew
down  a  severe  judgment  on  the  whole  nation  "  (Lindsay).  2.  The  inevitable,  rigorous,
and  impartial  execution  of  Divine  Justice.  Pi-inces  are  not  above  its  correction,  nor
bondsmen  below  its  protection.  3.  The  far-reaching  consequences  of  transgression ;  to
the  children  and  children's  children  of  the  tiansgressor.  "The  evident  intention  of
God  in  ordering  the  death  of  so  many  of  Saul's  family"  (which,  however,  is  not
expressly  stated)  "  was  to  give  public  attestation  of  the  abhorrence  of  Saul's  perfidy
and  cruelty,  and  to  strike  into  the  hearts  of  his  successors  on  the  throne  a  salutary
dread  ol'  committing  similar  offences.  The  death  of  these  seven  persons,  therefore,  is
not  to  be  regarded  as  a  punishment  inflicted  upon  them  for  personal  offences,  even
though  they  might  have  a  share  in  their  father's  persecution  of  the  Gibeonites,  but  an
act  commanded  by  God  in  virtue  of  his  sovereign  rights  over  the  lives  of  all  men,  to
teach  princes  nioderation  and  equity,  and  to  prevent  the  perpetration  of  enormous
crimes,  which  are  inconsistent  with  the  welfare  of  the  civil  government  as  well  as
incompatible  with  the  principles  of  true  religion"  (Chandler).

Vf  L  Followed  by  merciful  dbuvbranoe.  "  And  after  that  [the  expiation]  God
was  entreated  for  the  land  "  (ver.  14).  "  Long-forgotten  sin  had  been  brought  to  mind
and  acknowledged  and  expiated ;  homage  had  been  paid  to  justice ;  the  evil  of  unfaith-
fulness had  been  exposed  j  the  honour  of  the  nation  had  been  purged  from  foul  stains ;
it  had  been  shown  that  neither  kings  nor  princes  can  do  wrong  with  impunity;
maternal  fondness  had  been  touchingly  displayed ;  ■  a  long-forgotten  duty  had  been
attended  to;  a  noble  example  had  borne  fruit;  cmd  after  that  God  was  entreated  for
the  land.  The  generous  heavens  poured  down  their  showers,  the  languishing  life  of
field  and  vineyard  revived,  and  the  earth  was  clothed  with  beauty  and  teemed  with
fiiiitfulness  again.  There  was  one  more  proof  of  the  everlasting  truth, '  Rightaouanesa
exalteth  a  nation"'  (C.  Tince}.— D.


OH.  XXI.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  623

Ver.  2. — (Gibbon.)  Unrighteous  zeal.  "  And  Saul  sought  to  slay  them  in  his  zeal
to  the  children  of  Israel  and  Judah."  When  his  attempt  was  made  is  not  certainly
known ;  pussibly  soon  after  his  sparing  Amalek  (and  to  make  amends  for  it) ;  or  at  the
time  of  his  massacre  of  the  priests  at  Nob  (where  the  Gibeonites  then  assisted  the
Levites,  before  the  removal  of  the  altar  and  tabernacle  to  Gibson) ;  more  probably  at
the  time  of  his  expulsion  of  the  necromancers  and  soothsayers  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  3);
being  "one  of  those  acts  of  passionate  zeal  in  which  he  tried  to  drown  the  remorse
of  his  later  years."  His  zeal  (like  that  of  others  in  later  times)  was :  1.  Religious  and
patriotic  in  intention  and  profession ;  to  purge  the  land  of  the  remnant  of  the  heathen
(Deut.  vii.  2,  24),  to  honour  God,  to  benefit  his  people.  Good  intentions  are  not
enough  to  constitute  good  actions.  2.  Blind  and  wilful, "  not  according  to  knowledge  "
(Rom.  X.  2;  Acts  xxvi.  9).  3.  Irreverent  and  ungodly;  in  violation  of  a  solemn  com-
pact in  the  name  of  God,  and  against  those  who  were  consecrated  to  his  service.  His
humblest  ministers  should  be  held  in  respect.  4.  Unjust  and  ungrateful ;  for  they  had
done  no  wrong,  but  had  performed  useful  senrice.  5.  Proud  and  tyrannical ;  regarding
them  with  contempt,  and  taking  advantage  of  their  defenceless  condition  (1  Sam.  xxii.
6 — 19).  6.  Cruel  and  murderous.  7.  Selfish  and  covetous ;  to  appropriate  the  spoil
to  his  family  and  adherents.  8.  Popular  and  acceptable.  The  people  never  .forgave
the  crafty  manner  in  which  they  had  originally  been  induced  to  spare  their  live  s,
looked  upon  them  with  suspicion  and  dislike,  and  readily  sympathized  with  Saul's
attack  upon  them  (as  they  did  not  in  the  case  of  the  priests  at  Nob),  and  consented  to
share  the  plunder.  9.  Kestrained  and  unsuccessful.  Some  survived.  It  is  seldom
that  persecutors  are  able  to  do  all  they  endeavour  to  do.  10.  Infectious  and  disastrous,
in  its  influence  on  his  family  and  the  nation. — D.

Vers.  8 — 14. — (Gibbah.)  Sizpah.  "  And  Eizpah  the  daughter  of  Aiah  took  sack-
cloth," etc.  (ver.  10;  ch.  iii.  7).  The  days  of  harvest  had  come;  but  not  the  fruits  of
harvest.  The  heaven  was  brass,  and  the  earth  iron  (Deut.  xxviii.  23).  The  misery
of  famine  was  accompanied  by  a  sense  of  Divine  wrath  on  account  of  sin.  The  guilt  of
blood  was  on  the  land,  and  especially  on  "the  house  of  Saul,"  for  the  destruction
of  the  Gibeonites.  Nothing  would  satisfy  the  demand  of  the  sorrowing  bondservants  of
Israel,  or  (as  it  was  believed)  restore  Divine  favour,  save  the  death  of  seven  men  of
Saul's  family  (John  xi.  50).  These,  therefore,  two  of  them  being  sons  of  Eizpah,  were
taken  and  crucified  (Numb.  xxv.  4)  at  once  on  the  hill  before  Jehovah,  and  their
remains  left  unburied,  a  prey  to  ravenous  birds  and  beasts.  And  in  her  maternal  grief
and  affection,  spreading  sackcloth  on  the  rocky  floor  (either  for  her  bed  or  as  a  rough
tent  to  shelter  her),  she  watched  them  there,  under  the  scorching  sun  by  day  and  the
drenching  dews  by  night,  and  protected  them  from  molestation  until  they  received  an
honourable  burial.  "  They  were  accounted  as  accursed  and  unworthy  of  the  burial  of
dogs ;  but  she  would  not  cast  them  out  of  her  heart.  The  more  they  wore  shuimed
by  others,  the  more  she  clung  to  them ;  and  the  deeper  the  disgrace,  the  deeper  her
compassion."    Observe—

I.  Her  special  desire  and  aim  ;  for  it  was  more  than  an  instinct  of  natural  affection
that  prompted  her  watching  near  the  dead.  Regarding  their  unburied  condition  as  one
of  ignominy  (Ps.  Ixxix.  2),  and  perhaps  as,  in  some  way,  affecting  their  happiness  in
the  future  life,  she  was  desirous  of  their  being  honourably  interred.  It  was  deemed
necessary  (unlike  what  was  required  in  other  instances,  Deut.  xxi.  22,  23)  that  they
should  remain  exposed  before  Jehovah  till  assurance  was  given,  by  the  fall  of  rain,  that
the  satisfaction  was  accepted.  If  she  could  not  do  what  she  would,  she  would  do  what
she  could  (Mark  xiv.  8);  and,  by  preventing  further  injury,  render  the  fulfilment  of
her  desire  possible.  Her  intense  maternal  love  led  her  to  seek  the  safety  and  honour
of  the  dead ;  well  may  a  similar  love  lead  others  to  seek  the  safety  and  honom:  of  the
Uving  I

II.  Hek  extkaobdinabt  devotion  ;  as  it  appears  in  :  1.  'Her  unquenchable  attach-
ment. Others  might  despise  them  as  criminals,  but  she  could  only  regard  them  and
cling  to  them  as  children  (Song  of  Sol.  viii.  7).  2.  Her  humble  submission  and  resigna-
tion to  what  was  unavoidable.  "  Truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I  must  bear  it "  (Jer.  x.  19).
8.  Her  entire  self-surrender  and  self-sacrifice.  If  she  could  not  remove  their  reproach,
she  could  share  it  with  them.    4.  Her  patient  endurance  of  suffering ;  through  long  and


624  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xn.  1—22.

lonely  nights,  and  dark  and  dreary  days.  6.  Her  ceaseless  vigilance,  seal,  and  conrage.
6.  Her  unwearied,  faithful,  hopeful  perseverance.  "The  emotions  in  woman  act  as
powerful  motives  on  the  will,  and,  when  strongly  called  forth,  produce  a  degree  of  vigour
and  determination  which  is  very  surprising  to  those  who  have  usually  seen  the  indi-
vidual under  a  different  aspect "  (Carpenter).  7.  Her  importunate  prayers  for  the  fulfil-
ment of  her  desire.  "  She  refrained  from  all  violent  and  illegal  methods  of  gaining  her
ohject.  She  used  no  force  or  stratagem  to  secure  for  her  beloved  ones  a  safe  and  decent
burial;  but  waited  watchfully,  meekly,  and  humbly,  for  the  time  appointed  by  the  Lord.
Neither  did  she  give  way  to  despondency,  and  quit  the  melancholy  scene  in  wild
despair ;  but  did  what  she  could  to  alleviRte  the  drradful  evil.  Though  her  heart  was
broken  and  her  grief  too  bitter  for  utterance,  she  still  hoped  in  God,  still  looked  for  his
merciful  interposition,  and  waited  day  after  day,  and  night  after  night  until  the  rain
of  heaven  came  down  and  released  the  bodies  of  her  beloved  ones"  (Hughes,  'Female
Characters  of  Holy  Writ ').

HI.  Her  effectual  endeavotjb.  At  length  (how  long  is  not  stated)  "showers  of
blessing"  fell,  and  her  wish  was  accomplished.  Loving,  faithful,  devoted  service:  1.
Exerts  an  undesigned  influence  on  others.  "And  it  was  told  David,"  etc.  (ver.  11).
2.  Fails  not,  sooner  or  later,  to  receive  its  due  reward.  3.  Is  followed  by  effects  greater
than  any  that  were  desired  or  expected.  "David  was  pleased  with  her  tenderness,  and
was  excited  by  her  example  to  do  honour  to  the  bodies  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  (1  Sam.
xxxi.  12,  13;  ch.  ii.  5 — 7),  and  thus  showed  that  he  did  not  war  with  the  dead,  and
that  his  recent  act  in  d(  livering  up  Saul's  sons  was  not  one  of  personal  revenge,  but
of  pnblic  justice"  (Wordsworth).  She  did  more  than  she  intended;  and  what  she  did
is  to  this  day  "told  for  a  memorial  for  her." — ^D.

Vers.  15 — ^22  (1  Chron.  xx.4 — 8). — Oiants:  a  sermon  to  young  people.  "As  for  these
four,  they  were  born  to  the  giant  (Bd-rapha)  in  Gath,  and  fell  by  the  hand  of  David,
and  by  the  hand  of  his  servants "  (ver.  22).  Of  the  age  before  the  Flood  it  is  said,
"  In  those  days  were  the  giants  \_NephiHm,,  men  of  lofty  stature  and  ferocious  character]
upon  the  earth"  (Gen.  vi.  4;  Numb.  xiii.  32,  33).  At  a  subsequent  period  there  was  a
like  formidable  race  called  Rephaim  (Gen.  xiv.  5;  xv.  20),  to  which  belonged  the  Emim,
the  Zuzim  (Zamzummim),  and  the  Anakim  (Deut.  ii.  10, 11,  20, 21;  ix.  2).  One  of  this
race,  of  extraordinary  stature,  was  Og,  King  of  Bashan  (Deut.  iii.  10;  Josh.  xii.  4).
Others,  more  recently,  dwelt  among  the  Philistines  (Josh.  xi.  12),  like  Goliath  (1  Sam.
xvii.  4—11)  and  the  fom-  here  mentioned,  who  were  either  sons  of  a  celebrated  giant  (the
Bapha)  or  descendants  of  the  original  founder  of  the  tribe.  They  were  all  idolaters  and
formidable  opponents  of  Israel.  And  there  are  giants  among  us  now.  I  do  not  mean
such  ogres  as  children  read  of  in  story-books ;  or  such  harmless  persons  of  exceptional
height  as  are  sometimes  seen ;  or  even  such  as  appear  in  any  bodily  form ;  but,  never-
theless, real,  powerful,  and  terrible  giants,  aptly  represented  by  "l^ese  four"  slain  by
David  and  his  heroes.

I.  Thet  belokg  to  one  familt.  It  is :  1.  An  ancient  family ;  as  old  as  $in,  and
came  into  the  world  with  it.  It  survived  the  Deluge ;  spread,  among  the  dispersed
nations,  over  all  the  earth ;  had  one  of  its  principal  settlements  in  Canaan ;  and,  amidst
all  the  conflicts  and  changes  of  mankind,  has  continued  to  this  day.  2.  An  ungodly
family.  None  of  its  members,  believe  in  the  living  and  true  God  or  obey  his  command-
ments ;  yet  they  have  many  gods  (1  Sam.  xvii.  43).  3.  A  selfish  family.  They  all  seek
their  own,  and  often  contend  against  one  another.  4.  A  numerous,  mighty,  and
destructive  family.  They  have  their  walled  cities  and  strongholds,  defy  the  armies  of
the  living  God  (ver.  21  \  and  sometimes  terrify  them  (1  Sam.  xvii.  1 — 11)  by  their
imposing  appearance  and  evil  doings  (Ps.  xiv.  1 — 3;  Horn.  iii.  10 — 18).  What  is  this
giant  fimily  ?  You  have  doubtless  already  discovered  that  it  consists  of  sins,  vices,  and
wickedness  of  all  kinds.

II.  Thet  are  known  by  various  names.  Here  are  long  lists  of  them  (Matt.  xv.  19 ;
Gal.  V.  19 — 21 ;  Col.  iii.  5 — 9).  But  notice  especially  these  four :  (1)  Pride,  or  undue
self-esteem  and  contempt  of  other  persons  (vers.  16, 17).  The  name  Ishbi-benob  signifies
"  my  dwelling  is  on  the  height ; "  and  was  possibly  given  to  him  because  he  had  his
castle  on  a  lofty,  inaccessible  rock.  The  brazen  head  of  his  lance  was  eight  pounds  in
weight ;  and,  arrayed  in  new  armour,  he  resolved  to  kill  David,  and  nearly  succeeded ;


OH.  XXI.  1—22.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  62S

but  was  himself  smitten  down  by  the  aid  of  Abisbai.  Pride  is  baughty,  self-confident,
contemptuous,  and  presumptuous.  It  has  overthrown  many  mighty  men ;  and  is  an
ungodly,  selfish,  and  most  dangerous  adversary.  "  Be  not  proud  "  (Jer.  xiii.  15 ;  oh.  xxii.
28;  Obad.  L  3,  4;  Jas.  iv.  6).  (2)  Falsehood,  or  deceit  (1  Sam.  xxL  1—8).  "There
was  again  a  battle  with  the  Philistines  at  Gob  [Gezur] :  then  Sibbeohai  the  Hushathite
[1  Ohron.  xxvii.  11]  slew  Soph  [Sippai]."  This  is  a  double-faced  giant ;  exceedingly
crafty,  mean,  and  mischievous.  "Lying  lips  are  abomination  to  the  Lord"  (Prov.  xii.
22 ;  Eev.  xxi.  8).  (3)  Hatred,  or  ill  will ;  and  (in  various  forms)  envy,  revenge,  anger,
and  strife.  "Elhanan,  the  son  of  Jaare-oregim  [Jair]  the  Bethlehemite  [ch.  xxiii.  24]
slew  Goliath  the  Gittite" — possibly  a  son  of  the  gimt  whom  David  slew,  and  of  the
same  name;  or  (more  probably,  as  in  Chronicles),  "Lahmi  the  brother  of  Goliath,  the
shaft  of  whose  spear  was  like  a  weaver's  beam."  He  is  a  powerful,  fierce,  and  obstinate
foe ;  and  only  by  the  strength  which  God  gives  [Elhanan]  can  he  be  overthrown.  (4)
Dishone-ty ;  "a  man  of  stature  [measure  or  length]  that  had  on  each  hand  six  fingers,
and  on  each  foot  six  toes,  four  and  twenty  in  number,"  etc. ;  slain  by  Jonathan,  David's
nephew  (1  Sam.  xvi.  9  ;  xvii.  3  ;  ch.  xiii.  3).  He  has  a  powerful  grasp;  covets,  seizes,
and  steals  tlie  possessions  of  others,  in  defiance  of  right  and  justice.  There  are  many
other  giants,  such  as  (5)  Ignorance,  (6)  Sloth,  (7)  Intemperance,  (8)  Impurity,  (9)
Profunity,  (10)  Infidelity,  (11)  Superstition,  and  (12)  Idolatry.

III.  They  must  be  fought  against  and  overcome  ;  in  their  onslaught  upon  our-
selves and  others.  If  we  do  not  conquer  them,  they  will  conquer  us.  And  we  can
conquer  them  only  by:  1.  Faithfully  following  "  the  Captain  of  our  salvation ; "  obeying
his  commands,  and  depending  on  his  might.  2.  Incessant  vigilance  and  firm  resistance.
3.  Ever-renewed  and  courageous  effort.  4.  Confident  assurance  cf  victory,  inspired  by
many  promises,  the  presence  of  our  Divine  Leader,  and  the  success  which  has  been
already  achieved.  "  These  conflicts  of  David's  servants  are  typical  of  the  spiritual  com-
bats of  Christ's  soldiers  with  the  family  of  the  evil  one"  (Wordsworth).  "Fight  the
good  fight  of  faith  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  12 ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  1—7 ;  xiv.  1— 15).— D.

Ver.  17. — The  lamp  of  Israel.  In  the  view  of  his  followers,  David  was  the  lamp
(Hebrew,  naer)  or  glory  of  the  nation,  and  the  continuance  of  his  life  and  reign  was
essential  to  its  welfare.  This  is  a  striking  testimony  to  their  estimate  of  his  personal
character  and  faithful  and  prosperous  rule.  Similar  language  is  used  of  others.  "  He
was  the  lamp  that  burneth  and  shineth,"  etc.  (John  v.  35 ;  viii.  12 ;  Matt.  v.  14).  And
every  faithful  servant  of  God  is  "a  light-giver  in  the  world"  (Phil,  it  15).  Such  a
lamp  is —

I.  Kindled  by  the  gracious  hand  of  God,  the  true  Glory  of  Israel,  the  Father  of
hghts,  the  Fountain  of  life  and  light  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9).  None  are  so  ready  to  recognize
dependence  upon  God  for  life  and  all  good  as  the  devout  man  himself,

"  Thou  art  my  Lamp,  O  Jehovah,
And  Jehovaii  enlightens  my  darkness."

(Oh.  xxii.  29 ;  Ps.  xviii.  28;  xxvii.  1.)

"  David's  regal  life  and  actions  were  the  light  which  the  grace  of  God  had  kindled  for
the  benefit  of  Israel."  Whatever  his  gifts,  his  graces,  his  position,  his  success,  they  are
all  humbly,  gratefully,  and  constantly  ascribed  to  their  Divine  Source  by  the  faithful
servant;  and,  whilst  we  admire  him,  we  should  "glorify  God  in  him"  (1  Cor.  xv.  10;
Gal.  i.  24).

II.  Conducive  to  the  real  wblfabe  of  men.  "  Neither  do  men  light  a  lamp  and
put  it  imder  the  bushel,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  15).

"  Heaven  does  with  us  as  we  with  torches  do.
Not  light  them  for  themselves,"  etc.

('  Measure  for  Measure,'  act  L  bo.  1.)

By  Ms  counsel,  his  example,  his  endeavours,  his  prayers,  he  renders  invaluable  service
to  others  in  directing  them  in  perplexity  and  peril :  preserving  them  from  error  and
evil;  stimulating  them  to  efifort  and  conflict;  and  contributing  to  their  safety,  pros-
perity, and  lastinfj  happiness.

III.  Exposed  to  imminent  dangbb  op  extinctioh.     The  light  is  liable  to  bfl


523  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  ixi.  1— 22.

quenched.  Life  is  always  precarious ;  the  life  of  some  peculiarly  bo  :  like  that  of  David
when  he  went  down  into  the  conflict  (vers.  15,  16 ;  ch.  ▼.  17 — 25),  waxed  faint,  and  was
set  upon  by  the  giaut  Ishbi-benob,  in  a  new  suit  of  armour.  And  it  is  not  only  natural
life,  but  also  moral  and  spiritual  life,  that  is  beset  by  danger.  The  part  which  a  good
man  takes  in  the  conflict  between  good  and  evil  attracts  the  attention  of  his  adversaries,
makes  him  a  gpecial  object  of  attack  (1  Kings  xxii.  31) ;  bis  efforts  are  exhausting,  and
his  zeal  is  apt  to  consume  him  (Ps.  Ixix.  9 ;  cxix.  139).  "  Ernestus,  Duke  of  Luneburg,
caused  a  burning  lamp  to  be  stamped  on  his  coin,  with  these  four  letters,  A.  S.  M.  G.,  by
which  was  meant,  Aliis  servient  melpsum  contero, '  By  giving  light  to  others  I  consume
myself  "  (Spencer).

IV.  Worthy  of  being  highly  esteemed,  carefully  sustained,  and  zealously  guarded.
"  And  Abishai  succoured  him,  and  he  [Abishai,  or  perhaps  David,  ver.  22]  killed  him,"
etc.  The  prestrving  care  of  God  (ch.  viii.  14)  does  not  render  needless  human  sym-
pathy, assistance,  prudence,  resolution  (ch.  xviii.  3).  He  who  freely  spends  his  strength
and  risks  his  life  for  others  ought  to  be  esteemed,  considered,  defended,  and  helped  by
them  (1  Thess.  v.  12,  23 ;  2  Thess.  iiL  2;  Heb.  xiii.  17);  and,  herein,  they  also  benefit
themselves  and  the  whole  community.  "  If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me,"  etc,
(John  xii.  26— 28).— D.

Ver.  1. — Seeking  GocFsface,  "  David  sought  the  face  of  the  Lord  "  (Revised  Version).
The  Authorized  Version  has  here  "inquired  of  the  Lord,"  as  in  oh.  ii.  1,  where  it  is
.the  translation  of  a  different  phrase.  Doubtless  the  substantial  meaning  is  the  same.
But,  as  with  words,  so  with  phrases,  two  are  seldom  wholly  synonymous ;  and  the
differences  are  often  instructive,  suggesting  each  its  own  tiain  of  thought.  So  it  is
with  these  two  phrases.     That  in  the  Eevised  Version  leads  us  to  think  of —

I.  The  nature  or  teoe  worship.  It  is  seeking  the  face  of  God,  to  realize  his
presence,  behold  his  glory,  be  made  sensible  of  his  majesty,  holiness  and  loving-kind-
ness. Or,  in  greater  strictness,  this  may  be  said  to  be  preliminary  to  the  worship  of
him.  We  come  into  his  presence  that  we  may  present  to  him  our  adoration,  praises,
confessions,  and  prayers.  We  must  not  be  content  with  coming  into  his  house,  seeing
his  servants,  joining  in  ceremonies — leaving,  as  it  were,  our  names  and  messages,
engaging  and  depending  on  the  intercession  of  those  who  are  supposed  to  approach
nearer  to  him.  Our  heavenly  Father  does  not  keep  such  state  as  to  exclude  or  repel
any  one  from  coming  near  to  him.  He  wishes  to  see  his  children,  to  smile  upon  them,
to  embrace  them,  to  speak  with  them.  Any  methods  of  worship  which  keep  men  at
a'  distance  from  him  are  contrary  to  his  will.  The  mediation  of  Christ  is  not  a
substitute  for  intimate  converse  with  God,  but  a  means  of  attaining  it,  as  we  may  see
by  considering —

II.  The  possibility  and  wabbant  of  such  worship.  There  are,  doubtless,  diffi-
culties in  the  way  of  the  approach  of  men  to  God.  These  are  removed  pre-eminently  by
the  mediation  of  our  Lord.  1.  Ignorance  separatesfrom  God ;  Chriit  maJteshim  known.
By  his  teaching,  by  his  own  character,  and  by  the  Spirit  he  imparts  to  his  disciples.
"  In  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ "  we  see  that  of  the  Father  (2  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  John  xiv.  8,  9).
2.  Sin  separates  from  Qod;  Christ  delivers  from  sin.  (1)  He  has  atoned  for  sin  by
his  death.  He  "  suffered  for  sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to
God  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  18).  He  has  thus  removed  the  barrier  presented  by  the  justice  of
God  and  "the  curse  of  the  Law"  (Gal.  iii.  13).  And  through  faith  in  Christ  the
conscience  is  purged  from  sin  by  his  blood  (Heb.  ix.  14),  and  the  believer  has  "  bold-
ness to  enter  into  the  holiest"  (Heb.  x.  19 — 22).  Through  Christ  the  face  of  God
shines  with  a  benignant  brightness  on  those  who  approach  him.  (2)  Christ  cleanses
the  nature  and  character  from  sin.  He  thus  produces  that  purity  of  heart  which  is
necessnry  for  those  who  would  "  see  Qod"  (Matt.  v.  8).  3.  Not  only  the  putting  away
of  sin,  hiif  certain  positive  dispositions  are  necessary  in  seeking  the  face  of  Qod.  Christ
has  secured  and  he  imparts  these.  To  his  disciples  is  given  "  the  Spirit  of  adoption
(Rom.  viii.  15),  and  thus  they  come  to  God  with  confidence,  affection,  and  self-sur-
render. Thus  Christ  is  "  the  Way  "  by  which  we  "  come  to  the  Father  "  (John  xiv.  6),
"  Through  him  we  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father  "  (Eph.  ii.  18).

ni.  The  necessity  op  such  worship.  We  must  seek  God's  face  if  we  would
behold  it  with  joy.     He  sometimes  surprises  men  by  sudden  and  unexpected  manifes-


OH.  XXI.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  627


tations  of  himself  to  them ;  but  this  will  ordinarily  he  to  those  who  love  him  and
are  in  the  habit  of  seeking  him  (see  John  xiy.  19 — 23).  Hence  the  exhortations,
"  Seek  the  Lord, '.  .  .  seek  his  face  evermore  "  (Ps.  ov.  4) ;  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find  "
(Matt.  vii.  7  ;  comp.  2  Chron.  vii.  14).

IV.  GoBLT  MEN  ABB  DISTINGUISHED  BY  8U0H  WOKSHIP.  "  This  is  the  generation  of
them  that  seek  him,  that  seek  thy  face,  O  God  of  Jacob  "  (Ps.  xxiv.  6).  "  When  thou
saidst,  Seek  ye  ray  face ;  my  heart  said  unto  thee.  Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek  "  (Ps.
xxvii.  8).  1.  The  godly  are  impelled  to  this:  (1)  By  love  to  God,  and  consequent
longing  after  him  (Ps.  xlii.  1,  2 ;  Ixiii.  1,  2).  (2)  By  faith  in  him  and  in  his
promises  (Heb.  xi.  6).  (3)  By  the  sense  of  needs  which  only  God  can  supply.  (4)
By  memory  of  former  converse  with  God,  and  of  the  enjoyment  and  profit  derived
from  it.  2.  Hence  they  seek  Qod'sface  daily  ;  and  with  special  earnestness  in  times  of
special  difSculty  or  danger.  David  felt  how  much  he  needed  Divine  guidance  in
reference  to  the  famine  whiQh  for  three  years  had  harassed  the  country;  hence  he
"  sought  the  face  of  the  Lord."  In  trouble  the  Divine  call  may  be  heard,  "  Seek  ye
my  face; "  and  many  begin  to  do  so  when  trouble  is  upon  them.

V.  Such  woeship  is  fkuitfui,  of  blbssino.  It  is  never  in  vain  (Isa.  xlv.  19),  although
at  times  it  may  appear  to  be  so  (Job  xxiii.  3 — 9).  "  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  tind  me,
when  ye  shall  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart "  (Jer.  xxix.- 13)  is  a  promise  of  universal
applicability.  And  to  gain  the  vision  of  God's  face  is  to  be  blessed  indeed.  The  sight
of  him  :  1.  Calms  and  soothes  and  comforts  the  heart.  As  a  mother's  &ce  soothes  the
Buttering  child.

"  Sorrow  and  fear  are  gone.

Whene'er  thy  face  appears :
It  stills  the  sighing  orphan's  moan.

And  dries  the  widow's  tears :

It  hallows  every  cross ;

It  sweetly  comforts  me,
Makes  me  forget  my  every  losi^

And  find  my  all  in  thee."

2.  Encourages  to  pray.  When  his  face  is  seen,  we  are  enabled  to  tell  him  all  that
is  in  our  heart,  with  the  assurance  of  snccess  in  our  suit.  3.  Sheds  light  into  the  soul.
The  "  light  of  his  countenance  "  scatters  the  darkness.  Perplexities  are  half  solved  as
soon  as  we  have  canght  sight  of  the  face  of  God.  4.  Produces  likeness  to  him.  "  We
shall  be  like  him  ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is"  (1  John  iii.  2)  is  a  promise  partially
fufiUed  in  the  present  life.  5.  The  crowning  result  is  to  "  see  his  face"  in  the  fulness  of
its  glory,  and  for  ever.  (Kev.  xxii.  4.)  But  to  those  who  refuse  to  seek  him,  turning  to
him  their  back,  and  not  their  i'ace  (Jer.  ii.  27),  he  says,  "  I  will  show  them  the  back,
and  not  the  face,  in  the  day  of  their  calamity"  (Jer.  xviii.  17);  and  they  will  at  length
say  "  tt)  the  mountains  and  rocks,  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that
gitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  (Rev.  vi.  16). — G.  W.

Ver.  10.-—^  mother's  love  and  grief.  This  verse  is  part  of  a  narrative  full  of
difficulty  and  darkness.  It  stands  out  a  bright  light  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness — a
grand  exhibition  of  a  mother's  love.

I.  A  mother's  love  is  much  tried.  Not  often  as  Eizpah's  was ;  but  always  in  some
way  or  other ;  as :  1.  By  the  conduct  of  her  children.  2.  By  the  conduct  of  others
towards  them.  3.  By  their  troubles.  4.  By  their  deaths ;  especially  when  untimely
or  by  violence ;  and  most  of  all  when  their  untimely  or  violent  deaths  are  the  penalty
of  their  misconduct,  which  was,  however,  not  the  case  with  the  sons  of  Bizpah.

II.  It  occasions  hbe  much  sorbow.  Love,  in  this  world,  always  brings  grief,
through  making  the  sorrows  of  others  our  own,  as  well  as  rendering  us  sensitive  to  their
treatment  of  ourselves.  The  more  deep  and  tender  the  love,  so  much  the  more
poignant  the  grief.  And,  as  a  mother  loves  most,  she  is  most  susceptible  of  sorrow.
She  is  often  pained  by  her  children  when  they  do  not  think  it ;  and  every  stroke
inflicted  on  them  strikes  her  to  the  heart.

III.  It  IB  UTTERLY  UNSELFISH.  She  loves  because  it  is  her  nature — freely,  spon-
taneously, making  no  calculation,  asking  for  no  return.  Not  without  hope,  indeeid,  that
she  may  one  day  be  rewarded  by  her  children's  welfare  and  affection ;  but  far  flrom


628  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxl  1— 22.

regulftting  her  love  by  this :  rather  she  lavishes  it  most  on  those  from  whom  she
cannot  expect  recompense — the  weakest,  the  most  sickly,  those  most  likely  to  die;  yen,
as  Bizpah,  those  who  are  dead.  "  Death  might  bereave  her  of  them,  not  them  of  her
love  "(Bishop  Hall).

IV.  It  IB  MOST  SELF-DENTDIG.  Prompting  to  and  sustaining  in  arduous  labours,
long  and  wearisome  watchings,  self-inflicted  privations,  for  the  good  of  her  children
For  the  sake  of  their  health,  she  willingly  hazards,  and  even  sacrifices,  her  own.  For
the  sake  of  their  education  and  advancement,  she  cheerfully  gives  up,  not  only  liixurics,
but  comforts,  and  even  necessaries.  And  when  they  have  gone  beyond  her  reach  into
tlie  unseen  world,  their  mortal  remairis  are  dear  to  her,  and  she  will  spare  nothing  that
may  honour  them  or  prevent  dishonour  to  them.  Of  such  affection  Rizpah  is  a  signal
instance.

V.  It  18  MOST  PBB8I8TENT.  Through  six  months  Bizpah  continued  watching  day  and
night  (with  the  aid,  doubtless,  of  her  servants)  by  the  crosses  on  which  the  bodies  of  her
S'  ins  and  other  relatives  hung,  that  neither  vulture,  nor  jackal,  nor  any  other  "  bird  of
the  air  "  or  "  beast  of  the  field  "  might  devour,  or  mangle,  or  even  "  rest  on  "  them,  until
she  had  gained  her  point  in  their  honourable  burial.  A  striking  example  of  the
jiersistence  of  a  mother's  love.  But  this  was  only  the  crowning  proof  of  her  affection.
A  mother's  love  is  lifelong.  "  A  mother's  truth  keeps  constant  youth."  It  endures
through  years  of  toil,  hardship,  and  suffering ;  when  feebly  responded  to,  or  quite
unappreciated,  or  requited  by  neglect,  hardness,  or  cruel  wrong.  When  son  or  daughter
is  utterly  debased  and  degraded,  the  mother  clings  and  hopes;  when  cast  off  by  all  the
world,  she  does  not  abandon  them.

"  Tears  to  a  mother  bring  distress.
But  do  not  make  her  love  the  less."

(Wordsworth.)

VI.  It  is  sometimes  bbottght  into  notice  and  honoured.  Thus  it  was  with
Eizpah.  What  she  had  done  was  reported  to  the  king ;  it  aroused  his  attention  to  his
neglect  to  give  honourable  burial,  in  the  family  sepulchre,  to  the  bones  of  Saul  and
Jonathan.  He  now  repaired  the  neglect,  and  buried,  not  only  them,  but  (as  is  implied)
the  remains  of  the  seven  which  had  so  long  been  hanging  exposed,  "  in  the  sepulchre
of  Kish  his  (Saul's)  father."  Thus  a  mother's  love,  in  this  case,  exercised  a  powerful
beneficial  influence.  Moreover,  it  received  honourable  mention  in  the  holy  records,  and
wherever  the  Bible  comes,  "there  shall  also  this,  that  this  woman  hath  done,  be  told
for  a  memorial  of  her  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  13).  And  although  usually  the  light  of  a  mother's
love  shines  chiefly  in  the  privacy  of  home,  and  she  neither  asks  nor  expects  applause
or  lecnrrl,  it  is  impossible  that  she  can  act  a  noble  part  without  exercising  an  influence
for  good  which  may  widen  and  ramify  far  more  than  she  could  have  imagined,  and
may  secure  her  an  honour  she  never  desired.  And  if  no  others,  "  her  children  arise  up,
and  call  her  blessed "  (Prov.  xxxi.  28),  and  tell  of  her  character  and  works  to  their
children.

In  conclusion :  1.  ^  human  love  be  so  deep  and  strong,  what  must  be  the  love  of  Ood,
from  whom  it  springs,  and  of  which  it  is  one  great  sign  and  proof?  All  the  love  of  all
parents,  of  all  human  beings,  flows  from  this  original  Fountain.  The  Fountain  is  greater
than  the  streams.  2.  Mothers  should  seek  to  home  their  love  perfected,  by  being  sanctified
and  elevated  by  the  love  of  God,  and  directed  supremely  to  the  ends  which  he  seeks^
the  moral,  spiritual,  and  eternal  welfare  of  their  children.  With  this  view,  they  should
watch  carefully  their  living  children  (as  Eizpah  her  dead  ones),  and  especially  whilst
they  are  young,  that  they  may  not  be  defiled  or  injured  by  foul  bird  or  beast.  3.  How
strong  and  constant  should  be  the  love  of  children  for  their  mothers  I  Prompting  them
to  all  that  would  gratify  and  honour  them  and  promote  their  happiness;  to  self-denial
and  self-sacrifice  for  their  good,  should  they  live  to  need  the  help  of  their  children ;  and
to  patience  and  forbearance  towards  them,  should  they,  under  the  infirmities  of  old  age,
make  demands  on  these  virtues.  "  Despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old "  (Prov!
xxiii.  22).  4.  How  base  the  conduct  of  many  children  (especially  of  many  sons)  to  their
mothersl  Selfishly  wasting  their  resources,  imposing  on  their  credulity,  abusing  their
indulgence,  disgracing  their  name,  breaking  their  hearts.  "A  foolish  [wicked]  son  ii  the
heaviness  of  his  mother  "  (Prov.  x.  1). — G.  W.


OH.  XM.  1—22.]  THE  SECOND  B  ^OK  OP  SAMUEL.  629

Vers.  16 — 22. — Giant-hiUers.  These  huge  monsters  were  dangerous  enemies.  To
§lay  them  was  to  do  valuable  service  to  king  and  country.  To  assail  them  required
much  coumge.  Those  who  killed  any  of  them  gained  great  renown ;  and  their  names
and  deeds  were  recorded  in  the  chronicles  of  the  kingdom,  and,  as  to  some  of  them,  have
found  a  place  in  the  Book  of  bouks.

I.  Some  oiant  foes  of  the  Divine  Kino  and  kingdom  that  need  to  bb
DB.STR0TBD.  We  may  name  superstition,  whether  pagan,  papal,  or  protestant ;  infi-
delity;  selfishness;  p^^de;  tyranny,  ecclesiastical  or  political;  slavery;  sensuality;
intemperance;  war;  Tnammon.  Singly,  or  in  partial  union,  they  as.'^ail  the  subjects  of
Christ,  and  oppose  them  in  their  endeavours  to  extend  his  kingdom.  And  behind  lie  the
dtvil  and  his  angels,  ever  active  and  formidable  (Bph.  vi.  11,  12).

II.  To  BATTLE   AGAINST   THESE   MONSTERS   IS   THE   DUTY   OF  ALL  ChEIST's   SERVANTS.

1.  It  is  involved  in  their  Christian  calling.  The  new  nature  which  is  given  to  ihem  is
instinctively  hostile  to  Satan  and  his  works.  The  endeavour  to  serve  God  and  benefit
men  necessarily  brings  them  into  conflict  with  these  powers  of  darl<ni'ss.  The  attacks
made  on  themselves  compel  them  to  fight  in  self-defence  (1  Pet.  v.  8,  9).  2.  They  are
supplied  loith  arms  and  armour /or  the  purpose.  (Eph.  vi.  11 — 17.)  3.  The  enslavef/
and  degraded  condition  to  which  these  giant  euils  have  reduced  their  victims  appeah  to
and  stimulates  them.  4.  Their  own  happy  condition  under  the  reign  of  Christ  supplies
them  with  a  powerful  motive.  5.  Regard  for  him  impels  and  strengthens  ihem.
Loyalty,  desire  for  his  glory,  the  hope  of  his  approval,  and  of  the  honours  and  rewards
he  bestows.

III.  Heroes  ni  the  fight  attain  to  distinction  and  reward.  1.  Who  are  the
heroes  t  Kot  those  who  engage  these  giants  (nominally)  as  a  profession  and  for  tha
sake  of  earthly  rewards.  But  such  as  (1)  rerjounce  for  tliemsclves  their  service,  which
all  who  profess  to  oppose  theth  do  not ;  (2)  show  great  zeal  in  contending  against  them ;
(3)  cheerfully  expose  themselves  to  hardship  and  peril  in  doing  so^  displaying  con-
spicuous courage  and  endurance.  Those  faithful  in  times  of  persecution — confessors,
martyrs.  Those  who  bear  the  gospel  to  savages,  or  encounter  dangerous  climates  in
serking  its  extension.  2.  Their  honours  and  rewards.  (1)  In  many  cases,  success;
not,  alas  1  in  killing  these  giants— they  are  not  dead  yet — but  in  preserving  themselves,
and  rescuing  others  from  their  power,  and  in  diminishing  their  dominions.  (2)  Enrol-
ment in  the  Divine  records.  Many  illustrious,  names  are  written  in  huinaii  records  ;
more  have  been  overlooked ;  but  all  are  in  the  "  book  of  remembrance  written  before  "
God  (Mai.  iii.  16).  (3)  Pinal  promotion  to  honour,  power,  and  blessedness  (see  2  Tim.  iv.
7,  8 ;  and  the  promises  made  in  Rev,  ii.  and  iii.  to  "  him  that  overcometh  "). — Q.  W.

Ver.  17. — The  ttnquenchablejjight.  "  That  thou  quench  not  the  light  of  Israel."
"  The  men  of  David "  who  thus  speak,  and  doubtless  the  multitude  of  his  subjects,
regarded  him  as  the  light  (literally,  as  in  Revised  Version,  "the  lamp")  of  the  nation
— its  guiding  mind,  its  sa'ety,  glory,  and  joy.  His  death  would  involve  the  nation  in
darkness — in  perplexity,  confusion,  peril,  and  trouble.  Such  was  likely  enough  to  be  the
consequence  of  his  death  at  that  period.  Nevertheless,  David,  as  a  moral  and  spiritual
lii^ht,  bums  on  still  for  all  peoples  and  generations.  Death  did  not  quench  this  light.
More  emphatically  is  this  true  of  Jesus  Christ  our  King.

I.  He  18  the  Light  of  men.  Intended  ultimately  to  "lighten  every  man  ;"  actually
enlightening  those  who  receive  him.  He  is  their:  1.  Teacher  and  Guide.  Through
whose  revelations  they  know  God  and  himself  and  themselves ;  sin  and  righteousness ;
heaven,  and  the  way  to  it ;  perdition,  and  how  to  escape  it ;  the  real  worth  of  things ;
the  wisdom  needful  for  the  guidance  of  life.  Christ  sheds  light  upon  all  things —
the  light  by  which  their  true  character  and  relations  are  made  apparent.  2.  Safety
and  Salvation.  In  darkness  is  peril;  in  lisiht  security.  3.  Olory.  Imparting  to
them  of  his  own  lustre.  4.  Joy.  In  knowledge  and  conscious  safety  are  peace  and
happiness  and  hope;  in  ignorance,  doubt,  and  perplexity,  is  unhappiness.

II.  His  light  cannot  be  qdbnched.  1.  Not  the  light  of  his  personal  glory  In  the
battle  with  his  foes  and  ours,  he  fell  and  died ;  but  he  rose  again,  and  to  a  greater  bright-
ness of  glory,  in  consequence  of  his  death.  His  cross  itself  is  a  great  light  for  men.
He  lives  above  all  the  power  of  his  enemies.  He  goes  with  his  people  to  battle,  but
cannot  be  touched  by  the  foe.    2.  Nor  the  Light  he  has  become  to  men  through  tit*

n.  BAuni:*  2  k


630


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxii.  1—51.


knowledge  he  has  given  to  the  world.  Great  and  formidable  and  persistent  have  been
the  efforts  to  extinguish  the  light;  but  it  bums  on  unquenched  and  unquenchable.  It
may  be  obscured  here  and  there,  and  for  a  time,  but  it  can  never  go  out.  It  will  yet
shine  forth  over  the  whole  earth,  and  scatter  all  the  darkness  of  error  and  sin.  3.  Nor
the  Light  he  is  to  each  of  his  lelieving  people.  Through  life,  and  in  death,  and  for  ever,
he  remains  their  Light.  His  presence  in  their  hearts  is  their  wisdom  and  joy  under  all
circumstances.

Then :  1.  Be  grateful  for  him.     2.  Accept  the  light  be  sheds.   ?.  "  Walk  as  children
of  light."  i.  Be  lights  yourselves.  Shine  by  speech,  and  especially  in  your  lives. — G.  W,


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEK  XXn.


Datid's  Psalm  of  THASKSGimro.

This  song,  which  is  identical  with  Pb.
xviiL,  though  with  many  verbal  differences,
is  so  universally  acknowledged  as  a  genuine
composition  of  King  David,  that  the  objec-
tions taken  by  one  or  two  critics  serve  only
to  give  us  greater  security  by  reminding  us
that  the  other  side  has  been  carefully  argued.
The  differences  between  its  form  here  and
In  the  Book  of  Psalms  suggest  many  im-
portant considerations  with  regard  to  textual
criticism.  From  the  absence  of  manuscripts,
we  have  very  scanty  means  of  judging  of
the  correctness  of  the  ordinary  Hebrew  text.
We  have,  indeed,  abundant  proof  that  the
Jews  took  extreme  care  of  their  sacred  text
m  the  early  centuries  of  our  era;  but  we
nevertheless  find,  most  frequently  in  names,
mistakes  which  have  arisen  from  the  care-
lessness of  scribes,  and  especially  from  the
confusion  by  them  of  similar  letters.  Thus
the  Sibheehai  of  ch.  xxi.  18  becomes  Me-
bunnai  in  ch.  xxiii.  27,  owing  to  some  scribe
having  mistaken  two  letters  in  the  name.
And  as  the  similarity  between  them  exists,
not  in  the  old  Hebrew  writing,  but  in  the
square  chiiracter  substituted  after  the  exile,
the  confusion  must  be  subsequent  to  that
date.  In  comparing  the  two  texts  of  this
psalm,  we  find  similar  instances  of  confusion
of  letters  in  vers.  11,  42,  43 ;  we  find  words
transposed  in  vers.  5, 6 ;  and  clauses  repeated
or  omitted  in  vers.  13,  14.  In  short,  all  the
phenomena  with  which  we  are  familiar  in
the  textual  criticism  of  the  New  Testament
are  also  found  here.  And  may  we  not  add
that  they  end  in  the  same  result?  The
general  sense  and  meaning  remain  much
the  same.  The  variations  of  reading  do  not
affect  the  teaching  of  Holy  Scripture  on  any


important  point.  It  may  beasked,  then — ^Why
should  we  notice  them  at  all?  And  why
urge  them  upon  the  attention  of  scholars  ?
The  answer  is  that  there  exist  flaws  and
blemishes  in  the  Massoretic,  that  is,  the
ordinary  Hebrew,  text,  and  that  the  removal
of  them  is  prevented  by  the  strange  idea
which  accords  infallibility  to  the  Massorites,
and  will  not  concede  to  the  far  more  difficult
problem  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  text  that
which  is  granted  as  a  matter  of  course  to
the  comparatively  modern  Greek  text  of  the
New  Testament.  And  thus  the  Old  Testa-
ment is  neglected,  and  left  outside  that  care-
ful and  minute  study  so  lavishly  expended
on  the  New,  and  so  rich  in  useful  results.

Of  the  date  when  David  wrote  this  psalm
there  can  be  little  doubt.  It  was  at  the
close  of  his  first  great  series  of  victories,  after
Toi,  the  Hittite  King  of  Hamath,  had  sent
to  him  an  embassy  of  congratulation  (ch.
viii.  9,  10),  referred  to  very  triumphantly  in
vers.  45,  46,  But  there  is  no  trace  in  it  of
the  sorrow  and  shame  that  clouded  over  his
latter  days ;  and  no  man  whose  conscience
was  stained  with  sins  so  dark  as  those  of
adultery  and  murder  could  have  written
words  so  strongly  asserting  his  integrity  and
the  cleanness  of  his  hands  as  are  found  in
vers.  21 — 25.  The  psalm  belongs  to  David's
happiest  time,  when  he  had  won  for  Israel
security  and  empire.  It  is  written  from
first  to  last  in  a  tone  of  jubilant  exultation,
caused,  as  we  may  well  believe,  by  Nathan's
acceptance  of  his  purpose  to  build  the  temple,
and  by  the  solemn  appointment  of  David  as
the  theocratic  king.  If  it  were  arranged
according  to  time  and  matter,  it  would  be
placed  immediately  after  ch.  viii.,  as  it  is
evidently  David's  thanksgiving  for  the
benefits  and  blesainga  just  promised  to  him
and  his  seed.


CH.  xxn.  1 — 61.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


631


But  the  soribes  inserted  it  here,  not  bo
much  because  of  it8  historical  value,  as  be-
cause it  is  a  national  thanksgiving  for  the
founding  of  that  empire  by  which  Israel
became  verily  the  theocratic  people,  and  the
type  upon  earth  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Mes-
siah. The  prophet  who  compiled  the  Books
of  Samuel  rejoiced  in  David's  victories,  not
because  they  gave  Israel  worldly  dominion,
but  because  they  were  a  fulfilment  of  past
prophecy,  and  a  necessary  part  of  the  prepa-
ration for  the  religious  position  which  Israel
was  to  hold.  Such  as  it  had  been  uuder  the
judges,  Israel  would  have  been  no  fit  home  for
the  prophetic  light.  It  could  not  have  grown
and  developed,  nor  the  race  have  become  a
Church  fit  to  be  the  teacher  of  all  mankind.
And  in  this  hymn  the  Church  expresses  her
joy  at  the  high  office  and  extended  useful-
ness to  which  God  has  seen  fit  to  call  her.

The  spiritual  exposition  of  the  psalm  will
naturally  be  sought  in  commentaries  on  the
Book  of  Psalms.  But  such  matters  as  its
outward  form,  and  the  differences  between
the  two  texts,  wilL  not  be  out  of  place  here.

Ver.  1. — David  spake.  The  introduction
was  probably  written  by  the  prophet  who
compiled  the  Books  of  Samuel.  The  scribe
who  collected  the  Book  of  Psalms  would  be
a  priest,  and  he  has  repeated  it  with  one  or
two  additions,  the  most  important  of  which
is  that  the  psalm  was  written  "by  David
the  servant  of  Jehovah."  This  title,  mean-
ing the  minister  or  vicegerent  of  Jehovah,
is  one  so  high  that  it  would  certainly  not
have  been  given  to  David  in  his  lifetime;
nor  was  it  even  until  Moses  was  dead  that
he  was  honoured  with  this  rank  (Deut,
xixiv.  5).  But  what  was  David's  right  to
this  title,  which  put  him  on  a  level  with
Moses  ?  It  was  tlug :  In  adding  to  the  sa-
crificial ritual  enacted  by  Moses  a  daily
service  in  the  temple  of  sacred  minstrelsy
and  songs,  David  was  acting  with  higlier
powers  than  were  ever  exercised  by  any
other  person.  For  though,  as  we  have  seen,
Samuel  was  the  originator  of  these  services
in  his  schools,  yet  there  is  a  wide  difference
between  private  and  public  services;  and
David  made  his  anthems  part  of  the  national
liturgy.  But  it  would  only  be  when  the
halo  of  long  use  had  gathered  round  his  holy
psalmody  that  David  would  be  placed  on
an  equality  with  Moses,  and  his  authority
to  institute  a  new  ritual  for  the  n^ion  be
recognized.

Vers.  2—4.—
"Jehovah  is  my  Cliff  and  my  Stronghold
and  my  Deliverer :


The  Ood  of  my  rock,  in  whom  I  take


My  Shield  and  the  Horn  of  my  salva-
tion.
My  Fastness  and  my  Place  of  refuge :
My  Saviour :  thou  savest  me  from  violence.
I  call  upon  Jehovah,  the  praised  One,
And  I  am  saved  from  my  enemies."

The  Syriac  in  ver.  2  inserts,  "  Fervently  do

1  love  thee,  Jehovah  my  Strength ; "  but  it
probably  only  borrows  the  words  from  Ps.
xviii.  1.  For  we  may  well  believe  that  it
was  at  a  later  period  of  his  life,  after  deeper
and  more  heart-searching  trials,  that  David
thus  felt  his  love  to  Jehovah  only  strength-
ened and  made  more  necessary  to  Lim  by
the  loss  of  his  earthly  happiness.  In  ver.  3
The  God  of  my  rook  is  changed  in  Ps.  xviii.

2  into  "My  God  my  Eock"  (Authorized
Version,  "strength") — ^probably  an  inten-
tional alteration,  as  being  far  less  rugged
and  startling  than  this  bold  metaphor  of  the
Deity  being  his  rock's  God.  In  the  original
the  words  present  each  its  distinct  idea.
Thus  in  ver.  2  the  rock  is  a  high  cliff  or
precipice.  It  is  the  word  aela,  which  gave  its
name  to  the  crag-city  of  Idumea.  Fortress
really  means  a  rook,  difBcult  of  access,  and
forming  a  secure  retreat.  It  is  entirely  a
natural  foi-mation,  and  not  a  building.  In
ver.  3  rock  is  a  vast  mountainous  mass
(Job  xviii.  4),  and,  as  it  suggests  the  ideas
of  grandeur  and  immovable  might,  it  is  often
used  for  God's  glory  as  being  the  Strength
and  Protection  of  Us  people  (Deut.  xxxii.
15,31;  Isa.  xxx.  29,  margin).  Next  follow
two  ordinary  metaphors,  the  thield  for  de-
fence, and  the  horn  for  attack ;  after  which
David,  who  had  so  often  sought  safety  among
the  cliffs  and  fastnesses  of  the  mountains,
returns  to  the  same  circle  of  thoughts,  and
calls  God  his  High  Tower,  the  word  signifying,
not  a  building,  but  a  height,  a  lofty  natural
stronghold;  and  finally  hw  Befuge,  a  place
of  safe  retreat  among  the  mountains.  This
and  the  rest  of  the  verse  are  omitted  in  Ps.
xviii.  2.  In  ver.  4  the  words  are  as  literally
translated  above,  and  signify,  "  Whenever  I
call,  I  am  saved."  In  all  times  of  difficulty,
prayer  brings  immediate  deliverance.

Vers.  5—7.—

"  For  the  breakers  of  death  surrounded  me ;
Torrents  of  wickedness  [Hebrew,  '  of  Be-
lial '3  terrified  me ;
Cords  of  Sheol  surrounded  me ;
Snares  of  death  came  suddenly  upon  me.
In  my  distress  I  cried  unto  Jehovah,
Anil  to  my  God  I  cried.
And  he  heard  my  voice  out  of  his  palace,
And  my  cry  was  in  his  ears."

Instead  oShreahers — waves  dashing  violently
on  rocks— Ps.  xviii.  4  has  "  cords  of  death,"
translated  "  sorrow  "  in  the  Authorized  Ver-


532


THE   SECOND   BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xxii.  1—51.


Bion.  But  "  cords  of  death  "  mean  the  fatal
snares  of  the  hnnter,  and  are  not  in  keeping
with  "  torrents  of  wickedness."  "  Bulial,"
literally,  "  worthlessness,"  is  by  many  sup-
posed from  the  context  to  mean  here  "(te-
btruction,"  that  is,  physical  instead  of  moral
wickedness.  So  in  Nah.  i.  11  "  a  counsellor
of  Belial "  means  a  ruinous,  destructive
counsellor.  Sheol  is  the  world  of  the  de-
parted, and  ii  equivalent  to  "  death."  Cried
is  the  same  verb  twice  used.  In  Fs.  xviii.
6  it  is  altered,  in  the  former  part  of  the
verse  unto  "I  called"— a  change  probably
suggested  by  the  more  fastidious  taste  of  a
later  age.  For  temple  we  should  translate
palace,  or  heavenly  temple.  It  is  not  the
temple  in  Jerusalem,  which  was  not  yet
built,  but  God's  heavenly  dwelling,  that  is
meant.  Instead  of  the  terse  ellipse,  "  And
my  cry  in  hia  ears,"  the  full  but  heavy
phrase, "  My  cry  before  him  came  into  hiii
ears,"  is  substituted  in  Fs.  xviii.  6.
Vers.  8—10.—

"  And  the  earth  quaked  and  trembled ;
The  foundations  of  the  heavens  shook.
And  quaked  because  he  was  wroth.
A  smoke  went  up  in  his  nostril.
And  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured ;
Bed  hot  cinders  burned  from  him.
And  he  bowed  the  heavens  and  came  down,
And  darkness  was  under  his  feet."

In  describing  the  manifestation  of  God  for
hid  deliverance,  David  bore  in  mind  and
repeated  the  description  of  God's  descent  to
earth  given  in  Exod.  six.  16,  18.  But  the
poetic  vigour  of  David's  imagination  intensi-
ties the  imagery,  and  makes  it  more  grand
and  startling.  Not  merely  is  there  the
earthquake  and  the  volcano  and  the  storm-
cloud,  but  the  dim  form  of  the  Almighty  ia
present,  with  the  smoke  of  just  anger  at
unrighteousness  ascending  from  his  nostrils,
and  the  lightnings  flashing  forth  to  execute
liis  wrath.  But  David  certainly  intended
that  these  metaphors  should  remain  ideal ;
and  it  was  quite  unnecessary  for  the  Targum
carefully  to  eliminate  all  such  expressions
as  seem  to  give  the  Almighty  human  shape.
In  so  doing  it  merely  changes  poetry  into
prose.  But  even  more  dull  and  common-
place is  the  explanation  given  by  some
modern  commeiitators,  that  all  that  is  meant
is  that  David  was  once  saved  by  a  thunder-
storm from  some  danger  or  other.  Eeally
this  glorious  imagery,  taken  from  all  that
is  grandest  on  earth,  is  intemled  to  magnify
to  us  the  spiritual  conception  of  God's
justice  coming  forth  to  visit  the  earth  and
do  right  and  equity.  In  ver.  8  for  "  the
foundations  of  the  heavens,"  we  find  in  Ps.
xviii.  7  "the  foundations  of  the  hills."  The
former  is  the  grander  metaphor,  and  sig-nifles
the  mighty  mountain  ranges,  like  those  of


Lebanon,  on  which  the  skies  leem  to  rest.
The  smoke  signifies  hailstorms  and,  perhaps,
also  the  rain  driven  in  wreaths  along  the
ground  by  the  wind.  Bed  hot  cinders
homed  from  him  describes  the  flashing
lightnings  that  were  shot  forth  like  the
coals  from  the  refiner's  furnace  when  heated
to  the  full.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the
Eeviaed  Version  retains  the  bathos  of  the
old  rendering,  that  God's  fiery  breath  set
coals  on  fire.

Vers.  11—13.—
"And  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did  fly;

And  he  was  seen  upon  the  wings  of  the
wind.

And  he  made  darkness  booths  round  about
him;

Gathering  of  waters,  thickenings  of  clouds.

Out  of  the  brightness  before  him

Coals  of  fire  burned."

In  ch.  vi.  2  Je&ovah  is  described  as  sitting
upon  the  cherubim;  his  presence  there,
called  by  the  rabbins  his  Shechinah,  that
is,  dwelling,  being  indicated  by  a  cloud  of
light.  In  this  psalm  the  cherub  is  his
chariot,  on  which  be  rides  forth  to  judg-
ment. He  was  seen.  There  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  right  reading  is  preserved  ia
Ps.  xviii.  10,  where  we  find  a  verb  signify-
ing the  swooping  down  of  a  bird  of  prey
upon  its  quarry  (Deut.  xxviii.  49;  Jer.
xlviii.  40).  The  two  words  differ  only  in
the  substitution  of  r  for  d,  and  these  letters
are  so  similar  in  Hebrew  that  they  are  con-
stantly interchanged.  Booths ;  made  of
branches  of  trees,  and  forming  a  temporary
abode.  So  the  dark  storm-clouds  are  gathered
round  the  Almighty  to  veil  his  awful  form
from  sight  as  he  goes  forth  for  judgment.
Gathering  of  waters;  probably  the  right
reading.  Instead  of  which  in  the  psalm  we
find  "dark  waters."  The  gathering  of
waters  would  describe  the  massing  of  the
rain-clouds.  The  difference  here  also  con-
sists only  in  one  letter.  Out  of  the  bright-
ness, which  closely  surrounds  the  Deity  in
the  midst  of  the  black  mass  of  the  tempest,
the  lightning  flashes  forth.  This  brightness
is  the  Shechinah  (see  above),  to  which  St.
Paul  also  refers  where  he  says  that  God's
dwelling  is  in  "  the  unapproachable  light "
(1  Tim.  vi.  16).

Vers.  14—16.—
"Jehovah  thundered  from  heaven.

And  the  Most  High  uttered  his  voice.

And  he  sent  forth  arrows,  and  scattered
them  [the  evil-doers] ;

Lightning,  and  terrified  them

And  the  sea-beds  became  visible,

The  foundations  of  the  world  wore  laid
bare,

At  the  rebuke  of  Jehovah,

By  the  breath  of  the  wind  of  his  nostril,"


CH.  xxii.  1—51.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


633


Terrified.  The  verb  signifles  "  to  strike  with
Budden  terror  and  alarm  "  (see  Exod.  xiv.  24 ;
Jqsh.  X.  10).  It  describes  here  the  panic
caused  by  the  lightning,  and  by  the  violent
throes  of  nature,  so  powerfully  described  in
ver.  16.  Laid  bare.  This  Is  the  meaning
of  the  word  "  discovered  "  in  the  Authorized
Version.  When  the  version  was  made,  it
was  equivalent  to  "uncovered,"  but  has  now
changed  its  signification.
Veis.  17—20.—

"He  stretched  forth  his  hand  from  on  high ;

he  took  me.
He  drew  me  out  of  many  waters.
He  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemy.
From  them  that  hated  me ;  for  they  were

too  mighty  for  me.
For  they  attacked  me  in  the  day  of  my

misfortune.  '
But  Jehovah  became  my  Staff,
And  he  brought  me  forth'  into  •  wide

place;
He  delivered  me,  because  he  had  pleasure

in  me."

In  the  midst  of  this  fearful  convulsion  of
nature,  whUe  all  around  are  stricken  with
panic,  David  sees  a  hand  stretched  out  from
above,  ready  to  deliver  him  from  the  over-
whelming flood  of  hatred  and  peril.  At-
tacked me.  The  word  does  not  signify  "  to
prevent,"  or  "anticipate,"  but  "to  assail."
So  in  ver.  6,  "  The  snares  of  death  assailed
me ; "  and  in  Isa.  zxxvii.  33,  "  The  King  of
Assyria  shall  not  attack  this  city  with
tthidld,"  It  is  the  same  verb  in  all  these
placed.  Staff;  in  the  Authorized  Version,
"itay,"  But  it  means  something  to  lean
npon,  and  Is  rightly  translated  "  staff  "  in  Ps.
xxiii.  i,  A  wide  place ;  in  opposition  to  the
straits  of  affliction.  He  had  pleasure  in  me.
In  ch.  XV.  26  this  confidence  is  gone,  and
David  doubts  whether  the  favour  of  Jehovah
bad  not  been  forfeited  by  him.
Vers.  21—25.—

''Jehovah  hath  requited  me  according  to  my
righteousness.

According  to  the  cleanness  of  my  hands
hath  he  recompensed  me.

For  I  have  kept  the  ways  of  Jehovah,

And  sinned  not  so  as  to  depart  from  my
God.

For  all  bis  judgments  have  been  kept  in
sight.

And  from  his  statutes  I  have  not  departed.

I  was  also  perfect  towards  him,

And  was  on  my  guard  against  my  sin.

Therefore  hath  Jehovah  recompensed  me
according  to  my  righteousness.

According  to  my  cleanness  in  his  eye-
bight."

It  is  impossible  to  inppose  that  these  verses
could  have  been  written  after  David's  fall.


For  while  he  acknowledges  in  them  a  ten-
dency to  sin,  he  affirms  that  he  had  been
on  his  guard  against  it,  and  that  he  had
ever  kept  God's  statutes  present  before  his
view.  However  complete  may  be  the  peni-
tent's recovery,  yet  can  he  never  again  be
"  perfect,"  the  word  applied  to  an  animal
without  blemish,  and  therefore  fit  for  sacri-
fice. The  crime  remains  a  blemish,  even
though  the  intense  sorrow  for  the  sin  may
make  it  the  means  of  even  attaining  to  a
higher  stage  of  spirituality  and  devotion.
In  ver.  22  the  words  literally  are,  "  I  have
not  sinned  away  from  God,"  sin  necessarily
removing  the  sinner  away  from  that  near-
ness to  God  which  is  the  privilege  of  tho
saint.

Vers.  26—28.—

"  With  the  pious  man  thon  wilt  show  thyself
pious ;

With  the  perfect  msn  then  wilt  ghow
thyself  perfect;

With  the  pure  thon  wilt  show  thyself
pure;

And  with  the  crooked  thon  wilt  show  thy-
self perverse.

Aud  the  afflicted  people  thou  wilt  save ;

And  thine  eyes  are  upon  the  haughty,  to
bring  them  down."

Having  afiirmed  his  integrity,  and  that  God
therefore  had  pleasure  in  him  and  rewarded
him,  David  now  asserts  that  this  is  the
unfailing  rule  of  God's  dealings  with  men.
The  general  current  of  their  lives  is  so
ordered  as  to  be  in  harmony  with  their
characters.  It  is  not  by  luck  or  good  fortune
that  prosperity  attends  the  righteous,  nor  is
it  by  chance  that  things  go  awry  with  the
fraudulent,  but  it  is  by  the  law  of  God's  pro-
vidence. Pious.  The  Hebrew  word  means
"pious "in  the  original  sense  of  the  word,
which  includes  kindness  to  men  as  well  as
love  to  God  Perverse.  In  the  Authorized
Version  "  unsavoury."  Beally  it  ia  tlie  same
word  as  that  used  in  Ps.  zviii.  26,  and  signi-
fies "thou  wilt  make  thyself  twisted,"  only
the  form  is  archaic,  as  is  the  case  with  some
other  words  here.  Experience  eonflrins  the
psalmist's  verdict.  For  constantly  a  strange
perversity  of  fortune  and  an  untowardncss  of
events  are  the  lot  of  those  whose  hearts  are
crooked.  Af&ioted.  The  word  iu  the  original,
includes  the  idea  of  humility,  and  so  leads
naturally  on  to  the  thought  of  the  abasement
of  the  proud.  In  the  psalm  the  somewhat
harsh  expression  used  here  has  been  softened
into  the  more  easy  phrase,  "  The  haughty
eyes  thou  wilt  bring  down."
Vers.  29-31.—

"  For  thon,  Jehovah,  art  my  Lamp;
And   Jehovah  will  make    bt   darkness
Ught.


534


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [ca.  xrn.  1—51.


For  by  thee  do  I  ran  upon  a  troop;

In  my  God  I  leap  over  a  wall.

God — his  way  is  perfect ;

The  word  of  Jehovah  is  purified.

He  is  a  Shield  to  all  that  trust  in  him."

Lamp.  The  lamp  burning  in  the  house  is
the  proof  of  life  and  activity  present  there ;
and  thus  the  extinguishing  of  the  lamp
means  ruin  and  desolation  (Job  xxi.  17).
So  David  is  called  "the  lamp  of  Israel"
(oh.  xxi.  17),  because  the  active  life  of  the
nation  centred  in  him.  In  a  still  higher
sense  the  life  and  being  of  his  people  centres
in  God,  and  without  him  the  soul  is  waste
and  void,  like  the  universe  before  God  said,
"  Let  there  be  light."  I  run.  To  the  war-
rior in  old  time  speed  was  as  important  as
strength,  and  thus  Homer  constantly  calls
Achilles  "  fleet  of  foot."  It  was  his  fieetness
which  gave  Asahel  a  high  place  among  the
mighties  (oh.  ii.  18),  and  to  this  quality
David  now  refers.  The  troop  signifies  a
light  armed  band  of  marauders,  whom  with
God's  aid  David  could  overtake,  and  stop  in
their  course  of  rapine.  The  wall  means  for-
tifications like  those  of  Jerusalem  (ch.  v.  7).
Sieges  were  tedious  affairs  in  old  time,  but
David  had  captured  that  city  with  a  rapidity
so  great  that  the  metaphor  in  the  text  is  most
appropriate.  Purified;  or,  rej^neti.  This  does
not  mean  that  it  is  proTeO  by  experience
and  found  true,  but  that  it  is  absolutely
good  and  perfect  like  refined  gold  (see  Pb.
lii.  6).
Vers.  32—34.—

"  For  who  is  God,  save  Jehovah?
And  who  is  a  rock,  save  our  God?
God  is  my  strong  Fortress,
And  he  guideth  the  perfect  in  his  way.
He  maketh  my  feet  Hke  the  hinds.
And  upon  my  high  places  he  doth  set
me."

God;  Hebrew,  El;  the  Mighty  One,  nsed
several  times  in  this  psalm.  In  the  second
clause  the  word  is  Mohim,  the  ordinary
name  of  God,  The  psalmist's  question  is  a
strong  assertion  that  Jehovah  alone  is  God,
and  that  he  alone  is  a  Bock  of  safety  for  his
people.  He  gnideth,  etc.  In  Ps.  xviii.  32
"  He  maketh  my  way  perfect,"  like  his  own.
The  phrase  here  is  probably  that  which
David  wrote,  as  being  less  usual,  and  it  sig-
nifies that  God  will  direct  the  upright  man
in  his  good  way.  Hinds.  David's  feet  are
swift  as  hinds,  an  animal  famous  for  its
speed  and  sureness  of  foot.  My  high  places.
The  tops  of  the  mountains  are  the  favourite
resort  of  the  antelope  (oh.  i.  18);  and  so
with  David,  the  possession  of  such  rocky
citadels  aa  Bozez  and  Seneh  (1  Sam.  xiv.  4)
made  him  master  of  th«  whole  countiy.


Vers.  35—37.—
"  He  teacheth  my  bands  to  war;
And  mine  arms  can  bend  a  bow  of  bronze.
And  thou  hast  given  me  thy  saving  shield ;
And  thy  hearing  of  me  hath  made  me

great.
Thou  hast  enlarged  my  steps  under  me;
And  my  feet  have  not  slipped."

Bow  of  bronze.  In  Job  xx.  24  we  also  read
of  bows  made  of  this  metal,  or  compound  of
metals,  which  was  a  far  more  ancient  material
for  weapons  than  steel.  The  bending  of
such  a  bow  was  proof  of  great  strength,  and
the  last  artifice  of  Penelope,  to  save  herself
from  the  suitors,  was  to  promise  her  hand
to  the  man  who  could  bend  Ulysses'  bow.
Thy  hearing  of  me;  in  Fs.  xviii.  35,  and
Authorized  Version  and  Revised  Version
here,  "  thy  gentleness."  The  words  in  the
Hebrew  are  very  nearly  alike,  but  the  Sep-
tuagint  notices  the  difierence,  and  translates
•'  hearing  "  in  this  place,  but "  chastisement "
in  the  psalm.  The  Vulgate  has  "  gentieneds  "
or  "  mildness"  here,  and  "  discipline  "  in  the
psalm.  The  Syriao  alone  has  "  (discipline  "  in
both  places.  My  feet;  literally,  an&^c-toneo,
the  weakness  of  which  causes  men  to  totter.

Vers.  38—40.—
"  I  have  pursued  my  enemies  and  destroyed
them;

Ifeither  did  I  turn  again  until  I  had  con-
sumed them.

And  I  have  consumed  them,  and  smitten
them  through,  and  they  arose  not;

Yea,  they  fell  under  my  feet.

For  thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength
unto  the  battle;

Thou  hast  made  them  that  rose  against  ma
to  bow  under  me."

In  the  Psalms,  for  destroyed  we  find  "  over-
taken," and  the  second  "  I  have  consumed
them  "  is  omitted.  This  exultation  of  David
at  the  result  of  his  wars  is  in  accordance  with
the  harsh  treatment  inflicted  by  him  upon
the  vanquished.  His  enemies  were  God's
enemies,  whom  he  must  consume.  The
"new  commandment"  of  Christianity  for-
bids and  condemns  this  delight  in  conquest.
Vers.  41—43.—

"  And  mine  enemies  thou  hast  made  to  turn

upon  me  their  back,
Even  those  that  hate  me ;  and  I  have  utterly

destroyed  them.
They  looked,  but  there  was  none  to  save,
Even  to  Jehovah,  but  he  answered  them

not.
And  I  beat  them  small  as  the  dust  of  the

earth;
As  the  mire  of  the  streets  I  stamped  upou

them,  I  trode  them  down."

Those  that  hate  me.    The  sentence  ia  to  be
completed  fiom  the  pievious  olaiue|  "my


OH.  xxiL  1— 51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


635


haters "  and  "  luy  eDemies  "  being  equiva-
lent. There  are  several  small  variations
between  the  text  here  and  in  Ps.  xviii.,  such
as  "they  cried"  for  they  looked;  and  "I
emptied  them  out"  for  I  stamped  upon  them,
the  difference  in  both  cases  consisting  in  a
single  letter.
Vers.  44—46.—

"And  thou  hast  delivered  me   from  the

strivings  of  my  people ;
Thou  hast  protected  me  that  I  might  be

head  of  the  nations.
A  people  whom  I  knew  not  have  become

my  servants ;
Children   of    strangers    have    submitted

themselves  to  me;
At  the  hearing  of  the  ear  they  obeyed  me.
The  children  of  the  strangers  faded  away ;
They  fled  trembling  out  of   their  fast-


Feople,  in  the  singular,  means  the  Jewish
people  as  opposed  to  the  nations,  that  is,  the
heathen  world.  The  strivings  here  referred
to  are  the  long  dissensions  which  followed
Ishbosheth's  death,  and  delayed  for  many
years  the  appointment  of  David  as  king  of
all  Israel.  He  now  feels  that  the  watchful
care  which  had  protected  him  during  that
dangerous  period  had  a  higher  purpose  than
the  union  of  the  twelve .  tribes  under  one
head.  He  was  to  be  the  founder  also  of  that
empire  over  the  nations  which  symbolized
the  gift  of  the  heathen  world  to  Christ.  And
this  empire  had  been  extended  to  people
previously  unknown  to  David.  Such  might
be  the  case  with  Hadarezer,  King  of  Zobah,
but  it  more  especially  referred  to  Toi,  and
the  Hittite  kingdom  of  Hamath  (ch.  viii.  9).
It  was  not  from  force  of  arms,  but  from  the
hearing  of  the  ear,  that  is,  from  the  wide-
extended  fame  of  David's  couquests,  that  Toi
sent  ambassadors  to  offer  allegiance  and
presents.  They  fled  trembling.  This  is
certainly  the  sense  in  Ps.  xviii.  4.1,  where,
however,  there  is  a  transposition  of  letters.
Probably  it  is  the  sense  here.  But  if  we
might  go  to  the  cognate  languages  for  an
explanation  of  a  rare  word,  it  would  mean
"  came  limping  out  of  their  fastnesses,"  as
men  worn  out  with  fatigue  and  exhaustion.


Vers.  47—49.—

"  Jehovah  liveth ;  and  blessed  be  my  Rook,
And  exalted  be  the  God  of  the  rouk  of  my

salvation.
Even    the  God  that  giveth  me  avenge-

ments,
And  bringeth  down  peoples  under  me.
And  bringeth  me  forth  from  my  enemies.
Yea,  thou  liftest  me  up  above  those  that

rise  up  against  me;
From  the  violent  man  thou  deliverest  me."

In  Ps.  xviii.  46  we  find  simply  "  the  God  of
my  salvation."  Perhaps  there  seemed  to
the  compiler  to  be  some  confusion  in  calling
Jehovah.first  David's  Eock,andthen the  God
of  his  rook  (but  see  note  on  ver.  3).  Avenge-
ments,  in  the  plural.  In  the  Law  the  sanc-
tions were  chiefly  temporal,  and  therefore
the  saints  of  old  watched  anxiously  for,  and
were  strengthened  by  observing,  the  con-
stantly recurring  proofs  of  God's  righteous
government  of  men.  Peoples,  in  the  plural ;
heathen  nations.  The  violent  man  may
especially  be  Paul,  as  is  supposed  in  the
title  prefixed  to  this  soiig  in  the  Book  of
Psalms.  There  probably  it  is  general,  and
includes  all  who  were  bitter  in  their  hostility
to  David.
Vers.  50,  51.—

"  Therefore  will  I  praise  thee  among  the
nations.
And  to  thy  Name  will  I  sing.
Great  deliverance  giveth  he  to  bis  king.
And  showeth  grace  to  his  messiah —
To  David,  and  to  his  seed  for  ever."

Great  deliverance ;  literally,  he  maheth  great
the  salvation  of  his  king ;  that  is,  he  resoueth
him  marvellously  again  and  again.  The
K'ri  substitutes  tower,  but  it  has  no  sup-
port either  from  the  versions  or  from  P.-^.
xviii.,  though  admitted  into  the  Authorized
Version.  The  difference  between  the  two
words  "making  great"  and  "tower"  is,
in  the  Hebrew,  trifling.  To  his  messiah.
This  mercy  was  shovm  to  David  as  the
anointed  theocratic  king,  whose  rule  was
the  symbol  of  that  of  Christ.


EOMILBTICS.

Vers.  1—4. — Songs  of  deliverance.  The  facts  are :  1.  David  composes  a  song  at  the
end  of  all  the  deliverances  which  during  his  life  God  had  wrought  for  him.  2.  He
describes  God  as  being  to  him  a  Bock,  a  Portress,  a  Shield,  a  High  Tower,  a  Place  of
Befage,  and  represents  him  as  being  actively  his  Deliverer  and  Saviour.  3.  He,  in  look-
ing on  to  the  future,  resolves  to  trust  in  him  who  had  been  so  much  to  his  life  in  the
past,  and  expects  to  be  saved  from  his  enemies.  4.  He,  reviewing  the  past,  feels  that
God  is  worthy  of  the  praise  expressed  in  this  song.  There  is  a  beautiful  congruity  in
the  place  of  this  song  being  at  the  close  of  the  most  detailed  and  protracted  narratire


53«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMtJEL.        [oh.  xxn.  1—51.

of  personal  history  to  he  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  even  in  the  entire  Bilile  wltii
the  exception  of  that  referring  to  Cl  riot — seeing  that  that  history  was  one  o''  most
strange  vicissitudes,  and  ftdl  of  dangers.  The  story  of  David's  life  is  so  neci-ssarily
occupied  with  events  as  *hey  appeared  to  men  and  as  the^  pertain  to  visible  histoiy.
that  this  song  is  a  true  supplement,  inasmuch  as  it  brings  into  view  the  deep  spirittul
feelings  that  influenced  him  in  the  midst  of  those  events,  and  so  furnishes  a  key  to  the
religious  life  of  the  great  king.  This  song  of  deliverances  reminds  us  of  the  song  of
Moses  when  Israel  triumphed  over  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts  at  the  Red  Sea  (Exod.  xv.),
of  the  song  of  the  ransomed  as  they  were  to  return  to  Zion  with  everlasting  joy  on
their  heads  (Isa.  xxxv.  10),  and  of  the  still  more  wonderful  new  song  by  the  redeemed
from  all  nations  and  kindreds  of  the  earth  (Rev.  v.  9 — ^13 ;  xiv.  l-r-3).  In  these  his-
toric and  prophetic  instances  we  have  illustrations  of  songs  of  deliverance  ever  rising
from  gralel'ul  hearts,  establishing  thus  with  the  past  and  the  future  a  community  o(
religious  experience  which  is  at  once  a  fruit  and  an  evidence  of  the  Divine  redemption
wrought  out  by  our  Saviour.  Taking  the  experience  of  David  as  our  guide^  we  mas
observe—

I.  The  peeils  of  life  abb  sometimes  so  extreme  as  to  inbuce  immense  efforts
TO  ESCAPE  THEM.  History  tells  us  some  of  the  perils  of  David's  life,  both  when  Saul
pursued  him  with  relentless  cunning  and  cruelty,  and  when,  as  king,  kindred,  friend,
and  foe,  and  also  the  unseen  powers  of  darkness,  sought  his  ruin.  The  subsequent
references  in  vers.  5,  6  give  his  impression  of  the  greatness  of  his  distress ;  and  the
allusions  to  "  rock,"  "  high  tower,"  and  "  fortress  "  remind  us  of  the  time  when  his
extremity  was  such  that  he  climbed  the  craggy  cliff  or  hid  himself  in  the  inaccessible
clefts  of  the  rocks.  No  man  was  so  near  to  death  as  was  David,  and  no  good  man  came
nearer  to  moral  and  spiritual  destruction  than  did  he  in  the  case  of  Bathsheba  and
Uriah.  This  is  the  common  lot  of  men  on  earth,  though  some  find  their  perils  less
than  those  of  their  fellows.  In  business  affairs.  In  statesmanship,  in  special  enter-
prises, in  matters  of  health,  in  common  intercourse  with  men,  and  in  spiritual  experi-
ence, there  arc  seasons  when  it  seems  to  be  a  question  of  a  few  hours  whether  we  make
wreck  or  escape.  Then  comes  a  strain,  a  demand  on  our  fullest  resources,  correspond-
ing to  that  on  David  when  Saul  sought  his  life,  or  when  spiritual  destruction  was  in
the  train  of  Batbsheba's  unholy  love.

II.  No    HIGH    CHABACTEE    RAISES   US   ABOVE   LIABILITY   TO  THESE  EXTREME   PERILS.

The  world  is  infested  with  evil,  and  the  best  characters  find  that,  as  mortal,  fallible  men,
t'ley  are  liable  to  the  exigencies  of  life,  and  as  good  men  they  are  objects  of  attack  by
the  powers  of  darkness.  David  was  an  honest,  sincere,  devout  man,  and  specially  dear
(o  God  when  Saul  hunted  bis  life ;  and  he  was  superior  to  many  before  the  horrible
temptation  to  depart  from  purity  fell  upon  his  soul.  Character  is  a  defence  against
some  dangers,  else  were  it  of  little  worth ;  but  danger  to  our  calling,  our  enterprises,  our
health,  our  moral  position — subtle  and  serious — cannot  but  be  our  earthly  lot  Even
our  Lord  knew  the  tempter's  power  in  the  bitterness  of  poverty  ;  and  he  warned  the
best  men  arotmd  his  Person  to  expect  peril  to  eai  thly  interests,  and  to  watch  lest  at
any  time  even  their  devouter  hearts  should  be  overcharged  with  surfeiting  and  drunken-
ness and  the  cares  of  this  life  (Luke  xxi.  34 ;  cf.  16).

III.  Truly  religious  men  will  use  every  effort  to  escape  these  perils.  In
his  reference  to  "  rock,"  "  refuge,"  and  "  fortress,"  David  at  once  carries  us  back  to  the
time  when  he  used  his  utmost  endeavours  to  escape  from  Sanl  by  climbing  the  rocks
and  taking  refuge  among  the  fastnesses  of  the  mountains  (1  Sam.  xxii.  1,  5;  xxiii.  14,
15).  David  acted  as  though  all  depended  on  liimself.  The  cave,  the  cliff,  the  gorge,
the  lofty  peak,  were  sought  to  cover  him  as  a  "  shield,"  or  to  raise  him  as  on  a  "  high
tower."  So  far  as  the  two  men  were  concerned,  it  was  a  case  of  skill  against  skill,
endurance  against  endurance.  So,  also,  in  the  more  spiritual  conflicts  of  his  life,  he
laboured  hard  to  save  himself  from  destruction.  Prayer,  meditation  on  the  Divine  Law,
taking  heed  to  his  steps,  going  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  were  so  many  forms  of  personal
exertion  to  escape  the  foes  of  his  highest  life.  So  is  it  with  the  followers  of  Christ.
Thev  strive  daily  to  wai-d  off  the  ills  which  threaten  their  temporal  interests,  and  when
peril  becomes  extreme,  they  stir  up  all  their  energies  to  maintain  their  head  high  above
ali  impending  evils ;  and  what  is  true  of  temporal  is  true  also  of  spiritual  interests — they
give  all  diligence  to  make  their  calling  sure.


ua.  xxn.  1-51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  RAMtJEL.  637

IV.  The  vtstbt.e  means  of  safety  used  by  religious  men  abb  an  index  of  aH
INVISIBLE  RESODECB.  It  is  just  here  that  we  getat  the  heart  of  David's  meaning.  A
spectator,  observing  how  he  set  his  skill  against  that  of  Saul,  how  he  baffled  the  cruel
persecutor  by  feats  of  daring  among  the  caves  and  clefts  of  the  rock,  might  conclude
that  succeps  was  decided  by  a  mere  balance  of  ingenuity  and  agility — the  rock,  the
cave,  were  bis  defence.  But  no ;  he  used  these  visible  things,  but  all  the  time  his  soul
was  resiing  in  the  protection  of  God.  There  was  a  double  exercise  of  energy — that
which  expressed  itself  in  agility  of  movement  among  the  mountain  fastnesses,  and  that
which  expressed  itself  in  calm  trust  in  the  care  of  God.  God  was  his  Rock,  his  Siiield,
his  Fortress.  As  Elijah  saw  chariots  of  fire  where  others  saw  nothing  but  vacant  air,  bo
he  saw  the  Eternal  liock,  and  in  him  made  his  refuge.  The  same  double  exercise  of
energy  was  at  work  in  his  strenuous  efforts  to  maintain  his  piety.  It  was  not  prayer,
use  of  the  Divine  Law,  and  watchfulness  that  he  trusted  in,  but  the  ever-present  and
faithful  God.  Herein  is  the  characteristic  of  a  truly  godly  man.  An  inner  spiritual
activity  accompanies  all  the  external  forms.  His  soul  goes  out  after  the  living  God.
He  finds  safety  in  the  invisible  Bock  of  Ages.  God  in  Christ  is  his  actual  Hiding-place,
v.  The  best  thinos  in  nature  are  but  symbols  and  shadows  of  excellbnob
IN  Gk)D.  The  rock  and  the  high  tower  were  the  very  best  things  nature  afforded  to
David  in  his  dreadful  season  of  trial.  Those  wilds  then  answered  indeed  a  noble  pur-
pose. But  David  saw  in  their  protecting  powers  only  a  shadow  of  the  real  protecting
power  of  which  he  was  in  need.  All  the  saving  virtues  of  the  mountain  fastnesses
were  to  him  the  index  of  the  boumiless  resources  that  lie  in  God.  He  is  the  Rock.
Throughout  Soriptmre  there  seems  to  be  an  effort  to  set  forth,  if  possible,  the  reality  and
vastness  and  sufficiency  of  the  treasures  which  are  in  God  for  us.  Thus  Christ  is
represented  as  being  the  chief  and  best  of  all  things  in  nature — among  stars,  the  Bright
and  Morning  Star ;  among  fruit-bearing  trees,  the  luxurious  Vine ;  of  members  of  the
body,  the  Head.  Nature  can  only  indicate  what  wealth  of  resources  we  have  in  him.
His  riches  are  unsearchable  (Eph.  iii.  8).

VL   A  review  of   past   signal  deliverances  encourages  confidence  »  BESPEOT

TO  the  future.  Reviewing  the  wonderful  deliverances  wrouglit  for  him,  David  says,
"lu  him  will  I  trust;"  "I  shall  be  saved  from  mine  enemies."  The  conflict  of  life
was  not  over.  New  dangers  will  arise,  and  other  enemies  will  flit  the  ranks  of  the
fallen.  But  experience  of  God's  merciful  help  keeps  the  spirit  calm,  and  every  triumph
in  the  past  by  his  favour  is  a  guarantee  that  he  will  be  a  very  present  Help  in  every
time  of  need.  How  could  David  doubt  the  goodness  and  power  of  God  after  so  rich  an
experience  of  his  aid?  If  for  no  other  reason  than  the  confidence  it  inspires,  an  occa-
sional deliberate  review  of  what  great  things  God  has  done  for  us  is  very  desirable.
Doubt  and  fear  spring  from  too  much  attention  to  ourselves.  Security  lies  in  the
covenant  of  God,  and  not  in  our  own  powers,  and  a  remembrance  of  actual  help  received
is  a  reading  al'resh  of  the  many  Divine  ratifications  of  the  covenant.  The  din  and  hurry
of  daily  life  are  adverse  to  reflective  habits.  It  is  well  to  make  positive  efforts  at
certain  stages  of  life  to  resist  the  hindrances  to  reflection,  and  allow  to  pass  before  the
mind  the  varied  instances  in  which  God  has  rescued  us  from  impending  ruin,  both
temporal  and  spiritual.

VII.  A  rational  basis  for  praise  is  laid  in  a  consideration  of  God's  great
delivebaucbb.  It  is  not  without  solid  reason  that  David  says,  "  I  will  call  on  the
Lord,  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised."  There  are  manifold  reasons  why  praise  should  be
rendered  to  God,  but  here  the  basis  in  view  is  that  found  by  a  consideration  of  the
▼arious  acts  of  mercy  he  has  shown.  David's  deliverance  from  Saul,  from  the  treachery
of  I'o'g  and  Ahirhophel,  from  the  sorrows  and  shame  of  the  banishment  from  throne
•nd  city,  and  from  the  more  fearful  woes  of  backsliding,  were  indeed  events  never  to  be
for_;;ouen.  They  meant  to  him  life,  joy,  honour,  instead  of  death  and  disgrace.  All
that  is  valuable  in  life,  in  distinction,  in  personal  holiness,  and  victory  over  spiritual
evil,  appealed  to  his  generous  nature  to  acknowledge  in  thankful  form  the  great  things
which  God  had  done.  It  is  the  wont  of  some  agnostic  writers  to  represent  the  require-
ment of  praise  to  God  as  essentially  immoral — as  a  low  representation  of  God  as
selfishly  egotistic.  It  might  be  enough  to  say  that  agnostics  have  no  right  to  speak  of
essential  morality,  since  on  their  principles  there  can  be  no  such  thing.  But  apart
1xm»  that,  it  overlooks  the  i*al  taashing  of  Scripture  and  the  natural  action  of  human


S38  TnE  SECOND  COOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxn.  1— 61.

hearts.  Men  are  not  condemned  for  not  praising  God,  but  for  being  lovers  of  sin  in
thought,  feeling,  and  deed.  Their  condition  necessarily  involves  a  condemiiaiion,  as
surely  as  an  anarchical  state  involves,  by  its  condition,  its  own  destruction.  Their  not
rendering  acknowledgments  to  God  for  l)i3  mercies  is  only  a  symptom  of  the  real  evil,
and  not  the  actual  cause  of  condemnation.  A  heart  true  to  generous  and  pure  instincts
will  always  admire  power  blended  with  goodness,  and  be  thankful  for  good  placed
within  reach  by  that  beneficent  power.     "  Praise  is  comely."

VIII.    ThB   DBLIVBBAN0E8  WEOUGHT  FOE  HB   BY   GOD  ABE  ONLT  PBELIMINAKT  BLESS-

IHG8.  All  through  these  verses  David  speaks  of  deliverance,  of  being  saved  from
certain  evils,  and  God  as  a  Deliverer,  a  Saviour.  This,  of  course,  is  a  negative  good ;  it
is  doing  something  that  he  may  not  die,  and  not  be  lost.  But  it  is  only  a  superficial
view  to  say  that  this  was  all  that  David  was  thinking  of.  His  present  position  as
honoured  king,  ruling  over  a  united  nation,  and  blessed  with  a  moral  elevation  superior
to  any  other  man  then  living,  is  the  counterfoil  to  this  negative  aspect.  There  was  no
need  to  say  in  words  what  he  now  was.  His  life  tells  that  side  of  the  record  of  God's
mercy  and  power.  He  refers  to  the  deliverances  as  blessings  preliminary  to  his  positive
elevation  to  honour  and  distinction.  Being  delivered  from  the  hand  of  Saul,  he  was
made  king  in  succession ;  being  saved  from  the  banishment  consequent  on  Absalom's
rebellion,  of  course  he  was  positively  restored;  being  rescued  from  the  sin  of  back-
sliding, of  course  he  was  reinstated  in  the  Divine  favour  and  holiness  of  life.  This  is
the  correct  and  New  Testament  view  of  the  great  deliverance,  or  salvation,  wrought  for
ns  by  Christ.  We  are  delivered  from  the  curse  and  guilt  of  sin ;  but  that  is  the  negative
good,  preliminary,  necessary  to  the  implied  positive  elevation  to  sonship  and  eternal
holiness.  He  saves  from  condemnation,  but  does  not  leave  us  as  merely  liberated  souls.
He  gives  us  therewith  "  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God."  He  makes  us  "  kings  and
priests  unto  God."  The  positive  aspect  of  salvation  means  elevation,  progress,  con-
formity of  nature  to  the  Divine  will.

Vers.  6 — 19. — God's  answer  to  the  cry  of  distress.  The  facts  are  :  1.  David  repre-
gents  death,  the  grave,  and  ungodly  men,  under  various  figures,  as  causing  him  deep
distress.  2.  He  states  that,  on  crying  unto  God  out  of  the  greatness  of  his  distress,  his
voice  entered  even  into  his  ears.  3.  He  thus  indicates,  in  strong  figurative  language,
the  tokens  of  God's  attention  to  his  cry.  (1)  Some  manifest  signs  of  his  displeasure
against  his  foes  (vers.  8,  9).  (2)  A  speedy  and  yet  mysterious  condescension  to  the
need  of  his  servant  (vers.  10, 11).  (3)  The  blending  of  concealed  purpose  with  distinct
manifestations  of  the  reality  of  his  interposition  (vers.  12 — 14).  (4)  The  pressure  of
his  agencies  on  David's  enemies  (ver.  15).  (5)  The  thorough  rending  of  all  barriers
by  his  mighty  power  so  as  to  effect  deliverance  for  his  servant  (vers.  16 — 19).  David
represents  his  condition  as  one  of  isolated  anguish— he  is  cut  off  from  God  and  man,
standing  in  a  position  of  peril  and  suffering,  from  which  there  is  no  chance  of  escape.
Doubtless  there  were  several  occasions  in  his  checkered  life  when  this  was  true  ;  but
he  describes  them  in  the  terms  more  strictly  appropriate  to  the  time  when,  being
pursued  by  Saul  and  his  emissaries,  he  took  refuge  in  miuntains.  Like  one  standing
on  a  slight  elevation  when  the  floods  are  gathering  around,  he  sees  only,  on  every  side,
death  as  waves  eager  to  sweep  him  away.  The  ungodly  men  with  Saul  rush  on  as  a
torrent  from  which  there  is  no  escape.  The  sorrows  arising  from  the  thought  of  all  his
youthful  and  patriotic  aspirations  being  soon  buried  in  a  premature  grave,  and  a  once
promising  life  being  cut  off  as  a  worthless  thing,  gather  irresistibly  around  his  soul.
Whichever  way  he  turns,  to  the  cliff's  or  the  plain,  to  the  ravine  or  the  cave,  he  sees
that  death  is  there  spreading  out  snares  to  catch  him.  Neither  God  nor  man  is  nigh
to  rescue.  Life's  great  and  holy  purposes  are  being  crushed  and  blighted  for  ever.
No  one  cares  for  his  soul.  It  was  then,  when  destruction  was  inevitable,  that,  as  a  last
desperate  resort,  he  poured  out  his  anguish  before  God  and  cried  for  help.  The  help
came,  and  the  fact  and  form  of  the  interposition  are  the  theme  of  his  song.  Here  we
notice —

I.  Pbovidenoe  pebmits  mek  to  c»mk  into  great  BXTBBMITIE8.  David's  life  wa»
especially  providential.  He  was  from  his  youth  the  child  of  Providence,  and  yet,  for
no  other  traceable  reason  than  his  patriotism  and  his  goodness,  he  was  persecuted  by
Saul,  a  jealous,  suspicious  king,  even  to  the  degree  that  life  was  despaired  of.    All  the


OH.  xxn.  1-51.;]         THE  SECOND  BiDOK  OP  SAMUEL;  539

forces  of  society  and  of  nature  seemed  to  go  against  him,  aod  mcatiwhile  the  Gnd  of
his  youth  and  early  manhood  was  silent  and  apparently  far  away.  Our  only  interpre-
tation of  the  facts  is  that  God  allows  his  servants  sometimes  to  be  brought  very  low.
He  does  not  give  them  the  immunity  from  pain  and  peril  which  their  relative  goodness
and  fidelity  would  seem  to  warrant.  Yet  this  is  not  the  result  of  mere  arbitrariness  or
neglect.  It  is  part  of  an  educational  purpose,  and  inseparable  from  a  government  of
men  free  in  their  deeds  of  wrong.  The  latent  qualities  of  the  righteous  and  their
powers  for  future  use  can  often  be  best  developed  by  means  of  adverse  events  which
throw  them  more  absolutely  on  G-od  than  under  smooth  and  easy  conditions  they  ever
could  be.     We  need  not  be  surprised  if  we  fall  into  manifold  trials  (1  Pet.  iv.  12).

II.  ThB  extremities   of   life    develop  the   FDIiL   STKENOTH   OF   PBATBR.      David

had  been  accustomed,  like  all  pious  men,  to  pray,  but  now  he  cried  unto  God.  There
was  a  reserve  store  of  prayer  in  him  which  now  became  developed.  He  realized  as
never  before  his  need  of  God,  his  helplessness,  apart  from  pure  Divine  interposition  and
aid,  to  accomplish  the  purpose  for  which  he  had  been  selected  by  Samuel.  There  was
more  faith  in  him  than  he  had  been  aware  of,  and  now  it  was  brought  into  exercise.
This  was  the  first  gain  in  the  educational  process.  In  the  spiritual  life,  as  in  the
physical  and  mental,  our  capacities  become  atrophied  if  not  well  used,  and  circum-
stances that  draw  them  forth  in  unusual  degree  enrich  us  with  a  permanent  legacy
of  increased  power.  There  is  a  natural  tendency  to  inertia,  which  the  stress  of  our
environment  urges  us  to  overcome.  How  great  is  the  power  placed  in  our  hands  liy  the
privilege  of  prayer,  who  can  tell?  There  are  indications  of  its  greatness  in  particular
instances  recorded  in  the  Bible  and  known  in  modern  life.  It  availeth  much.  It
is  the  human  agency  by  which  the  exercise  of  the  Almighty  Power  bas  conditioned  its
own  exercise.  How  seldom  do  we  cry  unto  God  as  though  we  really  wanted  him  and
his  aid  I

III.  The  inteeposition  of  God  on  behalf  of  his  people  is  a  reality  in  LriE.
David  contrasts  in  thought  his  position  and  that  of  his  enemies.  He  was  apparently
left  alone  by  God  and  man ;  they  were  prosperous,  numerous,  strong,  and  eager  as
rolling  waves.  Death  was  before  and  behind  him,  so  that  he  could  not  move ;  they
were  free  to  act,  and  no  one  to  put  them  in  peril.  But  a  change  came ;  the  cry  of  distress
had  entered  into  the  very  ear  of  God,  and,  as  though  there  were  a  sudden  chaiiire  in  the
Divine  relationship  to  human  forces,  rescue  came.  To  David  the  interposition  was
as  real  as  the  previous  peril  and  agony.  It  was  not  mere  faint-heartedni'ss  in  Saul,  not
accidental  diversion  of  his  thoughts,  not  a  simple  refusal  of  his  men  to  go  further
in  pursuit  of  the  victim  of  his  malice ;  it  was  God  who  had  somehow  so  acted  on  men
and  things  as  to  bring  about  deliverance.  The  strong  figures  used  by  David  in  vers.
8 — 12  express  the  conviction  that  God  had  come  to  liis  help,  not  simply  by  the  action
of  normal  laws,  but  by  the  invisible  contact  of  the  eternal  energy  with  those  laws,
wondrously  subordinating  them  to  a  special  design;  The  true  believer  still  sees  God  in
his  great  deliverances.  The  answer  to  prayer  is  a  great  reality.  God  can  and  does  get
at  ms  suffering  children.  Men  see  not  the  invisible  hand,  but  those  who  cry  to  God
recognize  it.  The  profoundest  matters  of  life  are  objects  of  faith,  and  in  faith,  as  in
intention,  there  is  a  transcendent  knowledge  passing  all  demonstration  and  all
communication.

IV.  A  REVIEW  OF  Divine  interpositions  brings  out  to  the  eye  of  faith  their
STRONO  ohabacteristics.  David  here  reflects  on  the  deliverances  wrought  for  him  in
answer  to  earnest  prayer,  and  their  characteristics  appear  to  him  to  be  best  represented
by  the  bold  and  vigorous  language  in  vers.  8 — 16.    Among  these  we  may  notice:

1.  A  two/old  revelation — to  himself,  as  the  God  of  power  actually  stooping  to  his  help,
and  holding  in  his  hand  the  most  terrible  and  most  subtle  forces  of  nature;  and  to
his  enemies,  as  the  great  God  causing  his  voice  so  to  be  heard  in  the  course  of  things
as  to  reveal  his  wrath  and  impress  men  with  a  sense  of  his  greatness  and  majesty.

2.  An  asswrance  blended  tuith  uncertainty.  The  coming  down  and  the  Divine  bright-
ness brought  assurance  unmistakable;  but  the  darkness  and  mystery  of  his  move-
ments indicated  that  his  methods  of  working  out  a  saving  purpose  were  beyond  human
penetration.  3.  Use  of  appropriate  agencies  for  frustrating  wiched  purposes.  The
Divine  "arrows"  were  so  directed  by  unerring  wisdom  as  to  scatter  those  who  hitherto
were  bent  on  pursuit.    4.  Thoronghntss  in  clearing  away  all  natural  obstadts  to  the


540  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxii.  1—51

perfecting  of  the  deliverance.  So  thorough  was  the  reserve  to  be  that  the  swollen
torrents  and  deep  places  were  to  be  entirely  made  bare  of  water  in  order  to  render
escape  complete.  We  may  look  at  our  deliverances  as  from  enemies  human  or  fiendish,
and  we  shall  find  that  God  does  make  himself  known  as  our  Friend,  and  causes  our
IbeB  to  leel  his  displeasure.  We  know  that  he  helps,  but  we  know  not  all  his  ways.
He  brings  influences  to  bear  on  onr  foes,  so  that  they  are  weakened,  and  what  he
dues  he  does  perfectly,  clearing  away  whatever  may  hinder  our  safety.  The  same
general  truths  will  hold  good  if  we  look  at  our  many  deliverances  from  spiritual  peril.
He  seta  himself  against  evil,  and  comes  to  our  sorrowing  soul.  He  lets  us  know, enough
for  our  cheer,  but  does  not  throw  full  light  on  all  his  methods.  He  brings  the  mighty
influences  of  his  Word  and  Spirit  to  destroy  the  power  of  sin,  and  by  the  tremendous
work  of  Christ  clears  away  every  obstacle  to  our  full  salvation.

Oenesal  lessons.  1.  When  we  come  into  great  troubles  let  us  take  comfort  that
in  this  matter  we  are  sharing  in  an  experience  which,  in  the  case  of  some  of  the
best  of  men,  has  developed  a  more  earnest  spirit  of  prayer.  2.  The  records  of  God's
dealings  with  his  saints  shows  that  there  is  no  distress  too  deep  for  him  to  reach
and  remedy.  3.  There  is  no  place  on  earth  but  that  the  voice  of  prayer  is  free  to
enter  into  God's  holy  temple  and  even  to  his  ear.  4.  Although  for  a  season  during
the  prosperity  of  those  who  persecute  the  pious  it  may  seem  as  though  they  were
exempt  from  displeasure,  yet  God  is  angry  with  them,  and  will  in  some  significant  way
cause  them  to  know  it.  6.  However  desperate  our  case,  we  may  rest  assured  that  God
is  in  possession  of  all  the  means  of  gaining  access  to  our  need,  and  of  scattering
whatever  evils  threaten  us  with  ruin.  6.  There  are  no  powers,  however  deep-seated  and
established,  but  that,  if  we  trust  in  God,  he  will  clear  them  out  of  the  way,  so  that
we  may  find  a  position  of  safety,  and  consequent  elevation  to  honour  and  blessedness.

Vers.  20 — 30. — €M^»  righteousness  in  saving  the  righteous.  The  facts  are:  1.
David  states  that,  in  delivering  him  from  his  enemies,  God  recc^ized  his  uprightness
and  purity.  2.  He  affirms  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  had  in  his  conduct  endeavoured
to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God.  3.  He  declares  the  general  truth  that,  in  thus
rescuing  him  the  upright,  and  showing  disfavour  to  the  perverse  persecutor,  there  was
exemplified  the  principle  of  the  usual  Divine  procedure.  4.  He  ascribes  the  successes
of  the  past,  not  to  himself,  however  upright,  but  to  God,  his  Light  in  darkness  and
his  Strength  for  deeds  of  daring.  'J'here  is,  in  David's  references  to  his  own  righteous-
ness and  purity,  an  appear.ince  of  what  is  now  called  self-righteousness.  He  seems
to  violate  the  primary  canons  of  Christian  propriety  and  to  establish  a  doctrine  of  merit.
But  this  interpretation  of  his  words  is  an  utter  misconception  of  his  meaning,  and
proceeds  from  an  ignorance  of  the  historical  circumstances  he  had  in  mind  when  penning
the  words.  It  is  a  wrong  done  to  personal  experiences  of  the  Old  Testament  to
approach  their  interpretation  with  certain  prepossessions  based  on  New  Testament
teaching  with  reference  to  our  personal  unworthiness  before  Gwi  on  account  of  our
essential  sinfulness.  David  was  not  speaking  of  his  state  absolutely  before  God;  he
was  not  thinking  of  the  question  as  to  whether  he  or  any  one  else  was  a  sinner.  His
sole  thought  was  of  the  distinct  charges  brought  against  him  by  such  men  as  Doeg  the
Edomite,  and  believed  by  the  foolish  king  Saul;  and  he  was  conscious  that  his  being
hunted  by  Saul  was  a  grievous  wrong,  a  treatment  he  did  not  deserve.  Se  was  the
righteous  man,  for  he  loved  Said,  showed  him  kindness,  and  paid  him  honour;  Saul
and  Doeg  and  others  in  the  conspiracy  were  the  ■  unrighteous  men,  uttering  falsehoods,
using  cruelty,  and  cherishing  malice.  God  came  as  Judge  between  them,  and  by
interposition  showed  his  delight  in  what  his  servant  had  been  and  done  in  this
{Articular  matter,  and  his  displeasure  with  Saul  for  his  wicked  conduct.  He  vindicates
the  gracious  interposition  of  God  on  the  ground  that  it  is  a  righteous  and  glorious
thing  on  the  part  of  God  to  rescue  those  who  suffer  unrighteously,  and  to  declare,  by
his  rescue  of  them,  his  delight  in  them  as  compared  with  the  men  who  cause  their
sufferings  (cf.  1  Sam.  ixi.  7;  xxii.  9—13,  18—23;  xxiv.  7 — 15;  xxvi.  10—20).
The  vindication  and  illustration  of  God's  righteousness  in  saving  his  people  may  be
considered  as  follows.

I.    ThIBE   ABE   SPECIAIi    INBTANOES   IN    WHICH    IT    MAT   BB    BAID    THAT    GoD   BATES

nu  BioHTsoua.    In  ordinary  speech  we  say  that  God  saves  sinner*.    That  is  true  in


OB.  xxn.  1— 51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  641

the  Mnse  that  all  men  saTed,  whether  temporally  or  spiritually,  are,  in  their  relation  to
him,  sinful,  or  transgressors  of  the  Law.  But  in  relation  to  others  and  in  relation
to  specific  obligations  which  he  may  impose  on  them,  they  may  be  relatively  righteous,
and  his  saving  them  may  be  because  they  are  so.  Thus :  1.  Those  who  are  righteous
in  Ufe,  as  compared  with  others,  are  saved  from  calamity  and  suffering.  Noah  was
a  righteous  man,  and  therefore  was  spared,  while  the  Flood  carried  away  the  wicked.
Lot  was  a  righteous  man  in  comparison  with  the  Sodomites,  and  therefore  was  delivered
by  Divine  pressure  put  upon  him  from  the  destruction  which  befell  the  rest.  Some  of
the  better  Churches  in  Asia  were  not  doomed  to  the  woe  that  was  to  come  on  others,
because  God  "knew  their  works"  (Rev.  ii.,  iii.).  The  more  holy  and  demoted  to  Christ
we  are,  and  the  more  minutely  our  lives  are  regulated  by  the  laws  of  Ood  as  written  in
liis  Word  and  works,  and  in  our  own  mental  and  physical  nature,  tht;  mi -re  shall  we
be  saved  from  woes  that  come  upon  others  who  violate  laws  physical,  moral,  and
spiritual.  2.  Those  who  suffer  as  heing  unrighteous,  when,  all  the  time  the;/  are  not  so.
This  was  the  case  of  David,  who  was  persecuted  most  bitterly  by  Saul  on  the  ground
that  he  hated  his  king  and  sought  his  life,  when  all  the  time  he  loved  his  king
and  guarded  his  life.  It  was  as  a  righteous  man  in  this  particular  that  Go>l  saved  him
from  distress.  The  same  was  true  of  Joseph  in  prison;  of  the  Apostles  Peter  and
Paul ;  yea,  of  our  Saviour  himself.  And  often  still  does  God  save  his  people  from
the  reproach  and  sorrow  "brought  on  them  by  being  represented  as  being  other  than
they  really  are  (Matt.  v.  11,  12 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  14 — 17).  3.  Those  who  conform  to  the
gospel  law  of  salvation.  Before  God  all  are  sinners,  and  condemned  by  their  own
consciences  as  also  by  the  broken  Law.  But  Christ  has  made  full  atonement  for  sin,
and  now  therefore  God,  in  his  sovereign  grace,  hag  laid  down  a  new  law  for  us  to  keep,
based  upon  his  acceptance  of  Christ's  perfect  work,  namely,  that  we  exercise  faith  in
Christ  as  our  atoning  Saviour.  We  are  not  to  try  and  keep  the  Decalogue  as  a  condition
of  being  accepted;  we  cannot  attain  to  the  righteousness  of  the  moral  Law.  We  are  not
to  plead  the  value  of  repentance  and  a  future  life  better  than  the  past;  all  that  is
indefinite,  uncertain.  But  we  are  simply  to  have  faith  in  Christ  as  set  forth  in  the
gospel,  that  is  all  that  God  requires  for  our  acceptance ;  that  is  the  newly  created
law,  the  sum  of  all  obligations  in  reference  to  obtaining  justification  before  God.  In
other  words,  we  are  to  attain  to  the  "  righteousness  of  faith,"  the  righteousness
which  consists  in  fulfilling  the  obligation  created  by  gospel  grace,  and  then  there  is
no  condemnation:  we  walk  then  as  freed  sons  in  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children
of  God.

11.  In  all  these  instances  it  k  consonant  with  God's  natube  to  save  the
RiaHTEOus.  God's  treatment  of  Noah  and  Lot,  and  of  all  who  keep  his  truth  in  the
midst  of  prevailing  degeneracy,  marks  his  distinction  of  character  on  the  basis  of  good-
ness. It  is  the  Divine  nature  to  love  the  good  and  hate  the  evil  tendencies  of  men.
When  the  persecuted  are  delivered,  there  is  a  vindication  of  character  and  a  repressing
of  wrong  whicli  cannot  but  accord  with  God's  natural  love  of  justice.  When  ho
graciously  accepts  us  on  the  condition  that  we  have  fulfilled  all  that  he  requires  under
the  gospel  order,  and  in  our  justification  recognizes  the  "  righteousness  of  faith  "  (Rom.
iii.  25 — 2S ;  iv.  5,  6,  11, 13),  he,  accepting  that  kind  of  righteousness,  that  fulfilment
of  all  obligation,  maintains  the  honour  of  the  violated  Law  under  which  we  had  lived,
and  glorifies  the  sacrificial  work  of  his  beloved  Son.  There  is  therefore  nothing  arbitrary
in  the  "  law  of  faith."

IIL  These  special  instances  op  salvation  are  in  accokd  with  the  qbnbeal
PEiNCiPLE  of  God's  government.  David  was  quite  warranted  in  saying  that  when
God,  in  the  matter  of  the  deliverance  from  the  persecutions  of  Saul,  recompensed  him
according  to  his  righteousness  (ver.  25),  he  was  simply  acting  in  harmony  with  his
general  kindness  to  the  merciful  and  upright,  and  his  stern  and  repressive  ways  of
providence  toward  the  perverse  (vers.  26,  27).  The  actual  laws  revealed  in  the  Deca-
logue, in  the  civil  institutions  of  Moses,  in  the  precepts  of  the  New  Testament,  in  tlie
constitution  of  the  physical  and  mental  worlds,  all  go  for  the  good  and  against  the
wicked,  whatever  be  the  form  or  degree  of  the  goodness  or  wickedness.  It  may  be
that,  for  reasons  not  yet  made  clear,  the  wicked  triumph  for  a  while  and  the  righteous
cry  out  in  agony,  "0  Lord,  how  long!"  but  God's  government  is  vast,  intricate,  and
stretching  far  iuto  the  future,  and  there  are  forces  at  work  by  which  at  lait  the


542  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         t<^.  xxii.  1—51


righteous  shall  be  exalted  and  the  wicked  abased  (Ps.  v.  4—6, 11,  12;  xxxvii.  6,  7
23—40).

IV.  Those  who  abb  saved  by  GJod  on  the  oeound  of  bighteoubness  lay  no
CLAIM  TO  MEBiT.  The  object  of  David  in  this  passage  is  not  to  proclaim  his  own
deeds  and  claim  a  right  to  God's  favour,  but  rather  to  set  forth  the  righteousness  and
goodness  of  God  in  saving  those  who  conform  to  his  will.  He  had  kept  the  ways,  the
statutes,  and  the  judgments  of  God  (vers.  23,  24)  in  respect  to  his  behaviour  toward
Saul, — he  could  honestly  say  that ;  and  he  considers  it  a  matter  of  praise  and  glory  to
Oud  that  he  manifested  his  love  of  what  is  just  in  coming  to  the  rescue  of  such  a  one.
To  have  allowed  Saul  to  triumph  would  have  been  a  reflection  on  Divine  justice.  In
all  this,  therefore,  there  is  no  reference  to  merit  in  the  sight  of  God,  any  more  than
Koah  felt  that  he  merited  God's  favour.  It  was  in  neither  case  a  question  of  the  desert
of  the  entire  life,  but  of  the  state  of  the  life  in  relation  to  other  men.  So  in  our
personal  salvation  through  faith,  there  is  no  claim  of  merit.  It  is  all  of  grace.  The
"  law  of  faith "  is  the  creation  of  grace,  and  the  heart  to  conform  to  it  is  of  grace.
The  light  in  which  we  see  spiritual  things,  and  in  which  we  rejoice,  is  not  our  own.
The  Lord  is  our  Lamp,  and  he  lightens  our  darkness  (ver.  29).  If  we  are  able  to  break
through  troops  of  spiritual  foes,  and  leap  over  walls  (ver.  30)  that  hem  us  in,  it  is  not
because  of  our  strength;  it  is  only  by  our  God,  who  of  his  free  mercy  supplies  all  our
need.

Vers.  31 — 51. — The  facts  are:  L  David  asserrs  the  exclusive  perfection  of  God.  2.
He  states  that  his  strength  and  power  are  from  God,  and  that  God  teaches  him  to  move
and  act  with  advantage  in  times  of  war  and  dif&culty.  3.  He  refers  to  the  help  received
through  the  graciousness  of  God,  and  the  fact  that  thereby  he  was  able  to  subdue  all
his  enemies.  4.  Ha  alludes  to  the  subjugation  of  the  people  to  himself  as  the  con-
sequence of  Divine  help,  and  looks  on  to  further  triumphs  over  strangers.  5.  He
recounts  the  fact  of  his  deliverance,  and  makes  the  final  reference  to  them  a  fresh  reason
for  thanksgiving.

KTUnuledge  of  Oodfourided  on  experience.  From  vers.  31  to  87  David  seems  to  state
sume  of  the  results  arising  out  of  his  experience  of  God's  dealing  with  him  during  the
earlier  portion  of  his  life.  He  can  now  say  with  emphasis  what  at  one  time  could  only
be  said  as  a  matter  of  geniral  profession  on  the  part  of  a  pious  Hebrew ;  and  there  is  in
ver.  31  au  implied  contrast  with  certain  apprehensions  entertained  during  those  seasons
of  isolation  and  distress,  when  no  one  cared  for  his  soul,  and  the  course  of  providence
seemed  to  be  all  against  him.  And  in  this  respect  others  are  like  him;  the  more
profound  their  personal  experience  in  life,  the  more  clear  and  sure  are  their  conceptions
of  the  ineffable  perfections  of  God.

L    A   KNOWLEDGE    OF    GoD    IS    MOEB    A    QUESTION    OF    PERSONAL    EXPEBIENCK    THAN

OF  BPEO0LATION.  Among  the  Hebrews  there  were  grand  traditional  beliefs  and  con-
ceptions which  placed  their  pure  monotheism  far  above  the  theistic  faiths  of  other
nations,  and  David  in  early  years  inherited  these,  and  'could  give  beautiful  expression
to  them.  But  the  traditional  and  even  reasoned  views  which  he  had  acquired  were  not
his  greatest  treasure.  A  long  life  of  communion,  service,  conflict,  and  patient  trust
had  caused  him  to  see  that  experience  was  the  most  important  elemtnt  in  this  matter
of  knowledge  of  God.  No  doubt  it  is  possible  to  reason  up  to  God.  The  logical
outcome  of  the  principle  of  causation  is  God,  and  the  moral  nature  of  man  is  only
intelligible  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  supreme  personal  Ruler.  It  is  not  true  that  specu-
lative philosophy  leads  away  from  God.  AH  its  lines,  when  straightly  pursued,  con-
verge on  him.  The  question  is  one  of  personal  relations,  and,  it  is  not  within  the
competence  of  a  speculative  inquirer  to  settle  this  great  question  regardless  of  the  deep,
ineradicable,  and  most  sacred  experience  of  which  human  nature  is  capable.

II.   As  A    MATTEB    OF    FACT,    EXPEMENCE    GIVES    A    OLEAREB,    FULLEB,    AND    MOEB

ASSURED  KNOWLEDGE  THAN  ANY  OTHER  MEANS.  Experience  is  of  first  importance  in
matters  pertaining  to  spiritual  things.  We  know  the  reality  of  unseen  beings  existing
beneath  the  fleshly  covering  of  the  body  more  truly  by  the  mysterious  contact  of  our
self  with  an  invisible  counterpart,  than  by  any  physiological  or  psychological  arguments.
There  is  an  inexpressible  knowledge  in  our  conscious  intuitions  of  other  minds  being


OH.  xxn.  1-51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  543

In  communion  with  our  own,  whicli  is  the  more  clear,  sure,  and  satisfying,  in  that
it  is  inexpressible  in  words.  Likewise  the  personal  experience  of  holy  men  brings
them  so  near  to  the  living  God,  so  directly  in  contact  with  his  Spirit,  and  gives  them
tuch  clear  and  irresistible  convictions  of  his  Being  and  his  glorious  character,  that
to  such  men  the  light  thrown  on  the  question  of  the  Divine  existence  and  character
by  processes  of  reasoning  seems  very  cold  and  dim.  They  can  dispense  with  it  for
themselves.  Like  the  Apostle  John,  they  have  tasted  and  handled  and  felt  the  Divine
reality  (1  John  i.  1 — 3).

III.  The  clearer  and  more  suee  knowledge  relates  especially  to  his  exolu-
BivE  PEBFEOTiONS.  After  his  deep  and  often  trying  experience,  David  could  speak  most
confidently  of  God  as  "perfect"  in  all  things.  He  alone  was  worthy  of  the  name
God.  The  points  referred  to  are :  1.  His  methods.  2.  His  Word.  3.  His  care.  His
methods  of  discipline,  of  guidance,  of  instruction,  and  of  working  out  purposes  seemed
strange  and  obscure  while  David  was  in  trial,  but  in  the  end  he  saw  that  all  was
perfect.  So  is  it  ever.  The  more  we  experience  of  his  "  ways,"  the  more  do  we  learn
their  wisdom,  goodness,  and  justice.  His  "  Word,"  considered  as  promise,  covenant,
revelation,  or  manifestation  in  Christ,  requires  personal  experience  to  enable  us  to  see
how  perfect  it  is.  How  hearty  an  "  Ainen"  can  multitudes  give  to  this  statement  1  His
care  is  discovered  by  our  experience  through  scenes  of  danger  and  peril  to  he  indeed
sufficient,  suited  to  every  emergency,  and  most  gentle  and  considerate.  As  our
"  Buckler,"  "  Shield,"  and  "  Rock,"  we  know  him  more  truly,  as  life  advances  and  the
heart  becomes  charged  with  unutterable  experiences,  to  be  perfect.  How  vain  are  all
the  negations  and  disputations  of  restless  speculators  to  the  soul  rich  in  such  experience !

IV.  The  knowledoe  op  God  gained  bt  experience  issues  in  development  or
CHARACTER  AKD  FITNESS  FOB  HIGHEST  FORM  OP  WORK.  The  holy  man  enriched  by
Buch  knowledge  is  iiot  a  mere  knowing  creature ;  he  becomes  a  man  of  higher  character
and  more  extended  activity.  His  way  is  made  perfect ;  his  feet  are  those  of  the  hind ;
he  rises  to  the  best  positions  in  the  spiritual  sphere;  his  hands  are  fit  for  warfare;  he
becomes  calm  and  strong  in  the  guarantee  of  a  perpetual  shield ;  and  distinction  in  the
highest  society  and  fitness  tti  the  holiest  service  are  the  outcome  of  God's  gracious
dealings.  As  David,  after  all  his  strange  experience  of  God's  power  and  gentleness,
was  more  strong  in  faith,  more  skilful  in  administration,  more  apt  at  spiritual  warfare,
and  more  conformed  to  the  Divine  will ;  so  all  who  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord  more
perfectly,  and  enter  more  deeply  into  the  secret  of  the  Lord,  rise  in  spiritual  character,
and  become  more  fit  instruments  for  doing  the  purest  form  of  work  in  the  world.

2%e  gentleness  of  Ood.  This  beautiful  saying  of  David's,  in  ver.  36,  is  a  wonderful
Illustration  of  the  tenderness  of  his  own  heart,  and  of  the  deep  and  thoroughly  evan-
gelical thoughts  he  entertained  of  the  character  of  God.  There  is  much  in  this  son"
to  remind  us  of  terrible  power  (vers.  7 — 18);  but  it  was  to  David  tlie  power  and
terribleness  of  One  who  pities  the  poor  and  needy,  and,  out  of  his  deep  compassion,
throws  the  shield  of  his  almightiness  over  them.  In  one  respect  this  display  of  power
is  an  expression  of  gentleness ;  it  is  tender  care  and  loving-kindness  for  the  needy  in
their  defensive  aspect.  It  was  gentleness  that  took  David  from  the  sheepcote  to
make  him  King  of  Israel;  that  succoured  and  consoled  him  when  exiled  in  lonely
mountains  and  heathen  lands ;  that  spared  his  soul  and  healed  his  wounds  when  he
fell  into  his  dreadful  sin ;  that  upheld  his  broken  spirit  when  the  crushing  blow  of
rebellion  came  as  chastisement  for  sin ;  that  gradually  fashioned  his  character  iti  spite
of  adverse  influences  of  the  age,  and  made  him  a  blessing  to  Israel ;  and  that  so  toned
his  life  that  now  in  old  age,  instead  of  being  a  proud  monarch  boasting  of  his  strength,
he  is  constrained  to  ascribe  all  the  glory  of  his  life  to  God.  It  is  the  gentleness  of  God
that  elevates  and  ennobles  all  his  people.

I.  This  quality  is  most  oharactebistio  op  God  in  his  dealings  with  us.  To  it
—called  in  the  New  Testament,  love — we  owe  our  redemption  through  Christ.  The  reve-
lation of  "  righteousness,"  of  which  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  (Rom.  i.  17),  is  made
because  of  the  deep  love  of  God,  his  tender  pity  for  his  erring  children.  Our- Saviour,
who  is  the  express  Image  of  his  Person,  was,  during  his  earthly  course,  the  embodiment
i)f  aU  that  is  sweet,  tender,  pitiful,  gentle.  The  bruised  reed,  the  smoking  flax,  knew
hia  gentleness     Weeping  widows,  fallen  women,  outcast  lepers,  despised  sinners,  little


544  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xxn.  1—51.


children,  a  sorrowing  Mary  at  the  cross,  were  only  a  few  instances  in  which  the  infinite
tenderness  of  his  nature  went  forth  in  words  and  deeds  of  blessing.  The  spirit  o/hii
gospel  is  that  of  tender  compassion  for  all  men.  In  our  personai  experience,  the  same
spirit  is  revealed.  He  found  us  bruised,  defiled,  without  hope ;  and  he  tenderly  bound
up  our  wounds,  took  away  our  guilt,  and  gave  us  power  to  become  his  sons.  In  out
occasional  lapses,  how  tender,  how  patient,  and  pitiful !  When  adversity  has  come,
home  laid  desolate,  or  health  taken  away,  how  genily  his  hand  has  held  us  up  and
assuaged  our  grief  1  And  when  by  the  open  grave,  and  broken  down  with  sorrow,  his
aU-sufBcirig  gentleness  has  come  and  turned  our  sorrow  into  joy.  0  blessed  gentleness  1
How  dear  and  precious  is  our  God  to  our  often  weary  and  sinful  hearts !

II.  The  influenge  of  God's  qbsti.eness  on  us  is  to  elevate  cub  life.  It
made  David  "great."  That  was  its  object,  and  he,  appreciating  its  blessedness,  found
that  it  did  secure  its  object.  A  knowledge  of  this  as  the  distingu'shing  quality  in
God's  dealings  with  men,  tends  in  itself  to  raise  our  conceptions  of  God,  and  of  the
Older  of  his  government.  The  end  for  which  his  gentleness  found  expression  in  the
work  of  Christ  is  that  we  may  be  raised  from  our  low  estate,  and  be  lieirs  of  his  own
glory.  When  we  open  our  hearts  to  his  gentle  Spirit,  we,  like  the  prodigal,  rise  from
our  degradation  and  become  reinstated  as  beloved  and  honoured  children.  In  seasons
of  calamity  it  gives  us  strength  to  endure  and  to  wait,  and  a  deep  consciousness  of  its
reality  often  throws  over  the  character  a  more  than  earthly  beauty ;  and  when  his  love
has  done  all  its  blessed  work  in  us,  we  shall  rise  to  a  far  more  glorious  position  than
that  occupied  by  David  when,  as  king,  he  reached  the  highest  honour  attainable  among
men  (John  xvii.  24).

IIL   The   BBMEMBRANCE    of  his  gentleness    in   the    past  is    an    BNCOXJEAaEMENT

TO  us  FOB  THE  FUTnBE.  David  was  evidently  able  to  look  on  to  the  future  with
perfect  composure.  The  love  of  the  past  was  pledge  for  the  future.  Our  review  of
God's  gracious  dealings  with  us  will  cause  us  to  sing  of  his  loving-kindness,  and  to
fear  no  evil.     Having  given  us  his  l>eloved  Son,  we  are  sure  he  will  give  us  all  thingi.

Zri/e's  warfare.  Prom  ver.  38  to  ver.  44  David  takes  a  general  survey  of  his  life's
conflicts,  and  is  able  to  say  at  the  close  that  his  triumph  over  enemies  is  complete.
The  language  is  strong,  and  to  modern  ears  fierce  and  vindictive;  but  we  have  to
consider  the  position  which  he  believed  himself  to  hold  under  God,  and  which  ha
believed  to  be  imperilled  by  his  adversaries.  He  was,  and  knew  it  well,  the  anointed
of  the  Lord,  set  over  the  people  as  the  representative  of  God,  and  for  the  distinct
purpose  of  preparing  the  way  for  the  realization  of  those  vast  promises  of  good  tu  the
world  made  to  Abraham,  and  devoutly  cherished  by  every  enlightened  Hebrew.  Con-
sequently, the  personal  element  in  his  case  largely  disappeared.  The  attacks  on  him
were  attacks  on  Crod's  government,  an  effort  to  frustrate  God's  purposes;  and,  believing
those  purposes  to  be  the  wisest  and  best,  he  regarded  the  attempt  to  put  them  aside  as
most  wicked;  indeed,  as  the  crime  of  high  treason  against  the  Eternal  King.  Th^a
men  who  thus  oppose  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  are  instrumental  in  committing  so  great
a  sin  or  doing  so  serious  a  mischief  in  the  world,  deserved  the  judgment  which  God
allowed  to  come  is  obvious,  or  he  would  not  have  allowed  it;  and,  admitting  this,
there  is  no  obvious  sin  in  David  expressing  in  figurative  terms  his  acquiescence  and
even  satisfaction  in  that  judgment.  There  is  no  sin  in  a  man's  spiritual  vision  being
so  high  and  wide  that  he  sees  justice,  and  is  glad  that  justice  is  done.  It  is  only  when
we  introduce  the  more  personal  element,  and  judge  by  it  alone,  that  David's  words  are
felt  to  be  improper.  His  life's  warfare  suggests  ours,  and  that  being  led  on  by  the
Captain  of  our  salvation.

I.  These  abe  btbono  and  bitteb  foes  abound  ub.  Cruel  men  under  Saul's
leading,  Amalekites,  Philistines,  and  rebels  within  the  kingdom,  sought  the  ruin  of
David,  both  personally  and  in  his  capacity  as  anointed  king.  No  words  can  set  forth
adequately  the  number,  strength,  activity,  and  combinations  of  the  spiritual  foes  that
practically  seek  our  spiritual  life,  and  also  oppose  the  claims  and  preroi^atives  of  Christ.
Every  Christian  life  is  a  spii  itual  reproduction  of  David's  temporal  life ;  and  in  the
antagonism  of  our  own  Christian  experienca  we  have  a  miniature  view  of  the  great
conflict  going  on  between  the  King  in  Zion  and  the  principalities  and  powers  of  dark
ness  and  the  countless  forces  that  lie  concealed  in  the  depths  of  human  depravity.


OH.  xxir.  1— 51.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  645

II.  The  conflict  is  pboteacted  and  chabactbbizbd  by  vicissitudes.  From  tb«
day  that  Saul  entertained  a  wicked  jealousy  of  his  powers  (1  Sam.  xviii.  8)  till  th«
revolt  of  Sheba,  David  had  to  be  on  his  guard,  and  in  some  form  or  other  defend
his  person  and  his  right  to  the  kingdom.  Now  be  is  in  deepest  distress,  aud  now
rescued  by  the  interposition  of  God.  Sorrow  and  joy  were  his  portion.  The  lesson
for  us  is  obvious.  Our  warfare  is  lifelong.  As  long  as  there  is  lurking  evil  within  the
domain  of  our  nature,  as  long  as  strong  and  subtle  temptations  come  upon  us,  and  the
great  enemy  seeketh  our  life,  so  long  we  must  stand  in  the  whole  armour  of  God,  and
watch  and  strive  (Eph.  vi.  10 — 17).  And,  also,  we  have  our  seasous  of  anguish  and
desolation,  our  faintings  and  fears,  our  falls  and  wounds,  as  well  as  our  songs  of  triumph
and  joy.  The  Apostle  Paul  wrote  at  the  close  of  his  toils  and  conflicts  as  one  who  had
suffered  much  and  accomplished  much.  What  is  true  of  us  personally  is  true  in  a  way
of  the  great  Church  militant ;  there  are,  as  history  reveals,  times  of  sore  defeat  and
sorrow  and  apparent  abandonment,  and  times  again  of  magnificent  triumphs.

III.  There  is,  thbough  the  conflict,  abiding  tbctst  in  God  and  use  of  gifts.
The  language  in  which  David  describes  the  issue  of  his  conflicts  reveals  that  all  through
he  cherished  unceasing  faith  in  God,  and  used  well  the  fingers  to  fight  which  Provi-
dence had  trained.  In  darkest  seasons  his  hope  was  ia  God.  Not  armies,  but  God,
formed  his  Befuge,  Strength,  and  Defence  (vers.  40,  41).  Saving  the  great  lapse,
when  for  a  time  the  soul  was  estranged  from  its  Source  of  blessing,  there  was  a  calm
and  unshaken  confidence  that  the  great  purpose  for  which  he  was  called  to  the  throne
wovild  be  realized,  and  this  rendered  moral  support  to  all  material  means  employed  for
subduing  foes.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  our  warfare  that  it  is  the  "good  fight  of  faith."
From  first  to  last,  trust  in  the  presence,  help,  and  succour  of  God  enters  into  the
exercise  of  all  watchfulness,  prayerfulness,  and  resolute  endeavours  to  sulidue  every-
thing to  Christ.  Success  in  Christian  warfare  springs  from  a  subtle  blending  of  the
most  absolute  faith  in  the  almighty  grace  of  God  with  the  mo.st  energetic  use  of  know-
ledge and  resolve.  By  this  combination  also,  the  Church,  in  its  corporate  action,  seeks
to  banish  spiritual  foes  from  the  kingdom,  and  to  extend  Christ's  supremacy  over  all
people  and  lands.

IV.  Cbetain  and  complete  viotobt  IB  the  issms.  If  we  compare  David  when
an  outcast  among  the  caves  of  the  mountains,  or  a  wanderer  among  an  alien  people,
dependent  on  heathen  hospitality  for  his  sustenance  and  protection  (1  Sam.  xxvii.
1—7),  with  David  at  the  close  of  his  reign,  dwelling  in  regal  splendour,  and  in  peace
from  all  his  foes,  we  can  see  how  complete  his  triumph,  and  how  true  in  effect  is  the
bold  language  of  this  song.  Helpless,  unbefriended  by  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  his
oppressors  are  as  the  beaten  dust  and  trampled  mire.  Aliens  and  the  rebellious  among
his  own  people  (vera.  41 — 44)  alike  are  brought  low,  and  all  their  pride  and  strengtli
has  vanished.  It  is  only  when  we  come  to  the  end-  of  our  Christian  career  that  we  can
say  this  of  all  our  foes ;  but  it  can  even  now  be  said  of  many  in  the  past.  The  strongesi
language  of  David  will  be  inadequate  to  express  the  completeness  of  the  victory  we
shall  at  last  obtain  over  all  spiritual  foes.  As  Israel  saw  no  living  Egyptian  as  they
stood  on  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  as  the  multitude  in  Rev.  xv.  2-— 4  looked  over
the  calm  glassy  scene  of  a  former  arena  of  conflict  and  peril,  so  we  each  shall,  through
Christ,  be  able  to  survey  the  past  and  see  our  enemies  no  more.  More  than  conquerors,
we  shall  sing  the  song  of  triumph.  Sin  and  temptation,  the  horrible  dangers,  the
slippery  places,  the  roaring  torrents,  the  deep  waters,  will  have  been  overcome,  and  our
sanctified  nature  will  constitute  a  domain  in  which  the  voice  of  tumult  is  no  more
heard.  Our  personal  triumph  will  be  analogous  to  the  triumph  of  Christ  over  all  the
evil  forces  that  once  opposed  his  blessed  reign.

The  glory  of  the  accomplishment  of  life's  purpose  due  to  Ood.  In  the  section  from
ver.  45  to  ver.  51  David  looks  on  to  what  God  will  yet  do  for  him ;  he  reflects  on  what
is  now  his  happy  position,  and  on  the  connection  of  this  with  the  great  deliveranoeg  of
the  past ;  and,  thus  taking  a  threefold  view  of  his  life,  he  ascribes  all  the  glory  of  real
and  possible  achievements  unto  God  (ver.  50).  His  own  people  and  the  heathen  would
regard  him  as  a  great  king,  and  ascribe  his  wonderful  successes  to  his  superior  prowess
in  war,  and  skill  in  administration.  Not  so  the  man  of  God.  To  his  God  he  ascribes
all  the  glory.    Taking  the  particulars  of  David's  life  as  means  of  Ulnstration.  we  also

n.  SAMUEL.  2   N


516  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxii.  1—51.

may  Bee  that  the  accomplishment  of  our  life's  highest  purpose  is  no  occasion  of  praise
to  ourselves,  but  solely  of  glory  to  God.

I.  God  has  chosen  us.  David  was  called  to  leave  the  sheepfold,  and  raised  by  the
distinct  will  of  God  to  be  what  he  subsequently  came  to  be.  Never  does  he  forget  this.
It  was  all  of  free  sovereign  grace.  No  conquests  over  Philistines,  no  succession  to  Saul,
no  subjugation  of  people  under  him,  no  lofty  piety  for  the  enrichment  of  the  world  by
its  poetic  utterances,  would  have  had  place  but  for  the  Divine  choice.  It  is  so  of  all
men  after  God's  own  heart.  He  hath  begotten  them.  He  hath  made  them  kings  and
priests  unto  himself.  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us."  Whatever  conquests
we  achieve  in  the  spiritual  life  are  an  outcome  of  our  having  that  life  which,  as  clearly
taught  in  the  New  Testament,  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God  (John  iii.  5 — 8).

II.  In  ourselves  we  abe  unworthy  op  any  blessing.  David  knew  and  felt  thai
there  was  no  worthiness  in  him  that  he  should  be  called  to  be  king.  Whatever  moral
and  mental  fitness  there  may  have  been  in  him  as  compared  with  others,  it  was  all  of
God,  and  constituted  no  more  merit  than  the  sweetness  of  the  rose  gives  merit  to  the
rose.  And  during  his  career  he  fell  again  and  again,  so  that  his  spiritual  condition  was,
so  far  as  it  depended  on  his  watchfulness  and  care,  not  so  perfect  as  it  should  have  been.
It  was  God's  wonderful  "  gentleness  "  (ver.  36),  and  not  his  superior  spiritual  qualities
or  natural  force  of  character,  that  had  made  him  what  he  was.  The  experience  of  good
men  is  the  same  in  all  ages.  The  ancient  patriarch  (Gen.  xviii.  27),  the  evangelical
prophet  (Isa.  vi.  6),  and  the  Christian  apostle  (Rom.  xv.  10),  are  one  with  the  "  sweet
psalmist  of  Israel  in  confessing  entire  unworthiness  of  the  least  ol'  God's  mercies.
Selt-renunciation  before  God  is  essential  to  true  godliness.  All  the  honour  and  glory
are  due  to  him.

in.  God  pbovideb  the  means  by  which  our  life's  pubposb  is  wrought  out.
The  natural  gifts  that  distinguished  David,  and  the  wisdom  to  use  them,  and  the
disposition  to  use  them  for  the  right  ends,  were  provided  for  him.  The  moimtain  fast-
nesses in  which  he  found  a  shield  from  the  oppressor,  belonged  to  him  who  claims  the
"  strength  of  the  hills."  The  repressive  influences  brought  to  bear  on  the  rebellious
factions,  and  the  concurrent  events  which  issued  in  their  death  or  depression,  were
ordered  by  a  higher  wisdom.  The  gift  or  non-withdrawal  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the
occasion  of  the  dreadful  fall  (Ps.  li.  10, 11)  was  all  of  pure  mercy.  And  thus  it  was
through  God  alone  that  the  tempted,  tried,  sorrowing  king  was  enabled  to  pursue  his
course.  In  Lis  case  we  have  in  miniature  an  illustration  of  the  great  provision  which
God  makes  for  us.  We  are  stewards  only  of  gifts  of  God.  The  life  and  death  of  his
beloved  Son  is  the  great  Gift  by  which  all  else  is  guaranteed.  He  directs  us  to  the
Bock  of  Ages.  His  Spirit  worketh  within  us  to  will  and  to  do.  The  faith  by  which  we
cling  to  him  in  the  dark  and  cloudy  day  is  his  own  gift  (Eph.  ii.  8).  If  we  conquer  our
spiritual  foes,  it  is  he  who  teacheth  our  hands  to  war  and  our  fingers  to  fight.  By  him
alone  we  are  more  than  conquerors.  If  we  arrive  at  last  "  perfect "  in  Zion,  it  is  because
he  has  led  us  on  by  ways  we  knew  not.

IV.  He  controls  the  influenoes  at  work  against  ub.  The  "strangers"  and  his
own  "  people  "  are  brought  under  him  because  there  is  an  unseen  power  so  working  on
them  that  their  force  is  weakened  and  their  will  turned.  The  lite  of  David  is  fiill  of
this  Divine  control  of  adverse  influences.  Saul  and  Doeg  were  baflBed  and  restrained.
Philistines  at  Gath  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  4 — 7)  were  favourably  disposed  to  him  in  the  bitter
time  of  his  exile.  The  nation  was  made  willing  to  accept  him  in  place  of  the  successors
in  the  line  of  Saul.  The  wise  counsel  of  Ahithophel  was  turned  to  foolishness,  and
when  for  a  time  the  chastisement  of  rebellion  seemed  to  crush  his  heart,  the  hour  of
deliverance  came,  and  the  people  were  made  willing  to  welcome  him  once  more  to  bis
beloved  Jerusalem.  So  is  it  still.  Land  and  sea,  men  and  evil  spirits,  life  and  death,
are  all  alike  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  he  can  say,  "  Thus  far,  and  no  further ; "  "  Touch
not  mine  anointed."  Our  Lord  is  Lord  also  of  all.  Our  highest  interests  are  in  his  holy
hands,  and  there  is  nothing,  seen  or  unseen,  that  can  sever  us  from  the  love  of  God  that
is  in  Christ  our  Lord  (Eom.  viii.  35 — 39).  How  natural,  then,  the  words  "Therefore,  I
will  give  thanks  unto  thee,  0  Lord  "  (ver.  50)  1    "  He  "  showetb  mercy  for  aTermore.

Additional  topics —
L  Tba  influence  of  luccees  in  promoting  success  (ver.  45)^


OH,  xDi.  1— 51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  547

2.  The  accelerated  influences  of  the  spiritual  world  analogous  to  the  laws  of  motion

(ver.  45).

3.  The  inherent  sense  in  all  men  of  the  majesty  of  righteousness  (ver.  46).

4.  The  power  of  reputed  character  and  of  deeds  in  extending  personal  influence  orei

strangers  (ver.  46).

5.  Foreshadows  of  the  final  collapse  of  the  forces  of  evil  before  the  victorious  Christ

(ver.  46).

6.  The  ever-living  God  the  Joy  and  Hope  of  the  Christian  amidst  the  vicissitudes  of

life  (ver.  47).

7.  The  adoration  of  God  a  natural  expression  of  the  sanctified  heart,  and  its  Christian

element  based  on  an  experience  of  his  mercy  (ver.  47),

8.  The  qualities  of  the  rock  as  illustrating  the  Divine  perfection  (ver.  47).

9.  The  reality  of  providential  retribution  for  the  oppression  of  the  righteous  and  the

needy,  as  seen  in  individuals  and  nations,  and  revealed  in  history  and  Scripture
(ver.  48).

10.  The  various  methods  by  which  God  acts  on  human  souls  to  bring  them  into

submission  to  Christ  (ver.  48).

11.  The  Divine  process  of  bringing  soula  out  from  embarrassing  circumstances,

temporal  and  spiritual  (ver.  49).

12.  The  concurrence  of  Divine  and  human  action  in  spiritual  conquests  (ver.  49).

13.  The  setting  forth  of  the  wonders  of  redeeming  mercy  before  men  who  profess  no

interest  in  Christ.     How  to  do  it  (ver.  50).

14.  All  the  resources  of  the  Divine  nature  in  their  pledged  relation  to  the  accomplish-

ment of  the  purpose  of  Christ,  the  Anointed  One  (ver.  51).

15.  The  inheritance  of  Christ's  people  in  the  resources  belonging  to  him  (ver.  51).

16.  The  permanent  character  of  the  work  of  redemption  (ver.  51).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 51  (Ps.  xviii.). — (Jeedsalbm.)  David's  song  of  praise,  "And  David
spake  unto  Jehovah  the  words  of  this  soug,"  etc.  (ver.  1).  It  is  a  song  of:  1.  2%e
anointed  (messiah)  of  the  Lord,  his  king  (ver.  51),  his  servant  (Ps.  xviii.,  inscription).
Like  Moses  and  Joshua,  David  held  a  peculiar  and  exalted  position  in  the  kingdom  of
God  under  the  Old  Testament.  He  was  "  a  man  [unlike  Saul]  of  God's  own  choosing  "
(1  Sam.  xiii.  14 ;  xvi.  28),  to  fill  the  office  of  theocratic  king,  and  to  fulfil  his  purposes
concerning  Israel  and  the  world ;  he  was  also  specially  fitted  for  his  vocation,  faithfully
devoted  to  it,  and  greatly  blessed  in  it.  And  in  the  consciousness  of  this  he  here  speaks.
2.  Praise  to  the  Lord,  on  the  ground  of  his  perfections,  his  relations,  his  benefits ;
prompted  by  the  desire  to  render  to  him  the  honour  which  is  his  due  (1  Sam.  ii.  1 — 10).
"To  praise  God  means  nothing  else  than  to  ascribe  to  him  the  glorious  perfections
which  he  possesses ;  for  we  can  only  give  to  him  what  is  his  own  "  (Hengstenberg).  And,
more  especially,  of :  3.  Thanksgiving  for  past  deliverance,  from  imminent  perils,  to
which,  as  the  servant  of  God,  he  was  exposed  through  the  luitred  and  opposition  of  his
enemies.  Of  these  Saul  was  the  most  formidable ;  and,  after  becoming  King  of  Israel,
David  was  attacked  by  numerous  heathen  nations,  both  separately  and  in  combination
(ch.  V.  17 ;  viii. ;  x.).  It  was  probably  when  "  the  Lord  had  given  him  rest  round
about  from  all  his  enemies  "  (ch.  vii.  1),  and  after  the  promise  of  an  everlasting  kingdom
(ch.  vii.  12 — 16),  that  the  song  was  uttered ;  though  by  some  it  is  regarded  as  "  a  great
hallelujah,  with  which  he  retired  from  the  theatre  of  life."  "  Having  obtained  many
and  signal  victories,  he  does  not,  as  irreligious  men  are  accustomed  to  do,  sing  a  song
of  triumph  in  honour  of  himself,  but  exdts  and  magnifies  God,  the  Author  of  these
victories,  by  a  train  of  striking  and  appropriate  epithets,  and  in  a  style  of  surpassing
grandeur  and  sublimity"  (Calvin).  4.  Confidence  in  future  triumph  over  all  the
enemies  of  the  kingdom  of  God ;  of  which  the  success  already  attained  is  an  assurance.
God  is  praised,  not  only  for  what  he  is  and  has  been  to  him,  but  also  for  what  he  will
be  to  *'  David  and  At*  seed  for  ever  "  (ver.  61).    Of  this  song,  consider —

I.  Its  suBSTiiNOE;  or,  the  reasons  for  praise.  1.  Theperwnal  and  intimate  relatitm-
§hip  qf  Jehovah  to  Lis  servant  (vers.  2—4).


54«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxii.  1— 5L


"  Jehovah  ia  my  Bock,  and  my  Fortress,  and  my,  yeo,  my  Deliveret,
My  Bock-God,  in  whom  I  trust,"  etc

(Vers.  2,  3.)

(1)  He  stands  in  a  peculiar  relation  (beyond  that  which  he  bears  to  all  men)  to  thos«
to  whom  he  reveals  his  Name,  whom  he  takes  into  his  fellowship,  and  to  whom  he
promises  to  be  "  their  God."  These  things  make  it  possible  to  say,  "  my  God,"  and
(along  with  his  gracious  acts)  incite  the  personal  and  ardent  affection  expressed  at  the
commencement  of  Ps.  xviii.  (a  liturgical  variation  of  the  song),  "  Fervently  do  I  love
thee,  0  Jehovah  my  Strength,"  etc.  (2)  Nature,  history,  and  experience  furnish
manifold  emblems  of  his  excellences,  and  of  the  blessings  which  he  bestows  on  those
who  trust  in  him  (1  Saih.  ii.  2;  Deut.  xxxii.  4;  Gen.  xv.  1).  These  images  were
suggested  by  the  physical  aspect  of  Palestine,  and  by  the  perilous  condition  and  special
deliverances  of  David  in  his  early  life,  as  a  fugitive  and  a  soldier,  beset  by  many  foes.
(3)  He  is  all-sufficient  for  the  needs  of  his  people,  however  imraerous  and  great,  for
their  rescue,  defence,  permanent  security,  and  complete  salvation.

"  As  worthy  to  be  praised,  do  I  call  on  Jehovah,
And  (whenever  I  call)  I  am  saved  from  mine  eDcmies."

"  Faith  knows  no  past  and  no  future.  What  God  has  done  and  will  do  is  present  to  it."
2.  His  marvellous  deliverance.  (Vers.  5 — 20.)  In  a  single  comprehensive  picture  David
describes  the  many  dangers  that  encompassed  him  during  his  persecution  by  Saul,  and
the  many  providential  interpositions  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  24—28)  that  were  made  on  his
behalf.  (1)  Even  those  whom  God  loves  (ver.  20)  are  Bometimes  "greatly  afflicted,"
and  reduced  to  the  utmost  extremity  (1  Sam.  xxx.  1 — 10).

"  For  breakers  of  death  surrounded  m«,
Streiims  of  Belial  terrified  me ;
Cords  of  Sheol  girt  me  about,
Snares  of  death  overtook  me."

(Vers.  5,  6.)

(2)  Their  extreme  need  impels  them  to  rely  upon  God  all  the  more  entirely,  and  to
call  upon  him  all  the  more  fervently ;  nor  do  they  call  in  vain.  "  In  my  distress  I
called,"  etc.  (ver.  7), "  and  he  heard  my  voice  (instantly)  out  of  his  (heavenly)  temple."

(3)  Very  wonderful  is  the  answer  of  God  to  their  cry,  in  the  discomfiture  of  their
adversaries  and  their  complete  deliverance.  "  The  means  by  which  this  deliverance
was  achieved  were,  as  far  as  we  know,  those  which  we  see  in  the  Books  of  Samuel — the
turns  and  chances  of  providence,  his  own  extraordinary  activity,  the  faithfulness  of  his
lollowers,  the  unexpected  increase  of  his  friends.  But  the  act  of  deliverance  itself  is
described  in  the  language  which  belongs  to  the  descent  upon  Mount  Sinai  or  the
passage  of  the  Red  Sea "  (Stanley).  The  unseen  and  eternal  King  was  moved  with
wrath,  at  which  the  whole  creation  trembled  (vers.  8,  9) ;  he  approached  in  the  gathering
thimder-clouds,  and  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,  armed  as  "  a  man  of  war  "  (Exod.  xv.  3),
and  preceded  by  his  arrows  of  lightning  (vers.  10 — 13) ;  then,  in  the  full  outburst  of  the
tempest,  with  the  thunder  of  his  power,  "hailstones  and  coals  of  fire,"  he  scattered  the
enemy,  and  disclosed  the  depths  from  which  the  cry  for  help  arose  (vers.  14 — 16);
finally,  with  distinguishing,  condescending,  and  tender  care  (ver.  36)—

"  He  readied  from  above,  he  laid  hold  of  me,
He  drew  me  out  of  great  waters,"  etc.

(Vers.  17—20.)

"It  is  true  that  the  deliverance  of  David  was  not  actually  attended  by  any  such  extra-
ordinary natural  phenomena;  but  the  saving  hand  of  God  from  heaven  was  so  obviously
manifested  that  the  deliverance  experienced  by  him  could  be  poetically  described  as
a  miraculous  interposition  on  the  part  of  God"  (Kdil).-  3.  His  riyhteous procedure.
(Vers.  21 — 28.)  "  He  delivered  me  because  he  delighted  in  me  "  (ver.  20).  He  acted
toward  David  in  accordance  with  his  giacious  choice  of  him  to  be  his  servant,  and
delivered  liim  because  he  was  "  well  pleased"  with  his  faithful  service ;  the  ground  o(
this  deljveiance  being  now  stated  more  fully —

"  Jehovah  rendered  me  according  to  my  righteousness,
Aooording  to  the  oieauuess  of  my  hands  bath  he  reoompenaed  mo,"  ato.


ea.  Xln.  1— 61.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  649

This  language  (comp.  1  Sam.  xxvi.  13 — 25)  neither  implies  entire  freedom  from  lin
nor  indicates  a  boastful  spirit,  but  is  expressive  of  sincerity,  integrity,  fidelity;  in
contrast  with  the  calumnies  and  wickedness  of  enemies,  in  fulfilment  of  a  Divine  call,
in  obedience  to  the  Divine  will  generally,  and  in  the  main  course  of  life,  as  :  (1)  An
expression  and  justification  of  the  ways  of  God  in  a  particular  instance.  (2)  An  illus^
tration  of  the  law  of  his  dealings  with  men  (vers.  26,  27).  "  The  truth  which  is  here
enunciated  is  not  that  the  conception  which  man  forms  of  God  is  the  reflected  image  of
his  own  mind  and  heart,  but  that  God's  conduct  to  man  is  the  reflection  of  the  relation
in  which  man  has  placed  himself  to  God  (1  Sam.  ii.  30 ;  xv.  23)  "  (Delitzsch).  "  Jehovah
is  righteous;  he  loveth  righteousness"  (Ps.  xi.  7).  This  is  a  most  worthy  reason  for
praise.  (3)  An  admonition  and  encouragement ;  "  with  the  design  of  inspiring  others
with  zeal  far  the  fulfilment  of  the  Law."

•And  oppreaaed  people  thou  savest;
And  thine  eyes  are  against  the  haughty :  them  thou  humblest.''

4.  ffis  eontinued  and  effectval  help.  (Vers.  29 — 46.)  The  righteousnessjand  faithfulness
of  God  are  further  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  David  (after  his  deliverance  from  the
hand  of  Saul)  in  his  wars  with  the  external  enemies  of  the  kingdom.  (1)  Having
rescued  his  servant  from  destruction,  he  calls  him  to  active  conflict  with  surrounding
enemies  (vers.  29 — 32).  In  the  former  part  of  the  song,  David  is  represented  as  a
passive  object  of  his  aid;  in  the  latter,  as  an  active  instrument  for  effecting  his  purposes.
(2)  He  prepares  him  for  the  conflict,  and  strengthens  him  in  it  (vers.  83 — 37).  (3)  He
enables  him  to  overcome  his  enemies  and  utterly  destroy  their  power  (vers.  38 — 43).
(4)  He  extends  and  establishes  his  royal  dominion,  making  him  to  be  "  head  of  the
heathen  ".  (vers.  44 — 46).  Herein  the  Mesiianic  element  of  the  song  specially  appears.
Not,  indeed,  that "  it  is  a  hymn  of  victory,  spoken  not  in  the  person  of  the  prophet
himself,  David,  but  in  the  Person  of  his  illustrious  Son  and  Lord"  (J.  Brown,  '  The
Sufferings  and  Glories  of  the  Messiah') ;  nor  that  there  is  here  a  direct  and  conscious
prediction  of  the  future  Christ ;  but  that  the  assured  triumph  of  "  David  and  his  seed  "
over  the  nations,  the  extension  of  the  theocratic  kingdom,  prefigured  the  more  glorious
victories  of  "  the  King  Messiah."  "  David's  history,  from  first  to  last,  was  a  kind  of  acted
parable  of  the  sufferings  and  glory  of  Christ "  (Binnie).  "  Prophecy  reveals  to  us  the
foreknowledge  of  God ;  but  typical  institutions  reveal,  not  only  his  foreknowledge,  but
his  providential  arrangements.  The  facts  of  history  become  the  language  of  prophecy,
and  teach  us  that  he  with  whom  a  thousand  years  are  but  as  yesterday  guides  the
operations  of  distant  ages  with  reference  to  each  other ;  and  thus  in  a  typical  economy
we  trace  not  only  the  all-beholding  eye,  but  the  all-directing  hand  of  the  Deity  ;  nut
only  the  Divine  omniscience,  but  the  Divine  omnipotence.  The  foretold  and  minute
resemblance  between  characters  and  transactions,  separated  from  each  other  by  an  interval
of  a  thousand  years,  is  too  striking  an  argument  of  the  hand  of  God  to  be  controverted
or  explained  away  "  (Thompson,  'Davidica').  The  kingdom  of  Christ,  nevertheless,  is
of  a  higher  nature,  and  established  by  other  means,  than  the  theocratic  kingdom  of
Dav.d.  "This  was  the  foundation  of  that  resplendent  image  of  the  Messiah  which  it
required  the  greatest  of  all  religious  changes  to  move  from  the  mind  of  the  Jewish
nation,  in  order  to  raise  up  instead  of  it  the  still  more  exalted  idea  which  was  to  tnke
its  place — an  anointed  Sovereign  conquering  by  other  arts  than  those  of  war,  and  in
other  dominions  than  those  of  earthly  empire"  (Stanley).  "  Thus  all  David's  hopes  and
lU  his  joy  terminate,  as  ours  always  should,  in  the  great  Redeemer"  (Matthew  Henry).
IL  Ixa  SPIRIT ;  as  it  appears  throughout  the  song,  and  particularly  in  its  contusion —

"  Living  is  Jehovah,  and  blessed  is  my  Book;
Exalted  is  the  Bock-Ood  of  my  salvation,"  eto.

(Vers.  47—81.)

1.  Personal,  appropriating /aitt.  "Faith  it  is  which  gives  its  peculiar  grandeur  to
David's  song  of  triumph ;  his  masterpiece,  and  it  may  be  the  masterpiece  of  human
poetry,  inspired  or  uninspired.  What  is  the  element  in  that  ode,  which  even  now
makes  it  stir  the  heart  like  a  trumpet  ?  What  protects  such  words  (vers.  7 — 17)  from
the  imputation  of  mere  Eastern  exaggeration  ?  The  firm  conviction  that  God  is  the
Deliyerer,  not  only  of  David,  but  of  all  who  trust  in  him ;  that  the  whole  majesty  of


560  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xxn.  1— SL

God,  and  all  the  powers  of  nature,  are  arrayed  on  the  side  of  the  good  and  the  opprest"
(0.  Kiijgsley,  '  David :  Pour  Sermons ').  2.  Heartfelt  delight  in  God.  3.  Fervent
gratitude.    4.  Unreserved  conseeration  to  his  service,  his  honour,  his  glory.

**  Therefore  will  I  give  thanks  unto  thee,  O  Jehovah,  among  the  heathen;
And  sing  praises  nnto  thy  Name."

(Yen.  50,  £1.)

(See  on  this  song,  Chandler,  Maclaren,  W.  M.  Taylor,  and  commentaries  on  Pg.  xvH!,)
"  David,  King  of  Judah,  a  soul  inspired  by  Divine  music  and  much  other  heroism,  was
wont  to  pour  himself  forth  in  song ;  he  with  a  seer's  eye  and  heart  discerned  the  God-
like among  the  human  1  struck  tones  that  were  an  echo  of  the  sphere-harmonies,  and
are  still  felt  to  be  such.  Reader,  art  thou  one  of  a  thousand,  able  still  to  read  the
psalms  of  David,  and  catch  some  echo  of  it  through  the  old  dim  centuries';  feeling  far
off  in  thine  own  heart  what  it  once  was  to  other  hearts  made  as  thine?"  (Carlyle,
' Miscellaneous  Essays'). — D.

Ver.  24  (Ps.  xviiL  23").— Self-preservation,  "  I  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity  "
(perversion,  distortion,  departure  from  the  line  of  truth  and  rectitude).  The  life  of  a
good  man  is  a  conflict  (ch.  x.  12).  "  A  man  will  never  persevere  in  the  practice  of
uprightness  and  godliness,  unless  he  carefully  keep  himself  from  his  inquity  "  (Calvin).
His  self-preservation —

L  Implies  bxposubb  to  a  danseboub  enemy.  1.  There  is  none  greater  than  sin.
Every  other  evil  is  slight  compared  with  it.  2.  Each  man  has  "  his  besetting  sin."
"  I  kept  myself,"  not  merely  against  iniquity  becoming  my  own,  but  against  the  iniquity
which  lies  near  to  me,  and  to  which  I  am  specially  liable  from  my  ci  institution  or  con-
dition (1  Sam.  xxiv.  5).  A  traitor  within  the  fortress  is  a  more  dangerous  foe  than
any  other.  3.  It  besets  him  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  by  manifold  "devices."
4.  To  be  overcome  by  it  is  inexpressibly  disastrous.

II.  Eequires  the  adoption  of  peopeb  methods.  1.  Due  consideration  of  the
'danger.  To  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed.  2.  Constant  and  resolute  vigilance
against  the  first  approaches  of  the  enemy  (Heb.  iii.  13).  3.  The  habitual  practice  of
self-restraint  and  self-deniaL  4.  The  daily  exercise  of  the  virtues  and  graces  that  are
most  opposite  to  the  sins  to  which  he  is  disposed  (Gal.  v.  16).  5.  Familiar  acquaint-
ance with  the  Word  of  God  (Eph.  vi  13 — 17).  6.  Continual  looking  unto  God  for  his
effectual  aid.  "  Kept  [guarded]  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  1.  5).
7.  Unceasing  prayer.  "  Keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God  "  (Jude  21);  "  Keep  your-
selves from  idols"  (1  John  v.  21).

III.  Dbsekves  to  be  sought  with  the  utmost  earnestness,  because  of  the
advantages  by  which  it  is  attended.  1.  An  assurance  of  personal  sincerity  (1  John  v.
18 ;  Heb.  iii.  14).  "The  careful  abstaining  from  our  own  iniquity  is  one  of  the  best
eviilences  of  our  own  integrity ;  and  the  testimony  of  our  conscience  that  we  have  done
BO  will  be  such  a  rejoicing  as  will  not  only  lessen  the  grief  of  an  afflicted  state,  but
increase  the  comfort  of  an  advanced  state  "  (Matthew  Henry).  2.  An  experience  of
Divine  help,  of  which  it  is  an  indispensable  condition.  3.  An  increase  of  moral
strength.  4.  A  preparation  for  future  victories.  "  To  mortify  and  conquer  our  own
ajipetites  is  more  praiseworthy  than  to  storm  strong  cities,  to  defeat  mighty  armies,
work  miracles,  or  raise  the  dead  "  (Scupoli). — ^D.

Vers.  26— 28  (Ps.  xviii.  25— 27).— Divine  rectitude.  Consider  the  righteousness  of
God  as  it  appears  in :  1.  The  supreme  importance  which  he  attaches  to  moral  distinctions
amongst  men.  Such  distinctions  are  often  made  light  of  in  comparison  with  wisdom,
might,  and  riches  (Jer.  ix.  23);  and  those  who  possess  the  latter  despise  and  trample
upon  the  ignorant,  the  weak,  and  the  poor  (ver.  27).  But  God  has  chiefly  respect  to
men  in  their  moral  attitude  toward  himself,  their  relation  to  the  law  of  right,  their
personal  character  (1  Sam.  iL  30).  With  him  the  great  distinction  is  that  between
the  righteous  and  the  wicked  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15,  16).  Whilst  his  infinite  greatness  dwarfs
earthly  power  and  honour  into  insignificance,  his  perfect  righteousness  exalts  moral
worth  beyond  measure.  2.  UTie  different  treatment  which  he  adopts  toward  men  of
different  character.    In  himself  he  is  always  the  same  (1  Sam.  xv.  29) ;  but  the  aspect


OH.  xxn.  1— 51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  551

which  his  character  and  dealings  assume  toward  them"  is  determined  by  their  own
character  and  conduct,  and  is  the  necessary  manifestation  of  his  unchangeable  recti-
tudfe — on  the  one  hand,  toward  the  "loving,"  etc.,  full  of  love  (all  that  is  kind,  desir-
able, and  excellent) ;  on  the  other,  toward  the  "  perverse,"  perverse  (contrary, antagonistic,
"  as  an  enemy,"  Lam.  ii.  6 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  23,  24 ;  Hos.  ii.  6),  inflicting  severe  chastise-
ment. "  There  is  a  higher  law  of  grace,  whereby  the  sinfulness  of  man  but  draws
forth  the  tenderness  of  a  father's  pardoning  pity;  and  the  brightest  revelation  of  his
love  is  made  to  froward  prodigals.  But  this  is  not  the  psalmist's  view  here,  nor  does
it  interfere  with  the  law  of  retribution  in  its  own  sphere  "  (Maclaren).  3.  The  signal
thange  which  he  makes  in  their  relative  positions ;  saving  and  exalting  the  oppressed
•nd  afflicted,  and  humbling  the  proud  oppressor;  his  purpose  therein  being  to  vindicate,
honour,  and  promote  righteousness,  and  to  restrain,  correct,  and  put  an  end  to  iniquity
(1  Sam.  ii.  8,  10).  "What  is  God  doing  now?"  it  was  asked  of  Eabbi  Jose,  and  the
reply  was,  "  He  makes  ladders  on  which  he  causes  the  poor  to  ascend  and  the  rich  to
descend"  (The  Midrash).— D.

Ver.  31  (Ps.  xviii.  30). — QocPe  way.  Word,  and  defence.  "  I  can  overcome  all  oppo
•ition  in  and  with  my  God"  (ver.  30);  for:  1.  His  way  is  perfect.  His  providential
dealings,  especially  in  leading  his  servant  forward  in  the  conflict.  Although  ofttimes
mysterious  and  different  from  what  might  have  been  expected,  it  is  marked  by  perfect
rectitude,  perfect  wisdom,  perfect  love ;  and  is  exactly  adapted  to  effect  his  holy  and
beneficent  purposes  (Job  xxiii.  8 — 10;  Pb.  Ixxvii.  19 ;  xcvii.  2).  2.,  His  Word  is  tried
(purified  as  silver  and  gold,  without  dross,  and  very  precious).  It  is  the  chief  means
of  preparation,  instruction  and  help ;  "  the  sword  of  the  Spirit."  Its  declarations,  are
true,  its  directions  good,  its  promises  faithful  (Prov.  xxx.  5 ;  Ps.  xii.  6,  7).  The  more
it  is  tested,  whether  by  friends  or  foes,  by  examination  or  experience,  the  more  it  proves
itself  to  be  indeed  the  Word  of  God,  and  of  unspeakable  worth.  "  There  is  none  like
that ;  give  it  me  "  (1  Sam.  xxi.  9).  3.  His  defence  is  sure ;  himself  effectuating  his
Word,  and  being  "  a  Shield  to  all  that  trust  in  him,"  affording  certain,  constant,  and
complete  protection.  Faith  is  the  bond  of  union  between  men  and  God,  the  "  taking
hold  of  his  strength,"  a  necessary  means  of  defence,  and  hence  often  called  a  shield
(Eph.  vi.  16 ;  Heb.  x.  35) ;  but  it  is  God  himself  who  is  such  in  the  highest  sense
(Jer.  Ii.  20 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  29 ;  Ps.  v.  12).  He  is  God  alone  (ver.  32) ;  the  absolute,
incomparable,  perfect  One ;  worthy  to  be  trusted  and  praised  (ver.  4). — D.

Ver.  33. — Ood  it  my  Strength.  "The  God  who  girdeth  me  with  strength"  (Ps.
xviii.  32).  Physical  strength  is  derived  from  God.  Much  more  is  spiritual.  It  is
obtained  through  faith.  And  every  believer  may  say,  "  His  strength  is  mine."  There-
by :  1.  /  live — live  unto  God,  "soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world"
(Titus  ii.  12;  Hab.  ii.  4;  Gal.  ii,  20).  2.  1  sfemrf— stand  fast  in  temptation,  attack,
danger  (Rom.  xiv.  4 ;  2  Cor,  i.  24;  Phil.  iv.  1).  3.  I  walk — walk  forward,  in  the  way
of  the  Lord,  surely,  swiftly  (ver.  34),  perseveringly  (2  Cor,  v,  7  ;  Isa.  xl.  31).  4,  /  lalour
— labour  with  and  for  God,  zealously,  patiently,  and  not  in  vain  (Isa.  xxvL  12;  1  Cor.
XV.  58).  5.  /  endure — endure  "  hardness,"  afflictions,  reproaches,  yea,  all  things,  sup-
ported and  "  strengthened  with  power  through  his  Spirit  in  the  inward  man  "  (2  Tim.
ii.  3;  Heb.  xi.  27;  Ps.  cixxviii.  3).  6.  J/pA<— fight  "the  good  fight  of  faith,"
against  his  enemies,  courageously  and  effectually  (ver.  35),  7.  /otiercome— overcome
in  life  and  death  (1  Cor.  xv.  57). — D.

Ver.  36. — True  greatnesi.  "  Thy  answering  hath  made  me  great."  Ps.  xviii.  85,
"Thy  gentleness"  (humility,  meekness,  conde.scending  grace).  True  greatness  con-
sists not  in  external  prosperity,  nor  in  splendid  achievements,  but  in  moral  and  spiritual
excellence.    "  The  good  alone  are  greats"    Notice —

1.  Its  conditionb,  on  the  part  of  man.  1.  Conscious  weakness,  th*  sense  of  ntter
helplessness  in  himself  (1  Sam.  xxx.  1 — 10 ;  John  xv.  5 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  Heb.  xi.  84).
2.  Believing  prayer  (ver.  7).  "  By  showing  us  our  own  nothingness,  humility  forces
us  to  depend  upon  God ;  and  the  expression  of  that  dependence  is  prayerfulneas."
S.  Ardent  aspiration.  "  When  sea-water  rises  into  the  clouds  it  loses  its  saltness  and
becomes  fresh ;  lo  the  loul  when  lifted  up  to  God  "  (Tamil  proverb).


652  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xxn.  1— 6L


II.  Its  bestowmbnt  ;  by  "that  practical  heartening;  on  the  part  of  God  when  called
upon  for  help,  which  was  manifested  in  the  fact  that  God  made  his  steps  broad "  (Keil).
1.  In  wonderful  condescension  (Ps.cxxxviii.  6).  2.  By  manifold  methods;  preserving,
Instructing,  strengthening,  exalting  those  who  trust  in  him.  3.  With  considerate
adaptation  to  their  nature  and  capacities.  "The  great  God  and  Father,  intent  on
making  his  children  great,  follows  them  and  plies  them  with  the  gi  acious  indirections
of  a  faithful  and  patient  love"  (Bushnell, ' Christ  and  his  Salvation').  "Like  as  a
father,"  etc.  (Pb.  ciii.  13).

III.  Its  manifestation.  Ab  the  effect  of  sunshine  and  rain,  received  and  appro-
priated by  a  plant,  appears  in  its  abounding  strength,  beauty,  and  fruitfulness,  so  the
effect  of  Divine  grace  appears  in  enlargement  and  elevation  of  mind,  sincere  and  fervent
love  to  God,  a  set  purpose  to  do  his  will,  eminence  in  "  love,  joy,  peace,  gentleness,"  etc.
(Gal.  V.  22),  maturity  of  character  (Hos.  xiv.  5 — 7),  holy  and  beneficent  "activity,
growing  conformity  to  the  perfect  Pattern  of  true  greatness  (Matt.  xx.  25 — 2T).  "  Have
the  mind  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  ii.  5). — D,

Ver.  50  (Pb.  xviii.  49). — Z%e  praise  of  Qod  among  the  heathen,  "  Therefore  will  I
give  thanks  unto  thee,  O  Jehovah,  among  the  heathen  "  (Rom.  xv.  9).  The  purpose
of  God  to  bestow  the  blessings 'of  salvation  upon  all  nations  was  made  known  in  the
earliest  ages  (Gen.  xii.  3 ;  Numb.  xiv.  21 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  43).  "  From  the  beginning
there  existed  a  power  to  rise  above  the  exclusiveness  of  Old  Testament  religion,  namely,
the  vital  germ  of  knowledge,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  would  one  day  find  its  comple-
tion in  a  universal  monarchy  embracing  all  people  "  (Riehm,  '  Messianic  Prophecy ').
In  sympathy  and  co-operation  with  the  Divine  purpose  David  here  speaks.  That
purpose  is,  in  its  highest  sense,  fulfilled  in  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ
(1  Sam.  ii.  10;  v.  3).  This  language  is  such  as  might  be  adopted  by  Christ  himself
(Ps.  ii.  8 ;  Heb.  ii.  9 — 13).  It  should  be  that  of  all  his  followeis ;  to  whom  he  said,
"  Go  ye,  therefore  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  18 — 20),  "  proclaim  the  good  news  to  every  creature  "
(Mark  xvi.  15)  ;  "  Ye  are  witnesses  of  these  things  "  (Luke  xxiv.  48 ;  Acts  i,  8).  As
such  it  indicates —

I.  A  JOYFCL  PROCLAMATION  of  the  Word  of  truth,  by  which  God  is  glorified  in  his
Son  (ch.  vii.  14,  26);  pertaining  to:  1.  His  marvellous  doings,  in  conflict  with  the
powirs  of  evil  and  in  victory  over  them,  through  humiliation,  suffering,  and  sacrifice
(Ps.  xxii.).  "Make  known  his  deeds  among  the  people"  (Ps.  cv.  1,  2;  John  xii.  31,
32).  2.  His  glorious  exaltation  and  reign  (ver.  47).  "  Say  among  the  heathen.  The
Lord  is  King"  (Ps.  xcvi.  10;  Phil.  ii.  9 — 11).  His  reign  is  righteous,  beneficent,  and
universal.  3.  Eis  saving  benefits — the  remission  of  sins,  deliverance  from  oppression,
"  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  Praise  him,  all  ye  people :  for
his  merciful  kindness  is  great,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxvii.  1,  2).  "  The  means  of  bringing  them
to  the  knowledge  of  God  is  not  the  sword,  but  the  proclamation  of  God's  great  deeds
for  his  people.  As  David  in  his  character  of  missionary  to  the  heathen  world  praises
his  God's  grace,  so  at  bottom  all  missionary  work  among  the  heathen  is,  in  the
announcement  of  the  Word  of  the  God  who  is  revealed  in  Christ,  a  continuous  praise
of  the  Name  of  the  living  God  "  (Erdmann).

II.  A  SAOEBD  EESOLVB.  "  I  will  praise  thee."  This  determination,  or  "  vow  of
thanksgiving,"  ought  to  be  made  by  eveiy  one  who  has  himself  received  the  knowledge
of  salvation,  from  :  1.  A  feeling  oi  compassion  for^the  urgent  need  of  the  heathen  (Acts
xvi.  9).  He  may  not  keep  the  "  good  tidings"  to  himself  (1  Kings  vii.  9).  2.  A  con'
viction  of  duty,  arising  from  acquaintance  with  the  merciful  purpose  and  express  com-
mands of  the  Lord.  3.  An  impulse  of  grateful  love,  on  account  of  the  condescending
grace  shown  toward  himself,  constraining  him  to  obey  the  Lord's  will,  promote  hia
purpcse,  and  glorify  his  Name.  It  will  also  lead  him  to  employ  every  means  in  his
jowei  that  "Christ  may  be  magnified "  (Phil.  i.  20).

■  LA  CONFIDENT  I'ERBUASiON  that  the  heathen  will  listen  to  "the  joyful  sound,*
freely  submit  themselves  (vers.  44 — 46),  and  join  in  the  piaise  of  God ;  founded  on ;
1.  His  powB)' to  effect  his  purposes.  2.  His /ai<A/M?mess  in  fnllilling  his  promises.  3.
His  past  achievements  (vers.  48,  49).  "  They  shall  come  and  declare  his  righteousness  "
(Ps.  xxii.  27 — 31).  "Above  eighteen  centuries  have  verified  the  prediction  of  the
permanency  of  his  kingdom,  founded  as  it  was  by  no  human  means,  endowed  witb


CH.  ixii.  1— 51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  663


Inextinguishable  life,  ever  conquering  and  to  conquer  in  the  four  quarters  of  the  world;
a  kingdom  one  and  alone  since  the  world  has  been,  embracing  all  climes  and  times,
and  siill  expanding,  unworn  by  the  destroyer  of  all  things,  time ;  strong  amid  the
decay  of  empires ;  the  freshness  and  elasticity  of  youth  written  on  the  brow  which  hu
outlived  eighteen  centuries  "  (Pusey, '  Daniel,*  p.  62). — D.

Ver;s.  2 4. — God  the  Sefuge  and  Deliverer,  The  psalm  was  composed  as  a  thanks-
giving for  the  safety  and  deliverances  David  had  experienced  when  Saul  so  persistently
sought  to  destroy  him,  and  afterwards  in  the  wars  with  the  house  of  Saul,  and  with  the
heathen  tribes  that  set  themselves  against  him.  It  appea'.s  to  belong  to  an  earlier
period  than  the  place  it  occupies  in  the  book  would  indicate.  It  is  scarcely  possible
that  David  could  have  asserted  his  uprightness  and  innocence  in  the  strong  terms  of
vers.  21 — 25  after  his  great  sins.  These  verses  form  the  introduction  to  the  psalm,
and  express  in  emphatic  language  the  safety  and  salvation  which  David  had  found  in
God.  The  Christian  may  use  the  words  of  the  similar  perils  to  which  he  ia  exposed,
and  of  others  not  immediately  in  the  psalmist's  view.

I.  The  dangers  to  which  wb  are  exposed.  Bodily,  mental,  spiritual.  To  reputa-
tion. Prom  our  own  constitutional  tendencies.  Prom  diseases  and  accidents.  Prom
the  malice  of  men,  and  their  favour.  Prom  prosperity  and  adversity.  From  solitude
and  society.  From  labours,  rest,  and  pleasures.  Prom  Satan  and  his  angels.  Prom
the  broken  Law  and  injured  justice  of  God.  Always  and  everywhere,  under  all  cir-
cumstances and  conditions,  we  are  all  exposed  to  perils.

II.  The  safety  and  deliverance  to  be  found  in  God.  The  psalmist  labours
to  express  his  sense  of  the  protection,  safety,  and  deliverance  which  God  had  vouch-
safed to  him,  yea,  which  God  himself  had  been  to  him.  The  imagery  he  uses  is  taken
chiefly  from  natural  features  of  Palestine,  with  which  he  had  become  especially  familiar
as  affording  refuge  and  safety  during  the  time  that  he  was  hunted  by  Saul.  He  calls
him  "my  Rock,"  in  the  heights  and  recesses  of  which  he  had  been  safe  from  his  foes;
"  my  Portress,"  his  fortified  castle,  too  high  to  be  reached,  too  strong  to  bo  broken  into ;
"my  Deliverer,"  by  whose  aid  he  had  escaped  from  many  a  peril;  "the  God  of  my
Eock,"  equivalent  to  "  my  mighty  God ; "  "  my  Shield  and  the  Horn  of  my  salvation,"  at
once  protecting  him  in  battle  and  pushing  his  enemies  to  their  destruction ;  "  my  high
Tower,"  or  lofty  Eetreat ;  "my  Refuge  and  my  Saviour."  What  the  Almighty  was
to  David  he  is  to  all  his  people.  We  may  use  similar  language.  Our  dangers  may
not  be  so  fearful  in  appearance,  or  so  numerous,  or  so  obvious;  but  they  are  as  real  and
serious.  And  our  safety  and  deliverance  must  come  from  "  the  Lord."  The  words  of
the  text  show  that  it  is  not  only  what  he  employs  for  our  good,  nor  what  he  himself
does,  but  what  he  is,  that  assures  of  safety.  Not  only  does  he  afford  protection  and
secure  deliverance  ;  he  is  our  Protector  and  Deliverer.  In  bis  almightiness,  love,
knowledge,  wisdom,  universal  presence,  observation,  and  operation,  we  realize  salvation.
In  Jesus  Christ,  his  very  righteousness  has  become  our  friend,  and  assures  us  of  victory.
The  safety  thus  assured  is  not  absolute  immunity  from  trouble,  but  protection  from  the
evil  it  might  produce,  and  change  of  its  character.  The  righteous  are  visited  with
calamities  similar  to  those  which  befall  the  wicked,  and  in  some  conditions  of  society
with  calamities  peculiar  to  themselves.  But  in  their  case  they  lose  their  unfrieiidly
character,  and  become  visitations  of  a  Father's  love,  means  of  deliverance  from  worse
evils,  and  of  obtaining  greater  good.  The  evil  which  they  might  do  God  will  defend
UB  from,  if  we  trust  and  obey  him.  Nor  are  the  righteous  sure  of  absolute  preservation
from  sin,  though  they  would  enjoy  perfect  immunity  if  they  fulfilled  the  necessary  con-
ditions on  their  part.  But  they  have  a  right  to  feel  sure  of  preservation  of  body  and
soul  in  this  world,  until  their  appointed  work  is  done ;  and  of  final  deliverance  from  all
evils  (2  Tim,  iv.  18).    They  should  not  desire  more.

III.  The  conditions  op  safety  and  dblivebanob.  1.  Faith.  "In  him  will  I
trust "  (ver.  3).  Confidence  in  God  as  our  Friend,  Protector,  and  Saviour.  Especially
as  he  is  revealed  to  us  in  the  gospel.  Faith  assures  us  of  the  Divine  love,  lays  hold  of  the
Divine  strength,  enables  us  to  flee  to  God  aa  our  Refuge,  to  rise  to  the  lofty  Rock  and
Tower  where  we  are  above  all  adverse  powers,  and  safe  from  their  assaults,  and  gives
the  calmness  needful  for  employing  such  means  as  tend  to  safety  and  victory.  "  AU
things  are  possible  to  hinc  that  believeth  "  (Mark  ix.  23).    2.  Prayer.    "  I  will  call  ob


B54  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxn.  1— 51.

the  Lord  ...  bo  shall  I  be  saved  from  mine  enemies  "  (ver.  4).  Faith  prompts  obedi-
ence, as  in  other  respects,  so  in  respect  to  prayer.  Divine  help  and  protection  ar«
promised  to  those  who  pray.  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble :  I  will  deliver
thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me  "  (Ps.  1.  15).  The  sense  of  peril,  the  knowledge  that
there  is  safety  in  Grod,  and  that  his  delivering  power  is  exercised  on  behalf  of  those
who  seek  him,  cannot  but  lead  the  Christian  to  that  earnest  and  believing  prayer  which
pr«Taila.  The  Apostle  Paul,  after  pointing  out  other  methods  of  ensuring  victory  over
our  enemies,  adds,  "  Praying  always,"  etc.  (Eph.  vi.  18).

IV.  The  betubn  to  be  made  fob  safety  and  deliverance  realized,  and  antioi-
FATED.  Praise.  This  psalm  is  one  of  the  returns  of  praise  which  David  made  to  his
Deliverer,  of  whom  he  speaks  in  ver.  4  as  "  the  Lord  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised."
Many  are  ready  to  pray  to  God  in  danger,  who  forget  or  refuse  to  praise  him  when  they
have  experienced  deliverance.  The  Christian  will  not  fail  to  give  thanks,  not  only  for
what  he  has  experienced  of  Divine  protection,  but  for  what  he  feels  sure  he  shall
experience,  up  to  and  including  victory  over  death  itself,  "  the  last  enemy,"  in  view
of  whose  approach  he  sings,  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory  through
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (1  Cor.  xv.  26, 57).— G.  W.

Ver.  4. — Ood  worthy  to  he  praised.  The  conjunction  of  ideas  hero  is  a  little  singular.
"  I  will  pray  to  the  Lord,  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised."  It  may  originate  in  the  feel-
ing that  it  is  fitting  that,  when  we  seek  new  blessings  from  God,  we  should  not  be
unmindful  of  those  which  he  has  already  bestowed.  Praise  should  accompany  prayer
(see  Phil.  iv.  6,  "  prayer  .  . .  with  thanksgiving  ").  Add  that  the  subjects  of  praise  are
encouragements  to  prayer.  In  the  act  of  praising  him  we  are  reminding  ourselves  of
the  strong  reasons  we  have  for  hopefully  seeking  further  mercies  from  him.

I.  God  18  WORTHY  TO  BE  PRAISED.  Not  merely  to  be  feared,  entreated,  strictly
obeyed,  and  submitted  to.  He  is  worthy  of  thankful  and  rejoicing  obedience  and
submission.  It  is  not  fitting  that  he  should  be  served  sullenly  or  silently;  or  that
prayer  to  him  should  be  as  a  cry  of  a  slave  to  his  master,  or  of  one  oppressed  to  his
oppressor,  or  as  a  request  for  help  addressed  to  a  stranger.  We  should  speak  to  him
with  the  confidence  and  love  which  his  relation  to  us  and  past  goodness  are  fitted
to  inspire.    One  way  of  ensuring  this  is  to  blend  praise  with  prayer.

II.  What  it  is  that  renders  him  worthy  to  bb  praised.  Some  obtain  praise
who  are  not  worthy  of  it  in  any  measure ;  others,  much  more  than  they  deserve.  But
God  is  worthy  of  and  "  exalted  above  all  blessing  and  praise  "  (Neh.  ix.  5).  Whether
we  consider  his  nature,  his  regard  for  his  creatures,  his  works  or  his  gifts,  we  must  feel
that  it  is  impossible  to  render  him  praise  worthy  of  him.  But  to  the  utmost  of  our
power  we  should  praise  him  for :  1.  His  glorious  perfections.  Especially  his  infinite
moral  excellences — his  truth,  holiness,  righteousness,  and  love.  2.  His  wonder/vZ
worJes.  In  creation,  providence,  and  grace.  3.  Specially,  his  redeeming  mercy.  His
kindness  to  us  in  .Christ.  The  display  of  his  perfections  in  the  gift,  the  Person,  and  the
work  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  The  mercy  he  exercises  in  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  the
admission  of  sinners  into  his  family,  and  all  the  operations  by  which  he  brings  his
"  many  sons  [and  daughters]  unto  gloryl"  (Heb.  ii.  10).  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  for
this  purpose.  The  final  bliss  and  glory.  4.  The  goodness  of  God  to  ourselves.  Not
forgetting  that  he  is  "  worthy  to  be  praised  "  for  the  commonest  blessings  we  enjoy,  as
well  as  those  distinguishing  blessings  which  we  receive  as  his  children  through  faith  in
Christ.  And  not  only  for  the  blessings  which  give  us  pleasure,  but  for  those  which  give
us  pain,  but  are  bestowed  that  we  may  become  in  a  greater  measure  "  partakers  of  his
holiness  "  (Heb.  xii.  10).

III.  By  whom  he  ought  to  be  praised.  1.  By  all  his  ereatureg  according  to  their
capacity.  All  his  inanimate  and  irrational  creatures  do  praise  him.  Their  existence,
qualities,  order,  and  (as  to  the  living  creatures)  their  happiness  "show  forth  the  excel-
lences "  of  their  Creator.  "  All  thy  works  shall  praise  thee,  0  Lord  "  (Ps.  cxlv.  10 ;  comp.
Ps.  cxlviii. ;  xix.  1 — 4).  All  intelligent  beings  ought  to  praise  him;  all  the  right-
minded  of  them  do.  Those  who  enjoy  least  of  his  bounty  have  much  to  thank  him
for,  and  often  praise  him  more  than  those  who  enjoy  most.  We  do  not  say  that  those
who  are  suffering  in  hell  the  penalty  due  to  their  sins  can  be  expected  to  praise  him
whose  wrath  abides  so  terribly  upon  tiiem  ;  although,  if  a  somewhat  fashionable  doctrine


OH.  xxn.  1— 51.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  655

be  true,  they  have  strong  reasons  for  giving  him  thanks,  since  he  is  taking  the  wisest
and  best  means  to  make  them  meet  for  tiie  glory  and  joy  in  heaven  which  will  at  length
be  their  portion  !  2.  Especially  by  his  redeemed  people.  Who  are  the  objects  of  his
special  regard  and  gracious  operation,  and  to  whom  the  work  of  praise  on  earth  i«
peovdiarly  committed  (Isa.  xliii.  21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9).  On  some  aooounts  the  redeemed  and
regenerate  have  more  reason  to  give  thanks  to  God  than  those  who  have  never  iinned.

"  They  see
On  earth  a  bounty  not  indulged  on  high,
And  downward  look  for  Heaven's  superior  praise. .  ••
They  sang  Creation,  for  in  that  they  shared :
Creation's  great  superior,  man,  is  thine ;
Thine  is  redemption ;  they  just  gave  the  key,
'Tie  thine  to  raise  and  eternize  the  song."

(Young.)

Nevertheless,  angels  do  give  thanks  for  redemption,  and  with  good  reason.  For  It  is  the
work  ol  the  God  whom  they  love ;  it  enriches  their  conceptions  of  him ;  it  enlarges
their  service  of  him ;  and  it  supremely  and  eternally  blesses  vast  muliitndes  in  whom
they  feel  the  deepest  interest.  It  thus  gratifies  their  desires,  and  adds  to  their  wealth
of  knowledge,  goodness,  and  happiness.

IV.  The  kind  and  duration  of  the  praise  ot  which  he  is  worthy.  1.  The  kind.
Clearly  the  best  possible ;  which  is  not  necessarily  that  which  is  most  poetical  or  most
musical,  though  in  these  respects  man  should  do  his  best.  But  that  is  best  of  all
which  comes  from  the  heart,  and  from  a  heart  fullest  of  admiration,  adoration,  love,
and  gratitude.  Much  which  professes  to  be  praise  of  God  is  heartless  mockery.  2.  The
duration.  For  ever  and  ever  (Eph.  iii.  21).  While  we  have  any  being,  in  this  world
and  the  next  (Ps.  cxlv.  1,  2;  cxlvi.  2).  For,  as  God  is  everlasting,  the  reasons  for
praising  him  can  never  end. — G.  W.

Ver.  7. — Prayer  in  distress  heard.  The  distress  referred  to  is  graphically  described
in  vers.  5, 6, 17, 18.  The  interposition  of  God  for  the  psalmist's  deliverance  is  poetically
depicted  in  vers.  8 — 20.  The  connecting  link  is  given  in  this  verse.  David,  in  his
danger  and  trouble,  called  on  God,  and  therefore  he  was  delivered.    We  have  here —

I.  Distress.  This  may  arise  from  various  causes;  such  as:  1,  Enemies.  As  in
David's  case,  with  the  dangers  of  the  battles  fought  against  them.  There  are  many
forms  less  extreme  in  which  the  enmity  of  men  may  show  itself  and  occasion  pain  or
peril.  2.  Circumstances.  Worldly  losses  and  anxieties.  3.  Personal  affliction.  Of
body  or  mind.  Special  distress  from  afSictions  which  implicate  the  nerves,  and  so  the
mind  itself.  4.  Death  of  dear  friends.  5.  Conviction  of  sin.  (See  Ps.  xxxii.  3, 4.)  It
would  be  well  if  this  form  of  distress  were  more  common.  6.  Pressure  of  powerful
temptation.  The  mighty  and  threatening  uprising  of  inward  corruptions,  or  the  pressing
solicitations  of  evil  from  without.     7.  Fear  of  calamities  or  of  death.

II.  Pbayeb.  Natural  for  men  to  call  upon  God  when  they  are  in  great  trouble  or
danger.  Yet  all  do  not ;  and  of  many  the  prayers  are  unacceptable,  because  they  lack
the  moral  and  spiritual  elements  of  successful  prayer  (see  Hos.  vii.  14).  Prayer,  to  be
acceptable,  must  be :  1.  That  of  a  righteous  man.  (Vers.  21 — 25 ;  Jas.  v.  16 ;  Ps.  Ixvi.
18.)  Yet  the  prayers  of  one  who  is  stirred  by  his  affliction  to  sincere  repentance  will  be
heard ;  for  repentance  is  the  beginning  of  righteousness.  2.  Offered  in  faith.  (Matt.
xxi.  22.)  3.  Importunate  and  persevering.  (Luke  xi.  8,  sej. ;  xviii.  1 — 8.)  4.  Accom-
panied, where  praciicahle,  with  the  use  of  appropriate  means.  David  fought  vigorously
as  well  as  prayed  earnestly.

III.  Deliverancb.  The  Almighty  heard  the  psalmist's  voice  "out  of  his  temple"
(equivalent  to  "  the  heavens  "),  and,  interposing  in  majesty  and  power,  delivered  him,
discomfiting  and  scattering  his  foes.  True  prayer  is  always  heard  and  answered ;  but
the  deliverance  granted  is  often  not  according  to  our  conceptions  and  desires,  yet  ever
according  to  the  perfect  wisdom  and  goodness  of  our  heavenly  Father.  Sometimes  the
causes  of  our  distress  are  removed ;  sometimes  they  are  allowed  to  continue,  but  the
distress  is  allayed,  and  the  causes  turned  into  blessings.  So  it  was  with  St.  Paul's
"  thorn  in  the  flesh,"  although  he  prayed  earnestly  and  repeatedly  (2  Cor,  xii,  8 — 10)


65«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         fcH.  xxn.  1— St

Spiritual  deliverance,  however,  is  always  granted  to  those  who  truly  seek  it ;  and  ulti-
mately complete  rescue  from  all  that  afflicts  the  Christian.

IV.  Gbateful  rbmembbance  and  THANKSoiviNa.  Although  David's  victories  were
wrought  through  the  skill  and  valour  of  himself  and  his  troops,  he  gives  to  God  all  the
glory  of  them ;  for  he  knew  that  all  was  due  to  him.  His  example  will  be  followed  by
the  Christian,  as  he  reviews  life  and  caUs  to  mind  his  distresses  and  deliverances.  He
will  recognize  the  hand  of  God  in  all,  and  render  praise  to  him  who  both  famishes
the  means  of  deliverance  and  exercises  the  power  which  renders  them  successfuL
Finally,  let  none  wait  for  trouble  before  they  begin  to  pray.  Live  in  the  habit  of
prayer,  and  you  will  be  able,  when  trouble  comes,  to  pray  truly  and  successfully.  Other-
wise you  may  find  yourself  in  the  miserable  condition  of  those  described  in  ver.  42,  who
"  looked  even  unto  the  Lord,  but  he  answered  them  not." — G.  W.

Vers.  17 — 20. — Bescue  from  mighty  foes.  In  vers.  8 — 16  the  psalmist  depicts
Jehovah  as  appearing  in  his  glory  for  the  deliverance  of  his  servant.  The  picture
may  have  been  occasioned  by  a  storm  which,  in  one  of  his  battles,  had  terrified  his
enemies  and  aided  in  their  discomfiture  (comp.  Josh.  x.  11 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  10).  In  the
text  he  narrates  the  deliverance  itself.

L  The  enemies.  Who  were:  1.  Malignant.  "Hated  me."  There  was  not  only
opposition  and  contest,  but  personal  hatred.  Many  of  the  Christian's  foes  have  this
quality  in  a  high  degree  (John  xvii.  14),  notably  their  great  leader  and  chief,  Satan
(equivalent  to  "  adversary,"  1  Pet.  v.  8).  2.  Powerful,  "  My  strong  enemy  ...  too
strong  for  me."  In  physical  strength,  or  military,  or  in  numbers.  David  may  have
had  in  view  such  instances  as  these  recorded  in  ch.  viii.  3 — 5  and  xxi.  15 — 17.  The
Christian's  foes  also  are  "  powers  "  (Eph.  vi.  12).  Wherein  consists  the  power  of  the
enemies  of  the  righteous?  (1)  Their  inherent  vigour;  (2)  their  adaptation  to  our  lower
nature ;  (3)  their  number.  3.  Subtle.  "  They  prevented  me  in  the  day  of  my  calamity."
They  rushed  upon  him  unexpectedly,  when  he  was  enfeebled  by  calamity,  and  poorly
prepared  for  them.  David  may  be  thinking  of  the  attack  of  the  Syrians  of  Damascus,
while  he  and  his  army  were  engaged  with  Hadadezer  or  exhausted  by  the  contest  with
him  (ch.  viii.  5) ;  or  of  the  assault  of  the  giant  Ishbi-benob,  while  he  was  faint  from  fighting
against  the  Philistines  (ch.  xxi.  15,  16).  Thus,  also,  the  Christian's  foes  often  surprise
him  when  he  is  preoccupied  or  distressed  by  troubles.  The  day  of  calamity  is  a  day  of
spiritual  danger.  4.  In  a  measure  successful.  So  that  he  became  as  a  man  struggling
for  life  in  "  great  waters  "  (comp.  vers.  5,  6).  It  seemed  as  if  he  must  be  swallowed  up.
Thus,  also,  the  enemies  of  the  Christian  may  do  him  much  mischief,  temporal  and
even  spiritual ;  but  there  is  a  limit  to  their  power.  "  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to
and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth,  to  show  himself  strong  iathe  behalf  of  them  whose
heart  is  perfect  toward  him"  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9).

II.  The  Deliveebk.  Jehovah,  the  Almighty,  whose  glorious  interposition  on  behalf
of  his  servant,  in  answer  to  his  cry  of  distress,  is  described  in  the  previous  verses.  They
set  forth :  1.  His  awful  Tnajesly.  2.  His  power  over  ail  the  forces  of  natwe.  3.  The
intensity  of  his  interest  in  his  troubled  servants.  How  he  rouses  himself,  as  it  were,  for
the  rescue  of  those  in  whom  he  delights  (ver.  20).  4.  His  anger  against  their  enemiet.
(Vers.  8,  9.)  With  such  a  Friend,  who  can  neither  be  surprised,  evaded,  or  resisted,  the
righteous  need  not  dread  the  might  of  any  adversary,  nor  despair  of  deliverance  from
the  direst  troubles.

III.  The  DELIVBRANOK.  God :  1.  Supported  Mm  in  his  peril*.  "  The  Lord  was  my
Stay."  2.  He  saved  him  from,  them.  "He  stretched  fortli  his  hand  from  on  high;  ho
laiil  hold  of  me;  he  drew  me  out  of  great  waters ;  he  delivered  me,"  etc.  God's  hand
can  reach  his  servants  in  the  lowest  depths  of  trouble,  and  is  strong  to  rescue  them  from
tlie  strongest  of  their  foes.  3.  He  brought  him  into  a  condition  of  freedom  and  safety.
"  Into  a  large  place,"  a  broad,  open  space,  where  no  "cords  of  Sheol,"  or  "snares  of
death "  (ver.  6,  Revised  Version),  would  embarrass  or  endanger  him ;  where  he  could
move  about  with  perfect  freedom,  and  yet  perfect  security.  Such  help  from  on  high  is
realiz  d  by  God's  people  in  this  world ;  perfectly  when  the  hand  of  their  God  lays  hold
of  till  m  and  raises  them  from  earth  to  heaven.

1  \' .  The  peaibb.  (See  homilies  on  vers.  2 — 4,  4,  and  7.)  The  perfections  and  acts
•(  Jeliovah  are  of  such  a  nature  that  to  merely  recite  them  is  to  praise  him.    We  should


OH,  xxn.  1— 51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  657

acquaint  ourselves  as  fully  as  possible  with  his  excellences  and  works,  that  we  may
better  praise  him  by  declaring  them ;  but  our  own  experience  of  his  power  and  good-
ness will  give  us  the  liveliest  apprehension  of  them,  and  stimulate  us  to  the  most  ardent
praise. — Qt.  W.

Ters.  21 — 25  — Ood  rewarding  the  righteout.  "  He  delivered  me  because  he  delighted
in  me,"  the  psalmist  had  just  said.  The  reasons  of.  the  Divine  delight  in  him,  and  his
consequent  deliverance,  are  given  in  these  verses.  They  at  first  startle  us,  as  incon-
sistent with  the  humility  which  is  part  of  the  character  of  a  godly  man,  and  as
peculiarly  unsuitable  in  the  mouth  of  one  who  had  been  guilty  of  adultery  and  murder.
The  latter  part  of  the  difficulty  is  removed  if,  as  is  most  probable,  the  psalm  belongs  to
the  earlier  period  of  David's  reign,  before  his  commission  of  those  grievous  sins.  As
to  the  former,  we  shouM  hardly  find  the  Apostle  Paul  writing  in  this  strain ;  but  rather
referring  all  his  successes  to  the  exceeding  grace  of  God  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  9,  10).  His
consciousneas  of  sin  in  general,  and  of  his  special  guilt  on  account  of  his  persecution
of  Christians,  prevented  everything  that  savoured  of  boasting,  at  least  before  Go().
But  even  he,  in  appealing  to  men,  did  not  shrink  from  reciting  his  excellences  and
devoted  labours  (see  2  Cor.  i.  12 ;  vi.  3 — 10 ;  xi.  5 — 31),  though  ready  to  call  himself
a  "fool  "for  recounting  them.  And,  after  all,  the  truth  that  God  does  reward  the
righteous  according  to  their  rightecugness  is  as  much  a  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament
as  of  the  Old ;  and  there  are  occasions  when  Christians  may  fittingly  recognize  and
declare  that  the  favour  God  is  showing  them  is  according  to  their  righteousness;
although  the  deeper  consciousness  of  sin,  and  of  entire  dependence  on  the  mercy  of
God,  which  is  awakened  by  the  revelations  of  the  gospel,  makes  the  Christian  more
reluctant  to  mention  his  virtues  as  a  reason  for  the  kindness  of  God  to  him.  As  the
meritorious  ground  of  such  kindness,  David  would  have  been  as  far  as  St.  Paul  from
regarding  them.    Notice—

I.  The  psalmist's  chabactee.  This  he  describes  by  various  words  and  phrases,
which  only  in  part  differ  from  each  other.  1.  Righteousness,  Uprightness,  rectitude,
moral  and  spiritual  goodness  in  general.  2.  Cleanness  of  hands.  Hands  free  from  the
stain  of  innocent  blood,  of  "filthy  lucre,"  etc.  3.  Ohservanoe  of  God's  ways.  The  ways
he  prescribes  of  thought,  feeling,  speech,  and  action.  These  are  inquired  after  and
followed  by  the  good  man.  4.  Adherence  to  Qod.  "  Have  not  wickedly  departed  from
my  God  " — from  his  presence,  worship,  the  ways  he  prescribes,  and  in  which  he  is  to  be
found.  Some  degree  of  turning  from  God  at  times,  every  one  who  knows  hioiself  will
be  conscious  of;  but "  wickedly"  to  depart  from  him,  to  do  so  consciously,  deliberately,
persistently,  this  is  apostasy,  the  very  opposite  of  godliness  and  righteousness.  The
Christian  will  esteem  the  slightest  deviation  from  God  as  wicked;  but  he  justly  recylls
his  perseverance  in  the  habits  of  piety  and  holiness,  in  spite  of  all  temptations,  v/ith
thankfulness.  5.  Mindfulness  of  his  Word,  and  persevering  obedience  to  it.  God's  Word
ts  "his  statutes,"  what  he  has  determined  and  appointed,  and  "  his  judgments,"  what
he  declares  and  prescribes  as  just  and  right.  These  the  psalmist  "kept  before"  him,
and  from  them  he  "did  not  depart."  And  his  attention  and  obedience  to  them  were
universal — they  extended  to  "  all "  of  them.  One  necessary  quality  of  a  true  obedience.
"Then  shall  I  not  be  ashamed  when  I  have  respect  unto  all  thy  commandments"  (Ps.
cxix.  6).  6.  Uprightness  hefore  Ood.  With  regard  both  to  him  and  to  men.  7.  Avoid-
ance of  the  besetting  sin.  "  I  have  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity."  There  is  a  particular
ain  to  which  each  is  specially  prone.  To  keep  one's  self  from  that,  by  watchfulness,  prayer,
and  resolute  resistance,  is  special  evidence  of  genuine  piety.  8.  Purity  of  life  in  general.
"  My  cleanness,"  and  that  "  in  his  eyesight,"  a  very  different  thing  from  being  pvu-e  in
the  eyes  of  men.  Includes  purity  of  heart  as  well  as  conduct,  such  as  is  so  true  and
genuine  as  to  bear  the  Divine  inspection.

II.  The  psalmist's  recompense.  In  his  preservation  and  deliverance  firom  so  many
perils  and  enemies,  he  recognized  the  Divine  reward  of  his  righteousness,  the  Divine
reply  to  the  calumnies  of  his  enemies,  the  Divine  attestation  of  his  innocence.  1.  There
is  a  real  righteousness  in  the  character  of  godly  men.  By  this  they  are  essentially  dis-
tinguished from  others.  It  is  not  a  mere  difierence  of  taste.  2.  The  Divine  recom'
fense  of  such  righteousness  is  certain.  On  account  of :  (1)  The  character  of  God.  "The
righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness  "  (Ps.  xi.  7).    (2)  His  relation  to  the  righteous.


668  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxii.  1—51.

As  their  Father,  etc.  (3)  His  promises.  (4)  His  almighty  power.  He  is  ahle  to  do  all
that  is  suitahle  to  his  nature,  and  that  he  has  bound  himself  to  do  by  bis  Word.  3.
Those  who  receive  such  recompense  should  recognize  and  acknowledge  it.  The  righteous
do  continually  receive  recompense  for  their  righteousness;  rewards,  both  spiritual,
material,  and  social.  But  sometimes  the  happy  results  of  their  piety  are  very  manifest,
and  then  they  should  be  specially  noticed.  (1)  To  the  glory  of  God.  Praising  him  and
inciting  others  to  praise  him.  (2)  For  encouragement  of  themselves  and  their  brethren.
Increasing  their  faith,  and  strengthening  their  determination  to  continue  in  their  chosen
course,  and  their  assurance  of  ultimate,  complete  recognition  and  reward.  For  the  whole
reward  is  not  yet.  "  Great  is  your  reward  in  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  12);  but  on  earth  the
"guerdon"  may  be

"  Many  a  sorrow,  many  a  laboin«
Many  a  tear."

Finally,  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  have  the  perfect  Example  of  righteousness  and
its  recompense;  how  it  may  be  tried,  and  how  sure  is  its  reward.  In  him,  too,  we
behold  the  Source  of  righteousness  for  us,  and  the  Fledge  of  its  ultimate  triumpL —
O.W,

Vers.  26,  27. — Correspondence  between  the  character  of  men  and  the  conduct  of  Ood
towards  them.  The  psalmist,  having  spoken  of  God's  treatment  of  himself  according
to  his  righteousness,  now  shows  that  his  case  was  no  exception  to  the  general  rule  of
the  Divine  proceedings,  but  an  illustration  of  it;  that,  universally,  God  renders  to  men
according  to  their  character  and  works.

I.  The  merciful  experience  his  mercy.  Our  Lord  declares  the  same  truth,  when
he  says,  "Blessed  are  the  merciful:  for  they  shall  obtain  meicy"  (Matt.  v.  7);  and
when  he  declares,  "  If  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your  heavenly  Father  will  also
forgive  you  "  (Matt.  vi.  14) ;  and  teaches  us  to  pray,  "  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we
also  have  forgiven  our  debtors  "  (Matt.  vi.  12,  Eevised  Version).  But  how  does  this  con-
sist with  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  ?  It  mtist  be  in  harmony  with  it,  since
both  are  Divine.  If  it  do  not  accord  with  some  human  statements  of  the  doctrine,  it
must  be  because  these  are  erroneous  or  defective.  Faith  is  not  a  mere  assent  to  the
truth,  or  reliance  on  the  atonement  of  Christ  and  the  mercy  of  God  in  him ;  but  it
involves  acceptance  of  Christ  as  Teacher  and  Lord  as  well  as  Redeemer,  and  therefore
a  willing  obedience  to  his  instructions,  of  which  part  is  that  we  should  be  forgiving,
and  that  only  those  who  are  shall  be  forgiven — only  the  merciiul  shall  find  mercy.
Moreover,  faith  in  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  works  love  in  the  heart ;  a  faith  which
does  not  is  of  no  avaQ.  From  another  point  of  view,  "repentance  toward  God"  is  as
essential  to  salvation  as  "faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Acts  xx.  21),  and  will
be  produced  by  it.  It  is  vain,  therefore,  for  the  unmercilul  to  trust  in  the  mercy  of
God,  or  to  cry  to  him  for  mercy ;  his  mercy  is  shown  only  to  the  merciful.  But  to
them  it  is  shown ;  and  that  not  only  in  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins,  but  in  the  bestow-
ment  of  all  needful  blessings.  They  also  should  bear  in  mind  that  their  enjoyment  of
the  love  of  God  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  love  which  they  cherish  and  display ;  and
that  every  degree  of  selfishness  will  deprive  them  of  some  blessing.

II.  The  TjPKiaHT  expebibnoe  God's  uprightness.  He  is  essentially  upright,  just,
faithful ;  but  the  happy  experience  of  his  uprightness  is  for  those  who  "  walk
uprightly"  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11) — those  who  are  sincere  and  true-hearted  towards  God  and
men.  To  these  he  will  show  himself  upright  by  manifesting  to  them  his  favour,  and
fulfilling  to  them  all  his  promises  (oomp.  Ps.  xoii.  12 — 15);  while  to  others  he  will
show  the  same  quality  by  the  execution  of  his  threatenings.

III.  The  pure  experience  his  purity.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they
shall  see  God  "  (Matt.  v.  8).  1.  Genuine  Christians  are  holy.  Truly  so,  though  not  per-
fectly. They  have  been  cleansed  by  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God,  and  "  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  his  Son  "  (1  John  i.  7).  They  have  turned  from  s|in,  and  it  is  their  abhorrence.
They  watch  and  pray  against  it;  and,  when  they  fall  into  it,  mourn  with  sincere  grief.
They  cherish  purity  of  heart,  lip,  and  life.  They  desire  and  strive  after  perfect  holiness.
2.  To  such  Ood  shows  himself  holy.  (1)  He  reveals  to  them  his  holiness.  They  are
capable  of  such  a  revelation,  because  of  their  purity  of  heart.    Sin  blinds  the  soul,


OH.  xra.  1— 51.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  669

fncapaoitating  it  from  iliscerning  and  appreciating  the  holy.  (2)  He  acts  towards  them
holily.  He  requires  holiness  of  them,  and  works  it  in  them.  All  his  dealings  with
them  are  in  accordance  with  holiness,  and  have  for  their  end  to  promote  their  sanctifi-
cation.  Hence  he  does  not  indulge  his  children,  but,  when  necessary,  afflicts  them,
that  they  may  heoome  more  and  more  "  partakers  of  his  holiness  "  (Heb.  iii.  10).  He
will  not  be  satisfied  until  they  perfectly  reflect  his  image,  and  he  can  "  present  them
holy  and  unblameable  and  unreproveable  in  his  sight "  (Col.  1.  22).

IV.  The  feowabd  find  him  fkoward.  1.  Sinners  arefroward.  They  are  perverse,
unreasonable,  ungovernable,  impracticable.  They  show  this  in  their  feeling  and  cout
duct  towards  God,  his  Word  and  ways.  They  will  not  submit  to  his  instructions  or
obey  his  commands.  They  "walk  contrary  unto"  him  (Lev.  xxvi  21),  do  the  opposite
to  that  which  he  enjoins.  2.  To  them  God  shows  himself  froward.  It  is  a  bold  expres-
sion, and  therefore,  perhaps,  the  translators  of  this  book  softened  it  into  "  unsavoury,"
or  distasteful.  But  the  same  word  is  rightly  translated  in  Ps.  xviii.  26,  "  froward."
The  meaning  is  clear.  God  acts  as  if  perverse  towards  the  perverse.  As  they  will  not
pay  regard  to  his  will,  he  will  not  to  their  desires  and  prayers.  As  they  oppose  him,
he  opposes  them,  thwarts  their  purposes,  disappoints  their  hopes.  As  they  "  walk  con-
trary vmto "  him,  he  "  will  also  walk  contrary  unto  "  them  (Lev.  xxvi.  24).  It  is  a
universal  truth,  discernible:  (1)  In  nature.  If  we  would  have  nature  work  good  to  us,
we  must  learn  and  obey  its  laws.  If  we  will  not,  they  will  work  us  harm.  (2)  In  the
affairs  of  life — in  business  and  association  with  men.  If  we  will  not  ascertain  and  live
according  to  the  laws  which  should  regulate  our  conduct,  they  will  avenge  themselves,
inflicting  pain,  loss,  perhaps  utter  ruin.  (3)  In  respect  to  religion  and  salvation.  These
ori^nate  in  the  benevolent  will  of  God ;  and  if  we  would  experience  their  benefits,  we
must  have  humble  and  obedient  regard  to  that- will.  We  must  ask  of  him,  "What
must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  and  "What  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  If  we  choose  to
reject  the  Divine  revelations  and  requirements,  and  in  pride  and  perversity  take  a
course  opposed  to  them,  the  Almighty  will  not  alter  his  plans  to  please  us,  but  will
bring  upon  us  the  just  consequences  of  our  fiowardness.  He  will  appear  froward  to
the  froward,  in  that,  when  they  call  upon  him,  he  will  not  answer ;  when  they  seek
him  early,  they  shall  not  find  him  (see  Prov.  i.  24 — 29).  It  is  vain  and  foolish  for
man  to  assert  his  own  proud,  capricious  will ;  he  will  find  that  there  is  another  and
stronger  will,  that  will  assert  itself  to  his  discomfiture  and  destruction,  unless  he  repent.
— G.W.

Ver.  28. — Qod  observing  and  humbling  the  proud.  "Thine  eyes  are  upon  the
haughty,  that  thou  mayest  bring  them  down."  The  mention  of  "  afflicted  people  "  in
the  first  clause  of  this  verse  renders  it  probable  that  the  psalmist,  in  the  second,  referred
to  proud  oppressors  who  had  afflicted  them.    But  the  words  express  a  general  truth.

I.  God's  obsebvation  of  the  proud.  "  His  eyes  are  upon  the  haughty."  1.  His
sees  them ;  knows  who  they  are,  distinguishes  them  from  others,  overlooks  none  of  them.

2.  He  sees  through  them,  with  those  piercing  eyes  of  his,  that  search  the  hearts  of  men.
However  they  may  conceal  or  disguise  their  pride  before  men,  they  cannot  before  him.

3.  Ee  nonces  all  the  exercises  and  manifestations  of  their  pride.  Their  self-complacency
and  self-laudation ;  their  contempt  of  others,  their  insolence,  their  injustice,  their
oppression  of  the  meek  and  humble,  their  self-assertion  as  towards  him,  their  resistance
and  unsubmissiveness,  etc. ;  all  is  open  to  bis  view ;  and  he  notes  all  for  remembrance,
exposure,  and  punishment.  If  the  proud  did  but  realize  that  the  eyes  of  the  Infinite
One  were  upon  them,  how  ridiculous  would  their  pride  soon  appear  to  themselves  I  how
unbecoming  and  contemptible  as  well  as  impious !  How  would  the  things  on  which
they  pride  themselves— their  strength,  intellect,  knowledge,  wealth,  honours,  mastery
of  men,  virtues,  etc.,  shrivel  into  insignificance  as  they  looked  upon  them  with  the  con-
sciousness that  God  was  looking  on !  4.  Ee  keeps  them  ever  in  sight.  So  that  nothing
can  escape  his  view,  and  they  cannot  elude  him  or  do  anything  to  the  real  injury  of
his  servants.

II.  His  humiliation  of  them.  At  the  right  time  and  in  the  most  effectual  way.
"Every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased"  (Luke  xviii.  14).  1.  Jehovah
sometimes  brings  down  the  haughty  from  the  position  which  fosters  or  displays  their
pride.    He  may  deprive  them  of  that  on  which  tliey  pride  themselves— -their  property,


5J0  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxii.  1—51.


mental  rigour,  physical  strength,  reputation  (by  permitting  them  to  fall  into  some
disgraceful  sin,  or  otherwise),  power  over  others.  He  may  bring  reverses  upon  them
in  the  full  career  of  their  prosperity  or  enterprises;  snatch  from  them  the  coveted
prize  just  as  they  are  about  to  grasp  it ;  rescue  the  humble  victims  of  their  oppressions.
While  reducing  them  to  a  lower  level,  ho  may  exalt  above  them  some  whom  they  have
despised.  In  the  height  of  their  glory  he  may  strike  them  suddenly  down.  Pharaoh,
Sennacherib,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Haman,  Herod,  are  illustrations  of  the  humbling  which
God  may  administer  to  the  haughty.  In  every  case  of  impenitent  pride  terrible
humiliation  comes  at  death  and  judgment.  2.  He  sometimes  brings  the  proud  down  in
their  own  esteem — humlles  their  spirit.  This  may  be  by  such  methods  as  have  just
been  referred  to ;  and  the  spirit  may  be  humbled  without  being  really  changed.  But
the  happiest  humiliation  is  that  which  is  wrought  in  the  heart  by  the  Word  and  Spirit
of  God,  aided  by  such  methods  or  apart  frcm  them.  The  man  thus  affected  comes  to
see  his  true  position  as  a  creature  and  a  sinner.  He  discerns  and  recognizes  his  entire
dependence  on  God ;  that  whatever  he  has  he  has  received  (1  Cor.  iv.  7).  He  perceives
and  acknowledges  the  sin  and  folly  of  his  pride,  humbles  himself  befoie  God  on  account
of  it,  casts  himself  on  his  mercy,  gladly  accepts  pardon  and  salvation  as  a  free  gift  of
God's  grace  in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  thus  receives  a  better  exaltation  than  ever  he  had
known  or  imagined  before.     Happy  those  haughty  ones  whom  God  thus  brings  down !

Then,  eschew  pride ;  and  "  be  clothed  with  humility  "  (1  Pit.  v.  5,  6).  This  grace
may  best  be  learned  at  the  cross  of  Christ.  There  we  see  our  condition  of  evil  and
peril  as  sinners,  our  entire  dependence  for  salvation  on  the  mercy  of  God  and  the
merits  of  his  Son,  our  equality  ia  respect  to  sin  and  salvation  with  the  meanest  of  those
-we  are  tempted  to  despise.  There  also  we  have  presented  to  our  contemplation  the
noblest  model  of  humility  and  self-humiliation  (Phil.  ii.  5 — 8). — G.  W.

Ver.  29. — Ood  the  Lamp  of  hi*  peoph.  The  image  of  a  lamp  seems  at  first  too
humble  to  be  employed  of  God.  "The  Lord  God  is  a  Sun"  (I's.  Ixxxiv.  11)  appears-
more  suitable  for  One  so  great,  who  ia  the  Light  of  the  universe.  Still,  the  humbler
and  homelier  image  is  expressive.  A  lamp  is  of  service  where  ihe  sun  is  of  none — in
iiiiues,  dark  cellars  and  dungeons,  etc.  Its  light  is  more  readily  commanded  and  appro-
priated. We  can  say,  "  My  lamp,"  we  cannot  so  well  say,  "  My  sun."  And  .so  this
image  may  convey  to  us  more  readily  how  God  is  a  Light  in  the  darkest  places  and
obscurest  recesses;  available  to  each  for  his  own  particular  needs  and  for  the  humblest
uses  of  daily  life.  But  the  distinction  need  not  and  should  not  be  pressed.  The  word
is  an  image  of  light.

I.  A  FACT  STATED.  "Thou  art  my  Lamp,  0  Lord."  1.  Ee  shines  as  a  bright  lamp.
(1)  He  is  Light  without  darkness  (1  John  i.  5);  essential,  independent,  unchangeable,
and  eternal  Light.  Not  needing  to  be  or  capable  of  being  replenished,  as  all  other
lamps,  literal  or  figurative.  (2)  He  shines  pre-eminently  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  (3)
In  and  by  his  Word — ^its  declarations,  precepts,  promises,  thieateuings.  "  The  com-
mandment is  a  lamp,  and  the  Law  is  light"  (Prov.  vi.  23).  (4)  By  liis  Spirit,  in  the
reason,  conscience,  and  heart  of  man.  Thus  "  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  lamp  of  the
Lord"  (Prov.  xx,  27,  Eevised  Version).  (5)  In  and  by  his  people.  He  so  shines  on
them  as  to  make  them  lights.  2.  He  thus  fulfils  the  various  purposes  of  a  lamp.  (1)
Bevealing.  Himself,  and  in  his  light  all  other  persons  and  things  in  their  true  nature  and
relations  to  him  and  each  other  (comp.  Eph.  v.  13).  Bringing  into  view  what  had  been
hidden  in  the  heart,  etc.,  by  the  darkness.  (2)  Guiding.  In  the  way  that  is  right  and
safe,  and  leads  to  salvation  (Ps.  cxix.  105).  He  thus  gives  "  the  light  of  life  "  (John
viii.  12).  (3)  Cheering  (Ps.  iv.  6, 7 ;  xcvii.  11 ;  comp.  Esth.  viii.  16).  3.  Ee  is  a  Lamp
to  each  believer.  "il/i/Lamp."  Similarly, "  The  Lord  is  iny  Light"  (Ps.  xxvii.  1).  The
godly  man  accepts  the  Divine  light,  uses  jt  in  practical  life,  enjoys  the  comfort  of  it.
Others  reject  it,  and  wander  and  stumble  on  in  darkness.

n.  An  assurance  cherished.  "  The  Lord  will  lighten  my  darkness."  From  his
knowledge  of  God  and  his  promises,  and  his  past  experience,  the  psalmist  felt  assured
that,  whatever  darkness  might  come  upon  him,  God  would  be  his  fight  in  and  through
it,  yea,  would  turn  the  darkness  into  light.  Such  an  assurance  may  be  cherished  by
all  the  people  of  God.  He  will  lighten  the  darkness  which  may  arise  from :  1.  Per-
plexity,   As  to  Divine  truth  and  aa  to  the  path  of  duty.    2.  Sin.    The  memory  of  sins


OH.  XXII.  1—51.]  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  561

long  past  or  recent ;  the  consciousness  of  pronenesa  to  evil.  3.  Spiritual  gloom.  When
the  lights  of  heaven  seem  blotted  out,  and  Gtod  seemg  himself  to  have  deserted  the
soul  (Pb.  xxii.  1,  2 ;  xlii.).  4.  Troubles.  A£Siction8  of  body  ;  bereavements,  making
dark  the  home;  unkindness  or  unfaithfulness  of  friends;  worldly  losses.  When  all
other  lights  go  out,  and  leave  in  gloom,  God  remains,  the  Light  of  his  friends,  and  vrill
in  due  time  Ughten  their  darkness.

Let  all,  then,  accept  this  glorious  Lamp  for  their  guidance  and  comfort.  How  bless  J
the  world  of  which  it  is  said,  "  There  shall  be  no  night  there  ...  for  the  Lord  God
giveth  them  light ; "  and  again,  "  The  glory  of  G-od  did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the
Light  thereof"  (Rev.  xxii.  5 ;  xxi.  23)  1  —Q.  W.

Ver.  31. — Fer/ection  of  Ood^s  way  and  Word.  Those  words  may  be  regarded  as  a
brief  summary  of  the  lessons  which  David  had  learned  from  his  varied  experiences  and
meditations.  They  are  the  perfection  of  God'a  way,  the  unmixed  truth  of  his  Word,
and  the  safety  of  all  who  flee  to  him  for  protection.

L  The  pbbfkotion  of  God's  way.  "  His  way  is  perfect."  This  is  true  of  all  his
proceedings,  in  every  department  of  his  operations.  His  ways  in  nature  are  to  a  large
extent  inscrutable ;  but  we  are  sure  they  are  infinitely  wise  and  good.  His  method  of
redeeming  and  saving  sinners  is  perfect.  But  here  the  reference  is  rather  to  the  course
of  his  providence— the  way  in  which  he  leads,  governs,  protects,  and  delivers  his  servants^.
1.  The  mecming  of  the  assertion.  That  God's  way  is  perfectly  wise  and  good  and
holy,  perfectly  adapted  to  fulfil  the  purposes  of  his  love  towards  his  children,  and  leads
to  an  end  that  is  perfectly  good.  Tbat,  in  comparison  with  the  way  we  might  have
preferred,  it  is  infinitely  superior.  2.  Th«  grounds  of  the  assertion.  It  expresses  a
conviction  which  springs  from :  (1)  Reason.  Because  God  is  perfect,  his  way  must  bo.
Perfect  Wisdom  and  Goodness  cannot  err;  unbounded  power  carries  into  effect  tl.e
determinations  of  perfect  Wisdom  and  Goodness.  (2)  Revelation.  Holy  Writ  is  in  most
cases  our  first  source  of  knowledge  as  to  God  and  his  ways;  and  it  abounds  in
duclarations  adapted  to  assure  us,  in  the  midst  of  all  our  perplexities  respecting  the
mysteries  of  Divine  providence,  that  the  ways  of  God  are  right  and  good,  and  will  issue
in  good  to  those  who  love  and  obey  him.  (3)  Experience.  Looking  back  on  his  own
life,  with  its  many  difficulties,  struggles,  and  perils,  David  could  see  enough  of  the  way
of  God  in  it  all  to  awaken  in  him  a  profound  conviction  that  it  was  a  perfect  way.
And  no  one  who  serves  God  can  fail  to  recognize  this  truth  in  his  own  life,  however
much  may  remain  at  present  dark  and  difficult,  (4)  Observation.  By  which  tlie
experience  of  others  becomes  available  for  ourselves.  In  this  we  may  include  tliu
recorded  experience  of  others  in  biography  and  history,  in  the  sacred  or  other  Ixioks.
The  history  of  ihe  Church  and  of  individuals  abounds  in  instances  adapted  to  increase
our  confidence  in  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  way,  while  leaving  vast  spaces  of
unsolved  mystery.  3.  The  influence  which  this  truth  should  have  upon  us.  (1)  Thank-
fulness and  praise.  (2)  Unwavering  confidence,  however  dark  some  of  the  Divine
proceedings  may  be,  whether  towards  ourselves  or  others.  (3)  Cheerful  submission  to
the  guidance  and  government  of  God.

II.  The  pdritz  op  God's  Wobd.  It  is  "  tried  ; "  literally, "  smelted,"  and  so  purified
and  refined,  as  metals  by  fire  (comp.  Ps.  xii.  6,  "  The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  words .
as  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  of  earth,  purified  seven  times  ").  The  meaning  is  that  God's
Word  is  thoroughly  genuine,  true,  sincere,  free  from  every  particle  of  opposite  qualities.
The  statement  applies  to  every  word  of  God — his  declarations,  revektions,  precepts,
promises,  and  threateoinga.  It  is  most  probably  made  here  as  to  his  promises.  These
aie  all  thoroughly  true  and  reliable,  free  from  error,  free  fi'om  deceit.  For  God :  (1 )
Cannot  lie  (Titus  i.  2).  (2)  Cannot  mistake.  Knows  perfectly  all  the  future,  ail
possible  hindrances  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes,  and  his  own  power  to
conquer  them.  (3)  Cannot  change.  Not  in  purpose ;  not  in  power.  Thus  w  hatevcr
tends  to  throw  more  or  less  of  uncertainty  upon  human  promises  is  absent  from  the
Divine  (see  further  on  ch.  viu  28).  The  Word  of  God  is  "tried"  in  another  sense  of
the  Hebrew  word.  It  has  been  "  tested,"  put  to  the  proof,  in  ten  thousands -of  instances,
and  has  ever  been  found  true.  The  experience  of  every  believer  testifies  to  its  perfect
truth ;  and  the  experience  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  world  in  its  connection  with  the
Church,  throughout  all  ages,  gives  the  same  assurance.    Then :  1.  Let  w,  tri:sl.  the  Word

U.  SAMUEIi.  2   O


662  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxii.  1—51.

of  CM  with  a  confidence  suited  to  its  entire  trustworthiness.  2.  Let  us  be  glad  and
ihanhful  that,  amidst  so  much  thai  is  unreliable,  we  have  here  a  firm  fotmdation  on
whieh  to  rest  our  life  and  hopes.  3.  Let  ou/r  word  correspond  with  that  of  Ood  in  its
freedom  from  all  insincerity  and  untruthfulness,  if  it  cannot  be  free  from  the  uncer-
tainty which  springs  from  ignorance,  inability,  or  mutability.

III.  The  pbotectioh  which  God  affobds  to  his  peoplb.  L  2%e  protection  itself.
"  He  is  a  Buckler  [Shield]  to  all  them  that  trust  in  him."  Not  only  he  secures  protection,
he  is  himself  the  Shield  that  protects.  As  a  hen  protects  her  chickens  under  her  own
wings  (Ps.  xci.  4),  so  the  Lord  covers  and  defends  his  people  with  his  own  Being  and
perfections.  Their  enemies  have  to  conquer  him  before  they  can  injure  them.  They
are  under  the  guardianship  of  his  knowledge,  power,  goodness,  faithfulness;  and  these
must  fail  before  they  can  perish.  2.  The  persons  who  enjoy  such  protection.  "  AH
them  that  trust  in  him  " — all,  as  the  word  is,  who  flee  to  Imn  for  reAige.  (1)  It  is
one  of  the  characteristics  of  the  godly,  that  in  their  perils  they  flee  for  refuge  to  God.
It  is  to  God  they  flee ;  not  to  lome  merely  imaginary  being  whom  they  call  God —
a  God,  for  instance,  who,.however  despised  in  the  time  of  prosperity,  is  ^ways  at  the
call  of  men  in  trouble;  too  merciful  to  punish  his  foes  severely;  too  tender-hearted  to
disregard  the  cry  of  distress,  although  it  come  from  impenitent  heaits.  Such  con-
fidence is  vain.  God's  Word  contains  not  a  promise  to  the  ungodly  and  unholy,  however
troubled  they  may  be,  unless  the  trouble  subdue  their  hearts  to  a  true  repentance.  But
those  who  live  by  faith  in  God  naturally  turn  to  him  in  danger  and  distress.  (2)  To
them  he  is  a  Shield.  Their  faith  itself,  Gkxl-produced  and  God-sustained,  is  a  shield
(Eph.  vi.  16) ;  it  inspires  their  prayers  and  struggles  after  safety ;  and  in  response  to
their  confidence  and  their  prayers  the  Almighty  becomes  their  Defence,  and  they  are
safe.  (3)  Their  safety  is  according  to  their  faith.  Faith  which  is  mixed  with  doubt
is  an  occasion  of  peril.  Intermittent  faith  brings  intermittent  safety.  If  for  a  time
we  &eefrom  our  Befuge,  we  are  exposed  defenceless  to  the  assaults  of  our  enemies,  and
shall  be  wounded  and  distressed.  Then,  "  trust  in  him  at  all  times  "  (Ps,  liiL  8) ;  and
let  your  prayer  be,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith  "  (Luke  xviL  5),  and, "  Pray  for  us  that  our
faith  fail  not"  (see  Luke  xxii.  32).— G.  W.

Ver.  32. — Jehovah  fhe  only  Ood,  the  only  Hock.  David's  experience  of  what  Jehovah
his  God  had  been  to  him  impels  him  triumphantly  to  contrast  him  with  all  other  that
men  called  gods.

I.  Jehovah  alons  is  God.  David  was  thinking  of  the  idols  worshipped  by  the
nations  around,  which  had  proved  themselves  unable  to  protect  their  worshippers  from
his  victorious  arms.  The  question  may  be  asked  as  to  all  other  idols,  and  all  persons
and  things  that  men  serve  as  if  they  were  gods — self,  wealth,  the  world,  etc. :  1.  Which
of  them  has  perfections  like  those  of  Jehovah  J  He  is  the  living  God,  the  everlasting,
infinite  in  power,  wisdom,  and  love ;  perfect  in  holiness  and  righteousness.  To  whom
besides  can  such  attributes  be  ascnbed?  "There  is  none  else"  (Deut.  iv.  39).
2.  Which  of  them  has  done  or  can  do  works  like  his  t  "  All  the  gods  of  the  peoples  are
idols :  but  the  Lord  made  the  heavens  "  (Ps.  xcvi.  5,  Revised  Version ;  comp.  Isa.  xlv.
18).  3.  Which  of  them  can  hdp  their  worshippers  as  he  can  f  They  are  "  vain  things,
which  cannot  profit  nor  deliver ;  for  they  are  vain  "  (1  Sam.  xii.  21).  4.  Which  of  them,
then,  is  worthy  to  receive  homage  such  as  it  due  to  him  1  Fear,  trust,  love,  worship,
obedience.  Yet  the  unregenerate  do  honour  one  or  other  of  these  vanities  more  than
God.  They,  as  truly  as  the  heathen,  "  worship  and  serve  the  creature  rather  than  the
Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever  "  (Bom.  i.  25,  Revised  Version).

II.  Jehovah  alonb  is  a  Book.  1.  Ood  is  a  Rock.  A  term  applied  to  him  by
Moses  (Deut.  xxxii.  4),  and  afterwards  very  frequently,  especially  in  the  Book  of  Psalms.
God  is  to  those  who  trust  in  him  what  a  rock,  lofty  and  difBcult  of  ascent  and  access  to
strangers,  is  to  a  people  invaded  by  powerful  foes.  In  him  they  find  safety  and  pro-
tection. And  as  a  rock  Is  marked  by  strength,  stability,  and  permanence,  so  God  k
mighty  to  protect,  unchangeable,  a  Bock  of  ages,  "  an  everlasting  Bock  "  (Isa.  xxvL  4,
Revised  Version),  a  Refuge  available  through  each  life  and  for  all  generations.  2,  A
alone  is  worthy  of  the  name.  There  are  other  persons  and  things  which  minister
strength  and  safety  to  men.  "  Wisdom  is  a  defence,  and  money  is  a  defence  "  (Eccles.  vii.
12),  friendship  also,  and  civil  eovernment  and  military  force,  etc    But  none  besides


OH.  xxu.  1— 61.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  663

God  deserves  the  name  of  a  Eock.  (1)  They  are  limited  in  their  worth;  he,  unbounded.
One  or  another  of  them  may  be  a  refuge  against  some  dangers ;  he,  against  all.  They
may  not  be  at  hand  in  the  time  of  most  pressing  need ;  he  is  always  near.  (2)  They  are
feeble  and  unstable;  he,  strong  and  firm.  (3)  They  are  transient ;  he,  everlasting.  (4)
They  are  dependent ;  he,  their  independent  Source.  All  their  fitness  and  ability  to  aid
us  is  fiom  him ;  so  that,  when  they  are  of  service  to  us,  it  is  he  that  is  showing  himself
to  be  our  Bock.

Then :  1.  Accept  thankfully  the  good  they  can  do ;  but  trust  in  the  Lord  alone  with
absolute  and  unwavering  confidence.  2.  Beware  if  resorting  to  OocPs  gifts  as  a  refuge
from  himself.  From  the  thought  of  him;  from  the  reproaches  of  a  guilty  conscience;
from  the  penalties  of  his  Law.  3.  If  you  reject  or  neglect  God  for  others,  lethinh  you
what  hdp  they  can  give  you  when  he  eececutes  his  judgments  upon  you.  (Judg.  z.  14 ;
Jer.  ii.  28.)— G.  W.

Ver.  33. — Divine  protection  and  guidance.  The  experience  of  David,  and  the  purpose
of  the  psalm,  naturally  lead  to  repetition  of  declarations  and  images  descriptive  of  the
protection  and  guidance  which  had  been  vouchsafed  to  him.  They  are  not  unsuitable
to  record  the  convictions  and  feelings  of  every  good  man  as  he  reviews  the  past  and
anticipates  the  future.  This  verse  in  the  Bevised  "Version  reads,  "  God  is  my  strong
Fortress,  and  he  guideth  the  perfect  in  his  way."

L  God  is  our  strong  Fortress.  A  fortress  is  a  protection  against  enemies.  1.  We
have  powerful  foes.  The  world  and  the  flesh,  the  devil  and  his  angels,  assault  us  con-
tinually, and  would  destroy,  not  only  our  peace,  but  our  souls.  They  are  too  strong
and  numerous  for  our  power  and  skill;  and  no  creature-power  is  sufficient  for  our
defence.  2.  God  is  ottr  Almighty  Protector.  The  Fortress  into  which  we  can  flee,  and
where  we  are  safe ;  which  no  enemy  can  scale  or  breach.  His  presence  surrounds  us ;
his  power  defends  us.  Tea,  he  is  in  our  hearts  to  strengthen  and  protect  us.  Every,
where,  and  under  all  circumstances,  we  can  resort  to  this  Befuge,  and  defy  our  foes.
We  should  therefore  be  ready  to  go  anywhere  and  do  anything  at  God's  command.
He  may  lead  us  where  temptations  are  numerous  and  powerful;  but  obeying  and  trust-
ing him,  we  are  secure.

IL  God  is  our  all-wise  Guide.  The  reading  and  translation  preferred  by  the
Revisers  gives  a  good  sense,  harmonizing  with  many  statements  of  Holy  Writ.  "  He
guideth  the  perfect  in  his  way,"  or,  perhaps,  "his  [God's]  way."  The  man  who  is  "  per-
fect" in  the  sense  of  "upright,"  sincere,  true, righteous,  whole-hearted,  may  be  assured
of  Divine  guidance;  while  the  insincere.hypocritical,  double-minded,  shall  be  left  to  go
astray.  In  the  margin  of  the  Bevised  Version,  however,  another  reading  and  rendering
are  given,  viz.  "  guideth  my  way  in  perfectness,"  which  appears  to  be  substantially  in
agreement  with  the  Authorized  Version,  "  maketh  my  way  perfect."  1.  God  leads  his
people  in  their  way.  By  his  providence.  Word,  Spirit.  In  respect  to  the  affairs  of  this
life,  and  those  of  the  soul  and  eternity.  He  guides  them  into  the  position'he  has  chosen
for  them,  and  to  and  in  the  work  he  appoints  for  them.  "  The  steps  of  a  good  roan
are  ordered  by  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  23).  2.  Bis  lead  is  perfect.  Such  was  the
conclusion  of  the  psalmist  in  reference  to  his  own  way.  He  cotild  see  that  all  had  been
ordered  aright  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  purposes  respecting  him.  Such
will  be  the  conclusion  of  all  God's  servants  at  the  last ;  and  their  faith  in  God  will
enable  them  to  cherish  this  conviction  now,  notwithstanding  all  the  perplexities  in
which  they  may  be  involved.  The  way  in  which  they  may  be  led  may  not  be  always
pleasant ;  but  it  is :  (1)  The  best  way.  The  way  of  holiness ;  the  way  in  which  they  can
gain  most  real  good,  serve  and  honour  God  most,  be  most  useful,  attain  ultimately  the
greatest  glory  and  felicity.  (2)  The  safe  way.  Sometimes  a  way  which  avoids  enemies
and  perils ;  in  other  cases,  a  way  through  the  midst  of  them,  which  God  makes  safe  by  his
protection.  (3)  The  way  that  ends  in  eternal  glory  and  blessedness.  It  is  "  the  way  of  life
which  goeth  upward  "  (Prov.  xv,  24,  Bevised  Version).  "  The  end  "  is  "  everlasting  life"
(Bom.  vi.  22).  It  may  be  asked  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  those  who  have  God  for  their
Guide  nevertheless  make  such  grievous  mistakes,  and  fall  into  so  much  trouble.  (1)
The  troubles  which  spring  from  want  of  worldly  wisdom,  as  well  as  those  which  arise
from  circumstances,  are  under  Divine  guidance.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  his  people
should  suffer,  and  his  benevolent  purpose  is  often  made  manifest  in  the  spiritual  proti  i


664  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [on.  xxii.  1—51.

and  greater  usefulness  of  the  sufferers.  (2).  Even  good  men  do  not  fully  seek  and  follow
the  guidance  of  God.  They  too  frequently  choose  their  own  way,  and  thus  fall  into
mischief.  But  God,  in  his  gooduess,  dues  not  therefore  forsake  them.  He  leads  those
who  are  true  at  heart  out  of  the  evils  into  which  they  have  brought  themselves,  turns
their  very  sins  and  follies  to  account  in  training  them  for  further  service,  and  briugi
them  safe  home  at  last.

The  lessons  are :  1.  Be  thankful  for  such  a  Guide.  2.  See  to  it  that  you  ever  honestly
seek  and  submit  to  his  guidance.  By  the  study  of  his  Word  and  providence,  and  by
earnest  prayer,  inquire  what  is  the  way  in  which  he  would  have  you  go ;  and,  when
you  see  it,  walk  in  it. — G.  W.

Ver.  36.~-Greatness  from,  God's  eondescension,  "  Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me
great."  David  had  been  raised  from  a  humble  position  to  one  of  greatness.  He  had
become  great  in  arms,  in  royal  dignity,  in  the  extent  of  his  dominion.  In  these  words
he  ascribes  all  his  greatness  to  the  condescending  goodness  of  God.  The  word  translated
"  gentleness  "  is  elsewhere  used  only  of  men,  and  signifies  "  humility  "  (Prov.  xv.  33 ;
xviii.  12;  xxii.  4).  But  in  speaking  of  God,  we  use  the  word  "condescension"  rather
than  "  humility."  Yet  it  is  said  of  him  (Ps.  cxiii.  6)  that  "  he  humbleth  himself  to
behold  the  things  that  are  in  heaven  and  in  the  earth ; "  i.e.  he  stoops  to  regard  them ;
it  is  condescension  in  him  to  notice  them.  The  words  of  the  text  may  be  used  by  all
Christians ;  especially  by  some  of  them.

I.  The  GEEATNBS3  TO  WHICH  CHRISTIANS  ABE  EXALTED.  1.  AH  of  them  are  made
great.  For  they  are  made :  (1)  Sons  and  daughters  of  the  great  God,  brothers  and  sisters
of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  having  a  nature  corresponding  with  the  names.  They  are
"  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature"  (2  Pet.  i.  4),  and  therefore  G«d-like,  in  holiness,
righteousness,  and  love.  (2)  Wise  with  heavenly  wisdom.  A  nobler  wisdom  than  that
of  philosophers.  "  Taught  of  God  "  (John  vi.  45),  who  reveals  to  them  what  he  hides
from  the  worldly  wise  (Matt.  xi.  25).  (3)  Powerful  with  the  noblest  power,  that
which  is  moral  and  spiritual,  by  which  they  "overcome  the  world"  (1  John  v.  4),  rule
their  own  spirits  (Prov.  xvi.  32),  and  subdue  others  to  the  obedience  of  faith,  (4)
Friends  and  associates  of  the  best  of  God's  creatures — holy  angels  and  redeemed  men ;
with  whom  they  form  one  family  (Eph.  iii.  15).  (5)  Heirs,  and  at  length  possessors,  of
a  grand  and  enduring  estate  (1  Pet.  i.  4).  These  things  are  not  mere  names  or  fancies ;
they  are  solid  and  enduring  realities,  to  have  the  lowest  place  and  the  humblest  share
in  which  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  to  be  greater  than  the  greatest  of  earthly  dignitaries
w  ho  have  no  part  in  them.  2.  Some  of  them  are  made  specially  great.  They  realize,
in  a  larger  measure  than  others,  the  various  elements  of  greatness  mentioned  above.
They  have  more  of  God  in  them ;  and  hence  are  richer  in  spiritual  wisdom  and  good-
ness, exercise  a  wider  and  stronger  influence,  do  a  greater  work,  attain  to  greater  honour
and  renown  in  this  world  and  the  next.  Apostles,  martyrs ;  eminent  teachers,  evangelists,
missionaries,  and  reformers ;  monarchs,  too,  and  statesmen,  poets,  etc.,  who  are  also  devoted
Christians.  Such  special  greatness  arises  sometimes  and  in  part  from :  (1)  Greater
natural  endowments.  More  of  physical  energy,  or  intellectual  power,  or  emotional  force,
to  begin  with,  (2)  Or  greater  opportunities,  which  may  be  such  as  rank  and  fortune
give,  or  the  state  of  things  around  them,  or  such  as  poverty,  afiBiction,  and  persecution
afford.  (3)  Special  earnestness,  faithfulness,  and  diligence  in  the  cultivation  and  employ-
ment of  powers  and  opportunities  (Luke  xix.  16—26).  (4)  Special  prayerfulness.
Hence  abundant  impartation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Source  and  Sustainer  of  all  spiritual
excellence.    (5)  Deeper  humility.     Without  this  all  seeming  greatness  is  not  greatness

at  all  "in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  and  will  shrivel  into  nothingness  (Matt,  xviii.  1 4;

Luke  ix.  48  ;  xiv.  11).

XL   To  WHAT   SUCH  GREATNESS   18  TO   BE    A80EIBED,   AND   18  ASOBIBED   BT  THOSE  WHO

ATTAIN  TO  IT.  To  the  condescension  of  God.  David  recognized  that  all  his  greatness
was  owing  to  the  goodness  and  power  of  God,  aud  in  their  exercise  on  his  behalf  he
discerned  vmspeakable  condescension.  Similar  should  and  will  be  the  feeling  of  all
who  are  raised  to  spiritual  greatness.  1.  The  work  of  God  in  their  exaltation  is  a  work
of  condescension.  This  appears  as  we  consider :  (1)  His  greatness  and  holiness,  and
their  littleness  and  sinfulness  (Ps.  viii. ;  Isa.  Ivil.  15).  God  must  stoop  to  reach  and
raise  such  creatures.     (2)  His  various  operations  upon  and  for  them.     When  wa


on.  XXII.  1—51,]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OE  SAMUEL.  665

consider  what  is  involved  in  the  Divine  processes  by  which  they  are  exalted,  they
resolve  themselves  into  attention  (so  to  speak)  to,  and  animating  or  controlling
influence  over,  a  countless  multitude  of  small  matters.  Tet  we  shall  not  be  astonished
at  this  when  we  remember  that  not  a  sparrow  is  forgotten  by  God,  and  that  his  children
"are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows"  (Luke  xii.  6,  7).  Also  that  great  results
depend  on  small  things ;  and  that,  in  fact,  to  the  Infinite  Mind  there  is  nothing  great,
nothing  small.  (3)  And  pre-eminently,  the  incarnation  and  work  of  the  Son  of  God.
The  self-humiliation  of  the  eternal  Word  in  becoming  man  (John  i.  1 — 3,  14),  and  of
the  God-Man  in  lowly  service  to  lowly  people,  patiently  enduring  the  greatest  indignities
and  most  painful  and  ignominious  sufferings,  "obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of
the  cross  "  (Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Luke  xxii.  27 ;  John  xiii.  2—5  ;  Phil.  ii.  6—8).  (4)  The  work
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Stooping  to  dwell  in  the  hearts  of  the  mean  and  sinful,  bearing
with  neglect,  waywardness,  resistance,  and  disobedience.  2.  The  eondeicension  thus
displayed  promotes  spiritucd  greatness.  Not  only  as  it  is  exercised  in  the  ways  before
mentioned,  but:  (1)  As  it  is  apprehended  and  realized.  The  majesty, holiness,  and  justice
of  God  tend  to  humiliate  and  repress  the  human  spirit,  and  discourage  aspiration  and
effort.  At  best  it  produces  only  a  "spirit  of  bondage"  (Bom.  viii.  15).  But  under  the
influence  of  condescending  love,  luve  is  enkindled,  confidence  is  awakened,  the  heart
expands  and  enlarges,  is  inspired  with  the  freedom  and  courage  which  prepare  for  noble
service  of  God  and  man,  rises  heavenward  and  yet  looks  on  earth  with  kindlier  eye,  and
more  resolute  purpose  to  labour  ami  suffer  for  its  good.  (2)  As  it  incites  to  imitation.
Contemplating  the  grandeur  and  beautyof  the  Divine  condescension,  we  become  trans-
formed into  its  image.  We  learn  to  stoop  to  the  lowly  and  even  the  degraded.  We
are  content  to  serve  in  lowly  ofBoes,  if  thereby  we  can  benefit  our  fellow-men.  It  no
longer  seems  strange  that  we  should  be  required  "  to  wash  one  another's  feet "  (John
xiii.  14).  And  this  is  the  way  to  become  great  (Mark  x.  43,  44).  Yet  we  must  not
indulge  the  thought  or  assume  the  air  of  condescension,  or  wo  shall  fail  both  to  benefit
others  and  to  secure  honour  for  ourselves.  Bather  let  us  accustom  ourselves  to  think
in  how  many  and  important  respects  we  are  on  a  level  with  those  whose  good  we  seek.
This  will  produce  in  us  genuine  humility,  and  enable  us  to  feel  towards  our  brethren
a  brotherly  sympathy  which  will  banish  the  sense  of  superiority. — G.  W.

Vers.  44,  45. — The  head  of  the  nations.  David  once  more  records  how  God  had
delivered  him  in  and  from  the  contests  in  which  he  had  been  involved;  and  declares
that  he  had  thus  kept  him  "  to  be  the  head  of  the  nations  "  (Revised  Version),  not
only  Israel,  but  foreign  peoples.  He,  or,  if  not  he,  the  Spirit  which  spake  by  him
(ch.  xxiii.  2),  may  have  had  in  view  the  ultimate  purpose  of  God  respecting  him  and
his'  posterity,  viz.  the  exaltation  of  his  great  Son  to  be,  in  a  wider  sense  than  was
applicable  to  David  himself,  "the  Head  of  the  nations."  We  may  at  least  take  the
words  as  applicable  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

I.  The  opposition  he  encounters.  Like  David,  he  has  to  withstand  many  "  striv-
ings of  the  people."  1.  In  his  life  on  earth  he  was  much  opposed.  He  endured  the
"  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself"  (Heb.  xii.  3).  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and
his  own  received  him  not"  (John  i.  11)— his  own  people,  his  own  family  (John  vii.  5).
All  classes,  with  a  few  exceptions,  rejected  him — Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  elders  and
scribes,  ecclesiastics  and  politicians,  rulers  and  people.  The  multitude  sought  once  to
make  him  king  (John  vi.  15),  and,  when  he  entered  Jerusalem  for  the  last  time,
welcomed  him,  in  the  hope  that  lie  was  about  to  ascend  the  throne  j  but  he  would  not
be  such  a  king  as  they  desired,  and  they  cared  not  to  have  such  a  King  as  he  was  to  be.
Hence  they  united  with  their  Buperiors  in  saying,  "  We  will  not  have  this  Man  to  reifii
over  us"  (Luke  xix.  14);  and,  to  put  an  end  to  his  pretenBiong,  put  him  to  deatli.
They  did  not  know  that  they  were  thus  very  effectually  promoting  his  victories  and
reign.  2.  Se  has  met  with  various  and  constant  opposition  ever  since.  His  cause  has
advanced  in  spite  of  perpetual  "  strivings"  against  it.  Jews  and  Gentiles,  kings  and  sub-
jects, rich  and  poor,  the  intellectual  and  the  ignorant,  the  refined  and  the  coarse,  have
"set  themselves  .  .  .  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Anointed"  (Ps.  ii.  2).  He  too
can  speak  still  of  the  "strivings  of  my  people."  As  at  first  amongst  the  Jew's,  S()
since  amongst  Christians  (so-called),  and  amongst  those  in  high  positions  in  his  Ch.ireli,
h»ve  been  found  his  worst  foes.    Men  are  willing  to  bear  his  Nome,  to  receive  soue  ui


566  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [cH.  xxii.  1—51.

hit  doctrines,  and  even  contend  for  them,  to  appropriate  the  comfort  he  gives ;  but  to
obey  him,  to  let  him  ruh  in  their  minds  and  hearts  and  lives,  in  their  homes,  in  their
business,  in  their  pleasures,  in  their  social  life,  in  their  national  affairs, — that  is  quite
another  matter.  And  those  who  strive  earnestly  to  obey  him  themselves,  and  to  induce
others  to  do  so,  must  be  prepared  for  opposite  "  strivings,"  and  even  persecution.  Nor
do  they  wonder,  seeing  they  find,  more  or  less,  in  their  own  nature,  elements  of  opposi-
tion to  the  rule  of  the  Christ  which  explain  the  hostility  of  others.

II.  The  exalted  position  he  nevertheless  occupies.  "Head  of  the  nations."
The  answer  of  the  Almighty  to  all  the  rebellious  counsels  and  works  of  men  is,  "  Yet
have  I  set  my  King  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion"  (Ps.  ii.  6).  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is
the  kingdom  of  Jehovah ;  vain,  therefore,  must  be  all  strivings  against  it.  Its  opponents
can  only  dash  themselves  to  pieces,  but  "ha  must  reign"  (1  Cor.  xv.  25).  1.  The
extent  of  his  dominum,  "  The  nations,"  in  a  wider  sense  than  was  true  of  David.
"All  nations  shall  serve  him"  (Fs.  Ixxii.  11).  And  not  only  all  nations  in  existence
at  any  one  time,  but  all  that  may  come  into  existence  while  the  world  endures,  2.
The  nature  of  hit  dominion.  (1)  He  is  "  Head  of  the  nations "  by  right.  By  the
appointment  and  gift  of  the  Father  (Ps.  ii.  7,  8 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18).  As  the  result  and
reward  of  his  own  righteousness  and  self-sacrificing  love  (Phil.  ii.  8,  9).  He  redeemed
men  by  his  blood,  to  make  them  "  a  kingdom  "  (Kev.  L  5, 6;  v.  9, 10,  Revised  Version).
As  truth,  righteousness,  and  love  are  rightful  rulers,  however  far  they  may  be  from
actually  ruling,  so  is  it  with  our  Lord.  (2)  He  actually  rules  over  all  nations.  "  He  is
Lord  of  all "  (Acts  x.  36).  All  authority  on  earth,  as  well  as  in  heaven,  has  been  ^ven
to  him  (Matt,  xxviii.  18).  Whether  men  know  him  or  not,  acknowledge  him  or  not,
he  is  their  King;  he  so  orders,  controls,  and  directs  the  affairs  of  the  nations  as  to  make
them  subserve  the  advancement  and  ultimate  universal  establishment  uf  his  spiritual
reign.  (3)  He  has  already  a  vast  multitude  of  willing  and  obedient  subjects  in  many
nations.  "  A  people  which  he  knew  not,"  gathered  from  the  Gentiles,  serves  him ;  as
well  as  many  from  the  people  whom  he  knew.  (4)  Many  render  him  feigned  obedience
(ver.  45,  margin).  It  is  an  evidence  of  his  gceat  power  among  the  nations  that  many
find  it  to  their  interest,  or  credit,  or  convenience,  to  profess  his  Name,  who  are  still
opposed  to  him  in  heart.  They  call  him  Lord,  though  they  do  not  the  things  which
he  says  (Luke  vi.  46).  (5)  All  nations  will  at  length  own  him  as  their  Head,  and
heartily  and  lovingly  submit  to  his  sway.  The  prophecy  will  yet  be  fulfilled :  "  There
followed  great  voices  in  heaven,  and  they  said.  The  kingdom  of  the  world  is  become  the
kingdom  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ :  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever "  (Rev.  xi.
15,  Revised  Version).  In  the  assurance  of  this,  let  his  people  labour  and  give  and
pray  with  joyful  hope  for  the  extension  of  his  reign  in  the  earth. — G.  W.

Ver.  47. — Praise  to  Ood  as  the  ever-living  Saviour.  The  whole  psalm  is  a  song  of
praise  to  God,  but  some  parts  bear  more  distinctively  this  character.  This  verse  is  one
of  them.

I.  The  titles  hbbe  given  to  GrOD.  1.  Bock,  (See  on  ver.  32.)  "  My  Bock."  The
Rock  to  which  I  have  fled,  and  where  I  have  found  safety  and  repose.  The  Bock  in
which  I  still  trust  and  will  trust  with  full  assurance  of  its  stability  and  security,  what-
ever be  the  confidences  of  others.  It  is  a  blessed  thing,  in  speaking  of  God,  to  be  able
to  use  this  word  "  my,"  as  expressive  of  personal  experience,  choice,  and  confidence.
2.  The  God  of  the  Rock  of  my  salvation ;  equivalent  to  "  the  God  who  is  the  Rock  of
my  salvation,"  "  my  mighty  Saviour."  David  had  experienced  salvation  from  enemies
and  dangers  many  times  and  in  many  ways ;  and  he  ascribes  all  to  Gud.  By  whatever
means  and  instruments,  it  was  God  who  had  delivered  him.  He  had  been  manifested
in  his  history  as  the  God  of  salvation;  and  in  saving  him  had  shown  himself  a  Rock,
<Ae  Bock  in  which  alone  safety  was  to  be  found.  The  higher  and  better  salvation  which
is  presented  to  us  in  the  gospel  is  from  God.  With  him  it  originated;  by  him  in
Christ  it  is  wrought.  Christians  joyfully  recognize  God  as  the  God  of  salvation,  the
Rock  of  salvation.  It  is  for  men  one  of  the  most  glorious  and  encouraging  names  of
God.  God  the  Creator,  God  the  Preserver,  God  the  Ruler,  are  glorious  names;  but  unless
to  them  could  be  added  God  the  Saviour,  they  would  afford  no  hope  or  comfort.  It  is
this  which  renders  all  other  names  of  God  attractive  and  inspiring.  Specially  gladden-
ing ia  it  to  be  able  to  say,  "The  God  of  my  salvation,"  the  Bock  of  ages  is  whiob


OH.  xxir.  1— 51.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  607

I  find  refuge,  the  God  who  hag  saved  me  and  is  saving  me,  and  in  whom  I  trust  that
he  will  fully  save  me,  from  the  guilt,  power,  and  consequences  of  my  sins,  and  all  the
assaults  of  the  deadly  enemies  of  my  soul.

II.  The  deolabation  made  respectino  him.  "  The  Lord  liveth."  Which  expresses  :
1.  Sis  real  existence.  In  contrast  with  idols,  which  are  dead,  helpless,  and  unahle  to
help.  2.  Eis  continued  existence.  In  contrast  with  men,  who  die  and  pass  away.  3.
ffis  manifested  existence.  He  lives  and  works  in  the  world,  in  the  Church,  in  each
believer.  By  his  operations  fur  the  good  of  his  people,  he  shows  himself  the  living
Gkid.  4.  The  satisfaction  which  his  servants  feel  in  him  as  ever-living.  (1)  Joy  that
such  a  Being  is  their  God.  That  they  know  and  worship  the  true  and  living  God.
(2)  Confidence  that  liis  life  renders  all  their  interests  secure  for  this  world  and  the
next.  And  not  only  their  interests  as  iudividuals,  but  those  of  th@  whole  Church  of
God.  Because  he  lives,  his  Church  cannot  perish.  (3)  Comfort  under  the  death  of
Christian  friends.  He  lives ;  and  therefore  their  death  was  his  act.  It  did  not  befall
them  because  he  had  ceased  to  be  or  to  be  able  to  deliver.  He  lives,  to  support  and
comfort  those  who  survive.  He  lives,  to  supply  the  place  of  the  departed  in  the  family,
the  Church,  the  world.  He  lives,  and  therefore  they  live  and  will  live  for  ever.
For  through  Christ  their  life  was  and  is  rooted  in  his.  He  is  their  abiding  Dwelling-
place.

III.  The  fbaise  bendbked  to  him.  "  Blessed"  (equivalent  to  "  praised"), "  exalted."
1.  Praise  is  the  utterance  of  exalted  thoughts  and  feelings  respecting  him.  Without
these  the  language  of  praise  is  of  no  value.  2.  To  publish  his  praise  by  speech  or
writing  is  to  exalt  him  in  view  of  others.  3.  Praise  in  such  words  as  are  here  employed
expresses  the  desire  that  all  should  exalt  him  by  accepting,  loving,  obeying,  and  extol-
ling him.  4.  The  publication  of  his  praise  is  adapted  to  produce  this  result.  5.  The
exaltation  of  Qod  should  ever  be  sought  in  our  services  of  praise.  Some  such  services
tend  rather  to  the  exaltation  of  musical  composers,  organists,  aud  choirs. — G.  W.

Vers.  50,  51. — Praising  Ood  among  the  nations.  In  bringing  to  a  close  this  grand
psalm  of  praise,  the  royal  writer  looks  around  and  forward.  He  reveals  a  purpose  and
expectation  that  his  song  will  be  heard  among  the  nations  at  large,  and  he  expresses
his  assurance  that  the  kindness  of  God  which  he  had  experienced  would  be  extended
to  his  family  down  to  the  latest  ages,  yea,  for  evermore.  The  two  verses  are  closely
connected.  Translate  "nations"  instead  of  "heathen;"  and  instead  of  "He  is  the
Tower  of  salvation  for  his  king,"  read,  "Effecting  great  salvations  [deliverances]  for  his
king."  Thus  the  verses  will  run,  "  Therefore  I  will  give  thanks  unto  thee,  O  Lord,
among  the  nations,  and  to  thy  Name  will  I  sing  praises ;  who  etfecteth  great  deliver-
ances for  his  king,  and  showeth  loving-kindness  to  his  anointed,  to  David  and  to  his
seed  for  evermore."

I.  The  OBonNDS  of  the  psalmist's  pbaisb.  1.  His  position.  God's  "king,"
"  his  anointed,"  the  messiah  (Christ)  of  God.  David  was  literally  aaointed  by  Samuel
as  the  future  king  of  Israel,  and  had  been  prepared  for  and  brought  to  the  throne  in
marvellous  ways.  He  recognized,  as  Saul  had  failed  to  do,  that  he  was  God's  king  and
representative,  ruling  God's  people  in  subjection  to  him.  The  position  was  far  mora
honourable  than  that  of  any  heathen  monarch,  however  much  wider  his  dominion.  2.
His  experience  of  the  goodness  and  power  of  Ood.  Protecting,  delivering,  giving  victory,
exalting  to  the  throne,  and  preserving  in  it.  "  Therefore,"  because  of  all  that  I  have
here  recorded  of  the  Divine  favour  to  me,  "  I  will  give  thanks,"  etc.  Note  the  value  of
experience  as  a  help  and  incentive  to  praise.  It  gives  reality  to  our  thoughts  of  God,
and  personal  knowledge  of  his  power  and  goodness.  It  stirs  the  heart  to  gratitude,  and
to  a  desire  that  all'should  know  and  praise  him.  It  furnishes  interesting  subjects  for
praise.  3.  2%e  osstworace  he  had  of  the  future  kindness  of  Ood  to  himself  and  his
family.  This  assurance  sprang  from  the  promise  of  God  by  Nathan  (oh.  vii.  12 — 16),
and  which  finds  its  ultimate  and  complete  fulfilment  in  the  exaltation  of  the  Christ,  the
Son  of  David,  to  be  King  of  all  men,  of  all  beings  and  things  in  heaven  as  well  as  earth.
It  was  a  great  honour  conferred  on  David  and  his  family  to  be  made  rulers  for  many
generations  of  the  people  in  and  through  whom  true  religion  was  preserved,  to  be
at  length  diffused  through  idl  the  earth ;  it  was  a  far  greater  for  him  to  spring  from
them  who  should  be  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  and  the  eternal  King.    For  consider:  (1)


668


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxni.  1— 3ft


His  persoual  glory.  Nut  only  Son  of  David,  but  Son  of  God,  filled  "  with  all  the  fulness
of  the  Godljead"  (Col.  ii.  9);  the  incarnate  Word.  (2)  The  nature  of  his  rule.  Espe-
cially his  spiritual  reign — the  reign  of  Divine  truth,  holiness,  and  love  in  the  hearts  and
lives  of  men ;  the  reign  of  peace  and  joy.  (3)  Its  extent.  Far  wider  than  that  of  David
or  Solomon.  To  include  at  length  all  nations  (Ps.  Ixxii.  8, 11).  (4)  Its  duration.  "  For
evermore."  'David  discerned,  in  the  Divine  promise  to  him  and  his,  enough  to  fill  his
heart  with  gladness  an  i  thankfulness ;  if  he  could  have  seen  even  as  much  as  we  are
permitted  to  behold,  his  wonder  and  gratitude  would  have  known  no  bounds.

II.  The  6PHERB  OP  Hia  pbaise.  "Among  the  nations."  1.  The  fulnesB  of  Ms
gratitude  moved  him  to  make  known  God's  goodness  as  widely  as  possible.  2.  He
desired  to  instruct  other  nations,  and  bring  thftn  to  worship  a  Ood  so  able  and  willing
to  bless  his  worshippers.  He  may  have  felt  a  special  obligation  to  instruct  and  benefit
the  peoples  who  had  been  brought  into  subjection  to  hiniself.  3.  The  interest  which
the  nation*  at  large  had  in  what  Ood  had  done  and  promised  to  him.  See  Bom.  xv.  9,
where  ver.  50  is  quoted  by  St.  Paul  in  proof  that  it  was  the  purpose  of  God  that  the
G«ntiles  should  "  glorify  God  for  his  mercy." — G.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXIII.


Ver.  1. — Now  these  be  the  last  words  of
David.  A  long  interval  separates  this  psalm
from  the  preceding.  The  one  was  written
when  David  hail  just  reached  the  zenith  of
his  power,  and,  when  still  unstained  by  foul
crime,  he  could  claim  God's  favour  as  due
to  his  innocence.  These  last  words  were
David's  latest  inspired  utterance,  written,
probably,  towards  the  end  of  the  calm  period
which  followed  upon  his  restoration  to  his
throne,  and  when  time  and  the  sense  of
God's  renewed  favour  had  healed  the
wounds  of  his  soul.  David  the  son  of  Jesse
said.  It  was  probably  this  account  of  the
author,  and  its  personal  oliaracter,  which
caused  the  exclusion  of  this  hymn  from  the
Book  of  Psalms.  It  seemed  to  belong  rather
to  David's  private  history  than  to  a  collec-
tion made  for  use  in  the  public  services  of
tlie  temple.  Said.  The  word  is  one  usually
applied  to  a  message  coming  directly  from
God.  It  is  used*  however,  four  times  in
Numb.  xxiv.  of  the  words  of  Balaam,  and
in  Prov.  xxx.  of  those  of  Agur.  The  so-
lemnity of  the  word  indicates  the  fulness  of
its  inspiration.  The  sweet  psalmist;  lite-
rally, he  who  is  pleasant  in  the  psalms  of
Israel.  David  might  well  claim  this  title,
as,  under  God,  we  owe  the  Psalter  to  him.

Vers.  3,  4. — He  that  ruleth,  etc.  This
rendering  of  the  Hebrew  is  very  boiiutiful,
and  fit  to  be  graven  on  the  hearts  of  rulers.
There  is  often  almost  au  inspiration  in  the
renderings  of  the  Authorized  Version.  Giam-
mutically,  nevertheless,  the  psalm  declares
the  blessedness  of  the  king  who  is  just,  and
may  be  translated  as  follows : —

"  He  that  ruleth  over  men  righteously,
That  ruleth  in  the  fear  of  God—
And  as  the  morning  light  shall  he  be,
when  the  sun  riseth,


A  morning  without  clonds;
Yea,  as  the  tender  grass  from  the  earth,
from  sunshine,  from  rain."

A  king  who  rules  his  people  justly  is  as
glorious  as  the  sun  rising  in  its  strength  to
drive  away  the  works  of  darkness,  and  give
men,  by  precept  and  example,  the  light  of
clear  knowledge  of  their  duty.  But  the  last
metaphor  is  especially  beautiful.  In  the
summer,  vegetation  dries  up  under  the
burning  heat  of  the  sun;  all  is  bare  and
brown,  and  a  few  withered  stalks  of  the
coarser  plants  alone  remain.  But  when  the
rains  come,  followed  by  bright  sunshine,
nature  at  one  burst  flashes  into  beauty,  and
the  hillsides  and  plains  are  covered  with
the  soft  green  of  the  reviving  grass,  through
which  myriads  of  flowers  soon  push  their
way,  and  clothe  the  landscape  with  bright
colours.  Su  a  just  and  upiight  government
calls  into  being  countless  forms  of  human
activity,  and  fosters  all  that  is  moially
beautiful,  while  it  checks  the  blighting  in-
fluences of  unregulated  passion  and  selfish
greed.

Ver.  5. — Altbongh  my  house,  etc.  The
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version  is  that
of  the  ancient  versions,  and  is  to  be  retained.
David  could  not  but  feel  that  his  house  was
too  stained  with  sin  upon  sin  for  him  to  be
able  to  lay  claim  to  have  been  in  fact  that
which  the  theocratic  king  was  in  theory,
and  which  David  ought  to  have  been  as  the
representative  of  Christ,  and  himself  the
Christ,  or  anointed  of  Israel's  God.  But
most  modern  commentators  take  the  nega-
tives as  interrogative,  and,  therefore,  as
strong  assertions.

" For  is  not  my  house  so  with  God?
For  he  had  made  with  me  an  eternal

covenant.
Ordered  in  all  things,  and  secure ;


OH.  XXIII.  1—39.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


669


For  all  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire,
Shall  he  not  make  it  to  grow?"

But  surely  David  had  failed  in  realizing
the  better  purposes  of  his  heart,  and  it  was
of  God's  good  pleasure  that  the  covenant,
in  spite  of  personal  failure,  remained  firm
and  secure.

Vers.  6,  7. — The  sons  of  Belial ;  Hebrew,
helial ;  not  u  proper  name,  but  a  word  sig-
nifying "  worthlessness,"  and  especially
vicious  wortWf  ssiiees  (see  note  on  1  Sam.
i.  16).  It  is  from  this  worthlessness  that
opposition  arises  to  the  just  king,  and  he
recognizes  it  as  that  which  thwarts  his
efforts.    The  words  may  be  rendered-^

"  But  the  ungodly  are  as  thorns,  to  be  all

of  them  thrust  away ;
For  they  may  not  be  taken  hold  of  with

the  hand.
And  the  man  that  would  touch  them
Must  arm  himself  with  iron  and  the  staff

of  a  spear ;
And  they  shall  be  utterly  burned  with

fire  unto  nothingness."

The  vicious  worthlessness  which  opposes
righteous  government  must  be  treated  like
thorns,  too  prickly  and  sharp-pointed  for
gentle  dealing.  They  must  be  torn  up  by
an  iron  hook  fixed  to  the  end  of  a  spear-
liandle,  and  then  burnt.  The  word  triins-
liited  in  the  same  place  in  the  Authorized
Version  is  rendered  by  Jerome  "  even  to
nothing;"  and  it  is  just  the  sort  of  phrase
for  which  his  authority  is  greatest ;  for  he
went  to  Palestine,  and  remained  there
several  years,  to  study  the  language  under
Hebrew  teachers  on  the  spot.  The  Septua-
gint  must  have  had  a  different  reading,  as
it  translates  "  their  shame."

Ver.  8. — These  be  the  names.  A  similar
list  is  given  in  1  Chron.  xi.  10 — 47,  with .
several  variations,  and  sixteen  more  names.
It  is  given  there  in  connection  with  David's
elevation  to  the  throne  of  all  Israel,  and  the
conquest  of  Jerusalem.  Such  catalogues
might  possibly  be  revised  from  time  to  time,
and  new  names  inserted  as  there  were  va-
cancies caused  by  death.  And  this  seems  to
have  been  the  case  with  the  list  in  Chronicles,
which  contains  the  names  of  all  who  were
admitted  during  David's  reign  into  the  order
of  the  migbties.  The  present  is  the  actual
list  of  the  order  as  it  existed  on  the  day  when
David,  at  Hebron,  was  anointed  king  over  all
the  twelve  tribes.  And  we  can  well  con-
ceive that,  on  so  grand  an  occasion,  David
founded  this,  the  first  order  of  chivalry,  and
gave  his  thirty  knights,  as  they  would  be
now  called,  their  special  rank  and  high
privileges.  The  Taohmonite.  This  verse  is
extremely  oormpt.  A  man  could  not  b«  a
Taohmonite  and  an  Ezniteattheiame  time.


In  the  Epvised  Version  the  oormption  is
confessed  in  the  mildest  terms,  but  there  is
something  painfully  ludicrous  in  giving
Josheh-basshebeth  as  the  man's  name.  The
reading  "  Jashobeam  the  son  of  a  Hachmon-
ite,"  in  1  Chron,  xi.  11,  is  confirmed  by  1
Chron.  xii.6,where  Jashobeam  is  mentioned
among  those  who  joined  David  at  Ziklag,
and  by  1  Chron.  xxvii.  2,  where  we  find
him  appointed  commander  of  the  first
brigade  of  twenty-four  thousand  men.  The
error  in  the  present  text  arose  from  the
scribe's  eye  being  misled  by  catching  sight
of  hassheheth  in  the  line  above,  it  being  the
word  translated  "in  the  same  place"  in  the
Authorized  Version.  He  Adino  the  Ezuite.
These  unmeaning  words  are  a  corruption  of
the  right  reading  preserved  in  Chronicles,
"he  lifted  up  his  spear."  The  number  of
men  whom  he  slew  at  one  time  is  there
stated  as  having  been  three  hundred ;  but,
as  Abishai  accomplished  this  feat,  and  yet
held  only  inferior  rank,  eight  hundred  is
probably  right.  And  possibly  it  is  not
meant  that  he  slew  them  all  with  his  own
hand,  though  that  is  quite  possible.  He
was  chief  of  the  captains.  The  word  for
"captain,"  shalieh,  is  derived  from  th»
numeral  "  three ; "  and  probably  il  was
the  title  of  the  three  who  formed  the  first
rank  of  the  miglities.  But  in  couise  of
time  it  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  the
commanders  of  the  body-guard  (2  Kings
X.  25) ;  and  we  find  Bidcar  so  styled  when
in  personal  attendance  upon  Jehu  (2  Kings
ix.  25);  and  Pekah  used  the  opportuuities
afforded  by  this  ofiSce  for  the  murder  of
Pekahiah  (2  Kings  xv.  25).  It  is  not  nsed
of  military  ofScers  generally.  Those  ad-
mitted to  the  list  were  evidently  the  outlaws
who  had  been  with  David  in  his  wanderings
and  at  Ziklag.  They  now  received  their
reward,  and  became,  moreover,  the  stay  of
David's  throne.  It  is  their  past  history
which  accounts  for  the  strange  composition
of  the  list.  A  large  number  came  from
Judah,  and  especially  from  Bethlehem.
Several  are  David's  own  relatives.  Seven
towns  or  families  furnish  sixteen  out  of  the
whole  list.  We  find  a  father  and  his  son,
and  pairs  of  brothers.  There  are,  moreover,
numerous  foreigners — Hittites,  Ammonites,
Moabites,  a  Syrian  from  Zobah,  and
Gideonites,  descended  from  the  aboriginal
inhabitants  of  the  land.  Such  a  list  would
have  been  sorely  resented  had  it  not  been
formed  out  of  men  who  had  earned  it  by
their  past  services  and  their  fidelity  to
David.

Vor.  9.— Dodo.  The  Hebrew  has  Dodai,
and  "Dodo"  is  a  mere  correction  of  tha
Massorites  to  bring  the  name  into  Torbal
agreement  with  1  Chron.  xi.  12;  but  in  1
Chron.  xzvii.  4  he  is  called  Dodai,  and  we


570


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxm.  1— 3


there  find  him  in  command  of  the  second
division  of  the  anny.  For  "Dodai,"  how-
ever, we  onght  to  read  there  "  Eleazar  the
son  of  Dodai."  Ahohite ;  Hebrew,  the  son  of
an  Ahohite,  and  probably  a  member  of  the
family  descended  from  Ahoah,  a  son  of  Ben-
jamin (1  Chron.  viii.  4).  He  would  thus
belong  to  the  most  warlike  tribe  of  Israel,
though  not  mentioned  among  the  Benjamites
who  joined  David  at  Ziklag  (1  Chron.  xii.
1 — 7).  He  joined  him,  apparently,  at  an
earlier  date.  That  were  there  gathered
together.  The  word  "there"  implies  the
previous  mention  of  some  place,  and  though
the  text  in  the  parallel  passage  in  Chronicles
is  more  corrupt  than  that  before  us,  it  has,
nevertheless,  preserved  the  name  of  the  spot
where  the  encounter  took  place.  In  Chro-
nicles the  name  of  Shammah  is  omitted,  and
his  achievement  is  mixed  up  in  a  strange
fashion  with  that  of  Eleazar.  Here  the  two
lieroes  have  each  his  separate  record,  and  it
is  only  on  minor  matters  that  the  text  there
is  more  correct.  Bestored  from  the  readings
in  Chronicles,  the  narrative  is  as  follows :
"He  was  with  David  at  Pas-dammim,  and
the  Philistines  were  gathered  there  to  battle,
and  the  men  of  Israel  were  gone  up :  and  he
stood  (that  is,  made  a  stand)  and  smote,"
etc.  Fat-dammim  is  called  Epkei-dammim
in  1  Sam.  xrii.  1.  It  was  situated  in  the
valley  of  Elah,  and,  as  being  upon  the
border,  was  the  scene  of  numerous  con-
flicts, whence  its  name,  "the  boundary  of
blood."  It  was  there  that  David  slew
Goliath.  Were  gone  away;  Hebrew,  went
up;  that  is,  to  battle.  The  idea  that  the
Israelites  had  fled  is  taken  ficom  the  parallel
place  in  Chronicles,  where,  however,  it  refers
to  Shammah's  exploit.  In  vers.  9  and  11
there,  the  phrase,  "the  Philistines  were
gathered  together,"  occurs  twice,  and  the
scribe,  having  accidentally  omitted  the  in-
tervening words,  has  confused  together  the
exploits  of  Eleazar  and  Shammah.  In
this  battle  Eleazar  withstood  the  Philistine
onset,  and  smote  them  till  his  hand  clave
to  bis  sword-hilt.  Many  such  instances  of
cramp  are  recorded,  and  Mr.  Kirkpatrick,
in  his  commentary,  quotes  one  in  which  the
muscles  of  a  warrior's  hand  could  be  relaxed,
tfter  hard  fighting,  only  by  fomentations  of
hot  water.

Ver.  10. — Victory;  Hebrew,  lalvation;
and  so  also  in  ver.  12  and  1  Sam.  xi.  13 ;
zix.  5.  Betnmed  after  him.  This  docs  not
imply  that  they  had  fled,  but  simply  that
they  turned  in  whichever  way  he  turned,
and  followed  him.  Battles  in  old  time  de-
pended very  much  upon  the  prowess  of  the
leaders.

Ver.  11. — Into  a  tioop.  Josephus  renders
it  "to  Lehi,"  the  scene  of  Samson's  ex-
ploit   The  word  is  rare,  but  occurs  again


in  ver.  13,  where,  however,  we  find  in
Chronicles  the  ordinary  name  for  a  host  sub-
stituted for  it.  The  Eevisera  have  retained
in  the  margin,  "or,  for  foraging;"  but  its
occurrence  in  Ps.  Jxviii.  10,  where  it  is  ren-
dered "thy  congregation,"  and  in  the  mar-
gin of  the  Revised  Version, "  troop,"  makes  it
probable  that "  troop"  is  the  ri.nht  rendering
here.  Lentiles.  In  1  Chron.  xi.  13,  "barley."
The  difference  is  probably  caused  bv  a  trans-
position of  letters.  The  Philistines  seem  to
have  made  this  incursion  in  order  to  carry
off  or  destroy  the  crops  of  the  Israelites.

Ver.  13. — And  three.  The  Hebrew  text
has  "  thirty,"  for  which  both  the  Authorized
Version  and  the  Revised  Version  silently
substitute  "  three,"  as  is  correctly  given  in
Chronicles.  The  ab.sence  of  the  article  shows
that  these  three  were  not  Jashobeam,  Eleazar,
and  Shammah,  but  probably  Abishai,  Be-
naiah,  and  another  whose  name  and  exploits
have  been  purposely  omitted  both  here  and
in  Chronicles.  Apparently  this  narrative,  so
interesting  as  showing  the  fascination  which
David  exercised  over  his  men,  is  given  as
having  led  to  the  institution  of  this  second
order  of  three  in  the  brotherhood  of  the
mighties.  In  the  harvest  time.  The  Hebrew
is  "  to  harvest,"  but  in  1  Chron.  xi.  15  "  to
the  rock."  As  the  preposition  used  here
cannot  mean  "in,"  this  is  probably  the  right
reading.  In  this  case,  also,  it  is  the  simi-
larity of  the  words  that  has  led  to  the  con-
fusion. Is  it  possible  that  these  lists  were
taken  from  very  old  and  worn  catalogues,
which  it  was  veiy  difficult  to  decipher  ?

Ver.  14. — An  hold ;  Hebrew,  the  hold.
The  definite  article  here  and  in  oh.  v.  17,
and  the  mention  of  the  Philistines  as  being
in  the  valley  of  Bephaim,  seem  to  indicate
that  David  had  abandoned  Jerusalem  upon
the  invasion  of  the  Philistines,  and  sought
refuge  at  AduUam  (see  note  on  ch.  t.  17).
In  its  neighbourhood  is  an  isolated  hill,  on
which,  probably,  was  a  frontier  fortress,  in
which  David  prepared  to  defend  himself.

Ver.  15. — ^Ihe  well  of  Bethlehem,  which  is
by  the  gate.  Bethlehem  is  now  supplied
with  water  by  an  aqueduct,  and  the  wells
close  to  the  town  have  ceased  to  exist.  The
cistern  of  "deep,  clear,  cool  water,"  described
by  Bitter,  in  his  '  Geography  of  Palestine,'
and  now  called  David's  Well,  is  three
quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  north  of  Bethle-
hem, and  too  distant  to  be  that  which  David
meant.

Vers.  16, 17. — ^Brake  through  the  host  (or,
camp)  of  the  Philistines.  The  Philistine
camp  was  pitched  in  the  valley  of  Bephaim,
and  to  reach  Bethlehem,  which  was  more
than  twenty  or  twenty-five  miles  distant,
these  three  heroes  must  pass  close  to  the
ground  occupied  by  the  enemy.  The  valley
of  Bephaim,  in  fact,  extended  from  Jerusalem


OH.  XXIII.  1—39.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.


671


to  Bethlehem,  and,  to  guard  their  posUion,
the  Philistines  held  Bethlehem  with  a
strong  garrison.  Of  course  the  heroes  wonld
use  every  precaution;  for  to  be  discovered
vrould  be  certain  death.  The  story  of  their
perils  and  presence  of  mind  in  danger,  and
hairbreadth  escape,  would  be  full  of  interest ;
but  we  are  told  only  that  they  succeeded,  and
returned  in  safety,  besudng  their  precious
burden ;  but  David  would  not  drink,  and
poured  it  out  unto  Jehovah.  The  word  is
that  used  of  a  sacrificial  libation ;  for  David
regarded  it  as  holy,  and  consecrated  to  God,
because  it  had  been  bought  with  blood — at
the  risk,  that  is,  of  the  lives  of  these  gallant
men.  Nothing  is  recorded  in  the  romances
of  the  Middle  Ages,  when  knightly  chivalry
was  at  Ita  height,  more  gallant  and  noble
tlian  the  exploit  of  these  men.  And  the
very  essence  of  its  devotion  lay  in  the  fact
that  it  was  done  to  gratify  a  mere  sick  long-
ing, and  therefore  out  of  pure  love.  Sick,
no  doubt,  David  was,  and  burning  with  fever ;
and  even  more  depressed  by  the  apparent
hopelessness  of  his  position.  The  exploit
changed  the  course  of  his  thoughts.  What
could  he  not  do  with  such  heroes  1  Though
lacked  during  their  absence  with  anxiety
and  self-reproach,  yet  on  their  return  he
would  be  dispirited  no  longer,  but  filled  with
confidence.  The  words,  "  Shall  I  driuk  ?  "
inserted  in  the  Bevised  Version,  have  ap-
parently dropped  out  of  the  text  by  acci-
dent. They  are  found  in  the  parallel  place
in  Chronicles,  and  in  the  Septuagint  and
Vulgate  here.  The  Syriao  has,  "At  the
peril  of  their  life's  blood  these  men  went."

Ver.  18. — Abishai  .  .  .  was  chief  among
three.  The  sense  is  obscured  in  the  Autho-
rized Version  by  the  translators  having
failed  to  notice  the  presence  of  the  defi-
nite article.  Abishai,  by  reason  of  this
exploit,  became  "  chief  of  the  three ; "  that
ia,  of  the  second  order  of  three  established
in  the  fraternity  of  the  mighties.  At  the
end  of  the  verse,  and  in  ver.  IH,  the  Autlio-
rized  Version  strangely  puts  the  article  where
it  is  absent  in  the  Hebrew,  and  omits  it
where  it  is  present.  The  right  rendering
and  meaning  is,  "  He  had  a  name,  that  is,
rank,  reputation,  among  the  three.  Was  he
not  the  most  honourable  of  the  three  ?  For
this  he  was  made  their  captain :  yet  he
attained  not  to  equal  dignity  with  the  first
three."

Ver.  20. — Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada.
He  was  a  very  important  person  throughout
David's  reign,  being  the  commander  of  the
body-guard  (oh.  viii.  18),  and  general  of  the
third  brigade  of  twenty-four  thousand  men
(1  Chron.  xxvii.  5).  The  meaning  of  the  de-
scription given  of  him  there  is  disputed;  but
probably  it  should  be  translated,  "  Benaiah
the  aon  of  Jehoiada  the  priest,  a*  head,"  that


ia,  of  the  brigade.  He  was  thus  the  son  ot
the  Jehoiada  who  was  leader  of  the  house
of  Aaron,  and  whose  coming  to  Hebron  with
three  thousand  seven  hundred  martial  priests
did  so  much  to  make  David  king  of  all  Israel
(1  Chron.  xii.  27).  Subsequently  he  took
the  side  of  Solomon  against  Adonijah,  and
was  rewarded  by  being  made  commander-
in-chief,  in  place  of  Joab  (1  Kings  ii.  35).
Eabzeel.  An  unidentified  place  in  the
south  of  Judah,  on  the  Edomite  border
(Josh.  XV.  21),  called  Jekahzeel  in  Neh.  xi.
25.  Two  lionlike  men  of  Moab.  The  Septua-
gint reads,  "  the  two  sons  of  Ariel  of  Moab,"
which  the  Revised  Version  adopts.  "Ariel"
means  "  lion  of  God,"  and  is  a  name  given
to  Jerusalem  in  Isa.  xxix.  1,  2.  The  Syriao
supports  the  Authorized  Version  in  under-
standing by  the  term  "  heroes,"  or  "  cham-
pions ; "  but  the  use  of  poetical  language  in
a  prosaic  catalogue  is  so  strange  that  the
Septuagint  is  probably  right.  If  so,  Ariel
is  the  proper  name  of  the  King  of  Moab,
and  the  achievement  took  place  in  the  war
recorded  in  ch.  viii.  2.  A  lion.  This  achieve-
ment would  be  as  gratefully  remembered  as
the  killing  of  a  man-eating  tiger  by  the
natives  in  India.  A  lion,  driven  by  the
cold  from  the  forests,  had  made  its  lair  in
a  dry  tank  near  some  town,  and  thence
preyed  upon  the  inhabitants  as  they  went
in  and  out  of  the  city.  And  Benaiah  had
pity  upon  them,  and  came  to  the  rescue,
and  Want  down  into  the  pit,  and,  at  the  risk
of  his  life,  slew  the  lion.

Ver.  21. — A  goodly  man.  The  Hebrew
text  has  "who  a  siglit,"  for  which  the
MasBorites  read,  "  a  man  of  sight,"  that  is,
handsome,  and  worth  looking  at.  In  1
Chron.  xi.  23  we  find  what,  no  doubt,  is  the
right  reading, "  a  man  of  measure  [equiva-
lent to  'a  tall  man'],  five  cubits  hi^h."
The  height  of  Goliath  was  six  cubits  and  a
span  (1  Sam.  xvii.  4).

Ver.  23. — ^David  set  him  over  his  guard.
We  have  already  seen  (upon  1  Sam.  xxii.
14)  that  the  words  mean  that  David  made
him  a  member  of  his  privy  council.  Lite-
rally the  words  are,  and  David  appointed
him  to  his  audience.  In  1  Cliron.  xxvii.  34
mention  is  made  of  "Jehoiada  the  son  of
Benaiah"  as  being  next  in  the  council  to
Ahithophel,  and  many  commentators  think
that  the  names  have  been  transposed,  and
that  we  ought  to  read, "  Benaiah  the  son
of  Jehoiada."

Ver.  24.— The  thirty.  This  order  of
knighthood  consisted  originally  of  thirty-
three  rnen,  of  whom  three  were  of  higher
rank,  and  presided,  probably,  each  over  ten,
while  Joab  was  chief  over  them  all.  This
arrangement  of  men  in  tens,  vrith  on  ofScer
over  them,  was,  in  fact,  the  normal  rule
among  the  Hebrews.    The  Moond  triad  is


572


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxm.  1—39.


nnnsnal,  but  is  explained  by  the  history.
In  honour  of  the  exploit  of  bringing  the
water  from  the  well  of  Bethlehem,  this
second  order  of  three  was  instituted,  lower
than  the  three  chiefs,  bat  higher  than  the
rest.  The  third  of  these  is  not  mentioned,
and  the  disappearance  of  the  name  is  not
the  result  of  accident,  but  of  purpose.  Had
it  been  a  scribe's  error,  there  would  have
been  some  trace  of  it  in  the  yersions.  But
if  the  name  was  erased,  it  must  have  been
blotted  out  for  treason,  and  we  thus  have
two  candidates  for  the  vacant  niche:  one
ia  Amasa,  and  the  other  Ahithophel.  The
name  of  Joab  we  cannot  for  one  moment
admit.  He  never  was  a  traitor  to  David,
nor  would  the  latter,  though  king,  have
ventured  to  degrade  one  so  powerful,  and
who  continued  to  be  commander-in-chief
until  David's  death.  Now,  if  Amasa  is  the
same  as  the  Amasai  in  1  Ghron.  xii.  18,  who
was  chief  of  the  captains  who  came  from
Judah  and  Benjamin  to  David  when  he  was
in  the  hold,  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  tlie
absence  of  his  name  from  the  list  of  the
thirty.  Plainly,  however,  David  did  not
regard  his  treason  with  strong  displeasure,
but  was  prepared,  after  Absalom's  death,  to
make  him  commander-in-chief.  But  we
must  remember  that  a  place  in  this  second
triad  was  gained  by  one  exploit.  The  three
were  those  who  broke  through  the  Phi-
listine host,  and  fetched  the  water  &om
Bethlehem.  Such  a  deed  would  account
for  the  close  attachment  between  David  and
Ahithophel.  He  was  the  king's  companion,
and  his  familiar  friend.  It  would  account
also  for  his  suicide.  His  love  to  David  had,
for  some  unknown  reason,  turned  to  bitter
hatred.  He  sought,  not  only  David's  life,
but  his  dishonour.  His  feelings  must  have
been  iiighly  excited  before  he  could  have
worked  himself  up  to  such  a  pitch ;  and  the
reaction  and  disappointment  would  he
equally  extreme.  He  never  could  have
faced  David  again,  remembering  the  warmth
of  former  love,  and  the  shamelessness  with
which  he  had  sought,  not  only  his  life,  but
to  bring  upon  him  public  shame  and  igno-
miny. And  his  name  would  have  been
totally  eraseiJ,  and  gone  down  into  silence.
Of  Ahithophel's  personal  accomplishments
as  a  brave  warrior,  we  cannot  doubt  (see  ch.
xvii.  1),  and  his  son  Eliam  was  one  of  the
mighties.  (On  u  son  and  father  both  be-
longing to  the  order,  see  note  on  ver.  88.)
Xlhanan  (see  note  on  oh.  xxi.  19).

Ver.  25. — Shammah  the  Harodite.  The
town  Harod  was  in  the  plains  of  Jezreel,  near
Mount  Gilboa.  In  1  Chron.  xi.  27  he  is
called  "  Shammoth  the  Harorite,"  the  latter
word  being  an  easy  corruption  of  Marodite ;
Mid  in  1  Chron.  xxvii.  8  he  appears  as  "  Sham-
bath  the  TErahite,"and  has  the  command  of


the  fifth  brigade.  "  Izrahite"  is  by  some  re-
garded as  an  error  for  "  the  Zarhite,"  that
is,  a  member  of  the  clan  descended  from
Zerah  the  son  of  Judah.  But  if  so,  how
did  he  get  to  Harod?  EUka.  Omitted  in
Ohronioles,  probably  through  the  repetition
of  the  word  "  Harodite."

Yer.  26. — Helez.  He  la  twice  called  a
Pelonite  in  Ohronicles,  and  was  general  of
the  seventh  brigade  (1  Ohron.  xxvii.  10),
where  he  is  said  to  have  belonged  to  the
tribe  of  Ephraim.  Whether  Paltite  or  Pelon-
ite Is  right,  no  one  knows;  but  Betli-Palet
was  a  town  in  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  not
in  Ephraim.  Ira.  Ira  had  the  command
of  the  sixth  brigade  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  9).
Tekoah  (see  note  on  ch.  xiv.  2).  This  In
is  a  distinct  person  from  his  namesake,
David's  confidential  minister  (oh.  xx.  26).

Yer.  27. — Abiezer.  He  had  the  command
of  the  ninth  brigade  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  12).
Anathoth,  now  Mata,  was  a  priestly  city  in
Benjamin  (Josh.  xxi.  18),  the  home  of  Abia-
thar  (1  Kings  ii.  26),  and  the  birthplace  of
Jeremiah  (Jer.  i.  1).  AnetholMtt  and  Anto-
thite,  in  the  parallel  places  in  Chronicles,
are  merely  different  ways  of  pronouncing
the  same  Hebrew  consonants.  Hebnimai.
Written  Sibbeehai  in  ch,  xxi.  18,  and,  as  the
name  is  so  written  in  both  the  parallel  places
in  Chronicles,  Mebwnnai  is  probably  a  mis-
take. In  1  Chron.  xxvii.  11  he  is  said  to
have  been  commander  of  the  eighth  brigade,
and  to  have  been  a  Zarhite  of  the  town  of
Hushah,  in  the  tribe  of  Judah  (see  1  Ghron.
iv.  4).

Yer.  28.— Zalmon.  He  is  called  llai  in
1  Chron.  xi.  29.  AhoMte  (see  note  on  ver.
9).  Maharai  the  Netophathite.  Netophnh,
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  (Ezra
ii.  22),  was  chiefly  inhabited,  after  the  exile,
by  the  singers  (Neh.  xii.  28).  Bobinson
identifies  it  with  Beit-Netif,  to  the  south
of  Jerusalem ;  but  probably  ei-roneously,  as
Beit-Netif  is  too  far  from  Bethlehem.  Ma-
harai  was  commander  of  the  tenth  brigade,
and  wns  a  Zarhite,  and  therefore  belonged
to  the  tribe  of  Judah

Ver.  29.— Heleb.  He  is  called  Beted  and
Seldai  in  the  parallel  places  in  Ohronicles,
where  we  are  told  that  he  was  a  descendant
of  Othniel,  and  commander  of  the  twelfth
brigade.  Ittai.  He  is  called  Ithai,  by  a
very  slight  change,  in  Chronicles.  Oibaah
is  the  Geba  so  closely  connected  with  the
history  of  Saul  (see  1  Sam.  xiii.  8,  15,  etc.).
(For  Ittai  the  PhUistine,  a  distinct  person,
see  oh.  XT.  19.)

Yer.  80. — Benaiah.  He  was  an  Ephraim-
ite,  and  had  the  command  of  the  eleventh
brigade.  Pirathon  was  a  town  in  Ephraim
(Judg.  xii.  15).  Hiddai.  Called  Hnrai  in
1  Chron.  xi.  82,  by  the  common  confasion
of  d  and  r.   Xhe  brooki  of  Oaaab.   "  Nal  ale<


OH.  xxni.  1 — 39.]


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


67S


Gaash,"  the  lavines  of  Oaash,  was  probably
the  name  of  some  village,  of  which  nothing
is  now  known.

Yer.  81. — ^Abi-albon.  He  is  called  Abiel
in  1  Chron.  zi.  32.  He  belonged  to  the
town  of  Beth-Aiabah  (Josh.  xt.  61 ;  zviii.
22),  called  also  Arabah  (Josh,  xviii.  18),  in
the  wilderness  of  Judah.  Azmaveth  the
Barhnmite.  He  was  of  Bahurim,  for  which
see  note  on  ch.  iii.  16.

Ter.  32. — Eliahba.  He  was  of  Shaalabbin,
in  the  tribe  of  Dan  (Josh.  six.  42).  St.  Jeiome
calls  the  place  Selebi,  the  modem  Sebhit.
Of  the  sons  of  Jashen,  Jonathan,  Shammah
the  Hararite.  In  1  Gliron.  xi.  34, "  The  sons
of  Hashem  the  Qizonite,  Jonathan  the  son
of  Shage  the  Hararite."  The  word  "  of"  is
not  in  the  Hebrew,  and  is  inserted  in  the
Anthorized  Version  to  make  sense.  Beally,
b'lM,  sons,  is  a  careless  repetition  of  the
three  last  letters  of  the  name  "Shaalbonite,"
and  should  be  omitted.  The  text  in  Chro-
nicles then  goes  on  regularly,  "Hashem  the
Gizonite,  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shage  the
Hararite ; "  but  see  note  on  next  verse.

Yer.  83. — Shammah  the  Hararite.  He
was  really  one  of  the  first  three  (see  ver.
II).  (For  the  reading  in  Chronicles,  see
above.)  A  very  probable  correction  would
be  "Jonathan  the  sou  of  Shammah,  the
sou  of  Agee  the  Hararite."  Thus  both
father  and  son  would  l)e  in  the  number  of
the  thirty.  Ahiam.  He  is  called  "  the  son
of  Sacar"  in  1  Chron.  xi.  35.

Yer.  81. — Eliphelet  the  son  of  Ahasbai,
the  son  of  the  Maaohathite.  In  Chronicles
this  becomes  "Elipha  the  son  of  Ur,  He-
pher  the  Mecherathito."  If  the  text  here
is  correct,  Eliphelet  must  be  a  native  of
Beth-Maachah,  a  town  in  Naphtali  (ch.  xx.
14).  Eliam  the  son  of  Ahitbophel  the  Oi-
lonite.  Instead  of  this,  we  find  "  Ahijah  the
Pelonite"  in  1  Chron.  xi.  36.  Eliam  is  sup-
posed by  many  to  have  been  Bathsheba's
father  (see  note  on  oh.  xi.  3;  and  for  Ahitho-
phel  the  Gilonite,  note  on  ch.  xv.  12).

Yer.  35. — Hezrai.    The  Hebrew  text  has


Betro,  as  in  1  Chron.  xi.  37.  His  nativa
place  was  Carmel,  for  which  see  note  on
1  Sam.  XV.  12.  Faarai  the  Arhite.  A  native
of  Arab,  in  Judah.  In  Chronicles  he  is
called  "  Naarai  the  son  of  Ezbai."

Yer.  36. — Igal  the  son  of  Nathan  of  Zobah.
In  Chronicles,  "Joel  the  brother  of  Nathan,"
Igal  and  Joel  in  Hebrew  being  almost  the
same.  If.  the  text  here  is  correct,  he  waa
by  birth  a  Syrian  of  Zobah,  for  which  see
note  on  ch.  x.  6.  Bani  the  Oadite.  In
Chronicles,  "  Mibhar  the  son  of  Haggeri,"
"  Mibhar "  taking  the  place  of  "  from  Zo«
bah ; "  "  the  son,"  ben,  that  of  "  Bani ; "  and
Haggadi,  "the  Gadite,"  becoming  "Hag-
gen."

Ver.  37. — ^Zelek  the  Ammonite,  The  pre-
sence of  an  Ammonite  among  the  thirty
reminds  us  -^  the  fidelity  of  Shobi,  the  son
of  Nahash  the  Ammonite  king,  to  Uavid
(see  ch.  xvii.  27).  Armonrbearer.  The
written  text  has  the  plural,  "  armour-
bearers,"  fur  which  the  K'ri  has  substituted
the  singular.  The  plural  is  probably  right,
and  if  so,  both  Joab's  chief  armourbearers,
or  squires,  were  foreigners,  Zelek  being  an
Ammonite,  and  Nahari  a  Gibeonite  (see
note  on  oh.  iv.  2).  In  actual  warfare  we
find  Joab  attended  by  ten  esquires  (ch,
xviii.  15).

Ver.  38.— Ithrite.  Of  the  family  of  Jether,
of  Kirjath-jearim  (1  Chron.  ii  53),  unless  Ira  .
and  Gareb  were  two  brothers  of  Amasa,  and
sous  of   Jether  the  husband  of   Abigail,
Ddvid's  sister  (ch.  xvii.  25).

Ver.  39. — Uriah  the  Hittite  (see  note  on
ch.  xi.  3).  Thirty  and  seven  in  ^1.  "  The
thirty"  became  a  technical  name,  and
might  receive  additional  members.  But  if
we  suppose  Asahel's  place  to  have  been
filled  up,  the  number  is  exact,  there  being
thirty  ordinary  members,  three  chiefs  of  the
first  class,  and  three  of  the  second,  of  whom,
however,  one  name  is  omitted.  In  Chro-
nicles sixteen  ailditional  names  are  given,
who  were  probably  men  admitted  to  the
order  to  fill  up  vacancies.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1—7. — ThefruitftX  lessons  of  David's  last  words.    The  facts  are :  1.  There  is  a
statement  that  these  are  the  last  words  of  David,  who  is  spoken  of  in  a  fourfold  respect.

2.  It  is  afiBrmed  that  the  utterance  which  follows  is  expressly  by  the  Spirit  of  God.

3.  The  true  ruler  is  described  as  one  who  is  just  and  one  fearing  God;  and  the  effects
of  his  government  are  compared  to  the  light  of  a  bright  morning,  and  the  tender  grass
after  rain.  4,  David  affirms  that  his  house  is  specially  characterized  as  one  with
which  God  has  made  a  sure  and  everlasting  covenant,  and  that,  consequently,  the
whole  salvation  he  cares  for  and  desires  will  be  advanced  and  realized.  5.  He  refers
to  worthless  men  having  no  sympathy  with  the  desires  of  his  heart  and  the  purposes
of  his  house— as  being  like  thorns  fit  only  to  be  ultimately  burned.  A  larger  space  ia
given  in  the  Bible  to  the  lifo  of  David  than  to  any  other  except  that  of  his  great
Antitype ;  and  herein  do  We  see  the  beautiful  harmony  o£  the  sacred  book  as  an  organic


B74  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxiir.  1—39.

whole,  for  just  as  in  the  New  Testament  there  ii  great  prominence  given  to  the  death
of  Christ  and  its  relation  to  sin,  corresponding  to  the  prominence  in  the  Old  Testament
of  the  sacriBccs  which  foreshadowed  it,  so  the  position  of  the  eternal  Eiog  in  Zion
in  the  one  book  is  in  the  same  relative  proportion  to  that  of  the  temporal  king  who
so  conspicuously  shadowed  forth  his  reign  in  the  other.  The  great  interest  thus
attaching  to  the  life  of  David  renders  his  last  words  of  unusual  importance.  We  shall
best  bring  out  their  teaching  by  noting  in  succession  the  very  fruitful  topics  suggested
by  this  section.

L  The  inpldencb  of  dtinq  wobdb  of  good  mkk.  We  feel  that  there  is  a  value
in  these  last  words  of  David,  not  simply  by  what  an  examination  of  their  strict  sense
may  yield,  but  because  they  are  his  last  words.  All  last  words  are  weighty  in  com-
parison with  others ;  for  they  close  the  record,  or  end  the  intercourse,  or  give,  as  in
dying  words,  the  matured  expression  of  one's  long  experience.  The  last  words  of  Jacob,
of  Moses,  of  Paul,  and  above  all  of  Christ,  are  very  rich  in  instruction  by  virtue  of
being  last.  The  last  words  of  children,  parents,  friends  who  sleep  in'  Jesus,  are  most
precious;  they  are  treasured  for  ever.  Tliere  are  special  reasons  for  attaching  weight
to  them.  1.  They  are  reflective,  and  touched  ty  the  influence  of  the  eternal  world.  Men
are  earnest,  sincere,  uttering  only  what  a  review  of  the  past  and  a  prospect  of  the
fixture  will  warrant.  2.  The  mind  is  uiually  calm.  ITie  passions  of  life  are  gone,  the
strife  of  tongues  is  no  more  heard,  the  spirit  is  open  to  the  still,  small  voice.  3.
Worldly  influences  are  in  abeyance.  The  pomps  and  fashions  of  this  world  are  reduced
to  their  proper  position.  There  is  scope  for  things  eternal  to  get  their  legitimate  hold
on  the  thoughts,  and  so  to  form  aright  the  conceptions  of  duty.  4.  The  action  of  the
Holy  Spirit  is  more  direct  and  strong.  The  great  hindrances  to  his  blessed  fellowship
are  reduced  to  a  minimum,  and  hence  a  truer  estimate  is  formed  of  life,  its  purpose
and  perils ;  of  Christ,  his  love  and  power.  5.  ITie  affections  are  most  pure  and  tender.
The  heart  goes  out  freely  toward  the  Saviour  and  toward  men.  Silver  and  gold  and
the  perishable  things  of  active  life  are  now  as  dross,  and  words  flow  forth  steeped  in  love
and  tender  concern  for  others,  and  delight  in  God's  great  salvation.  Dying  saints
preach  powerfiil  sermons.  Their  memory  is  blessed.  Their  words  are  rich  in  all  that
is  good  and  helpful.

II.  Tee  honoub  and  eesponsibilitt  of  bich  mental  bndowmbntb.  David  wai
the  man  raised  up  on  high,  the  anointed  of  God,  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel.  These
words  necessarily  imply  the  coexistence  in  time  of  varied  mental  endowments — wisdom
and  discretion  for  ruling,  lofty  conceptions  of  the  theocracy  and  the  far-reaching
character  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel,  and  all  the  qualities  requisite  for  the  sweetest
poetry.  He  was  certainly  most  honoured  of  men  in  that  age,  and  hence  his  responsi-
bility was  very  great.  The  references  to  the  ideal  ruler  (ver.  3)  indicate  how  conscious
he  was  of  solemn  obligations.  The  fact  is,  every  gift  of  God  bestowed  on  man  is  honour
put  on  him,  and  in  its  nature  it  is  a  talent  for  use,  that  the  world  may  be  the  better
for  its  existence.  The  possession  of  great  and  varied  gifts— of  thought,  emotion,  will-
power, and  of  aptitude  to  do  the  right  thing  at  the  right  time — is  a  wonderful  boon.
The  men  of  ten  talents  may  well  ponder  their  responsibilities  to  God  and  man.  What
blessing  or  woe  comes  to  the  world  according  to  the  direction  in  which  great  gifts  are
used !

III.  The  influence  of  sacbed  song  on  the  BELioions  life.  The  incidental
reference  to  the  "sweet  psalmist"  throws  a  sudden  and  unexpected  light  on  the
immense  influence  exerted  by  David  on  the  spiritual  thought  and  feeling  of  his  own
and  subsequent  ages.  He  had  touched  the  deepest  feelings  of  the  people,  and  by  his
psalms  done,  perhaps,  more  to  conserve  their  faith  and  hope  than  by  all  his  acts  of
formal  legislation  and  words  of  distinct  exhortation.  His  influence  will  never  cease.
The  saints  of  all  ages  are  cheered  and  comforted  by  his  sweet  words  of  song ;  and  they
find  relief  in  usin^  language  which  so  aptly  expresses  the  holiest  and  purest  feelings
and  thoughts  of  their  life.  He  blessed  Israel  with  a  wise  and  just  rule,  and  the  entire
world  by  the  most  enduring  influence  of  sacred  song.  The  place  of  sacred.song  in  the
Church  is  most  important.  It  elevates  thought,  nourishes  the  more  fine  and  tender
sentiments,  strengthens  the  most  secret  and  radical  elements  of  the  religious  life  by
giving  form  and  occasion  for  their  exercise,  enriches  the  memory  with  strains  that  spring
up  in  hours  of  weakness  and  sorrow,  and  stores  the  minds  of  young  and  old  with  •


CH.  xxiii.  1—39.3       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  675

treasury  of  precious  Christian  truth.  He  who  writes  a  good  hymn  blesses  the  generations
tocomu.

IV.  The  umknown  wobk  of  the  Holt  Spirit.  When  David  said,  "The  Spirit  of
the  Lord  spake  by  me,"  be  seemed  to  speak  of  what  was  a  familiar  truth.  He  was  no
stranger  to  such  Divine  help,  as  our  Lord's  testimony  to  the  Psalms  indicates  (of.  Ps.
li.  11).  Yet  if  we  confine  our  attention  to  the  bare  historic  record  of  his  life,  we
find  scarcely  any  distinct  reference  to  his  consciousness  of  the  direct  aid  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  For  aught  we  can  see  in  distinct  words,  there  was  none.  His  holy  influence
has  no  full  record.  Thus  the  most  important  spiritual  element  in  David's  spiritual
life  was  to  onlookers  unknown.  There  are  two  aspects  of  this  fact  in  our  Christian  life.
1.  We  do  not  know  the  great  extent  to  which  we  are  indebted  to  the  Holy  Spirit  for
our  perseverance,  our  highest  thoughts,  our  purest  feelings,  and  general  growth  in
excellence.  2.  Ihe  non-Ohristian  world  does  not  know  the  great  work  which  the  Holy
Spirit  achieves  in  Christian  Uves.  "  The  world  knoweth  him  not "  (John  xiv.  17).  It
becomes  us  to  remember  what  we  owe  to  him,  and  how  incessant  his  action,  though
men  live  as  though  he  were  not.  Beligiou  is  at  a  low  ebb  whenever  the  work  of  the
Holy  Spirit  is  forgotten.

V.  The  model  buleb.  In  his  closing  days  David  remembered  that  he  had  been
raised  on  high  to  be  a  ruler  over  Israel ;  and  doubtless,  in  reviewing  the  past,  he  was
humbled  in  observing  the  instances  in  which  he  had  failed  to  be  as  a  man  after  God's
own  heart.  But  in  the  assurance  of  forgiveness  he  could  now  reflect  on  the  ideal  which
had  ever  stood  before  him,  and  for  the  instruction  of  others  he  indicates  his  hope  of  the
ideal  being  approximately  realized  in  his  immediate  successor,  and  his  faith  that  in  the
coming  Christ  it  would  be  perfectly  realized.  The  two  elements  of  the  ideal  ruler  are
justice  and  the  fear  of  Qod.  These  qualities  being  in  full  exercise,  all  things  will  be
done  for  the  good  of  man  and  the  glory  of  God.  Human  obligations — morality  on  the
human  side — must  be  combined  with  religious  feeling — supreme  regard  in  everything
to  the  Divine  will.  The  effect  of  such  ruling  on  saints  is  (1)  what  the  bright  hght
of  morning  is  on  the  earth,  i.e.  it  is  conducive  to  safety,  cheerfulness,  full  development
of  activities,  and  extended  knowledge  and  usefulness ;  (2)  what  the  abundance  of  rich
verdure  is  in  a  tropical  climate,  i.e.  it  is  wealth,  beauty,  restfulness,  contrast.  'Ihe
history  of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  communities  illustrates  the  tjuth  of  this.  There  are
conditions  of  prosperity  which  can  only  be  fulfilled  by  the  ruled,  but  heie  we  have  to
do  with  the  natural  tendency  of  the  just  and  godly  ruling.  The  ruler  may  be  king,
president,  parent,  or  pastor,  and  wherever  the  standard  of  ruling  is  high,  so  in  propor-
tion will  these  effects  follow.  Bad  as  the  subjects  ruled  may  be,  the  model  ruler  will
to  some  extent  secure  for  them  these  blessings.  The  most  perfect  illustraiion  of  the
truth  is  to  be  found  in  Christ.  He  rules  justly,  and  in  harmony  with  the  mind  of  the
EternaL  An  examination  of  the  principles  of  his  kingdom,  its  discipline  and  spirit,  will
show  that  it  is  perfectly  equitable  and  is  an  expression  of  the  Divine  mind.  The  effects
that  flow  from  it  in  proportion  as  it  is  submitted  to,  are  exactly  those  here  set  forth.
Heaven  an^  earth  testify  (Ps.  Ixxii,).

VL  The  okderbd  covenant.  Through  Samuel  and  Nathan  (1  Sanuxr.  28;  ch.  vii.
12 — 17),  God  had  declared  his  promise  to  David,  and  David  on  his  part  had  solemnly
recognized  the  goodness  of  God,  and  virtually  pledged  himself  to  fulfil  his  side  of  the
sacred  engagement  (oh.  vii.  24 — 29).  Throughout  his  singular  life,  amidst  all  his
frailties,  he  had  found  God  gracious  and  merciful.  Though  manifold  dangers  had  arisen
which  seemed  at  one  time  to  frustrate  the  promise  and  hand  over  his  kingdom  to
anarchy  and  his  family  to  disgrace,  Divine  wisdom  had  so  ordered  all  things  that  now,
at  the  close  of  lite,  the  throne  is  firm  and  succession  is  sure  and  promising.  His  mind
evidently  ponders  a  threefold  covemint :  1.  Personal.  This  God  was  his  God,  and  he
covdd  say, "  I  am  thine  "  (Ps.  cxix.  9i ;  cf.  Ixi.  5).  2.  Official.  He  had  been  chosen  to  be
king,  and  God  had  guaranteed  to  him  all  needtul  help  and  blessing.  3.  Messianic.  The
private  and  official  covenant  was  to  him  a  type  of  that  wider  and  more  blessed  covenant
of  grace  which  is  exemplified  in  the  working  out  of  the  redemptive  purpose  in  Christ
(Ps.  ii. ;  cf.  Isa.  liii.  10—12).  In  respect  to  each  of  these  the  characterisiics  "  ever-
lasting," "  ordered  in  all  things,"  and  "  suce,"  were  most  precious  to  David's  heart.  The
covenant  made  with  us  in  Christ  is  thus  most  blessed.  It  is  a  covenant  of  pure  mercy,
originated  by  God,  designed  to  elevate  us  to  highest  dignity,  sustained  in  its  develop-


576  TIIR  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxin.  1— 39.

ment  by  all  the  resources  of  the  Eternal;  and  as  to  duration,  from  everlasting  to
everlasting  (Matt.  xiv.  34 ;  John  xvii.  24 ;  Eph.  i.  4 ;  1  Pet.  i.  20 ;  Bev.  xviL  8 ;
of.  John  iii.  16) ;  as  to  execution,  "  ordered  in  all  things,"  everything  pertaining  to  its
development  and  issue  being  so  foreseen  and  provided  for  that  nothing  is  left  to  chanca
or  the  exigencies  of  the  hour  (Luke  xxiv.  26,  27 ;  Acts  ii.  23^—28 ;  Gal.  iv.  4 ;
Eph.  i.  10 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9 ;  of.  Gen.  xxii.  14 ;  Eom.  xL  33 ;  Phil.  iv.  19)  ;  as  to  stahiUty,
"sure,"  resting  on  the  unchangeable  faithfulness  of  the  all-wise  and  all-powerful
QoA  (Pb.  Ixxzix.  1 ;  Isa.  xxv.  1 ;  1  Thess.  v.  24 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  3 ;  of.  Acts  11.  30 ;  Heb.
vL  17).

VII.  God's  faithfulness  man's  cwnsolation.  "Who  can  tell  the  consolation
brought  to  David  by  the  fact  that  the  covenant  of  God  was  so  "  sure  "  ?  Eeflection
on  his  own  fiailty  and  on  the  dangers  of  life  could  not  but  awaken  shame  and  (Iread;
but  this  sure,  well-ordered,  enduring  covenant,  no  words  suffice  to  set  forth  its
preeiousness !  In  this  we  have  a  common  experience  with  David.  Our  hearts  are  sad
and  pained  by  our  own  shortcomings ;  we  see  perils  to  our  salvation  on  every  side ;
the  resolutions  we  frame  for  the  future  partake  of  our  infirmity ;  the  struggle  to  attain
to  the  likeness  of  Christ  seems  to  be  interminable ;  and  the  possibility  of  so  changing
our  discordant  and  shattered  nature  as  to  present  it  blameless  before  his  face,  seems  to
us  very  slight.  But  the  bruised  and  crushed  spirit  finds  healing  and  rest  in  this — that
God  is  true,  and  has  resolved  to  save  us.  Blessed  knowledge  1  Instead  of  inducing
indiR'erence  or  carelessness,  it  supplements  the  comfort  it  brings  by  a  calm  and  steady
flow  of  energy  toward  the  holy  goal,  and  develops  gratitude  in  form  of  more  entire
consecration.  In  health,  in  sickness,  amidst  earthly  »^trifes  and  foars,  and  when  the
chilly  hand  of  death  lays  hold  of  us,  we  rest  in  him  who  cannot  die,  and  who  has  said,
"  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."    Truly  we  have  "  abundant  consolation."

VIII.  Joy  in  the  bevbaled  pubpobb  of  God.  To  see  God's  blessed  covenant  unfold
towards  realization  of  the  Divine  purpose  was  all  David's  salvation  and  desire.  Hii
heart  was  bound  up  with  it.  His  joys  and  his  sorrows  were  more  deeply  interwoven
with  the  spiritual  kingdom  than  with  personal  ease  or  regal  splendour.  Our  Saviour
sets  forth  the  same  more  illustriously  in  his  life.  It  was  bis  meat  and  drink  to  do  his
Father's  will.  To  see  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  spread  to  all  mankind  was  the
absorbing  passion  of  his  heart.  For  this  he  endured  the  cross  and  despised  the  shame.
The  prospect  of  the  issue  uf  his  death  gave  him  satisfaction  in  the  hour  of  death
(Ps.  liii.  10).  The  secret  of  his  life  was  oneness  with  the  Father's  wilL  The  Apostle
Paul  exhibits,  in  his  measure,  the  same  delight  in  God's  purpose.  It  is  a  mark  of  high
Christian  feeling  that  we  pass  from  our  own  personal  interest  in  redemption  to  delight
in  the  merciful  purpose  being  realized  in  others.  This  is  the  spring  of  enterprise,  the
purifier  of  the  neart  from  spiritual  selfishness,  the  sure  mark  of  having  the  mind  that
was  in  Christ.

IX.  The  CHABA0TEBI8TI08  OF  A  WICKED  LIFE.  Davld,  iu  vers.  5, 6,  contrasts  the  men
of  Belial  with  those  who  rejoice  in  and  work  along  the  lines  of  God's  covenant.  Their
power  often  terrifies  the  good,  causes  much  mischief,  and  seems  for  a  while  to  tend  to
their  permanent  prosperity.  But  theu:  power  is  barren  of  good  result,  noxious  in  its
influence,  and  destined  to  be  cut  short.  Here  we  have  the  truth  exemplified  in  the  case
of  all  who  are  alien  to  the  gracious  purpose  of  God  as  revealed  in  his  covenant  of  mercy.
The  life  of  the  wicked  is :  1.  Barren  as  thorns.  Whatever  promise  of  good  there  may  be
at  one  time,  it  never  passes  from  the  bare  thorn  condition  to  that  of  I'ruitfulness.  In
highest  moral  and  simplest  religious  fruitfulness  their  lives  are  worth  nothing.  2.  It
is  noxious  as  thorns.  A  wicked  life  pierces  and  wounds  those  who  come  under  its
influence;  it  tends  not  to  healing  and  comfort,  but  to  pain  and  distress.  3.  It  is  fleeting
in  power,  as  thorns  destined  to  be  crushed  by  a  mightier  force  and  consuiued.  The
wicked  may  be  in  great  power,  but  the  day  will  come  when  it  will  be  said  of  him,  "  He
is  not "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35,  36).  These  contrasts  of  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  should
strengthen  the  hearts  of  those  who  endure  persecution  and  trial.

Vers.  8 — 89. — ^The  facts  are :  LA  general  statement  of  the  names  of  David's  mighty
men,  with  a  comparative  reference  to  some  of  their  deeds.  2.  A  more  special  account
of  the  daring  of  three  who  procured  water  tor  David  at  the  risk  of  their  lives.  3.  The
refusal  of  the  king  to  drink  that  which  had  been  obtained  at  so  great  a  risk.


OH.  xxin,  1— 39,]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  677

Mighty  men.  The  account  here  of  the  heroes  who  figured  in  the  course  of  David's  life
is  supplementary  to  the  general  history,  and,  while  intended  to  set  forth  incidents  in
his  career,  is  also  most  probably  designed  to  give  a  place  of  honoiu:  in  the  national
records  to  those  whose  strength  and  valour  contributed  to  establish  the  kingdom.
There  are  deeds  of  mighty  men  recorded  in  the  annals  of  the  Church,  and  we  may  note—

L  That  a  place  op  honour  is  in  eesbrve  foe  those  mtho  bendeb  Hian  service.
Because  of  great  service  these  men  were  honoured  with  a  place  in  the  record  which  is
to  be  read  by  all  mankind.  In  subduing  the  world  to  Christ  there  is  scope  for  great
energies  and  efforts.  Those  who  by  prayer,  self-denial,  holy  living,  written  or  spoken
words,  or  other  means  and  weapons,  go  forth  daily  in  the  name  of  Christ  and  achieve
great  things,  will  be  honoured  in  the  esteem  of  the  coming  ages  and  ia  the  esteem  of
Christ.  While  all  good  men  shall  shine  as  with  the  brightness  of  the  Armament,  these
shall  shine  forth  more  distinctly  as  the  "stars"  for  ever  and  ever  (Dan.  xii.  3;
1  Cor.  XV.  41).

II.  That  the  gboond  of  the  honoitb  libs  in  theie  ovbkcoming  much  evil.
These  men  smote  gigantic  foes.  They  contributed  to  the  stability  and  splendour  of
David's  reign  by  sweeping  away  the  evils  which  would  have  checked  the  progress  of  his
wise  and  just  methods  of  government.  The  honour  of  Christian  soldiers  lies  in  ridding
the  world  of  gigantic  evils,  the  preliminary  step  to  the  perfection  of  good.  Those  who
smite  the  greatest  evils  or  a  multitude  of  the  most  pervasive  sins,  confer  unspeakable
benefits  on  mankind,  and  clear  the  way  for  the  positive  development  of  those  holy
principles  which  are  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  The  riddance  of  sin  and  the
introduction  of  holiness  are  concurrent  acts  in  Christian  warfare.  Some  men  are
marvellous  warriors  as  compared  with  others.

ni.  That  the  spirit  which  renders  such  triumphs  possible  is  that  of  devotion
to  the  kino.  These  men  followed  David,  were  under  his  guidance,  caught  his  spirit,
■ought  to  establish  his  supremacy,  and  hence  were  nerved  by  a  definite  inspiring
purpose.  Consecration  to  Christ  is  the  key  to  our  victories.  Wherever  there  is  true
devotion  to  him,  and  in  proportion  to  its  depth,  there  will  be  great  deeds  done  in  his
name.  Hence  the  apostolic  allusions  to  fighting  the  good  fight  under  the  leadership  of
the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation.

Christs  tribute  to  Christian  devotiwi.  The  exclamation  of  David,  "  Oh  that  one
would  give  me  drink  of  the  water  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem  1 "  was  probably  the  natural
unpremeditated  outcome  of  an  intense  feeling  of  thirst  when  hemmed  in  by  the
Philistines.  There  is  no  evidence  that  it  was  a  pretext  to  draw  forth  some  special
proof  of  devotion  to  himself.  The  incidental  knowledge  acquired  of  liis  actual  need,
nevertheless,  developed  in  the  hearts  of  these  brave  men  a  determination  to  obtain  drink
for  him,  even  at  the  risk  of  their  own  lives.  Where  true  loyalty  exists  there  is  no
waiting  for  formal  commands.  The  refusal  of  the  king  to  drink  what  they  so  nobly
obtained,  doubtless,  at  first,  filled  them  with  surprise,  and  possibly  caused  annoyance.
But  the  generous  sentiment  expiessed — ^that  he  valued  their  generous  devotion  so  highly
that  he  could  not  at  such  a  risk  indulge  in  any  persojial  satisfaction,  deeming  the
offering  too  costly  for  mortal  acceptance — this  must  have  removed  all  disappointment,
and  strengthened  the  bond  of  allegiance.  Here  we  may  see  a  parable  setting  forth
Christ's  tribute  to  the  devotion  of  his  followers.

L  The  highest  devotion  risks  all  foe  Cueist.  As  these  men  went  forth,  risking
life  for  their  king,  so  the  truest  devotion  leads  men  to  risk  all  for  Christ.  There  are
forms  of  devotion  in  which  little  is  given  up,  and  much  reserve  is  made.  The  stories
of  the  rich  young  man  in  the  gospel  and  of  the  going  first  to  prove  the  purchased  oxen
exhibit  a  profession  of  attachment  too  frequent  in  Cliristendom.  The  Apostle  Peter
came  nearer  the  truth  of  the  case  when  he  declared  that  he  and  others  had  "  left  all "
to  follow  Christ.  The  mind  to  forsake,  if  need  be,  father  and  mother,  houses  and  land,
and  to  give  up  life,  is  stated  to  be  the  condition  of  the  acceptable  service.  Wherever
there  is  a  real  appreciation  of  who  Christ  is,  what  we  are,  what  his  vast  mercy  to  us
is,  and  the  infinite  claims  of  his  love  upon  heart  and  life,  devotion  to  him  becomes  so
complete  and  absorbing  that  pain,  loss,  and  possibly  death  among  the  heathen  are
faced  with  composure  when  they  stand  between  the  soul  and  the  advancing  of  his
interests.

H.  SAMUEL.  2  F


578  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OF   SAMUEL.         [ch.  xxiii.  1—39.

II.  This  risk  of  life  is  an  offebino  wobtht  of  Christ.  The  position  of  David
as  tlie  anointed  of  the  Lord  and  distinct  ruler  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  rendered
it  right  and  reasonable  for  the  personal  risk  on  his  account.  For  the  covenant  with
David  and  all  the  great  issues  involved  were  at  stake.  And  so,  apart  from  the  subjective
feeling  which  prompts  to  full  devotion  to  Christ,  there  is  in  him  and  the  vast  enterprise
of  working  out  the  redemption  of  man  everything  to  justify  this  devotion.  The
surrender  of  life  and  all  is  an  offering  njost  worthy.  Our  mortal  interests  are  as  nothing
compared  to  the  requirements  of  his  kingdom.  He  is  worthy  of  all  might,  all  riches,
all  life,  all  that  men  or  angels  can  lay  at  his  feet.

III.  Christ  has  no  jot  in  the  loss  of  his  sebvants  when  seeking  to  sbevb  him.
David  felt  no  satisfaction  that  such  valued  lives  were  risked  for  him.  It  w.is  no
pleasure  to  think  that  widows  might  have  had  cause  to  weep  in  consequence  of  noble
devotion  in  his  service.  He  was  always  tenderly  regardfvd  of  the  lives  and  comfort  of
his  people.  And  although,  from  the  necessities  of  the  case  in  a  world  where  evil  has
to  be  fought  at  all  costs,  many  a  noble  life  has  to  be  sacrificed  and  many  a  pain  endured,
yet  Christ  finds  no  pleasure  in  the  sufferinj^s  of  his  people  any  more  than  he  had  in  his
own.  His  and  their  sufferings  were  to  him  a  painful  condition  of  conquest  over  sin.
He  feels  for  them  in  their  woes.

IV.  But  Cubist  pays  honotte  to  the  spirit  which  fbeelt  faces  great  bisks.
David's  refusal  to  drink  the  water,  and  his  pouring  it  out  before  the  Lord  as  though
it  were  too  sacred  for  mortal  lips  to  touch,  was  his  way  of  paying  honour  to  these
devoted  men.  His  feeling  in  regard  to  their  personal  devotion  is,  so  far  as  the  human
may  be  a  symbol  and  measure  of  the  Divine,  a  representation  of  the  feeling  cherished

'  by  Christ  with  respect  to  noble  deeds  in  his  service  and  the  spirit  from  which  they
spring.  He  looks  with  admiration  on  the  self-consuming  zeal  of  his  followers ;  he  sees
in  it  the  reflection  of  that  spirit  of  self-sacrifice  which  enters  into  his  own  sufferings
and  death  for  men.  They  are  partakers  with  him  of  the  cup  of  which  some  have  not
the  courage  to  drink  (Matt.  xx.  20 — 23).  Those  who  have  won  great  honours  in  his
service  are  to  be  welcomed  as  "  good  and  faithful  servants,"  and  to  be  made  "  rulers
over  many  things."  The  loss  of  parents  and  houses  and  lands  is  to  be  compensated  by
others  more  enduring,  with  life  eternal  (Mark  x.  30).  His  care  and  love  assured  to
them  in  trial,  his  grace  given  according  to  their  need,  his  distinct  promise  of  distinction
among  the  redeemed,  all  point  to  the  tribute  which  he  bears  to  the  noble  self-
sacrificing  spirit  which  animates  them  (John  xiv.  18, 19,  27 ;  iv.  18 — ^21 ;  2  Cor.  xii.
7—10;  Eev.  ii.  10;  iii.  10—12).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 7  (Matt.  i.  1). — The  son  of  Jesse,  and  the  Son  of  David.  The  relation  of
David  to  Jesus,  regarded  in  the  light  of  prophecy  and  history,  was  one  of:  1.  Bis-  editary
connection ;  inasmuch  as  he  not  only  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  (Gen.  xlix.  10;
Heb.  vii.  14 ;  Eev.  v.  5)  and  the  house  of  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite  (Isa.  xL  1),  but  was
ancestor  of  Jesus  (Matt.  i.  16 ;  Luke  iii.  23) ;  who  was  thus  leaal  heir  to  "  the  throne
of  his  father  David,"  and  was  born  in  "  the  city  of  David  "  (Micah  v.  2 ;  Matt.  ii.  6).

2.  Typical  representation,  in  his  office  as  theocraiio  king,  divinely  chosen,  "  the  Lord's
anointi  d  "  (messiah,  christ),  the  representative  of  God  and  of  the  people ;  his  devotion
to  the  purpose  of  his  calling,  fulfilling  the  will  of  God,  contending  ag  \inst  his  enemies,
and  ruling  his  people  righteously  ;  his  ex'iltation,  through  suffering  (1  Pet.  i.  11),  by  the
mighty  hand  of  God,  to  power,  honour,  and  dominion ;  his  influence  in  securins:  national
deliverance,  religious  benefits,  temporal  order,  prosperity,  and  happiness  ;  whereby  he
forshadowed  an  incomparably  greater  Ruler  of  a  kingdom  "not  of  this  world,"  who
saves  his  people  from  their  sins,  reconciles  them  to  God,  and  gives  them  eternal  life.

3.  Historical  resemblance  (closely  associated  with  the  former,  but  without,  so  far  as  is
revealed,  being  expressly  designed  by  God),  in  his  lowly  birth,  youthful  consecration
(1  Sam.  xvi.  12 ;  Luke  ii.  49),  and  humble  occupation ;  his  decisive  conflict  (1  Sam,
xvii.  50;  Matt.  iv.  11),  public  services,  and  bitter  persecutions;  his  attracting  around
him  a  band  of  faithful  followers  (1  Sam.  xxii.  1 ;  Matt.  x.  1),  increasing  fame,  and
|)opular  rccngnition  (ch.  U.  4 ;  John  vi.  15 ;  Matt.  xxi.  9) ;  his  great  achievements,


CH,  xxm.  1—39.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  579

spiritual  utterances,  and  beneficent  influence  (ch.  vi.,  viii.) ;  his  rejection  (oh.  xv.  13),
betrayal,  and  overwhelming  sorrows  (ch.  xv.  30) ;  his  final  victory  (ch.  xviii. ;  John  xii.
31,  32),  glorious  restoration,  and  diligent  preparation  for  an  enduring  reign  of  peace.
4.  Extraordinary  contrast.  Even  wherein  the  first  prefigured  the  second  David
(Ezek.  sxxiT.  23),  the  imperfection  of  the  former  stands  opposed  to  the  perfection  of
ti  e  latter.  And  Jesus  is  "  the  Son  of  God"  (Luke  i.  35)  iu  the  highest  sense,  David's
Lord  (Mark  xii.  37) ;  was  without  sin  and  always  well- pleasing  to  the  Father;  came  to
establish,  not  an  earthly  kiijsdom  (as  the  Jews  expected),  but  a  spiritual  one,  and  only
by  moral  means  (truth,  righteousness,  and  love) ;  died  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  rose  again,
and  ascended  into  the  heavens"  (Actsii.  34);  "who  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever.
Amen"  (Bom.  ix.  5). — D.

Vers.  1 — 3. — (Jerusalem.)  DaviiTs  last  words,  [The  closing  years  of  David's  life
(after  the  insurrection  of  Sheba  was  subdued,  ch.  xx.)  were  spent  in  peace.  Having
secured  a  site  for  the  altar  (ch.  xxiv.  25  ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  28),  he  made  preparations  for
the  building  of  the  temple  (1  Chron.  xxii.).  At  length  his  strength  began  to  fail ;  but,
when  made  acquainted  with  the  conspiracy  of  Adonijah,  he  displayed  something  of  his
former  energy  in  hastening  the  accession  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  i.).  He  also  "  gathered
together  the  princes  of  Israel,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  1, 2),  made  numerous  arrangements,
sacred  and  civil  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  3 — 32 ;  xxiv. — xxvii.),  addressed  a  convocation  of
princes,  gave  a  charge  to  his  successor,  and  offered  thanksgiving  to  God  (1  Chron.
xxviii.;  xxix.  1 — 25).  He  subsequently  gave  further  counsel  to  Solomon  (I.Kings
ii.  1 — 9).  About  the  same  time,  probably,  he  uttered  these  last  prophetic  words  ;  and
then,  at  the  age  of  seventy,  he  "  fell  on  sleep  "  (1  Kings  ii.  10  ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  26 — 28).
"  The  omission  of  David's  death  in  the  conclusion  of  this  work  is  satisfactorily  explained
from  the  theocratic  character  and  aim  of  the  composition,  since  in  this  conclusion  the
fulfilment  of  the  theocratic  mission  of  David  is  completed  "  (Brdmann).]

**  And  these  are  the  last  words  of  David :
An  oracle  of  David,  son  of  Jesse,
And  an  oracle  of  the  hero  highly  exalted,
Anointed  of  the  God  of  Jacob,
And  pleasant  (in)  Israel's  songs  of  praise.
The  Spirit  of  Jehovah  speaks  within  me.
And  hia  word  is  on  my  tongue ;
Says  the  God  of  Israel,
To  me  speaks  the  Book  of  Israel,"  etc.

How  varied  are  the  last  words  of  men !  How  significant  of  their  ruling  passion  I  And
how  instructive  to  others  (Gen.  xlviii.  21,  22 ;  xlix.  1 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  1 ;  Josh,  xxiii.
14;  xxiv,  27;  2  Kings  xiii.  19  ;  Luke  ii.  29  ;  Acts  vii.  59  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6—8) !  Here
is  David,  "  the  man  of  God's  own  choice,"  about  to  go  "  the  way  of  all  the  earth  "  (ch.
vii.  12 ;  1  Kings  ii.  2).  Highly  exalted  as  he  was,  he  must  die  like  other  men.  "  We
walk  different  ways  in  life,  but  in  death  we  are  all  united."  Ere  he  departs  his  spirit
kindles  with  unwonted  lustre,  as  not  unfrequently  happens  in  the  case  of  others ;  he
is  under  the  immediate  inspiration  of  God  (Numb.  xxiv.  3,  4),  and  sings  his  last  song
of  praise,  sweet  as  the  fabled  notes  of  the  dying  swan.  "  No  prince,  aud  certainly  no  one
who  had  not  acquired  his  kingdom  by  inheritance,  could  possibly  close  his  life  with  a
more  blessed  repose  in  God  and  a  brighter  glance  of  confidence  into  the  future.  This
is  the  real  stamp  of  true  greatness  "  (Ewald).  "  These  are  the  words  of  the  prophecy
of  David,  which  he  prophesied  concerning  tlie  end  of  the  age,  concerning  the  days  of
consolation  which  are  to  come  "  (Targum).  They  show  that  he  has  in  death  (what
it  is  also  the  privilege  of  other  servants  of  God  in  some  measure  to  possess)  —

L  Gbatbpul  memories  of  the  favour  of  God ;  which  has  been  manifested :  1.  Toward
one  of  lowly  origin  and  condition.  "  A  son  of  Jesse."  "  Who  am  I  ?  "  etc.  (1  Sam.
xviii.  18).  "I  am  the  least  in  my  father's  house"  (Judg.  vi.  15).  He  recognizes  his
natural  relationships,  recalls  his  early  life,  renounces  all  special  claim  to  Divine  favour,
and  is  filled  with  humility.  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?  "  (1  Cor.
iv.  7).  2.  In  raising  him  up  to  exalted  honour.  "The  man  [hero]  who  was  highly
exalted."    Earthly  diatinction  is  the  portion  of  a  few,  but  spiritual  distinction  is  the


580  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxin.  1—39.


possession  of  every  good  man  ;  lie  is  a  partaker  of  the  Divioe  nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4'),  raised
up  with  Christ,  and  made  to  sit  with  him  in  heavenly  places  (Eph.  ii.  6),  and  an  heir
«f  all  things  (1  Cor.  iii.  23).  "  The  Christian  helieves  himself  to  be  a  king,  how  mean
■oever  he  be,  and  how  great  soever  he  be ;  yet  he  thiuks  himself  not  too  good  to  be
■ervant  to  the  poorest  saint "  (Bacon,  '  Christian  Paradoxes').  3.  In  appointing  him
to  royal  dominion  over  men.  "  Anointed,"  etc.  He  has  "  an  anointing  from  the  Holy
One,"  and  shares  in  the  dominion  of  Christ.  'To  him  will  I  give  power  over  the
nations,"  etc.  (Rev.  ii.  26).  4.  In  conferring  upon  him  excellent  endowments,  in  the
exercise  of  which  he  quickens  the  spiiitual  susceptibilities  of  men,  furnishes  them  with
" acceptable  words"  in  their  approach  to  God,  and  becomes  a  helper  of  their  noblest  life
and  joy.  "  Pleasant  [lovely]  in  [by  means  of]'  the  praise-songs  of  [sung  by]  Israel"
"  He  was  not  only  the  founder  of  the  monarchy,  but  the  founder  of  the  Psalter.  He  is
the  first  great  poet  of  IsraeL  Although  before  his  tiine  there  had  been  occasional  bursts
of  Hebrew  poetry,  David  is  he  who  first  gave  it  its  fixed  place  in  Israelite  worship  "
(Stanley).

"  The  harp  the  monarch-minstiel  swept,

The  king  of  men,  the  loved  of  Heaven,
Which  Music  hallow'd,  while  she  wept

O'er  tones  her  heart  of  hearts  had  given ;

Bedoubled  be  her  tears,  its  chords  are  riven  I
It  Boften'd  men  of  iron  mould,

It  gave  them  virtues  not  tlieir  own  ;
No  ear  so  dull,  no  soul  so  cold,

That  felt  not,  fired  not  to  the  tone,

Till  David's  lyre  grew  mightier  than  his  throne  I "

(Byron,  'Hebrew  Melodies.*)

Altaough  his  greatness  was  peculiar,  yet  a  measure  of  true  greatness  belongs  to  every
one  of  the  "  royal  priesthood  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  6,  9  ;  Rev.  i.  6)  of  the  spiritual  Israel.  Ha
has  power  with  God  and  with  men,  represents  God  to  men  and  men  to  God,  employs  his
power  with  God  on  behalf  of  men,  and  his  power  with  men  on  behalf  of  God ;  and  if,
by  the  culture  and  use  of  the  gifts  bestowed  upon  him,  he  has  contributed  to  the  highest
good  of  men — this  (together  with  all  the  Divine  benefits  he  has  received)  is  a  matter
of  grateful  remembrance  and  fervent  thanksgiving  (Ps.  Xxxvii.  25,  37,  39;  ciii.).
"  It  is  not  what  we  have  done,  but  what  God  has  done  for  us  and  through  us,  that  gives
true  peace  when  we  come  to  the  end."

II.  Gbacious  communications  by  the  Spirit  of  God ;  inasmuch  as  he  is :  1.  Filled
with  Divine  inspiration.  "The  Spirit  of  Jehovah  speaks  within  me."  Such  inspiration
is  of  various  kinds  and  degrees,  and  given  for  different  special  purposes.  "Men  spake
from  God,  being  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost"  (2  Pet.  1.  21;  2  Tim.'iii.  16).  But  every
one  who  has  fellowship  with  God  is  inhabited,  pervaded,  inspired  Ijy  his  Spirit,
enlightening,  purifying,  elevating,  gladdening,  and  strengthening  him.  Some  are  "  full
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  a  dying  hour,  wliat  a  marvellous  elevation  of  thought  and
feeling  have  tliey  sometimes  attained !  "  Holy  men  at  their  death  have  good  inspira-
tions" (see  'Last  Words  of  Remarkable  Persons;'  'Life's  Last  Hours;'  Jacc-J, 'At
Nightfall,'  etc. ;  S.  Ward,  '  The  Life  of  Faith  in  Death ; '  J.  Hawes,  '  Confessions  of
Dying  Men,'  etc.).  2.  Enabled  to  utter  the  Divine  Word.  "  And  his  Word  is  on  my
tongue."  Even  though  there  be  no  new,  definite,  and  infallible  revelation  of  the  Word
of  God,  there  is  often  a  new  indication  of  its  meaning  and  application,  and  a  fresli,
fervid,  and  forcible  expression  thereof.  "  As  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance."  3.  Made  a
recipient  of  Divine  promises.  "  The  God  of  Israel  says."  He  who  entered  into  a  covenant-
relation  with  Israel,  and  promised  to  he  their  God,  gave  to  David  the  promise  of  an  ever-
lasting kingdom  (ch.  vii.  12 — 16),  and  still  gives  it,  with  an  inner  voice  that  cannot
bo  mistaken.  He  also  "  speaks  all  the  promises,"  not  only  in  the  written  Word,  but
also  in  the  soul  of  every  one  to  whom  that  Word  comes  in  "  much  assurance.'

"  Oh,  might  I  hear  thy  heavenly  voice
But  whisp*, '  Thou  art  mine  1 '
Those  gentle  words  should  raise  my  song
To  notes  almost  Divine."

4.  Constituted  k  witness  of  the  Divine  faitl^ulneas  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  promi'ie*.


CH.  xxiiL  1—39.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  581

"  To  me  speaks  the  Book  of  Israel "  (1  Sam.  ii.  2 ;  oh.  xxii.  2,  3,  32,  47).  ''  He  is
faithful  that  promised  "  (Hob.  x.  23),  His  fnithfulness  is  the  foundation  of  his  promises.
"And  the  heavens  shall  praise  thy  wonders,  0  Jehovah:  and  thy  faithfulness  in  the
assemWy  of  the  holy  ones  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  1,  2,  5,  8,  24,  33).  On  this  the  believer  rests
v?hen  all  things  fail,  and  of  this  he  testifies  in  death,  committing  his  soul  into  the  hands
of  God,  as  "  unto  a  faithful  Creator  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  19 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  5).

III.  Q-L0BI0C8  ANTICIPATIONS  of  the  kingdom  of  God;  wherein  the  glory  of  the
present  merges  into  the  gi-eater  glory  of  the  future,  and  earth  and  heaven  are  one  (vers.
3 — 5;  Ps.  Ixxxv.  11).  He  sees:  1.  The  majesty  of  the  King  of  righteousness ;  like  the
splendour  of  the  rising  sun.  His  view  .of  the  ideal  theocratic  ruler  of  the  future  has
its  perfect  realization  in  him  who  is  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  The  chief
object  of  the  Christian's  contemplation  in  death  is  the  glory  of  Christ.  "  Herein  would
I  live ;  herein  would  I  die ;  herein  would  I  dwell  in  my  thoughts  and  affections,  to  the
withdrawing  and  consumption  of  all  the  painted  beauties  of  this  world,  unto  the
crucifixion  of  all  things  here  below,  until  they  become  unto  me  a  dead  and  deformed
thing,  no  way  meet  for  affectionate  embraces  "  (Owen).  2.  The  brightness  of  a  heavenly
day;  "the  drawing  near  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,"  and  abounding  life  and
happiness  for  ever  (ch.  xxii.  51 ;  ver.  5).  "  Nevertheless  we  according  to  his  promise,"
etc.  (i!  Pet.  iii.  13).  3.  The  realization  of  a  blessed  hope ;  the  hope  of  personal  salvation
(ver.  5),  associated  with  and  assuied  in  the  immortal  life  of  the  King  and  his  people
(Ps.  xvi.  9 — H;  xvii.  15;  xlix.  15;  Ixxiii.  24;  John  xiv.  19).  4.  The  destruction  of
all  iniquity.  (Ver.  6.)  The  people  shall  be  all  righteous.  "  The  dying  eyes  see  on  the
horizon  of  the  far-off  future  the  form  of  him  who  is  to  be  a  just  and  perfect  Euler ;
before  the  brightness  of  whose  presence,  and  the  refreshing  of  whose  influence,  verdure
and  beauty  shall  clothe  the  world.  As  the  shades  gather,  that  radiant  glory  to  come
brightens.  He  departs  in  peace,  having  seen  the  salvation  from  afar.  It  was  fittiug
that  this  fullest  of  his  prophecies  should  be  the  last  of  his  strains,  as  if  the  rapture
which  thrilled  the  trembling  strmgs  had  snapped  them  in  twain"  (Maolaren).

"  They  who  watch  by  him  see  not ;  but  he  sees —
Sees  and  exults.     Were  ever  dreams  like  these?
Those  who  watch  by  him  hear  not ;  but  he  hears,
And  earth  recedes,  and  heaven  itself  appears."

(Eogers.)

"His  funeral  obsequies  were  celebrated  with  the  greatest  pomp  ever  yet  known  In
Israel,  and  his  arms  were  preserved  as  sacred  relics  in  the  temple ;  but  the  lapse  of  timn
only  increased  the  reverence  in  which  his  memory  was  held  in  the  national  heart,  until
it  finally  culminated  in  a  glowing  desire  to  behold  him  once  again  upon  the  earth,  and
to  see  the  advent  of  a  second  David  "  (Ewald). — D.

Vers.  3 — 7. — An  oracle  concerning  the  King  Messiah.  1.  The  hope  of  salvation,  and
more  especially  of  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  upon  earth,  was,  in  some
measure,  fulfilled  in  the  reign  of  David,  the  Lord's  messiah.  In  his  character  as
theocratic  ruler  he  was  a  type  (prefiguiement  or  anticipatory  outline)  of  Christ  (1  Sam.
ii.  10).  "  The  type  is  prophecy  in  deed."  2.  Under  Divine  inspiration,  he  formed  an
ideal  of  a  theocratic  ru7er,.xn  connection  with  his  own  personality  and  history.  Hence
the  representations  contained  in  the  Messianic  psalms  (xvi.,  xxii.),  in  some  things
transcend  his  experience,  and  in  others  are  mingled  with  his  infirmities.  3.  In  this
oracle  or  Divine  saying  (as  in  Ps.  ex.,  and  perhaps  others)  he  looked  forward  to  the
realization  of  his  ideal  at  a  future  time.  "No  part  whatever  of  the  Old  Testament  is
introduced  with  a  greater  majesty  of  language,  or  more  excites  the  expectation  of  some
splendid  and  glorious  sense,  than  the  last  words  of  David  "  (Kennicott).  The  promise
of  eternal  dominion  to  his  house  was  joined  with  an  intimation  of  his  death  (ch.  vii
12);  and  "these  last  words  show  how,  in  consequence  of  the  consciousness  of  his  own
guilt,  the  image  of  the  Messiah  was  separated  from  his  subjectivity,  and  came  before
him  as  a  majestic  form  of  the  future.  He,  the  highly  favoured  one,  who  had  considered
himself  immortal  (Ps.  xvi.),  must  now  die!  He  therefore  grasps  the  pillars  of  the
promise,  ceases  to  connect  the  Messianic  hopes  with  himself,  and  as  a  prophet  beholds
th«  future  of  his  seed  "  (Delitzsch).    "  These  words  are  not  merely  a  lyric  effusion  ol


582  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxm.  1—39.


the  promise,  but  a  propLetio  declaration  concerning  the  true  king  of  the  kingdom  of
God  "  (Keil).  "  They  form  the  key-stone  of  hi  s  life ;  his  prophetic  legacy  ;  to  which  the
cycle  of  psalms  cxxxviii. — oxlv.  must  be  regarded  as  supplementary  "  (Hengstenberg).
"  If  there  is  any  part  of  Scripture  which  betrays  the  movements  of  the  human  individual
soul,  it  is  this  precious  fragment  of  David'a  life.  If  there  be  any  part  which  claims  for
itself,  and  irhich  gives  evidence  of  the  breathings  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  is  this  also.
Such  a  rugged  two-edged  monument  is  a  fitting  memorial  of  the  man  who  was  at  once
the  king  and  the  prophet,  the  penitent  and  the  saint  of  the  ancient  Church  "  (Stanley).
4.  The  ideal  of  a  theocratic  ruler  was  only  partially  realized  in  Solomon  and  other
kings  of  tlie  house  of  David  (Ps.  xlv. ;  Ixxii. ;  Isa.  xxxii.).  5.  Although  the  hope  of
a  more  adequate  realization  thereof  was  again  and  again  disappointed,  it  was  not
extinguished,  but  lecame  more  and  more  spiritual  and  exalted  (Biehm,  'Messianic
Prophecy ; '  C.  A.  Bow,  '  The  Jesus  of  the  Evangelists ; '  W.  F.  Adeney,  '  The  Hebrew
Utopia').  6.  At  length  the  hope  of  Israel  was  perfectly  fulfilled  in  the  Person,  work,
and  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Luke  i.  32 ;  Matt.  xxii.  43 ;  Acts  ii.  36 ;  Bph.  L
20 — 22 ;  Eev.  i.  18.)  "  In  using  the  Old  Testament  now,  especially  for  purposes  of
edification,  we  should  feel  that  we  fail  to  do  justice  to  the  Old  Testament,  if,  when
expounding  any  truth  taught  in  it,  we  do  not  bring  into  connection  with  the  passage
explained  the  highest  form  of  the  truth  as  revealed  in  the  New  Testament "  (A.  B.
Davidson,  'Messianic  Prophecy,'  Expositor,  viii.).  What  is  here  said  must,  on  this
principle,  be  referred  to  Christ;  and  it  may  be  referred  to  him,  with  more  or  lesi
propriety,  in  his  earthly  life,  in  bis  heavenly  dominion,  or  at  his  second  appearing.  It
indicates —

I.  His  exalted  oeabacteb:  and  principles  of  government.     As  if  present  at  the
commencement  of  "  the  golden  age,"  David  beholds

"  A  ruler  over  men  [literally, '  in  man  *],  just  I
A  ruler  fearing  God  I "

Many  a  ruler,  like  "  the  unjust  judge,"  neither  fears  God  nor  regards  man.  He  acquires
his  position  by  craft  and  bloodshed,  and  exercises  his  power  in  oppression  and  ungodli-
ness. Not  so  the  ruler  here  depicted  ;  who  is  distinguished  by :  1.  Rectitude  of  heart,
of  speech,  and  of  conduct;  in  the  laws  according  to  which  he  rules,  and  his  adminis-
tration of  them,  rendering  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds;  herein  resembling,
reflecting,  and  representing  the  rectitude  of  God ;  and  prol  ecting  and  promoting  the
best  interests  of  men  (Ps.  Ixxii.  4;  Isa.  ix.  7;  xi.  1 — 10;  Jer.  xxiii.  5;  xxx.  9;  Ezek.
xx.\iv.  -'3, 24 ;  Hos.  iii.  5 ;  Micah  v.  1 — 5 ;  Zeoh.  ix.  9,  10).  "  The  history  of  the  actual
David  supplies  the  subject-matter  for  these  idealization?.  David  is  the  original  proto-
type on  wliich  they  are  formed,  and  round  whose  person  they  cluster.  They  may  be
described  as  David  idealized"  (C.  A.  Bow).  2.  Piety;  the  fear  of  offending  God,
reverence  for  his  Name,  delight  in  his  fellowship,  obedience  to  his  will,  opposition  to
his  adversaries,  dependence  on  his  strength,  and  devotion  to  his  honour  and  glory.
"  When  he  that  rules  is  just,  it  is  as  if  he  did  not  rule,  but  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ruled
in  the  earth  "  (Barrett, '  A  Synopsis  of  Criticisms ').  3.  Rectitude  united  with  piety ;
founded  upon  it,  pervaded  by  it,  and  expressive  of  it;  his  supreme  aim  and  constant
endeavour  being  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  All  this  is  realized,  even
beyond  expectation,  in  the  wonderful  Person  of  Christ,  and  his  just  and  merciful  reign
over  mankind.  "  Put  together  your  ideal  of  true  greatness  of  soul — power  combined
with  gentleness ;  dignity  with  no  pride ;  benevolence  with  no  weakness ;  sympathy  and
love  for  humanity  as  it  is,  and  especially  for  the  poor,  the  sad,  the  suffering.  Let  your
ideal  be  stainless,  and  even  unsuspected  of  stain ;  and  let  him  cheerfully  and  patiently
live  and  die  for  men  who  misunderstood  and  even  hated  him.  This  is  what  you  will
see  in  the  histoiy  of  Christ  .  .  .  the  Messiah  of  humanity  as  well  as  the  Jews"  (J.  M.
Wilson).  "The  type  set  up  in  the  Gospels  as  the  Christian  type  is  the  essence  of
man's  moral  nature  clothed  with  a  personality  so  vivid  and  intense  as  to  excite  through
all  ages  the  most  intense  affection ;  yet  divested  of  all  those  peculiar  characteristics  and
accidents  of  place  and  time  by  which  human  personalities  are  marked.  What  other
notion  than  this  can  philosophy  form  of  Divinity  manifest  on  earth?"  (Gold win  Smith,
quoted  by  LiJdon,  '  Some  Elements,'  etc.,  p.  218),

II.  His  benefioent  influence.


OH.  ixin.  1— 39.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMu^U  581

"  And  (his  appenrance  is)  as  the  light  of  morning,  (at)  the  rising  of  the  snn,
A  morning  without  clouds ;  (and  the  effect  thereof  as  when)
From  brightness  (and)  from  rain  Terdure  (springs)  from  (out  of)  the  earth."

As  the  influence  of  an  unjust  and  ungodly  ruler  is  powerful  for  evil,  so  the  influence  of
the  King  Messiah  is  powerful  for  good  and  much  more  abundantly  (Ps.  Ixxii.  6, 7, 16).
It  is  like  that  of

"...  the  great  minister
Of  nature,  that  upon  the  world  imprints
The  virtue  of  the  heaven,  and  doles  ont
Time  for  us  with  his  beam."

(Dante.)

The  sun  is  the  source  of  light,  heat,  and  force;  of  life,  health,  fertility,  beauty,  and
gladness.  What  a  change  takes  pluce  in  the  whole  aspect  of  nature  at  the  approach  of
"  the  powerful  king  of  day  " !  A  similar  change  takes  place  in  the  moral  and  spiritual
world  at  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  (Mai.  iv.  2;  Isa.  Ix.  2).  In  him,  who
is  "  the  Light  of  the  world,"  Jehovah  himself  becomes  manifest  to  men,  "  visits  and
redeems  his  people,"  and  "gives  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow
of  dsath,"  etc.  (Luke  i.  68 — 79).  "Even  as  the  light  of  the  morning  shall  he  arise,
Jehovah  the  Sun "  (Pye  Smith,  '  Scripture  Testimony  to  the  Messiah ').  At  his
appearance,  and  under  his  influence:  1.  Darkness  is  dispersed;  the  long  dreary  night
of  ignorance,  error,  injustice,  impiety,  oppression,  discord,  and  misery,  "  and  the  veil
that  is  spread  ovejr  all  nations  "  (Isa.  xxv.  7).  2.  Light  is  diffused ;  the  light  of  truth,
pure  and  bright;  revelations  of  heavenly  love  and  mercy;  a  spirit  of  gentleness  and
tenderness,  "  of  wisdom  and  might ; "  guiding,  quickening,  healing,  and  saving.  3.
Life  abounds  with  the  peaceful  fruits  of  righteousness;  spontaneously,  readily,  uni-
versally ;  as,  when  (after  a  season  of  drought,  or  in  spring)  heavy  showers  have  fallen
and  bright  sunshine  breaks  forth,  the  earth  clothes  itself  in  (resh  and  "  tender  green  "
(Isa.  XXXV.  1,  2).  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy
Ghost."  The  one  true  King  of  men  has  come,  his  influence  is  powerfully  and  widely
felt,  and  it  is  constantly  increasing;  nevertheless  we  see  not  yet  all  things  subdued
unto  him.  Like  prophets  and  kings  of  old,  we  still  wait  for  his  appearing.  "For  he
must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet "  (1  Cor.  xv.  25).
III..  His  assubbd  manifestation.

"  For  (there  is  sure  ground  for  my  expectation,  for)  is  not  my  house  (not  myself  merely)
thus  with  (related  to)  God  (that  out  of  it  such  an  exalted  ruler  and  big  beneficial
influence  shall  proceed)  ?

For  (because)  he  has  establislied  to  me  an  everlasting  covenant  (to  this  effect),

Arranged  in  all  (respects)  and  kept ;

For  (therefore)  all  my  salvation  (involved  therein)  and  all  (his)  good  pleasure  (expressed
therein) —

For  (therefore,  I  say)  will  he  not  cause  (them)  to  sprout  (to  be  fully  accomplished)?  "

"The  pledge  of  this  just  ruler  was  the  eternal  covenant  which  God  had  concluded  with
him"  (Tholuck).  The  whole  oracle  is  founded  upon  this  covenant  (solemn  promise,
sacred  engagement,  arrangement,  constitution,  dispensation),  securing  eternal  dominion
to  his  house  and  the  blessings  of  salvation  to  the  subjects  of  his  kingdom  (ch.  vii.  13,
10,  24).  "The  Davidic  covenant  is  the  embodiment  of  the  hope  of  David,  and  the
theme  of  his  last  meditations.  In  this  swanlike  song  David  clings  to  the  Messianic
promise  as  his  greatest  delight"  (0.  A.  Briggs,  'Messianic  Prophecy').  1.  It  cannot
fail  of  fulfilment,  in  the  appearing  and  reign  of  the  Messiah;  because  of:  (1)  The  faith-
fulness of  God,  "  the  Rock  of  Israel "  (ver.  3),  its  Author ;  (2)  its  having  been  actually
made,  (3)  with  the  express  assurance  of  these  things,  (4)  "to  David,  and  his  seed /or
ever"  (ch.  xxii.  51);  (5)  carefully  arranged,  provided  with  everything  adapted  to  effect
the  proper  end  thereof,  and  to  avert  failure,  even  through  apostasy  (ch.  vii.  14,  15) ;
(6)  and  its  being  constantly  preserved,  guarded,  watched  over,  until  completely  fulfilled.
2.  In  its  fulfilment,  the  promised  salvation  of  the  people  of  Qod,  and  his  gracious  pur-
poses concerning  them,  will  be  accomplished.  "  All  my  salvation,"  etc.  "  The  dying
Israelite  looked  forward  to  the  grand  destiny  of  his  people,  and  lost  his  personality  in
the  larger  life  of  the  nation,  and  thus  triumphed  over  death  through  the  thougkt  of  the


584  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.       [ch.  xxiii.  1—39.

immortality  and  future  blessedness  of  the  collective  Israel  "  (W.  P.  Adeney)  ;  or  rather
he  expected  to  share  with  them,  in  some  way,  their  glorious  inheritance  (Ps.  Ixi.  5,  6;
Ixxiii.  23,  26  ;  Isa.  liv.  10—14;  Iv.  3,  4;  Dan.  xii.  3,  4, 13).  3.  On  this  the  servant  of
God  rest$  with  strong  confidence  and  blessed  hope,  in  life  and  death  (Gen.  xlix.  18).
"  We  are  Baved  by  hope."  And  "  when  Christ,  who  is  our  Life,  shall  be  manifested,  then
shall  ye  also  with  him  be  manifested  in  glory"  (Col.iii.  4;  1  John  iii.  2;  2  Pet.  iii,  18).

"  My  God,  the  covenant  of  thy  love
Abides  for  ever  sure ;
And  in  its  matchless  grace  I  feel
My  happiness  secure."

IV.  His  FINAL  JUDGMENT  ou  the  wickcd.

'  And  worthlessness  jjUterally,  '  Belial,  ungodly  men ']  as  thorns  thrnst  away  (are)  all  of

them;
For  (because)  not  with  the  (unarmed)  hand  are  they  seized ;
And  (but)  the  man  who  touches  them
Is  filled  (fills  his  hand,  provides  hiraseU)  with  iron.
And  shaft  of  spear  (i.e.  a  long  spear),
And  with  fiie  are  they  utterly  burned  on  the  spot."

It  is  the  part  of  a  just  and  godly  ruler  to  punish  evil-doera.  The  undue  leniency  of
David  was  followed  by  disastrous  consequences  (ch.  iii.  39  ;  xiii.  21 ;  xiv.  33  ;  xix.  23  ;
XX.  10) ;  and,  at  the  close  of  his  life,  he  charged  his  successor  to  vindicate  the  Law
wherein  he  had  himself  failed  to  do  so  (1  Kings  ii.  1 — 9).  The  coming  King  is  not
only  a  Saviour,  but  also  a  Judge;  and  to  him  all  judgment  is  committed  (John  v.
22,  27).  "  There  rises  up  before  liim  (David)  a  field  overrun  with  thorns,  which  the
Divine  ministers  pluck  up  with  gauntleted  hands,  and  beat  down  with  their  burnished
spears,  and  commit  to  the  consuming  flames"  (S.  Cox,  'Expositor's  Note-Book').  His
judgment  is :  1.  Just.  2.  Certain.  3.  Irresistible.  4.  Complete.  The  day  of  grace,
during  which  forbearance  has  been  shown  in  vain,  is  followed  by  the  day  of  wrath
(Mai.  iv.  1 ;  Matt.  iii.  12 ;  xiii.  40—43 ;  Heb.  vi.  7).— D.

Vers.  8 — 12  (1  Chron.  xL  10 — 14). —  The  first  three  heroes.  Jashdbeam  the  son  of  Hach-
moni  {Zahdiel,  1  Chron.  xxvii.  2),  who  came  to  David  at  Ziklag  (1  Chron.  xiL  6),  and
becauie  general  of  the  first  division  of  the  army ;  Bleazar  the  son  of  Dodo  the  Ahohitc,
general  of  the  second  division  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  4) ;  and  Shcrnimdh  the  son  of  Agee  the
Hararite.  "  They  served  in  the  most  direct  manner  by  their  work  one  who  was  the
representative  of  the  Divine  government  on  earth  "  (Kriimmacher).  "  Such  traits  of
warlike  courage  (as  they  displayed)  are  more  significant  than  anything  else;  they
recall  to  us  completely  those  few  periods  of  history,  otherwise  unknown  to  us,  in  which
a  marvellous  aspiration  for  the  possession  of  some  higher  blessing,  such  as  freedom  or
immortality,  has  taken  hold  of  an  entire  nation,  and  so  has  produced,  through  special
instrumeuts  of  exceptional  power,  even  military  exploits  which  appear  incredible  to
ordinary  men "  (Ewald).  "  Christ  the  Son  of  David  has  his  worthies  too,  who,  like
David's,  are  influenced  by  his  example,  fight  his  battles  against  the  spiritual  enemies
of  his  kingdom,  and  in  his  strength  are  more  than  conquerors"  (Matthew  Henry).  In
these  battles,  neither  physical  prowess  nor  intellectual  strength  is  of  so  much  importance
a.s  moral  and  spiritual  qualifications,  and  especially  eminent  faith;  such  as  that  by
which  many  "from  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed  mighty  in  war,  turned  to  flight
aimies  of  aliens"  (Heb.  xi.  34).     It  ensures  success  by  means  of —

I.  Fearlessness  and  daring  courage  (ver.  8).  "  He  lifted  his  spear  against  eight
hundred  [three  hundred],  slain  at  onetime; "  went  imdismayed " against  a  multitude"
(2  Chron.  xiv.  11),  and  alone  (or  possibly  aided  by  others)  overcame  them  (Judg.  iii.
31 ;  XV.  15).  Instances  of  a  similar  kind  are  recorded  in  history  (see  '  Pictorial  Bible '
in  1  Chron.  xi.) :  "  Ajax  beating  down  the  Trojan  leader  with  a  rock  which  two
ordinary  men  could  scarcely  lift;  Horatius  defending  the  bridge  agjunst  an  army;
Richard,  the  lion-hearted,  spurring  along  the  whole  Saracen  line  without  finding  an
enemy  to  stand  his  assault ;  Robert  Bruce  crushing  with  one  blow  the  helmet  and  the
head  of  Sir  Henry  Bohun,  in  sight  of  the  whole  army  of  England  and  Scotland ; — such
are  the  heroes  of  a  dark  age.    In  such  an  age,  bodily  vigour  is  the  most  indispensable


CH.  xxiir.  1— 39.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  585

qualification  for  a  warrior"  (Maoanlay,  'History  of  England'),  Even  in  modern
times  (when  tlie  superiority  of  strength  of  mind  has  been  so  manifest)  it  has  accom-
plished extraordinary  feats.  But  how  much  greater  and  nobler  have  been  the  achieve-
ments wrought  by  moral  courage  and  spiritual  weapons  (2  Oor.  x.  4)1

II,  Indbpendbncb  and  single-handed  effort  (vers.  9, 10).  When  "  he  alone  remained  "
(Josephus),  " he  arose  and  smote  the  Philistines,  until  his  hand  was  wiary,  and  his
hand  clave  unto  the  sword,"  etc.  In  like  manner,  when  "  the  people  fled  from  the
Philistines  "  (vera.  11,  12),  Shammah  stood  alone  against  their  attack.  The  valour  of
some  men  depends  upon  the  presence,  sympathy,  and  help  of  others,  and  fails  when  they
are  left  to  themselves.  1.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  courage  of  a  true  hero  is
fully  brought  out  (Isa.  Ixiii.  3).  2.  He  is  independent  of  men  because  he  depends  upon
God.  3.  By  his  single-handed  effort,  jone  such  man  is  sometimes  able  to  "  chase  a
thousand "  (Josh,  xxiii.  10).  4.  His  courage  and  success  infuse  fresh  vigour  into
fearful  hearts;  and  "  the  people  return  after  him,"  tbough  it  be  "only  to  spoil."  He
alone  is  iit  to  be  a  leader  of  men.

III,  Steadfastness  in  passive  endurance  and  active  endeavour.  "  He  stood  in  the
midst  of  the  ground  "  which  was  "  full  of  lentiles,"  or  barley,  "  defended  it,  and  slew  the
Philistines  "  (who  had  probably  come  up  to  carry  away  the  ripe  crops) ;  like  Eleazar,
he  "  endured  to  the  end,"  and  conquered.  It  is  not  enough  to  exhibit  fearlessness  and
independence  at  first ;  we  must  continue  to  do  so  (Luke  ix.  51),  otherwise  nothing  will
be  gained,  but  everything  be  lost,  "Whatever is  each  man's  post,  chosen  by  himself
as  the  better  part,  or  appointed  by  his  leader,  there,  as  it  appears  to  me,  he  ought  to
Btay  in  spite  of  danger ;  taking  no  account  of  death  or  anything  else  in  comparison  with
dishonour  "  ('  The  Apology  of  Socrates ').  This  is  the  crowning  quality :  "  Having
done  all,  to  stand  [hold  the  fielil].  Stand  therefore,"  etc.  (Eph.  vi.  14) ;  "Be  ye  stead-
feat,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xv.  58 ;  Gal.  vi.  9) ;  "  Stand  fast  in  the  Lord."

TV.  Divine  help.  "  And  Jehovah  wrought  a  great  deliverance  "  (ver.  10,  repeateil
in  ver.  12).  Here  is  the  chief  source  of  success.  Human  effort  is  needful,  but  in  itself
ineffectual,  It  avails  only  through  the  help  of  God  (Ps.  cxxvi.  1 ;  cxxi.  2).  Nor  is
this  withheld  from  such  as  seek  and  rely  upon  it.  He  will  fight  for  those  who  fight  for
him.  How  often  has  he  enabled  them  to  prevail  against  an  overwhelming  hostl
"  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  To  him  it  should  be  ascribed.  And  every  great  deliverance
calls  for  great  thanksgiving. — D.

Vers.  13—17  (1  Chron.  xi.  15— 19).— TTie  well  of  Bethlehem.  When  a  shepherd-
youth,  David  doubtless  often  sat  beside  "  the  well  by  the  gate,"  and  refreshrd  himself
with  its  cold,  clear,  sparkling  water.  But  those  days  have  long  since  departed;  and
he  is  now  a  king,  with  many  cares.  Bethlehem  is  occupied  by  a  pai't  of  the  Philistine
iiost,  and  he  is  once  more  in  "the  hold"  (ch.  v.  17;  1  Sara.  xxi.  1),  accompanied
by  his  heioic  band  of  men,  to  whom  his  every  wish  is  equivalent  to  a  command.
"  What  a  circle  of  names  are  associated  with  his  name,  some  of  them  names  and  scarce
anything  beside — men  who  would  have  been  unheard  of  but  for  the  occasions  which
brought  them  into  temporary  connection  with  so  famous  a  man,  and  of  whose  lives,  apart
from  that  connection,  we  know  nothing ;  yet  all  of  whom  had  a  life,  had  a  character,  were
as  precious  as  individuals  in-  the  <'ye  of  God  as  the  great  soul  to  whom  they  owe  what
little  interest  they  have  in  the  eyes  of  men  !  "  The  names  of  these  three  "  knights  "
are  not  recorded;  but  their  chivalrous  achievement  is  immortalized.  "God  knows
them,  as  he  knows  the  noble  acts  of  all  his  saints  and  martyrs,  and  will  reward  them
at  the  great  day  "  (Wordsworth).     In  the  threefold  scene  here  described  we  have —        •"

I,  The  natural  wish  expressed  by  the  king.  "Oh  that  one  would  give  me
drink ! "  etc.  (ver,  15).  It  is :  1,  Involuntarily  excited.  "  In  the  harvest-time,"
oppressed  with  heat,  and  'exhausted  by  conflict  and  toil,  David  is  parched  with  thirst,
and  Overcome  with  a  great  longing  for  a  refreshing  draught  from  the  well  of  Bethlehem,
whose  familiar  walls  he,  perchnnce,  sees  from  a  distance.  So  men  sometimes  desire,  not
merely  the  satisfaction  of  bodily  appetites,  but  also  the  gratification  of  deeper  yearn-
ings, for  youth  and  home,  and  happier  conditions  and  experiences.  "  Oh  that  I  had
wings  like^  the  dove !  "  etc,  (Ps.  Iv.  6),  -  2,  In  itself  innocent.  Many  a  wish,  even  for
objects  at  present  out  of  reach  and  beset  by  difBculty  and  peril,  is  as  blameless  as  the
thirst  of  a  traveller  "  in  a  dry  and  weary  land  where  no  water  is."  Although  it  may  be


588  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxin.  1—39

"  according  to  nature  "  (in  the  best  sense),  it  nevertheless  requires  to  be  ccntrolled,_  regu-
lated,  and  subordinated  to  a  higher  law  than  that  of  pleasing  ourselves ;  and  it  is,  tog
frequently :  3.  Inordinately  indulged ;  so  that  it  becomes  a  dominant  selfish  impulse,
"  The  habit  of  wishing  and  hanEering  for  those  things  which  Providence  denies,  though
natural  to  us  and  often  given  way  to,  even  by  godly  men,  in  an  unguarded  hour,  is  a
degree  of  rebellion  against  the  Lord ;  and  it  shows  the  remaining  sensuality  and  selfish-
ness of  the  heart,  and  leads  to  many  snares  and  evils"  (Scott).  4.  Inconsiderately
uttered.  David  may  not  intend  his  men  to  hear  what  he  says  (still  less  to  challenge
their  devotion);  he  may  hardly  be  awai-e  of  their  presence.  But,  knowing  their
character  and  his  relation  to  them,  he  is  none  the  less  responsible  for  the  effect  of  hi«
words  upon  them ;  and  should  have  put  a  bridle  on  his  tongue  (Ps.  xxxix.  1 ;  cvi.  33 ;
cxli.  3).  Unregulated  impulses  and  imprudent  B|eeoh — what  mischief  have  they
wrought  in  the  world !     "  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation."

IL  Thk  heroic  deed  performed  by  his  followers.  "  And  the  three  mighty  men
oroke  through  the  host,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  "  It  was  a  foolhardy  thing  to  do,"  some  one
sayg;  "they  might  easily  have  seen  that  a  draught  of  water  was  not  worth  the  conflict
and  hazard  necessary  to  obtain  it."  Happily  they  did  not  see  it;  else  we  had  never
heard  of  their  heroic  enterprise.  Without  calculating  consequences,  they  act  from  •
sense  of  duty,  an  impulse  of  unselfish  devotion,  a  spirit  of  chivalry,  "  which  shrinks
from  no  sacrifice  in  order  to  do  the  sicallest  service  for  the  object  of  its  devotion ; "
therein  exhibiting :  1.  An  intense  attachment  to  their  leader,  love  to  his  person,
sympathy  with  his  need,  loyalty  to  his  office,  desire  to  please  him  and  to  do  his  will
(as  they  interpreted  it).  It  could  have  been  inspired  in  them  only  by  a  man  of  great
ability,  generosity,  and  enthusiasm.  They  learnt  it  of  him  (1  Sam.  xvii.  50).  His  self-
indulgent  and  momentary  wish  was  no  true  index  of  his  prevailing  disposition.  2.  A
spontaneous,  prompt,  and  cheerful  purpose  and  endeavour.  They  say  nothing  and  do  not
hesitate,  but  go  together  "into  the  jaws  of  death."  3.  Invincible  murage;  a  principle
which  is  as  needful  in  moral  and  spiritual  conflict  as  in  physical  warfare  (oh.  x.  12).
"Most  probably  it  made  such  an  impression  as  rendered  the  host  nf  the  Philistines  an
easy  prey  to  the  Israelites  "  (Blaikie).  4.  Entire  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice ;  dis-
regarding alike  their  own  pleasure  and  peril,  and  laying  down  their  lives  for  his  sake.
"  Greater  love  hath  no  man,"  etc.  (John  xv.  13).  "  Pure  love  has  its  measure  in  itself,
and  disregards  in  its  outward  expression  every  cvitic  (iVfatt.  xxvi.  7—13).  This  exploit
of  the  three  heroes  was  a  sacrifice  offered,  not  so  much  to  the  man  David,  as  rather  in
him  to  the  '  Anointed  of  the  Lord,' and  therefore  to  the  Lord  himself"  (Krummacher).
How  does  it  rebuke  our  lack  of  devotion  to  our  Divine  King  I  Were  we  as  ardent,
loyal,  courageous,  and  self-sacrificing  as  they,  what  victories  should  we  gain  over  his
adversaries  and  ours  1

III.  The  sacred  opferino  presented  before  the  Lord.  "And  he  would  not  drink
thereof,"  etc.  For  the  first  time,  probably,  he  becomes  acquainted  with  their  desperate
exploit,  when  they  come  into  his  presence,  stained  with  blood,  and  place  the  vessel,  con-
taining the  water  for  which  he  longed,  in  his  hands.  To  him  it  is  as  if  it  were  their
blood,  and  he  cannot  drink  it  (Lev.  xvii.  11, 12).  To  do  so  would  he  to  justify  his  former
wish,  and  gratify  himself  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives.  Their  devntion  evokes  within
him  a  nobler  feeling  and  impulse  than  he  before  displayed ;  so  that  he  practically  con-
fesses his  fault,  personally  shares  their  suffering  and  self-denial,  and  publicly  testifies  his
thaokfulnesa  for  their  preservation  and  his  devotion  to  their  welfare.  And  this  he  does
in  the  highest  and  most  effectual  manner — by  making  of  their  gift  a  libation  (1  Sam.
vii.  6),  or  drink  offering,  and  thereby  giving  honour  to  Ood.  "  It  was  too  sacred  for
him  to  drink,  but  it  was  on  that  very  account  deemed  by  him  as  worthy  to  be  con-
secrated in  sacrifice  to  God  as  any  of  the  prescribed  ofl'erings  of  the  Levitical  ritual.
Pure  chivalry  and  pure  religion  there  found  an  absolute  union"  (Stanley).  Alexander
denied  himself  of  a  draught  of  water  because  he  could  not  bear  to  drink  it  alone,  and
the  cup  was  too  small  to  be  divided  among  all  his  soldiers  ;  Sir  Philip  Sidney,  that  he
might  give  it  to  a  wounded  soldier,  whose  necessity  appeared  to  him  greater  than  his
own  ('Percy  Anecdotes');  David,  that  he  might  present  it  unto  God.  "  He  never  was
more  magnanimous  than  at  this  moment.  This  deed  was  a  psalm,  sublime  in  its  signifl-
oance,  and  for  ever  sweet  to  all  lovirg  hearts  in  its  pure  simplicity."  In  his  offering
'here  is :  1.  An  exalted  estimate  of  the  value  of  human  life.    2.  A  humble  renunciatioB


tH.  xiin.  1— 39.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  587


of  the  power  even  of  a  king  to  make  use  of  it  according  to  his  own  pleasure  or  for  a  selfish
end.  3.  A  solemn  recognition  of  the  sovereignty  of  God  over  "  life  and  breath  and  all
things."  4.  An  unreserved  submission,  surrender,  and  sacrifice  of  every  gift  to  him
who  alone  is  worthy.  David's  offering  must  have  deepened  the  attachment  of  his  three
heroes,  and  exerted  no  small  moral  and  spiritual  influence  on  all  his.  followers.  How
much  greater  is  the  "offering"  of  the  Son  of  David  (Eph.  v.  2;  Heb.  ix.  14),  and  his
claim  on  our  affection,  gratitude,  and  self-consecration  1  Constrained  by  his  love,  we
should  live  in  the  spirit  of  his  life  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  v.  15 ;  Phil.  ii.  17,  "  poured  out
as  a  libation ; "  2  Tim.  iv.  6).

Eefleotions.  1.  An  impulse  of  a  lower  kind  is  most  effectually  overcome  by
one  of  a  higher  order.  2.  A  wish  in  itself  blameless  may,  in  certain  circumstances,
be  sinful  and  injurious.  3.  An  action  which  is  mistaken  and  imprudent  some-
times affords  occasion  for  the  display  of  the  noblest  principles.  4.  The  self-denial
of  some  silently  reproves  the  self-indulgence  of  others,  and  incites  in  them  a  similar
spirit.  6.  The  highest  return  that  can  be  made  of  gifts  received  from  men  is  tn
consecrate  them  to  God.  6.  A  gift  made  to  God  is  not  "wasted,"  but  is  a  means
of  conferring  manifold  benefits  on  men.  7.  The  sacrifice  of  self  enriches  the  soul
by  enabling  it  to  partake  more  fully  of  the  life  and  love  of  him  for  whose  sake  it  is
made. — D.

Vers.  18 — ^23  (1  Chron.  xi.  22—25). — The  heroism  of  Benaiah.  He  was  son  of
Jehoiada,  chief  priest  and  leader  of  the  Aaronites  who  came  to  David  at  Hebron
(1  Chron.  xii.  27);  one  of  (a  second)  three  "  mighties "  (with  Abishai  and,  perhaps,
Asahel),  and  above  the  thirty  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  5,  6);  captain  of  the  host  for  the  third
month ;  and  commander  of  the  body-guard  (ch.  viii.  18 ;  xx.  23).  He  remained  faithful
to  Solomon  in  the  conspiracy  of  Adonijah,  was  commissioned  to  execute  Joab,  and
appointed  commander-in-chief  in  his  stead  (1  Kings  i.  26,  36 ;  ii.  29,  35).  He  was  "  a
valiant  man,  of  many  illustrious  deeds."  .  His  name  (equivalent  to  "  built  by  Jah  ")  is
suggestive  of  the  Divine  source  of  his  strength,  valour,  and  successful  conflicts  with  the
enemies  of  the  people  of  God.  He  slew  (1)  two  Modbitlsh  champions,  or  princes,  "  lions
of  God"  (oh.  viii.  2);  (2)  a  ferocious  lion,  which  had  been  driven  by  a  heavy  fall  of
snow  into  the  neighbourhood  of  human  habitations,  to  the  terror  of  the  inhabitants,
and  had  taken  refuge  in  a  pit  or  (empty)  cistern ;  and  (3)  an  Egyptian  giant  (fighting
on  the  side  of  the  Philistines).  "  His  valour  and  virtues  are  recorded,  not  only  for  com-
memoration and  remembrance,  but  likewise  for  example  and  imitation  of  his  virtues,
and  to  show  how  great  works  the  Lord  wrought  by  weak  means  "  (Guild).  1.  We  ought
never  to  contend,  except  in  o  good  cause ;  for  truth,  justice,  and  liberty,  the  honour  of
God,  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  the  welfare  of  men.  "  If  it  be  possible,"  etc.  (Rom.
xii.  18).  2.  We  cannot  avoid  conflict  altogether  without  sin,  captivity,  dishnnour,  aud
destruction.  In  a  world  like  this  there  is  often  no  choice  but  to  fight  or  be  slain.
"  Curse  ye  Meroz,"  etc.  (Judg.  v.  23).  "  Contend  earnestly  for  the  faith,"  etc.  (Jude
3).  "  Now  we  must  fight  if  we  would  reign."  3.  We  mttst  not  be  dismayed  by  the
power  of  the  enemy ;  "  in  nothing  affrighted  by  the  adversaries  "  (Phil.  i.  28) ;  their
strength,  their  number  (two  to  one,  ver.  20),  their  formidable  appearance,  their  varied
character,  natural  or  spiritual ;  lionlike  men,  real  lions,  or  "your  adversary  the  devil,"
who,  "  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  Be  strong  and  fear  not.
4.  We  should  not  be  unduly  concerned  about  our  own  safety;  but  seek,  above  all  things,
to  do  our  duty  faithfully,  and  use  our  best  endeavours  to  secure  the  ends  for  which  we
strive.  Having  traced  the  footprints  of  the  lion  in  the  snow,  "  he  went  down  "  (volun-
tarily placing  his  own  life  in  imminent  peril  to  secure  the  safety  of  others)  "  and  slew
the  lion  in  the  pit"  (knowing  that  he  must  succeed  or  perish)  "in  a  time  of  snow"
(which  is  apt  to  benumb  man's  strength  and  to  cool  their  courage,  and  when  beasts  of
prey  are  most  fierce  and  ravenous  from  hunger).  "  None  of  these  things  move  me,"
etc.  (Acts  XX.  24 ;  xxi.  13 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  16,  17).  5.  We  must  make  the  lest  of  our
resources,  however  inadequate  they  may  appear;  and  not  shrink  from  the  conflict
until  we  are  as  fully  armed  as  our  opponents.  "  He  went  down  to  him  with  [only]  a
staff"  (ver.  22);  skilfully  and  adroitly  deprived  him  of  his  spear  ("like  a  weaver's
beam "),  rendered  him  defenceless,  and  turned  his  weapon  against  himself.  We  must
fight  with  such  means  as  we  have.    6.  We  should  never  forget  the  example  of  our  great


588  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxra.  1—39


Leader  (1  Sam.  xviL  50) ;  that  he  sees  us,  is  ready  to  help  us,  and  will  greatly  honoui
"him  that  ovorcometh"  (rers.  22,  23;  Bey.  ii.  26).

»  Though  the  sons  of  night  blaspheme,
More  there  are  with  na  than  them;
Hell  is  nigh,  but  Christ  is  nigher,
Circling  us  with  hosts  of  fire."

7.  "We  should  be  encouraged  by  the  remembrance  of  past  successes,  achieved  by  ourselves
and  others.  These  are  a  sure  earnest  of  the  final  victory  of  the  kingdom  of  light  over
the  kingdom  of  darkness.    "  Greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,"  etc.  (1  John  iv.  4). — ^D.

Vers.  1 — '<. — The  righteous  Euler.  David,  in  his  last  days,  like  Jacob  and  Moses,
received  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  was  thus  enabled  to  predict  the  coming  of  the
perfect  King,  sprung  from  himself;  the  blessings  of  his  reign,  and  his  triumph  over  his
enemies.  These  "last  words"  of  his  are,  indeed,  regarded  by  some  as  primarily  a
description  of  what  a  ruler  of  men  should  be,  and  as  only  secondarily,  if  at  all,  relating
to  the  Christ.  Our  Authorized  Version  favours  this  interpretation  by  introducing  in
ver.  3  the  words,  "  must  be."  But  the  obvious  truth  that  rulers  ought  to  be  just  would
hardly  have  been  prefaced  by  so  solemn  an  introduction,  asserting  in  such  varied  words
and  phrases  that  the  declaration  was  owing  to  the  special  inspiration  of  God.  Nor
would  the  reference  to  the  " everlasting  covenant"  be  so  appropriate.

I.  The  human  speaker.  The  terms  used  indicate :  1.  His  origin.  "  David  the  son
ol  Jesse."  The  royal  son  was  not  ashamed  of  bis  father.  2.  His  exaltation.  "  Raised
up  on  high  "  (comp.  ch.  vii.  8, 9).  3.  His  Divine  appointment  as  king.  "  The  anointed
of  the  God  of  Jacob."  4.  His  gifts  and  works  as  a  sacred  poet.  "  The  sweet  psalmist
of  Israel"  (Hebrew,  "pleasant  in  the  psalms  of  Israel").  "As  David,  on  the  one  hand,
had  firmly  established  the  kingdom  of  God  in  an  earthly  and  political  respect  as  the
anointed  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  as  king;  so  had  he,  on  the  other,  as  the  composer  of  Israel's
songs  of  praise,  promoted  the  spiritual  edification  of  that  kingdom"  (Keif  and  Delitzsoh).

II.  The  DivixE  Speaker.  This  is  intimated  by  the  word  used  twice  in  ver.  1  and
translated  "  said."  It  is  the  word  commonly  used  of  the  utterances  of  God  by  his
prophets,  and,  without  any  addition,  indicates  that  the  saying  is  a  Divine  oracle.
Further,  that  what  is  said  here  is  from  God  is  distinctly  declared  by  the  assertion,
"  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  spake  by  me,  and  his  Word  was  in  my  tongue ;  the  Grod  Of
Israel  said,  the  Rock  of  Israel  spake  to  me  "  (vers.  2,  3).  Such  a  preamble  prepares  us
fur  an  utterance  of  great  weight  and  importance,  and  is  adapted  to  excite  the  utmost
confidence  in  it  as  one  of  "  the  true  sayings  of  God"  (Rev.  xix.  9).

III.  The  words  spoken.  David  was  himself  a  divinely  appointed  king  over  God's
nation.  He  had  ruled  on  the  whole  justly,  and  had,  with  his  people,  enjoyed  much  of
the  benefit  which  righteous  rule  secures.  He  was,  however,  conscious  of  not  having
realized  his  ideal,  partly  through  his  own  weakness  and  sinfulness,  partly  through  the
opposition  he  had  encountered  and  the  impracticableness  of  the  materials  which  he  had
had  to  mould.  But  before  he  leaves  the  world  he  has  a  Divine  assurance  that  One
should  arise  out  of  his  own  house,  who  should  be,  as  a  Buler,  all,  and  more  than  all,
that  he  had  himself  aimed  to  be — should  diffuse  amongst  his  subjects  the  greatest
blessings,  and  thoroughly  master  and  destroy  all  that  should  oppose  his  designs.
Note :  1.  Sis  descent.  The  reference  to  the  "  everlasting  covenant "  in  ver.  5,  com-
pared with  the  covenant  itself  in  the  promise  of  God  through  Nathan  (ch.  vii.  16),
suflSciently  indicates  that  David  discerned  that  the  King  of  whom  he  was  prophesying
would  spring  from  himself.  He  was  to  be  "  of  the  seed  ofDnvid  according  to  the  flesh"
(Bom.  i.  3).  2.  His  character.  "  Just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God."  (1)  The  fear  of  God
(equivalent  to  "godliness,  piety";  would  be  at  the  luundatiou  of  his  character.  He
would  rule  with  constant  regard  to  the  will  and  the  glory  of  God  (comp.  Isa.  xi.  2,
"the  spirit  of  .  .  .  the  fear  of  the  Lord").  How  much  this  feature  was  found  in  the
character  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Gospels  everywhere  testify.  (2)  He  would  be  eminently
"just."  This  characteristic  of  the  coming  King  of  men  appears  frequently  in  the
prophecies  respecting  liim  (see  Ps.  xlv.  6,  7;  Ixxii.  2;  Isa.  ix.  7;  xi.  3 — 5;  Jer.
xxiii.  5 ,  Zech.  ix.  9).  It  was  a  welcome  thought  in  a  world  filled  with  injustice,  which
WHS  unredressed  by  its  rulers,  yea,  often  perpetrated  by  them — a  world  in  which  th«


OH.  xxiii.  1— 39.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  689

poor  and  feeble,  the  widows  and  the  fatherless,  instead  of  being  protected  by  the  mighty,
were  often  trampled  down  by  them,  that  at  length  a  Ruler  would  arise  who  would  be
just,  and  would  cause  justice  everywhere  to  triumph.  These  prophecies  receive  their
fulfilment  in  the  character  and  reign  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  (a)  He  is  personally  just.
Henoehe  is  called  "that  Just  One"  (Acts  xxii.  14);  "the  Holy  One  and  the  Just  "(Acts
ill  14).  He  was  like  other  men  in  all  but  this,  that  he  was  "without  sin  "  (Heb.  ir.  15)
He  "knew  no  sin"  (2  Oor.  v.  21).  He  "did  no  sin"  (1  Pet.  ii.  22),  In  his  addressiv^
to  God  there  is  no  confession  of  sin  or  prayer  for  pardon.  Before  men  ho  c  uld  boldly
gay,  "Which  of  you  coiivicteth  me  of  sin?"  (John  viii.  46,  Revised  Version),  His
exaltation  is  attributed  to  his  love  of  righteousness  and  hatred  of  iniquity  (Heb.  i.  9).
(6)  Justice  distinguishes  the  salvation  he  effects.  For  this  King  is  als  >  Saviour  (Zech.
ix.  9),  David  felt  that  in  some  way  his  own  salvation  depended  on  him  (ver,  5).  In
the  light  of  the  New  Testament  the  truth  becomes  clear.  Jesus  the  Son  of  David,  the
Divine  King,  works  salvation.  Now,  in  doing  this,  he  displays  the  Ijighcst  regard  for
righteousness.  He  does  not  deliver  in  violation  of  justice ;  does  not  take  the  part  of
the  sinner  against  God  as  righteous  Buler.  By  his  death  he  makes  propitiation  for  sin,
that  God  "  might  be  just "  while  "  the  Justifier  of  him  which  believeth  in  Jesus  "  (Bom.
iii.  25,  26).  Moreover,  he  saves  from  sin  to  righteousness  (Rom.  viii.  4),  so  that  all  whi  >
are  his  become  just,  (c)  His  laws  are  just.  The  very  laws  of  some  kingdoms  are  tainted
with  injustice.  They  are  oppressive  or  partial,  favouring  one  class  of  the  people  at  the
cost  of  others,  etc.  Not  so  with  the  laws  of  the  Christ.  They  prescribe  all  that  is  right,
and  only  what  is  right,  both  towards  God  and  towards  men.  Were  they  obeyed,  all
injustice  and  wrong-doing  would  cease,  and  all  the  evil  dispositions  from  which  they
proceed,  (d)  His  rule  is  just.  Good  laws  are  sometimes  ineffective  through  bad
administration  of  them.  Commonly  the  enforcement  of  them  requires  money;  and
those  who  have  little  of  it  must  submit  to  injustice  for  want  of  the  means  to  set  the
machinery  of  the  law  in  motion.  Sometimes  the  magistrates  are  corrupt,  and  decide  in
favour  of  those  who  bribe  them,  or  too  indolent  and  indifferent  to  examine  sufficiently
into  the  merits  of  the  cases  brought  before  them.  Practical  injustice  also  springs  from
the  ignorance  or  weakness  of  rulers.  But  this  Euler  will  see  that  full  justice  is  done
to  all  under  his  sway.  He  knows  exactly  the  character  of  each  and  all ;  he  is  powerful
to  execute  judgment.  Mighty  oppressors  find  him  stronger  than  they.  Secret  plotters
against  the  just  discover  that  nothing  is  hidden  from  him.  With  him  sophistry  has  no
weight,  rank  and  wealth  no  influence.  "  He  shall  reward  every  man  according  to  his
works"  (Matt.  xvi.  27).  (e)  His  whole  power  and  influence  are  promotive  of  righteous-
ness, and  ensure  its  ultimate  prevalence.  3.  The  blessings  of  Ms  reign.  "[He  (or,  'it')
shall  be]  as  the  light  of  the  morning  when  the  sun  riseth,  a  morning  without  clouds ;

fwhen]  the  tender  grass  [springeth]  out  of  the  earth,  through  clear  shining  after  rain"
ver.  4,  Revised  Version).  Under  the  reign  of  this  Ruler  shall  be :  (1)  Unclouded  light
in  place  of  darkness.  Truth,  holiness,  and  happiness  shall  abound.  (2)  Fruitfulness.
Growth  and  increase  of  goodness  and  the  good  (Ps.  Ixxii.  6,  7,  16).  (3)  Beauty.  Like
the  flush  of  the  tender  grass  just  sprung  up  and  shining  in  the  light  of  the  morning
sun.  These  are  the  effects  which  the  Lord  Christ  does  produce  in  heart  and  home  and
country,  wherever  and  so  far  as  he  is  received  and  obeyed.  History  confirms  prophecy,
and  gives  additional  assurance  of  its  fulfilment.  4.  ITie  fate  of  the  wicked  under  his
rule.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  The  reign  of  One  so  just  and  powerful  ensures  the  destruction  of
the  wicked  as  well  as  the  salvation  of  the  righteous.  He  comes,  indeed,  to  subdue  the
wicked  by  truth  and  love,  and  render  them  righteous.  Bat  many  remain  obdurate,
refuse  submii-sion  to  him,  perhaps  oppose  him  actively  ;  these  he  destroys.  Note :  (1)
Their  worthlessness.  They  are  "  Belial "  (equivalent  to  "  worthlessness ") ;  good  for
nothing ;  "  thorns,  to  be  thrust  away  "  and  "  burned."  (2)  The  difSoulty  of  getting  rid
of  them.  Like  thorns,  difBcult  to  handle  and  "  thrust  away,"  requiring  whoever  would
deal  with  them  to  be  "  armed  with  iron  and  the  staff  of  a  spear."  Laws  cannot  restrain
them,  example  is  lost  upon  them,  benevolent  efforts  are  wasted  upon  them,  legal  punish-
ments only  harden  them,  the  gospel  itself  renders  them  more  perverse.  (3)  Their  certaiu
destruction.  "  They  shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire  in  their  place"  (Revised  Version)  ;
"  on  the  hearth  "  (Dean  Stanley).  See  Matt.  iii.  10, 12 ;  John  xv,  6 ;  Heb,  vL  8,  Let
sinners  tremble  and  repent  before  it  is  too  late.
IV,  The  comfobt  which  the  pbophboy  gave  to  David  himsblp.    (Ver.  5.)    Tha


590  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxin.  1— 39.

words  are  obscure,  and  yariously  interpreted.  Most  modern  scholars  translate  substan-
tially as  in  the  margin  of  the  Revised  Version,  "For  is  not  my  house  so  with  God?
for  he  .  .  .  for  all  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire,  will  he  not  make  it  io  grow  ?  "  So
taken,  the  words  are  altogether  words  of  assured  confidence  and  hope.  But  taken  as  in  the
Authorized  Version,  and  substantially  in  the  text  of  the  Revised  Version,  shadows  mingle
with  the  brightness.  The  glorious  vision  of  the  future  reminds  David  of  the  contrast
presented  by  the  past  and  present.  His  own  reign  has  not  correspot.ded,  or  only  in  a
small  measure,  with  the  picture  he  has  drawn.  Yet  he  finds  consolation  in  the  "  ever-
lasting covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure."  He  doubts  not  that  the  promise
given  him  through  Nathan  (ch.  vii.)  will  be  fulBlled ;  and  in  its  fulfilr  »ent  he  recognizes
the  fulfilment  of  his  own  ardent  "  desire,"  and  the  accomplishment  of  his  "  salvation."
So  let  us,  amid  all  the  blighted  hopes,  the  fears  and  troubles  of  the  present,  stay
ourselves  on  God,  and  admit  to  our  hearts  the  comfort  which  springs  from  his  covenant
in  Christ,  and -the  conviction  that  it  cannot  but  be  faithfully  and  fully  )erformed. — G.  W.

Ver.  5. — Comfort  from  the  everlasting  covenant.  David,  as  he  approached  the  close
of  life,  had  this  vision  (vers.  2 — ^7)  of  the  just  king,  and  the  happiness  which  would
attend  his  reign.  It  reminded  him  of  what  ought  to  have  been  the  character  of  his
own  rule,  and  what  might  have  been  its  blessedness.  The  perfect  realization  of  the
picture  by  himself  and  his  subjects  was  not,  indeed,  possible ;  but  the  actual  condition
of  things  was  not  inevitable.  He  knew  that  he  himself  had  largely  contributed  to  the
sins  and  tioubles  of  his  "  house  "  and  of  the  nation.  And  now  life  was  nearly  over;
and  as  the  past  could  not  be  undone,  neither  could  he  hope  to  repair  the  mischief  it  had
produced.  Under  the  sadness  of  his  reflections,  he  finds  relief  and  consolation  in  the
memory  of  the  "everlasting  covenant"  which  God  had  "made  with"  him,  which
ensured  that  from  his  house  should  arise  One  in  and  by  whom  w  uld  be  realized  the
perfect  ideal  of  a  Divine  King  and  kingdom.  His  utmost  "desire  '  would  then  be  ful-
filled, and  his  "salvation"  efiiscted.  For  it  seems  that  as  David,  in  the  hundred  and
tenth  psalm,  calls  his  great  Son  his  "  Lord,"  so  here  he  recognizes  him  as  his  Saviour.
These  words  of  David  have  often  been  used  by  godly  people  for  their  own  comfort ;  and
the  hymn  of  Dr.  Doddridge,  founded  upon  them,  commencing,  "  My  God,  the  covenant
of  thy  love,"  has  ministered  consolation  to  thousands.  We  shall  see  that  there  is  good
reason  for  such  an  application  of  them.

I.  The  covenant.  The  word  properly  signifies  a  mutual  agreement  between  two
or  more  persons.  When  used,  however,  of  a  transaction  or  arrangement  between  God
and  men,  the  idea  of  agreement  as  between  two  contracting  parties  retires  into  the
background,  or  vanishes  altogether ;  and  the  word  designates,  on  the  one  hand,  the
promises  of  God,  and,  on  the  other,  his  requirements.  In  this  passage  it  refers  to
the  Divine  promise  to  David  and  his  house  of  an  everlasting  kingdom  (ch.  vii.  12 — 16),
which  was  in  fact  the  promise  of  the  Christ,  and  of  all  the  blessings  (poetically  set  forth
in  ver.  4)  which  his  coming  and  reign  involved.  In  the  time  of  Isaiah  it  was  seen  that
this  covenant  was  in  effect  made  with  all  repentant  and  believing  souls,  and  that  the
"sure  mercies  of  David  "  (the  blessings  promised  to  him)  included  the  spiritual  mercies
for  which  they  hunger  and  thirst  (see  Isa.  Iv.  1 — 3).  Indeed,  in  the  fourth  verse  of
that  chapter,  David  and  his  illustrious  Descendant  are  identified,  as  in  other  Scriptures
the  latter  is  called  "David"  (Jer.  xxx.  9;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23,  24;  xxxvii.  24,  25;  Hos.
iii.  5).  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  our  text  may  be  used  by  Christians  in  its  original
purport.  But  if  there  were  any  doubt  of  this,  the  direct  application  of  the  term  "  ever-
lasting covenant "  to  the  promises  of  God  in  and  through  the  "  Lord  Jesus,"  and  sealed
with  his  "  blood "  (Heb.  xiii.  20) — promises  made  to  all  who  have  faith  in  Christ-
establishes  the  propriety  of  the  use  of  the  words  by  Christians,  though  it  were  in  a
sense  only  analogous  to  that  which  they  originally  bore.  Notice :  1.  The  contents  of
the  covenant.  (1)  The  promises  of  "all  spiritual  blessings,"  yea,  of  all  needful  tem-
poral blessings — pardon,  renewal,  adoption,  sanctification,  guidance,  support,  comfort,
preservation,  etc.,  terminating  in  eternal  life;  in  a  word,  salvation.  (2)  The  require
ments  of  faiih  in  Christ  and  obedience  to  his  laws.  2.  Its  qualities.  (1)  "  Ordered  in
all  things."  Well  arranged ;  the  product  of  perfect  wisdom,  and  worthy  of  it ;  so  con-
stituted as  to  be  adapted  to  its  purpose,  fitted  for  the  wants  of  men,  suited  to  reveaj
and  glorify  God.    (2)  "Sure."    More  literally,  "guarded,"  "preserved,"  and  therefor*


CH.  xxiii.  1—30.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  591

secure  and  sure.  God  takes  care  of  his  own  Word.  Enemies  may  assail  it,  but  lie
watclies  over  and  preserves  it.  Foolish  friends  or  professed  friends  may  misinterpret
it,  may  narrow  it  so  as  to  make  it  speak  the  language  of  their  own  particular  sect,  and
promise  good  oilly  to  its  members,  may  overlay  it  by  traditional  interpretations,  oi
otherwise  veil  it  from  the  sight  of  men  as  if  it  were  too  sacred  for  common  eyes,  oi
substitute  for  it  "another  gospel,  which  is  not  another"  (Gal.  L  6,  7),  which  they
regard  as  more  in  harmony  with  the  advanced  intelligence  of  the  times ;  but,  amid  hdlI
through  all,  God's  covenant  abides  sure,  the  only  basis  of  his  gracious  dealings  with
men,  the  secure  basis  of  men's  hopes  and  life.  (3)  Everlasting.  An  assertion  that
might  be  made  in  respect  to  its  origin  in  the  eternal  thought  and  purpose  of  God,  but
which  is  made  of  its  enduring  character.  It  is  a  covenant  which  "abides  the  same  ever-
more, which  God  will  never  alter,  and  will  be  eternally  fulfilling  in  the  experience  nt
his  children.  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  And  this  is  the  Word  which
by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you  "  (1  Pet.  1. 25).  3.  With  whom  it  is  made.  "  Wiih
me."  The  covenant  was  made  to  David  directly  and  personally,  through  Nathan.  The
covenant  of  God  in  the  gospel  is  with  all  those  who  conform  to  its  requirements — all
who  repent,  believe,  and  obey.  Whoever  sincerely  accepts  Christ  as  Saviour  and  Lord,
is  warranted  to  legard  the  promises  of  Gud  as  made  to  himself,  and  will  be  able  to  do
BO  with  increasing  confidence  as  his  faith,  love,  and  holiness  increase.  These  are  at
once  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  his  witness  to  each  Christian  that  he  is  a  Chris-
tian indeed,  one  of  "the  children  of  God,"  who  are  "heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with
Christ"  (Rom.  viii.  16,  17).

n.  The  estimation  in  which  it  is  held.  The  believer  values  it  as  beyond  all
price,  because  :  1.  It  assures  him  nf  sdval ion.  "This  is  all  my  salvation" — salvation
in  the  fullest  sense,  salvation  from  all  evil  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  blessing,  a  salvation
everlasting  as  the  covenant.  2.  It  meets  and  satisfies  his  best,  his  utmost  longings.
"  All  my  desire  " — delight,  pleasure.  The  aspirations  after  perfect  communion  with  God,
and  likeness  to  him  and  eternal  happiness  in  him,  all  are  met  and  satisfied  by  the
promises  of  God.

IIL  The  comfort  it  affobds.  "Although  my  house,  .  .  .  yet,"  etc.  Similarly,
the  Christian  may  realize  unfailing  support  and  consolation  from  the  consciousness  of
being  interested  in  the  everlasting  covenant.  1.  In  view  of  his  past  and  "present  life.
Its  unfulfilled  ideals,  disappointed  hopes,  broken  vows,  wasted  energies,  poor  results
(material  or  spiritual) ;  in  view  of  sins  committed,  work  undone  or  ill  done ;  after  sad
experience  of  the  unreliableness  of  the  promises  of  men  (whether  through  changed  mind,
or  changed  circumstances,  or  d^ath) ;  or  again,  when  he  thinks  with  sad  heart  of  the
moral  condition  of  his  "  house  "  (often  a  distressing  sight  to  godly  parents),  or  the  pain-
ful circumstances  in  which  it  may  be  placed  through  bereavements  or  worldly  misfor-
tunes ;  or  finally,  when  he  looks  upon  himself,  contrasting  what  he  mi;iht  have  become
with  what  he  is — ^it  is  a  thought  to  bring  rest  and  hope  that  God  has  made  with  him
an  everlasting  covenant,  which  remains  secure  and  unchanged  amid  all  changes,  and
assures  of  forgiveness  of  all  that  has  been  wrong  and  defective,  and  eternal  profit  from
all  that  has  been  painful,  and  final  and  complete  deliverance  from  all  sin  and  sorrow.
2.  In  anticipation  of  the  future.  (1)  The  future  of  this  life.  Its  uncertainties,  its  pos-
sible or  probable  troubles,  personal,  domestic,  national,  etc.  "  I  know  not  what  is  before
me,  but  this  I  know,  that  God  has  made  with  me  a  covenant  which  canned  faiL"  (2)  Its
approaching  end  and  the  eternal  future.  The  possible  suddenness  or  painfulness  of  the
end ;  its  possible  loneliness,  through  the  deaths  or  removals  of  those  who  it  had  been
hoped  would  be  near  to  impart  consolation;  in  the  case  of  the  aged,  the  certainty  that
departure  from  this  world  cannot  be  long  delayed;  the  dimness  and  stiangeness  of  the
invisible  world,  and  the  awfulness  of  eternity;  the  constitutional  dread  of  i  ath  which
haunts  some;  the  dread,  at  least  the  awe,  which  sometimes  visits  all  as  they  think  of
the  account  to  be  given  of  life  to  the  holy  Judge.  How  blessed  under  all  anxieties  ami
forebodings  to  say,  " '  I  know  whom  I  have  believed '  (2  Tim.  i.  12) ;  I  am  sure  he  will
not  forsake  me,  but  will  '  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work,  and  will  preserve  me  unto
his  heavenly  kingdom '  (2  Tim.  iv.  18) ;  for  '  he  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting
covenant,'  etc."  I

Let  Christians  aim  so  to  live  that  they  may  ever  enjoy  such  consolation.  Let  all
»pflV  to  make  it  their  own ;  for  it  is  available  for^all.    Hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord  before


592  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxm.  1—39.


referred  to:  "Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me :  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live;  and
I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of  David "  (Isa.
It.  S).— G.  W.

Ver.  8. — The  hing't  mighty  men.  From  this  verse  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  is  given
an  account  of  men  who  had  distinguished  themselves  in  the  service  of  David  by  their
might  and  prowess,  and  who  were  rewarded  with  promotion  and  a  place  in  this  honour-
able list.  Our  King,  Jesus  Christ,  has  also  his  mighty  ones — men,  women,  and  children
— whose  exploits  are  not  forgotten.

I.  Thbib  qualities.  1.  What  they  are.  They  are  the  ordinary  characteristics  of  a
Christian  existing  in  a  high  degree  of  strength  and  fervour.  (1)  Strong  faith.  The
eye  that  sees  the  invisible;  the  hand  that  grasps  the  promises;  strong  con6dence  in
God  and  Christ  (see  Heb.  xi.).  (2)  Ardent  love.  Warm  attachment  and  devoted
loyalty  to  their  King ;  love  to  his  kingdom  and  all  who  belong  to  it ;  love  to  men  in
general;  love  disinterested,  unselfish.  A  selfish  man  cannot  be  a  hero.  (3^  A  strong
sense  of  duty,  overpowering  the  desire  for  ease,  safety,  pleasure,  or  gain.  (4)  Intense
prayerfulness.  Earnest  prayer  is  "  pswer  with  Grod  and  with  men  "  (Gen.  xzxii.  28).
(5)  Clear  and  impressive  knowledge.  "  Knowledge  is  power."  "  A  wise  man  is  strong ;
yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  increaseth  strength"  (Prov.  xxiv.  5).  Knowledge  adds
strength  to  the  character  of  its  possessor,  and  is  a  powerful  weapon  in  the  service  of  our
King.  It  is  by  "the  truth"  that  Christ's  battles  are  fought  and  victories  won.  "The
fj,ospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation"  (Eom.  i.  16).  Christ's  "  mighty  men"  are
"mighty  in  the  Scriptures"  (Acts  xviii.  24).  (6)  Dauntless  courage.  (7)  Unwaver-
ing constancy  and  perseverance.  2.  Whence  they  spring.  David  was  brave  himself,
and  inspired  his  men  with  bravery.  They  became  "  mighty  men  "  through  the  influence
of  a  mighty  leader.  Consciously  or  unconsciously,  they  imbibed  his  spirit  and  imitated
him.  In  like  manner,  our  "  Leader  and  Commander  of  the  people  "  (Isa.  Iv.  4)  infuses
his  own  Spirit  into  his  faithful  followers.  They  become  mighty  through  close  union
and  association  with  him.  They  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his
might"  (Eph.  vi.  10);  "strengthened  with  might  by  God's  Spirit  in  the  inner  man"
(Eph.  iii.  16).

II.  Thbib  woekb.  Their  might  is  exercised :  1.  In  resisting  and  overcoming  tempta-
tion. In  conquering  the  enemies  of  Christ  as  they  assail  and  would  destroy  themselves.
A  man  may  be  a  hero  in  the  service  of  his  country  and  a  miserable  coward  and  slave
morally  and  spiritually,  yielding  without  resistance  to  the  impulses  of  lust  and  passion,
covetousness  and  ambition,  led  "  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will "  (2  Tim.  ii.  26).  2.
In  patient  endurance  of  suffering.  Martyrs,  confessors,  ordinary  sufferers.  Some  of
the  noblest  of  Christ's  "  mighty  ones  "  are  found  in  sick-chambers,  enduring  pain  and
perhaps  privation  for  long  months  or  years  without  a  murmur.  3.  In  assailing  and
conquering  religious  errors  or  practical  evils.  Especially  when  the  many  favour  them,
and  not  only  opposition,  but  obloquy,  has  to  be  encountered.  4.  In  promoting  the
salvation  and  welfare  of  men.  David's  "mighty  men"  displayed  their  strength  and
courage  chiefly  in  destroying  men's  lives;  Christ's  in  saving  and  blessing;  though  occa-
sionally they  too  are  called  to  take  up  material  weapons  in  the  service  of  their  King.
In  this  service  the  noblest  heroic  qualities  are  often  called  into  exercise,  as  in  the  case
of  missionaries  bearing  their  message  among  savages  or  into  perilous  climates;  minis-
ters of  icligion  at  home  patiently  and  lovingly  labouring  on  in  obscurity  and  poverty  ;
visitors  of  those  suffering  from  infectious  diseases ;  teachers  in  ragged  schools,  etc.

III.  Theik  vauietibs.  David's  "  mighty  men  "  were  from  various  tribes  of  Israel,
some  even  Gentiles,  and  had  each  his  own  peculiarities  of  character  and  achievement.
But  aU  were  alike  loyal  to  their  king  and  brave  in  serving  him.  Thus  it  is  also  with
Christ's  mighty  ones.  They  are  from  every  country  and  nation  where  he  is  known,
from  every  section  of  his  Church,  from  every  class  of  society ;  and  they  all  bear  some
marks  of  their  origin.  But  they  all  are  one  in  their  devoteid  love  to  their  King,  and
their  readiness  to  labour  and  suffer  for  hirn  even  unto  death.  They  differ  also  in  resjiect
of  the  special  elements  and  manifestations  of  their  power.  Some  owe  their  pre-eminence
in  part  to  physical  peculiarities;  others  are  gieat  in  spite  of  theirs.  Some  have  the
might  of  intellect;  others,  of  heart.  Some,  the  power  of  inflexible  determination;
others,  of  gentleness  and  tenderness.     Some  conquer  by  intense  activity ;  others,  by


OH.  xxiii.  1—39.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  593

passive  endurance  or  quiet  influence.  Some  are  powerful  through  their  ability  to
,  attract  and  lead  numbers ;  others,  acting  alone.  The  special  sphere  of  some  is  the
home ;  of  others,  the  Church ;  of  others,  the  exchange,  the  factory,  the  worlishop,  or
the  public  meeting.  Some  are  mighty  in  argument ;  others,  in  appeal ;  some,  in
instructing ;  others,  in  consoling,  etc.

IV.  Theib  bewaed.  1.  Fromotion.  David  promoted  those  of  his  men  who  distin-
guished themselves  by  their  bravery  to  posts  of  honour  (ver.  23).  Similarly,  our  Lord
teaches  di  that  those  who  are  faithful  to  him  shall  be  advanced  to  higher  positions  of
trust  and  power  (Luke  xix.  17,  19 ;  Eev.  ii.  26—28 ;  iii.  12,  21). ,  The  display  and
exercise  of  noble  qualities  increases  their  vigour,  and  thus  prepares  for  and  ensures
higher  and  wider  service.  2.  Honowrable  record.  As  here, "  These  be  the  names,"  etc.,
Christ's  heroes  also  have  their  names,  characters,  and  deeds  recorded.  (1)  Some  on
earth.  In  the  Divine  book ;  in  ordinary  biographies ;  in  the  memories  of  men.  (2)
All  in  heaven  (comp.  Phil.  iv.  3).  Not  all  who  are  mentioned  in  the  esrthly  lists  are
in  the  heavenly ;  for  some  obtain  a  reputation  here  to  which  they  are  not  justly  entitled.
Not  all  in  the  heavenly  list  are  in  the  earthly ;  for  good  men  are  not  omniscient,  nor
can  they  always  discern  superior  worth,  though  it  be  before  their  eyes.  The  chief
desire  of  us  all  should  be  to  have  a  place  in  the  heavenly  records — to  be  "  accepted  of
him"  (2  Cor.  v.  9),  whoever  may  reject  or  overlook  us.

In  conclusion :  1.  We  should  not  he  content  just  to  exist  as  OhrisUans,  hut  should
aim  to  he  "  mighty."  This  is  possible  to  all,  through  union  with  the  "  strong;  Son  of
God,"  maintained  and  increased  by  vigorous  exercises  of  faith,  meditation,  and  prayer;
and  th  ough  faithful  use  of  such  power  as  they  possess.  2.  Whatever  our  might  or
achievements,  we  should  ascrile  all,  and  he  sincerely  concerned  that  others  should  ascribe
all,  to  God.    (Vers.  10, 12.>— G.  W.

Vers.  15 — ^17. — Love,  courage,  and  self-sacrifice.  This  narrative  is  highly  creditable
to  both  David  and  these  three  brave  men.  It  shows  the  power  he  had  of  awakening  In
his  soldiers  passionate  attachment  and  devotedness  to  himself,  his  high  appreciation  of
such  qualities,  and  at  the  same  time  his  unwillingness  that  they  should  be  displayed
in  enterprises  which  hazarded  precious  lives  for  no  corresponding  advantage.  In  the
pouring  of  the  water  out  as  an  offering  unto  the  Lord,  because  it  was  too  custly  and
sacred  for  ordinary  use,  "  pure  chivalry  and  pure  religion  foxmd  an  absolute  union "
(Dean  Stanley).  On  the  other  hand,  the  heroism  of  these  men,  stirred  by  their  love
and  loyalty  to  their  chief,  although  displayed  in  a  rash  enterprise,  is  worthy  of  great
admiration.  We  are  reminded  of  similar  qualities  found  amongst  the  servants  of  the
Son  of  David,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Notice —

I.  The  devoted  love  op  Christ's  FAirHFUL  servants  to  himself.  1.  They  show
sincere  and  practical  regard  to  his  every  wish.  They  do  not  need  explicit  commands
in  detail,  still  less  accompanying  threatenings.  Enough  if  they  can  ascertain  what  he
desires ;  and  their  love  for  him  and  converse  with  him  enable  them  to  know  his  wishes
without  definite  verbal  revelations  or  laws.  A  large  portion  of  the  life  of  many  modem
(•hristians,  especially  in  the  departments  of  Christian  zeal  and  benevolence,  is  founded
on  no  express  command,  but  sprinj^s  from  love  and  sympathy — from  that  participation
of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  produces  intuitive  discernment  of  his  will,  and  that  devoted
attachment  which  promjits  to  the  gratification  of  his  every. wish.  2.  They  are  ready
to  encounter  danger  in  his  service.  The  work  of  Chi-ist  makes  at  times  great  demands
on  love,  zeal,  and  courage.  It  cannot  be  done  without  hazard;  but  his  true-hearted
friends  are  prepared  to  endure  the  toil  and  brave  the  peril.  Not  a  few  in  our  own  day
may  be  described  as  "  men  that  have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ"  (Acts  xv.  26).  This  spirit  of  Christian  heroism  is  not  confined  to  the  more
hardy  races,  but  among  the  softer  tribes  of  Polynesia  and  India,  the  knowledge  of  Christ
has  produced  a  similar  courage.  Converted  natives  offer  themselves  for  service  in  the
most  dangerous  fields  of  missionary  enterprise ;  and  when  some  fall  at  the  hand  of
savages,  or  through  attacks  of  deadly  diseases,  others  eagerly  press  forward  to  take  the
vacant  places.  The  language  of  St.  Paul  is  still  the  laufiuage  of  faithful  Christians,
"  None  of  these  things  move  me,  neither  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  myself,"  etc. ;  "  I
am  ready  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also  to  die  ...  for  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "
(Acts  XX.  24 ;  xxi.  13).  3.  They  are  sometimes  moved  to  ejctraordinary  manifestations
II.  SAWUPli.  8  <J


594


TUB  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxiv.  1— 25.


6f  thek  regard.  Like  the  three  heroes  whose  exploit  is  here  recorded.  Like  Mary  in
her  lavish  anointing  of  her  Lord  (John  xiL  3).  Warm  love  prompts  to  generous  deeds
and  gifts.  There  is  need  of  these  in  the  service  of  Christ ;  aud  if  ardent  love  to  him
were  more  common,  they  would  be  more  frequent.  Love  should,  however,  submit  to
the  guidance  of  wisdom,  lest  it  become  wasteful  or  injurious.  Our  Lord  will  accept
mistaken  offerings,  but  it  is  well  that  the  offerings  should  themselves  be  such  as  he  can
approve.  One  safeguard  against  mistake  is  the  remembrance  that  he  desires  no  display
of  love  which  is  fantastic  or  useless,  no  self-denial  or  daring  which  answers  no  propor-
tionate end  in  the  advancement  of  his  kingdom  and  the  promotion  of  the  good  either
of  our  own  souls  or  of  our  fellow-men.  There  is  abundant  room  for  all  possible  gene-
rosity, self-denial,  and  bravery  in  the  practical  service  of  Christ  and  man ;  to  expend
these  in  fruitless  ways  is  to  expose  our  works  to  condemnation,  however  good  and
acceptable  may  be  our  motives.  We  are  to  serve  God  with  our  reason  as  well  as  our
feelings.

II.  The  KBASONABLENBSB  AND  RWHTNESB  OF  SUCH  LOVE.  Because  of :  1.  Bis  self-
sarriflcing  love  for  them.  "  The  love  of  Christ  oonstraineth  us  "  (2  Cor.  v.  14)  is  their
sufficient  answer  to  any  who  allege  that  they  are  "beside  themselves"  (2  Cor.  v.  13).
His  love  requires  and  justifies  the  utmost  consecration  to  him  of  heart  and  life.  2.  His
injunctions.  He  claims  from  all  who  follow  him  that  they  should  love  him  more  than
their  nearest  relations,  more  than  their  own  life  (Matt.  x.  37 ;  Luke  xiv.  26),  and  that,  in
serving  him,  they  should  be  fearless  of  death  (Luke  xii.  4).  3.  Sis  exa/mple.  Of  love  to
the  Father,  and  complete  devotedness  to  his  will  and  glory  (John  xiv.  31 ;  iv.  34 ;  Matt,
xxvi.  39, 42 ;  John  xii.  27, 28).  4.  The  effects  of  svah  love.  In  purifying  and  ennobling
the  character  of  those  who  cherish  it,  and  promoting  through  them  the  well-being  of
mankind.  It  is  love  for  all  excellence,  stimulates  to  its  pursuit  and  greatly  aids  its
attainment.  It  is  the  inspiration  and  support  of  the  highest  and  most  persistent  bene-
volence ;  for  he  who  is  loved  is  the  Incarnation  of  Divine  holiness  and  love,  and  the
great  Friend  and  Benefactor  of  the  human  race,  and  the  return  he  asks  for  his  love  to  us
is  not  a  barren,  sentimental  devotion,  but  practical  obedience  (John  xiv.  15, 21,  23),  and
especially  a  fruitful  love  to  our  brethren  (John  xv.  12 — ^14;  1  John  iii.  16 — 18),  whom
he  teaches  us  to  regard  as  being  himself  (Matt.  xxv.  35—45),  Love  to  Jesus  Christ
has  been,  and  still  is,  the  strongest  motive-power  in  the  world  in  favour  of  all  godliness
and  goodness.  5.  Its  reioards.  Love  to  Christ  is  not  mercenary,  and  makes  no  stipu-
lation for  recompense.  It  is  its  own  reward.  Yet  in  the  midst  of  a  cold  and  unbelieving
world  it  needs  all  supports.  These  are  to  be  found  in  the  assurance  of  the  approval  and
aifection  of  Christ  himself,  and  of  the  Father  (John  xiv.  21,  23 ;  xvi.  27),  and  the  pros-
pect of  sharing  the  glory  and  joy  of  Christ  for  ever  (John  xvii.  24;  2  Tim.  iv.  8;
Matt.  xix.  29 ;  Jas.  L  12 ;  iL  5).  On  the  other  hand,  to  be  destitute  of  love  to  Christ
IS  to  be  lost  (1  Cor.  xtL  22).— Q.  W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXIV.


Ver.  1. — And  again  the  anger  of  Jehovah
was  kindled  against  Israel.  It  is  probable
that  this  chapter  once  stood  in  intimate
connection  with  ch.  xxL,  and  that  the
famine  therein  described  was  followed  by
a  pestilence,  of  which  the  blame  largely
rested  upon  David,  though  the  sin  punished
by  it  was  fully  shared  by  the  people.  In
saying  that  David  was  moved  of  Jehovah
to  number  Israel  and  Judah,  the  writer
acknowledges  the  great  truth  that  all  action,
both  good  and  evil,  is  of  God.  "  Shall  there
be  evil  in  a  city,  and  Jehovah  hath  not  done
it?"  (Amos  iii.  6).  While  we  are  taught
to  pray  that  we  may  not  be  led  into  tempta-


tion, yet  trial  and  temptation  are  by  God's
ordinance  for  man's  good.  Man  falls  only
when  the  temptation  gives  the  opportunity
for  the  outbreak  of  that  which  already  was
at  work  within  (Jas.  i.  14).  If  the  previous
watch  over  the  heart  has  been  careful  and
earnest,  then  the  temptation  is  a  stepping-
stone  to  a  nobler  and  more  pure  godliness ;
and  if  a  man  fall,  yet  even  so  he  learns  by
outward  proof  what  was  secretly  ruining
his  soul,  and  may  by  its  manifestation  be
led  to  repentance.  There  were  festering  in
David's  heart  a  thirst  for  war,  and  pride  in
his  victories;  a  growing  ambition,  and,  as
its  necessary  result,  a  disregard  of  the  rights
of  other  nations.  The  same  passions  were
gaining  a  daily  iuoreasing  influence  over


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


59S


the  people  generally.  It  is  too  often  the
case  that  a  nation  iiBes  the  bravery  which
has  obtained  for  it  freedom  from  foreign
oppression,  to  impose  the  yoke  of  slavery
upon  others.  But  this  chastisement  brought
bauk  David  and  his  subjects  to  more  up-
right counsels.  In  1  Chron.  xzi.  1  the
temptation  is  ascribed  to  Satan,  because
David  fell.  God  tempts,  that  is,  tries,  men
that  thsy  may  stand  more  firmly  and  ad-
vance in  all  that  is  true  and  good.  Satan
tempts  men  that  he  may  find  out  their
weaknesses  and  effect  their  ruin.  Yet
David  fell  only  to  rise  again.  Satan's
triumph  was  but  temporary,  and  the  result
was  good  for  king  and  people,  who  would
have  suffered  far  more  terribly  from  the  effects
of  their  lust  of  war  than  from  the  pestilence.
Temptation,  then,  has  two  sides,  and  is  good
or  evil  according  to  the  use  we  make  of  it ;
but  in  itself  it  is  a  necessity  for  our  proba-
tion. The  trials  and  sorrows  of  life  serve
but  to  break  up  the  fallow  ground  (Jer.  iv.
3);  and  without  them  our  hearts  would
remain  hard  as  the  roadway ;  and  the  good
seed,  which  may  spring  up  to  eternal  life,
would  lie  unheeded  upon  the  surface,  and
find  no  entrance  into  their  depths.  (On  the
word  "  Satan,"  nevertheless,  see  note  on
ch.  xix.  22.  The  Eevised  Version  in  1
Chron.  xxi.  1  puts  in  the  margin,  "or,
an  adversary."  But  in  such  matters  our
constant  adversary  is  the  devil.)  As  re-
gards the  exact  tithe  to  which  this  pesti-
lence may  be  referred,  we  cannot  draw
any  certain  conclusion  from  its  place  in
I  Chron.  zxi.,  because  it  seems  to  have
been  inserted  there  in  connection  with  the
arrangements  for  the  building  of  the  temple,
which  was  erected  upon  the  site  purchased
from  Araunah.  As  Joab,  however,  could
be  spared  for  nine  months  and  twenty  days
for  the  making  of  this  census,  it  is  plain  that
it  took  place  in  a  time  of  profound  peace.
Probably,  therefore,  its  position  in  1  Chro-
nicles is  right,  namely,  at  some  time  after  the
termination  of  David's  great  wars.  About
twelve  years  elapsed  between  the  capture
of  Babbah  and  the  rebellion  of  Absalom,
and  if  duriag  tiis  period  the  respect  of  the
people  for  David  was  first  damaged  by  the
revelation  of  his  adultery  with  Batbsheba,
and  the  murder  of  her  husband,  and  then
rudely  shaken  by  the  repeated  manifesta-
tion of  the  displeasure  of  the  Most  High,
it  is  not  so  surprising,  perhaps,  that  his  hold
upon  his  subjects  was  so  small  as  to  make
them  ready  to  favour  the  designs  of  his
ambitions  son.  Bat  wherein  lay  the  sin?
Not  only  was  a  census  lawful,  but  it  was
actually  commanded  (Exod.  xxx.  12,  iqq.);
and  the  idea  of  the  Jewish  commentators,
that  the  sin  consisted  in  neglecting  to  pay
the  half-shekel  there  enjoined  upon  each


man  numbered,  is  not  merely  gratuitous,
but  is  disproved  by  Joab's  remonstrance ;
for  he  objects  to  the  census  absolutely.
From  what,  too,  we  know  of  Joab's  character,
we  cannot  suppose  that  he  would  be  par-
ticularly shocked  at  this  being  a  census
of  the  fighting  men.  Yet  these  Israelites
were  very  noble  men  in  their  love  of  free-
dom and  their  respect  for  their  national  con-
stitution ;  and  if  Joab  observed  in  David  a
growing  disposition  towards  despotism,  and
foresaw  danger  to  the  nation's  liberty  from
the  king's  lust  of  foreign  conquest,  he  was
too  upright  a  statesman  not  to  oppose  a
measure  which  would  strengthen  the  king
in  his  dangerous  tendencies.  His  words  in
1  Chron.  xxi.  3,  "  Are  they  not  all  my  lord's
servants?"  seem  to  have  this  meaning.
David  was  the  master  of  all  these  fighting
men.  If  their  vast  number  was  paraded
before  his  imagination,  it  might  lead  him,
flushed  with  past  successes,  into  aggressive
war ;  and  victory  abroad  would  lead  to  the
destruction  of  freedom  at  home.  The  sin
plainly  lay  in  the  violation  of  the  principles
of  the  theocratic  government,  which  fos-
tered personal  independence  in  every  mem-
ber of  the  nation,  and  were  opposed  to
every  war  except  one  of  self-defence;  and
it  was  the  fact  that  a  nation  so  governed
was  weak  and  almost  powerless  even  to
protect  itself,  that  had  made  the  people
clamour  for  a  king.  And  now  the  opposite
dangers  were  developing  themselves,  and
the  Israelites,  dazzled  by  the  glamour  of
victory,  were  joining  with  their  king  in  a
longing  after  extended  empire.  The  pesti-
lence stopped  them  for  the  present  in  their
ambitious  course;  the  disruption  of  the
kingdom  under  Eehoboam  dispelled  their
dream  for  ever.  In  1  Chron.  xxvii.  23  we
also  find  the  thought  that  the  taking  of  a
census,  though  several  times  practised  by
Moses  (Exod.  xxxviii.  26;  Kumb.  i.  2;
xxvi.  2),  was  in  itself  presumptuous,  because
it  seemed  to  contradict  the  promise  in  Gen.
XV.  5,  that  the  seed  of  Abraham  should  be
past  numbering.  He  moved.  It  is  impos-
sible to  translate,  "  and  one  moved,"  under-
standing thereby  Satan,  as  stated  in  Chro-
nicles. It  was  Israel  which  had  incurred  the
Divine  anger  by  its  lust  of  war,  and  Jehovah
used  David,  who  was  himself  the  victim  of
the  same  evil  passions,  to  take  a  step  which
led  on  to  the  just  chastisement.  Ifumber;
Hebrew,  count.  It  is  a  different  word  from
that  translated  "  number  "  in  the  rest  of  the
chapter.

Ver.  2. — ^7or  the  king  said;  Hebrew,  and
the  king  said.  David's  command  was  not  the
cause  of  Jehovah's  anger,  but  the  result  of
his  having  himself  given  way  to  ambition ;
and,  as  he  yielded  to  the  temptation,  it  so
far  became  an  act  s>f  Satan,  in  that  it  led  to


696


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [ch.  xxiv.  1— 25.


sin;  but  iu  its  final  result  it  led  to  good,
in  that  tlie  chastisement  cured  the  people
of  their  thirst  for  war.  And  as  Satan  can
act  only  bo  far  as  the  Divine  will  permits,
the  temptation  was  most  truly  the  doing  of
JehoTah  (but  see  note  on  1  Bam.  xsvi.  19).
Captain  of  the  host,  which  was  with  him.
There  is  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  about  this
passage,  as  the  word  for  "  host "  is  not  that
elsewhere  used,  aud  the  last  phrase  is  some-
what meaningless.  In  1  Chron.  xxi.  2  we
find  "  David  said  to  Joab  and  to  the  rulers
of  the  people."  Without  the  concurrence
of  these  rulers,  who  were  the  princes  of  the
tribes,  the  census  could  not  have  been  taken.
But  as  the  ancient  versions  confirm  the
reading  of  the  Hebrew  here,  no  change  of
the  text  is  admissible.  Number  ye.  This
is  distinctly  the  war-word,  for  which  see
note  on  ch.  xviii.  1.  It  proves  that  the
census  was  taken  for  military  reasons.
Even  this  in  itself  was  not  wrong  (Numb.
ixvi.  2),  but  it  is  indicative  of  David's  pur-
pose. When,  moreover,  Moses  numbered
the  people,  the  census  was  taken  by  the
priests  (Numb.  i.  3;  xxvi.  1,  2),  and  from
the  payment  of  the  half-shekel  to  the
sanctuary,  it  appears  that  it  was  to  some
extent  a  religious  ceremony.  All  this
David  neglects,  and  the  employment  of
Joab  goes  far  to  prove  that  what  David
wanted  was  an  examination  of  the  military
resources  of  his  kingdom.

Ver.  3. — ^Why  doth  my  lord  the  king
delight  in  this  thing?  Joab  was  an  un-
scrupulous and  irreligious  man ;  but  he  was
clear-headed,  and  far  more  statesmanlike
than  David  (ch.  xix.  5 — 7).  He  saw  whither
the  king  was  drifting,  and  that  the  increase
of  the  royal  power,  resulting  from  success  iul
«ar,  would  be  fatal  to  the  liberties  of  Israel.
Probably,  too,  though  he  had  consented  to
onrry  out  Uriah's  murder,  yet  he  despised
David  for  it.  When  he  had  murdered
Abner  to  avenge  Asahel,  David  had  de-
prived him  of  his  command,  and  he  had  to
endure  a  long  period  of  disgrace ;  and  now
David  uses  him  to  murder  one  altogether
innocent.  Joab,  we  may  feel  sure,  noted
the  degradation  of  David's  character,  and
drew  the  conclusion  that  he  was  not  the
man  to  be  trusted  at  the  head  of  a  military
despotism.  Warned  thus  by  what  he  saw,
his  mind  reverted  to  the  principles  of  the
theocracy,  and  their  truth  and  value  be-
came more  clear  to  his  understanding;  and
honourably  he  remonstrates  with  David  for
violating  them.

Ver.  4. — The  captains  of  the  host.  The
matter  was  not  undertaken  without  a  council
being  held,  and  at  it  David's  chief  officers
agreed  with  Joab ;  but  David  had  made  up
his  mind,  and  would  take  no  advice.

Ver.  5. — Aroer.     There  is  some  uncer-


tainty as  to  the  Aroer  here  meant.  Thero
is  first  a  city  of  that  name  in  the  tribe  of
Gad  facing  Babbah  (Josh.  xiii.  25),  and
this  is  apparently  the  city  meant ;  for  it  is
said  that  "Joab  and  his  men  pitched  in
Aroer,  on  the  south  side  of  the  city  situated
in  the  middle  of  the  valley  of  Gad,  and
unto  Jazer."  Now,  Jazer  is  also  in  Gad,
about  seven  miles  west  of  Babbah,  and  as
Babbah  is  on  the  extreme  east  of  tie
Israelite  territory  towards  Ammon,  it  would
be  a  very  convenient  spot  from  which  to
commence  the  numbering.  But  there  is
another  Aroer  on  the  Arnon,  to  the  south
of  Beuben,  and  many  commentators  think
that  this  Aroer  must  be  meant,  as  other-
wise the  tribe  of  Beuben  would  seem  to
have  been  omitted.  But  this  Aroer  ia
regularly  called  "  Aroer  on  the  brink  of  the
valley  of  Arnon  "  (Deut.  ii.  36 ;  iv.  48 ;  Josh.
xii.  2 ;  xiii.  9,  16) ;  or  simply  Aroer  "  iu
the  valley  of  Arnon"  (Deut.  iii.  12 ;  2  Kings
X.  33);  and  cannot  possibly  be  "the  city
in  the  midst  of  the  valley  of  Gad,"  nor  can
this  Aroer  be  "  toward  Jazer."  Beally  the
difficulty  is  made  by  commentators  whose
idea  of  the  method  of  the  census  is  super-
ficial. Joab,  in  commencing  it,  formed  an
encampment  in  the  open  country  on  the
right-hand  side,  that  is,  on  the  south  of
Aroer  in  the  tribe  of  Gad,  as  being  central,
with  Beuben  on  the  south,  and  Manasseh
on  the  north.  It  was  "  toward  Jazer,"  that
is,  it  was  on  the  Jazer  klde  of  Aroer,  aud
not  on  the  side  opposite  Babbah.  We,  with
our  simpler  way  of  describing  the  points  of
the  compass,  would  merely  say  that  Joab's
camp  was  in  the  open  pasture-land  south-
west of  Aroer.  Joab  probably  selected  this
spot  because,  though  on  the  eastern  border,
it  was  yet  not  too  far  from  Jerusalem,  was
central,  and  because  a  brook  from  Jazer
flowing  eastward  for  some  distance,  and
thence  to  the  north  past  Babbah,  would
supply  his  people  with  water ;  and  from  this
camp  he  would  direct  the  proceedings  of
those  who  were  to  take  the  census.  And
as  probably  there  would  be  conaiderable
opposition — for  the  people  would  see  in  an
act  which  for  four  centuries  had  been  in
desuetude  threats  of  heavier  taxation,  of
heavier  forced  labour,  and  of  longer  service
with  the  army — Joab  would  require  the
presence  of  a  body  of  troops  sufficiently
powerful  to  overawe  malcontents.  And
these  would  be  of  no  use  at  Aroer  on  the
Arnon,  in  the  distant  south,  but  must  lie
encamped  in  some  central  position,  whence
detachments  could  rapidly  be  moved  to
any  place  where  there  was  danger  of  re-
sistance.

Ver.  6. — Then  they  oame  to  Gilead.  When
the  enumerators  had  finished  their  labours
iu  Beuben  and  the  region  south  of  Aroer,


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


697


Joal)    moved    his   camp   northwards,  and

Eitoheil  in  Gilead,  on  the  river  Jabbok ;  and,
aving  completed  the  counting  in  this  part
of  the  tribe  of  Gad,  would  next  enter  the
wild  regions  of  Manasseh.  It  is  probable
that  the  tribal  princes  and  local  ofScera
actually  numbered  the  people,  and  that
Joab,  with  a  powerful  force,  constrained
them  to  obedience  often  against  their  will.
It  was  possibly  this  danger  of  resistance
which  made  David  entrust  the  business  to
Joab,  instead  of  employing  the  Levites.
The  land  of  Tahtim-hodshi.  Gesenius  dis-
misses this  name  with  the  remark  that  it
can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  genuine.  The
versions  give  little  help;  but  Theniuscleverly
extracts  from  the  LXX.,  "unto  Bashan,
ivhioh  is  Edrei."  Otherg,  by  a  slight  change
In  the  Hebrew,  read,  "the  land  of  the
Hittites,"  and  suppose  that  Hodshi  is  a
corruption  of  the  Hebrew  word  for  "month,"
■0  that  the  whole  might  have  been,  "  They
eame  to  the  land  of  the  Hittites  in  the
(third)  month."  Others,  again,  suppose  that
Hodshi  is  a  corruption  of  the  name  of  the
town  Kadesh.  -But  the  versions  would  cer-
tainly have  preserved  anything  so  common-
place as  this.  When  they  make  mistakes,
it  is  almost  invariably  in  proper  names
or  unusual  phrases.  The  emendation  of
Thenius  is  too  ingenious  to  be  aooepteil,  but
it  gives  the  right  sense,  namely,  that  from
Gilead  and  the  tribe  of  Gad  the  numerators
went  northward  through  Bashan  and  the
rest  of  the  half-tribe  of  Manaeseli  till  they
came  to  Dan,  the  town  on  the  extreme  north-
east border,  and  the  limit  in  that  direction
of  the  Israelite  realm,  as  Beersheba  was  its
limit  on  the  south.  San-jaan.  Nowhere
else  is  Dan  found  with  this  addition,  and  the
Syriao  omits  it  even  here.  The  Vulgate,  and
Septuagint  (Codex  Alex.)  read  Dan-jaar
the  woodland  Dan.  Possibly  the  names  of
two  towns  have  been  run  into  one,  and  the
original  reading  was  "  unto  Dan  and  Ijon  "
(see  1  Kings  xv.  20).  Ijon  was  on  the
direct  road  from  Dan  to  Sidon.  Zidon.
This  was  on  the  extreme  northwestern
boundary.  It  did  not  actually  belong  to
David,  but  both  it  and  Tyre  had  apparently
placed  themselves  under  bis  protection,  and
were  bound  to  render  some  kind  of  military
service.

Ver.  7.— Tyre  (oomp.  Josh.  xix.  29).  Tyre
and  the  whole  coast-land  between  it  and
Sidon  had  been  too  strong  for  the  tribe  of
Asher,  and  remained  unsubdued.  But,  like
the  independent  states  in  India,  it  acknow-
ledged the  supremacy  of  the  paramount
power.  The  cities  of  the  Eivltes,  and  of  the
Canaanites.  It  is  evident  from  this  that
even  in  David's  time  there  were  towns  and
districts  were  Hivites  and  Canaanites  dwelt
as  distinct  communities,  governed  probably


by  their  own  laws.  But  as  they  were  bound
to  serve  in  the  Israelite  armies,  they  were
included  in  the  census,  and  possibly  one  of
its  main  objects  was  to  learn  the  number
of  fighting  men  of  alien  races  dwelling  in
Israel.  They  seem  to  have  been  reckoned
as  belonging  to  the  tribe  in  whose  borders
they  dwelt.  So  Baanah  and  Reohab,  the
murderers  of  Ishbosheth,  though  Beerothitei
(and  therefore  Gibeonites,  who  again  were
Hivites),  were  counted  to  Benjamin  (ch.
iv.  2).  These  Gentile  communities  were
chiefly  to  be  found  in  the  north,  for  which
reason  it  was  called  "the  circuit  (Gelil)  of
the  nations  "  (Isa.  ix.  1),  and  in  later  times
from  Qelil  came  the  name  GalUee.  The
Syriao  adds  "  Jebusites,"  and  we  find  Jeru-
salem occupied  by  a  community  of  Jebusites
living  in  independence  in  the  very  neigh-
bourhood of  the  warlike  tribe  of  Benjamin
(ch.  y.  6).  This  numbering  of  the  aborigines
by  David  is  referred  to  in  2  Chron,  ii,  17,
where  it  is  added  that  Solomon  made  a
separate  census  of  them,  and  found  that
there  were  in  Israel  no  fewer  than  a  hun-
dred and  firty-tbree  thousand  six  hundred
of  these  aliens.

Ver.  8. — Nine  months  and  twenty  days.
This  long  period  seems  excessive,  if  nothing
more  was  intended  than  merely  counting
the  heads  of  the  people,  especially  as  the
census  was  left  unfinished.  But  there
might  very  probably  be  difSculties  with  the
aliens  dwelling  in  Israel;  and  it  is  still
more  probable  that  there  was  a  complete
examination  of  all  the  military  resources  of
the  land.  The  result  showed  a  very  dif-
ferent state  of  things  from  that  described  in
1  Sam.  xiii.  19—22,  and  we  can  well  under-
stand the  existence  of  much  elation  and
war-lust  among  the  Israelites  on  the  first
flush  of  pride  in  their  new  empire.

Ver.  9. — ^There  were  in  Israel  eight  hun-
dred thousand  valiant  men  that  drew  the
sword;  and  the  men  of  Judah  were  five
hundred  thousand  men.  In  Chronicles  the
numbers  are,  "of  Israel  eleven  hundred
thousand  men,  and  of  Juilah  four  hundred
and  sixty-five  thousand  men."  These  dis-
crepancies are  a  remarkable  confirmation  of
the  truth  of  what  is  said  in  1  Chron.  xxvii.
24  that  because  of  the  outbreak  of  the
Divine  wrath,  "  the  number  was  not  put  in
the  account  of  the  Chronicles  of  King
David,"  Neither  the  writer  of  the  Books  of
Samuel  nor  of  Chronicles  had  any  official
document  to  refer  to ;  and  as  the  numbers
are  lump  sums,  and  derived  probably  from
what  was  said  by  the  enumerators,  the  more
exact  four  hundred  and  sixty-five  thousand
men  of  the  Chronicles  might  easily  in  round
numbers  be  called  a  half-million.  The  other
is  a  much  larger  discrepancy,  and  no  satis-
Factory  explanation  of  it  has  been  given.     It


59S


THE  SrCOND  fiOOK;  OP  SAMuEL.       [ca.  ^xiv.  1— 25.


ia,  however,  quite  possible  that  theadditional
three  bnndred  tliousand  men  were  made  up
of  the  thirty-eight  thousand  Levites,  as
numbered  on  a  later  oocaBion  by  David,  of
the  Btnjamites,  and  of  the  aborigines,  who
belonged  to  the  northern  part  of  the  kingdom,
and  might  be  included  among  "  all  they  of
Israel"  (1  Cbron.  xxi.  5).  The  numbers
are  further  attacked  on  the  ground  of  ex-
aggeration. A  million  and  a  half  of  fighting
men  means  a  general  population  of  six  or
seven  millions.  Now,  Palestine  at  most
does  not  contain  more  than  eleven  thousand
square  miles,  and  a  population  of  six  millions
means  five  hundred  and  forty-five  persons
to  every  square  mile,  or  one  to  every  acre.
The  country  was  undoubtedly  very  fertile
iu  ancient  times,  and  the  ruins  of  populous
cities  are  found  where  now  there  is  a  waste.
But  tliere  were  vast  forests  'and  pasture-
lands  and  downs,  where  there  were  the
means  of  subsistence  for  only  a  few.  But
we  must  remember  that  the  enumerators
wen  t  as  far  north  as  Tyre,  and  counted  the  in-
habitants, therefore,  of  the  seaboard  between
it  and  Sidon.  Probably  they  also  acted  in
the  same  way  in  the  south,  where  the  limits
of  Simeon  were  very  uncertain.  Besides
this,  there  is  a  very  remarkable  undesigned
coincidence.  We  read  in  1  Chron.  xxvii.
that  David  had  a  force  of  two  hundred  and
eighty-eight  thousand  men,  who  formed  his
regular  array,  and  of  whom  twenty-four
thousand  were  called  up  for  training  every
month.  But  there  are  reasons  for  believing
that  David  took  for  this  purpose  each  fifth
man  of  those  of  the  military  age  (see  Sime,
'  Kingdom  of  All  Israel,'  p.  389) ;  and  thus
the  whole  number  of  such  men  would  be
one  million  four  hundred  and  forty  thousand.
This,  as  Mr.  Sime  has  shown  (ibid.,  p.  378),
holds  a  middle  place  between  the  one  million
three  hundred  thousand  of  the  Book  of
Samuel,  and  the  one  million  five  hundred
and  seventy  thousand  of  Chronicles,  and
shows  that  these  numbers  are  not  to  be
rejected  on  the  score  of  exaggeration.

Ver.  .10. — David's  heart  smote  him.  It
appears  from  1  Chron.  xxvii.  24  that  the
census  was  not  completed,  and,  though  Joab
had  visited  Judah,  he  had  not  even  begun
to  enrol  the  names  of  the  men  of  the  tribe
of  Benjamin  (1  Chron.  xxi.  6).  It  appears
also  that  the  displeasure  of  God  was  mani-
festing itself  before  David  repented  (1  Chron.
xxi.  7 ;  xxvii.  24).  Some  sign  of  this,  either
in  public  trouble,  or  in  the  brooding  of  the
pestilential  miasma  over  the  land,  brought
home  to  David's  mind  the  conviction  of  sin ;
and  he  at  once  bumbled  himself  before  God,
for  tlie  vanity  of  mind  which  had  engendered
in  him  a  wicked  lust  after  martial  glory  and
thirst  for  bloodshed.  I  have  done  very  fool-
i8hl7(oomp.  1  Sam.  ziii.  13 ;  2  Chrou.  xvl.  9).


Ver.  11. — For  when,  etc. ;  Hebrew,  and
David  arose  in  the  morning,  and  a  word  of
Jehovah  came  unto  Oad,  a  seer  of  David,
toying.  The  visit  of  the  seer  was  the  result
of  David's  repentance,  and  not  its  cause.
And  he  was  sent  in  mercy,  that,  after  such
punishment  as  would  cure  both  king  and
people  of  their  folly,  there  might  be  for  both
forgiveness.  The  name  for  leer  is  not  roeh,
the  old  word  used  in  1  Sam.  ix.  9,  and  which
simply  means  "  one  who  sees ; "  but  chozeh,  a
gazer,  one  who  looks  with  fixed  eyes,  that
penetrate  into  the  hidden  world.

Ver.  13. — Seven  years  of  famine.  In  1
Chron.  xxi.  12  and  here  in  the  Septuagint  we
find  "  three  years."  This  is  probably  right
as  being  in  harmony  with  the  rest.  Three
years  of  famine,  three  months  of  defeat,  or
three  days  of  pestilenco.  In  Ezek.  xiv.  21
famine,  pestilence,  and  the  sword  are  men-
tioned as  three  of  God's  four  sore  judgments.
But  a  fourth  judgment  is  there  enumerated,
namely,  that  of  the  increase  of  wild  beasts,
and  Joshua  the  Stylite  says  that  in  Meso-
potamia, as  a  result  of  the  desolating  war
between  the  Bomans  and.  Persians,  about
A.D.  505,  beasts  of  prey  liad  become  so
numerous  that  they  entered  the  villages  and
carried  off  the  children  from  the  streets,  and
were  so  bold  and  ferocious  that  even  the
men  scarcely  dared  go  about  their  labours
in  the  fields  (Jos.  Stjl.,  edit.  Ur.,  chap.  85).
Now  advise,  and  see ;  Hebrew,  now  know,
and  Bee.  The  phrase  is  common  in  the
historical  books  (see  1  Sam.  xii.  17 ;  xiv.  38 ;
xxiii.  22;  xxiv.  11;  xxv.  17,  etc.).  Our
translators  render  the  phrase  in  a  multitude
of  ways  without  greatly  improving  it.

Ver.  14. — Let  us  faU  now  into  the  hand
of  Jehovah.  David  had  sinned  against  God,
and  to  God  he  humbly  submitted  liimself.
There  would  thus  be  nothing  to  come  be-
tween the  soul  and  God,  ana  prevent  the
chastisement  from  having  its  due  effect
upon  the  heart.  A  famine  would  indeed
equally  come  from  God,  but  would  neces-
sitate effort  and  exertion  on  man's  part.  In
the  pestilence  he  would  wait  patiently,  nor
look  to  anything  but  prayer  for  averting
God's  judgment.  In  Ps.  li.  1  David  refers
to  God's  mercies,  in  much  the  same  way  as
here,  as  being  a  motive  to  repentance.

Ver.  15. — Even  to  the  time  appointed.
This  rendering,  though  very  uncertain,  is
retained  in  the  Bevised  Version.  It  would
mean,  of  course,  the  end  of  the  third  day,  as
the  pestilence  was  to  last  for  that  time.  The
objections  to  it  are  that  there  is  no  article
in  the  Hebrew,  so  that  literally  it  would  be
"unto  a  time  appointed."  Secondly,  the
pestilence  did  not  continue  unto  the  time
appointed,  but  was  mercifully  stayed.  And
thirdly,  these  words  are  a  literal  translation,
indeed,  of  the  Vulgate,  but  a  violation  of  i(a


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.1       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAM  DEL.


699


mraning.  For  Jerome,  who  mnrle  tlie  trans-
lation, says,  " '  tempua  oonstitutum '  means
the  houi  when  the  evening  sacrifice  was
offered"  ('Tradd.  Heb.  in  Duos  Libros
Begum').  The  Tereions  all  agree  that  the
pestilence  lasted  only  a  few  hours.  Thus
the  Syriao  translates,  "From  morning  until
the  sixth  hour,"  t.e.  noon.  So  too  the  Septua-
gint,  "From  morniug  until  the  midday
meal."  The  Vulgate  ndda  on  three  hours,
as  the  evening  sacriGce  was  at  the  ninth
hour;  and  this  is  the  meaning  of  the
Chaldee  Paraphrase:  "From  the  time  the
daily  sacrifice  was  slain  until  it  was  burnt,"
As  the  word  moed  used  here  means  both  a
time  or  place  appointed  for  a  meeting,  and
also  the  meeting  itself,  the  right  translation
probably  is,  "  From  the  morning  even  to  the
time  of  assembly,"  or,  as  we  should  say, "  the
hour  of  service."  Moed  was  the  regular
word  for  the  time  of  the  temple  service,
derived  from  the  old  name  of  the  tabernacle,
which  was  called  "  the  tent  of  moed "  (see
Numb.  xvi.  19,  etc.),  rendered  in  the  Autho-
rized Version,  "  the  tabernacle  of  the  con-
gregation," and  in  the  Revised  Version,
"the  tent  of  meeting."  The  hour  would
thus  be  the  ninth,  or  three  o'clock  in  the
afternoon.  Seventy  thousand  men.  Tliis
is  a  vast  number  to  fall  victims  of  the  pesti-
lence in  so  short  a  time,  as  even  the  most
dangerous  forms  of  sickness  take  some  days
for  their  development.  But  similarly  the
army  of  fSennaoherib  was  cut  off  in  a  night
(Isa.  xxxvii.  36);  as  were  the  firstborn  in
Egypt,  whose  visitation  more  nearly  re-
sembles the  course  of  this  pestilence ;  and
the  rapidity  of  the  death-blow,  striking
down  so  vast  a  multitude  suddenly  through-
out all  parts  of  the  land,  would  be  proof  to
every  mind  that  tlie  mortality  was  the
Divine  chastisement  for  national  sin.  It  is
possible,  nevertheless,  that  the  black  death-
olond,  bringing  with  it  the  plague,  may
have  been  settling  down  upon  the  land  pre-
viously, and  have  alarmed  David,  and
brought  him  to  repentance ;  and  though  no
new  cases  occurred  after  the  offering  of  his
burnt  offerings  (ver.  25),  yet  It  by  no  moans
follows  that  all  cases  of  infection  were  mira-
culously cured.  The  malady  may  have  run
in  them  its  normal  course.  It  was  Jerusalem
that  was  saved  from  the  blow,  and,  after  the
offering  of  the  burnt  offering,  the  pestilence
smote  down  no  more.

Ver.  16. — The  angel.  In  the  next  verse
we  are  told  that  David  saw  the  angel,  and
more  fully  in  1  Chron.  xxi.  16  that  he
beheld  him  "  standing  between  the  earth
and  the  heaven,  having  a  drawn  sword  in  his
hand."  The  pestilence  plainly  was  not  a
natural  visitation;  though  possibly  the
means  used  was  a  simoom,  or  poisonous  wind,
IMlvanoing  with  terrible  rapidity  throughout


Israel.  The  lord  repented.  In  all  the
dealings  of  God  s  providence,  his  actions  are
made  to  depend  upon  human  conduct.
Looked  at  from  above,  from  God's  side,  all
things  are  foreknown  and  immutably  fixed ;
looked  at  from  man's  side,  all  is  perpetually
changing  as  man  changes.  The  rescue  of
Jerusalem  as  the  result  of  David's  peni-
tence and  prayers,  is  thus  to  human  view  a
change  in  the  counsels  and  even  in  the  feel-
ings of  him  who  changeth  not.  The  thresh-
ing-place. "  The  threshing-floor,"  as  rightly
translated  in  vers.  18,  21,  21.  Threshing-
floors  were  constructed,  whenever  possible,  on
eminences,  that  the  wind  might  drive  the
chaff  and  dust  away.  Araunah's  was  on  the
east  of  Jerusalem,  outside  the  walls,  upon
Mount  Moriah,  and  was  the  site  on  which
the  temple  was  built  (see  2  Chron.  iii.  1).
Araunah.  The  name  is  so  spelt  seven  times
in  vers.  20 — 24,  for  which  reason  the  Mas-
sorites  have  substituted  it  for  Avamah,  found
in  this  verse  in  the  Hebrew  text,  and  for
Aranyah  in  ver.  18.  In  1  Chron.  xxi.  the
name  is  spelt  Ornan ;  in  the  Septuagint  in
all  places,  'Opyd,  Orna,  and  in  the  Syriae,
Oron.  The  name  is,  of  course,  a  Jebusite
word,  and  the  variation  arises  from  the
narrators  having  written  down  tlie  sound  as
it  caught  their  ears.  In  this,  as  in  many
other  particulars,  it  is  clear  that  the  ehro-
nicier  derived  his  account  from  independent
sources.

Ver.  17. — I  have  done  wickedly ;  Hebrew,
J  have  done  perversely,  or  crookedly.  David
acknowledges  that  his  conduct  had  not  been
upright  and  straightforward  I,  but  that  he
had  turned  aside  into  the  paths  of  self-will
and  personal  aggrandizement.  These  sheep,
what  have  they  done  3  The  sin  had  been
quite  as  much  that  of  the  people  as  of  the
king;  for  the  war-lust  had  entered  into  the
very  heart  of  the  nation.  But  David,  with
that  warmtli  of  feeling  which  makes  his
character  bo  noble,  can  see  only  his  own
fault.  It  is  not  a  true  repentance  when  the
sinner  looks  for  excuses,  and  apportions  the
blame  between  himself  and  others.  To
David  the  people  seemed  innocent,  or,  if  at
all  to  blame,  he  felt  that  it  was  he  who  had
set  them  the  example  and  led  them  on.
The  narrative  in  this  place  is  much  briefer
than  in  Chronicles.

Ver.  18. — Go  up.  David  probably,  on  re-
ceiving God's  message,  had  gone  to  the  tent
which  he  had  pitched  for  the  ark  in  Zion
(ch.  vi.  17),  in  order  that  he  might  pray
there;  and  while  on  his  way  he  saw  the
dark  plague-clond  coming  as  the  messenger
of  God's  wrath  to  smite  Jerusalem.  In  an
agony  of  grief,  he  poured  out  his  prayer
that  Jerusalem  might  be  spared,  and  God
heard  him,  and  sent  Gad  a  second  time  to
bid  him  offer  sacrifice,  that,  by  making  an


600


THE  SECOND  W^K  OP  SAMUEL.        [cm.  xxiv.  1—^5


atonement,  he  might  stand  between  th  e  dead
and  the  living,  as  Aaron  had  done  in  the
wilderness  (Numb.  xvi.  46 — 48)  He  is
therefore  to  leave  the  tabernacle,  and  mount
up  to  the  summit  on  which  Arauuah's
threshing-floor  was  situated.  We  read  in
1  Chron.  xxi.  28—30  that  David  wished  to
go  to  Gibcoii,  where  the  Mosaic  tabernacle
and  altar  of  burnt  offering  were,  to  inquire  of
Goi],  but  that  he  was  afraid,  as  the  angel  of
the  pestilence  was  smiting  outside  the  walls.
Tliis  is  nientioueil  as  an  excuse  for  his
offering  at  an  uuconseorated  spot.  But  It
also  suggests  that  David's  choice  was  a  sub-
mission to  a  chastisement  already  at  work.

Yer.  20. — Araunah  .  .  .  saw  the  kiug.
In  1  .Ohrou.  xxi.  20,  "  saw  the  angel ; "  but
the  text  there  is  apparently  corrupt,  the
difference,  moreover,  in  Hebrew  between
"king"  and  "angel"  being  very  slight.
The  addition  there  of  the  story  of  Araunah's
four  sons  hiding  themselves  is  very  lifelike
and  natural.  Vox  these  remnants  of  the
aborigines,  though  tolerated,  yet  held  a  very
insecure  position,  as  we  have  seen  in  the
dealings  of  Saul  with  the  Gibeonites ;  and
the  eojiiing  of  the  king  with  his  retinue  to
tlie  out-of-the-way  spot  where  Araunah  was
at  wi  >rk,  no  doubt  filled  them  all  with  terror.

Ver.  22. — Behold,  here  be  oxen.  Araunah
was  threshing  out  his  wheat  by  dragging
sledges  or  frames  of  wood  without  wheels
over  it.  All  these  he  at  once  gives  to  David,
that  the  sacrifice  may  be  offered  without
delay,  as  it  would  have  cost  much  time  and
labour  to  bring  wood  up  from  the  city.
Instead  of  and  other  instruments  of  the
oxen,  the  Hebrew  has  "the  harness  or  furni-
ture of  the  oxen,"  all  of  which  was  of  wood.

Yer.  23. — All  these  did  Araunah,  as  a
king,  give  unto  the  king.  The  Hebrew  is,
"  The  whole  gave  Araunah  the  king  to  the
king ; "  and  so  the  Yulgate,  dedit  Areuna
rex  regi.  The  rendering  of  the  Eevised
Yersiun  (and  Keil),  "  All  this,  O  king,  doth
Araunah  give  unto  the  king,"  requires  a
change  both  of  the  order  and  of  the  tense.
It  is,  of  course,  possible  (though  highly  im-
probable) that  Araunah  was  the  representa-
tive of  the  kings  of  Jebus,  and  a  titular
monarch,  like  the  Maori  king  in  New  Zea-
land. But  the  word  is  omitted  in  the
Septuagint  and  Syriao,  and  is  probably  a
mere  repetition  of  the  following  word.  The
remark  is  made  in  order  to  point  out
-Araunah's  generosity;   and  to  mark   even


more  clearly  how  hearty  and  sincere  he  was  in
his  offering,  the  narrator  adils,  in  Araunah's
own  words,  his  prayer  for  God's  accepfitnce
of  David  and  his  offering.

Yers.  24, 25 David  bought  the  threshing-
floor  and  the  oxen  for  fifty  shekels  of  silver.
In  1  Chron.  xxi.  25,  "So  David  gave  to
Oman  for  the  place  six  hundred  shekels  of
gold  by  weight."  There  is  a  superficial,
but  no  real  discrepancy  between  these  two
narratives.  David  gave  the  fifty  shekels
for  the  immediate  use  of  the  place,  and  for
the  oxen  and  implements.  He  had  no  idea
at  the  time  of  permanently  occupying  it,
and  probably  the  note  in  the  LXX.,  inter-
polated by  scribes  from  the  margin  into
the  text,  is  true,  "  And  Solomon  added  to
the  altar  afterwards,  for  it  was  small  at  the
first."  It  was  a  small  altar  hurriedly  put
together  for  the  purpose  of  offering  one
sacrifice;  and  fifty  shekels  would  be  full
compensation.  But  the  saorifice  bad  hal-
lowed the  spot,  and,  when  finally  it  was
selected  as  the  site  for  the  temple,  David
bought  the  whole  area  and  all  that  Araunah
possessed  there.  Fifty  shekels  of  silver
would  be  about  £9;  six  hundred  shekels  of
gold  would  be  about  £1500 ;  so  that  there  is
no  comparison  between  the  two  sums.  But
the  precious  metals  were  worth  very  much
more  in  David's  time  than  in  ours,  so  that
the  smaller  sum  was  adequate  compensation
for  David's  first  acquisition,  while  the  larger
implies  the  purchase  of  an  extensive  and
valuable  estate.  Substantially  the  fuller
narrative  in  Chronicles  agrees  with  this.
David  refuses  to  sacrifice  of  that  which  cost
him  nothing,  and  must  therefore  have  at
once  paid  for  what  he  took.  But  when  God
accepted  his  offering,  and  answered  him  by
fire  from  heaven,  then  David  said,  "  This  is
the  house  of  the  Lord  God,  and  this  is  the
altar  of  the  burnt  offering  for  Israel."  And
as  the  Chronicler  has  in  view  throngliout
the  selection  of  the  site  for  the  temple,  lie
naturally  mentions  its  full  cost.  In  the
Book  of  Samuel  this  purpose  is  not  expressly  »
mentioned,  and  the  narrative  closes  with  the
forgiveness  of  the  sin  both  of  David  and  his
people.  Jehovah  was  entreated  for  the  land,
and  the  plagne^as  stayed.  But  this  sudden
smiting  down  of  so  large  a  host  humbled
both  king  and  people,  and  their  eagerness
for  war  and  their  lust  of  empire  ceased.

Dko  Olobia.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  facts  are:  1.  On  account  of  some  transgressions,  God,  leing  angry
with  I-rael,  permits  some  one  to  incite  David  to  number  the  people.  2.  David,  on
issuing  his  commands  to  Joab,i8  met  with  a  remonstrance  from  him  and  the  captains  uf
the  host.     3.  But  ihe  king  persisting  in  his  desire,  Joab  and  his  officers  and  men  apply


oa.  XXIV.  1—26.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK   OF  SAMUEL.  601

themselves  to  the  work,  and  at  the  end  of  nine  months  and  twenty  dayB  return  the
number  of  men  capable  of  serving  in  war  at  1,300,000.  The  difBoulties  involved  in
the  statements  of  this  section  may  be,  at  least,  lightened  by  a  few  considerations.  The
parallel  passage  in  1  Chron.  xxi.  mentions,  in  an  indefinite  way,  an  adversary  as  the
instrument  of  inciting  the  mind  of  David.  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  order  of  the
Divine  government  sometimes  to  allow  agencies  to  act  on  the  minds  of  men  for  purposes
of  trial  and  especially  for  discipline.  Adam  was  assailed.  Satan  had  pei-mission  to
tempt  Job.  David  recognizes  the  possibility  of  Saul  being  incited  against  himself  by
God  (the  Hiph.  as  here,  "^yj}) ;  1  Sam.  xxvi.  19.  A  spirit  or  agency  inclining  to  evil
is  said  to  go  forth  or  be  sent  from  Grod,  when  the  idea  of  permitting  the  free  action  of
evij  influences  as  a  means  of  punishment  for  previous  sins  is  to  be  inculcated  (Judg.  ix.
2S  I  Sam.  xvi.  14;  ch.  xvi.  10;  1  Kings  xxii.  21 — 23).  The  ascription  of  actions  to
Gjd  in  almost  absol.ite  terms,  where  in  reality  the  Divine  action  is  a  withdrawal  of
restraint,  is  a  stront;  Hebraism,  as  seen  in  the  hardening  of  Pharaoh's  heart  (cf.  Isa.  vi.
9,  10;  Ixiii.  17;  Matt.  xiii.  13 — 15).  It  is  no  uncumnion  thiog  for  sin  to  be  punislied
by  sin  (Ps.  xvii.  13,  14;  of.  Isa.  x.  5,  6).  Now,  accepting  this  general  tiacliing  as  to
some  of  God's  methods  when  trial  or  chastisement  are  in  view,  we  find  in  ch.  xxi.  that
the  nation  was  chastised  for  a  previous  national  or  semi-national  sin.  It  seems,  there-
fore, natural  that  the  expression  (ver.  1),  "  And  again  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled
against  Israel,"  really  sets  forth  the  event  of  this  chapttr  as  being  a  second  instance  of
national  siiffering  on  account  of  public  sin;  the  diffyrence  being  that  in  ch.  xxi.  the
famine  became  a  fact  before  the  occasion  is  revealed,  while  here  the  fact  of  sin  is  first
stated,  and  the  human  instrumentality  (jf  brin,!i;ing  on  the  punishment  is  then  set  forth.
David  had  sinned  in  the  matter  of  Uriah,  and  been  punished.  Absalom  had  sinned  in
rebellinsr,  and  had  also  been  punished.  But  he  was  not  the  only  sinner.  Israel  had
revolted  under  him  against  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  was  there  to  be  no  punishment  for
Israel  as  a  people  ?  The  whole  history  of  the  dealinj;s  of  God  with  them  gives  the
leply.  Apart  from  any  recent  unrecorded  sin,  there  is,  then,  historical  continuity  in
the  words,  "  The  anger  of  the  Lord  "  was  again  "  kindled  against  Israel."  The  peculiarity
of  the  case  is  this — that  the  free  falling  of  David  into  a  snare  of  pride  and  undue  reliance
on  material  strength  became  the  occasion  and  means  by  which  the  transgression  of
Israel  was  chastised,  while  be,  being  quite  free  in  his  sin,  was  also  caused  to  suifer  for  it.

Deferred  chastisements.  Some  time  evidently  had  elapsed  between  the  sin  of  Israel
and  the  expression  of  Divine  anger  against  it  (ver.  1).  This  and  the  other  Book  of
Samuel  sets  forth  the  chief  cases  of  public  visitation  on  account  of  sin,  e.g.  Eli,  Saul,
David,  Absalom ;  and,  in  keeping  with  this,  the  conduct  of  the  people  in  revolting  against
the  Lord's  anointed  is  now  made  the  occasion  of  Divine  displeasure.  With  reference  to
deferred  chastisements  observe —

I.  That  God  sometimes  waits  till  events  serve  the  pubpose  oj"  chastisement.
The  chastisement  of  Eli  did  not  come  till  national  affairs  so  far  developed  as  to  issue
in  a  disastrous  defeat  of  Israel.  David's  sin  bore  its  bitter  fruit  some  months  and  years
after  committal.  The  sin  of  the  house  of  Saul  was  brought  home  to  the  conscience  of
the  nation  after  his  death  (ch.  xxi.  1).  So  here  the  wicked  conduct  of  the  nation  in
rejeoiing  David,  God's  chosen  servant,  was  a  ved  to  remain  relatively  unnoticed,
as  though  God  were  waiting  for  such  a  development  of  events  in  the  natural  course  of
things  as  would  serve  the  pur[ioses  of  cha.stisement.  Nations,  Churches,  and  individuals
are  siill  allowed  to  go  on  for  a  while  till  events  mature  for  bringing  upon  them  the
reward  of  their  deeds.

II.  That  the  events  which  serve  fob  chastisement  are  brouoht  about  by  the
FREE  ACTION  OF  OTHERS.  The  free  action  of  the  Philistines  brought  on  Eli's  trouble.
The  free  action  of  Absalom  and  Israel  was  the  means  of  chastising  David  for  hig  sin  in
the  case  of  Uriah.  The  natural  development  of  famine,  united  with  a  revelation  of
God's  overruling  purposes,  smote  Israel  for  the  national  crime  against  the  Gibeonites
(ch.  xxi.  1 — 4).  So  here  the  free  action  of  some  evil  person  or  agent  on  the  free  mind
of  David  was  the  natural  event  which  issued  in  his  ofBcial  sin,  and  in  his  punishment
in  such  a  form  as  to  bring  on  Israel  the  chastisement  which  all  along  they  were  deserving
for  their  revolt.  The  same  is  .seen  in  the  free  action  of  Babylon  bringing  oj  tha
(jhastiseuieut  of  captivity,  and  of  Rome  in  bringing  on  the  chastisement  of  the  dispersioii


m  ME  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMtJEL.        [ch.  xxiv.  1-25.

due  for  rejectioi^of  Christ.    God  may  wait  long  before  he  brings  on  what  is  due  to
sin ;  but  all  free  events  are  in  his  hands,  and  be  will  use  up  some  of  them  when  fit
conditions  arise.
III.  The  fbeb  action  of  men  by  which  thbt  are  means  of  chastising  othbbs  ;

FOB   SIN   MAY    BB   ITSELF    SINFUL  AND    SUBJECT  TO  PUNISHMENT.      Davifi's    free   act   in

yielding  to  the  inducement  to  number  the  people  was  a  sin.  It  was  displeasing  to
Qod.  It  was  a  case  of  sin  opening  the  way  for  a  chastisement  for  sin.  There  were
circumstances  in  David's  personal  and  official  position  which  rendered  it  natural  that
bis  deed  should  be  at  once  disowned,  and  in  that  disownment  there  came  the  rod  which
smote  also  for  the  past  sin  of  Israel.  The  acts  of  Babylon  and  Rome  were  wicked,
though  they  were  the  rod  by  which  God  smote  his  people.  It  is  by  a  most  wonderful
adjustment  that  Gk)d  thus  makes  sin  the  avenger  of  sin ;  and  go,  in  course  of  ages,  sin
tends  to  establish  that  very  righteousness  of  God  which  in  its  initiation  it  sought  to
get  aside.  All  the  resources  of  God  are  at  his  command  at  any  time  for  expressing  his
anger  against  sin ;  but  he  does  not  create  new  agencies — he  uses  up  what  is  in  existence,
aad  utilizes  the  successive  acts  even  of  the  wicked.  It  is  a  solemn  fact  that  though
judgment  be  deferred  it  is  not  the  less  sure  (2  Pet.  ii.  3).  Here  is  a  warnius  to  the
impenitent,  and  a  restraint  on  aU.  The  injured  may  rest  assured  that  God  will  bring
1  recompense  (Bom.  xii.  19).

The  subtle  power  of  a  sinful  moHve.  The  narrative  simply  states  outwa  rd  facts ;  but
he  form  ol  '  m  compels  the  belief  that  David's  actions  were  now  governed  by  a  subtle
motive,  sinful  in  its  nature,  complete  in  its  mastery  over  intellect  and  will,  and  so  able
to  dominate  his  entire  nature  that  its  own  real  character  should  all  the  time  be  dis-
i^uised.  It  is  a  difScuIt  matter  to  disintegrate  the  complex  movements  of  the  mind  or
to  present  an  accurate  psychological  analysis  of  an  act  of  sin;  but  we  may  trace  in
David's  case  a  few  features  of  sin  in  its  subjective  workings.  An  underlying  sinful
motive  may  so  operate  as—

L   To  SECUBE  BKFOEE  THE  INTELLECT  A  GOOD  AREAY  OF  REASONS  FOE  AN  ACT.     David

must  have  formulated  reasons  for  his  proposal  to  number  the  people.  Most  probably  he
thought  it  was  a  natural  thing  after  all  the  vicissitudes  the  nation  had  passed  through.
It  would  afford  an  occasion  of  showing  how  God  had  blessed  and  prosjiered  the  people.
He  would  be  in  a  better  position  to  make  up  any  defects  that  might  be  discovered  in
the  defences  of  the  country.  The  knowledge  of  their  unity  and  strength  would  give
encouragement  and  confidence  to  men  apprehensive  of  danger  from  without.  The  result,
becoming  known  among  neighbouring  nations,  would  act  as  a  check  on  their  aggressive-
ness. His  successor  to  the  throne  would  be  in  possession  of  facts  that  would  help  his
administration  of  affairs,  and  there  would  be  some  comfort  in  seeing  how  far  Israel  was
realizing  the  hopes  held  out  to  their  ancestors.  Such  reasons  may  seem  to  be  the  out-
come of  mere  intellectual  activity ;  but  in  reality  they  are  set  in  order  by  the  subtle
influence  of  the  ruling  motive  over  the  intellectual  powers.  Men  do  not  know  to  what
extent  the  form  and  order  of  their  thinkings  are  determined  by  the  governing  desire.
Herein  lies  much  of  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  The  useful  nature  of  facts  can  easily  be
seen  when  the  disposition  would  have  it  so.  The  devil  was  a  clever  reasoner  in  Eden.
The  inner  adversary  of  our  soul,  be  it  evU  motive  or  propensity,  practieally,  by  influence
over  the  intellect,  performs  the  part  of  a  cogent  reasoner,  and  makes  out  a  case  for  the
consent  of  the  reason.

II.  To  DIVERT  CONSCIENCE  FROM  ITSELF.  Conscience  was  alive  in  David  when  first
the  question  of  numbering  occurred  to  him,  but  when  once  the  idea  is  entertained  and
the  subtle  unspoken  motive  has  strengthened  its  hold  on  the  mind  by  being  temporarily
cherished,  it  so  operates  as  to  weaken  the  gaze  of  conscience  on  itself  and  virtually
divert  it  to  more  incidental  circumstances.  An  evil  motive  cannot  live  face  to  face
with  a  live  conscience ;  but  if  by  persistence  it  can  get  lodgment  among  the  many
feelings  of  the  heart,  and  as  it  were  be  hidden  from  direct  single  gaze,  it  can,  by  its
contagious  nature,  create  a  condition  of  things  that  the  conscience  shall  be  occupied  with
other  evils  inferior  in  rank,  while  it  does  its  deadly  work  almost  without  coming  into
consciousness.  So  many  a  man  finds  his  conscience  busy  with  straining  out  a  gnat
while  the  evil  disposition  most  cherished  is  free  to  devour  a  cameL  Hence,  even  great
liiuMrs  are  fometimea  precise  and  punctilioiu  in  minor  matters.


CH.  xxtv.  1-28.]      THE  SECONO  BOOK  OP  SAMtTEL.  603

ITT.  To  GIVE  OBSTINACY  TO  THE  WILL.  It  Beems  strange  that  Da^'id  should  hare
ventured  to  go  against  the  deliberate  protest  of  Joab  and  the  chief  military  men.  His
disregard  of  Joab'a  wishes  can,  perhaps,  be  explained  by  his  previous  quarrels  with  him ;
but  that  he  should  have  gone  against  the  judgment  of  the  chief  men  in  the  army  is
explicable  only  on  the  moral  and  psychological  principle  that  the  subtle  power  of  an
evil  motive,  when  cherished,  imparts  a  peculiar  obstinacy  to  the  wilL  We  see  this
in  human  life.  The  persistence  of  men  in  carrying  out  a  sinful  feeling,  active  though
not  perhaps  distinct  in  consciousness,  is  amazing.  The  will  is  so  imbued  with  the
feeling  as  to  be  proof  against  all  reason  and  all  but  physical  force.  This  is  the  real
bondage.  This  led  Augustine  to  say  that  man,  as  a  sinner,  is  not  free.  There  is  some-
thing akin  to  the  blindness  and  insensibility  and  mechanical  necessity  of  physical  forces
in  a  will  subject  to  the  rule  of  a  sinful  motive.

IV.  To  ENSURE  BELF-ooMPOSDEB.  David  Seems  to  have  set  about  this  business  vrith
coolness,  and  to  have  been  calmly  determined  to  see  it  through.  There  was  no  excite-
ment, and  whatever  occasional  gleams  of  conscience  may  have  fallen  on  the  dark
recesses  where  the  hidden  sipful  motive  lay  doing  its  subtle  work,  they  did  not  per-
manently affect  the  self-possession  of  his  life.  The  sudden  breaking  of  the  spell  came
after  the  nine  months  and  twenty  days.  Bestlessness  and  anxiety  during  a  sinful
course  can  only  arise  when  conscieuce  and  desire  are  face  to  face,  and  conscience  is  not
diverted  from  its  gaze.  When  the  governing  feeling  has,  by  subtle  action,  brought
intellect,  conscience,  and  will  into  subjection,  or  rather  when  its  nature  has  somehow
tainted  and  weakened  them  all,  there  is  a  peace  and  composure  which,  if  not  of  God,  is
nevertheless  serviceable  for  the  execution  of  a  purpose.  It  is  the  bane  of  some  wicked
men  that  their  strength  is  firm.  It  is  an  evil  omen  for  a  religious  man  when  he  is  undis-
turbed in  doing  what  others  know  to  be  wrong.  "  Grey  hairs  are  upon  him,  and  ha
knoweth  it  not."

General  lessons.  1.  It  becomes  men  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances  to
remember  that  they  are  open  to  incitements  to  evil  as  truly  as  the  most  unfavoured.
2.  The  more  elevated  our  position  in  the  religious  life  the  more  subtle  are  the  tempta-
tions of  the  great  adversary.  3.  It  is  possible  for  a  really  good  man  to  becloud  his
last  days  by  falling  into  sin  through  lack  of  watchfulness  and  prayer  against  the  more
secret  forms  of  evil.

Vers.  10 — 17. — A  kin^s  sin  and  a  peoph't  chastisement.  The  facts  are :  1.  David,
re8eoting  on  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose,  comes  to  a  consciousness  of  his  sin,  and
makes  confession  before  God.  2.  In  the  morning  the  Prophet  Gad  is  sent  to  him  from
the  Lord,  offering  him,  as  a  choice  of  a  chastisement,  either  seven  years' famine,  or  three
months'  defeat  before  his  enemies,  or  three  days'  pestilence.  3.  David,  in  his  anguish,
elects  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  God.  4.  Thereupon  God  sends  a  pestilence  which  carries
off  seventy  thousand  men.  5.  There  being  some  relenting  in  the  anger  of  God"  when
the  pestilence  reached  Jerusalem,  David  entreats  with  the  angel  of  the  Lord  by  the
threshing-floor  of  Araunah,  that  he  would  have  pity  on  the  people  and  rather  smite
him  and  his  house.  The  various  truths  taught  in  this  section  may  be  briefly  set  forth
thus.

L  The  beactioh  of  man's  bpieitual  natttbe.  For  more  than  nine  months  the
anhallowed  feeling  which  prompted  the  numbering  of  the  people  had  held  sway,  and
now  during  the  silence  of  night  the  spiritual  man  that  had  been  suppressed  again  asserts
his  power.  David  comes  to  himself,  and  sees  his  conduct  in  a  Divine  Ught.  The
supremacy  of  sin  means  a  depression  of  the  better  nature.  The  awakening  to  a  sense
of  sin  is  the  reaction  of  that  better  nature.  The  same  was  seen  in  the  matter  of  Bath-
sheba  and  Uriah.  The  prodigal  son's  coming  to  himself  is  an  instance ;  as  also  the
repentance  of  every  sinner.  The  causes  and  occasions  of  the  reaction  may  come  from
without,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  change  does  lie  in  a  reaction.  The  spell  is
broken,  and  the  higher  nature  of  man  once  more  asserts  itself.

II.  The  causes  and  occasions  of  the  soul's  breaking  the  spell  op  sin  abb
definite.  '  David  came  to  himself  most  probably  for  three  reasons.  1.  Difficulties  of
carrying  out  his  project  may  have  pressed  on  him  the  need  of  reflection^  for  not  only
were  Joab  and  the  captains  reluctant  workers,  but  long  time  elapsed,  and  so  strong  was
the  oppoiitioa  that  two  tribes  were  not  counted  (1  Chron.  xxi.  4).    2.  The  ttram  qt


604  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP   SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxiv.  1— 25.

persistence  would,  by  psychological  law,  enfeeWe  purpose.  He  could  not  go  on  for  evef
in  a  line  of  sin ;  exhaustion  of  moral  motive  is  a  reality.  3.  The  gracious  action  of  Ood
would  revive  the  latent  and  suppressed  sense  of  right ;  for  though  the  Holy  Spirit  is
grieved,  he  does  not  depart  for  ever  from  the  erring.  The  same  is  true  still.  External
difficulties  of  a  sinful  course  make  the  way  hard,  and  so  give  chance  for  reflection  and
reaction  of  the  better  self.  The  exhaustion  and  satiety  of  persistence  in  evil  tends  to
open  a  way  for  the  action  of  Divine  influence.  The  misery  of  the  prodigal,  the  weariness
of  sin,  the  loss  of  early  novelty,  do  not  turn  men,  but  they  render  other  more  spiritual
action  more  timely.  The  real  cause  which  turns  these  occasions  to  account  is  the  gracious
action  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

HI.  The  changed  estimate  of  conduct  twDBK  the  light  of  God's  Spirit.  As
we  have  seen  (vers.  1 — 9),  plausible  reasons  could  be  assigned  for  numbering  the  people,
but  now  that  in  the  silence  of  night  the  light  had  come,  that  which  once  was  reason-
able and  proper,  and  persisted  in  as  essential,  is  folly  and  sin.  It  is  only  in  the  light
which  God  causes  to  shine  into  our  hearts  that  we  can  see  what  is  the  real  character  of
some  of  the  motives  lurking  there.  Saul  of  Tarsus  came  to  see  himself  in  the  light  of
God,  and  the  old  life  in  which  he  had  prided  himself  became  his  shame.  No  man  knows
himself  apart  from  Divine  illumination.  Repentance  marks  the  change  undergone  in  a
man's  estimate  of  himself  in  the  sight  of  God.

IV.  The  antithesis  of  sin  and  bight  beabon.  When  David  confessed  before  God
that  in  what  he  had  done  he  had  acted  foolishly,  he  not  only  expressed  a  changed
estimate  of  his  conduct,  but  also  illustrated  a  universal  truth.  Sin  and  wisdom  are
incompatible;  they  are  mutually  exclusive.  The  lie  from  the  beginning  has  been  that
it  is  good  for  man  to  do  his  own  will.  The  wisdom  of  being  "as  gods"  was  the  first  of
snares.  The  votaries  of  pleasure  and  the  scornful  rejecters  of  the  supernatural  Christ
deem  themselves  wise  in  following  the  bent  of  their  unholy  and  proud  disposition.  The
wise  "  disputer  of  this  world  "  looks  with  contempt  on  "  the  foolishness  of  preaching  "  and
of  the  obedience  to  Christ  which  is  its  object.  Yes,  like  David,  in  his  sin,  they  have
their  day ;  but  just  as  he  found  at  last  that  his  wisdom  was  all  the  time  folly,  so  othi  rs
i.iU  find  that  wisdom  is  utterly  removed  from  their  preference  of  their  own  to  the  will
of  Christ.  Sin  is  the  most  desperate  folly.  It  debases  man's  nature,  entails  numberless
ills  for  body  and  spirit,  interferes  with  the  true  development  of  the  mind  and  the
acquisition  and  enjoyment  of  the  treasures  of  good  hid  in  nature,  inflicts  a  stigma  and
leaves  a  stain  that  unfit  for  the  highest  society  in  the  universe,  and,  moreover,  mars
the  future  possibly  beyond  recovery.  Holiness  and  wisdom  alone  coincide.  To  g'j
against  the  will  of  God  is  a  species  of  madness,  The  history  of  individuals  and  of
nations  is  proof  of  it.

V.  God's  watchfulness  oveb  repenting  sinnbbs.  It  was  s  long  solitary  night
when  David  came  to  see  the  folly  and  sin  of  his  conduct.  The  outpouring  of  his
penitent  heart  was  known  to  no  human  being.  The  most  sacred  experiences  of  life  are
secrets  between  the  soul  and  God.  But  yet  in  the  morning,  just  at  the  right  time,  the
messenger  of  God  came  to  him.  His  mission  was  to  offer  alteinative  chastisements, but
there  was  implied  in  it  forgiveness.  The  eye  of  God  had  seen  the  inner  workings  of
the  broken  spirit,  and  the  occasion  was  seized  to  bring  David  again  into  more  direct
communication  with  his  God.  In  the  case  of  Bathsheba  Nathan  had  awakened  peni-
tence ;  here  Gad  came  to  help  forward  the  good  work  begun  in  penitence.  The  cry  of
Saul  of  Tarsus  was  heard  in  heaven,  and  to  help  him  a  servant  of  God  was  prepared  to
speak  the  words  suitable  to  his  case.  The  ear  of  the  Lord  is  ever  open  to  the  cry  of  the
humble,  and  his  eye  is  on  their  sorrows.  Some  message  or  messenger  will  be  sent  to
them  to  con6rm  the  fact  of  their  awakening  to  a  sense  of  sin,  and  do  what  is  best  for
their  restoration.  Let  every  punitent  remember  that  God  hears  the  cry  in  the  night,
and  sees  all  the  desires  of  the  broken  heart.

VI.  The  adaptation  of  chastisement  to  sin.  In  the  alternative  choice  of  David
as  to  the  form  of  chaslisement  there  is  secured  the  same  adaptation  of  the  infliction  to
the  nature  of  the  sin.  Many  explanations  have  been  offered  of  this  sin,  but  we  prefer
to  consider  its  essence  to  lie  in  a  sense  of  elaiion  in  the  strength  of  the  nation,  and  a
consequent  desire  to  be  assured  of  its  sufficiency  for  all  contingencies.  David  was
thinking  of  strength  and  glory  in  numerical  form.  In  this  he  was  going  counter  to  the
letter  and  spirit  oif  the  Law  laid  down  for  him  and  his  people  (Lev.  xxvL).    Success  and


en.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE   SECOND  BOOK  Off  SAMUEL.  605

prosperity  were  to  be  dependent  on  perfect  obudience  to  God's  commands  (Lev.  xxvi.
3,  4).  It  is  expressly  added  that  then  a  few  men  will  suffice  against  a  host,  and,  on  the
other  hand,  disobedience,  and  "pride  of  power"  (vers.  14,  15 — 19)  will  entail  defeat
and  desolation.  That  this  "  pride  of  power  "  was  the  real  sin  in  David's  case  is. seen  ia
this — that  the  three  alternatives  offered  to  him  are  the  yery  three  forms  of  chastisement
alluded  to  in  Lev.  xxvi.  3 — 10  (of,  16 — 20).  But  the  point  is  this,  that,  •whichever  form
of  chastisement  is  taken,  the  effect  is  the  same — a  diminution  of  the  power  which  was
an  object  of  pride.  The  sin  of  rejoicing  in  the  "arm  of  flesh"  (Jer.  xvii.  5;  cf  Isa.
XXX.  2)  was  visited  by  a  weakening  of  that  "  arm."  Famine,  war,  pestilence,  either,
would  take  away  from  that  very  number  which  it  was  David's  ambition  to  know  and
have  as  large  as  possible.  This  adaptation  of  chastisement  to  sin  is  seen  elsewhere.
The  infliction  for  wicked  craving  for  flesh  in  the  wilderness  (Numb.  xi.  33),  the  con-
fusion and  helplessness  of  those  who  sought  help  in  Egypt  rather  than  in  God  (Isa.  xxx.
2,  3,  16,  17),  the  turning  of  Laodicean  outward  respectability  into  a  loss  of  all  respecta-
bility (Rev.  iii.  14 — 18),  the  change  from  boasted  glory  to  corruption  in  the  case  of
Herod -(Acts  xii.  .21 — 23), — are  instances  of  a  certain  adaptation  of  chastisement  to  the
particular  sin  committed.  All  who  make  self,  or  personal  merits,  or  created  power,  a
substitute  for  God,  will  find  that  on  which  they  rest  vanishing  just  when  they  most
need  comfort.

VII.  The  penitent's  trust  m  the  justice  and  mbeot  of  God.  Of  the  three
dreadful  alternatives,  David  took  the  pestilence,  on  the  ground  that  his  broken  heart
could  rest  more  calmly  in  God's  judgments,  where  the  human  element  was  not  employed
as  agent.  Here  was  the  true  instinct  of  the  soul.  God  is  just  and  good,  and  in  his
hands  aU  is  sure  to  be  right  and  kind.  Man  is  weak  and  evil,  and  as  an  agent  may
blend  his  own  base  passions  with  the  execution  of  a  Divine  decree.  Even  in  the  hour
of  suffering,  when  sin  is  to  be  punished,  the  heart  has  faith  in  God.  Here  is  homage
to  God's  justice  and  mercy.  Many  a  man,  who  by  his  sins  brings  teriible  wars  on
himself  and  family,  bows  in  entire  submission,  and  rests  in  blended  justice  and  mercy.
This  is  the  essence  of  our  faith  in  Christ  as  Sacrifice  for  sin.

yill.  The  relative  ohabactee  of  open  manifestations  of  God's  pkbsbnce.
There  is  nothing  really  surprising  in  the  appearing  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord  to  David ;
for  it  is  in  keeping  with  the  theophanies  of  the  early  dispensation,  when  men  had
special  need  to  be  reminded  of  the  reality  of  God's  presence.  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,
Joshua,  Manoah,  were  predecessors  of  David  in  this  respect.  The  step  from  the  message
of  God  by  the  Seer  Gad  to  a  visible  manifestation  is  not  very  great  to  any  one  who
believes  at  all  in  the  supernatural ;  indeed,  the  final  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ  covers
all  prior  manifestations.  Those  who  profess  to  see  difficulties  in  these  Old  Testament
accounts  do  not  understand  the  logic  or  the  historical  congruity  of  their  position  as
believers  in  the  visible  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God.  Manifestations  of  God's  presence
are  relative.  Creation  is  an  expression  of  the  being  and  presence  of  God.  The  voice
which  comes  to  prophet  or  apostle,  the  glory  on  which  Moses  gazed,  the  pillar  of  cloud
arid  of  fire,  the  appearance  of  manna  after  the  promise  of  it,  the  vision  of  the  seer,  the
still  small  voice  to  Elijah,  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  the  frustration
of  the  scheme  of  the  wicked  and  the  furtherance  of  those  of  the  good,  and  the  spiritual
revelation  to  the  soul  in  fulfilment  of  the  precious  words  (John  xiv.  21,  22), — these  are
all  manifestations  of  God.  Christ  differs  from  all  in  that  he  is  the  Fulness  of  the  God-
head bodily.  It  is  a  mercy  that  our  poor  dull  nature  has  been  blessed  by  these
demonstrations  of  the  reality  of  things  unseen  and  eternal.

IX.  Mental  suffering  the  chief  penalty  of  sin.  David  sinned  in  numbering
the  people;  the  pestilence  smote  many  of  them,  but  touched  him  not.  Nevertheless,
he  was  the  greatest  sufferer ;  for  no  physical  death  could  equal,  in  the  pain  it  brings,  tLe
anguish  of  his  soul  in  seeing  that  his  sin  had  brought-  such  trouble  and  pain  on  "  these
sheep  "  (ver.  17).  To  a  man  of  his  generous  nature,  with  all  the  ambition  to  be  a  good
and  wise  ruler  (ch.  xxiii.  3 — 5),  it  must  have  been  torment  unspeakable  to  see  that  ha
was  an  occasion  of  bringing  woe  to  thousands  of  homes.  His  punishment  was  heavy
indeed.  A  similar  terrible  mental  punishment  comes  to  the  parent  who  sees,  in  his
reformed  years,  his  children  diseased  or  ruined  by  former  sins  of  his  own.  In  this
mental  anguish  lies,  perhaps,  the  hell  which  men  so  much  dread.

X.  The  PABCiMONX  of  Providence.    David  was  uut  (;uirecL  in  his  supposition  that


606  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxiv.  1—25.

"these  sheep"  had  not  gone  astray.  We  are  not  certain  whether  they  had  indulged  in
feelings  of  pride  ia  the  strength  of  Israel,  and  so  were  virtually  one  with  their  king  in
the  sin  of  numbering ;  but  we  know  that  they  had  sinned  in  the  revolt  of  Absalom  and
Sheba,  and  the  anger  of  the  Lord  against  Israel  may,  as  we  have  seen  (vers.  1 — 9),  be
referred  to  those  acts.  The  fact  that  they  had  not  been  chastised  for  so  great  a  sin  is
manifest,  so  far  as  the  history  is  any  guide,  though,  if  Absalom's  sin  deserved  special
visitation  on  him,  theirs  equally  deserved  a  visitation  on  themselves.  The  sense  of  the
whole  history,  therefore,  is  that  God  waited,  and  made  the  occasion  of  the  new  sin  of
their  king  the  opportunity  of  visiting  them  with  stripes  while  visiting  him  with  stripes
for  his  own.  Indeed,  the  severity  of  his  chastisement  lay  much  in  this,  that  he  was  the
instrumental  occasion  of  their  woe.  By  one  pestilence  the  double  chastisement  was
secured.  Philosophy  has  dwelt  much  on  the  "  law  of  parcimony  "  in  nature.  It  seems
also  to  run  through  many  providential  dispensations  in  relation  to  man.  By  the  Flood
God  punished  wicked  men  and  set  forth  his  faithfulness  to  the  righteous.  The  institu-
tion of  the  Hebrew  ritual  both  educated  men  in  spiritual  conceptions,  and  kept  them
distinct  from  the  nations  for  the  ulterior  purpose  of  Christ's  coming.  The  sacrifice  of
Christ  is  at  the  same  lime  an  objective  ground  of  forgiveness,  and  the  most  impressive
source  of  moral  influence  in  winning  men  over  to  God.  There  are  manifold  forms  of
the  same  law  in  daily  life.

Vers.  18 — 25. — The  facts  are :  1.  The  Seer  OtaA  having  directed  David  to  rear  an
altar  to  the  Lord  in  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah,  he  proceeds  to  carry  out  the
instruction,  2.  Araunah,  observing  the  approach  of  David  and  his  servants,  makes
obeisance,  and  desires  to  know  the  purport  of  his  visit.  3.  Ascertaining  that  David
desired  to  buy  the  thresliing-floor  that  he  might  there  entreat  for  the  staying  of  the
plague,  he  generously  offers  all  that  was  requisite  for  t;he  sacrifices,  and  expresses  the
hope  that  God  might  be  propitious.  4.  But  David,  not  caring  to-  offer  to  God  what
cost  him  nothing,  insists  on  purchasing  the  place  and  the  oxen  required.  5.  The
offering  being  presented  on  the  altar,  the  plague  ceases  to  trouble  Israel.

The  way  to  reconciliation  with  Qod  a  matter  of  Divine  revelation.  God  had
graciously  condescended  to  reveal  himself  in  visible  form  both  to  assure  David  that  the
plague  was  more  than  a  mere  natural  course  of  disease  (ver.  17),  and  to  render  an
approach  to  himself  more  accessible.  The  chief  effect,  however,  on  David  was  to
deepen  his  conviction  of  sin  and  his  pity  for  his  suffering  people.  His  prayer,  like  that
of  Moses,  was  that  he  might  suffer  if  so  be  they  be  set  free.  It  was  not  till  the  seer
came  the  next  day  that  David  learnt  what  course  to  take  in  order  to  secure  reconcilia-
tion, not  only  for  the  people,  but  for  himself  also.  God  reveals  to  man  the  way  of
reconciliation.

I.  This  is  true  op  the  gbound  op  cub  salvation  nr  Christ.  As  surely  as  the
prop'iet  from  God  informed  David  as  to  what  was  to  be  done  in  order  to  find  favour
with  God  and  escape  the  plague,  so  surely  has  God  revealed  in  his  Word  the  fact  that
thr  ugh  Christ  alone  do  we  find  favour  and  eternal  life.  The  work  of  redemption  by
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  not  discovered  by  the  exercise  of  human  reason.     In  the

esert,  when  Israel  was  perishing,  God  ordained  the  lifting  up  of  the  se^  pent,  and  caused
information  of  the  fact  to  be  given.  In  our  desert  life  Grod  sent  his  beloved  Son,
independently  of  our  asking  or  knowledge,  and  commissioned  his  servants  to  announce
the  way  of  salvation.  Reason  may  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  reality  of  the  historic
fact,  but  reason  could  not  discover  the  way  of  reconciliation.  The  Apostle  Paul  declares
that  he  received  it  not  of  man,  but  of  God.  They  do  not  understand  the  gospel  who
imagine  that  man,  by  his  learning  or  reason,  could  ever  find  out,  apart  from  special
revelation,  the  only  way  to  God.

II.  It  is  teub  op  the  means  by  which  salvation  becomes  personal.  Salvation
may  be  spoken  of  in  general  terms,  and  in  this  sense  is  too  often  the  subject  of  dis-
cussion. But  it  is,  also,  a  matter  of  personal  experience.  The  end  for  which  Christ
lived  and  died  becomes  realized  in,  individual  souls,  in  the  form  of  actual  forgiveness,
restoration  to  favour,  newness  of  life  and  progressive  holiness.  By  what  means  this  is
to  be  brought  about,  so  far  as  our  action  is  concerned,  is  purely  a  matter  of  revelation.
It  is  revealed  from  heaven  to  be  of  faith  (Rom.  i.  17).    As  Christ  was  the  Gift  of  God,


OH.  xxiy.  1— 25.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  607

so  the  revelation  that  we  are  saved  by  Christ  on  condition  of  our  faith  is  also  the  gift
of  God.  It  was  made  known  to  David  that  sacrifice  would  be  the  ground  of  pardon,
and  that  his  personal  use  or  application  of  that  to  the  need  of  the  hour  was  the  means
of  his  obtaining  the  benefit  of  it.  The  place  of  our  faith  in  our  salvation  from  the
plague  of  sin  is  not  a  question  of  human  speculation :  it  is  fixed  by  him  who  gave  the
sacrifice.

III.  It  is  teub  of  cue  individual  appreciation  of  what  God  has  albbady  hade
KNOWN.  The  spiritual  bearing  of  the  acts  enjoined  on  David  could  only  be  spiritually
discerned.  That  Christ  is  our  great  Sacrifice,  and  that  faith  is  the  means  by  which  we
are  to  appropriate  it, — these  are  things  plainly  revealed  in  Scripture,  and  could  only  be
known  as  Divine  ordinations  by  special  revelation ;  but  they  are  a  dead  letter  to  multi-
tudes. We  need  the  revelation  of  their  spiritual  bearing  to  our  own  souls  by  the  Holy
Spirit;  and  it  is  only  as  the  Holy  Spirit  takes  of  these  things  pertaining  to  Christ  and
reveals  them  to  our  individual  spirit  that  we  see  their  force  and  value  their  application.
Hence  a  revelation  of  the  matter  of  revelation  is  needful  to  conversion.  Hence  many
read  and  speak  about  salvation  who  never  see  its  real  significance  or  know  it  as  a
matter  of  personal  experience.  The  invisible  messenger  of  God  must  come  to  US'  as
truly  as  the  seer  came  to  David,  if  we  are  to  see  his  salvation  (John  iii,  5),

Devotion  of  property  to  OocPs  service.  Araunah  was  eager  to  provide  a  place  and
oxen  for  the  celebration  of  the  services  about  to  be  rendered  to  God. '  His  interest  in
David,  in  Israel,  and  his  homage  for  God  seem  to  have  prompted  the  fienerous  proposal.
On  the  other  band,  David's  sense  of  what  was  due  to  God  from  himself,  and  bis  personal
interest  in  the  solemn  transaction,  would  not  suffer  him  to  be  spared  cost  through  the
generosity  of  Araunah.    He  must  honour  God  with  his  own  and  not  with  another  man's


I.  All  oue  possessions  are  God's.  This  is  the  basis  of  our  devotion  of  what  we
hold  to  his  service.  We  are  really  but  stewards.  Our  mental  powers,  oar  wealth,  our
personal  influence,  our  very  life,  are  lent  to  us  for  a  season,  and  lent  with  a  view  to  use
in  God's  Name.  This  is  laid  down  in  the  words,  "  Ye  are  not  your  own ; "  in  the  parable
of  the  talents ;  in  the  very  constitution  and  dependence  of  our  lives ;  in  the  specific  com-
mands concerning  "firstfruits;"  and  this  was  practically  recognized  by  both  David
and  Araunah  in  their  emulation  in  self-sacrifice.  It  would  be  a  great  gain  to  the
Church  and  world  if  Christian  people  would  only  let  this  truth  sink  deeply  into  their
hearts.    What  elevation,  tone,  and  nobility  it  would  import  to  life !

II.  Thbbb  IB  no  nobler  use  op  possessions  than  m  GfoD's  SERVICE.  David  and
Araunah  were  one  in  this  belief.  They  strove  for  the  honour  of  devoting  substance  to
God.  In  a  well-ordered  Christian  life  all  is  devoted  to  God.  The  entire  life,  embracing
mental  powers,  occupations,  property,  time,  is  a  sacrifice  (Eom.  xii.  1).  But  by  reason
of  custom  we  recognize  that  as  specially  devoted  to  God  which  is  directly  employed  in
maintaining  his  holy  worship  or  diffusing  a  knowledge  of  his  great  mercy  to  mankind.
The  wonderful  way  in  which  the  priesthood  was  set  apart,  the  distinction  put  in
Scripture  on  men  whose  lives  were  chiefiy  spent  in  witnessing  for  God,  the  significant
words  of  our  Saviour  in  reference  to  the  widow's  mite  and  the  box  of  ointment,  and  the
glorying  of  the  Apostle  Paul  in  that  he  was  called  and  counted  worthy  of  a  special
ministry, — these  things  point  out  the  honour  of  using  our  gifts  and  possessions  in  further-
ance of  G-od's  gracious  purposes  to  mankind.

III.  The  use  of  our  possessions  in  God's  sbkvicb  is  a  means  of  vast  blessing  to
MANKIND.  By  devoting  their  substance  to  God  on  this  occasion,  David  and  Aravmah
knew  that  they  would  be  doing  that  which,  being  graciously  accepted,  would  issue  in
the  removal  of  the  plague  from  Israel.  No  wonder  that  they  were  ambitioDis  to  lay
their  gifts  at  the  mercy-seat  1  It  was  a  question  of  staying  the  plague.  Equally  in
our  case  it  is  daily  a  question  of  staying  the  plague,  lifting  the  curse  of  sin  and  scatter-
ing the  wholesome  blessings  of  salvation  over  the  land.  He  who  builds  a  sanctuary,
or  endows  a  college,  or  send  forth  missionaries,  turns  his  money  into  streams  of  spiritual
good,

IV.  A  TRUE  HEART  WILL  FIND  PUKE  SATISFACTION  IN  DEVISING  MEANS  OF  DEVOTING

GIFTS  TO  God.     David  honoured  the  noble  impulse  of  Araunah,  but  he  could  not  be
deprived  of  the  Batisfactiou  claimed  by  every  true  man  of  giving  of  bis  own.    There  is


608  THE   SECOND   BOOK   OF   SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxit.  1—25,

a  real  blessednesa  in  laying  our  gifts  of  mind  and  body  and  our  material  possessions  at
the  ^tar  of  Omi.  The  meanuess  which  would  worship  at  others'  expense,  or  look  on
spiritual  good  done  at  others'  cost,  can  never  dwell  in  a  Christly  sonl.  As  the  Saviour
himself  counted  it  a  deep  and  holy  joy  to  lay  down  his  life  for  others,  so  all  who  enter
into  his  spirit  feel  it  to  be  a  matter  of  thankfulness  when  occas  on  arises  for  some
surrender  in  his  service.  The  bountiful  soul  is  always  rich.  The  large  heart  is  never
in  poverty.     The  joy  of  their  Lord  is  their  portion.

Y.    It    IB  BT  THE    USE   OF    SUCH   ACTS   OF   DEVOTION    TO   HIS   SERVICE   THAT   GoD   HAS

HITHERTO  BLESSED  THE  WORLD.  The  self-surtender  of  Abiaham  when  he  left  Ur  of  the
Chiildees,  the  devotion  by  Moses  of  his  great  powers  to  the  leadership  of  Israel,  were
simply  conspicuous  instances  in  the  entire  history  of  redemption  of  God's  acceptance
and  use  of  human  powers  and  possessions  for  canying  out  his  great  purpose  of  mercy.
David  was  following  the  usual  order  in  the  case  before  us.  Even  our  blessed  Lord
came  to  earth  by  means  of  the  devotion  of  a  virgin  life.  The  "good  news"  has  been
sent  abroad  by  consecration  of  human  speech.  Who  would  not  fall  in  with  this  glorioui
succession  till  the  world  is  saved  ?

Plague  and  prayer.  The  narrative  plainly  teaches  that  this  plague  was  ordained  of
God  for  moral  ends,  and  that  it  was  stayed  by  means  of  the  intercession  offered  in  the
manner  suited  to  the  age  of  shadowy  sacrifice  before  the  offering  of  the  eternal  sacrifice
by  Christ.

I.  Afflictive  events  are  sometimes  to  be  reqaedbd  as  Divine  chastisements.
This  was  true  of  the  event  here  referred  to.  No  sensible  man  can  doubt  it.  The  only
way  to  get  rid  of  the  fact  is  to  regard  this  portion  of  Scripture  as  a  mere  superstitious
legend — human  superstitions  being  infused  into  a  natural  occurrence.  The  bad  logic
of  this,  in  the  case  of  one  who  accepts  the  supernatural  in  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  is
obvious.  If  God  thought  fit  to  deal  supernatiirally  with  men  at  one  time,  why  not  at
another?  In  Scripture  many  afflictive  events  are  set  forth  in  the  same  light,  and  we
may  fairly  say  that  God's  government  of  men  has  not  yet  ceased,  and  that  men,
especially  communities,  need  discipline  as  much  now  as  ever.  If  men  are  moral  beings
under  government,  and  if  the  order  of  nature  is  not  beyond  the  reach  and  control  of
God,  wo  have  a  right  to  regard  the  events  of  Scripture  as  examples  of  what  God  does
to  the  sons  of  men  (1  Cor.  x.  11).

II.  There  is  mors  m  these  events  than  the  nboessart  action  of  fhtsioal
LAWS.  The  presence  of  the  ant;el  here  shows  that  there  was  a  special  Divine  element
in  the  event.  The  same  is  true  of  other  similar  events  recorded  in  Scripture.  In
modem  Divine  chastisements  of  men  there  may  be  physical  order,  but  that  will  not  be
the  interpretation  of  the  moral  bearing  of  the  events.  There  seems  to  be  more  than
a  foreseen  coincidence  of  a  chain  of  physical  necessities  issuing  in  an  event  just  at  the
time  when  some  national  or  individual  sin  transpires.  Bare  prevision  of  a  coincidence
that  could  not  be  helped  is  a  poor  explanation  of  Divine  government.  The  scriptural
idea  is  the  best — that  &od  is/ree  and  above  and  lehind  all  the  forces  at  work,  and  in
some  way  not  revealed  and  not  certainly  discoverable  by  physical  science,  he  does  so
regulate  the  succession  of  physical  events  as  to  make  them  subserve  a  moral  purpose
when,  in  the  development  of  human  history,  there  arises  a  need  of  such  subservance.
We  must  either  admit  this,  or  place  God  practically  outside  his  own  possessions  as
a  helpless  spectator,  less  able  to  strike  in  than  are  we  ourselves.  The  mystery  may  be
great,  but  it  is  more  mysterious,  and  certainly  more  absurd,  that  there  should  be  such
a  God  deprived  of  freedom  of  action.

III.  The  removal  or  afflictive  events  is  connected  with  the  work  of  Christ.
The  offering  of  sacrifice  by  David  was  a  divinely  appointed  means  of  accepting  the
repentance  and  homage  of  the  nation.  "  Without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no
remission."  This  deep  spiritual  truth  was  doubtless  recognized  by  all  the  truly  pioiis
of  those  times.  Thus  it  sets  forth  the  greater  truth  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  the
ground  on  which  God  exercises  his  mercy  in  forgiving  our  sins  and  healing  our  wounds.
The  far-reaching  benefits  of  his  death  deserve  more  consideration  than  they  commonly
get.  Thousands  enjoy  the  fruit  of  his  sacrifice  who  know  him  not.  For  all  men  he
has  lifted  up  the  curse,  so  that  its  pressure  is  not  so  great  as  once  it  was  or  might  have
been.  When  the  rod  is  laid  by,  and  the  sinful  nation  or  individual  is  no  longer  smitten
it  is  for "  OaUf  •  sake."  ^  '


nn.  XXIV.  1—25.]         THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  60S


rV.    PkATEK  18  THE  HUMAN  MEANS  BY  WHICH  CHASTISEMENTS  ABB  REMOVED.      On  tile

basis  of  the  sacrifice  typical  of  Christ's  death,  David's  prayer  was  accepted  and  the
plague  was  stayed.  In  like  manner  Moses  intreated  for  Israel,  and  David  for  his  people.
The  nature  of  prayer  and  its  place  in  the  Divine  government  have  not  changed  with
years.  It  is  a  spiritual  power  as  truly  as  that  gravity  is  a  physical  force.  Its  exercise,
according  to  Scripture,  is  not  exclusive  of  the  use  of  personal  effort  to  remove  physical
evils,  and  certainly  not  exclusive  of  moral  conduct.  As  a  spiritual  power,  it  is  part  of
our  endowment,  and  to  be  employed  along  with  our  other  endowments  of  good  sense,
prudence,  and  correctness  of  life.  It  does  not  follow  that  answer  to  prayer  is  a  violation
.of  the  order  of  things.  We  do  not  know  how  far  God's  personal  contact  with  every
force  in  action  is  or  is  not  part  of  the  order,  and  hence  we  do  not  know  but  that  his
free  energy  may  so  modify  the  course  of  events  as  to  maintain  what  seems  to  us  to  be
natural  order,  and  yet  to  be  the  product  of  his  own  will.  The  pointsman  on  a  railway
may  suddenly  save  a  tiain  from  destruction  without  violating  the  order  of  nature.
Who  shall  say  that  the  watchful  energy  of  the  Eternal  may  not,  in  answer  to  our
urgent  cry,  so  act  as  to  obviate  what  otherwise  would  be  a  great  disaster?  "The
effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much."  It  is  mighty  only  as  it  is
the  concentrated  voice  of  a  "  newness  of  life  "  lifted  up  to  heaven  in  the  all-prevailing
Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0I18.

Vers.  1,  2  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1,  2). — (Jerusalem.)  A  sinful  census.  1.  This  census
appears  to  have  been  ordered  by  David  in  one  of  the  later  years  of  his  life.  The  word
"  again"  (ver.  1)  indicates  that  it  was  subsequent  to  the  famine  (ch.  xxi.  1,  14 ;  ver.
25) ;  and  a  measure  that  occupied  Joab  and  the  captains  of  the  host  nine  months  and
twenty  days  could  only  have  been  accomplished  during  a  time  of  settled  peace,  such
as  succeeded  the  rebellions  of  Absalom  and  Sheba.  "  Three  great  external  calamities
are  recorded  in  David's  reign,  which  may  be  regarded  as  marking  its  beginning,  its
middle,  and  its  close — ^a  three  years'  famine,  a  three  months'  exile,  a  three  days'
pestilence"  (Stanley).  No  man,  however  advanced  in  life,  or  whatever  the  wisdom  he
may  have  "  learnt  by  experience,"  is  wholly  exempt  from  the  power  of  temptation.  2.
It  was  a  census  of  those  who  were  capable  of  bearing  arms  (ver.  9),  and  of  the  nature
of  a  military  organization  (ch.  viii.  15 — 18).  "  But  David  took  not  the  number  of
them  from  twenty  years  old  and  under,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  23,  24).  The  result
showed  a  great  increase  of  the  people— 800,000  (1,100,000)  wairiors  of  Israel,  500,000
(470,000)  of  Judah,  omitting  Levi  and  Benjamin  (1  Chron.  xxi.  6);  representing  a
population  of  about  five  millions.  3.  Its  direct  and  declared  object  was  that  David
might  "know  the  number  of  the  people,"  or  become  fully  acquainted  with  its  military
strength,  "its  defensive  power  "  (Keil).  Of  any  additional  object,  except  what  is  implied
in  the  words  of  Joab,  "  Why  does  my  lord  the  king  delight  in  this  thing  ?  "  nothing
is  stated.  4.  It,  nevertheless,  was  wrong  and  exceedingly  sinful  This  is  evident,  not
only  from  the  expostulation  of  Joab,  but  also  from  the  confession  of  David  himself
(ver.  10),  and  the  Divine  chastisement  that  followed.  Wherein  consisted  his  sin?  A
census  was  not  in  itself  and  always  sinful ;  for  it  had  been  expressly  directed  by  God
(Exod.  XXX.  11—16  ;  ixxviii.  26 ;  Numb.  i.  2 ;  xxvi.  1—4,  63—65),  and  it  was  (as  it
still  is)  attended  with  important  advantages.  But  this  census  was  determined  upon  by
David,  (1)  apparently  without  due  inquiry,  by  means  of  oracle  (1  Chron.  xxi.  30)  or
prophet  (ver.  11),  concerning  the  will  of  the  Divine  King  of  Israel ;  without  adequate
grounds  in  relation  to  the  welfare  of  the  people ;  and  without  proper  consideration  of  the
danger  of  promoting  a  spirit  of  pride,  and  producing  other  evil  consequences  (Exod.xxx.
11, 12).  "  David  foi^ot  the  commands  of  Moses,  who  told  them  beforehand  that  if  the
multitude  were  numbered,  they  should  pay  half  a  shekel  (the  price  of  a  sin  ofTering)  to
God  for  every  head"  (Josephus).  In  its  omission  "  he  invaded  the  rights  of  the  supreme
King  of  Israel,  and  set  aside  a  positive  command  of  God.  The  demanding  the  tax  by
his  own  authority  might  have  created  a  national  disturbance,  and  therefore  should  have
prevented  him  from  numbering  his  people "  (Chandler).  (2)  ProbaWy  with  warlike
thoughts  and  intentions,  for  the  strengthening  of  the  army  and  the  further  extension  of

XL  SAMUEL.  •^   ^


610  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxit.  1— 2&


Israel's  dominion  by  foreign  conquests  (ch.  xxii.  44,  45).  "  Warlike  thoughts  certainlj
stand  in  the  background ;  if  we  fail  to  see  this,  we  lose  the  key  to  the  whole  transac-
tion, and  the  Divine  judgment  is  incomprehensible"  (Hengstenberg) ;  but  it  can  hardly
be  supposed  that  he  formed  the  definite  purpose  of  "  transforming  the  theocratic  stat«
into  a  conquering  world-state  "  (Kurtz).  (3)  Possibly  with  a  view  to  "  the  development
of  the  royal'powerin  Israel"  and  "general  taxation"  (Ewald);  which  made  it  obnoxious
to  Joab  and  the  council  (for  something  of  the  kind  seems  necessary  to  account  for  the
opposition  of  such  a  man).  (4)  Certainly  with  vain-glorious  pride,  self-elation,  distrust
of  God,  who  "  said  he  would  increase  Israel  like  to  the  stars  of  the  heavens  "  (1  Chron,
xxvii.  23),  and  presumptuous  confidence  in  himself  (1  Sam.  xv.  1 — 9 ;  Luke  iv.  5 — 12).
"  David's  heart  was  lifted  up  to  rejoice  in  the  number  and  strength  of  the  people
(Willet).  "The  very  same  action,  apparently  performed  with  different  intentions,
becomes  essentially  different  in  a  moral  point  of  view.  It  is  the  motive  in  which  it
originates,  or  the  spirit  with  which  it  is  carried  on,  that  gives  it  its  distinctive  character
in  the  sight  of  God.  David  was  actuated  by  a  vain-glorious  spirit,  which  is  always  an
abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.  He  was  thus  indulging  a  vain  conceit  of  his  own
strength,  a  proud  confidence  in  his  own  greatness,  as  if  his  chief  dependence  were  on
an  arm  of  flesh ;  forgetting  his  own  devout  profession  that  the  Lord  was  his  Eock  and
his  Fortress  and  his  Deliverer,  in  whom  he  would  trust "  (Lindsay).  "  From  its  first
origin  Israel  was  called  to  the  supremacy  of  the  world  (Deut.  xxxiii.  29).  David  now
thought  that  he  could  rise  step  by  step  to  such  elevation  without  the  help  of  God,  who
had  provided  for  the  beginning.  The  records  should  bear  witness  for  all  time  that  ha
had  laid  a  solid  foundation  for  this  great  work  of  the  future"  (Hengstenberg).  "It  was
a  momentary  apostasy  from  Jehovah  ;  an  oblivion  of  the  spirit  of  dependence  incul-
cated on  the  rulers  of  Israel."  This  was  the  root  of  the  offence ;  and  in  it  the  whole
nation  participated.  "This  history  shows  that  the  acts  and  fortunes  of  rtilers  and
people  are  closely  connected  together ;  and  that  the  sins  and  virtues  of  the  one  exercise
great  influence  on  the  happiness  of  the  other"  (Wordsworth).    Consider  that —

I.  God  is  never  anqby  with  any  person  or  people  except  on  account  of  bin.
"  David's  causing  the  people  to  be  numbered  was  the  immediate  cause  of  the  pestilence ;
for  the  procedure  originated  in  motives  which  the  Lord  condemned.  But  the  prim/iry
and  real  cause  is  to  be  found  in  the  verse  which  introduces  the  narrative,  and  which  is
almost  invariably  lost  sight  of  in  the  common  accotints  of  this  transaction.  It  is  that
'  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel.'  Now,  the  anger  of  the  Lord  could
only  be  awakened  by  tinfaithfulness  and  evil-doing ;  and  that,  whatever  its  precise
nature,  was  the  real  cause  of  the  calamity  that  followed,  and  relieves  the  case  of  the
apparent  harshness,  of  which  so  much  has  been  said,  of  making  the  people  suffer  for  the
oflFence  of  their  king  "  (Kitto, '  Daily  Bible  lUus.*).  1.  Sin  alone  eoocites  the  anger  of  Qod ;
which  is  his  holy  opposition  to  sin  and  sinners,  and  not  inconsistent  with  his  love,  but
rather  the  effect  of  resistance  to  it  (ch.  xi.  27).  2.  Whenever  sin  dwells  in  the  heart,  no
less  than  when  it  is  expressed  in  outward  actions,  God  observes  it,  and  is  displeased
with  those  who  are  guilty  of  it.  "  For  he  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  heart "  (Ps.  xliv.
21).  3.  His  displeasure  with  a  whole  people  \m^\\6%  prevalent  and  persistent  sin  among
them,  such  as  the  spirit  of  unbelief,  disobedience,  vain-glorious  pride,  and  presumption,
which  was  manifested  in  the  recent  rebellions  of  Israel,  and  appears  to  have  been
subsequently  indulged.  4.  So  far  from  being  palliated  or  passed  over  because  of  their
exalted  position  and  privileges,  their  sin  is  aggravated,  and  more  fully  ensures  their
chastisement  on  that  account.  "  You  only  have  I  known,"  etc.  (Amos  iii.  2).  "  It
may  be  not  unreasonably  surmised  that  they  were  smitten  with  the  same  unhallowed
elation  of  heart  (as  the  king) ;  that  they  were  tempted  to  exult  in  their  own  strength ;
that  they  rejoiced  in  the  prospect  of  beholding  the  proud  array  of  their  multitudes  of
fighting  men ;  and  that  dreams  of  grandeur  and  glory  may  have  been  before  their  eyes,
and  may  have  caused  them  to  depart  from  the  Lord"  (Le  Bas).  "  The  important  lesson
for  all  here  is  this — that  even  the  smallest  feeling  of  national  pride  is  a  sin  against  God,
and,  unless  there  be  a  powerful  reaction,  calls  down  the  judgments  of  God.  With  this
feeling  even  the  Komans  presented  offerings  of  atonement  at  their  census."

II.  Sin  in  a  people  is  usually  associated  with  sin  in  thbik;  buler.  1.  The
former  may  be  incited  by  the  latter  (1  Kings  xv.  SO).  Or :  2.  It  may  be  an  incitement
to  it  (John  xix.  12).     "  The  people  had  infected  the  king  with  their  own  arrogance^


9H.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  611

which  had  been  called  forth  by  their  success."  Or :  3.  Both  people  and  ruler  may  alike
participate  in  the  same  prevalent,  sinful  disposition  or  tendency  of  the  age.  As  formerly
(eh.  IV.  1 — 5), "  soft  indulgence  "  and  sensual  desire ;  so  now, "  the  lust  of  the  eyes  and
the  pride  of  life  "  (1  John  ii.  16)  seem  to  have  taken  possession  of  his  mind.  4.  The
sin  of  a  people  may  culminate  in,  and  he  manifested  and  represented  by,  the  sin  of  their
ruler.  For  this  he  is  eminently  responsible,  and  when  his  piety,  which  should  have
checked  the  evil  tendency  of  the  people,  and  may  hitherto  have  restrained  the  righteous
judgment  of  God,  begins  to  fail,  it  becomes  the  occasion  of  the  breaking  forth  of  his
fiery  indignation.  "  It  was  the  final  offence  which  filled  up  the  cup  of  wrath,  and  the
punishment  smote  the  nation,  and,  through  the  nation,  its  ruler"  (Kirkpatrick,  Horn.
Quart,  vi.).  "  The  Lord  was  wearied  with  the  sins  of  Israel  and  Judah ;  and  he  like-
wise beheld  the  secret  pride  of  David's  heart ;  and  for  these  things  he  was  resolved  to
visit  both  the  people  and  the  king."  "  Pride,  or  vain-glory,  or  self-sufficiency,  which
was  the  sin  of  David,  and  which,  for  the  very  reason  that  it  effects  us  less,  because  it  is
not  so  much  against  man  as  against  God,  offends  him  the  more.  It  is  a  substitution  of
ourselves  in  his  place ;  an  impious  thought  of  independence,  and  transference  to  our-
selves of  that  confidence  and  admiration  which  are  due  to  him  alone.  It  is  an  invasion
of  his  throne,  an  assumption  of  his  sceptre,  an  attempt  to  rob  him  of  that  glory  which
he  will  not  give  to  another,  a  removing  of  the  crown  from  his  head  to  put  it  on  our
own.  '  Wherefore  it  is  said,  God  resisteth  the  proud ' "  (J.  Leifchild).  "  He  was,  for  the
time,  the  image  and  emblem  of  all  who  in  any  age,  or  in  any  country,  love  to  have
arrayed  before  them  the  elements  of  their  worldly  strength ;  who  delight  to  see  spread
out  the  full  enrolment  of  their  powers  and  resources,  and  who  forget  that  there  is  One
before  whose  breath  all  these  things  shall  be  even  as  the  cloud-capped  towers  and  palaces
before  the  breath  of  the  whirlwind."

III.  The  sinful  mbasubes  of  a  etjlbb  are  bometimeb  the  effect  of  the  Divtob
DISPLEASURE  WITH  HIS  PEOPLE,  whose  sin  he  shares,  and  of  whose  punishment  he  is
made  the  instrument.  "  And  he  [Jehovah]  moved  [incited,  provoked]  David  to  say,"
etc.  "  The  thought  is — there  should  come  a  pestilence  over  Israel,  and  David  become
the  occasion  thereof"  (Thenius).  "  The  ruler's  sin  is  a  punishment  to  a  wicked  people."
Sin  implies  personal  responsibility ;  and  "  God  tempts  no  man  "  (Jas.  L  13).  But  in
his  universal  sovereignty :  1.  He  appoints  the  circumslances,  which  are  adapted  to  test
and  manifest  character,  and  often  conduce  to  sin.  2.  He  suggests  thoughts  which,
although  right  and  good  in  themselves,  are  sometimes  perverted  to  wrong  and  evil  by
human  folly  and  infatuation  (ver.  10).  "All  good  thoughts,  counsels,  just  works,  come
from  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  we  are  in  the  most  imminent  peril  at
every  moment  of  turning  the  Divine  suggestions  into  sin  by  allowing  our  selfish  and
impure  conceits  and  rash  generalizations  to  mix  with  them "  (Manrice).  3.  He  with-
draws his  restraining  grace  in  consequence  of  sin,  and  permits  men  to  be  tempted  of
Satan  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1),  who  readily  seizes  the  opportunity  'to  lead  them  into  trans-
gression. Deus  probat,  Satan  tentat.  4.  He  even  constrains  the  manifestation  of  the
iniquity  of  the  heart  for  holy  and  beneficent  ends.  "  God's  influence,  making  use  of
Satan  as  its  instrument,  leads  the  corrupt  germ  to  its  development,  rousing  into  action
that  which  slumbers  in  the  soul,  in  order  to  bring  about  the  retributive  judgment  in
which  man,  if  otherwise  well-intentioned,  learns  fully  to  recognize  his  sinful  condition,
and  is  moved  to  repentance.  The  question  is  not  of  simple  permission  on  the  part  of
God,  but  of  a  real  action,  and  that  of  the  nature  which  each  one  may  perceive  in  his
own  tendencies.  Whoever  once  yields  to  his  sinful  disposition  is  infallibly  involved
in  the  sinful  deed  which  leads  to  retributive  judgment,  however  much  he  may  strive
against  it"  (Hengstenberg).  "Though  it  was  David's  sin  that  opened  the  sluice,  the
sins  of  the  people  all  contributed  to  the  deluge"  (Matthew  Henry).

IV.    An  ADEQUATE  REASON  IS  AFFORDED  BT  SUCH   MEASURES    FOE  THE  OHABTISEMENT

OF  RULER  AND  PEOPLE.  "  It  was  nccdful  for  an  external,  visible  manifestation  of  the
sin  to  precede  the  judgment,  in  order  to  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men.  The  tempta-
tion was  presented  to  David ;  he  fell,  and  in  his  fall  represented  truly  and  faithfully  the
fall  of  the  nation.  The  nation  was  not  punished  vicariously  for  its  ruler's  sin,  but  for
a  sin  which  was  its  own,  and  was  only  embodied  and  made  visible  by  its  ruler's  act.
And  the  punishment  struck  the  very  point  of  their  pride,  by  diminishing  the  numbers
which  had  been  the  ground  of  their  self-confident  elation "  (Kirkpatrick,  2  Samuel),


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxiv.  1—26


"  Because  David  was  about  to  boast  proudly  and  to  glory  in  the  number  of  his  people,
God  determined  to  punish  him  by  reducing  their  number,  either  by  famine,  war,  or
pestilence"  (S.  Schmid).  1,  Sinful  actions  serve  to  manifest  the  hidden  sin  of  the
heart.  2.  They  show  the  connection  between  such  sin  and  its  just  retribution.  3.
They  make  chastisement  more  signal  and  salutary.  4.  They  are  often  overruled  to  the
glory  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  men.  INofe :  Some  of  the  difficulties  indicated  aliove
would  be  removed  by  regarding  the  first  sentence  as  "the  heading  of  the  whole  chapter,
which  goes  on  to  describe  the  sin  which  kindled  this  anger,  viz.  the  numbering  of  the
people "(' Speaker's  Commentary')}  and  by  reading,  "And  one  moved  David,"  etc. ;
i.e.  "one  of  his  courtiers  or  attendants,  who  is  therefore  called  satan,  or  an  adversary,
either  designedly  or  consequentially  both  to  David  and  his  people.  The  people  were
themselves  very  culpable;  as  they  knew,  or  might  have  known,  that,  upon  being
numbered,  they  were  to  pay  the  prescribed  ransom,  which  yet  they  neglected  or  refused
to  do;  as  partners  in  the  offence,  they  justly  shared  in  the  penalty  inflicted"  (Chandler).
But  this  esplanation  is  not  satisfactory.] — ^D.

Ver.  2  (1  Chron.  xxi.  2). — (The  kino's  palace.)  Self-elation.  This  chapter  con-
tains the  spiritual  history  of  a  great  soul  in  its  "  fall  and  rising  again,"  its  sin  and
recovery— its  (1)  self-elation,  (2)  self-will  (vers.  3,  4),  (3)  self-deception  (during  many-
months),  (4)  self-conviction  (by  self-examination,  ver.  10),  (5)  self-abasement,  (6)  self-
surrender  (ver.  14),  (7)  self-devotion  for  the  people  (ver.  17),  and  self-dedication  to  God
(vers.  24,  25).  Of  self-elation,  pride,  presumption,  vain-glory  (the  sin  of  David" ,  it  may
be  said  that  it  is —

I.  A  COMMON  EFFECT  OF  BXTBAORDiNARY  PBOSP^KITT,  temporal  or  Spiritual.  Pride ;
war,  famine,  or  pestilence ;  suffering  and  humiliation ;  peace  and  industry ;  prosperity
— pride  again;  such  is  the  melancholy  circle  of  human  affairs  (Exod.  viii.  14).  "  If  we
knew  how  to  enjoy  our  blessings  in  the  fear  of  God,  they  would  be  continued  unto  us ;
but  it  is  the  sin  of  man  that  he  extracts,  even  from  the  mercies  of  God,  the  poi  on  which
destroys  his  comforts ;  he  grows  fat  upon  the  bounties  of  Heaven,  spurns  its  laws,  and
awakens  its  vengeance  "  (E.  Watson).

II.  An  unoratbfdl  perversion  of  Divine  benefits.  "  The  grave  sin  of  proud
exaltation,  which  David  and  the  people  of  Israel  here  had  in  common,  presupposed  the
elevation  to  victory  and  power  that  God  had  bestowed  by  his  gracious  mind ;  and  its
consequence  was  the  judgment  that  revealed  God's  anger  against  the  perversion  of  his
favours  into  plans  of  self-aggrandizement "  (Brdmann).  What  should  produce  thankful-
ness and  humility  too  often  results  in  unthankfulness  and  vain-glory  (2  Kings  xx.  13).

III.  A  special  temptation  of  the  evil  one.  (1  Tim.  iii.  6.)  "  And  Satan  [an
adversary]  stood  up,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1).  "  We  see  that  God  and  Satan  both  had
their  hand  in  the  work ;  God  by  permission,  Satan  by  suggestion ;  God  as  a  Judge,
^atan  as  an  enemy ;  God  as  in  a  just  punishment  for  sin,  Satan  as  in  an  act  of  gin ;
God  in  a  wise  ordination  of  it  to  good,  Satan  in  a  malicious  intent  to  confusion"
(Hall).

IV.  A  ORiEvotJB  EXHIBITION  OF  SPIRITUAL  BLINDNESS ;  iuconsideration  of  dependence,
self-ignorance,  self-deception,  and  foolish  infatuation  (Jer.  ilix.  16).  "David,  when
strongly  tempted  to  this  gratification  of  his  vanity,  was  not  at  all  sensible  of  the  evil
of  such  an  act ;  while  Joab  was.  Joab,  though  a  man  of  blood,  and  apparently  1  ardened
in  iniquity,  could  see  through  David's  vain  and  arrogant  feelings,  while  David  himself,
whose  miud  was  under  ordinary  circumstances  eminently  sensitive  and  pious,  could  not
discover  the  impiety  of  his  proceeding,  but  persevered  in  evil  for  several  months.  Such
is  the  infatuation  of  sin  I "  (Lindsay).

V.  A  PECULIAR  provooativb  OF  DiviNB  WRATH  (1  Sam.  ii.  3  ;  Prov.  xvi.  6) ;  most
odious  of  all  things  in  the  sight  of  God,  because  most  directly  opposed  to  him.  "  Pride
is  the  beginning  of  sin"  (Bcclus.  x.  13).  "And  what  is  pride  but  the  craving  for
undue  exaltation?  And  this  is  undue  exaltation  when  the  soul  abandons  him  to
whom  it  ought  to  cleave  as  its  end,  and  becomes  a  kind  of  end  to  itself.  This  happens
when  it  becomes  its  own  satisfaction.  And  it  does  so  when  it  falls  away  from  that
unchangeable  good  which  ought  to  satisfy  it  more  than  itself"  (Augustine, '  The  City
of  CioA;  xiv.  13).

VI.  A   PERNICIOUS   INFLUENCE  IM   RELATION   TO  OTHER   PEOPLE ;   inciting   in  them  «


m.  XXIV.  1—25.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  613

similar  spirit,  and  bringing  untold  miseries  upon  them.  What  oppression,  strife,  and
other  deadly  fruits  grow  cot  of  this  "  root  of  bitterness  "  (Rxod.  xiv.  5)  I

VII.   A   RUINOUS    TENBENOY    IN    RELATION    TO    MAN    HIMSELF.      (Dan.   iv.    28;   PrOV.

xvi.  18.)  "Pride  wishes  to  dethrone  God.  Pride  takes  occasion  from  virtue  itself.
Pride  was  particularly  odious  in  David,  who  was  exalted  from  so  lowly  a  state.  His
pride  was  accompanied  by  falsehood ;  for  he  had  protested  his  humility  in  the  psalms
which  he  made  for  all  the  people  to  sing.  David  was  a  just  man ;  but  this  was  a  reason
why  God  should  punish  him  more  severely.  For  it  is  certain  that  the  sins  of  the  children
of  God  are  more  deserving  of  condemnation  than  the  sins  of  reprobates  and  slaves  of  the
devil.  These  only  offend  their  master,  but  those  do  outrage  to  their  Father ;  these  are
only  rebel  subjects,  but  those  are  upnatural  children  and  barbarians ;  these  only  abuse
the  gifts  of  nature,  but  those  profane  miserably  the  gifts  of  grace.  And  how  much  more
abominable  is  Judas  than  Pilate!  Be  not  surprised,  then,  that  when  David,  who  was
complete  in  a  thousand  graces,  committed  the  crime  of  felony  against  him,  the  Eternal
could  not  suffer  such  an  indignity  without  punishing  him  severely  "  (Du  Bosc,  in  Vinet's
'Histoire  de  la  Predication'). — D.

Vers.  3,  4  (1  Chron.  xxL  3,  4). — (The  rotal  oounoil-ohambeb.)  Unheeded  remon-
tlrance.  This  was  not  the  first  time  that  Joab  remonstrated  with  David  (ch,  iii.  24 ;
xix.  5) ;  but  his  manner  was  now  very  different  from  what  it  had  been  before ;  arising,
perhaps,  from  his  recollection  of  the  consequences  of  his  former  rudeness  (ch.  xix.  13),
and  his  fear  of  the  displeasure  of  the  king,  whose  authority  was  fully  restored.  His
remonstrance  appears  to  have  been  made  in  a  council  of  the  captains  of  the  army  (ch.
xxiii.  8),  to  whom  the  king  declared  his  purpose,  and  by  whom  Joab's  objection  to  it
was  supported  (ver.  4).  As  often  happens  in  other  instances,  it  was  :  1.  Greatly  needed,
on  account  of  a  sinful  and  dangerous  course  about  to  be  pursued.  (1)  Men  of  the
most  exalted  position  and  excellent  character  sometimes  go  astray  from  the  right  path.
(2)  The  error  of  their  way  is  often  perceived  by  others,  when  they  are  blind  to  it
themselves.  (3)  One  of  the  principal  means  of  preventing  their  continuance  therein
is  to  reason,  expostulate,  and  remonstrate  with  them  concerning  its  real  nature  and
probable  consequences  (Ps.  oxli.  5).  2.  Properly  offered.  (1)  By  those  to  whom  the
matter  is  one  of  just  concern.  Joab  was  captain  of  the  host;  and,  although  a  man  of
depraved  character,  he  possessed  a  souml  practical  judgment,  and  had  rendered  great
services  to  the  nation  and  the  king.  (2)  From  sincere  conviction.  "  No  man  is  so
wicked  but  that  sometimes  he  will  dislike  some  evil,  and  it  will  be  abominable  (1
Chron.  xxi.  6)  to  him  "  (Guild).  (3)  On  reasonable  grounds.  It  can  neither  increase
the  number  of  the  people  (which  is  with  God)  nor  the  power  and  honour  of  the  king
(already  supreme,  1  Chron.  xxi.  3),  and  it  will  be  "  a  cause  of  trespass."  "  Why  doth
my  lord,"  etc.?  "There  are  many  who  can  give  good  counsel  to  others,  for  the
avoiding  of  some  sins,  who  in  grosser  trespasses  have  not  grace  to  take  g-ood  counsel
themselves"  (Matt.  vii.  3).  (4)  In  a  right  spirit ;  devout,  loyal,  humble,  and  courteous.
There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  Joab  was  actuated  hy  sinister  motives ;  and  the  event
justified  the  wisdom  of  his  counsel.  3.  Impatiently  received,  and  imperfectly  con-
sidered; it  may  be  because  of:  (1)  Distrust  of  the  person  from  whom  it  comes.  "  Let
none  look  who  gives  the  counsel,  but  what  it  is ;  and,  if  good,  not  to  reject  it  for  hira
who  gives  the  same."  (2)  A  determination  to  have  one's  own  way ;  and  the  wish  to
show  independence  of  and  superiority  to  other  persons.  (3)  Dislike  to  the  nature  of
the  advice  itself,  and  indisposition  to  abandon  a  course  on  which  the  heart  is  set.  4.
Resolutely  rejected  and  wholly  overborne.  "  The  word  of  the  king  prevailed,"  etc.
His  persistency  in  his  purpose,  after  the  remonstrance,  (1)  increases  his  responsibility,
(2)  aggravates  his  guilt,  (3)  consummates  his  transgression.  "And  Joab  and  the
captains  went  out  from  the  presence  of  the  king,"  reluctantly  to  fulfil  their  commission ;
and  it  was  only  when  it  was  well-nigh  accomplished  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  24)  that  he
became  aware  of  his  sin  and  folly.  "  Men  seldom  accomplish  to  good  purpose  those
■ervices  in  which  they  reluctantly  engage ;  and  God  does  not  generally  allow  those
whom  he  loves  the  satisfaction  which  they  sinfully  covet"  (Scott). — D.

Vers.  5 10  (1  Chron.  xxi.  5 — 8). — (The  royal  bed-chambbb.)     An  awakened

conscience.    The  taking  of  the  census  occupied  over  nine  months ;  and  during  this  time


614  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxit.  1—25.

David  remained  insensible  to  his  sin,  and  waited  for  the  result.  At  length  the  work
was  finished  (about  wheat-harvest),  and  the  number  given  to  the  king ;  but,  whilst  he
looked  at  the  definite  proof  of  the  nation's  increase,  and  at  first,  perhaps,  felt  elated  at
the  thought  of  commanding  an  army  of  more  than  a  million  s«ldiers  (with  something
of  the  spirit  of  another  monarch,  Dan.  iv.  30),  the  same  night  "  David's  heart  smote
him;  and  he  said  unto  Jehovah,  I  have  sinned,"  etc.;  "and  David  arose  in  the
morning,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  What  the  remonstrance  of  Joab  failed  to  effect  was  wrought
by  the  opeiation  of  his  own  conscience.  "It  was  well  for  him  that  his  own  ways
reproved  him,  and  that  conscience  sounded  the  first  trumpet  of  alarm.  This  is  cbarac-
teristic  of  the  regenerate.  Men  who  have  no  light  of  grace,  no  tenderness  of  conscience,
must  have  their  sin  recalled  to  them  by  the  circumstances  which  at  once  reveal  its
enormity  and  visit  it  with  punishment ;  but  the  regenerate  have  an  inward  monitor
that  waits  not  for  these  consequences  to  rouse  its  energy,  but  lights  up  the  candle  of
the  Lord  within  them,  and  will  not  let  them  rest  after  they  have  done  amiss  till  they
have  felt  compunction  and  made  confession"  (J.  Leifchild).  Conscience  is  of  a  three-
fold nature — a  law,  a  judgment,  a  sentiment  (1  Sam.  xxii.  20 — 22).  Observe,  with
respect  to  it —

L  The  causes  of  its  continuing  long  asleep.  These  are  summed  up  in  "  the
deceitfulness  of  sin  "  (ch.  xii.  5,  6).  More  especially  :  1.  The  persistency  of  tiie  influence
under  which  sin  is  at  first  indulged;  viz.  the  pleasing  illusion  (aiismg  from  partial
views,  strong  passions,  and  self-will)  that  it  is  different  from  what  it  really  is,  and  the
agent  better  than  he  really  is;  which  (even  when  the  true  standard  of  right  is  recog-
nized) perverts  the  moral  judgment  and  deadens  the  moral  emotion.  "A  concrete  fact
IS  presented  in  a  partial  aspect ;  conscience  pronounces  its  judgment  according  to  the
representation  made  to  it;  this  representation,  or  rather  misrepresentation,  is  made,
directly  or  indirectly  by  the  influence  of  the  rebellious  will,  the  true  seat  of  all  moral
evU"  (McCosh).     Hence  evil  is  often  deemed  good,  and  self-glory  the  glory  of  God.

2.  The  assumption  (arising  from  self-confidence)  that  what  has  been  resolved  upon  is
justifiable  and  right;  and  indisposition  to  review  the  grounds  of  the  determination  or  to
examine  one's  self  so  that  a  too  favourable  estimate  of  his  character  may  be  corrected.

3.  The  absorption  of  the  mind  in  the  pursuit  of  the  object  sought  and  in  other  occupa-
tions, preventing  due  consideration  of  the  state  of  the  heart.  Alas !  how  many  on  this
account  "  regaid  iniquity  in  their  heart "  with  an  easy  conscience  1

"  Great  crimes  alarm  the  conscience ;  but  she  sleeps
While  thoughtful  man  is  plausibly  amused."

(Cowper  )

"  And  Satan  is  so  far  from  awaking  him,  that  he  draws  the  curtains  close  about  him
that  no  light  nor  noise  in  his  conscience  may  break  his  rest"  (Gurnall).  "If  a  man
accustoms  himself  to  slight  or  pass  over  the  first  motions  to  good,  or  shrinkings  of
conscience  from  evil,  which  originally  are  as  natural  to  the  heart  as  the  appetites  of
hunger  and  thirst  are  to  the  stomach,  conscience  will  by  degrees  grow  dull  and  uncon-
cerned, and,  from  not  spying  out  motes,  come  at  len<;th  to  overlook  beams;  from
carelessness  it  shall  fall  into  a  slumber ;  and  from  a  slumber  it  shall  settle  into  a  deep
and  long  sleep ;  till  at  last,  perhaps,  it  sleeps  itself  into  a  lethargy,  and  that  such  a
one  that  nothing  but  hell  and  judgment  shall  be  able  to  awaken  it"  (South,  Serm.
xxiii.).

II.  The  heans  by  which  it  is  suddenly  aroused.  In  some  cases  the  publication
of  the  offence,  the  reprobation  of  society,  the  threatening  of  punishment ;  in  others,
serious  consideration,  deliberate  reflection,  deeper  self-inspection  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  5 ;  Ps.
iv.  4),  induced  by :  1.  The  feeling  of  disappointment  and  dissatisfaction  which  com-
monly attends  the  attainment  of  an  earthly  end,  or  the  accomplishment  of  a  selfish
purpose.  David  has  the  number  of  the  people  before  him ;  yet,  after  all,  he  cannot
"delight  in  this  thing"  (ver.  3).  "All  is  vanity."  Where  shall  the  heart  find  rest
(Ps.  cxvi.  17 ;  Ixxiii.  25)  ?  2.  The  occurrence  of  circumstances  naturally  adapted  to  fix
attentiou  on  a  particular  subject  and  excite  inquiry  concerning  the  motives  by  which
one  is  actuated:  a  pause  in  "life's  fitful  fever;"  the  necessity  of  contemplating — what
next  ?  and  next  ?  a  sleepless  night  (Esth.  vi.  I) ;  "  sleep  that  bringeth  oft  tidings  of  future
hap  "  (Daute) — "  a  dream,  a  vision  of  the  night  "  (Job  xxxiii.  15).     "  David  had  made


CH.  xxrv.  1—25.:        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  BIS

spiritual  progress  since  the  time  when  it  required  the  parable  of  Nathan,  and  the  pro-
phetic announcement, '  Thou  art  the  man,'  to  awaten  him  from  his  spiritual  slumber.
At  this  period  of  his  life  he  examined  himself  and  weighed  his  own  actions  in  private,
especially  at  night-time ;  and  no  sooner  was  the  census  of  the  men  of  war  reported  to
him  than,  instead  of  being  elated  with  self-confidence  and  puffed  up  with  vain-glory,
'  his  heart  smote  him,'"  etc.  (Wordsworth).  "  Night  and  sleep  bring  us  times  of  revision
or  moral  reflection,  such  as  greatly  promote  the  best  uses  of  existence.  Whatever
wrong  has  been  committed  stalks  into  the  mind  with  an  appalling  tread.  All  those
highest  thoughts  and  most  piercing  truths  that  most  deeply  concern  the  great  problem
of  life  will  often  come  nigh  to  thoughtful  men  in  the  dusk  of  their  evenings,  and  their
hours  of  retirement  to  rest.  The  night  is  the  judgment-bar  of  the  day.  About  all  the
reflection  there  is  in  the  world  ia  due,  if  not  directly  to  the  night,  to  the  habit  prepared
and  fashioned  by  it.  Great  thoughts  and  wonderfully  distinct  crowd  in,  stirring  great
convictions — all  the  more  welcome  to  a  good  man ;  to  the  bad,  how  terrible !  '  Thou
hast  visited  me  in  the  night,'  says  David  ;  '  thou  hast  tried  me ; '  and  again,  '  My  reins
instruct  me  in  the  night  season.'  What  lessons  of  wisdom  have  every  man's  reins
given  him  in  the  depths  of  the  night ! — things  how  high,  how  close  to  other  worlds !
reproofs  how  piercing  in  authority,  how  nearly  Divine ! "  (Bushnell,  '  Moral  Uses  of
Dark  Things ').  3.  The  operation  of  Divine  grace  (in  connection  with  a  man's  own
thoughts),  which  visits  the  upright  in  heart,  dispels  every  illusion,  and  strengthens
every  holy  and  God-ward  aspiration.  Did  the  Lord  in  judgment  move  David  to  number
Israel  ?     His  judgment  was  founded  on  love,  and  his  goodness  led  him  to  repentanca

IIL  The  effect  of  its  renewed  activity.  "And  David  said  unto  Jehovah,  I
have  sinned  greatly  in  that  I  have  done,"  etc.  1.  A  right  knowledge  of  himself  and  a
correct  judgment  of  his  conduct.  2.  A  painful  sense  of  his  guilt  and  folly.  In  the
truly  penitent:  3.  A  humble  confession  before  the  Lord  (1  Sam.  vii.  6);  and:  4.
Fervent  prayer  for  forgiveness  (ch.  xii.  13).  Of  the  way  of  forgiveness  and  its  own
p&ciStation,  indeed,  conscience  is  unable  to  declare  anything ;  the  knowledge  thereof  is
afforded  by  the  "Word  of  God  alone  (ver.  18).  Nevertheless,  its  awakening  tests  and
manifests  the  character,  and  results  in  peace  and  righteousness,  or  in  increased  "hard-
ness of  heart,"  confirmed  rebellion,  remorse,  and  despair.  The  hour  of  its  awakening
comes  to  all ;  but  it  may  come  too  late,  when  there  ia  found  "  no  place  for  repentance  "
(ver.  16).— D.

Vers.  9—13, 18,  19  (1  Ohron.  xxi.  9—13, 18, 19).— The  Prophet  Gad.  "  And  when
David  was  up  in  the  morning,"  etc.  Gad  had  formerly  given .  valuable  direction  to
David  (1  Sam.  xxii.  5);  and  he  must  have  been  now  far  advanced  in  life.  He  was
"  David's  seer,"  or  spiritual  counsellor ;  a  true  prophet  of  God  (1  Sam.  ii.  27  ;  iii.  19  ;
ch.  vii.  3) ;  assisted  in  the  arrangements  for  the  temple  service  (1  Chron.  ix.  22),  and
(like  Samuel  and  Nathan)  wrote  a  (theocratic)  history  of  his  time  (1  Chron.  xxix.  29).
"The  most  celebrated  representatives  of  special  prophecy  in  David's  period  were
Nathan  the  prophet  and  Gad  the  seer.  As  Nathan  connected  Messianic  prophecy  for
ever  with  the  house  of  David,  so  Gad  was  instrumental  in  moulding  the  history  of
salvation  even  till  the  period  of  the  New  Testament,  since,  by  directing  David  to  build
an  altar  on  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah  the  Jebusite,  he  laid  the  foundation  ot
the  temple  upon  Mount  Moriah,  in  which  Israel,  by  prayer  and  sacrifice,  honoured  his
God  for  more  than  a  thousand  years  "  (Delitzsch).  He  was  fully  acquainted  with  the
king's  purpose,  the  remonstrance  of  Joab,  the  completion  of  the  census ;  and  may
possibly  already,  from  his  intimacy  with  David,  have  observed  misgivings  in  him
concerning  the  measure,  and  surmised  his  present  state  of  mind.  "  He  said  nothing  to
him  about  his  sin,  but  spoke  only  of  correction  for  it ;  which  confirms  it  that  David  was
made  sensible  of  his  sin  before  became  to  him"  (Gill).  Notice:  1.  His  Divine  mission.
"  The  word  of  Jehovah  came  unto  the  prophet,"  etc.  (1)  It  came  to  him  directly,  by
inward  intuition,  when  "  in  a  state  most  nearly  related  to  communion  with  God  in
prayer"  (Oehler).  (2)  With  the  irresistible  assurance  of  its  Divine  origin.  "The
prophets  themselves  had  the  clearest  and  most  profound  consciousness  that  they  did
not  utter  their  own  thoughts,  but  those  revealed  to  them  by  God"  (Riehm).  (3)  With
a  powerful  impulse  to  give  it  utterance,  in  "  fulfilment  of  a  definite  duty  laid  upon  him
by  God."    (4)  And  it  proved  whence  it  came,  by  its  manifest  adaptation  and  actual


61«  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxiv.  1—25.

accomplishment;  the  Divine  wisdom  and  might  with  which  it  was  imbued  (vers.  15,
25)  "  The  three  elements  which  enter  into  the  true  conception  of  a  prophet  ara
revelation,  inspiration,  and  utterance;  for  the  prophet  is  the  inspired  medium  of  truth
to  other  minds.  Revelation,  the  inner  disclosure  of  the  Divine  thought  and  will  to  the
human  soul,  is  an  essential  element  of  genuine  prophecy.  But  this  revelation  cannot
hecome  realized,  cannot  become  a  real  disclosure  of  thought  and  purpose  to  the  indi-
vidual as  a  preparation  for  prophecy,  without  inspiration.  The  soul  of  the  prophet
must  be  ethically  quickened  and  elevated  in  order  that  the  vvord  of  Jehovah  may  reach
the  people  through  him.  Nor  can  the  message  remain  concealed  in  the  prophet's  own
soul;  for  it  is  a  message,  a  Divine  commission,  to  communicate  a  revealed  truth  to
those  for  whom  it  is  divinely  intended  "  (Ladd,  •  The  Doctrine  of  Sacred  Scripture,'  i,
124).  2.  Bis  prophetic  message.  More  than  what  is  recorded  may  have  been  spoken
in  his  two  interviews  with  the  king ;  but  his  words  contain :  (1)  An  assertion  of  the  sole
sovereignty  of  Jehovah,  which  had  been  for  a  season  practically  ignored.  "  Thus  saith
Jehovah,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  The  oflioe  of  a  prophet  was  that  of  "  watchman  to  the  theo-
cracy" (Jer.  vi.  27) ;  he  had  to  observe  and  denounce  every  departure  from  its  principles
on  the  part  of  the  king  or  people,  and  give  warning  of  coming  danger.  (2)  An
announcement  of  the  approach  of  Judgment.  "  I  lay  before  thee  three  things,"  etc.
Already,  perchance,  the  king  had  a  presentiment  thereof;  but  now  it  was  rendered
plain  and  certain.  Yet  "  mercy  is  mixed  with  judgment ;  the  Lord  is  angry,  yet  shows
great  condescension  and  goodness."  "  His  mercies  are  great "  (ver.  li).  (3)  An
appointment  of  the  means  of  deliverance.  "  Go  up,  rear  an  altar  unto  Jehovah,"  eta
(ver.  18).  (4)  An  injunction  of  those  duties  or  conditions,  in  the  fulfilment  of  which
the  favour  of  God  would  be  enjoyed — submission,  trust,  and  unreserved  self-devotion.
3.  His  faithful  oledience.  "And  Gad  came  to  David,"  etc.,  with:  (1)  Simplicity;
uttering  the  word  of  God,  just  as  it  was  revealed  to  him,  adding  nothing,  and  with-
holding nothing.  (2)  Fearlessness.  (3)  Earnestness.  "  Now  advise,"  etc.  (4)  Dili-
gence and  perseverance.  4.  Eis  salutary  influence  (in  accordance  with  the  purpose  of
his  mission),  not  only  in  the  removal  of  the  pestilence,  but  also  in  (1)  checking  the
spirit  of  presumption  and  of  rebellion  against  Jehovah,  (2)  pacifying  a  troubled  con-
science, (3)  restoring  both  king  and  people  to  their  allegiance,  (4)  promoting  the
interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God. — D.

Ver.  13  (1  Chi-on.  xxi.  12). — (Jeeusalem.)  Preachers  and  hearers.  "  Now  advise
[know],  and  see  wliat  answer  I  shall  return  to  him  that  sent  me."  The  intercourse  of
the  prophet  with  the  king,  especially  his  language  at  the  close  of  the  first  interview,  is
suggestive  of —

L  The  vocation  of  the  preacher  of  the  gospel.  1.  Every  true  preacher  is  sent
forth  by  God.  2.  He  is  put  in  trust  with  the  Word  of  Goil,  and  is  sent  to  proclaim  it
to  others,  as  his  messenger  and  ambassador  (2  Cor.  v.  20) ;  not  to  teach  his  own  specu-
lations. 3.  The  purpose  of  the  proclamation  is  their  spiritual  welfare — their  instruc-
tion, edification,  salvation.  "  They  watch  on  behalf  of  your  souk  "  (Heb.  xiii,  17).
But,  too  often,

"The  aim  of  all

1b  how  to  shine :  e'en  they  whose  office  is

To  preach  the  gospel,  let  the  gospel  sleep.

And  pass  their  own  inventions  off  instead.

The  sheep,  meanwhile,  poor  witless  ones,  return

From  pasture,  fed  with  wind :  and  what  avail*

For  their  excuse,  they  do  not  see  their  harm  ?

Christ  said  not  to  his  first  conventiole,

'Go  forth  and  preach  impostures  to  the  world,'

But  gave  them  truth  to  build  on."

(Diinte,  'rar.,'xxix.)

4.  The  fulfilment  of  his  calling  demands  the  highest  qualities — wisdom,  sincerity,
sympathy,  disinterestedness,  self-denial,  fidelity,  courage,  zeal,  assiduity.  5.  The  manner
of  his  reception  vaiios  (Acts  xvii.  31),  and  tests  the  character  of  tliose  to  whom  he  is
sent  (Matt.  x.  11 — 13;  2  Cor.  ii.  16).  6.  He  must  return  to  him  who  sent  him,  and
give  account,  not  only  of  his  own  conduct,  but  also  of  the  manner  in  which  they  have


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  617

treated  him  and  his  message  (Ezek.  zxxiii.  30 — 33),  and  the  effect  produced  in  thcii
lives.  His  return  takes  |)laae  in  private  communion  with  God  on  earth,  and  at  "  the
end  of  his  life  "  (Heb.  xiii.  7).    "  What  answer,"  etc.  ?

IL  The  kbsponsibilitt  of  the  heabbb  of  the  Word.  1.  He  receiven  through  the
preacher  a  message  from  God  of  unspeakable  importance ;  not,  indeed,  an  announoi-ment
of  judgment,  but  a  revelation  of  mercy  and  of  his  will  concerning  him ;  repentance,
faith,  and  obedience ;  "  all  the  words  of  this  life  "  (Acts  v.  20).  2.  He  has  the  power
of  considering  and  understandln:^  it,  and  of  accepting  or  rejecting  it.  3.  He  is  under
the  strongest  obligation  to  accept  and  not  reject  it.  4.  He  cannot  avoid  doing  the  one
or  the  other;  indifference,  inattention,  or  procrastination  being  itself  an  "answer"  little
short  of  positive  rejection.  5.  Whatever  may  be  his  treatment  thereof,  it  is  fully
known  to  God.  6.  According  to  the  manner  in  which  he  treats  the  message  of  God,
is  he  justly  treated  by  God,  both  here  atid  hereafter.  "  The  word  that  I  have  spoken,
the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day"  (John  xii.  48).  "Now  therefore  advise
thyself."  "Consider"  (1  Sam.  xii.  24).  "Take  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear"  (Luke
viii.  1-18).

in.  The  mutual  dependence  of  preaoheb  and  heabek.  1.  On  the  preacher,
his  character,  adaptation,  diligence  (as  well  as  on  himself),  depend  the  hearer's  accept-
ance of  the  message  and  his  spiritual  benefit.  2.  On  thg  hearer,  his  attention,
acceptance,  obedience  (as  well  as  himself),  depend  the  preacher's  efSciency,  success,  and
present  joy.  "  That  they  may  do  this  [watch,  etc.]  with  joy,  and  not  with  grief;  for  this
were  unprofitable  for  you  "  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  3.  The  relation  in  which  they  stand  to
each  other  will  ftilly  appear  in  the  light  of  the  great  day ;  when  the  salvation  of  the
hearer  will  be  clearly  seen  to  have  been  connected  with  the  faithful  labours  of  the
preacher  (Dan.  xii.  3),  and  the  reward  of  the  preacher  will  be  proportioned  to  his
success  (and  not  merely  to  his  fidelity).  "  For  what  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of
rejoicing!"'  etc.  (1  Thess.  ii.  19,  20;  1  John  ii.  28).  4.  For  his  own  benefit,  therefore
(as' well  as  that  of  the  hearer),  the  preacher  should  seek  that  the  hearer  may  be  believing,
obedient,  and  fruitful  in  good  works  (1  Thess.  iii.  2;  v.  I'i,  13).  5.  For  his  own  benefit,
also,  the  hearer  should  seek  that  the  preacher  may  be  faithful  and  successful.  6.  Each
should  pray  for  the  blessing  of  God  upon  the  other,  so  that  the  proper  end  of  preaching
and  hearing  may  be  accompliBhed.-^D.

Ver.  14  (1  Chron.  xxi.  13). — (The  king's  palace.)  Submission  to  Divine  chastise-
ment. "  Let  us  now  fall  into  the  hand  of  Jehovah."  Already  David  had  been  convinced
of  his  sin.  He  had  also  confessed  it  and  sought  forgiveness.  Nor  had  he  done  so  in  vaiii.
But,  as  formerly  (ch.  xii.  10 — 12),  so  now,  the  (temporal)  penalties  of  sin  must  follow.
Throughout  he  exhibited  a  spirit  the  exact  reverse  of  that  in  which  he  had  numbered
the  people.    Consider —

I.  The  chastisement  of  sin  which  was  laid  before  him,  1.  It  was  consequent
upon  his  sin,  and  adapted  to  its  correction.  A  vain-glorious  pride  and  warlike  policy
result  (in  the  providence  of  God,  sometimes  by  means  which  can  be  clearly  seen)  in
the  destruction  of  human  life ;  not  only  directly  by  war  (Matt.  xxvi.  52),  but  also
bv  famine  (through  lack  of  proper  cultivation  of  the  soil,  wasting  consumption  of  its
produce,  etc.)  and  by  pestilence  (to  which  both  contribute);  and  are  rebuked  and
eiiastitied  thereby  (Rev.  vi.  4 — 8).  2.  It  was  a  necessity,  from  which  there  was  no
escape  He  and  his  people  must  sufier,  according  to  the  fixed  and  just  method  of  the
Divine  procedure,  for  the  vindication  of  the  honour  of  God  and  the  promotion  of  their
own  w  elfers.  Herein  no  choice  is  left.  3.  But  it  was  also  optional,  within  certain
limits  (Jer.  xxxiv.  17)t  "  Every  example,  public  or  private,  of  a  sin  brought  face  to
face  with  its  suffering,. presents  an  aspect  of  choice  as  well  as  of  compulsion.  The  mere
questiofl  g1  confession  or  denial,  with  the  consequences  of  either,  is  such  an  alternative
in  the  case  of  individual  wrong-doing.  The  adoption'  of  this  expedient  rather  than
that,  in  the  way  of  avoidance  or  mitigation  of  consequences,  is  an  alternative"  (C.  J.
Vaughan).  Why  was  such  a  choice  submitted  to  him?  To  test  his  character;  to
deepen  his  sense  of  sin,  by  the  consideration  of  its  terrible  effects ;  to  induce  the  open
acknowledgment  of  his  guilt ;  to  perfect  his  submission ;  "  to  give  him  some  encoui  age-
nient  under  the  correction,  letting  him  know  that  God  did  not  cast  him  out  of  com-
muniou  with  himself,  but  that  still  his  secret  was  with  him ;  and  iu  affiicting  him  he


•18  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.         [cm.  xxir.  1—25.

considered  his  frame,  and  what  he  could  best  bear  "  (Matthew  Henry).  4.  And  it  caused
him  great  distress;  all  the  greater  because  he  was  required,  not  merely  to  8ubmit
passively  to  chastisement,  but  to  choose  the  form  thereof,  and  thus  make  it,  in  8om«
sense,  his  own.  "  All  chastening  seemeth  for  the  present  to  be  not  joyous,  but  grievous,"
etc.  (Heb.  xii.  11).

II.  The  bpibit  of  submission  which  he  displayed.  "Is  it  a  choice  made?  or,  i»
it  a  choice  referred  back  to  the  offerer?  Is  it,  'I  choose  pestilence'?  or  is  it,  'Let  God
choose '  ?  Whatever  the  application,  the  principle  stands  steadfast — In  everything  let
m«  be  in  God's  hand ;  whether  for  the  choice  of  my  punishment,  or  for  the  infliction
of  it,  he  shall  be  my  Judge ;  for  his  mercies  are  great — greater  than  man's;  the  more  free
his  choice,  the  more  direct  his  dealing,  the  better  is  it  for  the  man,  the  better  is  it  for
the  nation  that  must  suffer."  "  And  David  chose  for  himself  the  mortality  [death]  "
(LXX.);  "that  affliction  which  is  common  to  kings  and  to  their  subjects,  and  in
which  the  fear  Wris  equal  on  all  sides"  (Josephus).  Of  famine  and  war,  with  their
untold  miseries,  he  had  had  experience,  not  of  pestilence.  By  the  former  he  would
become  dependent  on  men  (for  the  sustaining  or  the  sparing  of  life) ;  by  the  latter,
more  directly  on  God ;  and  whilst  "  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel,"  his
"anger  endureth  but  a  moment"  (Ps.  xxx.  5),  and  "his  mercies  are  great."  Tbe
spirit  evinced  is  one  of:  1.  Self-abasement,  before  the  majesty  of  the  supreme  King
and  Judge.  2.  Self-abnegation ;  with  noble  disinterestedness,  getting  aside  all  care  for
his  personal  safety,  and  enduring,  in  common  with  the  meanest  of  his  subjects,  the
just  chastisement  of  Heaven.  His  position  might  secure  him  against  suffering  and
death  by  famine  and  "  the  sword  of  his  enemies ; "  not  by  "  the  sword  of  the  Lord  "
(1  Chron.  xxi.  12)—

"  The  pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness.
And  the  sickness  that  wasteth  at  noonday."

(Pa.  xoi.  6.)

3.  Self-surrender ;  the  sacrifice  of  his  own  will  to  the  will  of  God  (1  Sam.  iU.  18 ;  ch.
IV.  23—29;  Ps.  cxxxi.).

••  And  in  his  will  is  our  tranquillity :
It  is  the  mighty  ocean,  whither  tends
Whatever  it  creates  and  nature  makes."

(Dante, 'ParVUt)

"Though  he  slay  me,"  etc.  (Job  xiii.  15).  "If  Christ  stood  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his
hand  pointed  at  my  breast,  yet  would  I  rush  into  his  arms  "  (Luther).  4.  Confirtence
in  the  abounding  mercy  of  God.  For  he  is  not  like  man,  ignorant,  inconsiderate,
unjust,  wilful,  selfish,  cruel,  and  malicious ;  but  knows  all  things  (the  secrets  of  the
heart,  the  force  of  temptation,  the  sincerity  of  penitence,  the  reality  of  love),  is  con-
siderate (of  human  infirmities,  Isa.  Ivii.  16),  righteous,  "  merciful,  and  gracious,"  etc.
(Exod.  xxxiv.  6),  very  pitiful  (Ps.  ciii.  13,  14),  mitigates  affliction  (Isa.  xxvii.  8),
mingles  with  it  many  consolations,  and  "repents  him  of  the  evil"  (Jonah  iv.  4;  1  Sam.
XV.  29 ;  ver.  16).  Such  trust  is  the  spring  of  true  submission,  and  it  is  fully  justified
by  the  event.  5.  Co-operation  with  the  merciful  and  holy  purposes  of  God  in  relation
to  the  moral  welfare  of  those  whom  he  afflicts.  The  selfishness  of  men  in  famine  and
their  cruelty  in  war  tend  to  evoke  rebellion,  wrath,  and  retaliation ;  the  recognition  of
"  the  mighty  hand  of  God"  (Jas.  iv.  10;  1  Pet.  v.  6)  tends  to  produce  lowly  obedience,
tenderness,  and  kindness.  6.  Concern  for  the  welfare  of  the  nation,  which  would  suffer
less  by  the  last  than  by  the  first  two  of  the  calamities ;  and :  7.  Zeal  for  the  interests  of
religion  and  the  glory  of  God.  "Let  thy  Name  be  magnified  for  ever"  (ch.  vii.  26).
"When  the  apostle  said  to  the  Hebrews  that  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands
of  the  living  God,  does  it  not  contradict  the  decision  of  David  ?  By  no  means.  The
apostle  meant  to  speak  of  those  who  fall  tuithout  repentance  into  the  hands  of  God  for
punishment ;  but,  in  a  penitent  disposition,  nothing  is  so  sweet  as  to  fall  into  the  loving
and  most  gracious  hands  of  the  living  God"  (Du  Bosc). — D.

Vers.  15, 16  (1  Chron.  xxi.  14, 15). — (Jerusalem.)  Pestilence.  Pestilence,  even  more
than  famine  and  war,  was  regarded  by  David  as  directly  inflicted  by  the  hand  of  God.
How  far,  in  this  instance,  it  occurred  in  connection  with  secondary  causes  is  unknown.


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  619

But  doubtless,  ordinarily,  it  depends  on  such  causes ;  the  crowding  together  of  great
numbers  of  people,  the  accumulation  of  filth,  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  the  suscepti-
bilities of  the  persons  affected  by  it.  "The  peculiar  source  of  the  thought  that  a
numbering  of  the  people  brought  mischief  lies  probably  in  the  experience  that  epidemic
sicknesses  often  broke  out  in  such  numberings,  because  therein  a  great  mass  of  people
was  crowded  together,  to  facilitate  the  business,  in  a  proportiooally  smeil  space"
(Thenius).  Most  of  the  great  plagues  that  have  afflicted  manldnd  appear  to  have
originated  in  the  East,  where  the  climate,  the  soil,  and  the  social  habits  of  the  popu-
lation afford  conditions  favourable  to  their  production.  In  all  cases,  however,  the  hand
of  God  must  be  recognized  in  the  consequences  of  violating  his  laws,  physical  and  moral ;
and  in  the  employment  of  them  "  for  correction."     Consider —

I.  Its  mournful  peevalenob  ;  as  at  this  time  in  Israel,  so  in  other  ages  and  nations
(Exod.  xii.  29;  Numb.  xxv.  9;  2  Kings  xix.  35;  Jer.  xxvii.  13).  1.  Its  sudden
appeftrance.  2.  Its  rapid  diffusion;  "from  the  morning  to  the  [a]  time  appointed
[the  time  of  assembly]."  "  It  burst  upon  the  people  with  supernatural  strength  and
violence,  that  it  might  be  seen  at  once  to  be  a  direct  judgment  from  God"   (Keil).

3.  Its  extensive  presence ;  "  from  Dan  to  Beersheba."  4.  Its  dreadful  destructiveness ;
"  seventy  thousand  men  "  (fourteen  in  the  thousand  of  the  whole  population).  "  Such
a  pestilence  and  loss  of  life  as  this  [at  Athens,  480  B.C.]  was  nowhere  remembered
to  have  happened"  (Thucydides,  ii.  47).  At  Borne  (a.d.  80)  ten  thousand  perished
daily ;  in  England  (1348)  more  than  half  the  population ;  in  London  (1603)  over  thirty
thousand;  and  again  (August,  1665)  eight  thousand  persons  weekly.  These  are  only  a
few  of  the  many  recorded  instances  of  the  awful  "  visitation  of  God."

II.  Its  merciful  arrest.  "And  the  angel"  (1  Sam.  xxix.  9;  ch.  xiv.  17;  xix.  27;
Ps.  civ.  4 ;  xxxiv.  7 ;  xxxv.  5 ;  xci.  11),  who  had  been  "  destroying  through  all  the
territories  of  Israel"  (1  Chron.  xxi.  12),  "stretched  out  his  hand"  (having  a  drawn
sword  therein,  1  Chron.  xxi.  6)  "  upon  Jerusalem  to  destroy  it,"  etc.  The  pestilence
approached  the  city,  threatening  its  destruction,  and  filling  all  hearts  with  terror
(1  Chron.  xxi.  16,  20).  We  can  conceive  that  it  might  have  spread  until  the  whole
human  race  perished.  But  its  destructive  force  was  limited  (as  it  always  is) :  1.  When
its  purpose  was  accomplished  and  the  law  of  retribution  satisfied.  "It  is  enough."
2.  By  the  same  Divine  power  as  sent  it.  "  Stay  now  thine  hand."  God  has  placed
in  the  human  constitution  a  self-healing  power.  "Our  natures  are  the  physicians
of  our  diseases"  (Hippocrates).  He  provides  special  remedies  for  special  diseases;
alleviates  and  often  cures  them  in  unexpected,  extraordinary,  and  mysterious  ways.
The  Christian  religion  is  a  remedial  system  by  which  mortality  itself  is  "  swallowed
up  of  life."  "I  am  Jehovah  thy  Physician"  (Exod.  xv.  26;  Matt.  viii.  16;  John  iii.
14,  15 ;  Eev.  xxii.  2).  3.  With  tender  pity  toward  the  afflicted,  involving  a  change
of  his  procedure.     "  And  Jehovah  repented  him  of  the  evil "  (1  Sam.  xv.  24—31).

4.  In  connection  with  the  moral  condition  of  men  and  their  altered  relation  to
himself— humiliation  (ver.  10),  trust  (ver.  14),  and  prayer  (ver.  17).  "  Then  David
and  the  elders,  clothed  in  sackcloth,  fell  upon  then:  faxjes"  (1  Chron.  xxi.  16),  their
spirit  being  doubtless  shared  in  by  the  people,  whose  representatives  they  were.  _  God
deals  with  men  according  to  the  state  of  their  hearts  (ver.  1),  and  commences  doing  so
even  before  it  is  fully  expressed  in  outward  actions.  Ps.  xci.  ("by  David"  LXX.),
'tinder  ihe  Bhadow  of  the  Ahnighty.'

"  Because  he  bath  set  his  love  upon  me.
Therefore  will  I  deliver  him,"  etc.

(Ps.  xci.  14.)

"  Some  years  ago  an  eminent  physician  in  St.  Petersburg  recommended  this  psalm  as
the  best  preservative  against  cholera  "  (Perowne).

III.  Its  mobal  uses,  with  respect  to  those  who  suffer  from  it  or  to  mankind
generally,  in :  1.  Producing  efficient  impiessions  of  the  majesty  of  God;  his  sovereignty,
justice,  and  might.  2.  Proving  the  real  condition  of  the  hearts  of  men ;  whether  they
will  "  keep  his  commandments  or  no"  (Deut.  viii.  3).  3.  Inducing,  in  those  who  are
rightly  disposed,  proper  feelings  of  penitence,  humility,  dependence,  submission ;  and
correcting  vanity,  pride,  and' self-will.  4.  Inciting  a  purer  and  loftier  trust  in  God,  and
more  complete  devotion  and  self-sacrifice.     "Plagues  to  us  are  not  funeraUi  of  terror,


620  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxiv.  1—25.

but  exercises  of  holiness.  We  understand  their  meaning.  They  ar©  messages  sent  to
us  by  God,  to  explore  our  hearts,  to  sound  the  depth  of  our  love  to  him,  and  to  fathom
our  faith  in  Gkid  "  (Cyprian,  'Do  Mortal itate ').  5.  Presenting  a  terrible  picture  of  the
svil  of  sin,  by  exhibiting,  not  only  the  natural  consequences  thereof,  but  also  its
degrading  effect  on  the  ignorant  and  unbelieving,  who  pass  rapidly  from  the  extreme
of  fear  to  the  opposite  extreme  of  recklessness,  licentiousness,  and  despair  (1  Cor.  xv.  32).
"So  they  resolved  to  take  their  enjoyment  quickly,  and  with  a  sole  view  to  gratification ;
regarding  their  lives  and  their  riches  alike  as  things  of  a  day.  And  fear  of  gods  or
law  of  men  there  was  none  to  stop  them  "  (Thucydides).  6.  Teaching  the  solidarity  of
the  race ;  and,  more  especially,  constraining  "  the  higher  and  more  privileged  ranks  of
mankind  to  own  their  oneness  of  life  with  the  humbler  and  more  degraded  or  even
savage  classes  "  (Bushnell).  7.  Promoting,  in  Still  other  ways,  the  advancement  of
mankind  in  knowledge,  virtue,  and  piety ;  for  it  is  through  the  discipline  of  suffering
that  the  race,  like  the  individual,  "learns  obedience."  "  The  Lord's  dealing  herein  is
not  penal,  but  paternal  and  medicinal "  (Q-uild). — D.

Vers.  17—19  (1  Chron.  xxi.  16—19). — (Zion.)  Belf-devotion.  "  These  sheep,  what
have  they  done  ?  "  etc.  (ver.  17).  As  through  one  man  many  suffer,  so  through  one
man  many  are  delivered  from  suffering  and  greatly  benefited.  This  is  especially  the
case  when,  like  David,  he  is  their  head  and  representative,  the  shepherd  of  the  flock
of  God  (ver.  17 ;  ch.  v.  2).  His  numbering  the  people  in  a  spirit  of  self-exaltation  was
the  occasion  (not  the  cause,  ver.  1)  of  the  pestilence ;  his  intercession  for  them  in  a
spirit  of  self-devotion  is  now  the  means  in  connection  with  which  the  calamity  is  limited
in  its  duration  (from  three  days  to  nine  hours)  and  wholly  removed  (ver.  25).  Already,
with  an  "  awful  rose  of  dawn,"  the  agent  of  destruction  goes  forth  on  his  mission,  and  a
"  great  cry  "  of  distress  reaches  the  city  (Bxod.  xii.  30).  Then  the  king  gathers  the
elders  together  (at  the  tabernacle  and  before  the  curtained  ark,  ch.  vii.  2 ;  xii.  20 ;  xv.  25 ;
adjoining  the  palace  in  Zion,  ch.  v.  7) ;  they  are  clothed  with  sackcloth,  and  over-
whelmed with  fear  and  grief  (1  Chron.  xxi.  16;  ch.  xii.  16;  xv.  SO);  and  at  length,
"  about  the  time  of  assembly,"  or  evening  oblation  (Acts  iii.  1),  there  appears  (beyond
the  Tyropoean  Valley)  on  Mount  Moriah  (2  Chron.  iii.  1),  "  by  the  threshing-floor  of
Araunah  the  Jebusite  "  (just  outside  the  city),  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord  standing  between
the  earth  and  the  heaven,  having  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand  stretched  out  over
Jerusalem;"  and  they  "  fell  upon  their  faces"  in  humiliation  before  the  Lord.  "Signi-
ficantly, it  was  as  the  Divine  command  of  mercy  sped  to  arrest  the  arm  of  the  angel-
messenger  of  the  judgment,  that  he  became  visible  to  David  and  his  companions  in
prayer"  (Bdersheim).  "As  in  2  Kings  vi.  17  the  source  of  seeing  the  heavenly
powers  was  in  Elisha,  and  by  his  mediation  the  eyes  of  his  servant  were  opened,  so
here  the  flight  of  David's  mind  communicated  itself  to  the  elders  of  his  retinue,  whom
he  collected  about  him ;  and,  after  he  had  repaired  to  the  place  where  he  saw  the  vision,
was  revealed  even  to  the  sons  of  Araunah  "  (Hengstenberg).  "  And  David  said  unto
God,"  etc.  "  And  Gad  came  that  day  to  David,"  etc.  (ver.  18 ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  18).
Here  is —

r.  A  rEARPTTL  VISION  OF  JUDGMENT  impending  over  the  people.  This  judgment  may
be  regarded  as  representing  that  to  which  nations  are  exposed  in  this  world,  and
individuals  both  here  and  hereafter;  real,  terrible  and  imminent;  the  result  luui
reflection  of  human  sin  and  guilt,  which

"  Blackens  in  the  oloud,
Flashes  aoross  its  mass  the  jagged  Are,
Whirls  in  the  whirlwind  and  pollutes  the  aiti
Turns  all  the  joyous  melodies  of  earth
To  murmurings  of  doom."

(Tolfourd.)

1.  Similar  judgment  has  been  already  executed  (ver.  16;  Jude  7;  Rom.  v.  12;  Bev
ii.  11 ;  xxi.  8).  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  2.  Solemn  warnings  of  its  certain  and
speedy  approach  liave  been  repeatedly  given  (vers.  13, 17;  2  Pet.  ii.  3;  1  Thess.  v.  2  3).
3.  Only  a  few  persons  have  any  adequate  impression  thereof;  whilst  they  behold  "'tha
wrath  to  come,"  the  rest  are  blind  and  unconcerned,  immersed  in  the  pleasures  and


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  621

cares  of  this  life  (Luke  xxi.  34 ;  Matt.  vii.  14).  4,  They  whose  eyes  are  opened  are
oaturally  imptjUed  to  seek  the  salvation  of  themselves  and  others,  and  are  under  the
obligation  of  doing  so  (Jude  22,  23).  "  Take  a  censer,"  etc. ;  "  and  he  stood  between
the  dead  and  the  living ;  and  the  plague  was  stayed  "  (Numb.  xvi.  46 — 68 ;  Joel  ii.  17).

IL  A  FEKVENT  ENTBEATV  FOB  THE  PEOPLE,  that  they  may  be  spared.  In  his
intercession  for  them  (1  Sara.  xii.  23 ;  xv,  10,  11,  35)  David :  1.  Takes  the  burden  of
their  guilt  upon  himself ;  whilst  he  recognizes  his  responsibility,  openly  confesses  his
transgression  in  "commanding  the  people  to  be  numbered"  (1  Chron.  xxi.  17),  and
honours  the  jvistice  of  God  in  inflicting  punishment ;  he  "  forgets  their  sin  is  his  own,"
regarding  them,  "  not  indeed  as  free  from  every  kind  of  blame,  but  only  from  the  sin
which  God  was  punishing  by  pestilence  "  (Keil).  "  Many  of  those  sheep  were  wolves
to  David.  What  had  they  done  ?  They  had  done  that  which  was  the  occasion  of
David's  sin  and  the  cause  of  their  own  punishment;  but  that  gracious  penitent  knew
his  own  sin ;  he  knew  not  theirs  "  (Hall).  2.  Feels  a  tender  compassion  for  them  in
their  misery  and  danger.  His  language  "  shows  the  high  opinion  he  had  of  them,  the
great  affection  he  had  for  them,  and  his  sympathy  with  them  in  this  time  of  distress  "
(Gill).  3.  Offers  himself  freely,  and  his  "father's  house"  (his  life  and  all  his  most
cherished  hopes)  to  the  stroke,  that  it  may  be  averted  from  his  people.  "  Hitherto  David
offered  not  himself  to  the  plague,  because,  as  Chrysostom  conjectureth,  he  still  expected
and  made  account  of  himself  to  be  taken  away  in  the  plague,  but  now  seeing  that  it  was
God's  will  to  spare  him,  he  doth  voluntarily  offer  himself"  (Willet).  4.  Urges  an
effectual  plea  on  their  behalf;  not  merely  that  they  are  blameless  (in  comparison  with
himself),  and  may  be  righteously  spared,  but  that  they  are  the  chosen  flock  of  the  Divine
Shepherd,  whose  mercies  are  great,  whose  promises  to  them  are  numerous  and  faithful,
and  whose  glory  they  are  designed  to  promote  in  the  earth  (1  Sam.  xii.  22 ;  Ps.  Ixxiv.
1 ;  xcv.  7).  "  Wilt  thou  also  destroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked  ?  "  (Gen.  xviii.  23) ;
"  Yet  now  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin,"  etc.  (Exod.  xxxii.  32 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  36  ;
Dan.  Lx.  3) ;  "I  could  wish  that  I  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  on  behalf  of  my
brethren,"  etc.  (Eom.  ix.  3) ;  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  "
(Luke  xxiii.  34);  "The  good  Shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep  *  (John  x.  11);
"He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession"  (Heb.  vii.  27).  "In  his  hands  intercessory
prayer  is  the  refuge  of  the  guilty,  the  hope  of  the  penitent,  a  mysterious  chain  fastened
to  the  throne  of  God,  the  stay  and  support  of  a  sinking  world."

III.  A  FAVOUBABLE  ANSWER  PROM  THE  LoBD.  Although  David  sees  not  the
interposition  of  God,  by  which  the  hand  of  the  angel  is  stayed,  yet  his  prayer  "  availeth
much  in  its^  working"  (Jas.  v.  16).  "And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  [now  transformed
from  a  minister  of  wrath  into  a  minister  of  mercy]  commanded  Gad  [who  previously
announced  the  message  of  judgment]  to  say,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xxi.  18);  "And  Gad  came
that  day  to  David,  and  said  unto  him.  Go  up,  rear  an  altar,"  etc. ;  "  And  David  went
up  as  the  Lord  commanded "  (vers.  18,  19).  The  answer  is  propitious ;  a  sign  of
Divine  reconciliation.  But  why  the  command  to  rear  an  altar,  instead  of  the  direct
assurance'  of  forgiveness  (oh.  xii.  13)  ?  1.  To  show  forth  to  all  the  people  (who  con-
fess by  their  elders  and  representatives  that  they  have  part  in  the  king's  transgres-
sion) that  forgiveness  is  possible  only  in  connection  with  sacrifice,  wherein  justice  and
mercy  are  alike  exhibited.  2.  To  call  forth  their  renewed  and  open  obedience  and  self-
devotion.  8..  To  give  there  a  public  sign  of  the  Divine  acceptance  and  removal  of  the
judgment  (1  Chron.  xxi.  26, 27).  4.  To  establish  a  new  and  permanent  centre  of  Divine
worship,  in  fulfilment  of  previous  promises  (ch.  vii.  13);  so'overruling  the  evil  for  good,
and  turning  the  curse  into  a  blessing  (1  Chron.  xxii.  l).  This  was  a  turning-point  in
the  history  of  the  nation  ;  and  henceforth  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  began  to  be
superseded  by  that  of  the  temple.

Conclusion.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  the  intercession  of  Christ  (unlike  that  of
David)  is  the  intercession  of  the  Innocent  for  the  guilty ;  that  he  is  also  himself  the
Altar,  "  which  sanctifieth  the  gift,"  and  "  the  Propitiation  for  our  sins ; "  and  that  in
dependence  upon  him,  as  well  as  after  his  example  and  in  his  spirit,  all  our  prayers  and
"  spiritual  sacrifices  "  must  be  presented  unto  God. — ^D.

Vers.  20 — 23  (1  Chron.  xxi.  18 — 23). — (Moeiah.)  Arawnah  the  Jebusite.  Araunah
(Aravnah,  Avarnah,  Aranyah,  Oman)  was  :  1.  A  Gentile  by  birth ;  almost  the  last  relic


622  THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMDEL.         [ch.  xxiv.  1— 25.

of  the  Canaanitist  tribe  whose  fortress  was  taken  nearly  thirty  years  before  (ch.  v.  6).
"  He  was  not  slain  by  David  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  because  of  the  good  will  he
bore  to  the  Hebrews,  and  a  particular  benignity  and  affection  which  he  had  to  the  king
himself"  (Josephus)  ;  with  whom,  during  his  exile,  he  may  have  become  acquainted.  2.
A  proselyte  to  the  faith  of  Israel  (ver.  23),  "  There  was  no  other  people  who  were
specially  called  the  people  of  God ;  but  they  (the  Jews)  oaimot  deny  that  there  have
been  certain  men  of  other  -nations,  who  belonged,  not  by  earthly  but  heavenly  fellow-
ship, to  the  true  Israelites,  the  citizens  of  the  country  that  is  above  "  (Augustine).  3.
A  prosperous  owner  of  property  on  the  hill  Moriah  (at  that  time  outside  the  city),
where  he  had  his  threshing-floor,  and  dwelt  with  his  four  sons.  His  prosperity  was
due,  not  merely  to  his  own  industry,  but  chiefly  to  his  friendship  with  David  and  his
people.  4.  A  partaker  of  the  sufferings,  as  well  as  the  privileges,  of  the  inhabitants, of
Jerusalem.  Whilst  occupied  in  threshing  wheat  (by  means  of  sledges  drawn  by  oxen),
it  was  given  him  to  see  the  supernatural  messenger  of  wrath  (1  Chron.  xxi.  20) ;  and
"  his  four  sons  with  him,  hid  themselves  "  from  fear.  5.  A  loyal  subject ;  respectful,
courteous  (ver.  20),  and  grateful  for  the  king's  visit  to  him  in  his  threshing-floor  (ver.
21).  "  It  was  a  piece  of  condescension  to  be  marvelled  at ;  and  the  language  expresses
a  desire  to  know  his  pleasure  concerning  him,  supposing  it  must  be  something  very
urgent  and  important "  (Gill).  6.  A  generous  donor  and  public-spirited  man  (ver.  22).
"  AH  does  Araunah,  0  king,  give  to  the  king  "  (ver.  23).  "  His  liberality  and  princely
munificence  is  registered  to  all  after-ages  in  the  Holy  Scripture ;  what  is  done  by  a  pions
heart  to  the  honour  and  worship  of  God  shall  never  want  its  own  reward  and  blessed
remembrance ;  as  was  the  breaking  of  the  box  of  precious  ointment "  (Guild).  7.  A
devout  worshipper  of  God.  "Jehovah  thy  God  accept  thee."  8.  A  ready  helper
toward  the  building  of  the  altar  and  temple  of  God.  9.  A  pattern  to  Christians.  10.
A  pre-intimation  of  the  willing  homage  of  the  Gentile  world  to  Christ  (ch.  xxii.  50) ;
an  earnest  or  firstfruits  of  the  harvest  (Ps.  IxxiL  10,  IV).  "  In  every  place  incense
shall  be  offered,"  etc.  (Mai.  i.  11).— D.

Ver.  24  (I  Chron.  xxi.  24,  25). — (Mobiah.)  Personal  sacrifice.  "  And  I  will  not
offer  unto  Jehovah  my  God  of  that  which  doth  cost  me  nothing."  The  gift  of  Araunah
would  have  enabled  David  to  perform  a  religious  service  in  a  cheap  and  inexpensive
manner.  But,  (1)  humbly  recognizing  the  obligations  that  rested  upon  him,  and
animated  by  a  spirit  of  self-devotion,  (2)  he  nobly  repudiates  an  offering  which  would
have  been,  not  really  his  own,  but  another's;  or  rendering  to  God  a  selfish  and
mercenary  service;  "which  rebukes  and  condemns  the  avaricious  disposition  of  many
in  this  age,  whocan  part  with  nothing  for  the  maintenance  of  God's  worship  or  promot-
ing religion  or  any  good  work  "  (Guild).  "  It  is  a  heartless  piety  of  those  base-minded
Christians  that  care  only  to  serve  God  good-cheap  "  (Hall).  (3)  He  also  generously
resolves  (acting  toward  the  Divine  King  of  Israel  in  the  same  spirit  as  Araunah  acted
toward  himselQ  to  purchase  all  that  was  required  at  "  the  full  price,"  and  thus  serve
God  at  his  own  cost,  with  self-denial  and  self-sacrifice.  "  And  David  bought  the
threshing-floor  and  the  oxen  for  fifty  shekels  of  silver"  (1  Chron.  xxi.,  "the  place,"
the  whole  hill  perhaps,  for  "  six  hundred  shekels  of  gold  by  weight ").  The  principle
applies  not  only  to  gifts  of  money  (ch.  viii.  11) ;  but  also  to  the  employment  of  thought,
effort,  time,  talents,  relationships,  influence ;  the  renunciation  of  ease,  pleasure,  conveni-
ence, name,  and  fame ;  the  endurance  of  privation,  pain,  opposition,  dishonour,  and  shame;
its  highest  application  is  to  the  "whole  burnt  offering"  of  a  man  himself  (heart,  soul,
will),  which  virtually  includes  all  other  offerings,  and  without  which  they  are  vain.
"  What  a  change  it  would  make  in  the  Christian  world  if  Christians  of  all  sorts  would
put  this  question  seriously  to  their  souls,  '  Shall  I  serve  God  with  that  which  costs  me
nothing  ? ' "  (Manton,  xxii.  94).  Personal  sacrifice  is :  1.  Enjoined  by  the  express  com-
mands of  God.  "  None  shall  appear  before  me  empty  "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  20)  ;  "  Every
man  as  he  is  able,"  etc.  (Deut.  xvi.  16) ;  "  It  shall  be  perfect  to  be  accepted  ;  there  shall
be  no  blemish  therein.  Neither  from  a  stranger's  hand,"  etc.  (Lev.  xxii.  21,  25).  Men
were  required  to  offer  what  was  valuable,  not  worthless ;  what  was  their  own,  not
another's.  Even  the  poorest  were  not  exempt.  Self-denial  is  also  "  the  law  of  Christ "
(Mark  viii.  34;  x.  21 — 27).  2.  Incited  by  the  supreme  claims  of  Ood;  arising  from
hia  greatness  and  goodness,  his  ownerahip  of  all  things  (1  Chron.  ixix.  14),  his  mani-


OH.  XXIV.  1—26.]       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  623

fold  mercies  (ver.  14),  above  all,  the  unspeakable  Gift  of  his  only  Son  (Bom.  viii.  32 ;
xii.  1).  3.  Expressive  of  a  right  feeling  toward  Qod.  Keverence,  gratitude,  love,  self-
consecration,  holy  zeal  (John  xii.  3).  "Everything  depends  on  the  predominant
principle  and  purpose.  If  a  man's  prime  feeling  be  that  of  self,  he  will  go  the  easiest
and  most  economic  way  to  work  and  worship ;  if  a  man's  prime  feeling  be  that  of  Qod,
he  will  rebuke  all  thoughts  of  cheapness  and  facility.  In  the  first  case,  he  will
seek  the  largest  possible  results  from  the  least  possible  expenditure ;  in  the  second,
the  expenditure  will  be  itself  the  result.  Now,  it  is  the  end  and  essence  of  all  religion
to  turn  the  mind  from  self  to  God ;  to  give  it  absorbing  views  of  the  Divine  beauty
fcnd  glory  ;  to  fill  it  with  Divine  love  and  zeal ;  to  make  it  feel  honoured  in  honouring
God,  blessed  in  blessing  him ;  to  make  it  feel  that  nothing  is  good  enough  or  great
enough  for  him ;  and  when  the  mind  is  thus  afi'ected  and  thus  possessed,  it  will  under-
stand and  share  the  spirit  of  David's  resolve  "  (A.  J.  Morris, '  The  Unselfish  Offering ').
4.  Essential  to  the  true  service  of  Qod ;  for  this  depends  not  so  much  upon  the  form
or  amount  of  the  offering  as  upon  its  relation  to  the  offerer;  its  being  the  genuine
expression  of  the  heart  (as  it  professes  to  be) ;  without  which  the  service  is  formal,
unreal,  and  insincere.  That  which  costs  nothing  is  worth  nothing  (Mai.  i.  8 ;  Isa.  i.  11 ;
Ps.  li.  16,  17).  5.  Necessary  to  the  assured  acceptance  of  God.  It  alone  is  attended
with  the  sign  and  sense  of  his  approval  (1  Chron.  xxi.  26).  6.  Conducive  to  the  proper
honour  of  Ood  amongst  men;  in  whom  it  begets  a  spirit  like  its  own.  7.  Embodied  in
highest  perfection  in  Christ ;  "  who  gave  himself  up  for  us,  an  Offering  and  a  Sacrifice
to  God,"  etc.  (Eph.  v.  2).  "  A  Spanish  proverb  says,  '  Let  that  which  is  lost  be  for
God.'  The  father  of  a  family,  making  his  will  and  disposing  of  his  goods  upon  his
death-bed,  ordained  concerning  a  certain  cow  which  had  strayed,  and  had  been  now  for
a  long  time  missing,  if  it  were  found  it  should  be  for  his  children,  if  otherwise  for  God.
Whenever  men  would  give  to  God  only  the  lame  and  blind,  that  which  costs  them
nothing,  that  from  which  they  hope  no  good,  no  profit,  no  pleasure  to  themselves,  what
are  they  saying  in  their  hearts  but  that  which  this  man  said  openly,  '  Let  that  which
is  lost  be  for  God '  1 "  (Trench, '  Proverbs ').— D.

Ver.  25  (1  Chron.  xxi.  26 — 30;  xxii.  1). — (Moriah.)  The  new  altar.  "And
David  built  there  an  altar  unto  Jehovah,"  etc.  1.  An  altar  was  a, place  of  sacrifice
(Gen.  iv.  3,  4 ;  viii.  20 ;  xxii.  14) ;  consisting  (according  to  Divine  direction,  Exod.  xx.
24,  25)  of  earth  or  unhewn  stone,  and  constituting  (according  to  Divine  assurance)
a  point  of  meeting  or  reconciliation  between  God  and  men;  the  offerings  which  it
sustained  and  sanctified  (and  with  which  it  was  identical  in  purpose)  being  of  divers
kinds,  symbolic  of  certain  truths,  and  expressive  of  various  feelings  on  the  part  of  those
who  brought  them.  It  was  a  prime  necessity  of  religious  worship  in  ancient  iime;  the
appointed  way  of  access  to  God ;  the  table  at  which  Divinity  and  humanity  held  fellow-
ship with  one  another.  2.  The  altar  erected  by  David  on  the  threshing-floor  of  Araunah
marks  the  commencement  of  a  new  chapter  in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God
under  the  old  covenant.  Heretofore  sacrifice  was  offered  in  different  places  (1  Sam.  i.
3;  ii.  33;  vi.  15;  vii.  9,  17;  ix.  12;  xi.  15;  xiv.  35;  xvi.  3;  xx.  6;  ch.  vi.  13,  17;
XV.  12) ;  and  the  requirement  of  the  Law  (Deut.  xii.  13, 14)  was  imperfectly  fulfilled,
in  consequence  of  the  unsettled  condition  of  the  nation  and  the  disorganized  state  of
religious  worship  (1  Kings  iii.  2).  Whilst  the  ark  was  at  Jerusalem,  "  the  altar  of  the
burnt  offering"  remained  at  Gibeon  (1  Chron.  xxi.  29,  30);  and  although  not  finally
abandoned  till  some  time  after  (1  Kings  ill  4),  it  henceforth  began  to  be  superseded
by  the  new  altar,  which  was  divinely  appointed  and  consecrated  by  fire  from  heaven
(1  Chron.  xxi.  26),  and  chosen  by  Jehovah  (Deut.  xvi.  15)  as  the  place  of  his  worship,
the  central  sanctuary  for  succeeding  ages.  "  Now  when  King  David  saw  that  God  had
heard  his  prayer,  and  had  graciously  accepted  of  his  sacrifice,  he  resolved  to  call  that
3ntire  place  the  altar  of  all  the  people "  (Josephus).  "  And  David  said.  This  is  tlM
house  of  the  Lord  God."  etc.  (1  Chron.  xxii.  1,  2 ;  Gen.  xxviii.  17);  "And  Solomon
began  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem  in  Mount  Moriah,  where  the  Lord
appeared  unto  David,"  etc.  (2  Chron.  iii.  1).  Ps.  xxx.,  inscription :  '  A  song  at  the
dedication  of  the  house '  (see  Hengstenberg).  "  I  will  extol  thee,  O  Lord,"  etc.
"  And  as  for  me— I  had  said,  in  my  prosperity,
I  shall  not  be  moved  for  ever,"  etc.

(Fi.  xxxL  6—10.)


624  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxiv.  1—25


3.  The  chief  interest  for  ns  of  this  altar  (as  of  every  other)  arises  from  the  fact  that  it
was  not  merely  symbolic  of  spiritual  truth,  but  also  typical  of  its  embodiment  in
Christ — ^the  Altar  (as  well  as  the  Offering  and  the  Offerer),  the  new  and  only  true  (Htb.
vii.  2),  perfect,  effectual,  central,  universal,  and  enduring  Altar  and  Temple  (John  ii.  21),
where  God  records  his  name,  and  where  we  draw  nigh  to  God,  offer  spiritual  sacriiioes,
and  find  acceptance  with  him.  It  was  "a  shadow  of  things  to  come;  but  the  body  is
of  Christ "  (Col.  ii.  17).  "  We  have  an  altar  [his  cross  and  sacrifice],  whereof  they
have  no  right  to  eat  who  serve  the  tabernacle  '  (Heb.  ziiL  10).  Consider,  with  this
reference —

I.  The  bbection  of  the  altab,  as  (in  connection  with  the  offerings,  apart  from
which  it  cannot  be  fully  contemplated)  :  1.  Rendered  necessary  by  human  sin,  through
the  temptation  of  Satan ;  estrangement  from  God  through  pride  and  disobedience  to
his  Law ;  exposure  to  condemnation  and  death  (Heb.  ix.  22).  2.  Ordained  by  Divine
wisdom  and  love,  "before  the  foundation  of  the  world"  (1  Pet.  i.  20),  in  order  to  tlie
remission  of  sins  and  the  restoration  of  sinners  to  the  fellowship  of  God  (Heb.  ix.  26).
3.  Adapted  to  the  fulfilment  of  that  purpose ;  by  the  atonement  there  made  (ch.  xxi.  3 ;
Lev.  i.  4  ;  Isa.  liii.  6 ;  John  i.  29 ;  1  John  ii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  Gal.  iii.  13) ;  by  the  exhi-
bition of  the  duty,  sinfulness,  and  desert  of  men,  and  the  sovereignty,  righteousness,
and  mercy  of  God  (Bom.  iii.  21 — ^26).  "  When  sinful  souls  approached  the  altar  of
God,  where  dwelt  his  holiness,  their  sinful  nature  came  between  them  and  God,  and
atonement  served  the  purpose  of  covering  their  sins,  of  cancelling  the  charges  on  which
they  were  arraigned  "  (Kiiper).  4.  Designed  to  do  away  with  every  other  altar  and  to
afford  free  access  to  God  for  all  people  in  all  places  and  ages  (Isa.  Ivi.  7  ;  John  iv.  23 ;
Eph.  ii.  18).  The  language  in  which  the  death  of  Christ  is  'described  in  the  New
Testament  is  derived  from  the  sacrifices  of  the  former  dispensation,  and  can  only  be
properly  understood  by  some  acquaintance  with  them.  It  is  no  longer  needful  or  possible
to  set  up  cm  altar  (according  to  a  common  mode  of  expression),  except  in  the  sense  of
recognizing,  approaching,  and  making  known  "  the  altar  of  God  "  which  is  set  up  in
Christ  Jesus  (Ps.  xliii.  4;  John  xiv.  6).     "Let  us  draw  near,"  etc.  (Heb.  x.  22).

II.  The  offerings  pkesbnted  there.  "  And  offered  burnt  offerings  and  peace
offerings  "  (1  Sam.  i.  3 ;  ch.  vi.  17 — 19).  In  becoming  himself  an  Offering  (Isa.  liii,  12)
and  Propitiation  for  our  sins  (complete  and  incapable  of  being  repeated  or  rendered  more
efBcacious),  Christ  displayed  a'spirit  (Heb.x.  5 — 7)  in  which  (coming  to  him  with  peni-
tence, ver.  10,  and  faith)  we  must  participate,  and  thus  "  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,"
etc.  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  1.  The  free,  entire,  and  continual  surrender  (ver.  14)  and  dedication
of  ourselves,  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  to  God  (Kom.  xii.  1).  2.  Prayers,  supplications
and  intercessions  (ver.  17 ;  Judg.  xx.  26 ;  Ps.  Ii.  17  ;  cxli.  2).  "  And  the  Lord  Jehovah
was  entreated  for  the  land."  "  Sacrifice  is  in  the  main  embodied  prayer."  3.  "  The
sacrifice  of  praise  "  (Heb.  xiii.  15).  4.  Holy  obedience  (ver.  19),  generous  gifts  (ver.
24),  and  benevolent  activities.  "  To  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not :  for  with
such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased  "  (Heb.  xiii.  16 ;  Phil.  iv.  18).  "  The  altar  is  not
to  stand  in  its  beauty  and  stateliness  a  solemn,  unapproachable  thing,  on  which  we  may
reverently  gaze,  but  which  we  may  not  touch  without  sacrilege.  It  is  for  use ;  its
broad  summit  is  to  be  laden  with  oblations  and  crowded  with  victims ;  it  stands  in
the  midst  of  us ;  it  accompanies  us  wherever  we  wander,  that  it  may  invite  our  offer-
ings, and  be  always  ready  to  receive  what  we  should  always  be  ready  to  give  "  (Ps.  iv.
5 ;  sxvi.  6 ;  cxviii.  27).

III.  The  acoeptanob  op  the  offbrbb.  "  Jehovah  thy  Grod  accept  thee  "  (ver.  23) ;
"  And  the  plague  was  stayed  from  Israel."  Christ's  offering  was  well-pleasing  to  God  ;
and  we  are  acceptedin  him  Hiph.  v.  2 ;  1.  6,  7).  1.  There  is  now  no  condemnation
(Rom.  viii.  1 ;  Heb.  x.  16 — 18).     The  sword  is  put  up  again  into  the  sheath  thereof.

2.  The  presence,  favour,  and  sanctifying  power  of  God  are  manifested  to  us  (Acts  ii.

3,  4).  3.  Peace  with  God,  and  "  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  are  vouchsafed
to  us.  4.  And  we  "  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (Rom.  v.  1, 2 ;  Eph.  iL  19 — ^22,'
Rev.  xxi.  3,  4).

**  Thou  didst  turn  for  me  isy  mourning  into  dancing ;
Thou  didst  put  off  my  sackcloth,  and  didst  gird  me  with  joy ;
To  the  end  that  my  glory  should  sing  praise  to  thee,  and  not  be  silent.
O  Jehovah  my  God,  for  ever  will  I  give  thanks  anto  thee."

(Ps.  XXX.  U,  19^


•H.  XXIV.  1—25.]         THE  SECX3ND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  625

CoNOLUBioN.  1.  "  JesuB  Chrfst  is  the  Object  of  the  two  Testaments  :  of  the  Old,  its
expectancy  ;  of  the  New,  its  model ;  of  both,  the  centre  "  (Pascal).  As  in  every  part  of
the  country  there  is  a  way  which  leads  to  the  metropolis,  so  in  every  part  of  Scripture
there  is  a  way  which  leads  to  Christ.  2.  The  method  of  human  salvation  has  always
been  the  same  in  the  mind  of  God ;  but  it  has  been  gradually  revealed  to  the  mind  of
man ;  and  wherever  faith  has  been  exercised  in  God,  in  so  far  as  he  has  revealed  hia
saying  purposes,  it  has  been  accounted  for  righteousness.  3.  "  To  the  cross  of  Christ
all  eternity  looked  forward ;  to  the  cross  of  Christ  all  eternity  will  look  back.  With
reference  to  it  all  other  objects  were  created  and  are  still  preserved ;  and  every  event  that
takes  place  in  heaven,  earth,  and  hell  is  directed  and  overruled  "  (Paysor).  4.  "  Where-
fore, receiving  a  kingdom,"  etc.  (Heb.  lii.  28).  "  Now  the  God  of  peace,"  etc.  (Heb.
xiii.  20,  21).— D.

Ver.  10. — Sinful  numbering.  Thii  is  part  of  a  narrative  which  presents  various
serious  difSculties.  The  chief  is  that  which  arises  from  the  statement  that  God  moved
David  to  commit  the  sin  for  which  he  afterwards  punished  him.  In  1  Chron.  xxi  1
the  instigator  is  said  to  be  Satan,  or  "  an  adversary ; "  and  it  is  possible  to  translate  here
(' Speaker's  Commentary ')"  one  moved  David."  Still,  the  translation  in  our  English
versions  (both  Authorized  and  Revised)  is  more  natural.  The  statement  reminds  us  of
Numb.  xxii.  20,  22,  and  is  probably  susceptible  of  a  similar  explanation.  God  gives
permission  to  men  who  indulge  sinful  desires  to  gratify  their  desires.  He  says  "Go"
when  they  strongly  desire  to  do  so,  and  thus  punishes  them  by  allowing  them  to  sin,
and  then  inflicting  the  penalty  due  to  such  sin.  Moreover,  the  sacred  writers  speak
more  freely  than  we  are  accustomed  to  do  of  the  agency  of  God  in  connection  with  the
sins  of  men  (see  ch.  xii.  11 ;  xvi.  10 ;  Exod.  vii.  3 ;  1  Sam.  xxvi.  19 ;  1  Sings  xxii.
20—23;  Eaek.  xiv.  9, 10;  Mark  iv.  12;  2  Thess.  ii.  11, 12).  Our  Lord  teaches  us  to
pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  which  implies  that  God  may  thus  lead  men.
However,  if  David  knew  that  in  some  sense  God  had  bidden  him  number  the  people,
ho  none  the  less  felt  that  the  sin  of  the  proceeding  was  great,  and  that  it  was  his  own.

I.  David's  snr.  In  what  did  it  consist?  As  the  narrative  does  not  explain, and  no
law  or  statement  of  the  Scriptures  can  be  adduced  in  explanation,  it  is  impossible  to
answer  the  question  satisfactorily.  That  there  was  sin  in  the  numbering  of  the  people
at  this  time,  the  strong  remonstrance  of  the  by-no-means-over-scrupulous  or  pious  Joab
(ver.  3)  makes  manifest.  It  may  have  been  done  in  a  spirit  of  pride  and  vain-glory,
that  the  king  might  delight  himself  in  the  contemplation  of  the  greatness  of  his  armed
forces.  For  it  should  be  noted  that  only  those  that  "  drew  the  sword "  (ver.  9)  were
counted.  The  kings  of  Israel  were  not,  like  other  monarchs,  to  trust  in  the  multitude
of  their  armed  men,  but  in  their  God,  who  could  save  or  give  victory  by  many  or  by
few  (1  Sam.  xiv.  6 ;  2  Chron.  xiv.  11).  Possibly  David  may  have  had  ulterior  designs
that  were  opposed  to  the  will  of  God.  He  may  have  proposed  to  himself  to  reduce  the
people,  as  into  more  complete  unity,  so  into  more  slavish  subjection  to  the  throne  (comp.
1  Sam.yiii.  11 — 18);  or  he  may  have  had  designs  of  unjust  aggression  on  other  peoples.
Similar  sins  are  committed:  1.  When  men  reckon  up  their  achievements  or  possessions,
or  the  number  of  their  servants  and  retainers,  in  a  spirit  of  pride,  self-satisfaction,  or
false  confidence  (Dan.  iv.  30).  2.  When  they  sum  up  their  wealth,  not  to  consider
how  they  may  best  employ  it  for  the  good  of  men  and  the  glory  of  God,  but  to  frame
schemes  of  sinful  indulgence  (Luke  xii.  19).  3.  When  the  calculation  of  numbers  or
resources  is  made  in  order  to  determine  the  safety  or  otherwise  of  perpetrating  or  con-
tinuing some  injustice  to  others.  Eulsrs  increasing  and  reckoning  their  hosts,  etc.,  with
a  view  to  unjust  wars,  or  the  suppression  of  the  liberties,  or  other  violation  of  the  rights,
of  their  subjects.  4.  When  numbers  are  counted,  instead  of  arguments  weighed,  pre-
viotw  to  adopting  a  religious  or  political  creed,  or  to  obtain  encouragement  in  the
practice  of  any  wickedness  (John  vii.  48 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  2).

n.  David's  repentance.  It  was  long  in  coming — so  long  as  to  excite  our  amaze-
ment. It  included :  1.  Conviction.  "  His  heart  smote  him."  His  conscience  accused
him.  He  saw  the  greatness  of  his  sin  and  folly.  Sin  is  always  folly,  though  folly  is
not  always  sin  (see  on  ch.  xiii.  13).  2.  Humble  confession  made  to  God.  3.  Earnest
prayer  for  pardon.

III.  His  punisumest.     The  reply  to  his  prayer  was  not  such  as  he  may  have  hopeil.

II.  SAMUEI..  2   B


626  THE   SECOND   BOOK  OF   SAMUEL.         [ch.  xxiv.  1—^:5

The  Prophet  Gad  was  sent  to  him,  not  to  assure  him  of  pardon,  but  to  offer  him  a  choice
of  punishments  (vers.  12, 13).  He  chose  pestilence,  as  being  more  immediately  from
•*  the  hand  of  the  Lord,"  whose  "  mercies  are  great."  Accordingly,  a  terrible  plague
fell  on  the  people,  destroying  seventy  thousand  men  in  less,  apparently,  than  one  day.
For  although  three  days  had  been  named  as  the  duration  of  the  pestilence,  the  time
was  evidently  shortened,  and  the  plague  ceased  as  it  threatened  to  destroy  Jerusalem
(ver.  16).  To  that  extent  the  prayers  of  David  (vers.  10,  17),  and  the  sacrifices  which
he  hastened  to  offer  by  direction  of  the  prophet,  prevailed.  The  king  had  sinned ;  the
punishment  fell  on  the  people.  David  Mt  and  pleaded  the  incongruity  (ver.  17).  What
can  we  say  respecting  it?  1.  It  is  according  to  a  universal  law  of  Divine  procedure.
The  difficulty  meets  us  everywhere.  Subjects  suffer  on  account  of  the  sins,  and  even
the  mistakes,  of  their  rulers ;  children,  of  their  parents ;  and,  more  widely,  the  innocent,
because  of  the  sins  and  follies  of  others.  It  is  useless  to  argue  against  facts.  2.  Eventi
which  are  judgments  to  the  guilty  are  simple  trials  to  the  innocent,  and  may  be  unspeak-
able blessings.  When  the  godly  are  struck  down  with  others  in  a  time  of  general
calamity  they  exchange  earth  for  heaven.

"  The  Bword,  the  pestilence,  or  flre,
Shall  but  fulfil  their  best  desire ;
From  sins  and  sorrows  set  them  &ee,
Aad  bring  thy  children,  Lord,  to  thee."

(Watt*)

S.  In  this  ease  the  people  suffered  for  sins  of  their  own.  It  was  because  "  the  anger  of
the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel "  for  their  sins  (ver.  1),  that  David's  sin  was  per-
mitted and  its  punishment  inflicted.  Many  other  cases  would  admit  of  a  similar
explanation.  4.  Although  the  calamity  which  fell  on  the  nation  was  great,  a  greater
would  have  been  the  death  of  its  sovereign  ly  the  plague.  5.  David  suffered  severely
in  the  destruction  of  »o  many  of  his  subjects.  If  his  sin  was  that  of  pride  in  the  number
whom  he  ruled  and  could  lead  to  war,  the  punishment  corresponded  to  the  sin.  He
was  made  to  feel  how  soon  God  could  deprive  him  of  that  in  which  he  boasted.  6.  When
all  has  been  thought  and  said  that  is  possible,  it  is  for  us  (1)  to  recognize  that  God's
ways  are  necessarily  beyond  our  comprehension — we,  are  soon  out  of  our  depth  as  we
contemplate  them  j  (2)  to  cherish  imdoubting  confidence  in  his  wisdom,  righteousness,
and  love  in  all  his  proceedings,  whether  they  are  discernible  by  us  or  not.  Such  confi-
dence is  required  and  justified  by  what  we  do  distinctly  know  of  him ;  and  it  is  the
only  way  to  settled  peace  in  a  world  so  full  of  misery  and  mystery.  7.  Let  us  carefMy
avoid  sin,  not  only  because  it  is  evil  in  itself  and  will  bring  pain  and  sorrow  to  ourselves,
but  because  others  will  inevitably  be  involved  in  the  consequences  of  our  conduct.
Many  children  are  sufferers  for  life  through  the  wickedness  of,  their  parents. — G.  W.

Ver.  13. — Pressing  for  an  answer  to  God's  message.  "Advise,  and  see  what  answer
I  shall  return  to  him  that  sent  me."  These  words  of  Gad  to  David  might  well  be
addressed  by  religious  teachers,  and  especially  ministers  of  the  gospel,  to  those  whom
they  instruct.    Notice —

I.  God's  messen&brs.  "  Him  that  sent  me."  1.  True  ministers  of  Christ  are  God's
messengers.  Their  office  is  not  a  human  invention.  They  are  not  mere  lecturers,  who
may  choose  their  own  themes  and  aims ;  not  mere  philosophers,  free  to  speculate  at  will
and  give  the  people  the  result  of  their  speculations ;  still  less  mere  performers,  whose
business  is  to  amuse.  They  are  sent  of  God,  by  the  operations  of  his  Spirit,  the  guidance
of  his  providence,  and  the  appointment  of  his  Church ;  and  have  a  definite  message  from
him  to  their  hearers,  viz.  the  gospel  (in  the  wider  sense)  of  Jesus  Christ — its  revelations,
precepts,  promises,  and  threatenings.  In  delivering  this  message,  they  have  a  definite
end  to  seek — the  salvation  of  their  hearers.  He  who  is  not  convinced  that  he  is  God-
sent — "  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  take  upon  him  this  office  and  ministration  "
(Prayer-book) — ought  not  to  assume  it.  2.  They  should  cherish  a  due  sense  of  their
position.  Which  will  keep  alive :  (1)  The  feeling  of  responsibility  to  God.  "  As  they
that  must  give  account"  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  (2)  Humility.  The  consciousness  of  a  Divine
mission  might  tempt  them  to  pride  and  arrogance,  but  the  consciousness  of  unworthiness
and  imfitneu  for  so  sacred  a  work  will  keep  them  humble.    "  Who  is  suf&cient  for  thcM


OH.  xxiY.  1— 26.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  627

things?  "  (2  Cor.  iL  16).  (3)  Care  as  to  what  they  teach.  That  Jt  m«y  be  the  very
message  of  God.  "Preach  the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee"  (Jonah  iii.  2).  (4)  Care  as
to  the  spirit  and  aim  of  their  teaching.  Not  to  exalt  or  enrich  themselves,  or  merely
please  men,  but  to  glorify  God  and  promote  the  salvation  of  their  hearers  (John  vii.  18 ;
Gal,  i.  10 ;  Col.  i.  28).  (6)  Faith  and  hope.  That  he  whose  messengers  they  are  will
guide  and  support  them,  give  success  to  their  endeavours,  and  amply  reward  them.
3.  Hearers  should  recognize  tht  position  of  their  ministers.  Such  recognition  will :  (1)
Regulate  their  expectations  from  them.  They  will  not  expect  them  to  flatter,  or  merely
entertain,  or  to  suppress  unwelcome  truths.  They  will  desire  them  to  be  faithful  to  their
convictions  as  to  the  message  God  would  have  them  deliver.  (2)  Induce  them  to  give
earnest  heed  to  their  instructions  and  admonitions.  Their  attitude  will  be  that  of
Cornelius  and  his  friends  (Acts  x.  33) :  "  Now  therefore  are  we  all  here  present  before
God,  to -hear  all  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of  God;"  and,  when  the  words
addressed  to  them  are  perceived  to  be  Divine  truth,  they  will  receive  them  "  not  as  the
word  of  men,  but  as  the  Word  of  God  "  (1  Thess.  ii.  13),  with  faith  and  obedience.  (For
the  opposite  spirit  and  practice,  see  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31,  32.)

II.  The  alternatives  they  pbesbnt.  Happily  they  have  not,  like  Gad,  to  offer
a  choice  of  fearful  calamities,  but  of :  1.  On  the  one  hand,  eternal  life ;  commencing
now  in  the  enjoyment  of  pardon  and  peace,  holiness  and  hope ;  and  perfected  in  heaven.
This  to  be  secured  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God  as  Saviour  and  Lord,  with  corresponding
love  and  obedience.  2.  And,  on  the  other,  eternal  punishment;  "indignation  and
wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish "  (Bom.  ii.  8,  9) ;  to  be  assuredly  secured  by  rejection
of  Christ,  and  of  God  in  him.  These  solemn  alternatives  must  not,  cannot,  be  kept
out  of  view  by  a  faithful  messenger  of  God ;  and  the  thought  of  them  will  give  earnest-
ness to  his  ministrations,  and  to  the  treatment  of  them  by  his  hearers  (comp.
Dent  XXX.  15—19).

III.  The  answer  fob  which  they  press.  Christian  ministers  should  endeavour
as  far  as  possible  privately  to  urge  individuals  to  consider  what  answer  they  will  give
to  the  Divine  message,  what  choice  they  will  make  between  the  alternatives  presented
to  them.  This  cannot  be  always  done ;  but  in  their  public  addresses  they  ought  to  be
urgent  in  pressing  their  hearers  to  definite  consideration  and  decision.  They  should
show  them :  1.  That  on  answer  has  to  ie  given,  and  that  to  Ood,  who  searches  the
heart.  That,  in  fact,  they  are  ever  giving  a  reply ;  ever  choosing  the  evil,  if  not  the
good.  2.  That  their  answer  should  he  the  result  of  careful  consideration.  "  Advise,
and  see ; "  consider  and  determine.  A  great  point  is  gained  when  men  are  induced  to
consider  the  claime  of  God  and  their  souls.  3.  That  such  consideration  should  le
prompt.  It  is  both  sinful  and  perilous  to  delay.  To  put  off  attention  to  God's
message  is  insulting  to  him,  and  may  end  in  his  deciding  suddenly  and  unexpectedly
for  us  which  of  the  two  alternatives  shall  be  ours.  4.  That  they  are  themsdves
intensely  concerned  that  the  answer  given  should  he  that  which  is  alone  wise  and  good
— the  hearty  acceptance  of  Christ  and  salvation.  "  As  though  God  did  beseech  you  by
us :  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God  "  (2  Cor.  v.  20). — G,  W.

Ver.  14. — OocPs  treatment  preferred  to  man's.  David  had  good  reasons  for  the
choice  he  made.  He  knew  well,  from  his  own  treatment  of  defeated  enemies  (oh.
xii.  31 ;  1  Chron.  xx.  3),  how  fearfully  cruel  were  conquerors  in  war  in  those  days,
what  an  awful  scourge  to  his  subjects  would  be  the  ravages  of  a  victorious  invading
army.  He  also  doubtless  dreaded  the  disgrace  and  permanent  damage  to  the  kingdom
which  would  be  thus  wrought,  and  the  dishonour,  in  the  view  of  the  heathen,  which
would  be  cast  on  the  Name  of  Jehovah  its  God  (see  Josh.  vii.  8,  9).  Taking  the  words
in  a  wider  application,  they  express  what  will  be  the  natural  preference  of  good  men.

I.  Grounds  of  the  pbepekbncb  herb  expressed.  1.  The  great  mercy  of  Ood
and  the  unmercifulness,  or  limited  mercy,  of  men.  2.  The  righteousness  of  Ood  and
the  unrighteousness  of  men.  We  can  never  be  sure  that  in  a  particular  case  righteous-
ness will  guide  human  proceedings;  we  know  that  the  Divine  are  always  thus  guided.
Many  men  are  utterly  regardless  of  what  is  right  where  their  own  interests,  inclina-
tions, or  passions  are  concerned ;  and  even  the  best  men  are  liable  to  fail  in  respect  to
pure  and  constant  regard  for  rectitude.  3.  The  knowledge  and  wisdom  of  God,  and
the  ignorance  and  folly  of  men.     Much  of  the  misconduct  and  untrustworthiness  ol


628  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [ch.  xxiv.  1— 25.

men  springs  from  ignorance  and  folly.  When  they  mean  well,  they  often  do  ill
through  not  knowing  the  actual  fitate  of  the  affairs  with  which  they  are  called  to  deal,
not  taking  the  trouble,  perhaps,  to  ascertain  it ;  or,  when  they  know  it,  not  under-
standing how  to  treat  it.  But  the  Divine  knowledge  and  wisdom  are  perfect.  4.  The
power  ©/■  Ood  and  tht  weakness  of  men.  Men  are  often  incapable  of  doing  the  good
they  know,  and  even  strongly  desire  to  do ;  and  their  weakness  often  causes  them  to  do
mischief  while  endeavouring  to  do  good.  God  is  Almighty  to  effect  what  his  wisdom,
mercy,  and  rectitude  prompt.  5.  The  relation  of  Ood  to  good  men.  Their  Father,
their  covenant  God.  The  certainty  that  he  will  honour  those  that  honour  him,  and
turn  all  things,  including  his  own  chastisement  of  them,  to  their  good,  and  ultimately
bring  them  to  eternal  glory.  The  preference  will  be  strong  in  proportion  to  the  actual
contrast  between  the  men  with  whom  we  have  to  do  and  God.  There  are  some  men
who  are  so  God-like  that  we  should  not  be  averse  to  falling  into  their  hands  in  a
conddeiable  variety  of  circumstances.  It  would  be  to  a  limited  extent  like  falling  into
the  hands  of  God.

II.  Oases  ik  which  the  pbefebencb  wouid  be  exercised.  1.  The  endurance  of
suffering.  As  in  the  text.  It  is  better  to  suffer  from  disease  than  from  human  violence.
The  suffering  will  be  easier  to  bear,  more  likely  to  profit,  less  likely  to  excite  resent-
ment and  other  evil  passions.  The  infliction  will  be  more  tempered  with  mercy,  and
promote  in  a  greater  degree  the  ends  of  mercy.  2.  Judgment  of  chanbcter  and  actions.
To  be  judged  by  God  is  preferable  to  being  judged  by  men.  Men  are  often  fond  of
passing  judgment,  but  for  the  mpst  part  very  incapable.  They  commonly  judge
ignorantly,  or  from  prejudice,  and  therefore  unjustly.  They  are  apt  to  be  wrong  alike
in  their  favourable  and  unfavourable  opinions  of  others.  When  condemned  by  them,
it  is  well  if  we  can  appeal  with  confidence  to  the  judgment  of  God,  wliich  is  always
just.  3.  Forgiveness.  Men  forgive  reluctantly,  in  a  limited  measure,  with  reserves ;
and  soon  grow  weary  of  pardoning  the  same  offender.  To  pardon  "  seven  times,"  much
more  "  seventy  times  seven  "  (Matt,  xviii.  21,  22),  seems  to  them  an  impossibility.
Indeed,  repeated  offences,  as  they  appear  incompatible  with  real  repentance,  may
justify  hesitation  to  pardon  repeatedly,  since  the  state  of  the  offender's  heart  cannot  be
known.  But  God,  who  knows  the  heart,  discerns  where  it  is  true,  notwithstanding
frequent  falls ;  and,  pitying  human  weakness,  forgives  many  times  a  day.  And  his
pardons  are  full  and  complete.  Add  that  forgiveness  from  men  does  not  ensure
forgiveness  from  God,  and  that  having  the  latter  we  can,  if  need  be,  dispense  with  the
former.  There  is  then  abundant  reason  why,  in  the  matter  of  pardon,  we  should  prefer
to  have  to  do  with  God  rather  than  men.  4.  Spiritual  guidance  and  help.  QiA  has
appointed  that  men  should  instruct  and  aid  their  fellow-men  in  matters  of  religion  and
morals.  But  those  who  offer  themselves  as  spiritual  guides  are  fallible,  and  they  differ
widely  on  important  points.  It  is  then  encouraging  and  assuring  that  Divine  guidance
and  help  are  available.  By  the  devout  study  of  God's  holy  Word,  and  earnest  prayer
for  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  aid  is  promised  to  those  who  seek  it  (Luke  xi.  13),  all  may
obtain  such  heavenly  wisdom  and  strength  as  shall  ensure  them  against  serious  error
and  failure.  And  after  listening  to  the  conflicting  statements  of  human  teachers,  and
their  denunciation  of  those  who  decline  their  counsel,  a  religions  inquirer  may  in  many
instances  wisely  turn  from  them  to  God,  saying,  "Let  me  fall  into  the  hand  of  the
Lord  rather  than  of  man."

In  conclusion :  1.  It  is  a  great  comfort  to  sincere  Christians  to  know  that  they  are
ever  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  When  they  seem  to  be  most  left  to  the  will  of  arbitrary,
unjust,  and  cruel  men,  God  is  over  all,  controlling,  overruling,  sanctifying,  compelling
their  most  malignant  foes  to  promote  their  real  and  lasting  good.  He  will  rectify  and
compensate  for  all  the  injustice  and  injury  which  he  permits  men  to  inflict  upon  them.
2.  Impenitent  sinners  might  well  prefer  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  men  rather  than  of  Ood.
The  limited  knowledge  and  power  of  men,  as  well  as  their  feeble  hatred  of  sin,  would  be
in  their  favour;  at  the  worst,  they  can  only  "kiU  the  body."  But  God  abhors  sin  with
i  perfect  hatred,  knows  fully  the  guilt  of  each  sinner,  and  "  hath  power  to  cast  into  hell "
{Luke  xii.  4,  5).    "  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger  ?  "  (fs.  xc.  11). — G.  W.

Ver.  23. — Acceptaiux  with  Ood.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  accept  thee.''  A  good  wish,
flowing  from  good  will,  and  all  the  heartier  because  of  the  occasion.     For  Divint


OH.  XXIV.  1—25.]         THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  629

BcceptaDce  of  the  king  and  his  offerings  meant  deliverance  for  the  nation,  Araunah
included,  from  the  ravages  of  the  pestilence.  The  sincerity  of  his  wish  was  proved  by
the  substantial  offers  with  which  it  was  accompanied.

I,  The  blessing  desiked.  Araunah  referred  to  the  favourable  reception  by  God  of
David's  offerings.  In  the  widest  sense,  acceptance  with  God  includes :  1.  Acceptance
of  ourselves.  Our  reception  by  God  into  his  friendship  and  favour.  Unless  the  man  is
accepted,  his  offerings  cannot  he.  God  receives  nothing  from  his  enemies — a  truth
which  should  he  very  seriously  pondered  by  multitudes  of  his  professed  worshippers,
who  give  him  outward  homage,  hut  withhold  from  him  themselves.  Who,  then,  are
accepted  by  God?  Those  who  come  to  him  according  to  his  appointment,  with  repent-
ance, faith,  self-devotement,  confessing  sin,  trusting  to  the  mercy  and  entering  on  the
service  of  God.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation,  men  are  accepted  through  faith  in
Jesus  Christ.  When  we  receive  him  as  Saviour  and  Lord,  God  receives  us  (comp.  Rom.
V.  1,  2).  2.  Acceptance  of  our  worship.  Which  includes  devout  exercises  of  mind  and
heart,  study  of  the  Word  of  God,  pious  meditation,  praises  and  thanksgivings,  prayers.
What  worsliip  is  accepted  ?  Such  as  is  offered  in  the  name  of  Jesus  (John  xvi.  23, 24 ;
Bph.  iii.  12 ;  PhiL  ii.  10,  Revised  Version).  Sincere  (Isa.  xxix.  13 ;  John  iv.  24),  humble
(Luke  xviii.  10 — 14),  reverential  (Heb.  xii.  28),  yet  trustful  and  affectionate  as  children
(Eom.  viii.  15).  Not  that  of  slaves  or  mercenaries.  3.  Acceptance  of  our  gifts.  We
give  to  God  when  we  give  for  the  support  of  his  worship  and  the  spread  of  his  kingdom,
and  when  we  give  to  the  poor  for  his  sake  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  Our  gifts  are  acceptable  (l)
when  presented  with  pure  hearts,  not  ostentatiously  to  gain  human  applause  (Matt,  vi.
2 — 4),  not  with  a  view  to  atone  for  sin  and  obtain  pardon,  not  to  bribe  men  to  unholy
compliances;  (2)  when  they  are  our  own  property,  not  the  fruit  of  dishonesty, oppres-
sion, or  injustice;  (3)  when  they  are  in  due  proportion  to  our  ability  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).
4.  Acceptance  of  active  service.  Labours  for  the  good  of  others,  temporal  and  spiritual.
All  honest  work  springing  from  and  guided  by  Christian  principles.

U.  The  desiee  itself.  In  this  case  it  was  a.  patriotic  desire.  It  ii  always  pious
and  benevolent.  Pious,  as  it  recognizes  the  necessity  of  God's  favour  and  approbation
to  the  well-being  of  men,  and  implies  his  willingness  to  he  favourable  to  them.
Benevolent,  as  it  is  a  desire  that  others  should  enjoy  the  most  essential  and  all-compre-
hensive of  blessings,  without  which  other  blessings  are  of  small  and  temporary  value.
Not  health  or  wealth,  not  acceptance  with  men,  not  long  life,  not  intellectual  superiority,
not  refinement  of  taste,  etc.,  are  of  primary  importance ;  and  these  should  not  be  first
in  our  minds  when  seeking  the  welfare  whether  of  ourselves  or  of  others  j  but  the  favour
of  Almighty  God,  and,  as  the  sure  means  of  securing  this,  the  possession  of  Christian
faith  and  holiness.  "Wherefore"  let  us  "labour  that,  whether  present  or  absent"
(living  or  dying), "  we,"  and  all  in  whom  we  are  interested,  yea,  all  mankind, "  may  he
accepted  of  him"  (2  Cor.  v.  9).— G.  W.

Ver.  24. — Cheap  religion  repudiated.  "  Neither  will  I  offer  burnt  offerings  unto  the
Lord  my  God  of  that  which'  doth  cost  me  nothing."  We  have  in  the  context  "a  laudable
contention  between  a  good  king  and  a  good  subject "  (Manton).  Araunah  wished  to
give  the  site  for  an  altar,  the  animals  and  fuel  for  sacrifice,  taking,  on  account  of  the
necessity  for  haste,  the  threshing  oxen  and  implements  for  the  purpose.  David  insisted
on  paying  for  alL  The  text  expresses  his  reason.  He  felt  it  was  unworthy  of  his  posi-
tion and  means  as  monarch,  of  the  greatness  of  God,  and  of  his  own  relation  and  obliga-
tions to  him,  to  offer  sacrifices  which  had  cost  him  nothing.  His  determination  is
worthy  of  adoption  by  all,  and  will  be  adopted  by  all  true-hearted  Christians.  They
will  not  worship  and  serve  God  without  cost  to  themselves.  In  considering  the  words,
we  need  not  confine  attention  to  gifts  of  money  or  other  property.  In  the  worship  and
service  of  God,  expenditure  of  thought,  feeling,  time,  strength,  etc.,  is  required  as  well
as  of  property ;  and,  in  relation  to  each  and  all,  the  true  Christian,  when  the  need  for
such  expenditure  arises,  and  he  is  tempted  to  avoid  it,  will  he  ready  to  exclaim,  "I  will
not  serve  the  Lord  my  God  without  cost."    His  motives  are  such  as  follow.

I.  Eevbeence  foe  God.  Sense  of  his  majesty  and  excellence.  The  feeling  that  he
who  is  so  great  and  glorious  should  be  served  with  the  best  we  can  present  to  him,
internal  and  external ;  and  that  to  come  before  him  without  any  worthy  gift  is  to  insult
luia(BeaMaLL7.8,U).


630  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxiv.  1—25.

n.  Gratitude  to  God.  For  his  great  and  manifold  gifts  to  us,  especially  that  of  his
Son,  with  all  tlie  unspeakable  blessings  which  come  to  us  with  and  through  him.  If
duly  sensible  of  what  we  have  received  from  God,  we  shall  be  eager  to  make  him  such
return,  poor  though  it  is,  as  is  possible  to  ns,  and  diall  feel  that  we  can  never  do  enough
for  him  who  has  done  so  much  for  us.

III.  Love  to  God  and  man.  The  substance  of  true  religion.  Love  to  God,  awakened
and  kept  alive  by  his  love  to  us  and  by  increasing  knowledge  of  his  all-perfect  and  lovely
character,  will  produce  love  for  bis  worship,  his  people,  his  cause  in  the  world,  our  fellow-
men  In  helping  these  by  deed  and  gift,  we  offer  sacrifices  to  him  (Phil.  ii.  17 ;  iv.  18 ;
Heb.  xiii.  16),  and  all  who  love  him  will  offer  such  sacrifices.  In  proportion  to  the
ardour  of  their  love  will  be  the  measure  of  their  services ;  and  they  will  never  grow
weary  of  them,  since  love  makes  them  a  delight.

IV.  Justice  to  others.  The  worship  of  God  cannot  be  maintained,  nor  his  kingdom
extended,  nor  his  will  as  to  the  poor  done,  without  cost  of  various  kinds,  in  which  it  is
right  that  all  should  do  their  part  according  to  their  capabilities.  If  some  shirk  their
duty,  others  may  be  compelled  to  do  more  than  fairly  belongs  to  them.  The  thought
of  this  will  move  each  to  take  his  proper  share  of  gift  or  labour.

V.  The  example  op  othbks.  1.  The  liberal  expenditure  of  some  on  their  idols.
Heathen.  Worldly  men.  Ourselves,  perhaps,  before  we  were  converted.  2.  The
liberality  of  many  Christians.  In  every  circle  a  few/are  known  who  are  generous  in
deed  or  gift,  or  both,  in  the  service  of  God  and  the  poor.  Their  zeal  incites  others  by
the  power  of  sympathy  and  the  feeling  that  they  are  themselves  under  equal  obligation
to  their  Saviour  and  their  God.  3.  The  cost  at  which  multitudes  of  Christians  have  had
to  serve  Ood.  In  times  of  persecution  their  religion  has  cost  many  their  property,  liberty,
or  lives ;  and  they  have  borne  the  cost  bravely  and  gladly  (Heb.  x.  34 ;  Acts  vi.  41 ;
Phil.  ii.  17 ;  Col.  ii.  24).  Shame  on  us  if  we  grudge  the  much  smaller  cost  of  religion
to  us.  4.  Above  all,  the  example  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  (2  Cor.  viii.  9 ;  Titus  ii.
14.)  Eemembrance  of  the  cost  to  him  of  our  opportunity  of  serving  God  acceptably
will  strengthen  us  when  tempted  to  make  our  religion  as  cheap  as  possible.

VI.  Pbbception  of  the  worthlessness  or  a  religion  that  costs  us  nothing.  1.
Jt  is  unreal.  A  mere  name  and  pretence.  Eeal  religion  begins  and  is  maintained  at  the
cost  of  much  thought,  feeling,  and  prayer.  Where  it  exists  it  must  move  the  heart  to
zeal  and  generosity  in  the  service  of  God,  cannot  but  manifest  itself  in  works  and  gifts.
2.  It  is  unacceptable  to  God.  Instead  of  accepting,  he  abhors  it.  It  is  contrary  to  his
will.  The  spirit  of  the  old  injunction,  "  They  shall  not  appear  before  the  Lord  empty,"
is  plainly  of  universal  application;  and  the  New  Testament  abounds  in  precepts  enjoin-
ing zeal  and  generosity  in. the  service  of  God.  3.  It  is  therefore  fruitless  of  good,  now
and  hereafter.  It  may  be  correct  in  creed,  fair  in  profession,  interesting  in  sentiment,
beautiful  in  phrase ;  but  it  is  useless.  It  answers  no  substantial  end  of  a  religion.  It
does  not  elevate  and  improve  the  worshipper.  It  can  hardly  secure  even  the  approval
of  men.  It  does  not  avert,  but  ensure  and  increase,  the  judgments  of  God.  Those  who
practise  it  will  justly  have  their  "  portion  with  the  hypocrites "  (Matt.  xxiv.  51).

VII.  Assurance  of  recompense.  God  will  not  let  any  man  be  a  loser  in  his  service.
1.  He  gives  valuable  rewards  now  to  those  who  expend  their  energies  or  substance  for
him.  The  practical  manifestation  of  Christian  principles  strengthens  them.  Talents
employed  are  multiplied.  "  Unto  every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have
abundance "  (Matt.  xxv.  29).  Service  opens  opportunities  and  develops  capacities  for
service.  Influence  for  good  widens,  honourable  positions  in  Christ's  Church  are  reached
without  ambitious  striving  for  them,  the  esteem  and  affection  of  the  good  are  enjoyed.
The  pleasure  of  doing  good  is  experienced,  and,  withal,  the  pleasures  of  a  good  conscience
— the  consciousness  of  Christian  principles,  affections,  and  aims,  and  of  the  approval  of
God.  2.  Great  is  their  reward  in  heaven.  Perfected  character ;  enlarged  and  exalted
service;  the  unclouded  light  of  the  Divine  countenance;  the  blessings  of  those  whom
they  have  helped  to  save;  the  eternal  joy  and  glory  of  the  Lord.

In  conclusion :  1.  This  resolution  deserves  the  serious  consideration  and  adoption  of:
(1)  Ministers  and  other  teachers  of  religion,  who  are  often  tempted  to  do  their  work
with  as  little  trouble  to  themselves  as  possible.  The  help  afibrded  by  such  books  as
this  may  be  abused  by  the  indolent.  (2)  All  who  have  opportunity  to  expend  money,
time,  or  talents  in  the  service  of  Christ.     Cordially  adopted,  it  will  make  the  numeroui


CH.  XXIV.  1—25.]        THE   SECOND  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  631

calls  on  Christian  zeal  and  liberality  in  our  day  matter  of  thanl^fulness  rather  than  of
annoyance.  It  will  induce  even  the  poor  to  render  aid  according  to  their  means.
2.  The  subject  shows  the  disadvantages  attending  endowments  of  religion.  They  tend
to  deprive  worshippers  of  the  pleasure  and  profit  of  worshipping  God  with  cost  to  them-
selves. Where  they  exist,  Christians  should  compensate  themselves  for  the  loss  thus
inflicted  on  them  by  exercising  all  the  greater  generosity  towards  other  branches  of
Divine  service,  such  as  missions  at  home  and  abroad,  charity  to  the  poor,  etc. — G.  W.

Ver.  25. — Efficacious  sacrifices.  These  sacrifices  of  David  illustrate  the  nature  and
purpose  of  such  offerings  under  the  Law.  David  acted  in  obedience  to  a  message  from
God  (ver.  18).  He  did  not  offer  sacrifices  in  order  to  render  God  merciful  j  it  was  the
mercy  of  God  which  originated  them.  It  was  because  he  would  stay  the  destroying
pestilence  that  he  directed  David  to  offer  them.  Still,  the  sacrifices  were  a  condition
of  the  exercise  of  his  mercy.  It  was  when  they  had  been  offered  that  "  the  Lord  was
entreated  for  the  land,  and  the  plague  was  stayed  from  Israel."  Hence  the  question
arises — ^Why  should  the  Merciful  One  have  required  the  death  of  innocent  victims  in
order  that  his  mercy  might  be  displayed  in  the  cessation  of  the  pestilence  ?  If  it  he
said  that  this  method  of  entreating  him  was  a  solemn  and  expressive  acknowledgment
that  the  sins  which  occasioned  the  pestilence  were  deserving  of  death,  the  answer
may  be  accepted  as  a  partial  explanation.  But  the  question  recurs — Why  should  not
the  confession  of  sin,  with  sincere  penitence,  be  accepted  without  the  infliction  of  death
on  the  innocent  ?  The  only  satisfying  answer  is  that  which  takes  into  account  the
justice  as  well  as  the  mercy  of  God,  and  recognizes  in  the  death  of  the  innocent  an
atonement  for  the  guilt  of  those  to  whom  mercy  is  shown.  In  exercising  his  mercy,
God  would  also  "  declare  his  righteousness  . . .  that  he  might  be  just "  while  justifying
the  sinner  (Rom.  iii.  25,  26),  and  that  men,  while  seeking  and  obtaining  forgiveness,
might  discern  more  clearly,  feel  more  deeply,  and  acknowledge  more  heartily,  the
righteousness  of  the  sentence  which  condemned  them  to  death.  These  remarks  apply
more  especially  to  the  "  burnt  offerings."  The  "  peace  offerings  "  (thank  offerings)  were
added  apparently  as  an  expression  of  joyful  gratitude  for  the  deliverance  which  was
confidently  expected  through  the  sacrifice  of  the  burnt  offerings.  The  text  reminds  us
of  another  sacrifice  which  was  offered  ten  centuries  later  near  the  site  of  David's  altsr,
and  which  has  rendered  all  other  offerings  for  sin  superfiuous  and  unlawful.  It  may
tend  to  the  better  understanding  of  both  to  view  them  together,  noting  their  resem-
blances and  contrasts.

I.  Theib  kesbmblances.  1.  In  their  origin.  Both  were  of  Divine  origin  ana
appointment.  They  originated  in  the  love  and  righteousness  and  wisdom  of  God — his
perception  of  what  "  became  him  "  (Heb.  ii.  10).  2.  In  their  nature.  As  making
atonement  for  sin,  by  which  God  was  "  entreated,"  and  the  exercise  of  his  forgiving
mercy  rendered  consistent  with  a  due  regard  for  justice.  3.  In  their  significance  for
men.  Displaying  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  Divine  displeasure  against  it,  and  at  the
same  time  the  loving-kindness  of  God — his  readiness  to  pardon ;  and  thus  tending  to
produce  at  once  abhorrence  of  sin  and  penitential  grief,  and  the  assured  hope  of  pardon.
4.  In  their  results.  Reconciliation  between  God  and  sinners ;  forgiveness  of  sin  and
deliverance  from  its  penalties ;  renewed  enjoyment  of  the  favour  of  God ;  renewed  con-
fidence in  and  obedience  to  him  ;  added  strength  to  resist  temptation.

II.  The  incalculable  6upbbiobitt  of  the  bacbifice  of  our  Lobd.  1.  David
offered  tlve  lives  of  animals ;  our  blessed  Lord  offered  himself.  They  were  of  little
value ;  but  who  shall  calculate  the  worth  of  him  who  was  not  only  the  perfect  Man,  but
the  Word  Incarnate,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  ?  They  could  not  understand  the
transaction  in  which  they  were  made  to  participate,  and  could  take  no  voluntary  part
in  the  sacrifice.  But  Jesus  entered  fully  into  the  mind  of  God,  shared  to  the  utmost
his  love  to  sinners  and  hatred  of  their  sins,  made  the  Divine  purpose  his  own,  and  in
devoted  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  Father  surrendered  himself  willingly  to  suffering
and  death  for  our  salvation.  The  virtue  of  his  sacrifice  arose  from  his  Divine  dignity,
his  perfect  oneness  with  the  Father  in  mind  and  heart,  and  his  perfect  obedience  unto
death  (John  x.  17,  18;  Phil.  ii.  6—8;  Heb.  ix.  14;  x.  5—10).  2.  David  provided
Ms  mm  sacrifices ;  Jesus  was  the  Gift  of  God.  (1  John  iv.  9, 10.)  No  man,  no  creatura,
eould  provide  a  sacrifice  of  sufllcient  worth  to  really  and  effectually  atone  for  the  sias


832  THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xxiv.  1-25.

of  men.  3.  Z%e  moral  significance  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  immeasurably  greater
than  of  the  offering  of  any  number  of  animal  saarifices.  As  a  revelation  of  God  and
man,  of  holiness  and  sin,  of  the  Divine  hatred  to  sin  and  love  to  sinners,  of  the  heauty
and  glory  of  self-sacrifice,  etc,  it  is  altogether  unique.  4.  The  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice
of  Christ  transcends  incalculably  that  of  the  saorijKes  offered  by  David.  (1)  The  value
of  the  latter  for  atonement  depended  wholly  on  the  will  and  appointment  of  God ;  the
worth  of  the  former  was  essential  and  intrinsic.  (2)  The  one  atonement  was  of
limited,  the  other  of  boundless,  efficacy.  The  former  removed  limited  guilt — of  a  single
nation,  and  for  the  time ;  the  other  was  for  the  sins  of  all  men,  everywhere,  and  in  all
ages  of  the  world  (John  i.  29 ;  1  John  i.  7 ;  ii.  2 ;  Heb.  x.  14).  (3)  The  sacrifices
of  David  arrested  a  pestilence,  and  thus  lengthened  the  lives  of  many ;  that  of  Christ
saves  from  eternal  punishment,  and  secures  eternal  life  (1  Thess.  i.  10 ;  John  vi.  51 — 5i).
(4)  The  former  had  doubtless  some  influence  on  some  of  the  Israelites,  favourable  to
repentance,  faith,  and  obedience ;  the  latter  has  produced  and  will  yet  produce  a  com-
plete revolution  in  the  position  and  character  of  vast  multitudes  belonging  to  many
nations.  Those  who  believe  are  by  the  death  of  Christ  brought  to  God  (1  Pet.  iii.  18 ;
Heb.  X.  19,  20),  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Gal.  iii.  13,  14),  pardoned  and
justified  (Bph.  i.  7;  Eom.  v.  9),  sanctified  (Eom.  viii.  3,  4;  Bph.  v.  25—27),  led  to
thorough  consecration  of  life  to  him  who  died  for  them  (2  Cor.  v.  14, 15),  and  to
assured  hope  and  unspeakable  happiness  (Eom.  v.  5 — 11;  viii.  32 — 39),  issuing  in  the
perfection,  glory,  and  bliss  of  heaven  (Eev.  vii  9,  10,  13 — 17).  5.  The  animals  offered
by  David  ceased  to  exist ;  the  great  Redeemer  obtained  for  himself  by  his  self-sacrifiee
exaltation  to  universal  dominion  and  immortal  glory,  including  the  honour  of  leading
and  saving  those  for  whom  he  died,  and  of  receiving  their  loving  and  devoted  homage
(Eom.  xiv.  8,  9;  Eph.  i.  19—23;  Phil.  ii.  8—11;  Heb.  xiii.  20;  Eev.  i.  17,18).
6.  The  benefits  of  David!  s  offerings  came  to  the  people  through  his  faith,  penitence,  and
obedience ;  those  of  the  sacr^ce  of  Christ  come  to  each  Christian  as  the  result  of  his  ovm.
Its  moral  and  spiritual  power  is  thus  enhanced.  7.  The  burnt  offerings  of  David  laid
the  foundation  for  his  thank  offerings ;  much  more  does  the  death  of  Christ  call  for,
induce,  and  render  acceptable,  thank  offerings  of  a  nobler  kind,  and  these  innumerable,
unceasing,  and  throughout  eternity.  Such  are  the  presenting  of  ourselves  to  God,  and
the  offerings  of  praise,  prayer,  and  beneficence  (Eom.  xii.  1 ;  Phil.  iv.  18 ;  Heb.  xiii.
15,  16 ;  Eev.  viii.  3,  4).  Let  us  not  fail  to  present  such  thank  ofierings.  Let  us  take
up  the  song  of  the  banished  apostle  (Eev.  i.  5,  6),  "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed
us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood  ...  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever."
Let  us  now  join  angels  and  the  Church  and  all  creation,  and  purpose  and  hope  to  join
them  for  ever,  in  the  sublime  anthem  (Eev.  v.  ,12,  13),  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that
was  slain  to  receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and
glory,  and  blessing  .  .  .  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto  him  that
eitteth  upon  the  ti^one,  aad  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen." — Q.  W.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


TO


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.


CHAPTEB  L

THKMB

Waiting  on  Providence       ...  ...

A  Subtle  Temptation          ...  ...

Becularity  and  Spirituality  of  Mind

in  Contrast        ...  ...

Sorrow  for  the  Miscarriage  of  Life's

Great  Fnrpose  ...  ...

The  Incidental  Teaohings  of  a  Great

Disaster            ...           ...  ...

The  Hebrew  Monarchy      ...  ...

David's  Beign      ...  ...

A  Change  of  Dynasty         „,  ...

Selfish  Craft

Unselfish  Grief     ...            ...  ...

Capital  Punishment             ...  ...

The  Song  of  the  Bow

David's  Lamentation  over  Saul  and

Jonathan           ...            ...  ...

"  How  are  the  Mighty  fallen  I "  ...

Wonderful  Love  ...            ...  ...

A  Sad  End  of  a  Perverse  Life  ...

A  Weighty  Question          ...  ...

Juy   amongst    the    Enemies    of  the

Church
A  Beloved  Friend's  Death  lamented

CHAPTEB  n.

The  Beginnings  of  Prosperity  ...

The  Uses  of  Partial  Success  ...

An  Instructive  Episode      ,„  ...

Fanatical  Patriotism          ...  ...

Instructive  Youthful  Imprudenoe  ...

The    Alternations   of    Passion  and

Beasoa             «•           m.  •..


AOK

Divine  Guidance  ...            ...

—*

5]

7

David  anointed  King  of  Jndah

...

52

8

Commendation^    ...

...

53

Opposition  to  the  Divine  Purpose

...

54

11

Fratricidal  Strife ...

...

55

The    Untimely  Fate   of  Asahel:

to

12

Young  Men       ...           ...

»••

56

war        ...            ...            ...

•••

67

11

The  Sorrows  of  Victory

...

59

16

Inq[uiring  of  God  ...            ...

•  >•

60

19

Gratitude  and  Policy

■  ■•

61

21

22

Longing  for  the  Cessation  of  Wars

...

62

23
23

CHAPTEB  Til.

25

Bival  Interests     ...

...

69

Faithfulness  in  Small  Things

»*«

73

26

Policy  without  Principle    ...

a..

74

28

Policy  with  Principle

•«.

77

29

Defective  Sympathy

•*•

80

30

The  Incidence  of  Guilt       .«

»••

82

31

Deferred  Punishment         ...

»•■

84

«  The  House  of  David  "      ...

•••

86

33

The  Character  of  Abner     ...

■  ••

87

83

The  Dissensions  of  the  Wicked

•••

88

A  Domestic  Episode

•  ••

89

An  Urgent  Appeal:  an  Evangelistic

10

Address

•aa

90

42

The  Vengeance  of  Joab

•  ••

91

14

David's  Lament  over  Abner

•as

93

45

Acceptance  with  the  People

a..

94

47

The  Fall  of  a  Prince  and  a  Great  Man

94

The  Sons  of  Zemiah

•  a.

95

49

Doing  Bight  wrongly         ^

•*•

95

INDEX.


thbhh

rAGK

Death  of  a  Great  Man

...       96

A  Weak  King

...      97

Sure  Betiibution  ...           ...

•■«      yy

CHAPTER  IV.

Worldly  Blindness  the  Parent  of  Sorrow

and  Wtonp;        ...            ...            ...  101

Cluatored  Truths  ...            ...            ...  103

The  Unhappy  Lot  of  Ishbosheth      ...  105
An  Unfortunate  Prince :  a  Sermon  to

Ohildrea           ...            ...            ...  105

Assassins              ...            ...            ...  107

A  Good  Man's  Motto           ...            ...  108

The  Eeward  of  the  Wicked              ...  109

A  Lifelong  Affliction          ...            ...  110

Redemption  firom  all  Adversity        .,.  Ill

CHAPTER  V.

The  Triumph  of  Patient  Fidelity     ...  120
The  Acquisition  and  Building-up  of

Zion    ...            ...            ...            ...  122

Divine    Favour    vouchsafed    to    Im-
perfect Men      ...            ...            ...  124

The  Renunciation  of  Human  Strength

and  Wisdom  before  God  ...            ...  126

David  anointed  King  of  all  Israel    ...  127

The  Shepherd-King            ...            ...  129

Jerusalem              ...            ...           ...  130

Hiram,  King  of  Tyre          ...            ...  182

Victory  over  the  Philistine*              ...  133

The  Destruction  of  Images ...            ...  134

Renewed  Conflict...            ...            ...  135

Signs      ...            ...            ...            ...  135

Tardy   Acceptance    of     a    divinely

Appointed  Ruler             ...            ...  137

Desirable  Greatness            ...            ...  138

Perception    of  Divine    Agency   and

Purpose             ...            ...            ...  139

Divine  Assurance  of  Victory            ...  140

Divine  Omens  of  Coming  Victory     ...  141

CHAPTER  VL

Religious  Restorations        ...            ...  140

Human  Judgments  on  Divine  Acts  of

Judgment         ...           ...           ...  151

Distrust  a  Foil  to  Faith  and  Love    ...  154

Joy  restored          ...            ...            „.  156

Wise  Religious  Leadership               „.  158

Domestic  Hindrances  to  Piety           ...  159

The  Ark  ionght  after  Liong  Neglect  160


THBicB  ^  rAoa

The  Ark  brought  out  of  Deep  Ob-
scurity ...  ...  ...     1G2

The    Ark    upheld    with    Irreverent
Hands...  ...  ...  ...     164

The    Ark    regarded  with  a  Fearful
Heart...  ...  ...  ...     1G5

The  Ark  received  with  a  Right  Spirit     166
The  Ark  led  forth  with  Devout  En-
thusiasm ...  ...  ...     167

The  Ark  established   in  its  Chosen

Resting-place    ...  ...  ...  168

The  Ark  and  the  Bible       ...  ...  170

Family  Worship  ...  ...  ...  171

Unholy  Scorn       ...  ...  ...  172

The  Death  of  Uzzah  173

Dread  of  God        ...  ...  ...  175

God's  Blessing  abiding  with  the  Ark  176

The  Ark  brought  to  Zion   ...  ...  177

Religious  Zeal  despised      ...  ...  178

Domestic  Religion  ...  ...  179

A  Despiser  rebuked  ...  ...  180

CHAPTER  VII.

Commendable  but  Unseasonable  Zeal  188
The  Historic  Development  of  God's

Purpose  concerning  Man  ...  190

Consolation  in  Disappointment         ...  191

The  Testing  Period,  and  its  Rewards  193
The  Blending  of  the  Temporal  and  the

Eternal  ...  „.  .„  194

The  Educational  Influence  of  God's

Great  Love        ...  ...  ...  195

David's  Purpose  to  build  a  House  for

the  Lord  ...  ...  ...  197

The  Prophet  Nathan  ...  ...  199

"  The  Lord  is  with  thee "   ...  ...  199

A  Forbidden  Purpose         ...  ...  199

A  Great  Name      ...  ...  ...  201

The  Prospect  of  Death       ...  ...  202

The  Promise  of  an  Everlasting  King-
dom    ...  ...  ...  ...  202

Glimpses  of  the  King  Messiah  ...  204

Thanksgiving  and  Praise  ...  ...  205

Promise  and  Prayer  ...  ...  207

A  Prayer  found  in  the  Heart  ...  208

David's  Desire  to  build  a  Temple     ...  208

David's  Everlasting  Kingdom  ...  210

Meditation  before  the  Lord  ...  212

Kffects  of  God's  Goodness  on  the  Heart  213
Unutterable  Thoughts  and  Feelings

known  to  God   ...  ...  ...  213

God's  Works,  and  God's  Heart  and

Words...  ...  ^,  ...  214


INDEX.


lii


THBHB  PAGE

God  surpassingly  Great  and  ever  the

same    ...  ...  ...  ...  215

The  Blessedness  of  God's  People      ...  217

God's  Promises  and  our  Prayers        ...  218

God's  Name  magnified  in  his  People  219
Prayer  induced   and    encouraged  by

Promise  ...  ...  ...  221

Truth  of  God's  Words         ...  ...  221

A  Guod  Man  a  Prayer  for  his  Family  222

CHAPTER   VIIL

The  Historic  Mirror            ...  ...  229

David's  Wars  and  Victories  ...  231

Dedication  of  Property  to  God  ...  233

God's  Preserving  Care        ...  ...  234

David's  Administration      ...  ...  235

Divine  Preservation             ...  m.  237

Dedication  of  Treasure  to  God  ...  238

Getting  a  Name    ...            ...  ...  239

CHAPTER   IX.

The  Power  of  Hallowed  Associations  241

A  Spiritual  Parallel  ...  ...  243

For  Jonathan's  Sake  ...  ...  246

Showing  the  Kindness  of  God  ...  247

The  Kindness  of  Machir  Ben-Ammiel  248

Mephibosheth  before  the  King         ...  248
Lost  and  Found :  a  Sermon  to  Young

People  ...  ...  ...  249

«The  Kindness  of  God" 250

Eating  at  the  King's  Table  ...  250

CHAPTER  X.

Rejected  Friendliness

International  Quarrels        ...  ...

Requiting  Evil  for  Good    ...

Ridicule...  ...  •••  •••

An  Agreement  of  Mutual  Help

Martial  Courage   ...

Kindness  misinterpreted  and  ill-
requited  ...  •••  •••

Co-operation,  Courage,  and  Resigua-
iioa     ...  ...  .*•  •••


254
255
257
258
259
200

261

2G3


CHAPTER   XI.

The  Beginnings  of  Great  Sins
The  Crooked  Ways  of  Sin  ...
Complicity  in  Evil
David's  Fall  into  Sin         m.


269
272
274
276


THEME  PAGE

Bathsheba             ...            ...  ...  278

Entanglements  of  Sin         ...  ...  279

Uriah  the  Hittite...            ...  ...  280

Complicity  in  Sin  ...            ...  ...  281

Warnings  from  History       ...  ...  282

Concealment  of  Sin             ...  ...  283

God's  Displeasure  at  Sin     ...  ...  284

David's  Fall         285

CHAPTER   XII.

Nathan's  Parable...            ...  ...  292

The  Convicted  Sinner         ...  ...  294

Providence  and  Natural  Affection  ...  297

Tokens  of  Eestoratiou         ...  ...  299

Rabbah's  Lesson  to  Mankind  ...  800

A  Faithful  Reprover  of  Sin  ...  301
The  Parable  of  the  Rich  Oppressor;

or,  the  Poor  Man's  Lamb  ...  302

The  Blinding  Influence  of  Sin  ...  304

"  Thou  art  the  Man  1 "        305

The  Penalties  of  Sin           ...  ...  3(16

The  Acknowledgment  of  Sin  ...  308

Tlie  Forgiveness  of  Sin       ...  ...  310

Giving  Occasion  to  blaspheme  ...  312

Ddvid's  Behaviour  in  AfiBiotion  ...  313

The  Death  of  a  Child         ...  ...  315

The  Birth  of  Solomon         ...  ...  316

The  Fall  of  Rabbah             ...  ...  317

Unconscious  Self-Condemn ation  ...  317

Despising  the  Commandments  of  God  318

Despisers  of  God  ...            ...  ...  319

Confession  and  Pardon       ...  ...  320

Religion  reproached  through  the  Con-

,     duct  of  the  Religious       ...  ...  322

An  Infant's  Illness  and  Death  ...  322

CHAPTER  XIIL

The  Firstfruits  of  Iniquity  ...  ...  328

Home  Troubles     ...            ...  ...  330

Lost  and  Exiled   ...            ...  ...  332

The  Crime  of  Amnon          ...  ...  333

A  False  Friend     ...            334

Tamar    ...            ...            ...  ...  335

Impunity               ...            ...  ...  335

The  Revenge  of  Absalom   ...  ...  337

Parental  Sorrows  ...            ...  ...  338

A  DiahoUcal  Friend:   a  Homily  for

Young  Men       ...            ...  ...  339

Things  that  ought  not  to  be  done  in

Israel  ...            ...            ...  ...  341

Fools  in  Israel      ..•            m.  ...  343


INDEX.


CHAPTEB  XIV.

THEHl  FAGK

Astuteness  in  Human  Affairs            ...  348

Means  to  bring  back  the  Banished   ...  349

Imperfect  Beconciliation    ...            ...  352

The  Woman  of  Tekoah       354

"  As  Water  spilt  upon  the  Ground  "  ...  356

God's  Bestoration  of  his  Banished    ...  357

Flattery 359

Physical  Beauty   ...            ...            ...  359

Bestored,  but  not  Beformed              ...  360

Bemembrance  of  God         ...            ...  362

God  fetching  Home  his  Banished     ...  363

An  All-comprehensi?e  Blessing       ...  364

Absalom's  Beauty               ...            ...  365

CHAPTEB  XV.

The  Shady  Side  of  Human  Kature  ...  372

Submission  in  the  Day  of  Adversity  . . .  375

Fidelity  in  Misfortune        ...            ...  377

Prayer  for  Divine  Intervention         ...  378

The  Bebellion  of  Absalom  ...            ...  379

David's  Flight  from  Jerusalem         ...  382

The  Devotedness  of  Ittai    ...            ...  384

The  Ark  restored  to  its  Place            ...  385

David's  Tears  on  Olivet      ...            ...  387

The  Counsel  of  Ahithophel               ...  388

The  Prieadship  of  Hushai ...            ...  399

Absalom's  Pious  Vow         ...            ...  391

A  Farewell  Blessing           ...            ...  392

Ittai  an  Example  to  Christians         ...  393

David's  Besignation  to  the  Will  of  God  395

The  Place  of  Worship        ...            ...  396

CHAPTEB  XVI.

The  Cruelty  of  Avarice      ...            ...  399

The  Eeproaohes  of  the  Wicked         ...  401

The  Waves  and  Billows  of  God        ...  402

Illustrations  of  Facts  and  Principles  ...  405

The  Benefaction  of  Ziba     ...            ...  408

Tlie  Beviliug  of  Shimei      ...           ...  409

The  Zeal  of  Abishai            ...            ...  412

An  Inconsistent  Friend      ...            ...  413

Shiniei's  Curses    ...           ...           ...  414

Unfaithful  Friends              ...            ...  415

CHAPTEB  XVn.

Conflicting  Counsels           ...            ...  420

Division  of  Labour  in  doing  Good    ...  123

The  End  of  the  Wicked     424

Sympathy  in  the  Day  of  Adversity  ...  425

The  Council-Chamber  of  Absalom    ...  427
Blight  Serricei :  a  Sermon  to  Young
Penoua             ...           »n           •»    428


David's  Escape  across  the  Jordan     ...  429

The  Suicide  of  Ahithophel ...           ...  430

Hospitality           432

Suicide  ...            ...            ...            •.•  433

Supplies  for  the  King's  Army           ...  434

CHAPTEB  XVIII.

The  Discharge  of  Painful  Obligation!  440

A  Bevelation  of  Sin  and  its  Issue     ...  442

The  Place  of  Principles  in  Conduct ...  444

The  Belation  of  Character  to  Work  ...  44H

Sympathetic  Enthusiasm    ...            ...  4+7

Miscellanies          ...            ...            ...  448

The  Great  Lamentation      ...            ...  US

David's  Victory  over    his  Bebellious

Subjects             ...            ...            ...  450

A  Faithful  Soldier              ...            ...  451

The  End  of  Absalom           ...            ...  452

Posthumous  Fame               ...            ...  453

"  Is  the  Young  Man  ...  Safe?"     ...  454

David's  Lament  over  Absalom          ...  454

The  Surpassing  Worth  of  Christ      ...  456

Dealing  falsely  against  our  Lives     ...  458

The  Omniscience  of  our  Eiug           ...  459

Absalom's  Monument          ...            ...  4B0

A  Good  Messenger  of  Good  News     ...  461
Concern  for  the  Welfare  of   Young

Men 462

A  Father's  Anguish  at  his  Son's  Death  4G3

CHAPTEB  XIX.

Solitariness  in  Beligious  Experience  469

The  Bemoter  Consequences  of  Sin    ...  471

The  Influence  of  Superior  Minds      ...  473

Boyal  Clemency    ...            ...            ...  474

A  Beautiful  Old  Age          ...            ...  477

The  Uses  and  Perils  of  Bivalry        ...  479

Inmioderate  Grief                ...            ...  481

David's  Betum  to  Jerusalem             ...  482

The  Pardon  of  Shimei        ...           ...  483

The  Vindication  of  Mephibosheth    ...  484

OldBarzillai         ...            ...            ...  485

Loving  Enemies  and  hating  Friends  487

Late  Beflection  and  Appreciation     ...  488

Inability  hindering  Desired  Service  ...  489

The  Privations  of  Old  Age ...           ...  491

CHAPTEB  XX.

Man's  Bevolt  against  Christ             ...  497

Unsauotified  Power            ...           ...  499

The  Causes  and  Bemedies  of  B'sligious

Strife  ...           ...           ...           ...  500

The  Insuireotion  of  Sheba  ...           ...  602


INDEX,


THEHB  PAaB

The  Murder  of  Amftg*        ^            ...  504

A  Peacemaker      ...            ...            ...  505

Departure    from    and  Adherence    to

Christ...            ...            ...            ...  507

Peaoeableness  and  FaithfulneBa       ...  508

Seeking  to  destroy  God's  Inheritance  509

CHAPTER  XXI,

A  Story  of  Deferred  Betribution       ...  515
The   Difficulty  of   Establishing    the

Kingdom  of  God  in  the  World      ...  518

Famine  ...            .„            ...            ...  520

Unrighteous  Zeal...            ...            ...  523

Bizpah   ..,            „,            ,..            ...  523

Giants:  a  Sermon  to  Young  People  ...  524

The  Lamp  of  Israel            ...           ...  525

Seeking  God's  Face            ...            ...  526

A  Mother's  Love  and  Grief               ...  527

Giant-Killers        ...            ...            ...  529

The  Unquenchible  Light  ...            ...  529

CHAPTER   XXII.

Songs  of  Deliverance          ...           ...  535

God's  Answer  to  the  Cry  of  Distress  538
GoiI'b    Righteousness  in    saving  the

Righteous         ...           ...           ...  540

Knowledge  of  God  founded  on  Experi-
ence   ...           ...           ...            ...  542

The  Gentleness  of  God       543

Life's  Warfare      ...            ...            ...  544

The  Glory  of  the  Accomplishment  of

Life's  Purpose  due  to  God             ...  545

Additional  Topics               ...            ...  546

Dayid's  Song  of  Praise       ...            ...  547

Self-Preservation ...            ...            ...  550

Divine  Rectitude  ...            ...            ...  550

God's  Way,  Word,  and  Defence        ...  551

God  is  my  Strength            ...            ...  551

True  Greatness     ...            ...            ...  551

The  Praise  of  God  among  the  Heathen  552

God  the  Refuge  and  Deliverer          ...  553

God  Worthy  to  be  praised  ...           ...  554

Prayer  in  Distress  heard     ...            ...  555

Rescue  from  Mighty  Foes  ...            ...  556

God  rewarding  the  Righteous           ...  557
Correspondence  between  the  Character
of  Men  and  the  Conduct  of    God

towards  them    ...            ...            ...  558

God    observing    and    humbling    the

Proud...            ...            ...            ...  559

God  the  Lamp  of  his  People             ...  560

Perlection  of  God's  Way  and  Word  ...  561

Jehovah  the  only  God,  the  only  Rook  562


Divine  Protection  and  Guidance      ...  503

Greatness  iiom  God's  Condescension  5'!4

The  Head  of  the  Nations   ...  ...  565

Praise    to    God  as    the   Ever-living

Saviour  ...  ...  ...  566

Praising  God  among  the  Nations     ...  567

CHAPTER  XXIII.

The  Fruitful  Lessons  of  David's  Last

Words...  ...  ...  ...  673

Mighty  Men         ...  ...  .„  577

Christ's  Tribute  to  Christian  Devotion  577

The  Son  of  Jesse,  and  the  Son  of  David  578

David's  Last  Words  ...  ...  579

An    Oracle    concerning    the      King

Messiah  ...  ...  ...  581

The  First  Three  Heroes      ...  ...  584

The  Well  of  Bethlehem      ...  ...  585

The  Heroism  of  Benaiah    ...  „  587

The  Righteous  Ruler  ...  ...  588

Comfort  from  the  Everlasting  Cove-
nant   ...  ...  ...  ...  .590

The  King's  Mighty  Men    ...  ...  592

Love,  Courage,  and  Self-Sacrifice      ...  503

CHAPTER  XXIV.

Deferred  Chastisements      ...  ...  601

The  Subtle  Power  of  a  Sinful  Motive  602
A  King's  Sin  and  a  People's  Chastise-
ment ...            ...            ...            ...  603

The  Way  to  Reconciliation  with  God

a  Matter  of  Divine  Revelation       ...  606

Devotion  of  Property  to  God's  Service  607

Plague  and  Prayer  ...  ...  608

A  Sinful  Census  ...  ...  ...  609

Self-Elation  612

Unheeded  Remonstrance    ...  ...  613

An  Awakened  Conscience  ...  ...  613

The  Prophet  Gad  ...  ...  615

Preachers  and  Hearers       ...  ...  616

Submission  to  Divine  Chastisement  ...  617

Pestilence  ...  ...  ...  618

Self-Devotion        ...  620

Araunah  the  Jebusite         ...  ...  621

Personal  Sacrifice  ...  ...  622

The  New  Altar 623

Sinful  Numbering  ...  ...  625

Pressing   for   an    Answer   to   God's

Message  ...  ...  ...  626

God's  Treatment  preferred  to  Man'i  627

Acceptance  witli  God         ...  ...  628

Cheap  Religion  repudiated  ».  629

Efficaoious  Sacrifices  ...  m.  631


;'  i  .


Mi


im


I


'<^s


.,;,  '

^11 ' "

1  ^    1  ,

i

.  '     ^

1       1 '

t
I


:i'';'K


,   iiliU,


'ilMlill


'll'lll


ift'


!i''hl

I


Ji;|:i


!i!


i  1 1 1.1'
