Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



i 









THE EVILS OF INFANT BAPTISM. 



THE 



EYILS OF INFANT BAPTISM. 



BY 



ROBEKT BOYTE C. HOWELL, D.D., 

Pastor of the Second Baptist CUOffS, RichmoDd, Ya. 



AUTHOR OP *'T1RMS OF COMMUNIGK," "tHK DKiLCONBHIP," **THS WAT OP 

SALTATION,*' BTC. 



" Brethren, whatsoeva things are tnie, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever 
things are just, whatsoever things are pare, whatsoever things axe lovely, what, 
soever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on tliese things.— Paul. 



THIRD EDITION. 



CHAKLESTON, S. C: 

I SOUTHXBN BAPTIST PUBLICATION SOCIETY. 

EICHMOND, VA.: 

VIRGINIA BAP. S. S. AND PUBLICATION SOCIETY. 

1852. 



>s 



Bntered Meoidfng to the Act of OongreaB, in the 700 1861, by 

SOBEST BOTTB a HOWELL, D.D^ 

In the Olerk^B OiBoe of the Sastem District of YirglDiak 



0HABLE8T0K: 

fniM POWIBrFBHM OT WALKIB AHS 9A3tm, 

No. lOl East Bey. 








PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 



Mt gratitude is due to God, and to his people, for 
the kindness with which this little work has been re- 
ceived. A second edition is demanded at a much 
earlier period than I had anticipated. I have pre- 
pared it with as much attention as my circumstances 
would permit. Some portions of the book, as will be 
seen, haye been recast, and a new Chapter has been 
added, on Infant Salvation. More perspicuity and con- 
clnsiyeness haye, as I think, been thus given to some 
of the arguments, and the whole work made much 
more complete. Again I send it forth, with the earn- 
est prayer that it may prove a blessing to the cause of 
true religion. 

Bob't Botte C. Howell. 

RBOBaiosD, Va., Dec. 17th, 1851. 



1 • 



TO THE 

^tuuk baptist Cjrttfijr, suit Coigttgittoit, 

CITY OF EICHMOIID, VmaiNIA, 

THIS VOLUm 
Xs &ef ]»ccttiillx 3B««(c8t$lr» 

BT BULB SMSfOCBD' AHS CiMLISMSt 

FAfiTOB. 



PREFACE. 



The foUowing pages were written with the specific 
design of considering, not the *'mode of baptism/' nor 
** the mbjecU of baptism/' but " the evils of infakt 
hapHsmJ* What baptism is, and who are authorized 
to receive it, have been questions of controversy during 
fifteen hundred years. The last two centuries have 
been especially prolific of essays and books on these 
subjects. Great learning and zeal have been called 
into requisition on both sides of the discussion. The 
conflict, as time passes, loses nothing of its interest, 
but grows each year, more and more warm. Kor will 
it ever cease imtil all christians fully understand the 
dime teachings in the premises, and submit them- 
selves to the guidance of the word of God. The evils 
d infant baptism seem, however, to be a topic which 
has attracted heretofore, but very little attention. I 
ha?e seen an occasional aUuaon to it in books, and 
periodicals, and sometimes a paragraph or two, af- 



X PBEFAOE. 

firming and sustaining the mischievous results of the 
rite. I myself -wrote a small tract on the. subject, 
more than twenty-five years ago, entitled "Plain 
Things for Plain Men/' suggesting most of the prop- 
ositions contained in this work. Beyond these 
almost nothing, so far as I know, has been pub- 
lished.* Consequently the advocates of infant bap- 
tism, driven from every othi»' quaiiter, bare \ej» felt 
themselves safe. They afibm,. and expect us to adiD^ 
that " If it does no good, it does no haem." It 19 
innocent, and therefore may be practised. It waa thia 
very apology, offered in ita behalf lately, by & friend 
in my presence, and which I had before so o£teaft faesE^ 
that called forth the book now before you. I thought 
it wrong to permit the public mind longer to remain: 
involved in this error ; and as I knew of no ona who 
was likely soon to expose it, I determinfid. toc undertafaa 
the task myself. I have attempted, with what sueceaa 

* Since the first edition of this work went to press, I have seen 
Br. Gill'sr Tract, " InAnt Baptism a Part and FiBih' of Popery;" 
edited hj Geoige B. Idei, P; Dv,. and pctbiisked in a IgMndBCBSoi 
little voliinie, by the American Baptist Publication Siooioty.. Thia 
volume has a chapter by Dr. Ide on " The Influence of In&nt 
Baptism on Protestant Churches, Historically considered.^' Tliis 
is an able and oonclusiye chapter, of which, in this second edition^ 
I Lava folly availad xnyselfl 



PBEFACE. Xi 



my readers 'will judge, to show that iBfatit baptiBm is 
hr from bdng harmless. On the contrary, that it is 
one of the most calamitous evils with which the church 
has eyer been visited. 

Permit, if you please, a word of explanation in the 
outset, regarding some terms, and phrases, of frequent 
occurrence. I have spoken of it as baptism, when 
only sprinMmg was used, and infamta were the sub- 
jects, not that I suppose any such thing reaMy baptism, 
or that others than believers are capable of the ordi- 
nance, but simply as a matter of courtesy, and in com- 
pliance with common usage. In the same sense I have 
spoken of "the church," "the churches," and "the 
churches of Christ." In the use of these, and like 
expressions, I shall certainly, by all intelligent people, 
be perfectly understood. 

One other prefatory remark wHl be pardoned. In 
this, as in every other book I have written, I have 
carefully sought the uUnost simplicity and plainness. 
I write for " the million," and I have determined that 
"the million" shall xmderstand me. I am unwilling 
to sacrifice force and directness to elegance of style. 
I do not enter in the presence of my readers, into la- 
bored criticisms, nor abstruse disquisitions, but give 
them the results simply, without fatiguing them with 



Xll PBEFAOE. 

the process ; and they have them in the plainest Saxon 
I can command. It has been my purpose to present 
the truth fully, fairly, and candidly, but at the same 
time, with all proper respect for the opinions of oth- 
ers. I have not introduced an argument which I do 
not beheve to be logical and conclusive, a single pas- 
sage of scripture which I am not persuaded is rele- 
vant, nor an authority from any writer, ancient or mod- 
em, which I am not assured is justly adduced, and 
applicable to the subject. My sole desire is the honor 
of truth, and the salvation of men. 

With these observations premised, I send foith this 
little volume, earnestly praying that God our Heavenly 
Father, may make it a blessing to his cause and 
people. 

Rob't Boytb C. Howell. 

BsoBMOiXD, Va., KaToh 24th, 1851. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTEE I. 

Pag«L 
Infimt baptism is an evil because itB practice is nnsnpported 

by the word of God 17 



CHAPTEB II. 



» 



Infiyit baptism is an evil because its defence leads to most 
i^JTirious perversions of scripture 40 

CHAPTER III. 

In&nt baptism is an evil because it engrafts Judaism upon 
the gospel of Christ 65 

CHAPTEB IV. 

In&nt baptism is an evil because it fiilsifles the doctrine of 
xmiversal depravity 90 

CHAPTEB V. 

Infimt baptism is an evil because the doctrines upon which 
it is predicated contradict the great fundamental princi- 
ple of justification by faith 100 

CHAPTEB VI. 

Infimt baptism is an evil because it is in direct conflict with 
the doctrine of the work of the Holy Spirit in regen- 
eration ', 117 

2 



XIV OONTENTB. 

CHAPTEB VII. 

Pags. 

Infant baptilBm is an evil because it despoils the church of 
those peooliar qiialitieB which are essential to the church 
ofCShrirt 180 

CHAPTEB VIII. 

Infant baptism is an evil because its praotioe perpetuates 
the superstitions that originally produced it 168 

CHAPTER IX. 

Infant baptism is an evil because it subverts the scripture 
doctrine of infiint salvation 175 

CHAPTEB X. 

Infknt baptism is an evil because it leads its advocates into 
rebellion against the authority of Christ 208 

CHAPTER XI. 

Infant baptism is an evil because of the connection it as* 
sumes with the moral and religious training of chil- 
dren 218 

CHAPTER XII. 

Infant baptism is an evil because it is the grand foundation 
upon which rests the union of church and state 225 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Infant baptism is an evil because it leads to religious per- 
secutions 284 

CHAPTER XIV. 

In&nt baptasm is an evil because it is contrary to the prin- 
ciples of civil and religious freedom • • 258 



COirrENTB. XV 

CHAPTEB XV. 

Page. 

In&Dt baptism is an evil because it enfeebles the power of 
the ohoTch to combat error 262 

CHAPTEB XVI. 

Infiint baptism is an evil because it injures the credit of re- 
ligion with reflecting men of the world 279 

CHAPTEB XVII. 

In&nt baptism is an evil because it is the great barrier to 
christian nnion 284 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

■ 

In&nt baptism is an evil because it prevents the salutary im- 
pression which baptism was designed to make upon the 
minds both of those who receive it, and of those who 
witness its administration 288 

CHAPTER XIX. 

lufant baptism is an evil because it retards the designs of 
Christ in the conversion of the world 298 

CHAPTEB XX. 
Becapitulation, with concluding addresses 802 



rmxi 



EVILS OF INFANT BAPTISM. 



CHAPTER I. 

ISVAWr BAPTISM IB AN EVIL BiBOAUSS ITS PRACTICE IS 
UNBTTPPOBTBD BT THE WORD 07 GOD. 

Fft)poaittoD italed ; no antbori^ in the Bible for loftmi baptism ; oonfoMiooa 
of its advocatea ; the great I^^>(e8tant role in religion ; their argumeuta ; it 
ii DO baptiam; iHina of the evil. 

Perfection on earth, in its absolute form, unhappily 
no longer exists. " Man's first disobedience" brought 
sin into the world. Evil was its attendant. And since 
that fatal hour, evil has been connected with all that 
pertains to our race ! It is like the air we breathe, an 
eyer present influence. It corrupts all that is pure, 
and impairs all that is beautiful. Where are the natu- 
ral beings whose perfections it has not disturbed ? 
What role of moral action is there, from compliance 
?nth which it has not turned men aside ? But these 
are not its most lamentable developments. Evil is found 
preyalling even in the professed churches of Christ ! 
Kor is its presence in the sanctuary seldom apparent. 
Scarcely is there a feature in our holy religion, which it 
has not somewhere, marred or distorted ! In no form, 
however, has it afflicted the catise of truth and salvation 

2* 



18 INFANT BAPTISM IS 

ftiore grievously, than in thai of infant baptism ; a rite 
generally prevalent, hut without divine authority ; re* 
ptdsive in itself, and in its consequences always inju- 
rious. This declaration I hold myself bound, in the 
following pages, to sustain by adequate testimony. At 
present I solicit your attention to the proposition an- 
nounced : ** Infant baptism is an evil because it is un- 
supported by the word of Ood^ 

It is assumed that infant baptism is unsupported by 
the word of God. This is the subject of the proposi- 
tion. I^ upon examination, it be foimd true, the predi- 
cate, that it is an eyil, follows as a matter of course. 
The forms and bearing of that evil may then be con- 
sidered. Is infant baptism supported by the word of 
God ? I aver that it is not. It is nowhere command- 
ed. It is nowhere, in any form, divinely authorized. 
Examine the holy record, from first to last, and you 
win discover not a trace of infant baptism. If it is 
anywhere commanded, or authorized, the passages in 
which that fact appears, can be produced. Where are 
they ? Let them be forthcoming. We have a right to 
see, and to examme them, for ourselves. We demand 
the texts. But this demand has before been often 
made, and always in vain. They have never been 
produced. They have not yet been found. They nev- 
er can be found. They do not exist. The word of 
God, in all its length and breadth, contains not a sylla- 
ble of authority for infant baptism, in the form of com- 
mand, of precept, of permission, of example, or in any 
other form whatever. In that sacred book not one 
word in relation to it, is anywhere uttered. He who 
claims divine authority for infant baptism, must justify 



UNSUPFOBTSD BT THE WOBD OF GOD. 19 

himself by addnciDg it. Until he does so> the least that 
can be said of it, is that '* it is unsupported by the 
vford of God:' 

The authority demanded, has however often been 
essayed. Learned, ingenious, and protracted efforts 
haye been attempted by every sect into which Pedo- 
baptist Christendom is divided. But as if God had de- 
termined to defend his own truth by the individual con- 
flicts of its adversaries, it has turned out that no two 
of them have been able to harmonize either as to what 
may be regarded as testimony in the premises, or the 
class of infants divinely authorized to be baptized ! 
Each is in collision with every other. Wall, Ham- 
mond, and others of that school, claim that Jewish 
proselyte baptism is its broad and ample foundation. 
Owen, Jennings, and many more, repudiate Jewish 
proselyte baptism, and predicate it upon circumcision 
as taught in the Abrahamic covenant. Beza, Dod- 
dridge, and their associates, teach that children are 
holy, and are therefore to be baptized. Wesley, and 
his disciples, teach that they are unholy, and must be 
baptized to cleanse them from their defilements. Bur- 
der, Dwight, and their class, permit no other infants to 
be bapti^d but those of christian parents, all of whom 
they contend, are bom in the church, and are there- 
fore entitled to its ordinances. Baxter, Henry, and 
those of similar faith, baptize infants to bring them 
into the covenant and church of the Redeemer. The 
evangelical divines of the Church of England, and of 
the Episcopal Church of America, tell us that " the 
doctrine of infant baptism is deduced by analogical 
reasoning, from statements of scripture applying more 



20 isnrAKT baftisu ib 

expressly, to the ease of adult baptism^" But those 
€tf the opposite character teach that baptism gives to 
the infant the regeneration of the Holy Ghost, and 
must therefare he admimstered* Many othen receive 
and practise it, because, as they say, " It is in conso- 
nance with the general spirit of i^digion !" Each of 
these theories shows all the others to be wholly desti- 
tute of scriptural support. Among the several classes 
of religionists now indicated, are to be found very many 
men of the most extensive learning and research. Why 
are they all thus in hopeless conflict on the subject ? 
The moment one brings forward his scriptural proofs 
of infant baptism, all the others clearly show them to 
be utterly false. Could this be the case were the 
ordinance anywhere enjoined or authorized ? Every 
unprejudiced mind must see that, taken together, the 
arguments of all classes of Pedobaptists, destroy one 
another throughout. Like the builders at Babel, no 
two of them speak the same tongue, although every 
one protests that he utters the language of the Bible ! 
It is true consequently, for any thing that yet appears 
to the contrary, that ir^ant baptism is unsupported by 
the word of God, 

But we have testimony in proof of our proposition 
still stronger if possible, than any which has yet been 
submitted. Very many of the most learned and pious 
Pedobaptist Biblical critics^ themselves candidly confess 
that infant baptism is not distinctly enjoined, nor direct- 
ly taught, in the word of God, Some of these I will 
now proceed to specify. 

Martin Luther, the great father of the Reformation, 
says : — " It cannot be proved by the scriptures, that 



UlirSUPPOBTED BT Tm^ WOKD OF GOD. 21 

infant baptism was instituted by Christ, or begun bj^ 
the first christtans after the apostles."* John Calm 
testifies tbns :-^" It is nowhere expressly mentioned 
h/ the evangelists, that any child was by the apostles 
baptiaed."! Bishop Burnet ayers :— ^" There is no ex- 
press precept, or mle given in the N^ Testament, for 
th^ baptism (rf infants. "J Strarck says :-^" The con* 
nection of infant bapttsm witb circumcision deserves no 
consideration^ since there were physical reasons for eir* 
cumoising in infancy."§ Angusti says : — " The paral« 
lei between circumcision and baptism is altogether f(»r* 
dgn to the ^ew Testament.") BiBbop Jeremy Taylor 
thus writes : — *' For the argument from circumcision, it 
is invalid from infinite considerations. Figures and 
types prove nothing, unless a command go along with 
them, or som^ express to signify such to be their 
purpose/'^ Dr. Woods of Andover remarks i-^' It 
is a plain case that there is no express precept respect* 
ing infant baptism iqi our sacred writings* The proof 
then^ that it is a divine institution must b^ mad^ oijit in 
some other way."** Prof. Stuart says :— ^* Oonar 
mauds, or plain a^d certain ^etxamples in ^e ^N^ew Tetsk 
tanient^ relative to it [infant baptism] I do not find."f f 
And finally Dr^ !&^eander declares :— " M baptisni was 
closely united with a c^nscioiis entrance on christian 
eommuokm, faith ^d baptism were olwayn conoect^ 

• Apad Van. Inf. Bapt, part 3, p. 8, 

t Institutes of Eeligion, liber 4, <&c. 

t £zpo8. 8d Arts., Art. ^8. % Hist Bap., p. 11. 

I Works, vol. 7, p. 829, 

^ Liberty of Prophesying, pp. 228-246. 

♦♦ Leot. on Inf.,Bap., p. 11. 

ft BiblJM S«pfi«litai7i l&»i P* iB8a. 



22 INFAI7T BAFTIBM IB 

with one another ; and thus it is in the highest degree 
probable, that baptism was performed only in instances 
where both could meet together, and that the practice 
of infant baptism was unknown" to the apostolic age.* 
In another work Neander says : — " Baptism was at 
first, administered only to adults, as men were accus- 
tomed to conceive baptism and faith as strictly con- 
nected. We have all reason for not deriving infant 
baptism from apostolic institution.^f Multitudes of 
other similar declarations could, were they necessary, 
be readily produced, but these are amply sufficient. 
It is acknowledged that the word of God does not 
teach infant baptism. This acknowledgment is made 
candidly, by those who ought to know, since they were 
among the most learned men, and best Biblical critics 
the world has ever produced, made agaitist themselves, 
voluntarily, freely, and of their own accord, and ought 
therefore to be considered decisive of the question. 
Infant baptism is not found in any farm in the Bible. 
Every effort to deduce it from the sacred records, no 
matter how ingeniously conducted, has proved a wretch- 
ed failure. It is confessed by its advocates that it is 
not found in the inspired pages. Infant baptism is 
therrfore, unsupported by the vford of God, 

May I now, in view of all these facts, and consider* 
ations, solicit your attention to the great Protestant 
principle in religion, so familiarly known to all who are 
in the least conversant with sacred literature ? — " 77ie 
word of God is a perfect rule of faith and practice.** 
To this maxim every evangelical denomination professes 

* Planting and Training, p. 101. 

t Ohnroh History, vol. 1, p. 811, Torrej'a TranslaUon. 



imSTJPPOETED BY THE WOKD OF GOD. 23 

to bow with entire submission. It avows the scrip* 
tures to be not the supreme authority only, but also the 
K>le authority, in all that pertains to religion. It repu- 
diates all tradition. It looks not to the Fathers of the 
church of whatever period, except in so far as they 
are sustained by the divine word. It relies exclusively 
upon the scriptures. If any doctrine or practice be 
there clearly taught, it must be received heartily, and 
fully. If otherwise, you dare not admit it. "The 
word of God is a perfect rule of faith and practice." 

For myself, and for my brethren — although we are 
not Protestants — I declare for this christian law in re- 
ligion the sincerest reverence. We receive it ftllly, and 
conform to it in every respect. We do this however, 
not simply because it is wise in principle, and safe, in 
practice, but because it is really an embodiment in an- 
other form, of the law of God himself. It comes to us 
with the sanction not of men only, but of God. The 
language of Jehovah on the subject is this : — " What 
thing soever I command you, observe to do it. Thou 
shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it."* And in 
another place he says : — " Ye shall not add imto the 
word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish 
ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of 
the Lord your God which I command you."f Is not 
this a plain declaration, in other terms, that, "The 
word of God is a perfect rule of faith and practice ?" 
Does any wie suppose that since these precepts had a 
more direct reference to the law of Moses, that they 
are not equally applicable under the gospel ? To such 
it may be rephed, that the law was much less perfect 

* Beut. xiLy 8. t Dent, iv., 2. 



24 UTFAlffT BAPTISM IB 

than is the gospel. Did our Heavenly Father enforce 
the obligations of the former with the most jealous 
particularity, and is he less careful as to our compliance 
with the demands of the latter ? Such an objection 
is unreaaonahU, It is also in direct conflict with apos- 
tolic teaching. To this very topic Paul refers, whea 
he says : — " God, who at sundry times, and in divers 
manners, spake in times past to the father$, by the 
propJiets, hath in these last days spoken unto t^, by 
his iS^ow."* " There/ore we ought to give the more 
earnest he^ to the things which we h^^ve heard, lest at 
any time we should let them slip. For if the word 
spoken by angels [messengers, in the law] was stead- 
fast, and every transgression, and disobedience received 
a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if 
we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began 
to be spoken by tlie Lord, and was confirmed imto us 
by them that heard him, God also bearing them wit- 
ness, both with signs and wonders, and divers mira- 
cles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost ?"f " See that ye 
refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not 
who refused him that spake on earth, much more 
shall not we escape if we refuse him that speaketh from 
heavenJ'X Thus it is seen that if the inspired apostle 
knew whereof he afiirmed, and reasoned not iUogicalJy, 
it is unquestionably true that the gospel requires to be 
obeyed, not with less, but with more carefulness, par- 
ticularity, and fidelity than did the law. To no com- 
mandment of the gospel therefore, may you add any 
thing whatever ; neither may you diminish aught from 
it. You are obliged to obey, and in the manner en- 

♦ Heb. i., 1. t Heb. ii., 1-4. X Heb. xii., 26. 



XUXSUTFOKTEB BY THE WC»D OF GOD. 95 

joined, all that Jehovah has there revealed for your 
gnidance. It is " the word of €hd/' and that **i8 <$ 
j)erfect rule of faith and practice.** 

Bnt we are constantly told that the gospel, iinlilw 
the law, is in many respects, indefinite in its instnie* 
tions, giving only the outlines, and great principles of 
religion, and leavmg the details to he filled up by the 
wisdom and pious discretion of the foUoweis <^ Christ. 
He who has arrived at this ccmclusion has wholly mis- 
taken the subject. If the word of God is a perfect 
rule of faith and practice, then the assumption cannot 
possibly be true. It is unreasonable in itself ; it is m 
conflict with the inspired teachings just recited ; and it 
proceeds on the false assumption that the gospel is 
less perfect than the law ! On the contrary, in the gos-* 
pel every duty required is distinctly enjoined. No one 
need mistake its authority, or its nature. That ruLle is 
. certainly not perfect, to whatever department of life it 
may pertain, which only sketches general principles^ 
and great outlines, and leaves the details to be supplied 
by each individual in such manner as may seem to him 
most proper. The word of God is no such rule. It is 
perfect. It is disfigured by neither redundancy nor 
defect. It must be obeyed in all things, without addi* 
tion, diminution or change. You can never depart 
from it in any particular, without incurring immuu^t 
peril. 

It is proper to remark in passing, that our pedobap^ 
ttst brethren have yet a'twther method of satisfying 
themselves that infant baptism is scriptural. When, as 
we have seen. Dr. Woods stated that since <' It is a 
plain case that there is no express precept concerning 

3 



26 iNFAiirr baptism ib 

infant baptism in our sacred writings/' and that conse- 
quently» ''The proof that it is a divine institution 
must be made out in some other way/' you were per- 
haps, at a loss to conceive what that "other way^' 
could be. By what process can any ordinance be 
proved ** a divine institution/' in regard to which not 
a word is said " in our sacred writings ?" No such 
thing can be done. Since the Bible is our only author- 
ity in all cases, the proof proposed is clearly impossi- 
ble. We will however hear Dr. Woods. He obtains 
his proof thus : — " It cannot with any good reason, be 
denied, or doubted, that those christian writers who 
have, in different ways, given testimony to the preva- 
lence of infant baptism in the early ages of Christiani- 
ty, are credible witnesses. Nor can it be denied that 
they were under the best advantages to know whether 
the practice commenced in the times of the apostles. 
On this subject, as the^ were not liable to m^take, so 
their testimony is entitled to full credit !"^ This is the 
method. It is by tradition, vouched by the Fathers, 
that protestant pedobaptists discover that the word of 
God teaches ordinances which are confessedly not in 
the word of God ! These protestants will not allow 
whe papists to prove, in the same way, the divine au- 
thority for the invocation of saints, prayers for the 
dead, the use of holy water, and such like " institu- 
tions," which they can do, readily and fully. Thejf 
are popish. But this is protestant. If therefore the 
Fathers say, this was an apostolic tradition, it was an 
apostolic tradition ! And more ; in this matter, these 
same Fathers **were not liable to mistake/** Their au- 

* Apnd Hodges on Inf. Bap., p. 89. 



UNBTTPPOBTED BY THE WOBD OF GOD. 27 

thonty therefore, though entirely worthless when in 
favor of the Catholics, is when infant baptism is to be 
proved scriptural, as pood at least, as that of the apoS' 
ties, since of them no more can be said than that they were 
not liable to mistake! Who woujd have supposed that 
theolc^cal professors could have been guilty of rea<* 
Boning so absurdly? The argument, it would seem, 
needs not a word of refutation. I would not stop to 
consider it, if Dr. Woods alone, relied upon such testi- 
monies. But it is a common pedobaptist resort. I 
wiU offer two or three examples. 

Dr. Miller deposes thus regarding tradition : — " The 
history of the christian church from the apostolic age, 
furnishes an argument of irresistible force, in fayor of 
the divine authority of infant baptism." He proceeds 
— " Can the most incredulous reader who is not fast 
bound in the fetters of invincible prejudice, hesitate to 
admit, firsts that Augustine, and Pelagius, verily be- 
lieved that infant baptism had been the imiversal prac- 
tice of the church from the days of the apostles ; and 
secondly, that situated, and informed as they were, it 
was impossible that they should be mistaken ?''* These 
men flourished four hundred jeais after Christ. The 
word of God says not a word about infant baptism. 
This however does not disconcert Dr. Miller. Augus- 
tine, and Pelagius, say it was an apostolic tradition. 
And this he says, is " an argument of irresistible force, 
ID favor of the divine authority of infant baptism," and 
by which every one *' not fast bound in the fetters of 
invincible prejudice," must be convinced. But these 
Fathers also declared that infant communion was an 

* luL Bap., pp. 81, 26. 



38 nrPAKT baptism ib 

apostolic tradition, litis Dr. Miller docs not regard as 
of any importance. Their testimony makes infant 6ap- 
tism scriptural ; but it has no such effect upon infant 
eomfrVunion / Was Dr. Miller dreaming when he ut- 
tered this logic ? Richard Watson says : — " Hie anti^ 
quity of infant baptism," taken together with the other 
arguments, *' establish this practice of the church upc»i 
the strongest basis of scripture authority /" In another 
place he says :-^" That a practice which can be traced 
up to the very first periods of the church, and has 
been till very modem times, its uncontradicted practice, 
should have a lower authority than apostolie usage, may 
be pronounced impossible,*** To these I will add the 
declaration of Mr. Hodges. He says : — " Were there 
no other testimony but* that of Irenseus alone, it seenas 
to me, every unbiased and conscientious man must hold 
himself bound to continue infant baptism, were the 
scriptures even silent on the subject, "f By these and 
such like arguments, our pedobaptist brethren essay to 
prove infant baptism scriptural, not by the scriptures, 
but by the Fathers. ** It is a plain case," say they, 
"that there is no express precept respecting infant 
baptism in our sacred writings ;" yet we are assured 
that the traditions of early times, vouched by the Fa- 
thers, '* establish the divine authority of infant bap- 
tism with irresistible force." The Fathers say it was 
practised in the time of the apostles, and 'f it was im-» 
possible that they should be mistaken !" It is not in 
the scriptures, but it is undeniably scriptural ! And 
these men who so contradict themselves, and abuse 

♦ Theol. Insts., vol. 8, pp. 882, 897, 899. 
t Inf. Bapt., p. IM. 



TTksUFFOBTED BY THS WOBD OF GOD. 20 

common sense, are Protestants, nrho proclaim that ''The 
word of God is a perfect rule of faith and practice," 
and who clamorously join in the cry, " The Bihle, the 
Bible alone, is the religion of Protestants." Yet to- 
tally aside from the Bible, and by tradition ezelusiyely, 
they hold infant baptism. Thus they renounce, in this 
case at least, their professed protestant principles, and 
return to the old and exploded dogmatism of popery. 
Their position is utterly inconsistent, and cannot be 
maintained. They are in truth, compelled either to 
r^ect all the traditions, as they do all the teachings of 
the Fathers, which are not sustained by the word of 
God, and thus become Baptists ; or, as in this in- 
stance, they must receive them all irrespective of their 
biblical character, and thus become avowed Roman 
Catholics. However this may be, by the confession 
that the Bible does not in itself teach it, they have 
surrendered the argument to us, and made the truth 
still more sure, that Infant baptism is unsupported by 
the word of God. 

How unhke the reasomng of Woods, and Miller, 
Watson, and the rest, on patristic tradition, is that of 
their brother pedobaptist, the great !N^eander ! He 
says : — '' Not till so late a period as — at least certainly 
not earlier than — Irenseus appears a trace of infant 
baptism. That it first became recognized as an apos- 
tolic tradition in the course of the third century, is evi- 
dence rather against, than for, the admission of its 
apostolic origin, especially since, in the spirit of the 
age when Christianity appeared, there were many ele- 
ments which must have been favorable to the introduc- 
tion of infant baptism." These were " the same ele- 

3*' 



80 mvAjsrr baptism is 

ments 'from whicb [aftenrards] proceeded the notion 
of the magical effects of outward baptism ; the notion 
of its absolute necessity for salvation; the notion which 
gave rise to the mythus that the apostles baptized the 
Old Testament saints in Hades. How very much must 
infant baptism have corresponded with such a tenden- 
cy, if it had been favored hy tradition! It might in- 
deed, be alleged on the other hand, that after infant 
baptism had long been recognized as an apostolical tradi- 
tion, many other causes hindered its universal intro- 
duction, an(f the same causes might still earlier stand 
in the way of its spread, although a practice sanctioned 
by the apostles. But these causes could not haT6 
acted in this manner in the apostolic age. In later 
times we see the opposition between theory and prac- 
tice, in this respect, actually coming forth. Besides, it 
is a different thing that a practice which could not al- 
together deny the marks of its later institution, al- 
though at last recognized as of apostolic founding, 
could not for a length of time, pervade the life of the 
church ; and that a practice really proceeding from 
apostolic institution, and tradition, notwithstanding the 
authority that introduced it, and the circumstances in 
its favor arising from the spirit of the times, should not 
yet [in the third century] have been generally adopted. 
And if we wish to ascertain from whom such an insti- 
tution was originated, we should say certainly, not im- 
mediately from Christ himself Was it from the prim- 
itive church in Palestine, from an injunction given by 
the earlier apostles ? But among the Jewish christians 
circumcision was held as a seal of the covenant, and 
hence they had so much less occasion to make use of 



UNBUPPOETED BY THE WOED OF GOD. 31 

anotlier dedication for their children. Could it have 
been PawZ, -who first among heathen christians intro- 
duced this alteration in tfie use of baptism ? But this 
would agree least of all with the peculiar christian 
characteristics of this apostle. He who sayi^^f him- 
self that Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach 
the gospel ; he who always kept his eye fixed on one 
thing, justification by faith, and so carefully avoided 
every thing which could give a handle or support to 
the notion of a justification by outward things ; how 
could he have set up infant baptism against the circum- 
cision that continued to be practised by the Jewish 
diiristianjS ? In this case the dispute carried on with 
the Judaizing party, on the necessity of circumcision, 
would easily have given an opportunity of introducing 
this substitute into the controversy, if it had really ex- 
isted. The evidence arising from silence on this topic 
has therefore the greater weight."* Thus this distin- 
guished scholar, and Ecclesiastical Historian, disposes 
of the question about which others are so confident, 
whether infant baptism was really an apostolical tradi- 
tion. He fully proves the wbole to be an utter fiction, 
not less gross than that which insisted that " the aposr 
ties baptized the Old Testament saints in Hades. '^ 

There is still one other argument however, which is 
supposed by many, to be sufiScient to sustain infant 
baptism upon a scriptural basis, as ** a divine institu- 
tion." I am told It is not forbidden in the word of 
God. It may therefore be practised. Not forbidden, 
forsooth ! Infant baptism not forbidden in the word of 
God ! It may therefore, be practised ! And is this 

* Church History. On baptism. 



82 INFANT BAPTISM IB 

tbe fashion of your argument? Upon this principle 
what may you not do ? You are obliged to bi^tize all 
to whom God has commanded the ordinance to be ad- 
ministered ; and you may also baptize ail others whose 
baptism he has not eTpres&lj forhiddm ! ! What shall 
I say of a proposition so monstrous ? Its folly can be 
concealed from no one, who will think for a single mo- 
ment on the subject. Need I enter into its formal ref- 
utation ? This is surely unnecessary. Yet, since the 
argument is so easy and plain, it may be as well to 
prove that infant baptism is in truth, actually prohibit' 
ed by the word of Qod. 

It is prohibited, in the first place, by the fact that it is 
imrecogmzed in the sacred records, as a divine institu- 
tion. The great christian axiom which teaches that 
"The word of God is a perfect rule of faith and prac- 
tice," is, as we have seen, adopted by every protestant 
denomination upon the face of the earth. We have, 
besides this, seen that it is fully sustained by the 
teachings of divine revelation, and that no other princi- 
ple in religion, can be true in theory, or safe in prac- 
tice. Whatever God has revealed, we are bound to 
Receive in the love of it, and to obey with reverence, 
and fidelity, without addition, diminution, or change. 
Infant baptism, we have clearly seen, is not taught in 
the Bible. Its friends and advocates confess that it 
does not there appear, and therefore they vainly seek 
to sustain it by tradition, and the authority of early 
Christian Fathers. Is all this true ? Is the word of 
God not a perfect rule of faith and practice ? Are 
jou, as taught by Moses and Paul, permitted to add 
any thing to the commandments of God, or to diminish 



UNSUPPOETED BY THE TVOBD OF GOD. 83 

aught from them ? Dare you receive any doctrine as 
an article of faith, or practise any rite as a christian 
ordinance, not taught, and instituted by Jehovah? To 
these inquiries who will venture an affirmative answer? 
No one, surely. Is infant baptism directly enjoined in 
the word of God ? It confessedly is not. Then it is 
not by the word of God allowed. It is unlawful. 
And that which cannot l^ allowed, because it is not 
lawful, is clearly prohibited. Thus Ood has, in his 
word, clearly prohibited infant baptism. 

Infant baptism is prohibited, secondly, by the apos- 
tolic commission. This is the "law of baptism" in- 
stituted by Jesua Christ himself, and ** the only law," 
as Baxter justly observes, " he ever ordained on the 
subject.'' As recorded by Mark, it has the following 
reading : — " Go ye into all the world, and preach the gos- 
pel to every creature. He that believeth, and is bap- 
tized, shall be saved." This statute is perfectly simple 
and perspicuous. It ordains first, that the gospel shall 
be preached; secondly, that it shall be preached to every 
creature ; thirdly, that all those who believe tite gospel 
shall be baptized ; and fourthly, it promises that those 
who so believe, and are baptized, shall be saved. These 
are all positive declarations. Every positive necessarily 
has its negative. And does not every one know that 
the requirement of the positive is, as a general rule, the 
prohibition of the negative? When God commands 
you to do a specified thing, the command embraces 
that particular thing only ; and all that b not embra- 
ced is, by the very terms of the order, necessarily ex- 
cluded. Especially is forbidden whatever is inconsist- 
ent with the fi^thful performance of the duty enjoined. 



34 VSfVXST BAPTISM Ig 

All these are self-evident truths. Let them be applied 
to the law of baptism as contained in the commission. 
Only those are permitted to preach who are called of 
God to the work ; they are not allowed to preach, as 
coming from Christ, any thing but the gospel ; and 
those, and those alone, who believe the gospel, they are 
required to baptize. The persons to be baptized are 
minutely described. They are believers. Believers 
therefore, and believers only, are to be baptizeid. A 
law to baptize believers is necessarily confined in its aid- 
ministration to believers. It embraces no others. To 
baptize any others is a violation of the law. It is un- 
lawful. It is prohibited. Infants pare not believers. 
The baptism of infants supersedes and prevents the 
baptism of believers, and is therefor^ inconsistent with 
a faithful compliance with the law. Every violation of 
the law is unlawful, and consequently prohibited. In- 
fant baptism is a violation of the law ; is therefore 
unlawful; and consequently by the ' law itself, clearly 
prohibited. 

Infant baptism, thirdly, is prohibited by the very na- 
ture and design of baptism. This ordinance was insti- 
tuted and enjoined as the form in which you publicly 
profess your faith in Christ, and devote yourself to his 
service. Paul so teaches when he says, " As many of 
you as have been baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ." Episcopalians and Methodists consent to this 
truth when they concur in the declaration that it " is a 
sign of profession, and a mark of diflference, whereby 
christians are distinguished from others that are not 
baptized."* Presbyterians and Congregationalists, of 

* Arts, of Eel., Art. 17. 



UNSUPPOBTBD BY THE WORD OP GOD. 85 

all classes, regard it as " Not only for the solemn ad- 
mission of the party baptized into the visible church, 
but also," of " his giving up unto God, through Jesus 
Christ, to walk in newness of life."* In this great 
fact, therefore, all parties are in theory agreed. I now 
submit the inquiry whether such a profession of faith, 
and devotion to Christ, as baptism expresses, must not 
necessarily be a voluntary and intelligent act, on the 
part of the baptized ? To me no fact appears mpjre 
certain. To those who are incapable of such voluntary 
and intelligent action, baptism can never be administer- 
ed. Infants cannot profess their faith, even if they 
had any faith to* profess. They cannot devote them- 
selves to Christ. By the very nature of the ordi- 
nance therefore, ^ince they are incapable of compli- 
ance with its demands, they cannot be baptized. Any 
baptism which is unreasonable and inconsistent, be- 
cause it does not embrace the design, nor express the 
sense of the ordin&nce, is unlawful, and therefore pro- 
hibited. Infant baptism is unreasonable and inconsist- 
ent, because it does not embrace the design, nor ex- 
press the sense of the ordinance. It is therefore un- 
lawful. It is prohibited. 

It must now, I think, be evident to every unpreju- 
diced mind that infant baptism is by the word of God 
actually prohibited. It Is prohibited by the fact that 
it is unrecognized in the f sacred records, as a divine in- 
stitution ; it is prohibit^ by the terms of the apostolic 
commission ; and it is' prohibited by the very nature 
and design of baptism; 

My proposition is thus fully established. We have 

* West. Conf., ohap. 28, seet. 1. 



86 INFAKT BAPTISM IS 

seen that '' Infant baptism is not supported by the 
word of God/' because it is not found to be instituted, 
or in any manner authorized in the inspired records ; 
because the different sects who imagine that they find 
it there, prove the contrary by their mutual refutation 
of each other; because the most pious and learned 
among pedobaptists themselves, confess it is not direct- 
ly taught in the sacred writings ; because the great 
christian axiom whieh teaches that the divine word is 
our sole authority in religion, does not permit us to i e- 
ceive as scriptural what is not recognized in the scrip- 
tures ; because the attempt to make it a divine institu- 
tion by the testimony of the Fathers, through the 
medium of tradition, is a miserable failure ; and be- 
cause it is really and distinctly forbidden in the word 
of God. Infant baptism is, in truth, therefore, no 
baptism at all. God in his word, does not recognize 
it as baptism. It never can be recognized as baptism 
by the people of God. It is exclusively an institution 
of men foisted surreptitiously into the religion of Christ. 
It is therefore a most appalling evil. Some of the 
forms and bearings of this evil may now not improperly 
be considered. 

It betrays ministers into most fearful presumption. 
When an infant is baptized the minister performs the 
rite professedly, in the name, and by the authority of 
Jesus Christ ! But Jesus Christ never authorized any such 
thing ! On the contrary, he has discountenanced and 
forbidden it ! What then, shall be said of the act ? 
What magistrate in civil society would venture, under 
pretence of law, to do a thing, and especially in his of- 
ficial capacity, for the sanction of which no law could 



UNBTTFPOBTED BY THE WOED OF GOD. 87 

be produced, and which by existing laws, according to 
any reasonable interpretation, is plainly prohibited ? 
Such an officer would act most presumptuously. He 
would violate his trust. In what well-regulated com- 
munity would his administration long be endured? 
And shall ministers of religion thus conduct them- 
selves, and that too without compunction, and without 
rebuke ? In this unauthorized and prohibited cere- 
mony of infant baptism, shall they not only meet no 
discountenance, but on the contrary be sustained, and 
defended ? How can a conscientious servant of Christ 
occupy a position so revolting, and abhorrent ? 

But ministers are not alone concerned in this evil. 
Infant baptism must create in the minds of 4he people 
generally, who are under its influence, a want of proper 
respect for the word of God. The habit of acting 
without law, and in opposition to law, leads to this re- 
sult inevitably. This truth is so obvious that no argu- 
ment is needed in its support. May men do, under 
pretence of law, the most important acts for which no 
law can be produced ? May they indeed, do all these 
things, and be sustained in them, even in opposition to 
law ? How long then, will it be to them a mfitter of 
any special concern what the law may require ? They 
are not obliged to conform to its demands. They may do 
what they please with impunity, without regard to law ! 
Do they any longer yield a due respect to the law ? Do 
they feel for it any special deference ? Assuredly they 
do not. In civil society this is true, and it is pre-emi- 
nently true in religion. Infant baptism necessarily de- 
stroys respect for the authority of the word of God. 

The evil is still more striking in the fact, that it is a 

4 



S8 nvFAirr baptism ib 

bold attempt to perfect that which it is vainly conceiv- 
ed God has left imperfect. It is greatly more criminal 
to do in the name of Jesus Christ, what he has not 
commanded, than it is not to do what he has com- 
manded, since when you fall short you thereby confess 
the difficulty of obedience, but when you go beyond, 
you impugn his wisdom. In the former case you ac- 
knowledge your own deplorable weakness. In the lat- 
ter, and especially when you claim what he has not 
authorized or permitted as a part of his religion, you 
madly charge him with defectiveness, and attempt by 
additions of your own, to make his government more 
complete. Why did he not ordain infant baptism ? 
Evidently, because he did not design that his religion 
should embrace any such ordinance. You have dis- 
covered that it is necessary, and have therefore added 
it ! You saw that it was demanded to make God's ap- 
pointments complete ! You know better than Jeho- 
vah, what is requisite to give perfection to his re- 
ligion 1 

Who, in view of all these facts, can avoid the con- 
clusion that infant baptism is a sin against God ? 
What is sin ? Is it not any thought, word, action, 
omission, or desire contrary to the law of God ?* " Sin 
is the transgression of the law."f Infant baptism is 
not according to the law of God. It is a violation of 
the law of God. It is the transgression of the law 
of God. Therefore infant baptism is a sin against 
God. 

These are some of the forms in which, as an ordi- 
nance not instituted, nor sanctioned by Jesus Christ, 

* Crudin on the Word. f l John, iii. 4. 



TTKSUPPOBTED BY THE WORD OF GOD. 39 

• 

the evil of infant baptism is developed. Its practice 
betrays ministers into fearful presumption ; it creates a 
want of respect for the divine law ; it charges imper- 
fection upon the institutions of Messiah ; and it is a sin 
against God. Infant baptism is unsupported by the 
word of God. It is therefore a great and fearful evil. 

In conclusion permit me to entreat for these facts 
and arguments, your patient, unbiased, and prayerful 
consideration. You fervently desire to glorify God, 
and in all things to do his will. You have no wish to 
depart in any respect from the divine law. You would 
not encumber religion, much less pollute it, with any 
doctrines, or observances, not .sanctioned from on high. 
You must therefore, remove infant baptism from its 
place in your theological system. While it remains 
there, it will continue to produce its natural fruits. Its 
extirpation only, can relieve you from its inherent evil. 
Humbly receive, and diligently practice the religion of 
Christ, guided in all things, exclusively by his most 
holy word, and infant baptism will be known no more. 
To the ascertained will of our Heavenly Father meekly 
submit yourself. Upon this principle alone is it possi- 
ble for you to " keep the commandments of the Lord 
your God which he commanded you." "Behold to 
obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the 
fat of rams." But " rebellion is as the sin of witch- 
craft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry." 



CHAPTER ll. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE ITS DEFENCE 
LEADS TO MOST INJURIOUS PERVERSIONS OF THE WORD 
OF GOD. 

The general principle ; instances in iUnstrationt from tbe apoetolie commis- 
ftion ; from Peter's sermon ; from Paul's Instructions to the Corinthians ; 
from Clirist's blessing the children ; forms of the evil 

• 

The defence of infant baptism, unsustained as it is by 
divine authority, necessarily leads to most injurious per- 
versions of the word of God, The same may be said 
also, of every other departure from truth, to support 
which a resort is had to the sacred record. The eoil 
resulting will of course, be in proportion to the magni- 
tude, and peculiar bearing, of the error sought to be 
established. Infant baptism is not a mere ceremony, 
which when performed, ceases to be of any further im- 
portance. Considered in itself, it may indeed seem of 
little consequence. It is not however thus isolated. 
Its relations, and influences extend themselves into ev- 
#ry department of Christianity. It is the process by 
which the churches which practise it, receive their en- 
tire membership, and must therefore enstamp upon 
them all, its own peculiar character. It le^ds to insid- 
i^9us and hurtful expositious of scripture ; imposes upon 
the ^eqple false doctrines ; subverts the true ecclesias- 
tical polity ; pprrupts thp spirit of religbn; vitiates 



mVAJSTT BAPTISM LEADS TO, ETC. 41 

christian intercourse ; weakens the power of the gos- 
pel ; and hinders the conversion, and salvation of men. 
Like an error in the beginning of a mathematical calcu- 
lation, it runs through the whole process, continually 
increasing in ms^ni^ude as it advances, until every part 
of it is involved in hopeless confusion. How then, can 
infant baptism be taught and defended without most 
injurious perversions of the word of God ? 

In proof of the proposition now before you, I will 
point you to appropriate examples. But these are so 
numerous that I know not where to begin. A proper 
exposition of them all would require a volume. In the 
^pace allowed to this chapter it is not practicable to do 
more than briefly to refer to a few instances. These, 
bowever, of themselves, will be sufficient to establish 
the truth of the proposition now before us. 

Tl)e apostolic commission, which I had occasion in 
the preceding chapter to recite, has been confidently 
claimed as a law for the baptism of infants. '' Go ye 
therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost ; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever 
I have commanded you ; and lo I am with you alway, 
even unto the end of the world." This is the version 
of Matthew. That of Mark is as follows : " And he 
said unto them. Go ye into all the world, and preach 
the gospel to every creature. He that believeth, and 
is baptized shall be saved ; but he that believeth not 
shall be damned." How plain ! How perspicuous ! 
How comprehensive ! To mistake its sense would 
seem almost impossible. The solemn obligations thus 
imposed, are to be faithfully and always obeyed by 

4* 



42 nnrAsn baptssm lbads to 

both the teachers, and the taught. And let it not he 
forgotten that the several parts of the commission 
are to be observed in the order in which they are ea- 
joined. The order is plainly as imperative as the 
commands themselves. A violation of the order is in- 
deed a violation of the commands. This interpreta^ 
tion so evidently correct, is not peculiar to Baptists. 
Pedobaptists also give it their concurrence. Baxter, 
for example, says : — " This is not like some occasional 
historical mention of baptism, but is the very commis- 
sion of Christ to his apostles, and purposely expresseth. 
their several works in their several places and order." 
" To contemn this order, is to renounce all rules of or- 
der ; for where can we expect to find it if not here ?"* 
Each duty in the commission must therefore be ob- 
served in the order in which it is enjoined. Thus far 
all is simple and obvious. The commission is evi- 
dently, as before seen, a law to baptize believers; and 
believers only. 

By what kind of process, we now inquire, can it be 
possibly made to appear, that this law to baptize be- 
lievers is a law to baptize infants ? Pedobaptists shall 
themselves answer, and in their own words. " In this 
commission to his apostles," says Dr. Worcester, " his 
direction was that all ^nations should be baptized, and 
children constitute a part of all nations ;" therefore 
children are to be baptized.f Dr. John Edwards re- 
marks : — " This general commission includes all partic- 
ulars. Go baptize all nations, is as much, and as 
full, as if Chrbt had said. Go baptize o.ll, men, women, 

* Disp. of Eights to Sacr., pp. 91-149, 150. 
t Letters on Bap., p. 115. 



FEBVSSSXOISB OF THE WOBD Off OOD. 43 

and children."* Matthew Henry observes : — " If tt 
be the will and command of the Lord Jesus that all 
nations should be discipled by baptism, and children, 
a part of all nations, are not excepted, then children 
are to be discipled by baptism/'f These are fair ex- 
amples of their teaching, and of the manner in which 
they bring infant baptism into the commission of Christ 
to his apostles. 

Consider these expositions attentively. How evi- 
dent the perversions they contain ! Were the apostles 
directed to baptize all nations without respect to moral 
character, or any other religious qualifications ? Surely 
not. Is the commission a command in other words, 
to " baptize all, men, women, and children ?" Pre- 
posterous claim ! If infants are not in the commission 
" excepted " in express terras from baptism, are they 
therefore to be baptized ? How surprising the pre- 
tensioi) ! Is any one ever " discipled by baptism .^" 
To disciple is to teach. To teach is one thing. To 
baptize is another. They are not the same thing. To 
pretend then, that any one is "discipled by baptism" 
is nonsense. Here we have four perversions of this 
portion of the word of God, all palpable, and all made 
evidently for no other reason than to defend infant 
baptism. When great and good men, such as these, 
and the thousands of others who agree with them, 
thus interpret the commission, we cannot but lament 
the blindness of mind into which this pernicious error 
has betrayed them. 

One striking instance is now before you of the per- 
version of the word of God, made for the sal^e of de- 

* Theol. Eef., vol. i., p. 568. t Treat, on Bapt., p. 114. 



44 DTFAITT BAFTIBM LEAD6 TO 

fending infant baptism. Take if you please, another. 
In a learned and very elaborate work recently publish- 
ed, by a distinguished clergyman of the Episcopal 
church, we have the following passage : — " The chief 
scripture ground upon which it [infant baptism] is 
placed, is the text, .'The promise is unto you, and 
your children.' — Acts ii., 39. And one of its best 
supports is St. Paul's statement that the children of a 
believing parent are in a certain sense holy. — 1 Cor. 
vii., 14."* We have here therefore, as claimed by pe- 
dobaptists themselves, the two passages which are, the 
one their ** chief scripture ground^* for infant baptism, 
and the other *' its best support.** We will therefore, 
briefly examine them both, and see to what extent 
they have been perverted for the defence of the rite 
in question. 

"The promise is to you, and to your chi]dren."f 
This text we are told, is " the chief scripture ground 
upon which infant baptism is placed." That you may 
understand it perfectly, I will refresh your memory 
with the circumstances under which this inspired decla- 
ration occurred. It was uttered by Peter, in Jerusa- 
lem, during the ever memorable pentecost. Multitudes 
had on that day, been called together by " the signs, 
and wonders, and miracles" resulting from the fulfil- 
ment of the promise of God in the gift of the Holy 
Ghost. This intrepid apostle seized the occasion to 
preach Christ to the people. His sermon evinced 
great power, and was attended with singular success. 
Large numbers were convicted of sin, and in the an- 
guish of .their heart cried out : — " What shall we do ?" 

* Goode on Bapt., p. 81 . f Acts ii., 89. 



PEByEBSIOira OF THB WOBD OF GOD. 45 

In the strictest consonance with the apostolic commis- 
sion, and almost in its very words, he answered : — 
"Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the 
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye 
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the 
promise is to you, and to your children, and to all 
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God 
shall call," 

What, I now inqui^, was the promise of which the 
apostle here spoke ? It was undoubtedly, the gift of 
the Holy Ohost, Peter himself so declares. '* This is 
that which was spoken of by the prophet Joel :* And 
it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will 
pour out of my spirit upon all fiesh ; and your sons 
and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young 
men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream 
dreams ; and on my servants, and on my handmaidens 
I will pour out in those days of my spirit." " And it 
shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the 
name of the Lord shall be saved.''f It* is decided 
therefore that the promise was the Holy Ghost, whose 
influences as predicted by Joel especially, were at that 
moment seen so conspicuously among the people. This 
truth is indubitable. 

To whom, I next ask, was this promise made? 
Peter answers, " To you Jews, and to your children, 
and to all that are afar off," The words of the prom- 
ise in Joel, recited by Peter, are, To you Jews, and to 
**your sons and your daughters" By "children" 
therefore, the apostle means " sons and daughters," *or 
in general terms, posterity, \ The gentile nations are in 

• Joel ii., 2&-82. t Acta U., 16-21. X rs«ya< 



46 mvAtrr baptism leads to 

other places of the scriptures spoken of as " them that 
are afar off" They are, therefore, the persons al- 
luded to in that form of language. But was it the 
promise of God that all or any of these classes of per- 
sons, who in reality included " all Jlesh" should re- 
ceive the Holy Ghost in the times of Messiah — ''the 
last days" — unconditionally? No one will surely 
maintain that it was, and especially since these very 
conditions were explicitly stated. They were according 
to Joel, that the persons in question should ** call on 
the name of the Lord." Peter instructs us that hy 
calling on the name of the Lord is implied, that they 
should ** repent, and be baptized in the name of the 
Lord Jesus." The promise was to be fulfilled to all 
those who should comply with these conditioner and to 
none others. If you Jews repent of your sins, and by 
baptism profess your faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, 
you shall receiye the gift of the Holy Ghost, /or the 
promise is to you. If your " children," or as Joel 
calls them, " your sons and your daughters," repent of 
their sins, and by baptism profess their faith in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, they shall receive the gift of the 
Holy Ghost, for the promise is to your children. Nor 
are these privileges and blessings to be confined to your 
nation. They are to be extended to '' them that are 
afar oflT," to "all flesh," to " every creature," to "all 
nations," to as many as the Lord our God shall call by 
his gospel, and who shall repent and be baptized, no 
matter to what people they belong. They also shall 
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, /or the promise is 
to them. To that anxious multitude how full of en- 
couragement was this precious go^el message ! It fell 



PEBYEBSIONS OF THE WOBD OF OOD. 47 

upon their hearts like gentle showers upon the parched 
earth. Hope sprang up in the bosoms of about three 
thousand, who " gladly received the word." They be- 
lieved it ; they acted upon it ; they became the sub- 
jects of renewing grace, and received the Holy Ghost, 
according to the promise of God. 

Thus, briefly, I have submitted the sense of the 
passage, and that it is the true sense it seems to me 
impossible to doubt. In what part of it is infant bap- 
tism taught ? Not the remotest reference is found to 
any such thing. Yet say our friends, " It is the chief 
scripture ground for infant baptism !" How is it pos- 
sible for them to make good this assertion ? It can- 
not be done. But you shall hear their arguments. 
They shall speak for themselves. Mr. Henry gives the 
meaning of this passage as follows. Peter, he as- 
serts, intends to say, in other words, to the people : — 
" Your children shall have, as they have* had, an in- 
terest in the covenant, and a title to the external seal 
of it. Come over to Christ to receive those inestima- 
ble benefits ; for the promise of the remission of sins, 
and the gift of the Holy Ghost, is to you, and to your 
children." " When God took Abraham into covenant 
he said, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed ; — 
Gen. xvii., V — and accordingly every Israelite had 
his son circumcised at eight days old. Now it is 
proper for an Israelite, when he is btf baptism to 
come into a new dispensation of this covenant, to 
ask. What shall I do with my children ? Must they 
be thrown out, or taken in with me ? Taken in, 
says Peter, by all means ; for the promise, the 
great promise of God's being to you a God, is 



48 iNFAzrr baptism leads to 

as much to you and your children now, as ever it 
was."* 

Who that possesses any tolerable knowledge of the 
scriptures could readily imagine that learned and good 
men would venture this as the sense of the passage in 
question ? It is crowded in nearly every Une, with ab- 
surdities and perversions. Let them be separately, and 
more particularly designated. 

In the first place, the representation that the word 
''children*^ in the passage means the babes of those 
then present is absurd for three reasons ; first, because 
Joel says they were their sons and their daughters, who 
should then prophesy; and Peter did not intend to 
contradict Joel : secondly, because their babes could 
not fulfil the conditions upon which the promise was 
made : and thirdly, because of the nature of the prom- 
ise itself, which was that they should receive the gift 
of the Holy Ghost, and prophesy. The word "ckil- 
dren*' is unquestionably used by Peter, in the sense of 
posterity simply. This fact is so obvious that it is 
frankly conceded by some of the best biblical critics 
among the pedobaptists themselves. Dr. Whitby says : 
— " These words will not prove a right of infants to 
receive baptism, the promise here being that of the 
Holy Ghost mentioned in verses 16, 17, 18, and so re- 
lating only to the times of the miraculous efifusions of 
the Holy Ghost, and to those persons who by age were 
capable of these extraordinary gifts, "f Limborch of 
Amsterdam, says : — " By children the apostle under- 
stands not infants, but posterity." " Whence it. ap- 
pears that the argument which is commonly taken 
* Comm. in loco. t Annot. in loco. 



PEBTEBSIONS OF THE WOSD OF GOD. 49 

&om iJiis passage for the baptism of infants is of no 
force, and good for nothing."* With these distin- 
guished interpreters agree Doddridge, Hammond, and 
many others. To represent Peter therefore, as refer- 
ring to infant children, and inculcating their baptism, is 
a most injurious perversion of the word of God. 
* A second perversion is found in the imphcation that 
the faith and baptism of their parents, were the con- 
ditions upon which their infant children were to re- 
ceive the Holt/ Ghost, and the remission of sins. This 
passage teaches no such thing. Our pedobaptist breth- 
ren however represent Peter as saying in other words, 
to the Jews there under conviction of sin, and whom 
they, singularly enough, suppose to be inquiring, 
" What must I do with my children ;" " Come over to 
Christ to receive these inestimable benefits ; for the 
promise of the remission of sins, and the gift of the 
Holy Ghost, is to you and to your children." Do you 
join the church of Christ, and your children, by virtue 
of their relation to you, shall be entitled to the same 
blessings you receive. They shall share with you ev- 
ery gospel blessing, and especially " the remission of 
sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost." Do not hesi- 
tate therefore ; " come over to Christ." What a mon- 
strous perversion ! 

A third perversion of this passage is committed. 
Our pedobaptist brethren insist that the pronuse in 
question, relates to the blessings pledged in the cove- 
nant with Abraham, The promise as stated by Peter, 
was the gift of the Holy Ghost to believers. But 
their version is wholly different. They interpret the 

* Comm. in loco. 
5 



50 mFAST BAPTISM LEASB TO 

apostle as saying to tbe Jews : — " Your children [in- 
fants] shall [still] have, as they have had, an interest 
in the covenant [with Ahraham] and a title to the ex- 
ternal seal of it," all which the gospel gives to you, 
and consequently to them ! 

This short passage is suhjected to a fourth perver- 
sion. They maintain that the gospel covenant is a con- * 
tinuance of the covenant of circumcision ! Their lan- 
guage is, "When God took Ahraham into covenant, 
he said, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed ; — 
Gen. xvii., *l — and accordingly every Israelite had his 
son circumcised at eight days old. Now it is proper 
for an Israelite when he is to enter into a new dispensa- 
tion of this covenant, to ask. What must be done with 
my children ?" And is the gospel a new dispensation 
of this covenant that God made with Abraham, ac- 
cording to which " every Israelite had liis son circum- 
cised at eight days old ?" The gospel a new dispensa- 
tion of the covenant of circumcision ! And does Peter 
so teach ? No such thing appears, either in this text, 
or elsewhere. 

The fifth perversion of this passage, and the last I 
shall mention, is the clsum that Peter means by ** the 
promise," that infants are to be baptized, receive the 
Holy Ghost, and be taken into the church. " An Is- 
raelite" is represented as inquiring, If I " come over 
to Christ," and unite with this gospel church of yours, 
" What must be done with my children ? Must they 
be thrown out, or Aaken in with me ?" To this they 
represent the passage as answering : — " Taken in, says 
Peter, by all means ; for the promise, that great prom- 
ise of God's being to you a God, is as much to you 



PEBYEBSIONS OF THE WORD OF GOD. 51 

• 

and your children now, as ever it was." How mani- 
fest a perversion is here ! Strangely are good men 
blinded, so blinded by infant baptism, that they it 
seems, really believe that Peter teaches what they rep- 
resent in the passage ! 

Having thus disposed of "the chief scripture ground 
upon which it is placed," and found that no allusion 
whatever is made in it to infant baptism, we now turn 
to the other passage, which is, " one of its best sup- 
ports.*' This "is St. PauVs statement that the chil- 
dren of a believing parent are in a certain sense holy." 
In what sense are they holy ? To comprehend the 
whole matter perfectly, let us turn to the sacred rec- 
ord, and together with its context, read carefully the 
entire passage. "Now concerning the things whereof 
ye wrote unto me," says Paul, and proceeding, he gave 
various instructions to the Corinthians regarding mar- 
riage, and domestic duties. Among other things he 
says : " Let not the wife depart from her husband ; but 
if she depart let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled 
to her husband ; and let not the husband put away his 
wife." " If any brother hath a wife that believeth not, 
and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put 
her away. And the woman which hath a husband that 
believeth not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let 
her not leave him. For the unbelieving husband is sanc- 
tified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified 
by the husband ; else were your children unclean, but now 
are they holy. But if the unbelieving depart let him de- 
part. A brother, or a sister, is not in bondage in such 
cases ; but God hath called us to peace. For what 
knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy bus- 



52 INFANT BAPnSK LEADS TO 

band ? Or what knowest thou, man, whether thoa 
shalt save thy wife ? Bat as God hath distributed to 
every man, as the Lord hath called every one, so let him 
walk. And so ordain I in all the churches."* 

We will here pause if you please, until we have as- 
certained definitely, the true sense of this interesting 
portion of divine truth. Paul is without doubt, in- 
structing the Corinthians regarding their conjugal, do- 
mestic, and social relations. This fact no one can ration- 
ally question. On these topics they needed to be en- 
lightened, since they were evidently disposed to go 
astray. By some means, probably the instructions of 
Judaizing teachers among them, the church had, it 
seems, become agitated with the question whether the 
old Jewish law which required Israel to regard all gen- 
tiles as unclean, and their touch polluting, which in a 
word prohibited all familiar intercourse with them, 
ought not to govern christians in their relations with 
unbelievers. Should not the church regard all who are 
not members as unclean to them in the same sense that 
gentiles were formerly looked upon as unclean to Jews ? 
To this opinion the brethren of Corinth appear to have 
strongly inclined. They soon saw, however, that such a 
rule of intercourse if adopted among them, must be at- 
tended with the gravest consequences. It would not 
only sever their social and domestic relations, but would 
actually break up and destroy their families, since some 
of them were married to unbelievers, from whom of 
course, they must' instantly separate. That this was 
the true state of the case, and the actual question sub- 
mitted by them to the apostle, is so plain, from his 

♦ 1 Cor. vii., 1-17. 



PERVEBSIONS OF THE WOKD OF GOD. 53 

answer alone, that it is confessed by some of the pe- 
dobaptist commentators and divines themselves. Even 
Henry, for instance, could not avoid seeing it. He 
says : — " They thought that (the unconverted members 
of their families) would be common, or unclean, in the 
same sense as heathens in general were styled in the 
apostle's vision."^ Dr. Miller, notwithstanding his 
prejudices, is still more full. He says : — " It appears 
that among the Corinthians to whom the apostle wrote, 
there were many cases of professing christians being 
united by the marriage tie with pagans ; the former 
being perhaps converted after marriage, or being so un- 
wise as after conversion deliberately to form this une- 
qual and unhappy connection. What was to be deemed 
of such marriages seems to have been the grave ques- 
tion submitted to this inspired teacher, "f Upon this 
point therefore, we are certainly right. 

These were the perplexing circumstances under which 
they wrote to Paul for advice. He answered them in 
substance, that the old Jewish law regulating inter- 
course with gentiles, was not applicable to them, not 
only because the ceremonial dispensation to which it 
exclusively belonged had passed away, but also because 
in their case, (and the same was true of all other church- 
es,) its observance was impracticable. Any attempts 
to enforce it, must have been attended with the most 
disastrous consequences. The christians, unlike the 
Jews, lived, and must live, in the midst of unbelievers. 
Many of them were connected with their families, and 
were a part of them. With such persons they could 
not avoid contact, and association. If such separation 

• Gomm. m loco. t Miller, Bapt., pp. 17-20. 



54 INFANT BAPnSM IJLASe TO 

was necessary to preserve their cbnstian purity, then 
to retain it they " must needs go out of the world." 
Bat especially some of them were married to unbe- 
lievers, and if this abrogated Jewish law was to be en- 
forced all such husbands and wives must part from 
each other.' But this was not demanded by the gospel, 
and ought not to take place, unless the temper of the 
tmbelieving party should render it necessary. " If any 
brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be 
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away. 
And the woman which hath a husband that believeth 
not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not 
leave him." " But if the unbelieving depart, let him 
depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in 
such cases ; but God hath called us to peace." Be- 
lievers and unbelievers who are husband and wife, may 
lawfully, and ought to continue to dwell together. No 
such rule of ceremonial holiness, and uncleanness, ob- 
tains under the gospel as that which characterized the 
Mosaic economy. The marriage tie makes the parties, 
though it unite a believer with an unbeliever, holt/ to 
each other. The unbelieving husband is not unclean so 
that the believing wife may not lawfully dwell with 
him. The unbelieving wife is not unclean so that the 
believing husband may not lawfully dwell with her. 
Why then separate ? Let them remain together. And 
for their continued union there is yet another most im- 
portant reason. God may perhaps, bless the efforts of 
the believing, to the conversion and salvation of the 
tmbelieving party. 

And yet more. Must the believing husband or wife 
separate from the unbelieving, for the reasons alleged ? 



FEBYEBSIOKS OF THE WORD OF GOD. 65 

Then it will follow that, for the very same reasons, the 
believing parent must also separate from his own chil- 
dren, since they also are not believers ! Indeed, not a 
member of the church, if separation from all unbeliev- 
ers is necessary to preserve his christian purity, must 
touch his own children, eat with them, or associate 
with them. The believing parent occupies, in this re- 
spect, precisely the same relation to his child that he 
does to his unbelieving wife. Must he separate from 
his wife ? He must also separate from his child. But 
you do not, said Paul, consider your children unclean 
to you, but holy. You do not, you must not, human- 
ity forbids that you should, consider their touch pol- 
luting. They are sanctified, holy, clean, to you. So 
also the unbelieving wife is sanctified, holy, clean to 
you. You must not separate from your child. There- 
fore you must not separate from your wife. " The 
unbelieving husband is sanctified to* the wife, and the 
unbelieving wife is sanctified to the husband, else were 
your children unclean [to you], but now they are holy" 
to you. Therefore the unbelieving wife is holy to you. 
In the same way that the child is holy to the believ- 
ing parent, the unbelieving husband is holy to the be- 
lieving wife, and the unbelieving wife is holy to the be- 
lieving husband. You may lawfully remain with your 
children. You may therefore lawfully remain with 
each other. Throw aside these absurd notions about 
the old Jewish law of ceremonial purity. Dwell to- 
gether in the conjugal relation. " As God hath dis- 
tributed to every man, as the Lord hath called every one, 
so let him walk. And so ordain I in all the churches.'* 

* ev. Macknight in loco. 



66 mrjLsn: baptism leads to 

Is not this a true exposition of the sense of the 
apostle ? It is self-evident. . Some few of the more 
learned pedobaptist divines have seen and confessed it. 
Dressier, for example, says : — " According to Paul a 
holy pedigree is nothing in religion. Neither circum- 
cision nor uncircumcision availeth any thing, hut keep- 
ing the commandment of God. The passage 1 Cor. 
vii., 13, 14, [that now before us] does not support any 
such view. He says, if the christians would flee from 
every unbeliever, regarding him as unclean, they must 
flee from their own children, and hold them as unclean, 
for they were among the unbelievers. 'Otherwise 
your children would be unclean,' for they are not 
christians by birth merely. ' But now are they holy,' 
t. e., you are not to consider yourselves polluted by 
them."* 

Such is the lesson, in response to their inquiry, taught 
by Paul to his brethren the Corinthians. How beauti- 
ful ! How important ! How simple ! How easy to 
be understood ! Not the remotest reference is made 
in it in any way, to infant baptism. Yet it is declared 
to be " one of its best supports /** Accordingly our 
brethren have chiefly predicated upon it this declara- 
tion in the Westminster Confession of Faith : — " Not 
only those that do actually profess faith in and obe- 
dience unto Christ, but also the infants of one or both 
believing parents are to be baptized."f Commenting 
upon the passage, " Else were your children unclean, 
but now are they holy," Mr. Henry says : — " That is,* 
they would be heathen, out of the pale of the church, 
and covenant of God. They would not be of the holy 

♦ Doct. Sacra. Bapt., p. 187. t "VV^est. Conf., pp. 21, 22. 



PEBTlCfiSIOiSrS OF THB WOBD OF OOD. 57 

teed" " The children born to christians, though mar- 
ried to unbelievers, are not part of the world, but of 
the church."^ On the same passage Dr. Clarke re- 
marks : — " If this kind of relative sanctification were 
not allowed, the children of the^ persons could not be 
received into the christian church, nor enjoy any rights 
or privileges as christians ; but the church of God 
never scrupled to admit such children as members.'' 
Dr. Miller, after admitting all that we have just seen, 
still says that Patd " pronounces under the direction of 
the Holy Spirit, that in all such cases, when the unbe- 
liever is willing to live with the believer, they ought to 
continue to live together, that their connection is so 
sanctified by the character of the believing companion 
that their children are ' holy,' that is, in covenant with 
God ; members of that church with which the believ- 
ing parent is in virtue of his. profession united ; in one 
word, that the infidel party is so far, and in such a 
sense, consecrated by the believing party, that their 
children shall be reckoned to belong to the sacred fam- 
ily with which the latter is connected, and shall be 
regarded and treated as members of the church of 
God."t 

These £a*e specimens of the havoc made of the sense 
of the word of God for the sake of infant baptism. 
Look at the perversions here committed. 

Paul teaches, as they contend, that the o£fepring of 
parents one of whom is a believer, are bom members 
of the church with which the believing parent is con- 
nected ; that they are born in covenant with God ; 
that as such they are entitled to "enjoy the rights 

♦ Comm. in loco. t Miller on Bap., pp. 17-20. 



58 INFASTT BAPTISM LEADB TO 

and privileges of christians ;" and that were it not so 
their children "would be heathens!'' Here are four 
palpable perversions. None of these propositions are 
true in themselves ; they are not sustained at all in 
the word of God ; aM especially they are not found 
in the instructions of Paul to the Corinthians. But 
a still greater perversion of this passage, if possible, 
remains to be mentioned. Paul told the Corinth- 
ians that as they did not consider their children cere- 
monially unclean or unholy to them, but holy, and they 
therefore took care of them ; so the unbelieving party 
in marriage, since she bore the same relation to the be- 
lieving party with the child, was not to be considered 
by the other ceremonially unclean, or unholy, but holy, 
and they should therefore remain together. No, no, 
Paul ! respond our pedobaptist brethren, this is not 
what you mean 1 You mean that the holiness of the 
children is spiritual, that it is ** ecclesiastical" and 
more, you mean that this holiness is produced by hered- 
itary transmission, so that the children are born in the 
covenant and church of God, and, since as such they 
are entitled to "enjoy the privileges and rights of chris- 
tians," they are to be baptized ! Thus boldly do they 
contradict the apostle himself, and greatly also to his 
injury ; since if their interpretation is true they make 
Paul speak nonsense, and bring him into collision with 
himself, and other portions of divine truth. Are the 
terms unclean, sanctified, and holy to be understood in 
a spiritual, or an ecclesiastical sense ? They so main- 
tain. It is certain that these words are used in the 
same sense in their application to both parent and 
child. It follows thus, that if the child is to be bap- 



PESVEESIOBTB OF THE WOBD OF GOD. 69 

tized because that relationship makes it AoZy, as cer- 
tainly is the unbelieying husband, or wife, to be bap- 
tized because by the same relationship he, or she, is 
sanctified. He who is sanctified is holy, and the sanc- 
tified have the same right to baptism with the holy.* 
If then yon baptize the child upon the faith of its 
mother, you must, to be consistent, baptize the unbe- 
lieving husband upon the faith of his wife, since if the 
child is Ao/y, so also is the unbelieving father sanctified. 
But it is certain Paul teaches no such doctrine. Paul 
was wise. We have reason to lament that so much 
cannot be said of very many of his professed inter- 
preters. 

One other passage ought to be considered, and its 
false glosses briefly exposed, since much confidence has 
of late, been expressed that it contains evident author- 
ity for infant baptism. *' Jesus said. Suffer little chil- 
dren, and forbid them not, to come unto me, for of such 
18 the kingdom of heaven, "f Let us, in the first place, 
carefully examine this text, and ascertain its exact 
Beuse. 

The Saviour was in the midst of a discourse of sur- 
passing interest. His disciples were absorbed in their 
attention to his instructions. Suddenly there "were 
brought unto him little children.'' The object of those 
who brought them — probably their parents — the evan- 
gelist fully states. It was, " That he should f>ut his 
hands on them, and pray."J This was a very familiar 
observance among the Jews. Great importance was 

* In the original both words are the same, one the verb, the 
other the corresponding adjective, 
t Matt, xiz., 14. X See context. 



60 INFANT BAFTmC LEADB TO 

attached by them, and justly, to the benedictioos of 
holy men. To obtain them therefore, when practica- 
ble, had been common from the earliest times. *^ These 
parents fully believed that Jesus was a prophet of God, 
and they desired for their children his prayers and 
blessing. This was what they sought, and all that 
they sought. They however, encountered in their ap- 
proach, a rdfuke from the disciples! This occurred, 
not certainly, from any want of respect on the part of 
the disciples for their motives, and wishes, bat evi- 
dently because they were impatient of the interruption. 
Their feelings were deeply enlisted in the topic before 
them, and they were not willing that their Master 
should, on any account, be diverted from it. But he, 
observing what they did, *'was much displeased,"f 
and immediately suspending his discourse, " Called the 
little children to him.''| Thus he manifested his great 
love, patience, and condescensicxi. What the Siiviotir 
did for these children is now distinctly and fully stated: 
— " He took them up in his arms, put his hands upon 
them, and blessed them." Meantime he compensated 
his disciples for the interruption, by imparting one of 
the richest lessons to be found in all his teachings. It is 
contained in the very passage now in question : — " Of 
such is the kingdom of heaven." And he adds: — 
" Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive 
the kingdom of God as a little child, shall in no wise 
enter therein." 

By "the kingdom of heaven," and "the kingdom 
of God," here employed as convertible terms, our Sa- 

* Gen. xlviii., 14. Matt, ix., 18, Mark xvi., 18. 

t Mark x., 14r-16. % Luke xviU., 16. 



PERYEBSIOOKS OF THB WOBD OF GOD. 61 

vionr refers to the Gospel, the true priaciples of 
which in the heart, alone can qualify any one for the 
holy brotherhood of the church upon earth. This fact 
needs only to be stated. But what are we to under- 
stand by the phrase, ** Of such is the kingdom of 
heaven ?" Is it not sufficiently explained by the other 
phrase, " Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of 
God [the grace offered by Christ] as a little 4^ild, [in 
the spirit, and with the disposition of a little child] 
shall in no wise enter therein ?" This appears to me 
most evident. He does not say that the kingdom of 
heaven — ^the church — belongs to little children, or is 
composed of these, and other such little children. Cer- 
tainly not. This is plain from our present version, but 
in the original it is still more obvious. The word ren- 
dered " of stick,*'* conveys the idea, as every scholar 
must see, of comparison, and does not therefore, signify 
identity, but likeness. The church therefore, is made 
up, not, as pedobaptists tell us, of little children, but of 
those who by divine grace are made like little children. 
Only "such" can have a place there, as are spiritually, 
what little children are literally. Little children love their 
parents supremely : To fit you for a place in his visible 
church, you must love God supremely. Little children 
receive as true, and implicitly believe, whatever is de- 
clared by their parents : You must receive as true, and 
implicitly beUeve whatever is declared in his word, by 
God. Little children submit themselves to such pro- 
visions as are made for them by their parents : You 
must submit yourselves to such arrangements as are 
made for you by God. Little children obey the com- 

* roiovrvy, not uvrtitv. 

6 



62 IBTPANT BAFTIBM ISASS TO 

mandments of their parents : You must obey the com- 
mandments of God. In these and other respects, to 
qualify you for a place in the kingdom, or church of 
God, you must be like little children. You " receive the 
kingdom of God as a little child'' when you cherish the 
same love, faith, submission, and obedience towards 
God, that little children do towards their parents. 

Such is undoubtedly, the true, and full sense of the 
passage. How evangelical ! How rich ! Never, as has 
been said, did the Redeemer himself, teach a more im- 
portant lesson. Let it be observed, however, that neither 
in the passage, nor in the context, nor anywhere else in 
this connection, is there an allusion of any kind even 
remotely to baptism. With these facts and ezpositioiis 
before us, we turn to the interpretations of our pedo- 
baptist brethren. What are they ? Mr. Henry shall 
again serve as an example of them all.* He speaks 
thus : — " Observe the faith of those who brought [these 
children to Christ. They were believing parents.] The 
children of believing parents belong to the kingdom of 
heaven, and are members of the visible church. Of such — 
not only of such in disposition, and affection, (that might 
have served for a reason why doves, or lambs should 
be brought to him,) but of such in age — ^is the king- 
dom of heaven ; to them pertain the privileges of visi- 
ble church-membership as among the Jews of old." 
" Parents are trustees of their children's vrills, are em- 
powered by nature to transact for their benefit, and 
therefore Christ accepts their dedication of them as 
their [the children's] act and deed, and will own these 
dedicated things in the day when he makes up his 

«.Ck)znm. in loco. 



PERVEESIONS OF THE WOKD OF GOD. 63 

jewels. Therefore he takes it ill of those who forbid 
them, and [who] exclude those [children] whom he has 
received ;" " and who forbid water that they [infants] 
should be baptized, who if that promise be fulfilled 
(Isa. xliv., 3) [I will pour out my Spirit upon thy seed, 
and my blessing upon thine offspring] have received 
the Holy Ghost as well as we, for aught we know." 
Look at this gloss ! Ponder it ! How preposterous ! 
Dr. Clarke's commentary is as follows : — " Let every 
parent that fears God, bring up his children in that 
fear ; and by baptism let each be dedicated to the 
Holy Trinity. Whatever is solemnly consecrated to 
God, abides under his protection and blessing."* These, 
and such like, are the pedobaptist interpretations of the 
passage in question ! They are published to the world, 
and received, and defended, as expressing its true sense ! 
Is it surprising therefore, that a vail is thus thrown 
over the gospel, and its great truths withheld from 
the faith of the simple ? 

And now mark if you please, the glaring perver- 
sions with which this whole pedobaptist ** exposition" 
is crowded. I shall notice six only. It is here denied 
that Christ designs to illustrate the true christian char- 
acter by the disposition of children, and it is asserted 
that this might have been done by the dispositions and 
affections of doves, or lambs, as well as by those of 
children; thus the obvious truth is repudiated: it is 
maintained that Christ here teaches the church-mem- 
bership of literal infants, by natural birth ; that parents 
have a natural right to " transact" in religion for tkeii* 
children — ^impose upon them the vows, and ordinance 

* Comm. in loco. 



64 INFANT BAPTOni LKASB TO, ETO. 

of baptism — and that God will accept it as binding 
upon the children ; that in the last day, when Grod 
shall make np his jewels, persons will be ''owned" 
by him, because they were in their infancy " dedicated 
to the Holy Trinity in baptism ;" that Christ takes it 
ill of those who refuse to receive infants into the 
church, and to baptize them ; and that " for aught 
we know, infants have received the Holy Ghost as 
well as we," and ought therefore to be baptized ! 
What perverdons / What falsifications of truth ! 

We have thus seen how the word of God is per- 
verted in order to sustain this unauthorized rite, in the 
instances of the apostolic commission, the address of 
Peter on the day of pentecost, the instructions of Paul 
to the Corinthians, regarding social and domestic inter- 
course, and the blessing of children by our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Many, very many other examples equally strik- 
ing, might be produced, but enough has been said to 
establish fully the proposition with which we set out. 
It is unquestionably true that the defence of infant bap- 
tism necessarily leads to moat injurious^ perversions of 
the word of God, This is an evil, a most melancholy 
evil. It destroys all just principles of biblical mter- 
pretation ; it covers the sacred oracles with impenetra- 
ble obscurity; it inculcates error, and withholds the 
truth from the cause and people of God ; by it knowl- 
edge is abridged; faith is made weak; religion be- 
comes less enlightened ; and practical godliness is over- 
whelmed ! 



CHAPTEE III. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT ENGRAFTS 
JUDAISM UPON THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST. 

Form of ohardk organiattoo ; pedolMiptiflt theory; it proveB too mneb ; li 
in copflict with Christianity ; violates true analogy ; ia at war with Auular 
mental religion ; is antiscripturaL 

Thksjee are two theories, and two only consistent with 
themselyes^ of church orgameaticn. One of them mod- 
els the church upon the spiritual plan developed in the 
New Testament ; the other gives it the form of the old 
Jevfieh Theocracy. The former is Baptist. The latter 
is Roman Catholic. Between these two, and partaking 
more or less of hoth, stand all the various protestant 
denominations. Their evangelical spirituality is Baptist. 
Their other characteristics, and especially their infant 
baptism, is Roman Catholic; or rather Judaism, of 
which popery is confessedly, a continuation. To ob- 
tain a basis for this ordinance, they have been obhged, 
with the papists, to assume the unity of the Jewish 
church and the Christian church. Thus they engraft 
Judaism upon the gospel of Christ. I shall state their 
argument in their own language, as elaborately set 
forth, in terms acknowledged by all, to be correct, and 
per^icuous. " Abraham and his seed, were divinely 
constituted a true visible church of God." '< The Jew- 
ish society before Christ; and the Christian society after 

6* 



6C UXWkST BAFTIBM ENOBAFTB 

Cliristy aie one and the same churcb in dififerent dispen- 
sations." ''Jewish circumcision before Christ, and 
Christian baptism after Christ, are one and the same 
seal, though in different forms." " The administration 
of this seal to infants was once enjoined by divine au- 
thority." '' The administration of this seal to infants 
was never prohibited by divine authority." You will 
then perceive that we have ''a divine command for 
baptizing infants."* To this statement may be added 
that of Rev. Dr. Peters. He says : — " When [circum- 
cision] the ancient sign of the covenant which God 
made with his people for an everlasting covenant, was 
abolished, another [baptism] was instituted in the same 
church, imder the same covenant, of precisely the same 
import, and for the same purpose." Such is the plat- 
form erected for the support of infant baptism. It 
abandons the New Testament wholly, and assumes the 
old Jewish Theocracy as the true form of the gospel 
church ! 

1. In the consideration of this argument, so specious 
to many minds, generally so successful, and therefore 
advanced with so much confidence, I shall, in the first 
place, show that it proves immeasurably too muck. 

Let us, for the sake of the discussion, admit for a mo- 
ment that it is true, and what are the results ? By all 
Protestants at least, as soon as its bearings and results 
are understood, it must be instantly renounced, It is 
really available for Papists, and for Papists only. But 
to the demonstration. " Abraham and his seed were 
divinely constituted a true visible church of God." 
** The Jewish society before Christ, and the Christian 

* Br. Maooalla in Debate with BeV« A. Campbell, pp. 65, 59. 



JUDABH UPON TBS OUUKCU. 67 

society after Christ, are one and the same church in dif- 
ferent dispensations." "Jewish circumcision before 
Christ, and Christian baptism after Christ, are one and 
the same seal, though in different forms." ''They were 
mstituted in the same church, and under the same cov- 
enant." '^The administration of this seal to infants 
was once enjoined by divine authority." " The admin- 
istration of this seal to infants was never prohibited by 
divine authority." " You will therefore perceive that 
we have a divine command for baptizing infants." 
Very well. Now you have infant baptism, and you 
have it by ''divine command !" Presbyterians, Metho- 
dists, Congregationalists, and others are delighted. The 
argument is satisfactory. They embrace it with eager- 
ness. It is true, every word true. The thought has 
not occurred that it is dangerous. But we shall see. 

An Episcopalian perceives that it will serve his 
design. The other sects may protest against his use of 
it, but they cannot hinder it. All have an equal right 
to its benefits. He assumes as true, and admitted, all 
the propositions now before you, and then proceeds 
thus : — In the Jewish church there were three orders 
in the ministry, each a grade above the other in dignity 
and authority ; the chief priests, the common priests, 
and the levites. There are therefore, three orders in 
the ministry in the Christian church. It is the same 
church, and under the same covenant. These orders 
in the ministry of the church were once enjoined by di- 
vine authority. They were never prohibited by divine 
authority. You will therefore perceive that we have a 
divine command for three orders in the ministry of the 
Christian church. They are bishops, priests, and dea- 



88 INVABT BAFnaC EKGlZAFn 

caoBf and ire bare tbem by divine right and by regukar 
succession from the apostles. Episcopates are now 
folly gratified. Their episcopacy con be questioned no 
longer by any class c^ pedobaptists, sinoe the aigomeat 
for infant baptism and for episcopacy is the same, and 
you cannot overthrow one without at the same time de- 
stroying the other. Here, however. Episcopalians insist 
that the "analogy" shid^ cease. But no. The ball has 
been set in motion, and you must be content to see it 
roll on. The propositions are admitted, and they cany 
you resistlessly forward to other results. 

A Roman Catholic reminds you that in the Jewish 
church there was one great high priest, who was the 
pastor or Ushop of the whole visible church of God 
upon earth. In the Christian church therefore, there 
is one great high priest, who is pastor or bishop of 
the whole visible church of God upon earth. Although 
in different dispensations, it is the same church, and un- 
der the same covenant* The appointment of this uni- 
versal pastor or bishop was once enjoined by divine au- 
thority. It was never prohibited by divine authority. 
You will therefore perceive that we have a divine com- 
mand for one great high priest, who is the pastor or 
bishop of the whole visible church of God upon earth. 
This imiversal pastor or bishop we have, by " regular 
succession from St. Peter,*' He is the Pope, His resi- 
dence is Rome, the See of the Fisherman of Galilee, and 
the capital of the world, whence " by divine right'' he 
rules the whole visible church of God upon earth. His 
name at present is Pio Nono. 

You have obtained, from the argument before you, 
infant baptism ; but the process by which this has been 



JCDAIBH ITPOK TH3B OHUKCU. 69 

secured has also forced upon you, first epiteopaey, and 
then popery! If jou take the first you must also take 
the other two. And what else will you have? You 
most go still further. You must unite your church with 
the Mtatey and have a national religion ! This would be 
Tery convenient. It would give you dignity, and wealth, 
and power. The Jewish church was a national church, 
and the Christian church is the mme church* Therefore 
the Christian church must be a national church. The 
union of church and state was once enjoined by divine 
authority. It was never prohibited by divine authority. 
You will therefore perceive that we have a divine com- 
mand for the union of church and state ! The sacrifice of 
the mass would probably be agreeable, if it only po6Sess>- 
cd divine authority. It is a very imposing rite. You have • 
the wisfaed-for sanction in the Jewish sacrifices^ You 
want seventy cardinals ? The seventy elders who com- 
posed the Jewish coimcil will supply you. You are 
perchance fond of pageantry, and would willingly or- 
nament the persons of your ministry with pontificals, 
l^e splendid robes and mitres of the Jewish priests^ 
and especially the jewelled breast-plate of the high 
priest, will satisfy your vanity to the utmost. The 
Jewish church and the Christian church are the same 
^urch. All these were once enjoined by divine au- 
thortty. None erf them were ever prohibited by divine^ 
suthority. You will therefore perceive that we have 
ft divine command ^r the union of church and state, 
for the sacrifice of the mass, for the college of cardx^ 
iMds, and for priestly robes and ornaments. 

The argument for the whole parapherttsJia of popery 
» predsely the some witk tiiat to^ inHaut htfptism. It 



70 nffFABT BAPTBII KETOKAUB 

has the same force and ooncluaTeneBs. Infant bap- 
tism, episcopacy, popery, the union of chnrch and state^ 
the mass, cardinals, robes, aU, rest upon the same foun- 
dation and must stand or fall together. They are pred* 
icated not upon the gospel, but upon what our brethren 
call the analogy <^ the dinrch, and really upon Judaism. 
Indeed such is, and has been the influence of Moses 
upon Christianity, that pedobaptist churches of all classes, 
receive their members, and most of them are modelled, 
and governed, by his law rather than according to the 
gospel of Christ Are you a Pedobaptist ? To be con- 
sistent you must also be a Papist. The same law that 
requires infant baptism requires a pope, an established 
religion, and their adjuncts. Do you repudiate these ? 
For the same reason you must also repudiate infant bap- 
tism. But renouncing them all, you are forced back 
upon Baptist ground. You adopt the New Testament 
as giving the true form of the church of Christ. 

2. I, in the second place, remark that this Judaistic 
argument for infant baptism cannot be maintained, be- 
cause it is directly in conflict with Christianity as taught 
by Christ and his apostles. 

Essays to commingle Judaism with the gospel com- 
menced immediately after the ascension of our Redeem- 
er. The Judaism then preached was precisely such as 
our pedobaptist brethren now claim as legitimate in re- 
ligion. It did not indeed, include infant baptism, but 
advocated instead literal circumcision. The discovery 
that " Jewish circumcision before Christ, and Christian 
baptism after Christ, is one and the same seal, though 
in diflferent forms," was not yet made, nor did it come 
to light until some centuries after. The pxinGiple how* 



JtTDABQI VFGS THS CHVBOB. 11 

ever was the very same. Glance through ibe history of 
the first period of the church, as contained in the Acts 
of the Apostles, and you will find that, as soon as the 
gentiles b^aa to embrace the religion of Christ, there 
were instantly among them christianized Jewish priests, 
urging upon the converts the absolute necessity of add- 
ing to the gospel the doctrines and ntes of Moses. They 
said, in substance, to these disciples. The religion of Christ 
is true, and necessary^ but it is not enough ; ** Except 
ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot 
be saved."* The agitations and proceedings consequent 
upon this teaching in the church at Antioch in Syria, 
and subsequently in the council at Jerusalem, with the 
numerous admonitions regarding them contained in all 
the epistles, will fully instruct you as to the rise of Ju* 
daism in the Christian church, its nature as then taught, 
and the manner in which it was met and resisted by 
;.he apostles. "Certain men that came down from 
Judea," says Luke, thus '' taught the brethren." ** When 
therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension 
and disputation with them, they determined that Paul 
and Barnabas, and certain others of them, should go 
up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about 
this question."! We saw in the last chapter an in- 
stance of the influence of Judaism among the Corinth- 
ians, and the painful perplexity it occasioned regard- 
ing domestic and social intercourse. Among the Ga- 
latians were those who desired to be imder the law,;^ 
and they constrained their brethren to be circumcised. § 
Indeed, the epistles evince conclusively, that the 

• Acts XV., 1. t Gal. iv., 21. 

t Acte zv., 1, 2. S Gal. vi., 12, 18. 



73 iNFAirr baftibm enobaftb 

ebnrclies of tbe Romans, the Corinthians, the Galatians, 
the Ephesians, the Colossians, and the others, were 
constantlj excited, and agitated with Judaism. This fact 
cannot haye escaped the attention of any intelligent 
christian. Perpetually repeated efibrts w^« made by 
converted priests, and others, to engraft its forms, and 
ordinances, upon the gospel of Christ. 

How was this subject regarded by the inspired apos« 
ties ? Did they look upon the matter as of little im- 
portance ? They taught the churches that it was m 
cmflict with Christianity y and could result only in con- 
fusion and disaster. Corresponding with these senti- 
ments were the measures they adopted respecting it. 
Let us turn to their inspired instructions, and be en- 
lightened. Protesting against the introduction of the 
doctrines and rites of Judaism, Paul, for example, thus 
admonishes his brethren. ''O foolish Galatians, who 
hath bewitched you that ye should not obey the 
truth ?" " Received ye the Spirit by the works of the 
law, or by the hearing of faith ? Are ye so foolish ? 
Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect 
by the flesh? Have ye sufiered so many things in 
vain, if it be yet in vain ? He that ministereth to you 
the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doeth he it 
by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith ?** 
You wish to conform to the law of Moses that you 
may be accounted the children of Abraham. Remem- 
ber that " Abraham believed God, and it was accounted 
to him for righteousness. Know ye therefore that they 
which are of faith, the same are the children of Abra- 
ham.'' And further. "After that ye have known God, 
or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the 



Jtn>ABai JSPOV TBR OHCTBOH. 73 

weak and beggarly elements wbereunio ye desire to be 
again in bondage ? Ye observe days, and months, and 
times, and years. I am afraid of yon lest I have be- 
stowed upon you labor in vain." And still further. 
'* They [the Judaizing teachers] zealously affect you, but 
not well ; yea they would exclude you that ye might 
afifect them." ** My little children, of whom I travail 
in birth again until Christ be formed in you, I desire to 
be present with you now, and to change my voice, for I 
stand in doubt of you. Tell me, ye that desire to be 
under the law, do ye not hear the law ?" " It is writ- 
ten, Abraham had two sons, the one [Ishmael] by a 
bond maid, the other [Isaac] by a free woman. But he 
who was of the bond woman was bom after the flesh ; 
but he of the free woman was by promise. Which 
things are an allegory; [the two sons were typical] 
for these are [figures of] the two covenants ; the one 
[that shadowed forth by Ishmael is the covenant] from 
Mount Sinai [the law] which gendei^thfto bondage, 
which is [the son of] Agar." The other, that prefig- 
ured by Isaac, is the covenant of grace in our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Isaac was by promise ; Isaac was free ; 
and " we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
promise," and like him we are free ; ** For the law of 
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made us free from 
the law oi sin and death."* " What saith the scrip- 
tures ? Cast out the bond woman and her son [this 
law of ceremonies and external observances from Sinai], 
for the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with 
the son of the free woman." *' Brethren, we are not 
children of the bond woman, but of the free. Stand 

• Bom. viii., 2. 



74 nnrAST baptsoc xetorafib 

fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free, and be not entangled again in the yoke 
of bondage ;" ** the yoke which neither our fathers nor 
we were able to bear."* *' Behold I Paul, say unto 
you that if ye be circumcised Ohnst shall profit yoa 
nothing." *' Christ has become of no effect unto you, 
whosoever of you are justified by the law ; ye are fedka 
frpm grace. For we through the Spirit do wait for the 
hope of righteouffliess by faith. For in Jesus Christ 
neither circumcision ayaileth any thing, nor uncircum- 
cision, but faith which worketh by love. Ye did run 
well ; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the 
truth ?" ** A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.'* 
'' He that troubleth you shall bear his judgment whoso- 
ever he be." " I would that they were even cut off 
which trouble you. For, brethren, ye have been called 
unto liberty."! Once more. In Christ " dweUeth all 
the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are com- 
plete in him *V7hich is the head of all principality and 
power ; in whom also ye are circumcised with the cir- 
cumcision made without hands, [purified in heart by the 
Spirit] in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh 
by the circumcision of Christ ; buried with him in bap- 
tism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the 
faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him 
from the dead. And you being dead in your sins, and 
the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened to- 
gether with him, having forgiven you all trespasses ; 
blotting out the hand writing of ordinances that was 
against us, which was contrary to us, nailing it to his 
cross ; and having spoiled principalities and powers, he 
* AotB zv., 10. t GaL, ohs. iii., iv., v. 



JtJDAISlC ITFOK THB GHUBCH. 75 

made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in 
it. Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in 
drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of the new moon, 
or of the sabbath days ; which are a shadow of things 
to come ; but the body is of Christ."* In this manner 
did the apostles meet, and resist Judaism in the church 
of Christ. If any conclusion can be drawn from their 
language which is beyond question porrect, it certainly 
18 that they regarded its introduction as in conflict with 
Christianity, and portending destructive consequences. 
Judmsm was thus suppressed for the time, but it was 
BOt cast out. As some of the Canaanites were left in 
Israel, so Judaism remained in the church, to try the 
faith of the people of God. Nor did it lie inactive, but 
as time passed, and piety waned, it gained strength ; 
and at the present hour, though slightly changed in 
form from what it was originally, it has, as we have 
already seen, with all the sects, more influence in their 
ecclesiastical polity, and their administration of ordi- 
nances, than has even the gospel itself of the grace of 
God. 

We have thus seen how Judaism is embodied in 
the argument before us, by which infant baptism is sus- 
tained and defended. We have seen how it arose in 
the church, how deleterious was its influence, and how 
it was met and resisted by the apostles. ■ And are we 
after all, to be told that it is legitimate and scriptural ? 
Are we now to hear it defended by grave and learned 
divines ? That very corruption once so warmly depre- 
cated by Paul, and James, and Peter, and John, and 
the others, as so insufferable that they spoke of cutting 

• Col. ii., IK-IT. 



76 ZHF1»T BAPTIBM JWOMAm 

q^ those who troubled the churches with it, is it now to 
be assumed as granted, and made the foundation for in* 
fant baptism ? No, we cannot. We will not. We re«> 
podiote it. We protest against it. We denounce it as 
condenmed by the word of God, in conflict with chiis- 
tianity, and an offence to our adorable Redeemer. 

3. This argument for infant baptism, in the third 
l^ace, fails entirely, because it perverts, and renders 
wholly untntelUgiblo, the true scriptural anal<^ of the 
church. 

Pedobaptists call the argument for infant baptism^ 
which we are now combating, ancdogy ; but it is in 
truth identity, and not analogy, since they claim that 
the Jewish church and the Christian church are the 
same church, and that, although in different dispensa- 
tions, they subsist under the same eavenanf. This is 
unquestionably sameness, as distinguished from simiii-' 
tude and diversity. This is identity. And what is 
analogy? If Webster be authority for words, it is 
** an agreem^ent or likeness between things in seme cir^ 
cumstances and effects, when the things are otherwise 
entirely dififerent." A correspondence between the 
churches, of tliis character undoubtedly exists. But 
the identity claimed and advocated, and which is neces- 
sary to include and defend infant baptism, while, as wd 
have fully seen, it also includes and defends popery ia 
all its absurd extremes, is condenmed and denounced 
by the apostles. There is a beautiful analogy; but the 
identity assumed is nothing more nor less than naked 
Judaism. Trace with me if you please, briefly, the true 
analogy between the Jewish church and the Ghmtiaa 
church. 



JXXDAJSH UPOH THE OHtTROH. 17 

The relations between them are, I remark, precisely 
those subsisting between a figure and the thing signi- 
fied, or a shadow and its substance. The Jewish church 
was a figure, a shadow, a type of the Christian church. 
No one with this proportion distinctly in mind, can 
read carefully the epistle to the Hebrews, and then 
seriously doubt its truth. To state this important fact, 
to establish it, and to illustrate its various bearings, 
much space, and carefulness, are employed in this admi- 
rable epistle. Indeed it seems to have been one of its 
main designs. The Hebrews were naturally more prone 
than others to Judaism, and to fall consequently into 
the error which supposes that " the Jewish society be- 
fore Christ, and the Christian society after Christ, are 
one and the same church in different dispensations." 
Paul therefore instructs them that the people, the sac- 
rifices, the priesthood, the temple, and all the ordinan- 
ces and forms of the Jewish worship, were ** figures 
for the time then present,** and were ordained and in- 
stituted as " types of better things,** " until the times 
of reformation,*' in other words, until the coming of 
Christ. " The holy places made with hands were the 
figures of the true'* holy places.* All the parts of the 
Jewish church and worship were figures of the Chris- 
tian church and worship. What is true of all the 
parts, is true of the whole. The whole Jewish church 
therefore was a figure or type of the Christian church. 
This, as set forth in the word of God itself, is the true 
and exact analogy between the Jewish church and the 
Christian church. 

The rules in Hermeneutics by which these corre- 

* Hob. iz., 9, 10, 11-28, 24. 



78 XNFAirr baftihm ekosafts 

spondences are governed, are obvious and definite 
They are as follows. " No external institution or fact v,. 
the Old Testament is a type of an external institution 
or fact in the New Testament. External institutions 
and facts in the Old Testament are invariably types of 
internal and spiritual institutions and facts in the New 
Testament." These rules are, I am happy to say, rec- 
ognized as legitimate by the learned among pedobap- 
tists themselves. Turrettine, for example, the distin- 
guished successor of Calvin, referring to doctrines of 
Cardinal Bellarmine, says: — "For what Bellarmine sets 
forth, that these [Jewish rites] were not so much sacra- 
ments as types of sacraments is absurd, inasmuch as a 
sacrament is an external thing, and whatever is a type 
of any internal or spiritual thing has no need of any 
other type by which it may be represented. Two 
types may indeed be given similar and corresponding 
to each other of one and the same truth, and so far the 
ancient sacraments were similar to ours ;'' " but one 
type cannot be shadowed forth by another type," since 
** both are brought forward to represent one truth. 
So circumcision shadowed forth not baptism, but the 
grace of regeneration ; and the passover represented 
not the Lord's supper, but Christ set forth in the 
supper."* 

With these fixed principles of exposition before us, 
we will pursue, in order that the subject may be ren- 
dered if possible still more plain and certain, ''the 
analogy of the church" somewhat more in detail. 

Abraham, the great type of Messiah, was the head 
of the Jewish covenant and church ; Messiah himself is 

* Opera., torn, iv., p. 842. 



JUDAISM UPON THB CHUBGH. 79 

the head of the Ohristiaa covenant and church. The 
natural seed of Abraham were entitled by virtue of 
their carnal relationship to him as their father, to mem- 
bership in the Jewish church, and to all the ordinances, 
lights, and immunities of that church; the spiritual 
seed of Abraham bj virtue of their holy relationship 
to Jesus Christ as their father, are entitled to member- 
ship in the Christian church, and to all the ordinances, 
lights, and immunities of that church. The naturcU 
seed of Abi-aham in right of their father inherited the 
earthly Canaan ; the spiritual seed in right of their fa- 
ther Jesus Christ, inherit the Canaan above. In the 
Jewish church sacrifices were literal. They were all 
types, and pointed to the great sacrifice in the person 
of Christ, to be in the fulness of time offered by bim 
upon the cross. In the Christian church sacrifices are 
spiritual. ** The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit ; 
a broken and a contrite heart."* In the Jewish church 
offerings were presented to God in behalf of the people 
by priests only ; in the Christian church all the people 
are priests, and through Jesus Christ, present to God 
their own offerings ; for " ye are built up [not a literal 
house, as was the temple, but] a spiritual house, a holy 
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to 
God through Jesus Christ."f Every believer offers 
anew daily, the one infinitely glorious satisfaction of 
the Redeemer, by the power of which '' he hath per- 
fected forever them that are sanctified." In the Jew- 
ish church the high priest entered once a year into the 
most holy place, "made with hands," "not without 
blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors 
* Paalm li., 17. 1 1 Pet ii., 6. 



80 xNFijrr baptku xhobafib 

of the people ;" ** which was a figure for the time then 
present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices 
which could not make him that did the service perfect 
as pertaining to the conscience." In the Christiaji 
church ** Christ being come a high priest of good 
things to come by [the mimstry of ] a greater and more 
perfect tabernacle, [than that upon earth] neither by 
the blood of goats and of calves, but by his own 
blood, he entered in once into the [true] most holy 
place, [heaven itself] having obtained eternal redemp- 
tion for us. For if t^e blood of bulls and of ffoats, and 
the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth 
[in the Jewish church] to the [ceremonial] purifying <^ 
the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ 
[the infinite sacrifice, and who is also the great and only 
high priest in the Christian church] who through the 
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, 
purge your consciences [spiritually, and truly] from 
dead works to serve the living God ?" "It was neces- 
sary that the patterns of things in the heavens should 
be purified with these [priestly services of the Jewi^ 
church] but the heavenly things themselves with bett^ 
sacrifices than these. For Christ is not entered into 
the holy places made with hands, which are ^he figures 
of the true, but into heaven itself, there to appear in 
the presence of God for us," our adorable Intercessor, 
and Advocate. "And as it is appointed unto men 
once to die, but after this the judgment, so Christ was 
once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them 
that look for him shall he appear the second time with- 
out sin unto salvation." 

These are the teachings of the word of God. They 



JDBAISM UPON TfiS OHUBCH. 81 

dettonstrate.tliat tiie alleged analogy does not exists bvt 
on the ccmtrary is the very essence of Judaism. The 
figwre and the thing signified by it, cannot be one. 
The type and the reality are not identical. The shadow 
aad the st^tance are never the same thing. The Jew- 
ish church and the Christian church are not therefore 
the same church. But the Jewish church, with its in- 
stitutions and facts, were external and literal, and were 
types or figures of the Christian church, which with 
its institutions and facts, are internal and spiritual. 
That this is the doctrine of Paul it is impossible to 
doubt. So also are we instructed by the '' rules of in- 
terpretation" before recited. No external institution or 
fact in the Old Testament is a type of an external in- 
stitution or fact, but always of internal and spiritual 
institutions and facts, in the New Testament. The 
whole subject of analogy is thus perfectly plain. The 
Jewish church, the type, was external, and composed 
of all the natural seed of Abraham ; the Christian 
church, the reality, must therefore be internal, and 
composed of all the spiritual seed. No one was per- 
mitted to enter the Jewish — the external typical — 
church, who was not, either by natural birth, or as a 
proselyte, already among the covenant people. The 
analogy therefore requires that no one be permitted. to 
enter the Christian — the true spiritual church — who is 
not, by the new birth, and faith in our Lord Jesus 
Christ, already among the true covenant people of God. 
A correspondence exists in several respects between cir- 
cumcision and baptism. By circumcision the natural 
seed were recognized as the children of Abraham, and 
received as members of the Jewish church; by baptism 



82 mFANT BAPTISM ENGBAFT8 

the spiritual seed are recognized as believers in Christ, 
and received as members of the Christian church. Cir- 
cumcision was instituted expressly for literal infants,^ 
and it was commanded to be administered to them sooa 
after they were bom ; baptism was instituted expressly 
for spiritual infants — ^believers in Christ — and it is com- 
manded to be administered to them as soon as they 
are bom again. Circumcision was an essential pre- 
liminary to the passover ; baptism is an essential pre- 
liminary to the Lord's supper. All this is clear, but 
our pedobaptist brethren pervert the whole subject, 
and cover it with confusion, by supposing that because 
Abraham's natural seed was circumcised, that there- 
fore the natural seed of christians should be bap- 
tized ! How infinitely imworthy as you at once see, 
is this conclusion ! It is unreasonable, evidently 
forced, and contradictory of the true " analogy of the 
church." 

The pedobaptist doctrine is in fact, a misnomer ; it 
is not analogy, but Judaism. It is confused, it is un- 
intelligible. The trae evangelical analogy is clear, rea- 
sonable, and scriptural. Nor does it even intimate 
infant baptism ; but on the contrary teaches such great 
tmths and principles, as are wholly inconsistent with 
the practice, and as indeed, must ever forbid the bap- 
tism of mfants. 

4. This pedobaptist argument, I remark in the last 
place, is palpably antiscriptural. 

It maintains that the Jewish church and the Chris- 
tian church are the same church, in different dispensa- 
tions ; or in the language of Dr. Peters : — " When 
* With the exception of servants purchased with money. 



JUDAISM UPON THE OHUBOH. 83 

[circtinicision] the ancient sign and seal of the cove- 
nant which God made with his people for an everlast- 
ing covenant was abolished, another ordinance [bap- 
tism] was instituted in the same church, under the 
same covenant, of precisely the same import, and for 
the same purpose." The Jewish church and the 
Christian church, the same church! If so, then the 
only christian church now existing, is as we have seen, 
the jRoman Catholic ! It is not the Episcopalian, the 
Presbyterian, the Congregational, the Methodist, nor 
any other Protestant church, since Judaized as all these 
are, they fall far short of the Jewish church. Only the 
Catholic is a tolerable copy of the original. But if 
they were the same church, why did Christ deny it, 
when he told the Jews that his was a church urdike 
theirs, and into which none could enter by virtue of 
carnal relationship to Abraham, or to any other good 
men, but only by repentance of sin, and faith in him ? 
Why did Messiah deny it on another occasion, when he 
said : " The law and the prophets [the Jewish church] 
continued until John, since whom the kingdom of heav^ 
en [the Christian church] is preached, and all men 
press into it ?" Why did Paul deny the identity of the 
Jewish and Christian churches by comparing the former 
to Hagar and her posterity, and the latter to Sarah and 
hers ? Why did Nicodemus, and Paul, and the rest, 
trouble themselves about the Christian church ? They 
were already members, and officers of the Jewish 
church, and that was the same church ! Strange in- 
fatuation! How surprising that any man with the 
Bible before him should fall into an error so palpable ! 
This however, has already been sufficiently elaborated. 



84 iKFAirr BA7118M ssio&jypm 

But we are told that the J^ivish church and IJba 
Ghristiati church subsisted under the same covenant 1 
Were this true, then there would be no dstinction be- 
tween the law and the gospel. They would be the 
same in every correct sense. Very different from this, 
however, are the teachings of the word of God. Abra* 
ham, as any one may see who will be at the trouble of 
examining the Bible on the subject, was concerned in 
^100 toifenantSf which were made at di&rent times, and 
related to distinct things. The former had regard to 
Christ ; the latter to his naturul posterity ; the one 
was called the covenant of grace; the other the covenant 
of eircumcidon. The original promise in respect to the 
covenant ofgrcLce, was made to Abraham when he was 
seventy-five yeai« old, in these words : — ** In thee shall 
all families of the earth be blessed."* This promise 
was afterwards renewed, and ratified with an oath : — 
" By myself have I sworn, swth the Lord" — " In thy 
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. "f 
This Paul declares to have been the covenant of grace 
in Jesus Christ. He says : — " God willing more abun- 
dantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immuta- 
bility of his counsel, confirmed it with an oath, that by 
two immutable things [the oath and the promise] in 
which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have 
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to the hope 
set before us. "J The promises of this covenant, Paul 
teaches you, constituted the gospel, in relation to which 
he says : — " The scripture foreseeing that God would 
justify [not the Jews only, but also] the heathen 
through faith, preached before, the gospel unto Abra- 

• Gen. adi., 8. t Gen. xadi., 16-18. % Heb. vi., 17-20. 



jUDHsu uBoaf vaM ouujmw. 85 

hBJMf saying, In thj seed [Ghmt] shall all natioQs be 
blessed. '* It is proper to say in paswig, tb^t the 
gospel corenant now described was not really nmU 
with Abraham, bttt in the language of an apostle, was 
** confirmed to Abraham of God in Christ." It was 
therefore preYiously made. The same coyenant was 
announced to Adam in Eden, immediately after tbs 
fall, in a promise the language of whieh atrikbgly re* 
sembles that to Abraham, and which was repeated to 
Isaac, to Jacob, and to David : — '' The seed of the 
woman shall bruise the sa*peBt's head." The nature 
of this covenant was indieated to our fii«t parents, by 
the institution of sacrifices, pointing to the great atone- 
ment afterwards to be accomplished for noan, m the 
blood of Messiah. Who, I now ask, were the partus 
to this covenant for the redemption and salvation of 
men? Were they God and Abraham? No more 
than they were God and Adam, or God and David« 
They were God the Father, and God the Son ; the lat- 
ter of whom **took on bim" for the purpose of oaat 
redemption, "not the nature of angels, but the seed 
of Abraham ;" and in relation to this event it was 
that the promise was given, to "the Slither of the 
faithful," which promise pedobaplasts have so generally, 
and unhappily mistaken for the eovenani itself/ 80 
much for the covenant of grace. 

The covenant of circum^cision, received this name be- 
cause of the peculiar ordinance attached to it. This 
covenant was made, in the true sense of that word, with 
Abraham, twenty-four years after the promise above 
referred to, and when he was ninety-nine years old, for 
himsetf, and for aU his natural seed. In it nothfa^ 

8 * 



86 INFANT BAPTISM EKGBAFTB 

whatever is said regarding Messiah. It stipulated, in 
the first place, that his descendants should be numer- 
ous, prosperous, and happy ; in the second place, that 
they should possess a specified territory ; and in the 
third place, that so long as they observed the laws of 
God, he would surround them with security and hap« 
piness. This covenant, as is acknowledged, received 
its organized development at Sinai, and was conse- 
quently really and truly identical with that " covenant 
which God made with Israel, when he took them by 
the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt." 
The Mosaic law was the formal exhibition, the posses- 
sion of Canaan was the practical fulfilment, and the 
national religion of the Hebrews was the visible pre- 
sentation, of the covenant of circumcision. 

Thus it is seen that there were two covenants, dis- 
tinct from each other, of different dates, designed for 
different purposes, and dissimilar in their characters. 
Accordingly the apostles speak familiarly of " the cove- 
nants;** of "the old covenant;" of "the new covenant;" 
and these "covenants** they everywhere represent, con- 
sider, and contrast, as separate and distinct from each 
other. Paul, employing the language of Jeremiah,* 
thus speaks in relation to this important topic : — " Be« 
hold the days come, saith the Lord, when I will mako 
a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the 
house of Judah ; not according to the covenant which I 
made with their fathers when I- took them by the hand 
to lead them out of the land of Egypt." And "in 
that he saith ' a new covenant,' he hath made the first 
old."f There are therefore two covenants ; the one tho 
covenant of the law, the organized development of the 

♦ Jer. xxxi., 81-^4. * t Heb. viii., 8-12. 



^ JUDAISM UPON THE OHUBCH. 87 

^ coyenant of circumcision made with Abraham, which is 

" the old covenant ;" the other the covenant of the got" 
pel, the covenant between God the Father and the Son» 
the promise of which was announced to Abraham, which 
is ** the new covenant,^' The covenant of the law consti- 
tuted the dispensation of Moses, and was the covenant 
of the Jewish church ; the covenant of the gospel is the 
covenant of grace and redemption, the covenant of the 
Christian church. The covenant of the law had cir- 
cumcision annexed; the covenant of g^ce, in Christ 
Jesus, which was not visibly administered until after 
the law, or old covenant, had passed away, has baptism 

/ annexed. And yet pedobaptists declare in the face of all 

these facts, that the Jewish and the Christian are the same 
church, and subsist under the same covenant 1 Never 

( was there a conclusion more palpably antiscriptural, 

Pedobaptists also declare that circumcision and bap- 
tism *' were instituted in the same church, imder the 
same covenant ;" that they are ** of the same import, 
and for the same purpose." But the declarations of. 

) our Lord Jesus Christ on the subject contradict them 

in every particular. He asserts distinctly, that circum- 
cision belonged to the law of Moses, and was identified 

j with the covenant of Sinai. It never was therefore of 

the gospel, since the gospel covenant is "not according 
to," or like "the covenant" of Sinai. To the Jews 
the Saviour said : — " Moses gave you circumcision." 
And again. " A man on the sabbath day received a>- 
cumcmon that the law of Moses be not broken."* Did 
Moses give them circumcision ? Then circumcision was 
a part of his ceremonial law. Is it objected that the 
rite was in existence before Moses ? Sacrifices were 

* John vu., 23, 28. 



88 IKFANT BAFTIBM SNORA7IB 

also in existence before Moses. Cireameision may 
therefore be said to have belonged to his law, as prop- 
erly as sacriOces may be said to have belonged to hia 
law. Or if it is still insisted that circumcision belonged 
to the gospel, and was succeeded by baptism ; with the 
same truth may it be asserted that the offering of slaia 
beasts in sacrifice belonged to the gospel and is now 
succeeded by the sacrifice of the mass. Circumcision 
and baptism are both types ; but they are not the same 
type in different forms, since circumcision according to 
Paal, was a type of regeneration by the Spirit, and 
baptism, as John avers, is a representation, or type, of 
the burial and resurrection of Christ.* And since cir- 
cumcision and baptism are both types, the former is not 
a type of the latter, because one type cannot be a type 
of another type. Nor can one type ever be substitu- 
ted for another type. Baptism, therefore, cannot take 
the place of circumcision. They are distinct things, 
and must ever so remain. The claim of pedobap- 
tists that circumcision " was instituted in the same 
church, under the same covenant, and for the same 
purpose," with baptism, that is, in the gospel church, 
amounts to the declaration that the gospel church is in 
fkct, built upon the law of Moses ! We have now seen 
that the Jewish charch and the Christian church are 
not the same church in different dispensations, that they 
are not under the same covenant, that baptism does not 
come in the place of circumcision, and that the pedo- 
baptist argument that maintains the opposite c^ our 
conclusions, t^ palpably aniiscriptural. 

I have been necessarily somewhat prolix in this dis- 
cussion, but I could not in a narrower compass present 

♦ 1 John v., 8 



JUDAISM UPON THE CHUBCH. 89 

the subject clearly and intelligibly. I have shown con- 
clusively how for the support of infant baptism Judaism 
is engrafted upon the gospel of Christ. It has been 
seen that the argument, by which this great evil is 
perpetrated, proves vastly too much, and leads directly 
into all the extremes of popery ; that it is in conflict 
with Christianity as taught by Christ and his apostles, 
who deprecated Judaism as destructive of true re- 
ligion; that it perverts and renders imintelligible the 
true analogy between the Jewish church and the Chris- 
tian church, and which I have explained at some length, 
showing that it does not intimate the legitimacy of in- 
fant baptism, but teaches such doctrines as necessarily 
forbid it ; and that it is utterly antiscriptural, confound- 
ing the law and the gospel, and leading men into con- 
fusion and error. Judaism in the gospel church is what 
Hagar and Ishmael were in the family of Abraham, a 
shame, and an offence. " Therefore cast out the bond 
woman and her son.'* Sever the chains by which the 
bride of Messiah is manacled, and bound to the chariot 
of Sinai. Be it ours to contemplate the church of the 
Redeemer, not under the clouds of Judaism in which 
infant baptism has involved it, not obscured among the 
shadows of a former dispensation, but as developed in 
the gospel, distinct, spiritual, sanctified, the glory of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

In conclusion, I will only observe that by how much 
the gospel is thus corrupted, rendered difficult of com- 
prehension, its forms changed, and its benevolent designs 
rendered inoperative, by so much is infant baptism, to 
which all this may be justly ascribed, a lamentable, a 
most melancholy evil. 

8* 



CHAPTER IV. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT FALSIFIES 
THE DOCTRINE OF UNIVERSAL DEPBAVITT. 

Statement of the rabject ; natore of alleged infant daims ; their conflict 
with the doctrine of depravity ; incompatibility of these aentimenta. 

The children of those parents " who profess the 
true religion/' are bom, it is alleged, in the covenant, 
and church of our Lord Jesus Christ ! On this ground 
mainly, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and other 
Calvinists, maintain their right to baptism. A glim- 
mering of the same doctrine runs through the teach- 
ings of all the other sects. It is true as Bushnell 
justly remarks : — That " no settled opinions of the 
grounds, or import of infant baptism has ever been at- 
tained to" by them all.* In this, however, they agree 
as nearly as they do in any other doctrine regarding 
that ordinance. It is my purpose in the present chap- 
ter, to show that this aspect of the subject develops 
prominently, another of its evils, since it falsifies the 
doctrine of universal depravity, 

Pedobaptists claim that the infant offspring of be- 
lievers enjoy hereditary rights to the covenant of grace, 
and their attendant privileges of baptism, and member- 
ship in the visible church. The truth of this statement 

« Chiislaan Nnrtare, p. (O. 



INFANT BAPTISM, ETC. 91 

I shall now certify in such a manner as to render it in- 
disputable. 

"It is an important inquiry," says a distinguished 
writer upon the Symbols and Rubric of the English 
church, •* to what infants that title belongs. For not 
all even in the sight of man, can be considered as fit 
subjects for that holy rite," baptism. " Are the chil- 
dren of infidels fit subjects ?" " Baptism administered 
to them is not warranted hj our church."* Bishop 
Jewell says : — " No person which will profess Christ's 
name ought to be restrained or kept back therefrom, no 
not even the babes of christians, forasmuch as they" 
" do pertain unto the people of God."f Nowell, Bev- 
eridge, and the other British fathers, teach the same 
doctrine. " We see tli^," says Mr. Goode, " the ne- 
cessity of inquiring whether the child [brought to be 
baptized] is the offspring of parents who are at least 
professed christians." " Here is a question not decided 
by the church." More unscrupulous ministers will bap- 
tize any child for whom sponsors can be procured. 
" But it is at least reasonable to think that our church, 
administering baptism on the grounds stated by Jew- 
ell and Nowell, administers it on the supposition" that 
the parents are believers. " The faith of the parent is 
to th^ infant, as an infant," " mercifully reckoned by 
God as imputable to the infant, and on the strength of 
this it is baptized ; faith and baptism together, as in the 
case of adults, perfecting the work of infantine regen- 
eration"^ We have in these passages, the doctrine 
on the subject of the more evangelical of the English 

* Goode on Bap., p. 80. f Works, p. 216. 

^ Goode on Bap., pp. 81-88. 



99 INFANT BAFTQH 

church, and her dootrine in ih« premises is the doo- 
trine of the Methodist church, and of the Episcopal 
church in the United States. Dr. A. Clarke Iherdbre 
confidently says : — " Though infante haye not» ancjl caa- 
not have actual faith, jet thej are sanc4ifi(ed hy beings 
bom of religious parents. They are already in some 
sense, within the limite of the church imd covenant of 
promise."* The Westminster Confession, however, is 
definite. Ite language is :-^*~" The visible church, which 
is also catholic, consiste of all those throughout the 
world that profess the true religicm, together with their 
children ; and is the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christy 
the house and family of Qod."f The Directory is still 
more explicit. It is there affirmed that the children 
of believers are " Bom mthin tkt church, have by their 
birth inheritance in the covenant, and right to [baptism] 
the seal of it ;" " that they are christians, and federallj 
holy before baptism, and therefore are they baptized." 
On this subj;ect Mr, Baxter remarks : — " God hath 
made, and offered to the world a covenant of grace» 
and in it the pardon of sin to all true penitent believ-* 
ers, and power to become the- sons of God, and heirs 
of heaven. This covenant is extended also to the seed 
of the faithful to give them the benefits suitable to 
their age, the parents dedicating them to God» and en- 
tering them into the covenant, and so God in Christ 
will be their God, and number them with bis people.'* 
Mr, Baxter further says — " As children i^re made sin- 
ners and miserable by their parente without any act of 
their own, so they are delivered out of it by the free 
grace of Christ, not through their own faith, but upon 
♦ Efisays, p. 81. t Ch*p, xxv. 



FAIfilFIES ranVEfiSAL i>SPBAYITT. 98 

tMBdiiaoiis performed by their parents."* And Btlll 
further. " Of those baptized in infancy, some do be- 
tames receive the secret seeds of grace, which by th^ 
blessing of a holy education is stirring in them accord* 

ing to their capacity, ^9o that they never v>eT9 

actwd ungodly persons P* The late Dr. MillW says :— 
''The children of profes»ng christians Bte already in 
the church. They are horn members. They are hap- 
Used because they were members. They recdve the 
seal of the covenant because they are already vn the 
covenant by virtue of their birth. "f 

From these expositions we learn that, according to 
our pedobaptist brethrra, the children of believers 
are born in the covenant of grace, and have, by right 
of birth, the enjoyment of all its blessings ; are born 
members of the church, and by hereditary descent are 
entitled to the privileges of membership in the house 
of God, and to the promises of salvation. These are 
prerogatives arising exclusively from their hereditary 
relations. Their parents are holy. Therefore their chil- 
dren are holy. Of all such Dr. Hopkins says : — " The 
church receive and look upon them as holy. So they 
are as visibly holy, or as really holy in their view, as their 
parcnte are."t 

With these doctrines distinctly before us we turn to 
consider the subject of universal depravity , that we may 
ascertain to what extent these two principles harmonize 
with each other. 

Depravity f I remark, consists essentially in a state of 
mind the opposite of that which is required by the law 

♦ Works, vol. XV., p. 486, vol. xix., p. 261-264. 

t Miller ou Bap. % Theol., p. 819, 



94 rNFANT BAPTIBM 

of God. The law commands, and the obfi^^tion i& im- 
perative upon every human being, " Thou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with all thy soul, with all thy mind, 
and with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy- 
self."* The want of this love on the one hand, and 
the love of the world on the other, places the soul in 
that moral position known as depravity. By nature, 
men prefer the world and its sinful gratifications, to the 
love of God and of their neighbor. The creature 
usurps in their affections the place of the Creator. 
The moral powers are perverted, and turned aside 
from God. This is depravity. And I now remark 
that it is universal. It attaches to every human being. 
All are naturally aflfected by it in the same manner, 
and to the same extent. In this respect no material 
original difference exists between the children of the 
rich and the poor, the free and the bond, the holy and 
the unholy, the believer and the unbeliever. In sub- 
sequent life their characters are often very different; 
But this arises not from any difference in moral quali- 
ties, but in constitutional temperament, in instruction, 
in discipline, and in associations. These facts are ap- 
parent to every intelligent* observer. We see in the 
children of all classes, the same inclination to evil, and 
the same estrangement from God, more or less strongly 
developed. But they are fully confirmed by the word 
of God. " The lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, 
and the pride of life," all by nature pursue in prefer- 
ence to "the things of the Spirit" of God. The chil- 
dren of religious parents are involved in this depravity, 
to an extent fully as great as the children of others, 

* Matt, xxii., 87. 



FALSIFIES UNIVIEBSAL BSPRAYITY. 95 

who occupy with them the same social position. "All 
have sinned and come short of the glory of God."* 
** By one man sin entered into the world, and death by 
sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have 
Binned.^f " The scripture hath concluded all under 
sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be 
given to them that believe."]; Than this what lan- 
guage can be more conclusive ? It is therefore unde- 
niably true that all are corrupt ; that all are ahke de- 
praved. 

Our brethren themselves, notwithstanding their doc- 
trine of the holiness of the children of believers, maintain, 
and emphatically teach universal depravity. The Epis- 
copal church thus expresses herself : — " Original sin" 
" is the fault, or corruption of every man that naturally 
is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby every 
man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is 
of Ms own nature inclined to evil."§ The Methodist 
church says : — ** Original sin" " is the corruption of the 
nature of every man that is naturally engendered of the 
offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from 
original righteousness, and of his own nature inclined to 
evU, and that continually.") Calvinism in all its sects 
speaks thus : — Our first parents by sin ** fell from their 
original righteousness and communion with God, and 
so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the fac- 
ulties and parts of soul and body. They being the 
root of all mankind, the guilt of their sin was imputed, 
and the same death in sin, and corrupted nature, were 
conveyed to all their posterity, descending from them 

* Bom. iii., 28. f Rom. v., 12. % GaU. iii., 10-22. 

I Thirty-Nine Art, I Diacip. Art. EeL, viL 



96 nVF ANT BAPTISM 

by ordinaiy generatioiL From tfaifi original comip* 
tion, whereby we are naturally indisposed, disabled, 
and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to 
all evil, do proceed all acts of transgreasicn/'^ All 
other evangelical denominations hold the same princi- 
ples. They all teach universal depravity. £very mdfi 
therefore, descended of Adam, all the posterity of our 
first parents, are naturally indisposed io yood, wholly 
inclined to evil, and that continually. 

Let the doctrine of infant baptism, as based upon 
hereditary claims of the children of believers to the 
covenant of grace, be now compared with the doctrine 
of universal depravity. We take them both as set 
forth by pedobaptists themselves. On the one hand 
they earnestly teach that the children of believers " are 
sanctified by being bom of religious parents," are 
** bom within the church, and have by their birth in- 
heritance in the covenant," " are federally holy," and 
for these and like reasons, are baptized. Persons can* 
not have, at birth, all these endowments, and be at the 
same time wholly corrupt. Therefore the infant off- 
spring of believers are not naturally depraved. On 
the other hand, they all earnestly teach that ** every 
one^* is wholly depraved. " Every manC^ descended of 
Adam, is " defiled in all the faculties and pai*ts of soul 
and body," all *' are naturally indisposed, disabled, and 
made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all 
evil." With this corrupt nature "all that are naturally 
engendered of the offspring of Adam" are bom. The 
children of believing parents are not excepted, but 
fully included, since they too " are naturally engen- 

* Westmin. Confes., ch. vii. 



FALSIFIER UNDTEBBAL OffEPRAVnT. $7 

deared of the offspring of Adam/' and are a part of 
" all men,^* Are such corrupt and depraved peraoDjs 
hol^f ? Are they bom .members of the church ? Are 
they naturally inheritors of all the benefits of the cove- 
nant of grace ? It is impossible. They cannot at the 
same time be holy and corrupt, sanctified and depraved, 
in the gospel covenant and "naturally indisposed, dis- 
abled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly in- 
clined to all evil." Both these propositions cannot be 
true. The one falsifies the other. But that all are 
bom in sin, and are by nature, depraved, is true. The 
.word of God emphatically declares it. The whole doc- 
trine of hereditary claims to the covenant of grace, 
therefore, upon which our brethren so confidently pred- 
icate infant baptism, falsifies the doctrine of universal 
depravity ; it is baseless in itself, and upon ,their own 
principles; and it is fraught with mischief, "full of 
deadly evil." 

There are at least, I may now add, two other, and 
collateral disastrous consequences which arise from this 
aspect of infant baptism, and which must here be 
briefly noticed. The former is the absurdity that re- 
ligion is hereditary ; and the latter that the children of 
believers have no need of the regenerating influences 
of the Spirit of God ! 

In the first place, if children are " holy," are " in 
the covenant of grace," are " members of the church" 
" by being bom of religious parents,** then these chil- 
dren mherit " by their birth,** all the blessings of re- 
ligion, and of course, become religious by natural gener- 
ation. The infant children of believers are in the 
covenant and church of Christ, because their parents 

9 



98 INFANT BAJ^nau 

are in the covenant and church of Christ. The infant 
children of nnbelievers are not in the covenant and 
church of Christ, because their parents are not in the 
covenant and church of Christ. Religion and irre- 
hgion therefore are results of natural generation. Paul 
the apostle declares this whole hypothesis untrue. " The 
children of the flesh," he affirms, " are not [therefore] 
}he children of the covenant."* But pedobaptists al- 
lege, that the children of the flesh of believers, are the 
heirs of the covenant, and for the very reason that they 
are the children of the flesh. Which shall we believe ? 
Paul, or our pedobaptist brethren ? The Bible or the 
Confessions of Faith ? We cannot believe both, since, 
in the plainest terms, they contradict each other. 

In the second place, if the infant children of believing 
parents are "holy," are "in the covenant of grace," 
are " bom in the church," then of course, ikeir nature 
is pure. The work of the Spirit is not necessary to 
cleanse their hearts, and fit them for a higher life. 
They are the children of believing parents, and there- 
fore " sanctified." They are bom holy ! All this they 
are carefully taught from childhood. Are they not 
likely to believe it ? If they do, they cannot also be- 
lieve that they have a depraved and corrupt heart. 
Consequently they can never feel very deeply, their mis- 
erable condition as sinners, nor appreciate highly the 
grace of God in the gift of a Saviour. They are thus, 
and by their teachers, made ignorant of their own hearts, 
and deceived in a most vital point. I will not say that 
they never will be converted. It is evident, however, 
that their salvation is thus placed in fearful jeopardy. 

« Gal. iii., 12-20. 



FALSxFms xnsrmsBSAij depbayitt. 99 

It is now demonstrated that, by arrogating hereditary 
claims to the covenant of grace, infant baptism falsifies 
the doctrine of universal depravity, teaches that religion 
is propagated by natural generation, and that the chil- 
dren of believing parents have no need of the renewing 
power of the Holy Spirit of God. Thus infant baptism 
inculcates a religion that is neither moral nor spiritual, 
but merely physical. It is therefore a most revolting^ 
eviL 



CHAPTEE V. 

IKFAKT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE THE BOCTRINBB 
VTOV WHICH IT RESTS CONTRADICT THE OREAT FUN- 
DAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF JUSTIFICATION BT FAITH. 

Jostiflcation by faith ; inflmt baptism ; the two contrasted ; reciprocal in- 
fluence in the primitiye churches; justification by faith restored at the 
Reformation; embodied with inflmt baptism in all the Confessions of 
Faith; efltect upon protestantism; one or the other must be aban- 
doned. 

The doctrines upon whicb infant baptism rests, and 
the great fundamental principle of justification by faith, 
are in irreconcilable contradiction. They are through- 
out, the antagonists of each other. To them both no 
church, nor individual, can consistently adhere. One 
or the other must, sooner or later, be abandoned. 
Their opposite characters indicate this result, and the 
history of the church, primitive, popish, and protestant, 
evinces that it is inevitable. Let the doctrines in ques- 
tion be separately stated, and compared. 

The great fundamental principle of justification by 
faith, is taught in the word of God, in terms perfectly 
full and explicit. We are, says an apostle, ** Justified 
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth to be a propi- 
tiation through faith in his blood, to declare his right- 
eousness for the remission of sins," " that he might be 
just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Je- 



iNFAirr BA^PTsni, src. 101 

SOB."* And ** beii^ jostifted by liaith, we have pean^ 
with God thiottgh our Lord Jesus Christ "f Justifka^ 
tioB is the act of God by which he declares a man just 
and righteous. The justified are accepted, and ap-' 
]»^yed; as if they had ne^er sinned.- This is an act of 
GUkL's own free and sovereign grace, and tTie^efove ne- 
cessariiy irrespective of any works or worthiness on the 
part of the justified. It is* by faith, not as a meritori- 
ous agentcy to procure justification, but as the medium' 
through which it is bestowed. We are not j:nstlfied/of 
/xM, as if it were of itself a sufficient righteousness,, 
since faitii: no more than works can constitute such 
righteousness, but by faith through grace. '' It is of 
faith, that it might be by grace ;" faith being chaiac'o 
terized by a peculiarity which harmonizes with grace, 
and which loo^ not to itself, but to Christ for right- 
eousness and salvation. This, briefly, is justification by 
faith, as taught in^ the word of God. 

How shaM we ascertain the doctrines of mfont bap** 
tism ? They are not made known to us in the Bible. 
Bevelation is silent on that whole subject. We must,, 
c^ course,, rely upon the statements of protestant Pedo»* 
baptists for ouf auithority. With Papists I have* a4 
present nothing to do. Dr. Wall is more definite en 
this topic than any other writer now before me. He 
says :-^" Most of the Pedobaiptists go no further than 
Bl Asifitin does. They hold that God by his Spirit^ 
does, al the tinxe of baptisid, sea] and ffpply to the in" 
fant that is there dedloated to him, the promises of tker 
oovenant of which he is capable, viz. : adoption^ pavdon 
of sins, [and] translation from the state of nature to that 

• Boitfi Sli<, a4«-S6. tB<AB.V.,f# 

9* 



103 IHFAST BAPnHK 

oi grrace."* The doctrines upon which infant baptism 
rests teach, therefore, that in that ordinance the child 
receives adoption, pardon, and translation into the state 
of grace, and of course that he receives justification ! 
Davenant, the Bishop of Salisbury, thus speaks on this 
subject :— ^" The justification, regeneration, and adop- 
tion of little children baptized, confers upon them a 
state of salvation/'f Archbishop Usher writes thus : — 
" The branches of this reconciliation [received by in- 
fants in their baptism] are justifiecUion, and adoption."]; 
So teach all the other divines, and all the protestant 
Confessions of Faith and Catechisms. Infants are 
therefore, according to this doctrine, justified before 
God in baptism. 

Let now the great principle of justification by faith 
and the doctrines of infant baptism be compared. If 
you are justified by faith in our Lord Jesus Christy 
through grace, you are not justified by baptism, either 
in infancy, or at any other time ; and if you are justi- 
fied by baptism, then you are not justified by faith. 
This conclusion is perfectly plain. These doctrines are 
therefore as opposite as darkness and light. They em- 
phatically contradict and falsify each other. 

Justification by faith, I have said, is a fundamental 
doctrine of the gospel. It is vital. It is ** the faith 
once delivered to the saints." No system from which 
it is excluded, can ever be justly regarded as embody- 
ing the religion of Christ. It was taught by the 
apostles, and early ministers, constantly, forcibly, em- 
phatically. It was cherished by the primitive churches 

• Hiflt Inf. Bap., vol. ii., p. 148. 

t Letton to J>r. Ward, p. 25. t Bdef Method, Ao. 



COI7TBABICTB JTTBTmOATIOK BY FAITH. 103 

as a priceless truth. How can we account for its aban* 
donment by the professed followers of Jesus Christ ? 
There is, I answer, an inherent tendency in human na- 
ture, renewed though it may be, to pass from the sub- 
stance to the forms of religion. The transition is so 
easy that it can only be prevented by perpetual yigi< 
lance. The influence of this propensity the early 
churches did not very long escape. Among the first 
of the corruptions they admitted and embraced, was 
the undue importance which became attached to re* 
ligiotts ceremonials. They gradually exalted the writes 
above the doctrines of Christianity, while both were 
perverted and misapplied. Baptism, especially, was 
imagined to possess great and peculiar virtues. Thus 
justification through grace by faith, was ultimately dis- 
placed by justification through grace by baptism. Po- 
pery was the result, the doctrine of which, on this 
subject, is thus expressed by the Council of Trent :— 
''Justification is by means of the sacraments, either 
originally infused into us, or subsequently increased, or 
when lost, again restored."* Thus the christian world 
was plunged into darkness, which remained imbroken 
for a thousand years. 

But justification by faith was restored at the Refor- 
mation. Noble efforts to give back to men this truth 
had previously been made by Tindall, and Wicliif, and 
Huss, and others, but they all fell martyrs to their be- 
nevolent designs. Finally arose ** the monk of Witten* 
berg," the iron-nerved Luther. He was previously a 
blind slave of popery, and in his own esteem " irre- 

♦ Condi. Trid., Sess. vii., deoret. Sacram., apud Moehler, p, 
27». 



104 rBTFANT BAFHBM 

proachablj holy." His penimces, mortifiealio&s, and 
obedience, were exemplary ; but of true religion he 
knew nothing.' In his monastery, apparently by ac<»- 
dent, he fbund a copy of the Bible. It was the first 
he had ever seen. He read it with mingled surprise 
and delight. He began to be enlightened, but his soul 
labelled against its teachings. Refemng to his state of 
mind at this period, he himself says : — " I coiidd not 
endure the expressfion, * The righteous justice of God/ 
I did not love that just and holy being that punishes 
mnners.'^ But the Study of the Bible, with prayer, 
was continued daily. At length that striking passage 
attracted his attention, " The just shall live by fail^." 
It originated a taiiin of trhought, and feeling, wholly 
new. " There is th'fen," it occurred t9 him, " another 
life for the just than that possessed by other men, and 
this life is the fruit (rf faith !" Thus dawned upon his 
mind the great doctrine of justification by faith, which 
led first to his own reconciliation to God, and then to 
other consequences Of infinite moment. In allusion to 
this event Luther remarks in another place : — " When 
by the Spirit of Q^d' I understood these words, * The 
just shall live by faith ;' when I learned how the justi- 
fication of the sinuer pr6ceeds from God'sf mere mercy, 
by the way of faith ; then I felt myself bom again ais a 
new man, and I entered by an opened dbor into the 
very paradise of God. From that hout' I saw the pre- 
cious and holy scriptures* with new eyes. I went 
through the whole Bible. I collated a' multitude of 
paissftges, which taught me what the work of God was, 
and as I had before heartily hated that expression, 
* The righteous justice of God,' I began from this time 



CONTRADICTS JTSTIFICATION BY FAJTH. tOS 

to value And love it, as the sweetest aiid most consolJei- 
lory truth. Truly this text, ' The jusft shafl- live by- 
faith,' was to Die the very gate of heaven."* 

Was Luther now free from those deludous which had 
so long led men to rely for justification upon works of 
various kinds, ordinances, penances, and mortifications ? 
It would be very natural to suppose that he was. But 
he had gained no such freedoth. The pmfoundest ig- 
norance rested in those days, upon the mind^ of men. 
Thick darkness, in many respects, still covered his own 
soul. He dared not quit his secluded cell, and very 
naturally hesitated to act in oppositicn to the whole re- 
ligious world. His fetters wei^ not broken until some 
years after, when on businesd of his moniastery, he^itr 
ed Home. While there he determined, for the ^ke of 
the indulgence promised, to ascend in the prescribed 
manner '' la Scala Santa," a sacred staircase preserved 
in that city, up which our Saviour iis said to have piass- 
ed when brought before Prlate. " He began, but hod 
not dragged his prone body many steps before ai voice 
MTdsted him in tones of thunder, ' The juist shall Irve 
by faith.' Startled at these accents of teiror, he hur- 
rfed like a guilty thing, from the spot, and from! that 
hour the doctrine, although mingled with other and 
contradictory doctrines, took full possession of his soul. 
He planted himseif upon it as upon a rook, and looked 
serenely back oh the wild sea through which he had 
been struggling. The last rivet in his chain was sev- 
ered, and he stood up a freeman, "f Justification by 
faith was thus recalled from the oblivion into which it 
had been so long driven^ and through the instnmiental- 

* D^Aubign^'s BelbrmatioD. t Headley. 



106 iNFAirr BAPnsH 

ity of the leading miad, became the central principle of 
the Befoimation. 

All the denominations that then sprang out of popery, 
did not agree as to the details of religion. Hence their 
separate organizations. But they all concurred in the 
doctrine of j^tification by faith, whether Lutheran, 
Calyinist, or Episcopalian. They each embodied it 
fully in their separate Confessions, and other standards. 
And strange as it may appear, they also embodied in 
the same symbols, that opposite and contradictory sys- 
tem, infant baptism. Why they did this will more 
fully appear hereafter. I now speak of facts only. I am 
not attempting to account for them. Thus they threw 
together conflicting elements, which, as they had before 
done, gradually destroyed the blessings which had been 
gained. To the sublimest truths they united the rank- 
est corruption. To the gospel of Christ they chained 
the main supports of Popery, ignorance, and worldly 
conformity. These facts are most readily demonstrated 
by reference to the standards themselves. 

In the first place, I shall show that the Confessions 
of all the protestant sects embody the doctrine of justi- 
fication by faith. The Augsburg Confession is the 
symbol of Lutheranism. Its fourth article is in the 
following words : — " They teach also that men cannot 
be justified before God by their own «fifbrts, merits, or 
works, but are justified freely through Christ by faith, 
and are received into favor, and enjoy the remission of 
sins, through Christ, who by his death presented a sat- 
isfaction for sin.''* 

In full agreement with this is the Westminster Con* 

* Cox^s MelMicthon> 



OONTRABICIB JITBTIFIOATION BY FAITH. 107 

fession, which doctrinally is embraced by all classes of 
Calvinists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Independo 
ents, and others : — " Those whom God effectually call- 
eth he also freely justifieth ; not by infusing righteous- 
ness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by 
accounting, and accepting their persons as righteous ; 
not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, 
but for Christ's sake alone ; not by imputing faith itself, 
the act of believing, or any other evangelical obedience 
to them as their righteousness, but by imputing the 
obedience and satisfaction of Christ unto them, they 
resting on him as their righteousness by faith ; which 
f^th they have not of themselves, it is the gift of G.od« 
Faith thus received, and resting on Christ, and his 
righteousness, is the alone instrument of justifica« 
tion."* 

The doctrine of the Episcopal Church in all its sects, 
is contained in the eleventh of the Thirty-Nine Articles, 
in the following language : — " We are accounted right* 
eous before God only- for the merits of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our works or 
deservings. Therefore that we .are justified by faith 
only, is a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of 
comfort." 

Of the doctrine of the Methodist church in all its 
departments, the "Articles of Religion," in the Dis- 
cipline, is the symbol. Their ninth article speaks 
thus : — " We are accounted righteous before God only 
for the merits of our Lord and Saviour Jesus -Christ 
by faith, and not for any of our own works or de- 
servings. Wherefore that we are justified by faith 

* West. Con£, oh. ii., seotA. 1, 2. 



108 uxFAsrr baftibh 

obIj, is a most wholesome dodtfbe, and vety f ufl of 
comfort." 

These are the principal Confessions of j^iuth of all 
the Protestant sects, and ite have now seen= their teach- 
ing^ on this subject. If they are to be believed, we are 
justified before God> not hj our own efforts, merits, or 
worthiness, not by any thing done by iss, or in us, not 
c^ course by baplasm, or by any other act of obedience 
whatever, but alone through grace by flEiith in oiir 
Lord Jesus Christ. How great, how vital, how evan- 
gelical, how infinitely important this tilith ! Who 
could have supposed that they Would have inserted in 
each one of these very formularies amy principle di- 
rectly and plainly contradicting that fdready so fully 
and elaborately stated? Yet they did so. Infant 
baptism finds a place there, sustained by all the doe*> 
trines with which Popery had surrounded it. For 
proof ib the premises we retrace liiese several C<»i- 
fessions. 

The Augsburg is as follows : — ^They teach concern- 
ing baptism that it is necessary to salvation, because by 
baptism the grace of God is offered. Infants are to be 
bc^tized, who being brought to God by baptism, are 
received into his favor."* 

The Westminster Confession says r-^" Baptkm is a 
sacrament of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus 
Christ, not cnlly for the solemn admiission isi the party 
baptized ikito the church, but also to be tmto him a 
sign and seal of the cov^iant of grace, of remission of 
sins, and of his giving up unto God through Jesus 
Christ, to walk in newness of life."f '' % the right 

* Aug, Conf., art isw- f Cct&f eki :ibEviii., sect. 1. 



OONTBABIOfB ^ffSIBiGAnOiS BY FAITH. ].0|9 

.use of this ordinanee the grace pr<»nised is not only .<tf- 
fered, but really exhibited,* and conferred."f 

The Thirty-Nine Articles teach thus : — " Baptism is 
nqt only a sign qf profession, and a mack of 4ifferen<^e 
wherein christian men are discerned from others that 
be not christened, but it is also a sign of regeneration 
or the new birth, whereby as by an instrument, they 
that receive baptism rightly, are engrafted into the 
church. The promise of the forgiveness of sins, of our 
adoption to be the sons of GTod by the Holy Ghost, are 
visibly signed and sealed." " The baptism of young 
children is in any wise to be retained in the church, as 
most agreeable -to the institution of Christ. "J 

" The Methodist Articles of Religion" speak as fol- 
lows : — ** Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and 
mark of difference whereby christians are distinguished 
from others that are not baptized, but is also a sign pf 
regeneration, or the new birth. The baptism of young 
children is in any wise to be retained in the church. "§ 

Thus we have the teachings of all these Confessions 
on baptism. The summary may be embraced in a few 
words. Lutherans declare that baptism is necessary to 
salvation, and that by it infants are received into the 
favor of God, and saved. Presbyterians, with all their 
kindred sects, maintain that baptism is to the child a 
sign and seal of the covenant of grace, of his engrafting 
into Christ, of regeneration, and of the remission of 
sins, and that all these are by baptism not only offered 
to the child, but really exhibited and conferred upon 

* Used in the technical sense of the Latin exhibere^ to apply or 
convey. t Conf., ch. xxviii., sect. 6. 

t Thirty-Nine Art., 27. § Discip., Art. of Eelig., ivji. 

10 



110 INFAirr BAPTIBM 

him. And Episcopalians and Methodists affirm that 
by baptism the new birth, the forgiveness of sins, and 
adoption, are all to the child, visibly signed and sealed. 
The child therefore in baptism, is pardoned of sin, is 
regenerated, is adopted, is received into the church, re- 
ceived into the favor of God, and saved. All this cer- 
tainly involves justification, or the declaring the person 
innocent of crime. These Confessions teach, therefore, 
the justification of the sinner by baptism. Conse- 
quently on the doctrine of justification by faith, and 
the doctrines upon which they rest infant baptism, the 
Confessions, each and all of them, plainly, palpably, 
unmistakably contradict themselves. If you are justi- 
fied, pardoned, and saved through grace by faith, and 
not by works, merit, or obedience of any kind, then 
you cannot be justified, pardoned, and saved by bap- 
tism. But it may be objected that infants are not ca- 
pable of faith. Neither therefore, I answer, are they 
capable of baptism. They are saved by grace through 
Christ, and without baptism. Is baptism necessary to 
their salvation ? God forbid. Why then baptize them, 
since the act is without authority, and without benefit ? 
And especially why teach that baptism gives them 
pardon, regeneration, adoption, and salvation ? 

Do I deal unjustly with these several sects when I 
thus represent them as in collision with themselves ? 
Their inconsistencies on this point have been noticed 
and condemned by others as well as Baptists. Moehler, 
a Catholic priest, and recently Professor of Divinity in 
Munich, one of the most eminent Roman Catholic schol- 
ars of the age, says : — " At the commencement of the 
Beformation, Luther and Melancthon evinced on tl>^ 



CONTRADICrra JXTBTIFICATION BT FAITH. Ill 

matter the most decided opposition to the Catholic 
church ; and the internal ground of their opposition 
lay entirely in their one-sided conception of the justifi- 
cation of man before God. Hereby especially the com- 
munication of really sanctifying graces by means of the 
sacraments was thrown into the background, nay even 
totally called in question." " The highest point to 
which they could rise was the one-sided view of the 
sacraments considered as pledges of the truth of the 
divine promises for the forgiveness of sins. The sacra- 
ments accordingly were to have no other destination 
than to make the faithful receiver assured that his debt 
of sins was remitted, and to console and quiet him." 
** So mean a conception of the sacraments necessarily 
led to the view that they operate only through faith in 
the divine promise of the forgiveness of sins. It was 
only in course of the disputes with the fanatics, as 
Luther called them, or with the Sacramentarians, that 
the reformers of Wittenberg approximated again to 
the doctrine of the [Papal] church. Already the Con- 
fession of Augsburg expresses itself, though indefi- 
nitely enough, yet still in a manner to enable Catholics 
to declare themselves tolerably satisfied with it." ** By 
degrees the Lutherans [and all other protestants] again 
adopted the entire notion of the opus operatum, al- 
though they continue even down to the present day to 
protest against it." ** Thus in course of time no im- 
portant difference [in the premises] inherent in the na- 
ture of things, could be pointed out" between Catholics 
and Protestants .• This testimony from an enemy is 
true. Still Protestants of all classes, as everywhere 

* Symholism, pp. 282-285. « 



112 DIFAST BAPTISM 

dae, 80 among xa, m their sennons, and their converBa- 
tions, from the pulpit, and the press, continue to protest 
that they do not attribute to baptism any. justifying or 
saving power. And do they not ? 1 iiave fieurly recited 
the very words cf thar Confenians of Faith ! Do they 
believe these Confessions? Let us turn to some of 
their standard writexs, and see how they express th^n- 
selves on this subject 

** The gospel/' says Henry, the distinguished Pres- 
byterian commentator, '' contains not cmly a doctrine, 
but a covenant, and by baptism we are brought into 
that covenant. Baptism wrests the keys of the heart 
out of the hand of the strong xroji armed, that the 
possessicm may be surrendered to him whose right it is. 
The water of baptism is designed for our cleansing 
from the spots and defilements of the flesh. In bap- 
tism our names are engraven upon the breast-plate of 
the High Priest. This, then, is the efficacy of bap- 
tism; it is putting the child's name into the gospel 
grant. We are baptized into Christ's death ; that is, 
God doth in that ordinance seal, confirm, and make 
over to us, all the benefits of the death of Christ,''* 
among which, of course, must be embraced ^tw^j/Sca^um. 
Professor Charles Hodge, one of the Theological In- 
structors at Princeton, says : — '' We are baptized in 
order that we should die with him, [Christ] i. e., that 
we should be united to him in his death, and partakers 
of his benefits. This baptism unto repentance. Matt, 
iii., 11, is baptism in order to repentance ; baptism unto 
the remission of sins, Mark i., 4, that remission of sins 
may be obtained."! Bishop Bedell says : — " This I 

* Treat, on Sapt t Comin. on Bom. vi., 8. 



0OI9TRAJDIOIS J UBTUTIVATIOir BT FAITH. 113 

3rield to my Lord of Sarum most willingly, that the 
justification, and adoption which children have in bap- 
tism is not univoce the same with that which adulti 
have. And this I likewise do yield to you, that it is 
vera aolutio reatus, et veraciter, et in rei veritate per- 
formed in all the like emphatical forms, etc J** Bishop 
Burnet says: — "Here, then, is the inward effect of 
baptism ; it is a death to sin, and a new life in Christ." 
** We are not only ' baptized into one body,' but also 
saved by baptism. ''f The Episcopal Catechism affirms 
that the child is by his '* baptism, made a member of 
Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the king- 
dom of heaven." 

These are the expositions of standard writers among 
pedobaptists themselves, of all classes, explanatory of 
the efficacy of baptism as taught in their Confessions. 
They effectually shield me from the charge of mbrep- 
resentation, and at the same time evince that their doc- 
trine is such, in the language of Moehler, as '' to enable 
Catholics to declare themselves tolerably satisfied with 
it." They inculcate, as do their Confessions, justifica- 
tion h J faith, and also justification by baptism. Thus 
they contradict in one place what they teach in another. 
But Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Methodists, 
do not surely believe these baptismal doctrines ! Many 
of them, I admit, earnestly deny it ! Gladly wotdd we 
credit their disavowals. But we take up their stand- 
ards, catechisms, and writers of authority, and there, 
word for word, are the passages I have recited, and 
much, very much more of the same character. They 

• Letters to Dr. Ward, Letter 161, 

t £zpo8. Thirty-Nine Artft., pp. 895, 896. 

10* 



114 iswAJsrr baptibic 

deny that they betieve tbeir doctrines, and yet they 
continue to publish them to the world as expressing 
truly their faith. From the pulpit and from the press 
they disclaim and repudiate them ; but when called to 
the sacred altar, in their vows of office, they solemnly 
declare before God and men, that they do believe them 
" ex animo I " What now shall we say ? They deny ; 
they affirm; they again deny ; and again affirm ! The 
same contradictions which so strikingly mark their Con- 
fessions and Catechisms; we find peryading all their 
teachings, and practice ! I lament these facts, but 
they are so natural to their position, that from them 
there seems to be, without changing their ecclesiastical 
relations, no way of escape. 

We now turn to consider briefly, the results of the 
condition of things submitted. They are evil, and evil 
Qidy. Look over the protestant christian world as it 
exists at the present moment, and you wiU find that in- 
fant baptism is again rapidly expelling, as it did in early 
times, the doctrine of justification by faith from the 
churches. Among the Lutherans of Germany, the 
Calvinists in continental Europe, the Episcopalians in 
England, and others — I speak of them as communities — 
the baptism of infants is observed with the utmost care- 
fulness, but justification by faith has no practical influ- 
ence whatever. It is still in their Confessions, but it ^ 
has been banished from their pulpits, from their hearts, 
and from the faith of their people. Justification by 
faith they receive from the Bible. Infant baptism and 
its accompanying doctrines, they receive from Popery. 
The former is of God. The latter is of men. They 
cannot continue to exist together. All those churches. 



OOErrRADIGTB JUSTCBIOATION BY FAITH. 115 

now regarded as evangelical, will, sooner or later, give 
up justification by faith, or they will give up infant bap^ 
tism. What has been will be again. " Coming events 
cast their shadows before/' Justification by faith from 
one direction, and the doctrines of infant baptism from 
the other, like opposing currents in the ocean, meet and 
form a whirlpool, in which no church exposed to its 
violence can long survive. 

We have now seen the doctrine of justification by 
faith, and the - principles of infant baptism, and con- 
trasting them, have found that they are wholly contra- 
dictory and irreconcilable ; we have seen that it was 
infant baptism mainly, which expelled the doctrine of 
justification by faith from the early churches, and 
brought on Popery, by which the world was shrouded 
in darkness for a thousand years ; we have seen through 
what providential agency this great doctrine was re- 
stored, and how it became the central principle of the 
Beformation ; we have seen that though justification by 
faith is embodied in all the Protestant Confessions, Cat- 
echisms, and other formularies, it is placed in them side 
by side with infant baptism, and its doctrines, and that, 
as elsewhere, they reciprocally contradict, refute, and 
nullify each other; we have seen, in the history of 
protestantism, the practical results of uniting these 
conflicting elements, and have found that they cannot 
exist together, but that the destruction of this funda- 
mental doctrine is the inevitable result of maintaining 
infant baptism ; and we have seen that the tendency of 
all the other protestant sects is in the same direction, 
and that they also, must ultimately abandon practically, 
if not professedly, either justification by faith, or infant 



116 ZHFASTT BAPTISM, STO. 

baptism, with tbe priociples upon wbicli it is maintain* 
ed, and defended. It is now demonstrated fully, thai 
the doctimiiS, upon which infant baptism rests, contra* 
diet the great fundamental principle of justification by 
faith. It is thereCore, m all its bearings and influences, 
an alanntnir and most diaastrous evil. 



CHAPTER VI. 

INTAirr BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT IS IN DIRECT 
CONFLICT WITH THE DOCTRINE OF REGENERATION BT 
THE HOLT SPIRIT. 

Nature of regeneration; its 6&rly Id^tity With baptism; popitfk doctrine 
on the subject ; true prineiple restored at the Reformation ; s^ain eoor 
founded ; Confessions of Faith, CstechisnU) standard writers ; contra- 
dictions; evils inflicted. 

The relations of itifant baptism to the doctrines of 
justification by faith, and regeneration by the Holy 
Spirit, are in many respects the same. In the preceding 
chapter we considered the former. We now proceed 
to examine the latter. This also es a vital topic. It 
must not be summarily dispatched. It is necessaty to 
both your happiness, and your safety, that you should 
understand it. Tou may easily be misled. God forbid 
that any obstruction should be thrown in the way of 
jour obtaining a full knowledge of all that concerns 
your everlasting life. 

Our brethren of all the protectant denominatiooB^ 
fmek that we are ngenerated by the Spirit <f God; 
laid they also teach that we are regenerated 6y baptism/ 
Both these propositions cannot be true. This is oeif- 

* Baptists are not protestants. That yon are aware of this is 
taken for granted. See the proof in my work on Commimioii. 



118 mFAurr baptism qgntbadictq 

evident, since they are in direct conflict with each other. 
By the word of God, we are instructed that, while, on 
the one hand, regeneration is a spiritual change wrought 
in the soul by the Holy Ghost, baptism, on the other, 
is merely an outward ordinance of our religion. The 
one is the work of God ; the other is the work of 
man. Believers only, can be admitted to baptism; 
every believer is regenerate : consequently none but 
the regenerate can be lawfully baptized. Regenera- 
tion must then, as you perceive, come before baptism. 
And besides, the supposition that baptism is essential 
to regeneration, or ever produces it, is absurd. He 
who is regenerate is "bom again," "born of God," 
"bom of the Spirit," "quickened" into new life, has 
Christ formed in him the hope of glory," and is 
made a partaker of the divine nature." The moral 
image of God, lost by sin, in regeneration is restored 
to the soul. Is baptism, or any other ordinance, or 
all the ordinances together, competent to this great 
work ? Why should it be effected in baptism rather 
than in any other christian duty ? Is it obtained by 
these, or by any similar acts ? TheiTit is certainly, in 
part at least, the work of man. But can regeneration 
be so accomplished ? The supposition is at war equally 
with reason, and the word of God. He only who cre- 
ated us originally, has power to renew, and so to change 
our nature that we shall be conformed to the character 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, enabled to love him su- 
premely, to delight in his service, and to overcome all 
our corrupt propensities, and dispositions. Regenera- 
tion is one thing, and baptism is another and wholly 
different thing ; nor are they, in any sense, dependent 



it 
« 



BSaENBBATION BY THE SPIRIT OF GOD, .119 

the one upon the other. How profoundly to be dep- 
recated the fact that they should be confounded, and 
that, by any class of men, the latter should be substi- 
tuted for the former ! This deplorable evil, to all who 
truly love our Lord Jesus Christ, and have any just 
conceptions of the gospel, is matter of the deepest 
regret. Regeneration is essential to salvation. " Ex- 
cept a man be bom again he can in no case enter 
into the kingdom of heaven." "Ye must be bom 
again." But he who has mistaken baptism for the 
new birth is never regenerated. How then can he be 
saved? 

Dangerous, however, and fearfully fatal, as is this 
insidious error, it nevertheless arose in the church at a 
very early period. Its appearance was simultaneous 
with the perversion of the doctrine of justification by 
faith. It was a result, evidently, of a misconception of 
the design of baptism. According to the apostles, 
baptism is one of the witnesses of God, for our Lord 
Jesus Christ, (the other two being the Spirit, and the 
blood, that is, the sacred supper,) and it bears testi- 
mony to ^ the amazing facts that he died for our sins, 
and was buried, and rose again for our justification. 
In receiving baptism we express our faith in the pri- 
mary truth that " we have redemption by his blood, 
the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his 
grace." Had the church adhered unwaveringly to apos- 
tolic instruction on this topic, the defection we now de- 
plore never could have occurred. But the fathers be- 
came, unhappily, wiser than the apostles, and they 
determined that it was necessary to have some sacra- 
mental emblem of the work not only of God the Son, 



120 INFAUT BAFTIBM 

but also of God the Holy Spirit. The Lord's snpper 
being commemorative of the sufferings and death of 
Christ, they thought that sufficient for him, and so re- 
moved baptism from its legal place, as a concurring 
witness, and not only without authority, but expressly 
against authority, made it a witness, and significant of 
regeneration. They accordingly defined it, " the out- 
ward and visible sign of the inward and spiritual 
grace." Here the perversion commenced. It was 
soon established. The work of deterioration then rap- 
idly progressed. Ere long all distinction wa6 forgot- 
ten, and the church and her teachers confounded hope- 
lessly, what they called " the sign,** with " the thing 
signified.** With them baptism was now regeneration, 
and regeneration vras baptism ! This delusion fixed it- 
self permanently, and remains to the present hour the 
strong fortress of popery. Both by Papists of the 
West, and Greeks of the East, it is uncompromisingly 
maintained. The Council of Trent accordingly de- 
creed thus : — " If any man shall say that baptism is 
not essential to salvation, let him he accursed. Sin, 
whether contracted by birth from our first parents, or 
committed ourselves, is by the admirable virtue of this 
sacrament, remitted and pardoned. In baptism not 
only our sins are remitted, but also all the punishtnents 
of sins and wickedness are graciously pardoned of God. 
By virtue of this sacrament we are not only delivered 
from these evils, but also we are enriched with the best 
and most excellent endowments. For our souls are 
filled with divine grace, whereby being made just, and 
the children of God, we are trained up to be heirs of 
salvation also. To this is added a most noble train of 



IK CONFUOT WITH BlEG^EKESATION. 121 

virtues, which, together with grace, is poured into the 
soul. By baptism we are joined and knit to Christ as 
members to the head. By baptism we are signed with 
a character which can never be blotted out of our soul. 
Besides the other things we obtain by baptism, it opens 
to every one of us the gate of hearen, which before 
through sin was shut."* 

These facts sufficiently explain the manner in which 
regeneration and baptism were at first confounded, and 
the fatal extent of the consequent delusion. Baptism 
was a panacea which cured every malady. This was 
the condition of things everywhere prevailing, when 
the Reformation dawned upon the world. Spiritual 
religion — except among, a few who were denounced as 
heretics, and hunted down with fire and sword — was 
lost, and grace, and salvation, were communicated, and 
obtained, only through sacraments. ''Darkness cov- 
ered the earth, and gross darkness the people. The 
Reformation poured a flood of light upon the world. 
It restored the doctrine of justification by faith, as we 
saw in the last chapter ; and it restored also, though 
much less perfectly, the doctrine of regeneration by 
the Holy Spirit. It did both by giving back to the 
people the Bible, of which for many centuries, priestly 
jealousy, and priestly domination, had deprived them. 
The minds of men were recalled to first principles. 
True penitents turned to God, and obtsdned as in 
primitive times, by faith in Christ, assurance of the 
divine favor, the Spirit bearing witness with their 
spirit that they were bom of God. Luther, and Me- 
lancthon, and Calvin, and Zuingle, and Ridley> and 

* Condi. Trid., SdM. T, Can. 5. 
11 



122 IBFAHT BAFTIBM 

Latimer, and their compeers, were tbemselyes doabt- 
less regenerated. 

In Germany, and England, and France, and even in 
Spain, men awoke as from a sleep of ages. They 
shuddered when they beheld the golf from which 
they were barely delivered. They commenced the 
work of reform. They exposed the abases of popery 
in terms of indignant eloquence. They stated some 
of the doctrines of Christ with great clearness, but 
this, it must be confessed, is exhibited with pmnful 
obscurity. In none of the German Confessions is it 
presented with satisfactory Tiistinctness. Nor is it set 
forth with more plainness in the Thirty-Nine Articles, 
or in the Articles of Religion of Mr. Wesley. The 
Calvinists had evidently a better comprehension of the 
doctrine than the other protestants. The Westminster 
Confession thus speaks : — God is pleased " effectually 
to call [men] by his word and Spirit, out of that state 
of sin and death in which they are by nature, to grace 
and salvation by Jesus Christ; enlightening their 
minds spiritually and savingly to understand the things 
of God, taking away their heart of stone, and giving 
unto them a heart of flesh ; renewing their wills, and 
by his almighty power, determining them to that which 
is good."* 

I am gratified to say, however, that all these de- 
nominations, but especially those portions of them 
w;ho have preserved their evangelical character, have 
gradually acquired, as they became better instructed in 
the word of God, more distinct and full conceptions of 
the work of the Spirit in regeneration, and especially 

* ArU X., sect. 1. 



IN OOKFUOT WITH SBGianSBATION. 123 

is this true of the various classes of Methodists, Con* 
gregationalists, and Presbyteiians in our countiy and in 
Europe. Apart from infant baptism, they recognize 
amply the great truth as stated by us, that regenera- 
tion is a change of heart, efifected exclusively by the 
Holy Ghost. More than this ; they give in their life 
and character, most gratifying evidence that they are 
themselves the subjects of this heavenly renovation. 
Thus happy, in its influence upon the character and 
destiny of the church and people of God, has been 
the Reformation. 

But has any portion of the protestant pedobaptist 
world fully renounced the old popish dogma which 
teaches that infants are regenerated in baptism ? Do 
they believe in the doctrine of regeneration as exclu- 
sively the work of the Holy Spirit, and also in the 
antagonistic and conflicting doctrine of regeneration 
by baptism ? Such inconsistency, it would seem, is 
almost incredible. Yet when infant baptism is to be 
administered, or defended, all their evangelical princi- 
ples are apparently forgotten. This relic of popery 
can only be sustained by the dogmas of popery. Bap- 
tism and regeneration are not now esteemed by them 
as separate and distinct things, but are declared es- 
sentially identical. This statement is not hazarded 
carelessly. It is made after mature thought, and full 
investigation. I am aware that it is not a light im- 
putation. I shall therefore sustain it by the amplest 
evidence. 

What kind of testimony may be regarded as satis- 
factory in proof of so grave a proposition ? The dec- 
larations of Confessions of Faith, Catechisms, and ac- 



124 imrAirr baptihk 

credited writers, must, of course, be condusive. To 
these, therefore, I direct your attention. The Augs- 
burg Confession sajs : — *' Our church likewise teaches 
that since the fall of Adam, all men who are natu- 
rally engendered, are bom with a deprared nature, 
that is, without the fear of God, or confidence to- 
wards him, but with sinful propensities ; and that this 
disease, or natural depravity, is really sin, and still 
condemned, and causes eternal death to those who are 
not bom again by baptism and the Holy Spirit."*^ 
The earlier Helvetic, another Lutheran Confession, is 
still more explicit. Its language is : — "Baptism is, by 
the institution of the Lord, the law of regeneratwn. 
With which holy law, we, on that account, baptize 
our infants." The Thirty-Nine Articles embrace in 
substance the declarations of the Augsburg Confession, 
and add, "There is no eondenmation to them that 
believe, and are baptized.**^ For this reason they also 
baptize their infants ! The Articles of Beligion of the 
Methodist church assert that, baptism is "a sign of 
regeneration, or the new birth,'* and is to be admin- 
istered to infants.^ The Westminster Confession says : 
Regeneration,^^ with various other blessings, is 
offered^* in baptism, and that "by the right use of 
this ordinance the grace promised is not only offered, 
but really exhibited and conferred by the Holy Ghost, 
to such, whether of age, or infants, as that grace be- 
longeth unto according to the counsel of God's owli 
will, in his appointed time."§ Other Confessions not 
yet noticed conciu* with these. The Belgic Confession 

♦ Conf., Art. 11. t Art. 9. 

( Art. 17. S Art. 284 seotB* 1, 6. 



« 



IK OONFLKTT WITH BBQISEIEBATION. 135 

says : — ^" The sacraments are signs, and visible sym- 
bols oi things internal, and invisible, by which, as by 
means, God himself works in us by the power of the 
Holy Ghost." The Heidelberg Catechism, or Confes- 
sion, written by Zachary Ursinus, says : — ** Christ com- 
manded the external laws of baptism with this prom- 
ise annexed, that [in it] I am not less certamly washed 
by his blood and Spirit, from the pollutions of the 
soul, that is, from all my sins/' The Gallican Con- 
fession says : — " God really, that is, truly and effica- 
ciously, does- whatever he there [in our baptism in 
infancy] sacramentally shadows forth, and therefore we 
annex to the signs the true possession of that thing 
[regeneration] which is thus offered us."* The same 
doctrine is maintained in the Bohemian, the Saxon, and 
all the others. 

These are the teachings of the Confessions. Their 
lessons cannot readily be mistaken. The Catechisms 
maintain the same doctrine. The Bishops of the Eng- 
lish church, in their ** Answers to the Ministers of the 
Savoy Conference," remark : — " We may say in faith, 
of every child that is baptized, that it is regenerate by 
God's Holy Spirit ; and the denial of it tends to Ana- 
baptism, and the contempt of this holy sacrament, as 
nothing worthy, nor material whether it be administer- 
ed to children or no."f The present Bishop of Exeter 
thus states the doctrine of his church : — " The grace 
of God so certainly attends this ceremony of baptism, 
that regeneration and baptism are contemporaneous, 
and the terms are convertible, and may be used inter* 

♦ Sylloge Conf., p. 74, et seq. 
t CaldweU's Conf., pp. 826, SS6. 

11* 



126 INFAirr BAPTKir 

cbangeably."* And did not Mr. Wesley express him- 
self in similar terms ? He says : — " By baptism we 
who are by nature the children of wrath, are made the 
children of God. And this regeneration which our 
church in so many places ascribes to baptism, is more 
than barely being admitted into the church, though 
commonly connected therewith." '' By water then as 
a means, the water of baptism, toe are regenerated and 
horn again, whence it is called by the apostle, ' the 
washing of regeneration.' In all ages the outward 
baptism is a means of the inward. Herein we receive 
a title to and an earnest of the kingdom, that cannot 
be moved. In the ordinary way, there is no other 
way of entering into the church, or mto heaven." 
"If infants are guilty of original sin, then they are 
proper subjects of baptism, seeing in the ordinary way, 
they cannot be saved unless this be washed away in 
baptism."! Mr. Henry, Prof. Hodge, and others of 
their class, teach, as we saw in the last chapter, doc- 
trines essentially the same. Mr. A ins worth says : — 
'' Thus to whom God giveth the sign and the seal of 
righteousness by faith, and of regeneration, they [the 
infants] have faith and regeneration ; for God giveth no 
lying sign; he sealeth no vain or false covenants." 
"If we cannot justly object against God's work in 
nature, but do believe that our infants are reasonable 
creatures, and are bom not brute beasts, but men, 
though actually they can manifest no reason, or un- 
derstanding more than beasts, then neither can we 
object to God's work in grace, but are to believe that 

♦ Gorham Trial. 

t Works, N. Y. edit., voL L, pp. 15, 16. 



IN OOKSUGT WTTH BEOENERA.TION. 127 

our infants are sanctified creatures, and are horn he- 
lievers, not infidels, though actually they can manifest 
no faith, or sanctification."^ But Calvin himself ought 
to be heard in behalf of his followers. He says: — 
" We agree that sacraments are not empty figures, but 
do truly supply whatever they represent; that the 
efficacy of the Spirit is present in baptism to cleanse and 
regenerate us"\ With the divines of Zurich, he had 
however, in this matter, one sad difficulty, which is 
more than intimated in the Westminster Confession. 
In ** The Argument," drawn up in 1549, Calvin says : 
— ** We diligently teach that God does not put forth 
his power without distinction to all who receive the 
sacraments, but only to the elect." If then the child 
is not one of the elect, it is not regenerated in baptism. 
If it is elect, it is certainly regenerated in baptism. 

A volume might be filled with similar passages, but 
further proof is deemed useless. The Catechisms, and 
standard writers, even more conclusively than the Con- 
fessions of Faith, demonstrate, as you must plainly see» 
all that I have alleged. The fact is now placed be- 
yond question that, whatever they may avow, or main- 
tain at other times, whenever this ordinance is in ques- 
tion they all connect infant baptism and regeneration. 
With the Lutherans infants are born again by baptism ; 
with Episcopalians baptism and regeneration are con- 
temporaneous, and the terms are convertible ; with the 
Methodists baptism is the means by which their infants 
are regenerated and bom again ; and with Presbyterians, 
since God gives no lying signs, nor seals, infants of be* 

* Hanbniy^s S^tor. Memor., vol. i., pp. 418, 414. 
t £pi0t» ad Melano. Op., vol. ix., Epist. 82. 



ISR JSFAST BAPTISM 

lierers are believers, and if they are elect ir^anis, they 
are regenerated, sanctified, adopted, have conferred upon 
them, in a word, "all the benefits of the death of 
Christ." " The denial of this tends," in the language 
of the bishops, " to Anabapiism, and the contempt of 
this holy sacrament as nothing worthy, or material 
whether it be administered to children or no." They 
all teach, therefore, that we are regenerated exclusiyely 
by the Holy Spirit of God ; afid they also teach that 
we are regenerated by b{4}tism ! These propositions 
are the opposites of each other. They cannot both be 
true. But the doctrine of regeneration by the Holy 
Spirit is true. Therefore the doctrine of infant baptism 
is not true. 

I am here again met, however, with the declaration, 
that the best and most pious of all these classes utterly 
deny that they believe at all, as charged, in baptismal re- 
generation. To this disclaimer I have already replied in 
such terms as I think appropriate. I have said that their 
positions are irreconcilably at variance. I have myself 
often heard them assure these same baptized children 
when grown up, who had been regenerated in their infan- 
cy, that they must yet be regenerated or they could not 
be saved ! The attitude in which they are thus placed 
is most perplexing, and pitiable. They solemnly de- 
' clare to the world that they do not believe the very 
dogmas that in their books they solemnly declare that 
they do believe ! They repudiate them, and adhere to 
them ! In this dilemma they have involved themselves. 
I lament it sincerely, and trust that they may yet see 
their inconsistencies, and embrace the whole *' truth as 
it is in Jesus." 



m OOHFUCT WITH BEaENERA^TIOK. 129 

In these facts and considerations we have revealed 
another of the evils of infant baptism. It withdraws 
the mind from truth, and places it upon a fiction. It 
seduces men from the reality to the mere forms of re- 
ligion. It attributes to an ordinance, which since it is, 
despoiled of its form, and appUed to unlawful subjects, 
is no ordinance of Jesus, a work which the Holy Ghost 
only can do. It is utterly subversiye of the fundamental 
doctrine of the work of regeneration by the Spirit of 
God. It is a most deplorable evil 



CHAPTER VII, 

IHFANT BAFnSM IS AN ETIL BXCAUSE IT DESPOILS THB 
CHURCH OF THOSE PECULIAR QUALITIES WHICH ARB 
ESSENTIAL TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST. 

Qnalitles enentlal to the chnreb ; bow dertroyed by inftnt baptism ; ex- 
amplM drawn (bom protestantism in its rarious forms ; recoTory of the 
church hopeless. 

The true visible church of our Lord Jesus Christ 
upon earth, is necessarily spiritual, and pure. If de- 
prived of these qualities, it is evidently no longer his 
church. Its form, and organization, may still be re- 
tained ; it may be great, and powerful, and honored ; 
but it is a mere worldly corporation. It is not the 
church of Christ. 

Do you inquire what I mean by spirituality, and 
purity ? By spirituality 1 mean, that disposition of 
mind implanted by the Holy Ghost, by which men are 
inclined to love, delight in, and attend to the things of 
the Spirit of God. Those who are spuitual seek 
spiritual blessings, engage in spiritual exercises, pursue 
spiritual objects, are influenced by spiritual motives, 
and experience spiritual joys. Paul describes their 
character in terms, as clear as they are comprehen- 
sive. ** They that are after the flesh, do mind the 
things of the flesh ; but they that are after the Spirit, 
the things of the Spirit. For to be carnally-minded is 



raEAHT BAPTISM, ITTO. 181 

death, but to be spirituallj-minded is life, and peace. 
Because the carnal mind is enmity against Ood ; for it 
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. 
So then, they that are in the flesh cannot please Qod."* 
Such is spirituality. And purity is a fixed hal»t of 
abhorrence of whatever holiness forbids, whether in the 
heart or in the life. It is the disposition Uiat discoren it* 
self by a cautions fear of all that leads to sin, and by 
perseverance in prayer, devotion, and the service of God. 
Where these two qualities exist, all the others that difr- 
tinguish true christians, will ever be present. A con- 
gregation of such will be "living stones, built up a 
spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual 
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, "f All 
those from whom they are absent, are carnal and im- 
holy. And can men of this class legitimately compose 
Christ's church upon earth ? The supposition is pre- 
posterous. Spirituality, and purity, must distinguish 
those who are entitled to a place in the sanctuary of 
God. 

Of this character were all those who formed the 
church in its original organization. The King in Zion 
intended and required that the holiness of his church 
should be preserved, and perpetuated. But how can 
this be done ? Its accomplishment demands evidently, 
the strictest regard to appropriate laws of membership. 
That the required character cannot otherwise be at- 
tained must, to every thinking man, be perfectly ob- 
vious. Who does not know that the character of any 
association, among men, is determined, and ever miet 
be determined, by its laws of membership ? Tliese 
» Som. yiii., 6-^. t 1 Pet ii., 5. 



132 norAsrr bajptebm 

laws decide the qualifications of the individuals of 
"whom the association is composed. The aggregate is 
made up of the individuals. The character of the in- 
dividuals will inevitably be the character of the a^so- 
datum. This truth is self-evident. That would not 
be a Temperance society, however vehemently it, might 
demand the name, which should receive, and retain, 
krge numbers of men who continue in the daUy use 
of ardent spirits as a beverage. A Literary society 
would not remain such, in any proper sense, when 
filled up with wieducated men, who neither study, nor 
intend to study literature. Kor would a Medical so- 
ciety deserve the name, if composed mostly of plant- 
ers, merchants, and lawyers, who designed to give no 
special attention to medicine. If the specific character 
of the association is preserved and perpetuated, those 
only must be admitted to membership, and retsuned in 
the body, who are qualified by the necessary acquire- 
ments, and disposed to prosecute the objects had in 
view in its formation. These great truths are espe- 
cially applicable to the church of Christ. Her spirit- 
ualitg and purity as a body, can be preserved and per- 
petuated no otherwise than by admitting to member- 
ship, and retaining in communion, those individuals only 
Tf ho are spiritual and pure. 

In accordance with these facts, and corroborating 
their truth, the laws of membership enacted by our 
Lord Jesus Christ, are fixed with the greatest possi- 
ble plainness and particularity. Baptism is the out- 
ward form in which this membership is given and as- 
sumed. This ordinance is essential to admission into 
the visible church, and of that church all who receive 



DEBTBOTB THE GHUBOH. 133 

it are members. Paul so teaches us when he says : — 
" As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, 
have put on Christ."* All the denominations around 
us receive, and act upon this truth. At the baptism of 
a child in the Episcopal church, the minister says : — ** We 
receive this child into the congregation of Christ's flock, "f 
The Methodist minister says when a child is baptized, it 
is done that : — "He [this child] being delivered from thy 
[God's] wrath, may be received into the ark of Christ's 
church."J And the Presbyterian says : — " Baptism is 
a sacrament of the New Testament," "whereby the 
parties baptized are solemnly admitted into the visible 
church, and enter into an open and professed engage- 
ment to be wholly and only the Lord's."§ The laws 
of baptism, therefore, are confessedly included in the laws 
of membership. Let these laws, as enacted by Messiah, 
now be indicated. " TVoeA," said he, and " baptize** 
the instructed. "Preach the gospel," and "him that 
helieveth** the gospel, " baptize" In all your adminis- 
trations let the fact be remembered, that " My kingdom 
is not of this world."|| " The kingdom, and the domin- 
ion, and the greatness of the kingdom imder the whole 
heaven, shall be given to the people of the saint^ of 
thie Most High."^ The language of the New Cove- 
nant describes truly, without doubt, the character of 
those who are in that covenant, and such only are le- 
^timateiy, church members. "I will," says God, 
" put my laws into their mind, and write them in their 
heart ; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be 

» Gal. iU., 27. + The Liturgy. 

t Disdpline, oh. 8, seot. 2. § liorger Catechism, Qaest. 165. 
I John zviiL, 26. f Dan. vii, 27. 

12 



184 INTANT BAFTnaC 

to me a people ; and they shall not teach every man 
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know 
the Lord ; for all shall know me, from the least to the 
greatest/'* By the laws of Christ, therefore, only those 
are to be admitted into the chmvh who have been 
taught, who believe, who are not of this world, who 
are saints, in whose mind and heart the law of God is 
incorporated, and who know the Lord as their God. 
This character is required of them also by their rela- 
tions to Jehovah. The church of Ood offer him ac- 
ceptable worship, but this can be done by no others 
than those described ; *' for G-od is a Spirit, and they 
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and m 
truth."! It is also demanded by their relations to 
mankind. *' Ye are the salt of the earth. But if the 
salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted ? 
It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, 
and to be trodden under foot of men. Te are the 
hght of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot 
be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it un- 
der a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it giveth light 
unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine 
be^re men, that they may see your good works, and 
glorify your Father which is in heaven. "{ 

These are some of the laws of membership in his 
church as fixed by Christ himself. How definite I How 
precise in all things ! They describe, with the utmost 
clearness, the spiritual, and the pure. None others can 
ent«r his church, since it is his purpose to perpetuate 
in the body these holy qualities. The execution of these 
laws ia confided to bis ministers and fieople. If they 

•H6b.Yiu., 6. tBom. Tin., 2-6. t M«tt. v., 18-17. 



DES1!B0ZB TBDB QHUBCH. 18S 

swerve from their dttty, the result is lost. The skiet^ 
est obedience on their part, is coDsequeatlj commaoded^ 
and enforced by the most solenm sanctions. He who 
fails in his fidehty, no matter Who he is, or what may 
be his official po^tbn, sins against God, by disregard- 
ing his solemn injmictions ; sins against the church, by 
corrupting and degrading it; sins against the worlds 
because he removes and extii^ishes the light by 
which it is to be guided to salvation ; and sins against 
his own sotily covering himself with crime, and con- 
demnation. 

We are now prepared to inquire into the effect pro- 
duced upon the character of the church by ir^ant bap' 
tism. It sets aside all the laws of membership enacted 
by Christ for her preservation and glory ; it proceeds 
upon others of its own creation, and substitution ; it 
brings into Uie body, not the spiritual and pure only, 
but also all classes of men ; and it thus impresses upon 
it such a character as effectually destroys its claims to 
be regarded as the true visible church of Christ. It 
is thenceforth necessarily carnal and unholy. It is not 
the church of Christ, 

Infant baptism, I have said, necessarily leads to this 
melancholy result Let this proposition be further 
conadered. Does it not, to the extent that it pre*^ 
vails, throw the whole population of the country into 
the church ? This fact no man will deny. Is it not 
also true, tbat great multitudes of these baptlted chil- 
dren grow up to maturity in the church, worldly, sen- 
sual, wicked men ? They are all members, and some 
of them ministers, and other officers, in the church I 
If, as we have seen, the character of an association as 



186 IHXAJrr BAPTBK 

a body, is necessarily that of the indiTidiials of wliich it 
18 composed, then it follows with certainty, that infant 
baptism must soon despoil the church of its spirituality 
and purity, and render it carnal and unhdy, since it is 
by this rite, filled with members, officers, and nunisters, 
who are not themselyes spiritnal and pure, but carnal, 
unholy, and worldly. The church is what the members 
are of which it is composed. 

But the evil influence in the connection in which I 
now speak of it, is not negative merely, it is positive, 
and overwhelming. It not only exclztdes spirituality 
and purity from the church, but it introduces corrup- 
tions of the most destructive character. 

How it corrupts the church in her membership is 
sufficiently apparent. Its corrupting influence upon 
her doctrines has been seen in previous chapters. I 
:nrill here recapitulate. It perverts the word of God to 
bring it apparently into its support ; it engrafts Juda- 
ism upon the gospel of Christ ; its principles contra- 
dict the doctrine of justification by faith ; they are in 
conflict with the work of the Spirit in regeneration ; 
and they falsify the doctrine of universal depravity. 
What fearful destruction it has thus wrought«in all that 
is revered and holy ! What now must be her general 
temper, and disposition? Will she be as designed by 
Jesus Christ, and represented by his apostles, " A glo- 
rious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any sucb 
thing, but holy, and without blemish?"* Will she 
" crucify the flesh, with its affections and lusts ?" 
Will she " live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit," 
bringing forth the fruits of ''love, joy, peace, long-suf- 

♦ Eph. v., 27. 



IXBSmOTB THB GfllTBGH. 137 

fering, gentleness, goodness, faith, temperance?" Will 
she not rather be guided by ambition, pride, and vain- 
glory, relying for her advancement upon measures of 
mere worldly policy ? Will she not prefer a learned, 
or an eloquent, to a converted ministry ? Will she not 
be ready to embrace any false doctrines, or unscriptural 
practices, which may be found congenial with her un- 
sanctified nature, and suited to her purposes of domin- 
ion, and powQr? With such a spirit infant baptism 
has always been found inspiring the church. Nor is 
this less true of Protestantism than it is of Popery» 
Whence originated the Neology of Lutheranism, the 
Puseyism of Episcopacy, and the Unitarianism and 
Universalism of Calvinism ? Had these churches ad- 
hered to the laws of membership established by Christ 
Jesus, and admitted, or retained in their communion, 
none but the truly converted, could these miserable 
dogmas ever have covered them with shame and misery ? 
They are all, therefore, the legitimate oflfepring of in- 
fant baptism. Its advocates have " sown the wind," 
and as a natural consequence, " they have reaped the 
whirlwind." 

Nor does the evil of. infant baptism terminate even 
here. It blots out every vestige of the church itself, by 
wholly destroying its visibility ! This proposition may 
seem startling. Let us give it a candid investiga- 
tion. 

The doctrine taught by pedobaptists would bring 
every child upon earth into the church as soon as it is 
bom ! We will suppose, for the sake of the illustra* 
tion, that from this hour, the gospel is known in every 
land, and these principles universally prevail. What 

12* 



188 WPAssm iiA»i«ii 

would be the praetical effect ? Evidently that in on$ 
generation the whole world would be in the church / The 
Presbyterians would baptiee all the children of believing 
parents ; the Episcopalians would baptise '* upon the faith 
of the church/' all those for whom sponsors could bo se- 
cured ; and the Methodists, and others, would baptise the 
remainder ! Not a living being would be out of the church ! 
What now is the condition of things ? The church is 
the W(M-ld ; and the world is the church ! They are 
identical ! Either there is no church ; or there is no 
world ! If the world is not the church — and we know 
that it is not — then there is no visible church of God 
upon earth/ Its visibility is destroyed; and is de- 
stroyed bp infant baptism. What do we now see? 
The spirituaUty of the church is gone ! The purity 
of the church is gone ! The visibility of the church is 
gone ! The church itself is gone I It is despoiled of 
those peculiar qualities which are essential to the 
church of Christ. If there is no other than a Pedo- 
baptist church, then there is no true visible church of 
Christ upon earth ! 

But is not this an overstatement of the case? Would 
not a laudable christian charity draw a much brighter 
picture than the one I have now sketched ? I am re- 
minded that the Methodist church, the Presbyterian 
church, the Congregational church, and several other 
churches in this country, and in England, are, in their 
mumerous divisions, highly evangelical. All these, 
with infant baptism, still hold and teach the great fun- 
damental truths of the gospel. I am happy to con* 
cede that this is true. It is, however, the result of a 
peculiar condition of tihings, and cannot, therefore, dis* 



TXBSfSOYB TBE OHUSCH. 188 

credit any argument wbieh has been submitted on the 
subject. . Ihur causes, continually acting upon them 
ally have hitherto preserved them, in a great measure^ 
from falling into the same destruction which has over- 
whelmed others. 

The first is the grtai Baptist principle^ with which 
they are imceasiDgly in contact. In North America 
the Baptist churches contain a million of communi- 
cants. Four millions more, at least, are of their opin- 
ion, and under their influence. Nearly one-fourth, 
therefore, of all our population are strongly BaptisticaL 
All these regard infant baptism, and infant churok 
membership, as wholly unauthorized, and treat them 
as nonentities in religion. These Baptists ave difiused 
in all the families of the land, high and Iow> rich and 
poor, bond and free, learned and unlearned. They are 
associated with their Pedobaptist brethren upon equal, 
and most intimate terms. As a consequence of this 
state of things, the influence of infant baptism is, to a 
v^y great extent, neutralised, and destroyed. 

The second of these causes is the umversaU diffusion 
of the Bible, The^word of God is now carefully stud^ 
ied, in Sabbath-schools, in Bible-classes, in families, and 
in the closet, not by scholars only, but also by sfl 
classes of our people, and it is probably better under^- 
stood by them all, than it has ever been at any period 
since the days of the apostles. The masses are en- 
lightened; they exercise their own judgment; and. 
their religious opinions are approaching, consequently, 
much nearer the scriptural standard. In all the teach- 
ings of that holy book they find not one word to justify 
infant baptism. Thousands, consequently, who have 



140 XNFAiirr BAPnBM 

received the rite, refuse utterly, to act in accordance 
with it. They do not regard themselves as church 
memhers, or in any way privileged spiritually, hecause 
of their infant baptism. That, say they, was only a 
form. And indeed, so far has this conviction proceed- 
ed, that many, very many memberSf even of Pedobap- 
tist churches, do not hesitate to avow their entire dis- 
belief in the whole theory. Hence its wide-spread 
neglect throughout our whole land. In proportion as 
the Bible is understood, loved, and obeyed, does infant 
baptism, in all its relations and bearings, dwindle, and 
recede from public view. 

The third cause is found in the character of oar Pe^ 
dobaptist -ministry. The great body of them, and es- 
pecially of those connected with the denominations I 
have named, are converted men. Their religion and 
good sense lead them involuntarily to discard, except 
in its forms, the puerilities of their distinguishing rite. 
They preach to all alike, and boldly declare to sinners 
of every class, that if they are saved at all, it must be 
alone by the grace of God in Jesus Christ our Lord, 
whom they can approach only as penitent believers, 
and whose Spirit must renew and sanctify their hearts. 
Thus preaching the fundamental truths of the gospel, 
they falsify infant baptism, keep it out of sight, and 
avert in part its deleterious influence. 
. The fourth and last cause is the revivals of religion 
. which have so long, and so extensively prevailed in our 
country. Of these, in common with our churches, 
theirs have largely, and happily partaken. These re- 
vivals call the thoughts of men directly to the corrup- 
tions of their own nature, to the light of the word of 



DJSffTBOYQ THE OHUBGH. 141 

God, to the cross of the Redeemer, to regeneration by 
the Holy Ghost, and to pardon, justification, and salva- 
tion, through faith in Christ. True religion is thus 
everywhere spread abroad, and many, notwithstanding 
the errors of their standards, and other authorities, 
whose forms they still observe, are converted, and saved. 

These, mainly, are the causes which in America, and 
the British dominions, have thus far averted from them, 
its natural and inherent evils, and preserved their church- 
es from total overthrow. Take these away, and nothing 
can save them from utter disaster. 

We have now established our proposition by scripture, 
reason, and facts. We proceed still further to illustrate 
and confirm it, by the history and present state of ike 
Pedcbaptist world. 

Infant baptism swept the primitive churches into po- 
pery, with all its darkness, and horrors. The earthly 
" Head and Ruler," thus brought whole nations into 
the church, and made them subject to his authority. 
National governments were within, and subordinate to 
his, and all the people of which they were composed 
oVed to the "Holy See" their personal and primary 
allegiance. Thus the pope ruled the nations with " a 
rod of iron." That all this is due to infant baptism is 
demonstrated by these two facts : in the first place, 
that he exercised this authority solely upon the ground 
that the people, and princes, were all members of his 
church ; and in the second place, we all know that 
they never could have been of his church, but for in- 
fant baptism. May I not add, that it is by the same 
means that he still retains his influence over nations, * 
and communities, keeps them in awe of his spiritual 



14S inriJiT BikPTHH 

prerogaliTes, and holds them in servile snbjeetion to 
his will ? For what other purpose than to force them 
under his authority, does he so sedulouslj inculcate 
the pernicious dogma, that by their baptism received 
in infancy, they are brought into the fold of the church, 
wihin which they will be saved, and out q^ which 
they will be damned ; and that therefore, if they re- 
nounce their baptism, or apostatize from popery, their 
everlasting destruction is certain? Bo any of these 
nations, or communities, dare at any time, to oppose 
his authority, or disobey his orders ? He immediatelj 
lays them under an interdict^ suspending the sacraments, 
all public prayers, burials, and baptisms, the obseqmous 
priests implicitly obeying his mandates. A supersti- 
tious dread of these prohibitions, and particularly of 
that which withholds baptism from their children, soon 
reduces the people to an humble compliance, nnce to 
parents it seems most horrible that their children thus 
deprived must, if they die, be inevitably lost Whole 
kingdoms therefore yield to his exactions, however ar- 
bitrary or oppressive, because thereby, as they sup- 
pose, they save their own souk, and the souls of their 
children, which would be lost if they did not submit 
to the " Vicar of Christ !'' What a tremendous influ- 
ence does infant baptism give to popery ! How cun- 
ningly is it adapted to uphold its power !* 

Protestant Hierarchies in the old world were not, in 
adopting infant baptism, indifferent to the power which 
they would be able through its means, to exert over 
the people. But we are now considering its effect 

* Consult Dr. Gill^s In£ Bftp. a Fart and FOlar of Popeiy, 



upoa the ffiriiuaUty, the puriiiy, and other holy'quM* 
ties, which are essential to the true church of Christ. 
In these respects what, when uninfluenced hy antago- 
nistic causes, such as those I have recited, has been 
its effects upon the churchea of the Befarmatian ? Sur- 
yey the present aspect of the Epkcopal Church, and 
especially in England. Her creed was in the main, 
evangelical. Many of h^ eaxly miwtera were men of 
great leaniing, energy, and piety. She took a firm 
hold upon a large proportion of the people. She abol- 
ished the mass, and with it purged out most of the 
grosser abominations of popery, but she reiained ir^ni 
baptism, with its sacramental doctrines; It has had 
time to produce its mature fruits. And what are 
they? "The land which around the martyr-fires of 
Smithfield, swore eternal hatred to popery, is now full 
of popish cUgnitaries, popish priests, and popish prose- 
lytes r* Almost every week announces the conversion 
to Romanism of some of her minbters, and people ! 
Infant baptism has destroyed her gospel faith, and 
transformed her worship into a beggariy imitation of 
Italian pageantry. Of the Methodist church, a late 
and vigwous offshoot of Episcopacy, it is proper to 
say, that it has not. ^t existed long enough to feel 
deeply, the evils in question. But since it is following 
in the same steps, it must, at length, reach the same 
results. How many already, of her ministers, and 
members^ are found gding over to the Episcopal 
church, and some of them go on to Puseyism, and to 
Home 1 Thus Methodisooi evinces that the blood of the 
laother courses in the veins of the daughter. 
Turn now to Lutheranism. The fabric reared by 



144 iHMBT BAnmc 

the lefw me ni of QenDanj^ was Qrigiiuilly, mtaave, 
lofty, and glorious. But infant baptism was left, ap- 
parently a little rill beneath its fonndati<m. It has 
continued to flow on, slowly bat certainly nndermining 
the structure, and now it is OTertumed, and lies pros- 
trate, in stately ruins ! " For two centuries the doc- 
trines taught by Luther, were rigidly maintained. But 
they were by many, held merely as a dead letter." 
They constituted " a theological creed for which men 
would buckle on the armor of controversy, but which 
had no place in their hearts, and no influence over their 
hyes." " There came at last a chapge over the public 
mind." There was " a breaking away from old paths 
of thought, and a reckless pushing into new ones." 
What power existed to cU^k this current of things ? 
The whole of the people were in the church. Infant 
baptism had placed them there. Very few were con- 
verted. "Even her pastors, and theological professors, 
were in most instances, destitute entirely of any ex- 
perimental acquaintance with the power of Christianity. 
Such could have no inward witness of the truth of the 
gospel, and no illumination of the Spirit to guide them 
in their inquiries. Led exclusively, by nnsanctified 
reason, and a skeptical philosophy, they plunged into 
speculations" the most wild and extravagant. The 
Bible was either perverted to sustain their infidel theo- 
ries, or regarded by them as a mere mythical repre- 
sentation. Its inspiration they discarded as a fond 
conceit of former days. "This condition of things has 
continued until the church of Luther, the eldest daugh- 
ter of the Beformation, has, to a great extent, become 
crowded in all her departments with men who, while 



BESTBOYS THE GHT7BCH. 1^5 

partaking of her ordinances, and filling her offices, 
laugh ^t her doctrines/' and trample upon the word of 
God ! Tholuck, a distinguished minister of her own, 
says of the present state of the Lutheran church, that, 
it is "a huge mass, stiff, cold, and livid. What in 
many of its parts appears ISke life, is hut the life of the 
corruption itself hy which these parts are dissolving. 
Only here and ther^ amoiig its djring members is there 
a living one, that with difficulty averts death from it- 
self."* This is the deplorable condition of protestant 
Christianity in all the German states. By what means 
has it been produced ? By infant baptism. The bar- 
riers with which Jesus Christ surrounded his church, 
were by this rite, thrown down, and the unregenerate, 
profane, and worldly filled hef sanctuary. 

The church of Calvin offers to our consideration, and 
from the same cause, a similar history. Like Luther, 
he did not return to the gospel laws of membership, 
but continued the initiatory ordinance as practised by 
popery. The light of his doctrines, with the piety of 
his people, gradually waned. The very city where he 
dwelt, is now covered by " the black night of Sodn- 
ianismf Her radiance is quenched. Her voice of 
truth is hushed. The very pulpit in which he preach- 
ed, is polluted by lips that deny the divinity of the Son 
of God, and the renewing agency of his Holy Spirit." 

Such are the results to which infant baptism has al- 
ready brought Episcopacy, Lutheranism, and Calvinism, 
in Europe. But a still more striking instance, if possi- 
ble, of its pernicious effects is furnished in the history 
of Puritanism in our own country. ** The founders of 

* Predigten, Band 1, § 25. 
13 



146 mFAJsrr baptibm 

the New £ngland cliurclies had cast off the fetters of 
a tyrannical Hierarchy in the old world, and they 
brought with them to the new, views respecting the 
spiritual nature of christian communities, and the sim- 
pHcity of christian worship^ much more correct than 
those generally entertained in that age. They were 
men profoundly read in the scriptures, of great faith 
and zeal, and of exumplary holiness.* '' Their situation 
removed them far from the corrupting* influence of 
other less Evangelical societies. They were alone in 
the wilderness, with themselves, their offspring, and 
their God." Here, then, if it •irer can be anywhere, 
infant baptism would surely have been harmless. The 
process by which it inevitably leads to deterioration is 
thus described by Dr. Wisner, mho being himself a 
Puritan Pedobaptist, cannot be suspected of having 
colored his picture too highly. ** As to the promises 
[made at their baptism, by parents and friends] of 
educating children in the fear of the Lord," "they 
soon came to be alike disregarded by both those who 
exacted, and those who made them." "The most 
solemn and impressive acts of religion, came to be re^ 
garded as unmeafing ceremonies, the form only to be 
thought important, while the substance was overlooked, 
and rapidly passing away." " And now another and 
still more fatal step, was taken in this downward 
course. Why should such a difference be made [in the 
persons receiving them] between the two christian sac- 
raments, which reoAoa infers from the nature of the 
case, and the scriptures clearly determine, reqmre pre- 
cisely the same qualifications ? If persons were qual- 
ified to make in order to come to one ordinimce, [bap- 



DESTB0T8 THE OHIXBCH. 147 

■ 

tism] tbe very same profession, both in meaning and 
terms, required to come to the other, [the communion] 
why should they be excluded from that other ? The 
practical result, every one sees, would be, that if the 
innovation already made ^known among them as the 
Half- Way Covenant, according to which all the bap- 
tized, if not openly immoral, were regarded as church 
members^] were hot abandoned, another would be 
speedily intfoduced. And such was the fioct. Cor- 
rect moral deportment, with profession oV correct de- 
votional opinions, and a desire for regeneration, soon 
came to be regarded a»^-the only qualification for admis- 
sion to the communion,** Tl^e churches soon tame to 
consist very considerably, in many places, of unre^en- 
erate persons ; of t]y)se who regarded themselves, and 
were regarded by others, as unregenerate. Of all these 
things the consequence was, that within thirty years 
after the commencement of the eighteenth century, a 
large portion of the clergy throughout the country, 
were either only speculatively correct, or to some ex- 
tent actually erroneous in their religious opinions; 
maintaining regularly the forms of religion, but in some 
instances having'well-nigh lost, and ifi others having, it 
is to be feared, never felt its power, "f • 

"To such a states" remarks Dr. Ide,J "had the Pu- 
ritan churches of New England been brought by in- 
fant baptism within a single century ! Silently, but 
surely, it had done its work !" Successively it had de- 

* Vide Matber^s Magnalia, Book 5. 

t History of the Old Soath Chnrch. 

X In his excellent chapter in Gill's Part and Pillar, ch. 4, from 
which I havp here drawn my statements regarding Episcopacy, 
Lutheranism, Calvinism, and Poritanism. 



iiS INFABT BAFnBK 

Ktroyed the spiiituality, and the parity of the church. 
Truth was abandoned. BeligioD expired. ''Ereiy- 
where men avowedly unconverted, belonged to her 
communion, presided over her interests, and senred at 
her altars. With such a membership, and such a 
ministry, both alike carnal, it was not to be supposed 
that the church would long retain even a theoretical 
belief in the grand teachmgs of revelation. These, 
however, were not at once repudiated. The forms of 
faith which have become fixed in a community, do not 
suddenly pass away. Truth leaves the heart, and the 
lips, long before it leaves the (»reed. For a consider- 
able period, therefore, a dead, leaden orthodoxy hung 
over New England, hiding like a shroud the rottenness 
beneath. But this could not continue. An incipient 
change began to be perceived. The distinguishing 
doctrines of the gospel were not, indeed, denounced 
and opposed. They were passed over. While keep^ 
ing their place in the. Confessions, and Articles, they 
were quietly dismissed from the pulpit, to make room 
for moral essays, and panegyrics on the beauty of nat- 
ural virtue. The downward progress having gone thus 
far, must go further. Men are never satisfied with 
what is merely negative. They demand a positive. 
When once they have* discarded positive truth, their 
next step is to embrace positive error. Hence we find 
that as early as the middle of the last century, opin- 
ions involving a denial of the proper divinity of Christ, 
the depravity of human nature, the need of atone- 
ment, and the work of the Holy Spirit in regenera- 
tion, were extensively adopted in Massachusetts." 
'' They spread for fifty years through the country, per- 



DEBTBOTO THE CH0BCH. 149 

vading the graceless clergy, and more graceless laity/' 
''At last the great Unitarian apostasy stood revealed v^ 
aU its hideous deformity /" 

All these facts are authenticated by the stern Tdce 
of impartial history. They afford a demonstration most 
perfect, that infant baptism, wherever it is not coun- 
teracted by mitigating influences, will destroy, and must 
destroy, the spiritvaiity, the purity, the very visihility 
of the jchinrch. It inevitably despoils her c^ all those 
qualities which are essential to the true church of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

Infant baptism, as must be seen, in the light of all 
ihe facts and considerations now before you, is not 
merely a question of an oMinanee, it is also a ques- 
tion of tnembership in the church of Christ. In the 
former sense it is unlawful. In the latter it is fear- 
fully destructive. It most always give character to 
the church in which it is practised. It inevitably fiUs 
it with the unregenerate, and unholy, with skeptics, 
and unbelievers. And still more* Ayamst this de^ 
terioration and montl death, there is for Pedobaptist 
tkureheSf as such, no possible remedy. They possess 
within themselves no power to throw them off. They 
must wither and expire imder their influence. Not so 
with us. Do corruptions, no matter of what char^ 
acter, invade Baptist churches F They contain in- 
herently all the elements of restoration. They have 
only to recur to first principles, to their inspired laws 
of memhership, and discipline. By the former, no per- 
sons are admitted to a place among them, but those 
who are decided, in a judgment of charity, lo be true 
penitent believiNrs in Christ, bom of the Holy Ghost; 

13* 



150 INFAJfT BAFTffiM 

and by the latter laws, all those who depart from piety 
in Ufe, or truth in principle, are promptly separated 
from their communion. By this simple, but effective 
process, how often h&ve they puiged themselves from 
evils of all kinds ! Striking instances are perhaps, 
within your own memory. Antinomianism attempted 
to fasten itself upon our churches. It was promptly 
thrown off. Campbellism came, with its Pedobaptist 
doctrine of sacramental efficacy. They arcipe and cast 
out this source of impurity. Thus they have acted 
in all ages. They have only to enforce the fundamental 
laws of their constitution, which require that God's 
spiritual house shall be composed of spiritual mate- 
rials. While they do this, they will ever rejoice in a 
pure doctrine, a pure membership, a pure and able 
ministry, and a vigorous life. With Pedobaptist churches 
the case is wholly different. From a resort to first 
principles they can derive no help. These very first 
principles, embracing, as they do, infant baptism, and 
infant church membership, have done all the mischief. 
While they preserve and cherish the source whence 
they arise, they can never escape the corruptions that 
necessarily result. They may manifest occasional 
amendment. There may be in their history, intervals 
of revival. There have been such, in this country, 
among Presbyterians, and Congregationalists, and in 
the Methodist branch of the Episcopal church. Com- 
parative spirituality and purity, will in such cases, for a 
while prevail. But these periods must be evanescent. 
The same prolific fountain is perpetually sending f<Mrth 
its streams, and they must soon again be deluged. 
ITiey have no remedy^ They must renounce their first 



d!e8TBOtb the ouukcu. 151 

principles, and adopt the laws of church membership 
contained in the word of God. The annals of history 
contain not an instance of a Pedobaptist church, that 
has continued a Pedobaptist church, which has radical- 
ly and permanently reformed itself. The Church of 
England has not done it. The Church of Germany 
has not done it. The Church of Calvin has not done 
it. No Pedobaptist church ever has done it. None 
ever will, except those who cease to receive into their 
bosom the worldly and the profane. In a word, if 
they w;ould be what the church was designed to be by 
Christ, they must cease to be Pedobaptists, 

With Baptists, I remark in conclusion, are lodged, 
as you must plainly see, the only conservative influences 
now existing in the universe. It is ours^ with the 
blessing of God, to save from being quenched that 
truth which is " the world's only hope." It is ours 
also, to save Pedobaptists themselves, of all classes, 
from the consequences of their own errors. If we do 
not save them, they must sink. It is ours fb spread 
the gospel throughout the round earth. How exalted, 
therefore, how responsible, how far-reaching, is our 
mission/ It is fearfully sublime. It has, however, 
been assigned us by our God. Sustained by his grace, 
^t us dbcharge it with fidelity. He is even now, cloth- 
ing us with strength for the work. How unexampled 
^ our multiplication ! How rapid our diffusion over 
the whole earth ! Jehovah is evidently about to vin- 
^cate his gospel ; to sweep away the clouds of igno- 
)Ance, superstition, and error; to restore to man a 
pure uxd glorious Christianity. Of this great conflict 
hhi* Mill consent to remain an idle spectator ? Who 



152 iNVUxT BAitnSH, trrc. 

can refrain from participating in the Battle? Who 
does not involuntarily exclaim witli the piincely proph- 
et, "For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace, and 
for Jerusalem's sake I will not be silent, imtil this 
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and thia 
salvation thereof as a lamp that bumeth ?'* 



CHAPTER VIII. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE ITS PRACTICE 
PERPETUATES THE SUPERSTITIONS BY WHICH IT WAS 
ORiaiNALLY PRODUCED. 

OaiHeB wbieh produeed inflmt baptfini; hypofbesls b)r whicai It mm Jnt- 
tifled ; protestantB adopted it with all its ancient abaardities ; its ort- 
ginal saperstiticma still preyaiL 

INFANT baptism is f he o&j)titig (^ miper$iitvon. Nor 
lias any of the progeny of that most prolific mother 
been more productive of evil to the cause 6f tmth and 
salvation. In these respeets it has amply justified its 
origin. It is not the eldest hottk, but it is the most 
popular and insidious of them all* 

During the apostolic age, and until two hundred 
years of the church had been told, infant baptism was 
wholly unknown. The history of that period^ whether 
sacred or profane, inakes not the remotest allusion to 
such a practice. This of itself, is sufScient proof that 
it did not exist. But it is not the only testimony. The 
fathers in the church who then lived and wrote, often 
speak of baptism, and always in such terms as to con- 
vince us that it was not administered to children. One 
of them — Justin-— contrasts the state of christiaiis at 
their birth with their state at their baptism. " Then 
[at their birth^ says he] they were involuntary and un- 
conscious of what they experienced ; but at their 



154 INFANT BAPTISM 

baptism they had choice, and knowledge, and illumina- 
tion."* And Tertullian observes : — " The laver of bap- 
tism is the seal of faiik, which fedth begins from peni- 
tence. We are not washed [baptized] in order that we 
may cease from sinning, but because we have ceased, 
since we are already cleansed in heart. "f Infant bap- 
tism, therefore, could not have as yet been introduced. 
Origen, who lived in the middle of the third century, 
was the first who defended it. It was, as he tells us, 
a subject of "frequent inquiry among brethren. "J Con- 
sequently it must have been a new topic. " Brethren" 
did QOt understand it. Up to this time evidently, none 
received baptism, but such as with " choice and knowl- 
edge," made a credible profession of their " faith." In 
this ordinance they publicly ** put on Christ." But 
now, whether infants, or persons too young to under- 
stand the rudiments of religion, should be baptized, ex- 
cited "frequent inquiry among brethren." Thence on- 
ward the practice rapidly gained ground, and soon ac- 
quired universal prevalence. 

Why, I may ask, should such a thing as the baptism 
of infants ever have suggested itself to the minds of 
men ? It is not intimated in the word of God. Rea- 
son does not approve it. To religion it is plainly re- 
pugnant. From whence did it arise? It owes its 
existence, I answer, exclusively to 'blind superstition, 
which first persuaded men that there is a mysterious, 

* Christian Bev., No. 22. 

t De Penitentia, sect. 5, p. 128. 

X There is great nncertainty whether Origen wrote what is at- 
trihuted to him. His works have been wholly vitiated by inter- 
polations. 



PEBPinUATBS SITFEBSTrnOKS. 455 

secret, inexplicable efficacy in baptism, which conveys 
the grace of God to the soul of the recipient; then, 
that without baptism no one, whether adult or infant, 
could be saved ; and lastly, that infants really do, by 
some incomprehensible power of God, repent of their 
sins, believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore, 
according to the gospel, are entitled to receive bap- 
tism ! We will examine each of these propositions sep- 
arately. 

1. The opinion began to prevail as early as the mid- 
dle of the second century, that there is in baptism some 
mysterious, secret, inexplicable efficacy which conveys 
the grace of God to the soul of the recipient ! 

Of this fact testimony so ample has already been 
submitted that you need not her^ be detained with its 
repetition. This superstitious absurdity seems to have 
been first taught by the Gnostics, borrowed doubtless 
from the "Eugenia"* of the pagan Greeks. Gnosti- 
cism was a popular and inveterate heresy, f As a 
sect, it was nominally put down, and destroyed ; but 
its dogmas lived. Many of them were embraced by 
the teachers reputed orthodox, and perpetuated in the 
/lith of all subsequent ages. Among them, this is not 
the least striking or conspicuous. The spiritual bene- 
fits they attributed to- baptism were supposed not to be 
in the ordinance itself, but through that as a medium 
conveyed to the soul by the administrator, in virtue of 
the prayers, and the faith of the church, and as readily 
to one individual as to another. No one, whether 
adult or infant, was considered safe who should die 

* svysvta. Vide Stov^t on Bisoiplesliip. 
t Vide.Neander's Eool. Hist. 



166 INTAITT BAFnSM 

without having obtained the bim^fita of these elcaiusteg 
influences. Gregory Nazianzen, for example, suppos- 
ing, in <»e of his discourses, that he might be request- 
ed to express his opinion in the premises, proceeds to 
advise that in case of any apparent danger c^ death, 
children should be bi^tized, "Inasmuch,'' says he, 
'' as it were better they should be sanctified without 
knowmg it, than that they shoidd die without being 
sealed and initiated." In all other cases he prefers 
that baptism should be delayed until Uiose who re- 
ceive it are of sufficient age to allow the impresnon 
intended to be made by the recital of the mystic 
words.* On these accounts the ordinance continued 
to grow in importance until it assumed all the conse- 
quence wtUi which it has been invested in subsequent 



2. A kindred doctrine grew up with this, and soon 
took possesnon <^ the general mind, that no one, of 
whatever age, without baptism could be saved. 

And if indeed baptism conveys grace and salvation, 
which without it cannot be received, how can any one 
be saved to whom it has not been given? On this 
subject, Cyprian, the Bishop of Caarthage, saysif — 
** As far as in us lies, no soul is to be lost. It is not 
for us to hinder any person from baptism, and the 
grace of God. Which rule, as it holds to all, so we 
thmk it more especially to be observed in reference to 
infants, to whom our help, and the divine mercy, are 
rather to be granted.'* Ambrose also, the Bishop of 
Milan,]; remarks : — *' No person comes to the kingdom 

* Tamey on Bapt., p. 1S8. f Anno Dom. 250. 

% A. I>. 890. 



PERKJffl'UATBS UUPJUWi'ITIOKB. ' 1$7 

of heaven but hj baptism. Infants that are baptized, 
are reformed back again from wickedness to the primi* 
tive state of their nature/' And Chrysostom, the 
Patriarch of Constantinople,* observes :*^'* The grace 
of baptism gives us cure without pain, and fiUs us with 
the grace of the Spirit." " If sudden death seize us 
before we are baptized, there is nothing to be expected 
but hell.'' Thus do these great men express the doc- 
trine, which in their age prevailed among all who were 
considered orthodox. They believed that salvation 
without baptism was impossible. The effect upon the 
minds of parents and others, may readily be ima- 
gined. All, as we {nay suppose, were baptized with* 
out delay. 

Concurrent with these movements arose an institu- 
tion in the church, the workings of which had a pow- 
erful influence in hastening infant baptism. I allude 
to Catechumenical Schools, of which a full account 
may be seen in any extended ecclesiastical history. 
Concerning them I shall state but two or three facts. 
They originated in the second century, and were 'at- 
tached, as Sabbath-schools now are, to the several 
christian congregations. They proposed to instruct 
children, and proselytes in the principles of religion, 
preparatory to their admission to baptism and member- 
ship in the church. For several centuries they enjoy- 
ed boundless popularity. Into these schools were re- 
ceived children of all classes, and persons of all ages 
and circumstances. None of them, however, were bap- 
tized, except in cases of " danger of death," until they 
had passed through their regular novitiate, and could 

* A. D. 400. 
14 



168 INFAKT BAPTISM 

answer intelligibly the questions proposed in the rubric 
of the tinfes. But as we have seen, the impression of 
the importance and necessity of baptism was constantly 
increasing in intensity, and the result was, proportionally 
to shorten the catechumenical period. The qualifica- 
tions for baptism were also of course diminished in 
their number and extent, and finally, if the children 
could not themselves answer the questions, their friends 
were permitted to answer for them. 

The liturgy then, as now, required that all who were 
baptized should, preparatory to receiving the ordinance, 
renounce the world, the flesh and the devil, profess 
their faith in Christ, and promise 4x) walk in obedience 
to the gospel all the days of their life. This of course 
infants could not do. But the deficiency was supplied 
by sponsors, who did all this in their names, pledging 
themselves to the church and her ministry, that these 
little ones should subsequently receive the necessary 
instruction, admonition, and guidance, and at a suitable 
time, be brought before the bishop to be examined, 
and confirmed in their christian profession. In these 
facts we have the true history of the origin of spon- 
sors, or sureties for infants, in baptism. Such sureties had 
previously been employed only for older, or adult cate- 
chumens, having been first used for Pagans, and after- 
wards for others on their baptism. Ask you for testi- 
mony in proof of this statement ? It is abundant, and 
at hand. We satisfy ourselves with one only. The 
Edinburgh Encyclopaedia says : — ** In the second cen- 
tury christians began to be divided intoT believes, or 
such as were baptized, and catechumens, or such as 
were receiving instruction to qualify them for baptism. 



PERPETirATES SXTPEESTITIONS. 159 

To answer for these past] persons, sponsors or God 
fathers were first introduced."* By this device the 
consciences of all were quieted. Infant baptism thus 
gradually extended itself. And since preparatory in- 
structions were no longer necessary, the catechumeni- 
cal schools were not wanted, and they at last ceased to 
exist. Murmurings were doubtless uttered occasion- 
ally, by those who knew any thing of religion as taught 
in the word of God. But for these there was a ready 
remedy. They were all silenced, and the policy of the 
Catholic church fixed, by decrees such as the following 
established at the Council of Trent : — " Whoever shall 
affirm that the sacram«nts of the new law [the gospel] 
are not necessary to salvation," " and that they do not 
contain the grace they signify," "let him be ac-* 
cursed, "f 

3. Infant baptism was now established, and justified, 
by the grace conferred in the ordinance, its necessity to 
salvation, and the expedient of sponsors to answer for 
the child. Yet the difficulty was not entirely over- 
come. In those early days, repentance for sin, and 
faith in our L'ord Jesus Christ, were acknowledged as 
indispensable preliminaries to baptism. These condi- 
tions are so plainly set forth in all parts of the New 
Testament, that no Pedobaptist then pretended to call 
them in question. They felt, on the contrary, that 
they were obliged to comply with them. They knew 
also that the repentance and faith of the sponsor, were 
only those of the proxy or substitute, and not of the 
child. ♦ But it was the child who was to receive the or- 
dinance, not the sponsor, and the Bible requires these 

* Art. Sponsors. t Cone. Trid., Art. Btfpt. 



160 IKF4ST BAjnBlC 

oonditioiis of the very peison to be baptised bioiself. 
Here, it would seem, was an insuperable impediment. 
What was to be done ? A most convenient dbcoveiy 
was now made and announced to the world. It was 
aa effectual remedy: It was found that infknts do, by 
some unexplained and incomprehensible pow^ of God 
imparted to them, really possess, truly exercise, and 
acceptably profess repentance of sin and faith in Christ, 
and are therefore, according to the cpndidons prescribed 
in the gospel, the proper subjects, and legally entitled 
to receive baptism ! . 

This assumption is so monstrous that many may doubt 
whether' it was ever made. Sipce then it may, ^per- 
chance, be called in question, I shall here pause until 
the amplest proof has been submitted. .When first 
announced, it is not surprising that the proposition did 
not, at once, command imiversal asseut. It seemed, 
even to some high ecclesiastics, to be an absurdity. 
Bishop Boniface, for example, wrote on the subject, to 
St. Augustine, as follows : — " If I should set before 
thee a young infant, and should ask of thee whether 
that infant, when he cometh to riper years, will be 
honest and just," "thou wo<ildest, I know, answer, 
that to tell in these things what shall come to pass, is 
not in the power of mortal man. If I should ask 
what good or evil such an infant thinketh, thine an- 
swer would be with the like uncertainty. If thou nei- 
ther canst promise for the time to come, nor for the 
present pronounce any thing in this case, how is it that 
when such are brought to baptism, their parents there 
undertake what the child shall afterwards do ? Yea, 
they are not doubtful to say it doth [believe], which is 



FEBPirruAXEs aupsaKsrrnoNs. 16rl 

impossible to be done by infants ; at least there is no 
man precisely able to affirm it done. Youchsafe me 
hereunto some short answer, such as not only to press 
me with the bare authority of custom, but also instruct 
me with the cause thereof." To this very modest and 
sensible address Augustine thus replies : — " In the in- 
fant there is not a present actual hMt of faith. There 
is delivered unto them that sacrament a part of the due 
celebration whereof consisteth in answering to the Arti- 
cles of Faith, because the habit of faith that doth after- 
wards come with years, is but further building up the same 
edifice, the foundation whereof was laid by the sacrament 
of baptism. For that which we professed without any 
tmderstanding, when we afterwards come to acknowl- 
edge, do we any thing else but only bring into ripeness 
the very seed which Was sown before ? We are then 
[in infancy] believers, because we then begin to be that 
which process of time doth make perfect. And until 
we come to actual belief, the very sacrament of faith 
[baptism] is a shield as strong as after this, the faith 
of the sacrament, against all contrary infernal powers, 
which whoever doth think ' impossible* is undoubtedly 
farther off from christian'4>elief, though he be baptized, 
than are those innocents who at their baptism, albeit 
they have no concert or cogitation of faith, are not- 
withstanding pure and free from all opposite cogita- 
tions, whereas the other is not free. If, therefore, 
without any fear or scruple, we may account them, 
and term them believers, only for their outward pro- 
fessions' sake, who inwardly are farther off from faith 
than infants, why not infants much more at the time 
of their solemn initiation by baptism the sacrament of 

14* 



162 TNFAJSrt BAFTIBM 

fsdth, whereuBto tbey not only conceive nothing oppo- 
site, but have also that grace given them which is the 
best and most effectual cause out of which our belief 
doth grow. In sum, the whole church [infants and all] 
is a multitude of believers, all honored with that titl^ 
even hypocrites for their professions' sake, as well as saints 
because of then: inward sincere profession, and infants 
as being in their first degree of ghostly motion towards 
the actual habit qf faith. The first sort are faithful in 
the eyes of the world ; the second faithful in the sight 
of God ; the last in the ready, direct way to become 
both."*# Again: — "Infants do profess repentance by 
the words of those who bring them, when they do by 
them renounce the devil and this world. "f ^^ Bing- 
ham of the Episcopal denomination, in his learned work 
on the Antiquities of the Christian Church, writing of 
this early period, says ; — " Another sort of names giv- 
en to baptism were taken from the conditions required 
of all those who received it, which were the profession 
of a true faiths and a sincere repentance. Upon this ac- 
count baptism is sometimes called the sacrament of 
faith, and the sacrament of repentance. St. Austin 
uses this name to explain how children may be said to 
have faith, though they are not capable of making any 
profession of themselves." " And upon this account, 
when the answer [in the church] is made that an infant 
believes who has not yet the habit of faith, the mean- 
ing is that he has faith becausS of the sacrament of 
faith ; and that he turns to €hd because of the sacra" 
mint of conversion." Fulgentius uses ihe same terms 

♦ Hooker^B WorkSj^vol. i., pp. 680-687. 
t Wall. Hist. Iii£, YfA» ii., pp. 485, 488. 



FEBPimrATBS 817FEB8TITIONS. 163 

in nrging the necessity of baptism : — " Firmly believe 
and doubt not, that excepting such as are baptized in 
their own blood for the name of Christ, no man shall 
have eternal life who is not here first turned from his 
sins by repentance and faith, and set at liberty by 
the sacrament of faith and repentance, that is, by 
baptism."* 

Such are the teachings of the fathers on this subject. 
But we have still more indubitable authority. Th^ 
whole doctrine, in all its absurdity, is embodied unmis- 
takably, ib the liturgy of the ancient church. The 
priest there asks the child, and the sponsor sq^wers, as 
follows : 

'' Question, — Dost thou [the child] renounce the 
devil and all his works, all his angels, and all his ser- 
vice, and his pomps ?". 

*' Anstj[>er, — I [the sponsor in his name] do re- 
nounce." 

" Qttest, — Dost thou [the child] believe in Christ ?" 

*' Ans. — [By sponsor] I do believe." And he re- 
peats the cree4. * The infant, after some other ceremo- 
nies, is baptized, and of course baptized as a penitent 
beUever in Christ ! Thus the proof is complete that 
neither the ancient church nor the papacy ever aban- 
doned the great truth that repentance and faith are 
unchangeable gospel preliminaries to baptism, and that 
from the fourth century up to the Reformation, in- 
fants were believed to possess the required repentance 
and faith, upon a profession of which they were bap- 
tized. 

These were mainly, the superstitions that originally 

* Antiq. Chiis. JCSEuroh, vol. iii., p. 120. 



18t JSWASn BJtFfBK 

jwoAuced infiuit baptiam ; tlie belieC of «t mjsteiiotis 
cieanBing power in baptism itself ; the necessity in ail 
cases of baptism in curder to salvation ; and the plea 
that infants who are baptized have the necessary pre- 
liminarieB demanded in the gospel. From this accumu- 
lation of theological impniities, like Python from the 
ipud of the deluge, sprang infant baptism. 

I now proceed to the other branch of the proposition, 
and shall show condunvely, that the practice oi in£ant 
baptism perpetuates the superstitions by which it was 
originally produced. 

Thai all the sects o£ protestant pedobaptists are undei 
the influence at this moment, to a greater or less extent, 
of the first, and the second, of these forms of supersti- 
tion, is a fact that no man can successfully deny. Thar 
standards and other authorities teach unquestionably, 
that baptism carries with it some mysterious cleansing 
power, and that it is connected somehow, with grace and 
salvation ! The ancients believed, moreover, that little 
children brought to baptism are endowed with the 
^aees oi repentance and faith, and have therefore the 
gospel preUminaries required for baptism ! Do modem 
enlightened protestant pedobaptists credit this absurd!- 
iy ? The inquiry is worthy of our attention. 

We turn, firsl^ to the great, and, in some respects, 
incomparable Martin Luther. He practises no conceal- 
ments, but expresses himself boldly, and without equiv- 
ocation. He remarks : — " We here say and conclude 
that the children believe in baptism itself , and have their 
own faith which Ood works in them, through the in- 
tercession and hearty offering of the sponsors, in the 
faith of the christian church* and that is what we call 



FEBFEnLUnS flUFJSUmnONB. ifi& 

the power of anoihe? 'a fiuth ; not that any one can be 
aared by that, bmt he thereby (that is, through anoth- 
er's intercession and aid) may obtain faith of his own 
from God by which he [the infant] is saved." This 
faith is, he declares, the infants* '* own faith in which 
ihty believe, and are baptised for themselves."* In 
his larger Catechism, published 1529, he further says : 
— ** The great efficacy and usefulness of baptism be- 
ing thus understood, let us further observe what sort 
of persons it b.that receive such things as are offered 
by baptism. This, again, is most beautifully and dearly 
expressed in these words : ' He that believeth, and is 
baptized, shaU be saved.' That is, faith alone makes a 
person worthy to receive with any profit^ this salutary 
and divine water. \Viihottt faith baptism profits noth* 
mg, although in itself it cannot be denied to be a heav<> 
enly and inestimable treasure." '' We bring a child ta 
a minister of the church to be baptized in this hope 
and persuasion, that it certainly believes, and we pray 
that Ood may give it faith/' And again. In the 
'' Conference at Wittenberg," in 1636, when called 
upon to explain how infants who do not think at aU» 
can believe, Luther answered : — " As we even when 
asleep, are numbered among the faithful, and are in 
truth such although we are actually thinking nothing 
of God, so a certain beginning of faith (winch never^ 
theless is the work of God) exists in infants accorduig 
to their measure and proportion, of which we are igno- 
rant"! Thus we have the doctrine of Lutheranism on 
this subject. It cannot be mistaken. That churdi 

• Hinton^s Hist. Bapt, p. 889. 

t Buoer's Notes of the Conl in Q^da en 99ffW 



166 INFANT BAPmaic 

holds tbat it is lawful to baptize those only who exer- 
cise repentance of sin, and faith in Christ ; that infants 
do exercise repentance of sin, and faith in Christ; 
therefore it is lawful, and indeed obligatory, to baptize 
infants ! 

Calvin next demands our attention. What did he 
teach, and what do his followers now hold, on this 
subject ? 

Two incompatible and contradictory theories strug- 
gled in his mind. The infants of believing parents, and 
these only, he taught, are to be baptized. He says : — 
" This pxinciple must always be maintained," " that bap- 
tism is not conferred upon infants in order that they 
may become the children and heirs of God, but because 
they are already [their parents being such] in that rank 
and position. Otherwise Anabaptists would be right 
in excluding them from baptism."* The grace confer- 
red upon children, and the faith upon which they are 
baptized, are therefore hereditary ! This is the former 
theory. The latter refers to his doctrine of election. 
He taught that some infants are elect, and some nonf 
elect, and that only the elect children receive any ben- 
efit by baptism ! He remarks : — " We diligently teach 
that God does not put forth his power without distinc- 
tion to all who receive the sacrament, but only to the 
elect, "f " How, it is inquired, are infants regenerated, 
who have no knowledge either of good or evil ? We 
reply, that the work of God is not yet without exist- 
ence, because it is not observed or understood by m«."J 
Calvin says : — " Though these graces [repentance and 

* Agreemont at Zurich, 1549. f XJt Supra. 

X Calvin's IiiBt., xvi., 18. 



PSBPETUATES SUFEBSTmONS. 167 

faith] have not jet 'been formed in them, the seeds of 
both are nevertheless implanted in their hearts by the 
secret operations of the Sphit."* The grace and ben- 
efit are therefore elective ! But if they be hereditary 
how can they be elective? And if elective how can they 
be hereditary ? These two theories are radically the 
opposites of each other, and never can be harmonized, 
unless, indeed, God has elected to salvation only the 
infants of believing parents, whose faith and election 
are the faith and election of their offspring ; in which 
case faith and election are propagated by natural gen* 
eration, and no man can be saved whose parents before 
him were not believers in Christ. Thus does infant 
baptism overwhelm and destroy the scriptwe doctrine 
of Predestination I 

Apart, however, from these considerations, the Gal- 
vinistic doctrine on the subject before us, may be stated 
in a few words, thus: — "Faith is necessary to baptism. 
Ko child can be baptized without it. The parents of 
the child have faith. What belongs to the parents be- 
longs to the child. Therefore the child has faith, and 
upon that faith is baptized !'' So taught Calvin, and 
80 teach his disciples at this time. Of this fact I could 
introduce instantly a hundred witnesses. One, however, 
is sufficient. Dr. Miller, the late distinguished Profes- 
sor at Princeton, to whom I have before several times 
referred, remarks : — " After all, the whole weight of 
the objection [to infant baptism] in this case, is founded 
on entire forgetfulness of the main principle of the pe- 
dobaptist system. It is forgotten that in ever^ case of 

* InstitateS} xvi., 20. Eicamine BtishneU, p. 28 ; also p. 60 



168 INFAST BAFnBlff 

infant baptism faith is required, and if tbe parents be 
sincere is actually exercised. But it is required of the 
parent, not of the dhild. So that if the parent trulj 
present his child in faith, the spirit of the ordinance 
IS really met and answered." The Calvinistic doc- 
trine is therefore substantially the same as that of the 
Papists and the Lutherans. Presbyterians, Congre- 
gationalists, and the others, arrive, although by a dif- 
ferent route, at the conclusion that the gospel does 
require faith on the part of all those who are bap- 
tized as an indispensable condition of their receiving 
the ordinance ; that the children to be baptized have 
faith, since their parents' faith is their f^th ; and that 
infants are therefore baptized upon a profession of their 
faith. 

The only other great parent class of protestant pedo- 
baptists whose principles remain to be examined, is the 
Episcopal, embracing Methodists of all sects. Turn, if 
you please, to the liturgy of that church, whether oi 
England or America, and you will find the doctrine dis- 
tinctly and unequivocally taught, that infants are bap- 
tized upon a profession of their ovm faith! **The office** 
of baptism prescribes that the minister shall ask, and 
the sponsor answer as follows : — 

" Minister, — Dost thou in the name of this child, re- 
nounce the devil and all his works, the vsun pomp and 
glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, 
and the sinful desires of the flesh, so that thou wiH not 
follow nor be led by them ?" 

" Answer. — I renounce them all, and by God's help 
will endeavor not to follow, nor be led by them." 

** Minister, — ^Dost thou believe all the Articles of 



PESPETUATES StJPERSTmONS. 169 

the Christian Faith as contained in the Apostles' 
Creed ?" 

" Answer. — ^I do." 

" Minister. — ^Wilt thou be baptized in this faith ?" 

" Answer. — ^That is my desire." 

" Minister. — ^Wilt thou then obediently keep God's 
holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all 
the days of thy life ?" 

" Answer. — I will by God's help.** 

Willit be pretended that in these answers the spon- 
sors speak only for themselves? This is a common 
plea, and very often made, but it is plainly preposter- 
ous, since it is the child and not the sponsor that is to 
be baptized, and it is the child who is asked, " Dost 
thou believe ;" " wilt thou be baj^tized ;" " wilt thou 
obediently keep God's holy will." It is the ihfant, 
therefore, that renounces the world, the flesh, and the 
devil ; it is the infant that believes " all the Articles of 
the Christian Faith ;" it is the infant that desires to be 
baptized ; it is the infant that binds itself to per- 
petual obedience ! These facts are so obvious, that no 
intelligent man will, I persuade myself, upon mature 
reflection, venture to call them in question. These are 
the professions of their infants, upon which they are 
baptized. 

The fathers of all the protestant episcopal churches 
maintain infant repentance and faith at great length. 
Bucer, and Peter Martjnr, taught the doctrine in the 
Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, and Archbish- 
ops, Bishops, and inferior clergy, in all the pulpits of 
the land. But it is necessary to particularize. 

Cartwright, a distinguished divine of the Calvinistio 

15 



170 mFANT BAFTEBM 

scbool, thought proper to "admomsK* the British Par- 
liament on this subject, and in a learned address, ex- 
pressed his doubts whether all the infants baptized were 
eUct, and in case any were not, he insisted that they 
could not with propriety be said to believe. " It can/' 
he avowed, " no more be precisely said that it [the in- 
fant] hath faith, than it may be said precisely that it 
is elected."* This paper called forth a spirited reply 
from the famous Hooker, in which he severely rebukes 
the presumptuous Presbyterian. " Were St. Augustine 
now living," says Hooker, " there are [those] who would 
tell him for his better instruction, that to say of a child 
that it is elect, and to say it doth believe, is all one, for 
which cause sith no man is able precisely to affirm the 
one of any infant in particular, it foUoweth that pre- 
cisely and absolutely, he ought not to say the other. 
Which precise and absolute terms are not necessary in 
this case. We speak of infants as the rule of piety al- 
lowetjh both to speak and to think." ^* Baptism impli- 
eth a covenant or league between God and man, wherein 
as God doth bestow presently remission of sins, and the 
Holy Ghost, binding himself also to add (in process of 
time) what grace soever shall be further necessary for 
the attainment of everlasting life, so every baptized soul 
receiving the same grace at the hands of God, tieth it- 
self likewise forever to the observation of his law, no 
less than the Jews by circumcision bound them- 
selves to the law of Moses. The law of Christ re- 
quiring, therefore, faith and newness of life in all men 
by virtue of the covenant of baptism, is it toyish 
that the church in baptism exacteth at every mean's 

* Admonition to Parliament. 



FESFETUATEB BITPBBSTTnONS. 171 

hanAB [Infants included] an express profession of faith» 
and an irrevocable promise of obedience by way of 
stipulation ?"* Bishop Beyeridge asks, '' Why are in- 
fants baptized ?" and answers thus : — " The reason is, 
not only because they have the seeds of repentance^ and 
faith in them, which may afterwards grow to perfec- 
tion, but chiefly because they then promise to perform 
them, which is as much as we know adult persons, or 
those of riper years do."f 

We 'may, however, appeal to still higher authority 
than that of Bucer, or Peter Martyr, or Hooker, or 
Beveridge, or all these together. Cranmer the Arch^ 
bishop, and Primate in his day, of all England, speaks 
thus : — ** In baptism are our sins taken away, and we 
from sins purged and cleansed,' and regenerated in a 
new man to live a holy life, accordfing to the spurit and 
will of God." " They [the Anabaptists] say that those 
that should be christened, must first believe, and then 
be christened. Children, they say, cannot believe, for 
faith is gotten by hearing, and hearing by the word of 
God. So children cannot have faith, say the Anabap- 
tists. Wherefore they say that infants should not be 
christened.^ To this reason I answer and say that 
children may have faith, although they have it not by 
hearing, yet they have faith by the infusion of the Holy 
Ghost, as the holy prophets had, and many holy men 
in the old law bad. Also faith is the gift of God and 
the work of the Holy Ghost. Who should let [hinder] 
God to give his gifts where he mil, seeing faith is the 

♦ Hooker's Works, vol. L, pp. 688-687. 

t Church Catechism Explained, pp. 128, 129. 

X And they say truly, and reason oonduaively* 



173 TSfFAXn BAFnBM 

g^ of God ? He may g^ve faith as well to ekUdrett 
as to old men. Faith also is the work of God, and not 
of man, of man's will or reason. Who will let God 
to work where he lists? Therefore it U not impos'- 
stble for children to hare faith, as these Anahaptista 
falsely suppose." ** God regardeth no pereons, hut 
giveth his gifts withont all regard of pers(»ie. A 
child, or an old man, he counteth as a person in 
scripture. Wherefore it foUoweth plainly that he 
giveth not Mth to an old man, or denieth faith to a 
child, hecause he is a child, for then God should re- 
gard persons, which he doth not." " And when they 
[the Anabaptists] say they must express faith before 
they he christened, what will they do with deaf and 
dumb men, that get not faith by hearing, nor express 
their faith by words ? Will they exclude them from 
baptism, and condemn them to hell-|Mt?"* " Christ took 
little children in his arms and blessed them, and said, 
* Of such is the kingdom of heaven.' Here are tokens 
that God loved these children, that they pleased him» 
and that they had faith, for without faith no man can 
please God."f 

With all these testimonies before you, and the num* 
ber might be increased indefinitely, can you doubt the 
teachings of the Episcopal church, in itself, and in all 
its sects ? They hold with Lutherans, and Calvinistfl^ 
that infants who receive the ordinance^ are diviaoely en-» 

* It is not at aD snrpriiBing tliat this argument had no inflaenoA 
upon the hated Anabaptists. They would have been in a pitiable 
condition if they had had no more common sense on this saljiol^ 
than was shown by the Archbishop. 

t Bichme&d'fi Fathers of the English Church, voL iL, #t seq. 



doired with repentance of sin, and fmtli in our Lord 
Jesus Christ ; upon the reputed profession of which 
they are baptized I 

The fact is now incontroTertibly established that the 
practice of inftmt baptism perpetuaiee the superstitume 
by which it was originally produced, Protestant pedo- 
baptists, on all hands, still adhere to the old popish 
dogmas that baptism contains some mysterious divine 
efficacy, and that through it the spiritual state of in- 
fiEints is materially affected, both as regards their union 
with Christ in this world, and their salvation in the 
world to come. 

The evil thus brought upon all the interests of truth 
and salvation is incalculable. Religion itself is degra- 
ded and caricatured. The minds of its votaries are 
besotted with mberable logomachy, such as that we 
have just examined. Fanaticism and bigotry reign tri- 
umphantly. Who that has net resigned his reason, 
can believe that the baptism of an infant conveys to its 
soul the quickening grace of God ? Or that it is pos- 
able for an infant, at the age at which they are usu- 
ally baptized, to exercise repentance, and faith in the 
Redeemer? All this is taught in the Papal churchy 
and in the Protestant church, by the Catholic fathers, 
and by all the great Reformers. They were on many 
subjects wise and learned. On this subject they were 
neither. Do not, I pray you, oblige me to credit ab- 
surdities of any kind, and especially in religion. Not 
more insane than this is priestly pardon, the invocation 
of saints, transubstantiation, or purgatory. Infant bap- 
tism must, and does still look for support to the super- 
stitions by which it was originally produced. Who* 

16* 



174 n^Ai!rr baptibm, bto. 

ever submits to such superatitioDs in one department 
of religion, will Boon be ready to give up his judg- 
ment, and common sense, in aU the others. Thus a 
downward progress is commenced which cannot be ar- 
rested short of the dark caverns of popery. 



CHAPTER IX. 

XHTANT BAPTISM IS AN KViL BEOAUSB IT ST7BVBRTS THE 
TRUE DOOTRINB 07 INFANT SALVATION. 

Doctrine Btated ; arguments in proof; manner in whiclh inbTerted hj in- 
tuoA baptiam ; aathoritiea ; oonduaiona. 

Death is a relentless destroyer. He assails, without 
distinction, all classes and conditions of men. The young 
and the old alike fall beneath his power. Upon infan- 
cy, however, his shafts descend most frequently, and 
with a deadlier aim. How large the proportion of man- 
kind who are hurried into eternity during the first yean 
of their being ! Where is the family that has not mourn- 
ed infants loved, and lost ? Bleeding hearts, and flow- 
ing tears, in all lands, tell of sorrows which no words 
can ever adequately express ! Millions of infant spirits 
have gone mto the unseen world. Each is an immortal 
intelligence. In that world they all possess the sensi- 
bilities common to humanity. With these facts before 
us, one question of surpassing interest, presses itself 
upon us all. Of departed infants what is the eternal 
destiny ? Are tJiey happy, or miserable ? Parental af- 
fection implores, christian sympathy earnestly solicits, 
and ministerial faithfulness demands, that these inquiries 
receive a prompt, intelligible, and scriptural. answer. 
We believe that all infants are saved unconditionalfy. 



176 mPANT BAPTIBM BUBYEBTB 

ihnyagh the application to them, by the Holy Ohost, of 
the redemption of our Lord Jesua Christ, No matter 
whether they are in the church or out of the church, 
whether they are baptized or imbaptized, whether they 
are the children of believers or unbelievers, of heathens, 
mohammedans, or christians, their everlasting blessed- 
ness is equally, and in all cases, secure. These, and all 
other sttch like circumstances, are irrelevant, and never 
can affect their jrelations with Christ. Consequently 
they can have no bearing upon their fu(|pre destiny. 
Every child "dying in infancy is saved. This is the 
doctrine of the Baptist denomination. Not of 2k few 
only, nor of our churches, and people, of the present 
day alone. It is the doctrine which has been invaria- 
bly held by us in all countries, and in every age. It 
is the doctrine taught by the word of God. Having 
thus stated our position, I proceed at (mce, to the 
proofs of its truth. 

Infant salvation is guarantied, in the first place, by 
the nature of the divine government. 

God is infinitely good. His benevolence forbids the 
inflicUcm of unnecessary suffering upon any of his crea- 
tures. Misery is never permitted, but when demanded 
hj justice, as either the consequence, or the penalty of 
sin. The government of God is designed, not only to 
benefit his creatures, but also to manifest his glory. 
Through this medium, as well as through his works, 
and his word, he reveals his true character to all in- 
telligent beings. Infants have no personal, or individ- 
ual accounta1)ility. For the condemnation of the delib- 
erate and impenitent rejecter of the gospel, and also 
ef the wicked despisers of Qod, who violate the laws 



THE DOCTRINE pF DJEANT SALVATION. ^77 

of nature^ and of their own coasciepce, I oqn pe^rceiyi^ 
ample reasons. In such a case J. cap readily compre- 
hend how God, as the goyemor of the universe, vilj 
glorify his infinite righteousness. But J cannot se,e 
how this could occur in the case of infants. It i$ infi- 
nitely more in ^kccordance with all our conoeptiops of 
Crod, to conclude that in thein he will evince his spe- 
cial beneficence. It i3> in truth, abhorrent tp every 
feelmg of kindness and love, to suppose that he i^iU 
cast them off, or that he wiU not receive, and ^ve 
them. There is no want of fuliie3s in the redemptioi^ 
of Christ. The power of the Holy Spirit is not limited. 
God is infinitely gracious. What then is to hinder their 
salvatioA ? Bather, does not evjery consideration con- 
nected with him, with his government, an,d his glory, 
seem imperatively to demand the salvation of in- 
fants? 

But infants are, I remark secondly, redeemed hy our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and must therefore be saved. 

Their redemption is thus taught by an apostle : — 
''Death" [natural death] "reigned from Adam to 
Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the si* 
militude of Adam's transgression.*' In other words, 
infants, who have not committed actual offences, as 
Adam did, have nevertheless all inherited his depravity, 
and are, therefore, subject to physical suffering and 
death. " As," however, " by the offe^ice of one 
[Adam] Judgment [sentence] came upon all men to con- 
demnation, even so by the righteousness of one [Jesus 
Christ] the free gift [the offer of deliverance from con- 
demnation under a better covenant] came upon all men, 
[upon as many as were involved in the consequences of 



178 mFA3srr baftibm subvebtb 

Adam's sin] unto justification of life."* Christ Jesus 
suspended the execution of the sentence of death un- ' 
der which men had fallen, and introduced another cov- 
enant in the place of the first, and so changed the rela- 
tions of things that to man, though a sinner, destruction 
is not inevitable. The remedy is found in the satisfac- 
tion made to divine justice by Messiah, the promised 
" seed of the woman." In consideration of his atone- 
ment the ground of condemnation is changed. His in- 
terposition has placed the whole subject in an entirely 
new aspect. Previously, if I may so speak, all men 
were condemned. Their relation to Adam had involved 
them all in the curse. Subsequently the case was dif- 
ferent. " This is [now] the condemnation, that light 
has come into the world, and men loved darkness rather 
than light, because their deeds were evil."f " Ye are 
condemned," '' because ye have not believed on the 
name of the only begotten Son of God."J Not now 
it is not so much because of your relation to Adam, 
disastrous as that relation may be, as because you do 
not embrace Christ by faith. Hence all the counsels, 
the warnings, the commands, the invitations, the prom- 
ises of divine revelation, are addressed to those who are 
capable of exercising intelligence. And its denuncia- 
tions are hurled only against wilful rebellion, impeni- 
tency, and unbelief. What are we here taught con- 
cerning infants ? They have not the capacity to know 
any thing of the gospel. They are not impenitent, or 
rebellious. They have not rejected Christ. They are 
clearly included in his mediation, since " by his right- 
eousness the free ^t came upon all men to justification 
* Bom. v., 12-19. t John iii., 19. % John iii., 18, 



THE DOCTEINB OF INFAUT SALVATION. 179 

m 

of life." That free gift must of course have come 
upon them. They are redeemed by Christ. And 
again. The relation to us of our Lord Jesus Christ in 
the vHjrk of redemption, is clearly, to man as man. 
Adam and Christ, are alike, heads of the race, ** The 
first man Adam was made a living soul ; the last Adam 
[Christ] was made a quickening spirit. Howbeit that 
is not fii'st which was spiritual, but that which is natu- 
ral, and afterwards that which was spiritual. The first 
man is of the earth, earthy ^ the second man is the 
Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they 
also that are earthy ; and as is the heavenly, such are 
they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne 
the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image 
of the heavenly."* Both, therefore, according to this 
apostolic exposition, are heads, of mankind as man. 
The first Adam was the author of sin ; the second 
Adam was the author of deliverance from sin. The 
same terms are employed to desigq^te those who 
are involved in ruin by the former, and those to whom 
deliverance is offered by the mediation of the latter. 
Both events concern the whole race, of whom some 
reach maturity of life, embrace Christ by faith, and are 
saved ; others reach maturity, do not receive Christ, 
and are lost ; but great multitudes die in infancy, and 
do neither good nor evil. These last stand, according 
to Paul, in as strict a relation to Christ, as they do to 
Adam, with this difference, that "Where sin abounded, 
grace does much more abound." In bringing them 
into this world, divine sovereignty has justly, and with- 
out any act of theirs, entailed on them the depravity 

♦ 1 Cor. XV., 46-49. 



iSO IHVAHT BAFTIBIC SDBTESZB 

and corruption of the first Adam. In taldng them 
away from the world, the same divine sovereignty has 
^adouslf, and without any act of theirs, conferred on 
them ike salvation of the second Adam. Thus it is 
that, redeemed by the blood of Christ, they are saved 
by the infinite grace of Go4. 

But all in£Eints are depraved and sinful. How then 
ean they be saved f To prepare them for happiness, it 
is evident that the redemption of Christ nmst be ap- 
plied by ike Holy Spirit; to their purification from sin. 
Otherwise they would be incapable of eternal life. 

Every one is obliged to exclaim with David, " Be- 
hold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my 
mother conceive me."* Truly may it be said, ** The 
wicked are estranged from the womb. They go astray 
as soon as they are born."f All are depraved, and 
depravity necessarily incapacitates those who are under 
its influence for the enjoyment of happiness. From 
infants it must^ therefore, to secure their salvation, be 
removed, and their nature must be cleansed, and puri- 
fied. This great work can be done only by the Holy 
Ghost. The work of God the Spirit is therefore, 
equally as necessary to their salvation, and ours, as 
the work of God the Son, None are saved by the ab- 
stract redemption of the Son, irrespective of the per- 
sonal application of that redemption by the Spirit. 
Since, however, Christ died for all, and consequently 
for infants ; ^hd since the work of the Spirit is neces- 
sary to complete the designs of grace thus commenced ; 
his sanctification is given in full measure, to every de- 
parting child. In all such instances, his merits and 

♦ Psa. U., 6. t Psa. Iviii., 8. 



THE BOOTSODB OF WPA^H! ftAIiVATIOK. 181 

ngbteoufiness are thus applied personally y to fit them 
for the change. The scriptures nowhere teach that tkiU 
is done through baptism, nor any other ordiiianc» ; nor 
that it is withheld for the want of H. Will not the 
Holy Ghost *' quicken even your mortal iorfy*'* sleep- 
mg in the grave, to prepare you for the resurrection of 
the last day? "Why then should it be thought a 
thing incredible/' and especially since they are t^ 
deemed by Messiah, that he should sanctify the spif^ 
its of departing children, and thus " make them meet 
to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints ift 

light r 

There are, I unserve in the third place, instcMe^ pf 
infant salvation on record in the tifoTd of God, 

Disease had laid his withering hand upon the infaflt 
child of David. He fasted, and wept> and prayed for 
the life of his beloved boy. All was in rain. It 
pleased the Lord to order otherwise than as he desired. 
The child died. Now his servants were alarmed on 
account of their master. They were afraid to com* 
municate to him the melancholy intelligence : " For 
they said. Behold, while the child was yet aHv^, we 
spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our 
iroiee. How will he then vex himself if we tell him 
that the child is dead I -But when t)avid saw that his 
servants whispered, he perceived that the child was 
dead. Therefor^ he said unto his servants, Is the child 
dead 1 And they said, He is dead. Thtn David arose 
front the earth, and washed and anointed himself, and 
ehatiged his apparel, and caHae into the house of tht 
liOrd^ and worshipped. Then he came to his owil 

• Boia. viii^ 11. 
16 



182 INFAKT BAFnSH BUBYEBIB 

bouse, and when he required they set bread before 
him, and he did eat ! Then said his servants unto 
him, What thing ia this that thou hast done ? Thou 
didst fast and weep for the child while it was yet 
alive ; buf when the child was dead, thou didst arise 
and eat bread ! And he said, While the child was yet 
alive" I 'fasted and wept ; for I said. Who can tell 
whether God will be gracious unto me, that the child 
may live ? Can I bring him back again ? I shaM go 
to him ; but he will not return to me."* What is the 
lesson taught us by this touching incident? David 
did' not certainly copsole himself with the thought that 
he, too, should go to the grave whither his child had 
gone. This consideration couM surely, have afforded 
him no special pleasure. The grave" is cold, and si- 
lent, and dismal. Nor could it have been a grateful 
reflection that since God had taken him away, he must 
submit to the necessity. If these, or any similar feel- 
ings governed him, why were they not equally influ- 
ential, since they were all fully as applicable, in the 
case of another son, slain in battle ? When tidings of 
that unhappy event reached David, how then did he 
deport himself? Did he with calm and resigned ac- 
quiescence, say to those about him, Wherefore should 
I lament him? "Can I bring him back again? I 
shal] go to him ; but he will not return to me ?" On 
the contrary, he was wholly inconsolable. Overwhelm- 
ed by the blow, he turned away from his friends, and 
trembling with agony, he " Went up to the chamber 
over the gate of the city. And as he went, thus he 
said : my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom ! 

* 2 Sam. xiL» 16-28. 



THE DOCTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 188 

Would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, 
my son !"* Why now this insupportable grief ? The 
reason is obvious. . Absalom was of mature age. He 
was a sinner ag^nst GFod. Besides, therefore, his af- 
fliction as a father on account of his death, he could 
entertain no hope for him in another life. Regarding 
his infant child the case was different. He had fuU 
confidence that he would, when the scenes of this 
world were over, ** go to hiirC^ in the paradise above, 
where they would be associated in eternal glory. 
Therefore said he, in other words. He is happy now. 
He is in heaven. I will not grieve on his accouMt. I 
als<^ shall go ere long. Then I shaU join him on high. 
This hope is most consolatory. It " is stronger than 
the grave." It is all radiant with joy and bright- 
ness. David undoubtingly believed that his child was 
saved. 

Another instance, equally instructive, occurred in the 
family of Jeroboam. He, too, was a king of Israel, 
but a vile apostate, and wicked idolater. Hii child, 
also, was stricken with a deadly malady. He was 
greatly beloved, and his distressed father sought earn* 
estly, but in vain, to save his life. The little sufiferer 
sunk into the grave ! In the midst of the tumult of 
sorrow produced by this event, the prophet Abijah, 
sent of God for the purpose, disclosed to the weeping 
mother,' the designs of God in his removal at a period 
90 early. '' All Israel," said Jehovah, '' shall mourn 
for Am, and hwry him. He only of Jeroboam shall 
come to the grave. In him there is found some good 
thing."t This child, therefore, was removed, when so 
• 2 Sam. zviii., 88. t Kings ziv., et seq. 



184 tJStrAtn BAPTffiM JSTTBTSEBTB 

fottng that nothing of his personal history is recorded, 
as an act to him, of lore, and blessing. But how could 
this be ? Had he lived he would probably liave been 
ft king. If children — those of wicked parents, and of 
idolaters, as well as others — are not saved, he was lost. 
It is surely no blessing to a child, to take him away 
from the prospects of a kingly throne, and send him to 
destruction ! It is implied in scripture that it was an 
act of kindness to this child to remove him from all 
these prospects. Therefore God received him to him- 
self in heaven. And if he wa& saved, then the chil- 
dren who die in infancy, of other wicked men and 
idolaters, are also saved. • 

One other instance on recot^, of infant salvation, is 
worthy of our attention. The murder of all the chil- 
d;*en of Bethlehem and its vicinity, by the jealous 
Herod,' perpetrated in the hope that thereby he might 
succeed in destroying Messiah, was a horrible tragedy. 
It was foreseen, and predicted by an ancient prophet, 
in language full of mingled pathos and encouragement : 
— *' A Voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bit* 
ter Weeping. Rachel Weeping for her children, refused 
to be comforted, because they were hot. Thus saith 
the Lord : Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine 
eyes from tears." " They shall cotoe again from the 
lahd of the enemy. And there is hope in thine end, 
saith the Lord, that thy children shall come again to 
their own border."* Is the design of this passage dif- 
ficult to perceive ? Does it refer merely to the captiv* 
ity in Babylon, under Which the Hebrews were then 
suffering ? Ii^ the Mother of Israel represented as 

* Jere. xzzi., 15-17. 



'EBGE DOCPBINB OF INFAISTT SALTATION. 185 

creeping in her tetfderness, only tjver the Woes of h&t 
chQdren in a distant land, writhing under the dpprei^ 
Bions of their masters ? Does God comfort her merely 
with the assurance that they shall yet return from 
their hondage, and inhabit, in peace and prosperity, 
the fields and the cities df Judea ? Whatever may 
have been the primary sense of the prophecy, inspira- 
tion itself has given it a still higher, and more exalted 
meaning. The evangelist Matthew furnishes the inter- 
pretation. He says : — " Herod, when he saw that he 
was mocked by the wise inen, was exceeding wroth, 
and sent forth and slew all the children that were in 
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two 
years old and under.'* " Then was fulfilled that 
which was spoken by Jeretny the prophet, saying, In 
Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation, and 
weeping, and great mourning. Rachel weeping for 
her children, and would not be comforted, because 
they are not."* This ciiiel act of Herod, therefore, 
was in the mind of the prophet. Of the children slain 
by him, consequently, it was more especially said) Thet^ 
shall escape from the enemy ; there is hope for them ; 
the^ shall possess their land ! For these reasons their 
bereaved parents were exhorted to " refrain their voice 
from weepingj and their eyes from teattk" But how 
was it possible to fulfil such promises? These chil- 
dren were all dead ! They remained in their graves. 
Literally, these promises could never be fulfilled. The 
prophecy must therefore necessarily refer to another 
life. It evidently teaches the three following facts : — 
First, that all these slain children should be delivered 

♦ Matt, ii., 16-18, 
16* 



186 IKFANT BAFTIBM BUBVEBTS 

^m the great enemy, eternal death; secondly, that 
there was hope for them, since they were all redeemed 
by Christ, that they should enjoy eternal life ; and 
thirdly, that they should possess the heavenly land, of 
which the earthly Canaan was a type. These are the 
grounds upon which our Heavenly Father offers com- 
fort to their parents, and exhorts them to subdue their 
sorrows. Their children had been foully murdered. 
The jealousy of the king had, with bloody and* relent- 
less violence, torn them from their bosoms. By this 
means, however, they had gone speedily, and safely, to 
eternal hfe. I have sel^ected and laid before you these 
instances of infant salvation recorded in the word of 
God, and have drawn them from the children of the 
good and the pious, such as David ; from the children 
of the idolatrous and wicked, such as Jeroboam ; and 
from the children of all classes, such as were the be- 
reaved parents ''in Bethlehem, and all the coasts 
thereof," in order to prove to you that all infants are 
saved, without any regard to the character of their 
parents, or the circumstances undey which they were 
removed from the present life. 

We have now seen that all children who die in in- 
fancy, are saved by the grace of God ; that they are 
saved through the redemption of Jesus Christ ; that 
this redemption is applied to them personally, and di- 
rectly, by the Holy Ghost ; and that we have many 
instances of their salvation recorded in God's word ; it 
remains only to be proved that their salvation is uncanr 
ditional. 

They are involved, it is true, on account of their 
connection with Adam, in the consequences of his fall. 



TBE DOCIBINE OF INFAUT BAliVATION. 187 

But provision has been made for their unconditional 
deliverance, in the satisfaction of the second Adam. 
One among the clearest demonstrations of this truth is 
presented to us in connection with the doctrine of their 
resurrection in the last day. " Since by man came 
death," says Paul, *' by man came also the resurrec- 
tion of the dead. For as in Adam all die ; even so in 
Christ, shall all . be made alive"* — raised from the 
dead,\ ' It is true, then, that in the resurrection of the 
body, all will be raised. The righteous and the wick- 
ed, the christian and the idolater, the adult and the in- 
fant, will alike participate in that glorious event. Here 
there is no condition but that of humanity. Those who 
live to the age of personal responsibility, are saved only 
upon the conditions of repentance, said faith. The wis- 
dom of this provision no one can fail to perceive. They 
have a conscious being, a personal accountability. Yet 
it is not for their repentance, and faith ; nor bj/ their 
repentance, and faith, as a procuring cause, that even 
they are saved. They, too, obtain salvation by the 
grace of God in fesua Christ : " For by grace are 
ye saved, through faith, and that not of yourselves, 
it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man 
should boast. "^ But repentance and faith are acts of a 
mind enlightened, and comparatively mature. They 
are not demanded of infants. Infants are saved uncou' 
ditionally. 

Thus is the salvation of infants fully, and satisfacto- 
rily established. Wherever in the wide world, and 
whenever, any child dies in infancy, it enters immedi- 

* 1 Cor. XV. 21, 22. f rcCyrcs XfitowvifiiiCQVTau 

% Eph. U., 8, 9. 



188 HVAKT BAPTISM SUBTSBIB 

atelj into the joys of eternal life in hearen. It thence- 
forth dwells forever with the Redeemer. How full of 
the richest consolation is this glorious truth ! In no 
form more delightful, has Jehovah manifested to us his 
abundant mercy, and grace. ** Thanks be to God fot 
his unspeakable gift/' 

With all these fcxts before us, we turn to hear the 
easpositians on the subject of our Pedobaptist brethren. 
We are immeasurably pained to find them in utter con- 
fusion ) Their best conceptions of this subject are en- 
tirely inadequate, and unworthy. All their teachings 
tend evidently to subvert the true scripture doctrine of 
infant salvation. Most of them claim that infants 
must be brought into the church, since out of it there 
is no deliverance ; and all of them insist that the merits 
of Chiist's atonement and the sanctificatlon of the Holy 
Spirit, without which no one can be saved, are com- 
municated to them through baptism. Thus they make 
the salvation of infants dependent upon conditions, and 
such conditions as no child can control, but must be 
performed by parents, friends, and ministers ! Infant 
baptism and infant salvation are, therefore, always 
found more or less intimately associated in the minds 
of all classes of pedobaptists. These, 1 know, are 
grave charges, but the testimony is at hand by which 
they are atnply sustained. 

Before I offer this testimony, however, I will refer to 
a singular imputation against Baptists, and properly 
account for its existence. You have many a time, 
doubtless, heard the declaration that " Baptists believe 
in the damnation of infants/** Some persons with 
whom you have met, have perhaps told you to your 



THE IXKnmmi C^ IHFiJTT eALY^TIOH. 189 

faoe tbat Uiey have themselves heard Baptist people,. 
and Baptist ministers, avow the sentiment. Pedobap* 
tists of all classes, repeat everywhere the charge, and 
declare with indignant eloquence, that ** Baptists hold 
the damnation of infants !" If , as I have professed to 
do in this chapter, I have properly represented Baptist 
sentiment on the subject, how could such an accusatbn 
against us ever have originated ? And when produced 
and put into circulation, how could it have been kept 
up for so many ages ? The answers are easy. Pedo- 
haptists beUeve that the baptism of infants is necessary 
to their salvation. According to their doctrines, there- 
fare, if they are not baptized they must be damned. 
Baptists refuse to baptize infants. Pedobaptists in- 
stantly proclaim, as a consequence of their own prin- 
ciples, without waiting to hear our opinions on the ques- 
tion of their salvation, that therefore '* Baptists hold 
the damnation of infants !'' Nor will they give it up. 
To this day they insist that it must be so. Since 
we do not baptize infants, we surely believe that if 
they die in infancy they are damned ! One example 
will probably be sufficient to establish and illustrate 
the correctness of this account of the origin of the 
charge. Archbishop Cranmer, in one of his discourses, 
speaks of the Baptists .in the following language : — 
** Children, of necessity, must be christened, or else 
they cannot be purged of their sins, nor yet saved by 
Christ, and comd to life everlasting. Wherefore the 
Anabaptists that would not have children to be christen- 
ed, they show themselves that they would not have 
children to be purged from their sins, and be saved. 
If they would have children saved, they would not 



190 DfFANT BAPTISM SUBVERTS 

deny them the means whereby Christ purgeth hi 
church from sins, and saveth it, which is baptism."* 
Thus the slander arose, and was continued. The au*« 
thority for it was derived from Lords ArchhishopSf 
" Bishops, and other clergy." It is not, therefore, sur- 
prising that it was taken up by the multitude, and re- 
peated without end. The whole Pedobaptist English 
mind thus became imbued with the odium, throughout 
Europe and America, and it remains with them to the 
present hour. If we needed a defence against these 
allegations, it might be drawn from another class of our 
opponents, the Lutherans of all the Geiman states. By 
them we are, and ever have been, vilified and reproach- 
ed for holding that "In/ants are saved mthout bap^ 
HsmJ* The Augsburg Confession of Faith contains 
the following passage : — ** They condemn the Anabap- 
tists, who disallow the baptism of infants, and affirm 
that they may he saved without «f."f The German 
charge against us is true. We do believe that infants 
are saved without baptism. But the English charge is 
false, and they might, if they would, know it to be so. 
But in respect to us they do not wish to know the truth. 
It is the object of both parties, not to do us justice, 
but, if possible, to cover us with reproach, and thus, if 
they may, retard the progresa of our principles. But 
our principles are those of the gospel. They cannot 
be always, successfully resisted. They will ultimately 
find their way to the hearts of men. They must, in 
the end, gloriously prevail. ' Persecuted we may be, 
and perpetually denounced ; still we are really, the 

* Richmond^B English Fathers, vol. ii., <&o. 
t AugsboJig Confession, Art« iz. 



THE DOCTRINE OF mPANT SALVATION. 191 

only christians whose doctrines on infant salvation are 
rational, scriptural, or true. We return to the argu- 
ment. 

Roman Catholics, as is well known, universally hold 
and teach that no child can be saved unless it is bap- 
tized, and within " the pale of the church." The Fa- 
thers and Standards, of the Lutheran church, and the 
Episcopal church, all maintain the same doctrine. 
They insist that " baptism contains the grace which it 
represents," and by its intrinsic efficacy conveys to the 
child that grace " ex opere operato." Of these facts 
the amplest testimony has been given in the preceding 
chapters. The authorities there adduced need not be 
repeated.* Their truth will, by all intelligent men, 
be readily admitted. In this country, however, some 
Lutherans, and Episcopalians, are evangelical. They 
surely do not receive the absurdities believed by their 
Fathers ! Ask them, if you please. Will they answer 
you at all ? If they do, will it not be in evasive terms ? 
Some of them will perhaps be indignant, and tell you 
infants may be saved without baptism. Press them for 
an answer as to the grounds of their salvation. They 
will respond thus : — If, in such a case, infants are 
saved, it is " by the uncovenanted mercies of God,** 
Ah, " The uncovenanted mercies !" It may be so ; 
and it may not ! The matter is in their minds, at best, 
very doubtful ! But Methodists, Presbyterians, and 
others of those classes, surely know better. They believe 
that all infants are saved, baptized, or not baptized. 
You can readily try their faith upon that question. 
One form of the experiment may be seen at almost any 
time. They scarcely know themselves what they be- 



192 IB7ABT BAfTSM SUBVSOB 



tefe OB the subject. Tli^ viD ccrtamly letent the 
SBSiMcioa that they sappose inOants may, under any cir- 
cnmstances, be lost But let an unbaptiztd child of 
any of them» be sicky and in danger of death. The 
utmost trepidation aiises. Appalling fears of some 
disastrous consequences fill the bosoms of parents, and 
fiiaids. Alarm ragns. The little sofferar mnst not 
continue an hour ** unsealed,** "uninitiated" The 
mimster is sent for, and the child is baptized at mid- 
night ! The baptism quiets every foreboding, and is 
followed immediately by calmness, and resignation! 
Why all this appiehension, and haste ? What if it 
slundd die — ^if <^e it must — without baptism ? Can it 
suffer possible harm on that account ? Ah ! disguise 
it as you may, the old sup^^tition is still in their 
hearts. They believe — ^and ihej thus evince the fact — 
that there is in baptism, some sort of a mysterious 
sacramental efficacy, that afifects for good, the destiny 
of the child in another world ! 

But we will try their opinions by a surer and more 
tan^ble standard. What do our Methodist brethren 
teach on the subject ? 

The answer is found in the ''Doctrinal Tracts," 
written by Mr. Wesley himself, and published by order 
of the '' General Conference," as an authoritative ex- 
po^tion of Methodism. I invite you to examine the 
following passages: — "What are ^e benefits," says 
Mr. Wesl^, " we receive by baptism, is the next point 
to be consid^ed. And the first of these is the wash- 
ing away of original sin, by the application of Christ* s 
death. That we «re all born under the guilt of Ad- 
am's sin, and that all sin deserves eternal misery, was 



THE rKKJTRINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 193 

the unanimous sense of the ancient church, and is ex- 
pressed in the ninth article of our own. And the 
Bcriptiu'e asserts that we were shapen in iniquity, and 
in sin did our mothera conceive us ; that we were all 
by nature the children of wrath, and dead in trespasses 
and sins ; that in Adam aJl die ; that by one man's 
disobedience all were made sinners ; that by one man 
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, which 
came upon all men, because all had sinned. This 
plainly includes infants, for they too die ; therefore 
they have sinned ; but not by actual sin, therefore by 
original sin, else what need have they of the death of 
Christ? Yea, death reigned from Adam to Moses, 
even over those who had not sinned actually, according 
to the similitude of Adam's transgression. This, which 
can relate to infants only, is a clear proof that the 
whole race of mankind are obnoxious both to the guilt 
and punishment of Adam's transgression. But as by 
the offence of one, judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation, so by the righteousness of one, the free 
gift came upon all men uDto justification of life." 
** And the virtue of that free gift, the merits of Christ* 8 
life and death, are applied to us in baptism.** Here 
you have a plwn statement. Mr. Wesley proves very 
clearly, that all infants inherit sin from Adam, and are 
redeemed by our Lord Jesus Christ. But where is 
the proof that " the merits of his life and death are 
applied to them in baptism?" None is produced. 
The scriptures contain none. But still proof is offered, 
satisfactory to Mr. Wesley. Hear him. " The church 
declares in the rubric,** that " it ia certain, by God's 
wordy that children who are baptized, dying before 

17 



194 xsTFAirr baptism sitbverts 

they commit actual sin, are gaved. Here/' he adds, 
" it is plainly taught that infants" " can be saved only 
by the merit of Christ* s death, and that this merit is to 
be applied in baptism,'** The proof, then, is in the 
rubric ! It is not in the Bible. Christ's merits can 
only be applied to infants by baptism ! Is not the con- 
clusion strangely absurd that, after having redeemed 
all children who die in infancy by his blood, Messiah 
should still be dependent /or the application of his merits 
to them, and without which they cannot be saved, upon 
the contingency of their baptism/ If not baptized, 
they remain coji^upt and sinful, because his merits and 
righteousness can in no other way be applied to them. 
Corrupt and sinful beings must be lost. Unbaptized 
children die corrupt and sinful beings. Therefore, ac- 
cording to Mr. Wesley, unbaptized children must be 
lost. In another place the Father of Methodism gives 
us the following argument : — " If infants are guilty of 
original sin, then they are proper subjects of baptism, 
seeing, in the ordinary way, they cannot be saved unless 
this be washed away in baptism. Infants need to be 
washed from original sin. Therefore they are proper 
subjects for baptism. "f And this is the authorized 
and established doctrine of the whole Methodist church, 
English and American, on the subject of infant salva- 
tion ! It is approved by the people, and published for 
their instruction and guidance by the General Confer- 
ence ! Our Methodist brethren, therefore, believe that 
" The virtues of Christ's free gift— the merit's of hi& life 
and death — are applied to infants in baptism;*' that 
"Infants can be saved only by the merit of Christ's 
* DoobrmaX Traoto, p. 2i6, f 11^., ^ j^i. 



THE DOCTBINE OF INFAJST SALVATION. 19& 

deaths and this merit is to be appUed in baptism ;" 
that " They camiot, in the ordinary way, be saved un- 
less their original sin be wa&Jied away in baptism.^* 
And what is this but the same old dogma, in substance^ 
held by the Papists, the Lutherans, and the Episcopa- 
lians ? They all teach that " Baptism represents par- 
don, sanctification, and salvation, through Jesus Christ ; 
and that it always cwiveys the grace which it repre- 
sents." What a revolting subversion we here have of 
the scripture doctrine of infant salvation ! 

We will now pay our respects to the doctrines 
on the subject, of Presbyterians, and other Calvin- 
ists. 

These doctrines are set forth in the Westminster 
Confessidh of Faith, and Catechisms. We notice the 
following passages : — " The visible church" " consists 
of all those throughout the world, that profess the true 
religion, together with their children" "and is the 
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, the house and fam- 
ily of God, out of which there is no ordinary possibil- 
ity of salvation."* It follows, of course, necessarily, 
that the children of those who do not " profess the 
true religion" — ^and such, in their estimation, are the 
children of ninety-nine hundredths of tlie whole human 
race ; are not of *' the bouse and family of God ;" are 
not in the church ; are not to be baptized, and for 
them ** there is no ordinary possibility of salvation !" 
But Calvinists also tell us that they confer **^ benefits^* 
upon the children they baptize. What are these bene- 
fits ? The Confession answers : — " Although it be a 
great sin to contemn, or neglect this ordinance, yet 

* Westminster ConfeMion, ch. 25, see. 2. 



196 INFANT BAFTIBM StTBVERTS 

^ce, and salration, are not so inseparably annexed 
unto it, as that no person can be regenerated or saved 
without it, [since there may be some unknown extra- 
ordinary possibility of salvation] or that all that are 
baptized are undoubtedly regenerated/* [since some of 
the infants thus " sealed,^* may turn out to be of the 
" non-eUct.^^^ " The efficacy of baptism is not tied to 
that moment of time wherein it is administered ; [all 
its sanctifying effects may not instantly be imparted] 
yet notwithstanding, by the right use of this ordi- 
nance, the grace promised is not only offered, but really 
exhibited, [conveyed] and con/erred by the Holy Ghost, 
to such (whether of age or infants) as that grace be- 
longeth unto [if they be elect'l according to the counsel 
of God's own will, in his own appointed time."* 
27ie grace promised, is conferred upon the infant by 
the Holy Ghost, in its baptism/ What is the grace 
promised ? We have the answer in the Catechism. It 
is " The engrafting into" Christ ; " the remission of sins 
by his blood, and regeneration by his Spii it ;" " adop- 
tion, and resurrection unto eternal life."f These con- 
stitute " the grace promised," and they are all, accord- 
ing to Presbyterians, and their kindred sects, given to 
infants in their baptism ! Such infants, and only such, 
are in the church ; and out of the church, " there is 
no ordinary possibility of salvation,^* Thus we have 
an exposition of Calvinisiic doctrines on the subject. 
They hold baptism to be the medium through which, 
to the infant who receives it, are conveyed " the merits 
of Christ's death ;" the blessings of grace and salva- 

* West. Conf., ch. 28, sects. 5, 6. 
t Larg^er Cat., Quest. 165. 



THE DOCTEmE OF INFANT SALVATION. 197 

tion ! Again we have precisely the same old Popish 
teachiDgs maintained by all the other sects of Pedo- 
baptists. We have also, a like falsification of the true, 
scripture doctrine of infant salvation. 

Those who study the several Pedobaptist Standards, 
and other authorities on this subject, must be struck 
with the fact that they frequently speak of " tke ordi- 
nary way*^ of salvation, and of the " ordmary possihU- 
Hy of salvation /" What do they mean by such lan- 
guage ? Do they intend to teach their people that 
there may be some other way of salvation than that 
which God has revealed in his word ? Has not Jeho- 
vah himself told them that, apart from Christ Jesus, 
" there is nxme other name given under heaven among 
men, whereby we must be saved ?"* There is but one 
way of salvation. Infants are saved in the same way 
that all others of the redeemed are saved, by the grace 
of God in Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Am I told that the statements presented from the 
books may be true as to them, but after all, do not cor- 
rectly represent the actual faith of the several commu- 
nities involved ? Is it affirmed that they do not, espe- 
cially among us, credit this doctrine of baptismal effi- 
cacy, nor believe that baptism is necessary to the 
salvation of infants ? If not, they do not believe 
their books! Why, then, do they continue to print 
and circulate these books, and to declare that they 
do believe them, heartily ? If not, they do not 
believe their teachers! Why do they still hear, and 
sustain, and obey them ? Say you they do not be- 
lieve their own avowed baptismal doctrines? Why, 

♦ Acts iv., 18. 

17* 



198 IHVAirr BAPTISM SrBVEBtB 

then, do they BtHl baptuse their children ? Why are 
they 80 alarmed when their children are in danger of 
dying without baptism ? Why are they so impatient 
of any argument against infant baptism ? Why this 
ceaseless effort to keep up infant baptism ? Why all 
this^ and much more, if they do not belieye that their 
baptism has some sort of connection with the salvation 
of infants ? Individuals among them are doubtless ez- 
oepttoos, but the masses still hold infant baptism as a 
condition of infant salyation. Their Standards teaoh 
it; their fathers belieyed it; they themselves cherish the 
same faith, more or less explicitly. 

We have now seen that the whole Pedobaptast world 
make the salvation of infants conditional, and consign 
to destruction all those in whom these conditions are 
not fulfilled. 

One of these conditions is, as we have seen, that 
they be within " the pale of the church," But where, 
in the word of God, can the authority be found to sus- 
tun this necessity for th^f church membership ? Kone 
whatever exists. It is, besides, unreasonable in itself. 
The church was organized for special purposes, con- 
nected with the preservation of the christian character, 
the conversion of sinners, and the extension of the gos- 
pel among men. Only those, therefore, may enter it 
who are qualifi^ to enjoy its blessings, and to perform 
the duties involved. You might as well tell me that it 
fe necessary or beneficial to enlist infants to fight in our 
armies, as that it is advantageous to baptize them into 
our churches. Because the church sustains the char- 
acter indicated, it is invaiiably reqnired for admission 
that men give evidence of repentance for sin, faith in 



THE DOCTTEINE OF INFANT SALVATION. 199 

Christ, and a voluntary and cheerM obedience to all 
tlie demands of the gospel. Ko other class of persons 
can either receive good, or do good, in the visible 
church. The membership of infants can therefore nei- 
ther benefit them, nor the church. And what advan- 
tage can they derive from the ordinances ? They were 
instituted to designate believers, and to strengthen and 
confirm their faith. They never were enjoined upon 
infants. They are no more obligatory upon them than 
are repentance and faith. On such as possess no 
ability, rests no responsibility. God imposes no duty 
upon those to whom he has given no capacity to per- 
form it. The church was not designed for infants. It 
is no place for infants. Their non-performance of ob- 
ligations resting only upon adults, can never interpose a 
barrier in the way of their acceptance with God. The 
supposition that the church membership of infants is a 
condition of their salvation, is unscriptural, unreasona- 
ble, absurd, and not to be credited. 

Another condition of the salvation of infants pro- 
claimed by all pedobaptists, is, as we have seen, their 
baptism. 

This, I remark, is fully as unscriptural, unreasonable, 
and absurd, as the other. What pecuUar power is 
there in baptism, that with it they will be saved, and 
without it they will be lost ? Is it the medium through 
which are conveyed to the child " the merits of the life 
and death of Christ ?" Is the cleansing efficacy of the 
Holy Spirit given in baptism ? Impossible ! These 
blessings are never in any case, so conveyed, either to 
an infant, or to a behever. Grace and salvation are 
confijied to and conferred by no ordinances whatever. 



200 ISFAJST BAFTIBM BUBVEBIB 

They are always given to dying infants, and to believ- 
ing adults, by the direct action of God the Holy Ghost. 
The salvation of infants is in no way dependent on theur 
baptism. 

But further. The supposition that their salvation is 
dependent on any such conditions is an impedchment 
of the righteous justice of God, It is predicated on the 
supposition that he holds the dying, child responsible 
for proceedings of which it can have no knowledge, and 
over which it can exercise no possible control. Wheth- 
er it is baptized or not, depends entirely upon its parents, 
friends, and ministers. Even if it were obligatory, it 
would be their duty, not the child's. But it is the child 
that is to be saved, or lost. Shall the child be lost, 
because its parents were unfaithful, or unbelieving, or 
because the minister did not, or could not do his duty ? 
The conclusion is nothing less than to charge God in 
the face of heaven, with cruelty, and injustice. 

And lastly, the opinion that infant salvation is based 
on any of the conditions prescribed, and advocated, by 
pedobaptists, is horrible, on another account. It sup- 
poses that only those who are baptized, and in the 
church, are saved ! What becomes of all the unbap- 
tized who die in infancy ? They of course must be 
consigned to eternal death ! How countless the multi- 
tudes of children who go into the eternal world un- 
baptized ! This is true of many, very many, in chris- 
tian lands ; and in Pagan, and Mohammedan countries, 
it is true of all. If Pedobaptist doctrines on this sub- 
ject be true, untold millions of infants are damned ! 
They could not be saved without "the merits of 
Christ's life and death." These are communicated to 



THE DOCTBINE OF mFANT SALVATION. 201 

them only tihrough baptism. They never were bap- 
tized. They are lost ! But their doctrines are not 
true. They are, in themselves and in their results, 
wholly baseless. They are repugnant to every benevo- 
lent feeling of the soul. Never did the human mind 
conceive of sentiments more absurd and revolting. 

Infant baptism, as these facts and considerations am- 
ply evince, subverts, and falsifies the true scripture doc- 
trine of infant salvation, and thus proves itself an op' 
palling evil, by denying the teachings of the word of 
God on that subject, and placing it upon fictitious 
grounds; by requiring that infants shall be in the 
church in order to be saved ; by making baptism the 
means of removing original sin, and the medium of 
conveying to them "the merits of Christ's life and 
death;" by proclaiming that the purification of the 
Holy Spirit is obtained for them only through this ordi- 
nance ; and by keeping out of sight the great truth that 
all infants are saved unconditionally, by the grace of 
God in Jesus Christ. For all this evil inflicted upon 
the truth, and for the boundless distress and anguish 
created by the falsehood, Pedobaptists of all denomina- 
tions are responsible to God, and to men. Infant bap- 
tism has produced it all. They — ^not the Baptists — 
Are the men really, who " hold the damnation of in- 
fants T* We would, if we could, heal' the festering 
wound they have inflicted. We repudiate the doc- 
trine of infant baptism, and of infant damnation. We 
denounce all their accompaniments, and consequences. 
If God is just and good, if reason deserves respect, if 
the gospel is true, if the merits of Christ are effica- 
cious, if the Holy Spirit is not bound by the control of 



202 iNFAirr BAFnEoc, etc. 

men, and tied down to forms and ordinances, tlien all 
children dying in infancy, irrespective of any relation 
with the church, and without regard to baptism, or 
any other ordinance, are saved with an everlasting sal- 
vation, by the grace of God in Jesus Christ our Lord, 
whose merits and righteousness, to fit them for the 
glorious change, are personally and effectually applied 
by the Holy Ghost. 



CHAPTER X. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BSCAFSB IT LEADS ITS 
ADVOCATES INTO BEBELLION AGAINST THE AUTHOE- 
ITY OP CHEIST. 

CSnrtit^s authority paramomit ; lo&nt baptism contemns It, in regard to the 
persons to be baptized, the required pro&B8i<m of £iith, and the totm of 
baptism; it prevents the obedience of believera. 

The authority of Jesus Christ is everjrwhere absolute. 
In his church he is the sole lawgiver, and ruler. His 
known will is, in all cases, decisive of your duty. His 
light to govern is unquestionable. He is your Creator 
and Redeemer, infinitely wise, good, and merciful. You 
are his people, ignorant, imperfect, and dependent. To 
enlighten and guide you he has given his most holy 
urord, in which you have instructions on all subjects, 
and to the utmost extent. This perfect revelation you 
are obliged to receive as it is, and be governed by it in 
your heart, and your life. To attempt evasions in any 
respect ; to practise as his what he has not command- 
ed ; or to substitute in place of his ihstitutions any of 
your own ; is to come directly into collision with his 
authority. Infant baptism offends in all these re- 
spects. It leads to the violation of divine command- 
ments regarding the persons to be baptized, the prelim- 
inary profession of faith, the form of the ordinance, and 
the obligations to christian obedience. 

1. Infant baptism leads its advocates into rebellion 



204 INFANT BAPTIHIC IN OOLUBIOK 

against the authority of Chnst in regard to the persons 
to be baptized. 

These are described definitely, in the apostolic com- 
mission. When last the voice of Messiah was heard 
upon earth, it was in the utterance of the conunandy 
Go, and make disciples, not among the Jews only, but 
among all nations. Teach them the gospel, and those 
who believe it baptize in the name of the Father, and 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. This duty im- 
posed upon them is obligatory upon all their successors 
in the ministiy ** unto the end of the world." But in- 
fant baptism has introduced a condition of things that 
renders rebellion inevitable. In pedobaptist countries, 
such as Italy and Spain, an instance of compliance with 
the command of Christ has not occurred in a thousand 
years. In those lands, or among pedobaptists any- 
where, who can " make disciples, and baptize them ?" 
All the people have been baptized in their infancy. 
There are, it is true, among them many unbelievers ; 
multitudes who are still " in the gall of bitterness, and 
in the bonds of iniquity ;" they ought to hear and be- 
lieve the gospel ; but they have all been baptized ! 
They ai-e all in the church ! Shall we exhort them as 
Peter, in his day, did those of the same character, 
** Repent, and be baptized, every one of you ?" This 
would be inappropriate. They have "every one'* of 
them been baptized without repentance ! Have any of 
them — a rare event — been instructed, and obtained 
faith ? May we then say to them, as Philip did to an 
interesting convert, " If thou believest with all thy 
heart thou mayest be baptized ?" No ; they have all 
&em baptized without faith! And if any zealous preach- 



WITH THE AUTHORITY OF CHBIBT. 205 

er of righteousness should undertake to baptize one of 
these baptized infidels, after his conversion, he would 
subject himself to the disgrace and the civil penalties 
of being an Anabaptist. The Saviour requires that 
men shall first believe, and then be baptized. But 
the order he established is now reversed. The impeni- 
tent and unbelieving, as well as the holy and faithful, 
all have long ago been, baptized. Thus infant baptism 
subverts the authority of Christ. It baptizes exclusively 

UNBELIEVERS, AND BELIEVERS NEVER ! In proportion 

as it prevails the apostolic commission is contemned 
and violated. This remark may be illustrated by refer- 
ring to a fact in the history of our fathers. In Eng- 
land, until after the restoration of the Stuarts, there 
was not in the established church, even a liturgy for 
the baptism of adult persons. During the Common- 
wealth, the citizens had enjoyed under Cromwell, a 
liberty of conscience before wholly unknown. With 
the Bible in their hands, great numbers of the people 
became Baptists. Their children were of course not 
baptized. After the return of the monarchy, these 
were compelled to submit to the ordinance, and for this 
purpose the liturgy was remodelled, and an " office" 
inserted, then for the first time, for adults. Dr. Wall 
narrates these events thus : — " It was by reason of this 
[the prevalence of the Baptist] opinion in those times, 
that the Convocation that set presently after the resto- 
ration of Charles II., when they made a new book of 
Common Prayer, found it necessary to add to it an 
office for the baptism of those who, having been bom 
in those limes, had not yet been baptized, whereof there 
were many that were now grown too old to be baptized 

18 



206 INFAJIT BAPTISM IN OOLLISIOH 

as infants^ and ongbt to make profession of their own 
faith. They gave in the preface to the said book an 
account of the occasion which made this necessary 
then, though not formerly, in these words, * Together 
with aA office for the baptism of such as are of riper 
years/ Which, although not so necessary when the 
former book was compiled, yet by the growth of Ana- 
baptism, through the licentiousness [freedom of con- 
science] of the times, is now become necessary."* 
From the period, therefore, that popery took posses- 
sion of Britain in the seventh century, up to the reign 
of the second Charles, no believers, unless in secret, 
were ever baptized in all that realm ! Thus completely 
and effectually, as to the persons appointed to receive 
this ordinance, does infant baptism lead to rebellion 
against the divine law, and subvert the authority of our 
Lord Jesus Christ ! 

2. Infant baptism offers an indignity to the authority 
of Christ by dispensing with the appointed profession of 
faith as a condition of baptism. 

The previous profession of faith in Christ is made by 
the gospel itself, an indispensable condition of baptism. 
It can never be disregarded without a violation of the 
commandment of God. The apostles, and primitive 
christians, never departed from this principle in a single 
instance. So plainly is this fact set forth in the sacred 
word, and so firmly has it ever been fixed in the, public 
mind, that, as we saw in a previous chapter, it has al- 
ways been demanded even of infants ! Papists, Lu- 
therans, Episcopalians, and others, to this day,, farcically 
pretend that little children do believe ; and, since they 
* ffiflt. Inf. Bap., vol. u., pp. 821, 822. 



WITH THE AJJTROBXIY OF GBSISX. 207 

jcaonbt tbemselves make their own profession of faith, 
sponsors are appointed to make it for them ! But who 
that thinks at all, does not know that this is all a mis- 
erable fiction ? It is absurd. It is ridiculous. Infants 
have no repentance, no faith, no religion. They are. 
baptized without any profession of their own whatever. 
The law demands of all who are baptized a previous 
profession of faith. Infants make no such profession. 
Therefore infant baptism is rebellion against the law,. 
and an indignity to the authority of Jesus Christ. 

3. It also perpetuates the change of form, and thus 
wholly abolishes baptism itself. 

As we have but " one Lord," and " one faith," so 
we have but " one baptism." There is no other.. That 
" one haptisnC^ is the burial in water, and raising again, 
by a true minister of the gospel, of a believer in our 
Lord Jesus Christ, upon a profession of his faith, in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost. So ably and conclusively, by numerous wri- 
' ters, is this proposition established, that I deem it un- 
necessary here to enter into the argument. This is the 
form of christian baptism. It is its invariable form^ 
Baptism itself is but a form. The form is the thing. 
Take away the form, and nothing is left. Destroy 
the form, and you destroy baptism* He who in bap- 
tism is not immersed, is really not baptized. The 
change of its form is the abrogation of baptism. But^ 
except in the Greek church, infants are n^ver im- 
merse4. They have water sprinkled, or poured upon 
them. The form is changed. No one, I presume, 
imagines that this desecration would ever have become 
general, had it not been to accommodate infants. " Men 



208 mvAin baptism in collision 

and tDomen*^ who read, and believe the scriptures, who 
are goyemed by them, and act for themselves, would 
never think of submitting to any other than the scrip- 
ture form. But to immerse infants would be, to say 
the least, very inconvenient, and not always perhaps 
entirely safe. Infant baptism has, therefore, perpetua- 
ted the change of form, and thus wholly abrogated 
baptism itself. Infant baptism is thus also in conflict 
with the authority of Jesus Christ. 

4. Infant baptism prevents the obedience to Christ of 
believers. 

He commands all believers, as believers, and when 
they become believers, to be baptized ; but many who 
have been sprinkled in infancy, refuse to obey him ; 
and they refuse upon the ground expressly that they 
have been sprinkled in infancy. Now infant sprinkling 
is certainly not baptism. And it prevents true baptbm 
in a variety of ways. 

Multitudes among sprinkled christians will not think, 
or converse on the subject. They are offended if it is 
even mentioned in their presence. A sermon they will 
not hear ; a book they will not touch, unless it is de- 
signed to confirm them in their errors. If any one ven- 
ture to present to them the truth, and admonish them 
to obedience, they will be at no pains to conceal their 
displeasure, and will probably never forgive him ! They 
live and die unbaptized. 

But there are many, very many who read the scrip- 
tures for themselves, and who cease to entertain pedo- 
baptist sentiments. They would, if they might, most 
gladly be baptized. Will their own chosen and loved 
pastors baptize them ? Never ! Often have they been 



WTTH THB AUTHOKnT OF CHBIBT. 209 

besought to do so, but they -will not. They are immo- 
vable. What ! refuse to administer the laws of Christ ? 
How dare they refuse? His commands are upon 
them. "Teach," says the Redeemer, "and baptize 
those who believe." But no ; they have sprinkled 
them in their infancy; therefore when they believe 
they will not baptize them ! Infant baptism thus 
turns the professed ministers of Christ into rebels 
against him, and brings them, too, into collision with 
his authority ! 

In our country, however, there are large numbers 
who become enlightened, and consequently unhappy on 
this subject. They feel as if they must obey Christ, 
but how can they ? In Europe, such an act was, for 
many a century, and in most transatlantic countries is 
now, a serious offence against the laws of the land. 
Both administrator and subject would this day, be per- 
secuted, imprisoned, and, if they could not escape, be 
hurried by suffering possibly to an untimely grave. 
But in our own free land there are no such restraints^ 
May not every one here do what he shall think to be 
his duty? Yes, it is his imquestioned right. But after 
all, is the exercise of that right practicable ? Few who 
have no experience in the premises, or whose attention 
has not been especially called to the subject, can ima- 
gine how almost insurmountable are the difficulties 
such an one finds in his way. He cannot be bap- 
tized, as we have seen, in his own church. But he is 
at liberty to leave that, and join the Baptist church. 
Dare he venture such an act ? Few, unless favored by 
peculiar circumstances, find themselves possessed of the 
requisite courage. He reject infant baptism I K he 

18* 



910 QVFAliT BAFTKOC IN OaUJaiON 

dar^ esBsy bo bold an act, he ia taunted mi ridicDle4 
as presumifig to be wiser than the thousands of the 
great and the good who have gone before hioL Re- 
proached! Insulted 1 Scoffed! He shrinks appalled. 
Me dare reject infant baptism ! He is upbraided with 
a want of respect for kU parents and friends, who be- 
lieved in it, and who had him baptized in his infancy. 
Will he sb^me and acandali^ those who of all others 
^re d^ftfe^t to hip heart ? Me reject infant ba^ptism ! 
In this act he will renounce his family, and rjeiatiYes^ 
irho will pursue him ever after with qcom and con- 
lempt, as unwoirihy and degraded. Me leave his mofi 
duu^h 1 He loves his chinch devotedly, and cannot 
abandon it. M^ think of forsaking his own, md uniting 
with anoiiier church ! If he dare be will be at once 
denounced as weak-minded^ vacillating, and unstablei. 
It will b^ rung in Im ears that not much confidence is 
to be placed in the rel^ion or intelUg^ioe of those 
"rei|€ga4e%" who are going from one chnrch to anoth- 
&r. He join the Baptist church ! For that churchy 
above all others* be haa been taiight to cherish disre- 
spect / lie belieyea. its members to be mostly ignorant 
fanaticsy with i\rhom. intercourse must always be paice 
f uL All thi9» a^ o^y to be bapti«ad ! Had he not 
better give it up at oioe ? These are some of the bar- 
riers, that infant baptism throws m the way of obe- 
diencev They sho^ that, what our Lord Jesus Christ 
said o^ a memorable occasi<m, to the multitudes who 
surrounded him, is still true of all classes : — '< If any 
man pome to zne, snad hate not pove lesa than me] his 
father and Brother, and wile and GhiMren, and brethrai 
and sisters, yea, and his own. Me also, h& oannot be my 



WITH TBQSB AlgmtlWi ' K W CPSKT. 91% 

dSsciple. And whosoerer doth not betr kis cross, and 
oome after me, cannot be my disciple."* I have 
known many, and from my heart have pided theiB, 
who lamented in secret the obstacles in their way. 
They were always mihappy. Their conscienees wer^ 
perpetually upbraiding them. But they remained in 
disobedience ! 

There are persons, however, and I thank God that 
their numbers are rapidly multiplying, who rise supe- 
rior to every restraint, and obey our Lord Jesus Christ 
at whatever hazard. They know, and dare do their 
duty. To them nothing is so precious as a conscious-* 
ness that they please God. They are characterized by 
strong and independent minds, firmness of purpose, 
deep piety, and a readiness to sacrifice all for Christ. 
They count not their lives dear to themselves in com- 
parison with the approbation of their adorable Re- 
deemer. These can, and do, burst the bonds of inCwt 
baptism. But the thousands remain through life in 
slavery ! They cannot move. 

These are some of the forms in which infant bap- 
tism develops the evil inherent in its character; it 
leads directly to rebellion against the authority of 
Christ in regard to the persons to be baptized, receiv- 
ing those he has prohibited, and rejecting those he has 
received ; it dispenses with the profession of faith as a 
condition of baptism, which he has in all cases impera- 
tively demanded ; it has perpetuated the change of 
form in baptism, a form divinely instituted and com- 
manded, and thus abolished baptism altogether; and 
it prevents those who have been sprinkled in infancy 

* Luke xiv., 26, 27. 



SIS IHFABT BAFTlBlf, SFC. 

from obeying Cluist when they become belierere. It 
18 now seen to be most true, that infant baptism is an 
eyil because it brings its adyocates into direct rebeltion 
against the authority of our adorable Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

htfast baptism is an evil because op the conneo- 

TION IT assumes WITH THE MORAL AND RELIGIOUS 
TRAINING OF CHILDREN. 

Importance of correct training for children ; bow tnfiint baptism connects 
itself with it; the ii^juries thus inflicted. 

• 

The correct moral and religious training of children, 
is immeasurably important. No subject is more wor- 
thy of our careful attention. We are all, and especially 
those of us to whose charge these little ones have been 
providentially committed, called upon to study it with 
prayerful assiduity. The great business of parental life is 
the proper training of the next generation. Material errors 
here, must always result more or less disastrously, while 
true principles, prosecuted with fidelity, invariably se- 
cure the richest blessings. This most interesting and 
responsible work, however, is not permitted to proceed 
unembarrassed. With it infant baptism boldly connects 
itself, and confidently claims to be necessary to its faith- 
ful and successful prosecution. This connection, and the 
evil it inflicts, it is my purpose in the present chapter, 
briefly to consider. 

On the general subject of the moral and religious 
training of the young, Paul thus exhorts : — " Ye fa- 
thers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring 



214 nrrAHT bafiibic 

ihem vp in the nurture and admonition of the Lord."* 
Regarding the benefits to be expected from compliance 
with this injunction the wisest of men instructs us 
thus : — ** Train up a child in the way he should go, 
and when he is old he will not depart from it."f In 
approval of the domestic fidelity of Abraham Jehovah 
said : — " I know him that he will command his chiK 
dren, and his household after him, and they shaH keep 
the way of the Lord."t All those upon whom our 
heavenly Father has devolved this great duty, are held 
accountable to him, and to society, for its true and 
faithful perfonnanoe. How strong, too» are the other 
motives which impel them ! Who can look upon the 
children around Inm, and especially upon Ins own off- 
spring, without feeling in his heart a firm pui^xise, for 
tbeir sake, to discharge the obfigation to the ulanosi 
extent ? ^ese infant minds are so many blank sheets 
upon which you may wiite almost whatever you please. 
Ere, however, the work is commenced, kt the starding 
fact be duly weighed that impressions, when once given^ 
can never be en^rely ef^ed« They are to a greater 
or less extent indelible. If evil, or adverse to purity, 
and truth, an injury, probably m irrepandile injury, is 
done to the chMren themselvM, to all the social inter* 
ests with which they may afterwards be connected, and 
to whatever pettaans to human baj^piMss in this worlds 
and in the world to «ome. 

The principkM lo be instilled are &1I contuned in the 
** sacred oracles." They ought to be preserved sA iat 
as possible from ftll evil mfiuences, to have co»Btafat.ly 
before them a pure and holy example, end avery oppor-^ 

• Eph. vi., 1-4. t Pror. xxii., 6. % Ota. xTifi.j 1#, 



AN ^ifVBT io ^Sitil)6BSS. tii 

tunity shdtiH be iriiproved to fix ifi their heatik "tlii 
lessons of heavenly -wisdom. The great object miisl 
be — since piety includes morality, and fits them both 
for the duties of this life, and the glory of the life *o 
oome — to lead them to Christ, and to seek ibr thefli 
pure vital religion. tTritil this end is gained. Very little 
Comparatively, has been accomplished. The nUinner M 
which the proposed end is to be sought, is perspicuous- 
ly stated by God himself: — "These trords which I 
eonuhahd th^e this day, shall be in tkjf heart, and thoii 
shalt teach them dUigently unto thy children ; and thou 
irhalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and 
when thou walkest by the way, and when thou Heist 
down, and when thou risest up."* 

On this general subject there is, as far as knoVm to 
ktte, among <^hiistians of ail classes, no difference in 
^ntiment. The moMent, however, we descend .to par- 
ticulars, We are the poles asunder. Baptists insist that 
the successful moral and religious training of childreii 
eah only be fully attained by adhering strictly to the 
teachings of divine inspiratioia. And since th«r bap- 
tism and reception into the church in infancy, are meas- 
«res not authorized in the gospel, nor consonant ilrith 
teason, they must be productive not of good, but of 
6vil. Pedobaptists, on the contrary, earnestly insist 
that it in essential to a happy result in the premised that 
all infants be baptized, received into the church, and b6 
there brought up with the people of God. Here we 
]oin issue, and shall proceed to examine the merits of 
the controversy. I consider myself the more impera- 
tively called upon to do this, because Baptists have 



216 INFANT BAFTDnC 

heretofore thongbt it scarcely worth their while on this 
topic, to defend their opinions, or practice, with any 
special carefulness. We have been, and are, fiercely 
attacked, and violently denounced, in sermons, hooks, 
tracts, newspapers, everywhere, as wanting in aflfection- 
ate attentions to our children, and paying little or no 
regard to their moral and reU^ous training ! This odi- 
ous charge is rung perpetually in the puhlic ear, and it 
is thought to he sufficiently proved by the fjEict that we 
refuse to baptize, and receive them into our churches* 
The clamor has been kept up from age to age, and 
with so much zeal and pertinacity, that out of our own 
circles the calumny is almost universally beUevedi 
Justice and truth demand of us a temperate but firm 
defence. 

Baptists wanting in affectionate attentions to their 
children! Pay very little regard to their moral and 
religious training ! Let facts speak. Do the children 
of Baptists in their general conduct, evince less moral 
propriety than others ? Are they, when of the same 
social grade, less polished in their manners, less intelli- 
gent as men, or less patriotic as citizens? Are a 
smaller number of them in proportion, found to be 
truly religious, and active, and useful as followers of 
Christ ? Who dare affirm any of these things ? No 
man certainly, who has any respect for his own char- 
acter, or veracity. By reliable statistics, collected at 
different times, and in several cities of our Union, it 
has repeatedly been proved, that a much larger pro- 
portion of the children of Baptists become religious 
than of the children of Pedobaptists. During the early 
part of last year, a report was made, after accurate ex- 



AK nSUUBT TO GHILDBEN. 217 

aminatioiiy by the Baltimore Sabbath-scbool Superrn- 
teadents' and Teachers' Association, with the following 
results: — In the Protestant Episcopal Church Sabbath- 
schools of that city, among all the pupils, about <me in 
ev&cy forty-<me had professed religion; in the Sabbath- 
schools of the Presbyterian church. Old School, about 
one in ninety, and New School, about one in fifty ; in 
those of the Lutheran churches one in fifteen ; in those 
of the Methodise Episcopal churches, one in twenty ; in 
those of the Baptist churches, onb in fivb.^ A sim- 

♦ True tJnion, June 12th, 1851, A correspondent writes as 
follows : — 

^' A few months ago you published the statisticB of the Balla- 
more S. S. Superintendents^ and Teachers^ Association, to dis- 
prove the oft-repeated fallacy that Baptists are cruel to leave 
their children without * the seal of the covenant,' and thus ex- 
posed more than those who have enjoyed that * privilege' to live 
and die without Christ. We then showed that in the Sabbath- 
schools of this city, the proportion of converts was more than 
twice as large among the Baptists as in any other school, and 
more than ten times as great as in some of them. The report 
for the present year is still more conclusive, and I humbly trust 
it will tend to dissipate the fears and silence the complaints of 
those who say our children are left ' to the uncovenanted mer- 
dee of God.' Would that all the children were taught ^ ours 
are, that they are *■ by nature children of wrath,' needing the 
work of the Spirit and the application of the blood of Jesus to 
their hearts, before they aie fit for a place in his holy church. 
Then we might see more than we do converted in their early 
days, and consecrating the bloom of their youth to God. To 
teach an unconverted person (man or child) that he is a member 
of the church, and embraced within the covenant, simply be- 
cause a rite with which he had nothing to do, was performed 
upon him, can have no other effect than to lull his conscience to 
sleep, and to make him comparatively contented with his favor- 
able position. God grant that the day may soon come when 
Buch dangerous and unscriptural teaching shall cease, and when / 
the church shall be as she is described by inspiratloxi, ' a eho- 

19 



ilur i&Testigalion haft been mstde in Cincinilati, intSi lite 
results. In New York some years since, a scrutiny was 
instituted in a large number of families of aU the pre- 
Yuling denonainatioiis, and it was found that Tery many 
more of the Baptist than of any others, had been 
brought savingly to Christ. These are facts. What 
do they prove ? Kot that the baptized children 
aityund us have ah advantage over ours, but the con* 
trary. Eve(ry theory must be judged by its residts, 
and both the reasons and the facts in this case, prove 
that of infant baptism is worse than useless. The public 
mind is beginning to be enlightened on this subject^ 
and will not much longer bear with patience, the re- 
proaches, and defamations with which we are so un- 
tiringly pursued. 

What moral and relrgioud advantages Bxt, in ^e 
training of children, claimed as arising from their bap- 
tism, and admission as members into the church ? 

0ea generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation,* 'a peadiat 
people.^ 

" Bat to the Beport ; — 

Schocl. UTo. attending. Prqf, qfrt^gn, Proporiiaru 

Protestant Episcopal 1161 28 1 in 41 »/» 

Presbyterian, Old School 72d 8 1 in 9()«/4 

Do. New School.... 800 6 1 in 50 

English Lutheran 653 8^ 1 in 15 

itfethodist Episcopal 455B 220 1 in S0y4 

iBaptist 761 US 1 in 6'/t 

" It Will be seen by this table thrtt the Baptista have nearly 
three timee as many professor of religion in their schools as any 
other denomination, a&d aboat eeventeen times as many as are 
in the Old School Presbyterian church, one of the strbngest ad- 
vocates of infttnt baptism. These are eloquent fkcta, and irto 
ttvat that tifartte lati^^ge uay not be fbi^tten.'* 



AN tKtOm to (SUftDKEN. fill 

Ar& we told that ^hen tl« cMdrcfn aril baptize<i> 
BpoDsors, oir parents, ot both, come before the cbtireh> 
and there in the presence of God and men, enter mto 
the mosi solemn yo^rs that they witl " bring them up 
in the knotrledge and admomtion of the Lord ?" Afl 
ifaifi We know. And We know &Ei(M*e ihan Uiis. Sp(m* 
9or9, it is plai&, mtist be i^onsoiocis wh«n they asstime 
these voWSy that they cannot redeem them. It is noto- 
rious that not one in fifty ever even attempt it. Thd 
whole paraphernalia of ipon^orskip is in 'hct, a mer^ 
taatter of form and show, withoat aafthority, and with- 
out benefit. But what of the vows of parents ? Ar^ 
they not substantial, and valuab^ ? '0pon them surely, 
every ^reliance may be placed. And whAt do f?hey vow ? 
Why, that they really will do what God Almighty has 
eommanded theM to do ; in other words, tliat they will 
discharge an obligation Which no vows of any kind cati 
either absolve, of Irender more binding ! Who bas r^^- 
^uired this at their hands ? To me it is most evidi^nt 
that if without these vows they Will not obey the di- 
vine injunction, they will not obey it at all. If the atk- 
thority of the Most High is not miffici^ent of itself, vOWs 
and pledges will add nothing to fts force. But even if 
the vows in question were effective and desirable, Why 
connect them with baptlstii ? Tot this relation 1 can 
perceive no especial reason. No ben^ts, therefore, oft 
this ground are, or can be, sectored to the children. 

These baptized children, however, aiift taembers, W0 
are told, of the church. They have, in consequence^ 
thrown around them a strong moral influence, which 
without this relation, they could hot enjoy. This ii^ 
looked TLfod as giving them superior adv&ntagea. But 



820 ISFABT BAFIIBM 

are thej, after all, any more intimately associated i^ith 
the people of God, or mider the influence of the church, 
than they would have heen had no such proceedings 
ever have transpired? Certainly they are not. In 
either case they are under precisely the same control 
and direction. The children of Baptists are surroimded 
by all the moral influences and christian associations, 
that are enjoyed by those of pedobaptists, and their 
salutary results are felt to fully as great an extent. 
We have therefore all the benefits which have been 
supposed to attach to infant baptism, without incurring 
any of its evils. 

It is most evident that no good arises from the en« 
gagements of sponsors, from the promises of parents, 
from associations with the people of God, from the 
moral influence of the church, from any circumstances 
or sources whatever, connected with their baptism, 
which they would not have enjoyed, and which our chil- 
dren do not enjoy without it. On the contrary, they 
incur the most serious and dangerous evil, in two re* 
spects ; they are deceived on vital tenets relating tc 
salvation, and they are thereby placed in circumstan* 
ces extremely unfavorable to the reception of gospel 
truths. 

Infant baptism leads, in moral and religious training, 
directly into deceptions regarding the way of salvation. 

These baptized children will, as soon as they are 
capable of thought, inquire, if they care to think at 
all on the subject, what relation this ordinance has 
given them to Christ and salvation. They can 'find in 
the Book of God no answer. The Bible is silent. To 
what quarter, then, must they look for information? 



AN INJITBT TO CBTLDBJEN. 221 

To tlieir caiecliisms, of course. And wbat do these 
same catechisms teach them ? If they are CcUvinists, 
they teach them that they were born in the covenant 
of grace, and members of the church of Christ, and 
that in their baptism they had, sealed and made over to 
them, " all the benefits of the death of Christ !!' If 
they are Methodists, their catechisms teach them that 
their baptism cleansed them from the defilements of 
original sin, imited them with the church, and enrolled 
them among the faithful people of God ! If they are 
Episcopalians, (and so in substance of Catholics, Lu* 
therans, and others,) that by "their baptism they were 
made members of Christ, the heirs of God, and in- 
heritors of the kingdom of heaven." A great portion 
of their moral and religious training consists in teach- 
ing them these very catechisms, together with their 
creeds, confessions, and other standards. If they be- 
lieve them, they are unquestionably deceived as to the 
great principles of true religion. They must conclude 
that they are safe. What more is necessary ? If noigr 
they live moral and correct lives, they cannot fail of 
heaven ! And is this true ? No. It is wholly false. 
Their minds are miserably perverted ! They have mis- 
taken the very nature of vital Christianity. If they 
would look into the Bible, they would find its teachings 
on this subject the opposite of those contained in their 
catechisms. And would they examine their own hearts 
and lives, they would find them, in the light of the holy 
word, not pure, not sanctified, but still depraved, sinful, 
criminal. Tlieir moral and religious training has &e- 
trayed them I It may lead them to ruin. 
These deceptions imposed upon the infant mind, are 

19* 



$98 QG7AST MAjnam 

fostered in rip^r years, aiid streagthanedy aad deepened, 
aad fixed, by the press, and the pulpit of all classes I 
** Baptized young people" are addressed by their pas* 
tors, not as sinners, but as "children of the covenant." 
They are " pecvdiarly favored." Dr. Miller, for exam- 
ple, obserFes: — ''The only question they [baptized 
young people] can ask themselves is not. Shall we enter 
the churehf and be connected with Chnpt's family? 
But shall we continue in ili, or aet the part of ungratcdful 
deseriWB V Ha maaataias that :^^*^ Such ohildren ane 
to be registered as members ; aa saieh. they «Fe to be 
spedally tai^ht ; thw own rektioii to the church ten- 
derly pressed. There are to be meetiags exclusively for 
their parents, and for them as members with their par. 
rents, and in those meetings they are to see their school- 
fellows admitted into full communion." Thus ''they 
will be brought to recognize their own membership."* 
Alluding to these views of the venerable Princeton pro- 
fessor. Dr. Campbell of England* in a recent work, 
remarks : — " Under such a system it is hardly extrava- 
gant, with Richard Baa^r, and Dr. Miller, to believe* 
that in nineteen cases out oi twenty, our children would 
grow up dutifi^l, sober, (orderly, serious, and before they 
reached mature age, recognize their memberslup in a 
personal act, with sincerity and edification."! TMs. m 
the moral and religious training prompted by infant bap- 
tism» and taught in the books. Not the conversion of 
these children is sought, but " the unfolding of the 
elemtenta of the holy heart with which they were bom>" 
or which was imparted in baptism ! Other sinners may 
require to be "bom again," but thei^ have been "pu«« 
* StOTel*0 Hereditwy Caaixiui, p. SA. f. Jethio, p. fi». 



AST ivrJCE^^rir TQ, cmfi&m^' 98$ 

nfied hj bajptisn^/' It ijemaiQs only that they '' re<io§* 
nize their membership' ' ia the church, and they are Iq 
" full communion." They are not exhorted to " per- 
sonal religion," but w^ned against "personal apostasy," 
" the part of ungrateful deserters !" It i^ a calamitous 
mistake to connect infant baptism with the iporal and 
religious training of children. lU doctrines di^oeive 
piillioos. It pseates false hopes. It, leads them to coft* 
ceiv^ themselves favorites o£ heaven, when in truth they 
are ''in thiegall of bittexuesjii, a,nd in, the bouds of i^i- 
iquity." 

The children of Baptists ape led into no such, deoep* 
tions, but are carefully guarded against, thpm. No mi^s 
are thrown around them which prevent ihem from i^n* 
derstanding the gospel of Christ. They are npt obliged 
to perform the double labor of " unlearning what they 
have learned amiss," said then learning the truih. They 
set out in the right directi<»i, and industriously pursue 
it. They learn that all, whether bapti^d or nnbap- 
tized, are by nature, depraved and sinful, and that in 
order to be saved they must repent, and believe in our 
Lord Jesus Christ ; that all true religion is personal ; 
that every man mnst account individually to God ; and 
that each must for himself think, decide, and obey our 
Lord Jesus Christ, Their minds are not preoccupied 
by error, but open to receive the truth without preju- 
dice, and to practise^ it. without hindrance. These ad* 
vantages, are priceless. They are of unspeaJ^able mag- 
nitude and importance ! Of them, all, however, our 
brethren of the several denominations around us are 
unhappily deprived. The hearts of their children have 
been withdrawn from the truth, and " turned unto fa- 



221 mFAST BAFTmiC, ETC. 

bles.*^ Infant baptism, therefore, unfits parents, and 
others, for the successful moral and religious training of 
children, and it disqualifies the children under their 
charge from embracing the truth, by previously imbu- 
ing their minds with error, and implanting prejudices 
against the simple gospel of the Son of God. 

We have now submitted for your consideration the 
importance of the moral and religious training of chil- 
dren as enjoined in the word of inspiration ; the obliga- 
tions it imposes upon parents, and others ; and the claims 
to fidelity preferred by the interests of society, and urged 
by the spiritual and eternal destiny of the children them- 
selves. We have seen that from their baptism, and church 
relationship, no good is secured of any kind, but on the 
contrary, that they are seriously and permanently injured. 
We have ascertained that the evil inflicted consists, in 
part at least, in the false impressions made upon their 
minds in regard to the teachin/^ of the gospel, in regard 
to their own character as sinners, in regard to the way of 
salvation, and in regard to the true nature of the religion 
of Christ. And we have also shown that parents thus 
place both themselves and their children in a position in 
which they lose all the advantages of being guided by 
the divine word, of receiving originally just conceptions 
of themselves, and of preserving the mind free from pre- 
judices of all kinds in relation to both truth and duty. 
Most fearful, therefore, and often we apprehend fatal, 
is the evil of infant baptism, evinced in the connection 
which it arrogates with the moral and religious training 
of children. 



CHAPTER III. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT IS THE GRAND 
FOUNDATION UPON WHICH RESTS THE UNION OF CHURCH 
AND STATE. • 

lieBttBOny tn proof; origin and nfttnre of the miloii ; destniotlTO of true 

reHgioa. 

Infant baptism is inseparable from the union of 
cburch and state. They are essential to each other. 
This fact will, I presume, be admitted by all. In a late 
learned work, Dr. Williams, (of England,) remarks : — 
** Without it [infant baptism] those prophecies can 
never be fulfilled that predict the conversion of nations 
to God. National conversions must be pedobaptistical 
conversions, because there must be children included in 
these nations. A national church must therefore be a 
pedobaptist church. Indeed, those who aim at a na- 
tional church must have some principle upon which 
the whole of its inhabitants may be compressed within 
its pale. This infant baptism alone renders possible.''^ 
** Dr. Wall justly asserts that all national churches 
have practised infant baptism. Nothing is plainer than 
that where national churches are maintained, infant 
baptism must be practised, because the nation is brought 
into .the church in its infancy.^'f In Europe^ this is in 

♦ In StovePB Chr'n Discip. 

t Hinton's Hist of Bapt, p. 868. 



226 JSrAJST BAJPTBOt. 

fiiety one of the prindpol argnments in sapport of in- 
fant baptism, that it is the grand foundation npon 
vhich rests the union of church and state, and that 
without it such union cannot be maintained. The fol- 
lowing canon law of England is prompted by a con- 
viction of the truth now stated : — " No minister shall 
refuse or delay to christen any child, that is brought 
to him upon Sundays, or holy-da]^, to be christened ;" 
** and if he shall refuse to christen, he shall be sus- 
pended by the Bishop of his diocese fh>m his ministry 
by the space of three months/'* All who belong to 
the nation must belong to the church. To be in the 
church, all must be baptized. And to baptize all, 
they must receive the ordinance in their infancy. Were 
only those who repent, believe in Christ, and live holy 
lives, admitted into the church, then indeed would it 
be as Christ designed, pure, elevated, sanctified, but it 
never could be national, and particularly would it very 
seldom contain the kings, and princes, and great men 
of the earth. These can find their way into the church 
by no other medium than infant baptism. But they 
must be in the church in order to make it a national 
church. Infant baptism is essential to the union of 
church and state. 

Upon what arguments do the friends of a state 
church rely to prove its lawfulness ? The very same 
by which they defend infant baptism. To this fact I 
briefly alluded in a former chapter. Judaism in both 
cases, famishes the required testimony. The Jewish 
society before Christ, and the christian society after 
Christ, are one and the same church under di£ferent 

♦ Ch. Can., 68. 



VOXTSDATIOS OF ALL 6TATB BELIGIONB* 3$7 

dispensations. The Jewish church was national. The 
christian church must also be national. Every Hebrew 
was born in the Jewish church, and to confirm him in 
his rights and immunities, he was circumcised. In like 
manner every christian child is born in the church, and 
receives baptism. " If infant baptism is legitimate, a 
national church, and priesthood, necessarily follow."* 
Infant baptism, therefore, as is maintained, both by its 
friends, and its enemies, is the grand foundation upon 
which rests the imion of church and state. This fact 
having now been fully determined, we proceed to con- 
sider the origin and nature of the unica in question. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ foresaw that his holy religion 
would meet, in all lands, the condemnation of men in 
power, and that in its progress it would agitate society 
to its very foundations. He therefore said to his disci- 
ples : — " Think not that I am come to send peace on 
the earth. I am not come to send peace, but a sword. 
For I am come to set a man at variance against his 
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the 
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. And a 
man's foes shall be they of his own household."! " And 
ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake."t 
Accordingly, the religion of Christ no sooner began to 
be preached than it had arrayed against it all the prin* 
ces, priests, and officials of every government upon 
earth. Its advocates were pureued, hunted down, per- 
secuted, and destroyed everywhere. Resistance, how- 
ever, but added to its strength. God was in his truth. 
His purposes no earthly power can successfully frus- 
trate. The people heard, and believed. Disciples mul- 

* Henry Demxe. t Matt, x., 84-86. X Matt, zxlv.t.9. 



Stt flRV^IIPr BAl^tfSlt 



l^pled. HieMimSBm wsnodL Tr^e religion fi{>read H* 
Mlf into all the ramifioataonfl of society, in all placed 
and countries. At this inonient peculiar events weite 
transpiring in the Roman empire. Lvcinins and Con- 
stantine were in conflict for the imperial crown. Poli- 
ticians are ever sagacious to perceive, and avail them- 
selves, of any element in society which may hear them 
on triumphantly to their desired end. Lucinius iden- 
tified himself with the pi^ans, and mllied to his sup- 
port; all classes who composed the opposition to the re- 
Hgion of Christ. Constantino linked his foitiraes with 
the christilins. Battle were fought. Constantino was 
VictcMTOus. He ascended the throne of the Caesars. 
Numerous reasons show that of doctrinal religion this 
emperor knew very little, and of experimental refligion 
nothing. His connection with Christianity originated in 
a far-seeing policy, and afterwards continued from sim- 
ilar confflderations. The result was the adoption of the 
christian religion, and its establishment in the place of 
paganism, which had gone down with Lucinius, as the 
religion of the empire. 

The model upon which the union of church and state 
now brought into being was framed, was strictly pagan. 
The union itself was subsequently advocated by the 
priests as scriptural, upon the ground that Judaism was 
a national religion, and established by law. This con- 
sideration, however, did not at first, if it ever did after- 
wards, weigh in the mind of the emperor. He very 
well knew that in every nation, of whatever grade, be- 
fore that period, and it is still true of them all, the 
prevailing superstiticms were, and are, established by 
law, as the religion of the state. " Despotic rulers/' 



VOTnXDATLOV. 09 ML. 8TA75 BELIOIOKB. Sdd 

says Noel, ''have ever sought to «x0rt from their snh-. 
jects all possible adYantages for themselTes, and to thisi 
end to retain them in the most complete servitude. 
They have chiefly depended on their armies. But the 
fears and the hopes of superstition, have beetn too ob-> 
vious a support not to be largely employed. Well- 
paid soldiers have been their first instruments of powen 
Their second has been a well-paid priesthood. Priests 
have lent to despots in aid of their selfish designs, the 
portents^ and the predictions of supersUtion, Despots 
have in return, invested the superstition with splendor, 
and punished non-conformity with death*" " By the 
aid of the superstition the despot fortified his tyranny ; 
and by the aid of the despotism the priest gave cur- 
rency to hifi falsehoods." " l^either party was strong 
enough to rule alone. But when the priest preached 
for the despot, wd the despot governed for the priest, 
both the more easily kept their feet upon the n^cks of 
the people, and made the universal degradation subr 
servient to their greatness."* This was the policy es- 
tablished in Egypt, and Babylon, and Persia, and Greeoe, 
and Rome, and all other countries. AU this was well 
\mderstood by Constantine, He therefore combined iQ 
lumself, and in his successors, as had been the practipe^ 
the highest ecclesiastical, with the highest civU power, 
He gQvemed not only th^ state, but also the church« 
He regulated its discipline, assumed to decide all coQ" 
troversies, by judges of his own appointineRt, and* 
except those called by himself, interdicted the assem- 
bling of any council whatever. Thus the whole form 
a^d character given to his church by Jesus Qhxk% 

• XJnion pf Church and 8ti^te| pp. S5, 8^, 

20 



230 IBFABT BAFTIBK 

were destroyed and lost It was erected into a great 
hierarchy. Messiah was dethroned. It was no longer 
the church of Christ. Sach was the union of the 
church with the state, when that alliance was first 
brought into being. It was fashioned upon the princi- 
ples of paganism, and advocated upon those of Juda- 
ism. And upon this substantially, has been since mod- 
elled the union of church and state in every other 
coimtry ! 

The results of this union now demand our calm at- 
tention. 

Those which immediately arose were most disastrous. 
Wealth and honors poured into the church ; and with 
them came impiety, spiritual ignorance, ceremonies and 
superstitions of all kinds. Frequent pilgrimages, for 
example, were undertaken to Palestine, and to the 
tombs of the martyrs. Absurd doctrines and idle cere- 
monies daily multiplied. Dust and earth, brought from 
Judea, were sold and bought at high prices, as the most 
powerful remedy against the violence of wicked spirits. 
The old heathen habiliments, and processions, were 
brought into christian worship. Anothe virtues which 
had formerly among pagans been ascribed to their 
temples, their lustrations, and the statues of their gods, 
were by the baptized now attributed to their churches, 
their holy water, and the images of their saints.* To 
this deplorable condition was the cause of Christ at 
once reduced by the calamitous imion of the church 
with the state. 

Another result was to give increased prevalence to in- 
fant baptism, as a practice required by this new relation* 
* Noel, Uuiou of Church and State, pp. 87-^9. 



lOUNDATION OF ALL STATE BELIOIONB. 231 

The introduction of infants, though in piimitive times 
unknown in the christian church, was not a new policy 
in bodies ecclesiastic. The children of the ancient pa- 
gans had been ever, by appropriate forms, soon after 
their birth, solemnly presented to the gods. Infant 
dedication was therefore continued, and its form of 
course was now baptism. Policy demanded that Chris- 
tianity should be as much as possible, and particularly 
in its ceremonials, conformed to paganism, in order that 
the masses might be the more readily transferred from 
one religion to the other. On this subject Mr. Hinton 
remarks : — " We find it indelibly recorded on the pages 
of history, that the practice of baptizing infants did not 
spread extensively till after Christianity became the state 
religion of the Roman empire."* 

The last result I shall mention is, that any established 
religion ceases instantly to be the true religion. 

Christianity, as revealed by Messiah, necessarily in- 
volves individual inquiry, belief, and profession. An 
established religion is exactly the opposite, since it de- 
mands unexamining conformity. The gospel defers ev- 
ery thing to the conscience : — " Let every one be fully 
persuaded in his own mind," and " whatsoever is not 
of faith is sin." A state religion disregards the con- 
science altogether. The gospel requires men to reject 
every false religion. A state system compels men to 
embrace, right or wrong, the religion of their country. 
The gospel invites men to form a voluntary society upon 
conviction as men. An established religion herds them 
together by law, as animals, within the inclosure of a 
national ritual. The gospel binds every man to search 

* Hist of Bapt., p. 868. 



S82 DOrAZIT BAFTIBM 

after trnth, to recehre it» to Tnaintain it, and to promul- 
gate it, in opposition to error, however venerable and 
popular. All this is bj every state religion denounced 
and prohibited. The union of church and state is there- 
fore, in all cases, inevitably, and necessarily, iniquitous 
in itself, and full of evil in all its bearings, and relations, 
social, political, and reli^ous. It is unscriptural, it binds 
the consciences of men, it suppresses inquiry, it subjects 
the wise and good to be governed by the ignorant and 
vicious, it is a horrible engine of persecution, it is an in- 
jury to the state as well as to tbe church, and impedes 
and prevents the extenaon of the gospel, and the con- 
version of the nations. " I am thoroughly convinced 
that this unchristian connection between the church and 
the state [which has ever prevailed in Europe] has done 
more mischief to the gospel than all the ravmgs of infi- 
delity since the crucifixion. It converts good christians 
into bad statesmen, and political knaves into pretended 
christians. It is at best, but a foul and adulterous con- 
nection, polluting the purity of heaven with the abomi- 
nations of earth, and hanging the tatters of a political 
jriety upon the cross of an insulted Saviour."* 

Such is the union of church and state, in its origin, 
character, and results. Ours is the first christian country, 
and the only one, since the reign of Constantine, in the 
government of which this union has been repudiated 
and denounced as a monstrous evil. In the sentiments, 
therefore, which I have here expressed, I expect to have 
the concurrence of every true-hearted American chris- 
tian. But the union of church and state rests for its 
foundation upon infant baptism, without which it cannot 

♦ Dr. PMUp. 



FOUNDATION OF ALL STATE SEUGIONS. 233 

exist. Destroj infant baptism, and you destroy the 
union of church and state. That unhallowed relation is 
no longer possible. Is it consistent to repudiate and 
condemn the connection, and at the same time uphold 
the platform that supports and perpetuates it ? Can 
you deprecate the result while you continue to defend 
the cause ? He who defends infant baptism defends 
the union of church and state. For the enormities of 
every state religion, Catholic and Protestant, infant bap- 
tism is, as we have fully shown, justly chargeable. Tb0re» 
fore infant baptism is an enormous evil. 

20* 



CHAPTER XIII. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BECAUSE IT LEADS TO RE- 
LIGIOUS PERSECUTIONS. 

TtMamay flrom tbe natnre of pedoboptiBm ; from Its political taBodatioitB ; 
from the BonroM npou which it reUes for sapport ; from &ctB. 

Infant baptism leads to religious persecutions. Of 
thb fact I shall proceed at once to submit the amplest 
testimony. 

The first argument to which I call your attention in 
proof of the proposition before us, is found in the nature 
of pedobaptism itself. *It brings into the church the 
whole population of the country where it prevails. All 
are baptized, and admitted to membership. Every class 
and condition are necessarily included. Such a church 
must inevitably, and to a great extent, be ignorant of 
spiritual things, and essentially irreligious. The great 
mass, we all know, of every community, grow up with- 
out religion ; and although, according to Pedobaptism, 
in the church, and entitled to all its privileges, are full 
of sensuality and worldliness. The majority of mem- 
bers, therefore, especially in countries where infant bap- 
tism is fully carried out, know nothing of the renewing 
grace of God, and are governed in their feelings and 
pursuits by considerations entirely of earth. It cannot 
be expected, therefore, to feel much interest in holy 
things, or to exercise that love and forbearance towards 



mVAKT BAPTISM, STO. 28S 

others inculcated in the word of God, and especially if 
tbey appear to them to manifest disrespect or stuh- 
bomness. The persons who compose its several de- 
partments have their ambition to consult, their hatred 
to gratify, their superiors to please, and their schemes 
of personal aggrandizement to accomplish. This is the 
character and spirit with which infant baptism must in 
the nature of things imbue the church. Woe to him, 
therefore, who shall be found in the way of any of its 
purposes or designs. He must, he will be crushed. 
Such a church infant baptism makes. It will inevita- 
bly be a persecuting church. This conclusion is con- 
firmed by the history of all ages. Previous to the 
reign of Constantine, no such thing existed as the per- 
secution of christians by each other. They were all 
full of affection, forbearance, and kindness. Whatever 
might be the errors of their brethren, the thought did 
not occur to them that they might do more than ex- 
press their disapproval, and formally withdraw from 
them. Immediately after that period infant baptism 
became general, and persecutions commenced. The 
scenes of cruelty and blood which have since been en- 
acted, fill all who contemplate them with the deepest 
horror ! It is unquestionably true, therefore, that in- 
fant baptism leads to religious persecutions. 

A second proof is found in the political connection 
which, when practicable, infant baptism always as- 
sumes. We have just seen in the last chapter, that it 
IS the grand foundation upon which rests the union of 
church and state. Without infant baptism, no such 
union is possible. And the fact is well known that 
every state church ia all ages, and in all countries, has 



B86 ISXAaTBAPlBK 

been a penecvting e^ureh. Thb is true eves of hbBn 
thenisiii, as weU as of dizistianity. Nebaehadneesair 
compelled his subjects, of whatever creed, upon pain 
of death, to bow down to his golden idol. Darius 
thought it excellent policy to establish a rojal decree 
that no prayer should be offered to any god but bim- 
self for thirty days. The Greek legislators forbade the 
exercise of any but the national rdigion. Diaoo pun* 
isbed depaitures from the established (aith with death. 
Plato thought that eveiy such act should be denouiieed 
to the magistrate as a orirae. Azistotle allowed but 
one natioaai fonni of religioii. Socrates waa sentenced 
to drink the hemlock, and died for the crime of heresy. 
Establiahed religions in Christendom have been con* 
ducted on the same principles, and hare been equally 
as exclusive, as intolerant, and as bloody as paganism. 
Heathens, in common with Jews, p^fsecuted the follow- 
ers of Christy as long as they had any abihty, Infsnt 
baptism was introduced, the church waa united with 
the state, and Christianity immediately began to wa& 
in the footsteps of Heathenism and Judaism. From 
that to the pr^nt day, the history of every Hmk 
€hur^f popish and protestant, has been the sama. Bui 
no state church could ever have existed without infant 
baptism. Infant baptism, therefore^ is justly ehargesUs 
with all their persecutions. 

A third proof is derived from the source of the main 
argument upon which infant baptism relies for support 
The appeal of its friends is now, and has been i(xt 
many ages, to Judaism. In Judaism they find thdr 
**9enptwre testimony," for the union of church and 
state. In Judaism also tibey obtain ample anthotily 



usADB TO lasaxmm i^fion^unoNs. 3S7 

fbf ill thefir perseentiona. Judaisti^ is bow fh^e grand 
platform upon which all these principles stand. There 
all of them are alike sustained. If infant baptism is 
right, a state religion is right, and persecution is right. 
Look into pedobaptist standards, popish and protestant, 
and you will find that they maintain their doctrines, 
and defend their proceedings, by appeals to the laws 
of the Hebrews. Does any man dare to diflPer from 
the established religion ? Each priest is another Samu- 
el, and aimed with l^e same powers. He therefore 
hews the presumptuous Agags to pieces before the 
Lord. In the same scriptures that support their forms 
of ecclesiastical organizations, they find commands to 
punish those who depart from the doctrines, or violate 
the precepts of their religion. Can we be surprised, 
then, that such a church should practise persecution ? 
It would be wonderful if it did not. 

In proof that infant baptism leads to religious perse- 
cutions, I, in the last place> appeal to facts. 

Popery before the Reformation, poured out upon our 
Baptist Fathers all the fury of its malignant heart. 
Nor could any thing better have been expected, since 
the oath taken by her Bishops at their consecration, 
and similar ones ate made by every inferior priest, is as 
follows : — " I will persecute and oppose all heretics, 
and schismatics, to the utmost of my power."* And 
most fully do they perform their vows. I will not, 
hpwever, here recount the horrid details of her cruel- 
ties, practised in every disgusting and execrable form. 
They may be read in the Histories of the Church by 
Ifimy, Jones, Benedict, and o^ers. From the third to 

* Henrtiooe «t oohismsticoB pro posse perseqnar et hnptignabo. 



288 INFANT BAFTUM 

the fifteenth centuiy they were hunted down and de- 
stroyed like wild beasts. They ''had trials of cruel 
mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and 
imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn 
asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword. 
They wandered about in sheepskins, and goatskins, be- 
ing destitute, afflicted, tormented, (of whom the world 
was not worthy.) They wandered in deserts, and in 
mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth."* 
This was the measure meted to us by popery. And 
after the Reformation, did our Baptist Fathers receive 
kinder treatment from protestanta ? No ; in no respect 
whatever. They were still pursued with the same re- 
lentlessness. The papists and the protestants destroyed 
each other, in every possible manner. Never were ene- 
mies more bitter, or uncompromising. In but otie thing 
upon earth was it possible for them to agree, and that 
was in persecuting the Baptists, This was carried so 
far that in several of their treaties, both in Germany 
and Switzerland, as D'Aubign6 confesses in his History 
of the Reformation, a special article was inserted bind- 
ing both parties to use every possible effort to destroy 
all the Baptists in Europe. Let us briefly enter into 
this history, and see how far the pxotestants fulfilled 
their part of the obligation they assumed. Thus we 
shall have laid open before us more fully the persecu- 
tions into which infant baptism hurries its friends. 

" Luther, on his return from Wittenberg," says D'Au- 

bign6, ** extinguished in Germany the fanaticism of the 

Anabaptists."! How he did this is, for his own fame, 

but too well remembered by every reader of history. 

• Heb. zL, 8d-«8. t EBat. Sef., vol. ui., p. 805. 



LEADS TO SEUGIOUS FEBSECUTIONS. 239 

Kor were he, and his friends, content to destroy them in . 
their own land. They followed them with cruel hatred 
even into other countries. For example, Dr. Cox says : 
— **The princes of Germany, having discovered by 
means of interested letters, a secret correspondence be- 
tween the German and English Anabaptists, wrote an 
epistle to Henry VIII., containing a statement of their 
pernicious doctrines, and warning him of danger likely 
to result from their fanatical proceedings, imless pre- 
vented by a bold and timely interference."* This 
" epistle" of " the princes of Germany," we are spe- 
cially informed, was advised by Luther, and written by 
Melancthon. It was their work. How attentive Henry, 
and his successors, were to the advice it contained, the 
prisons of the " United Kingdom," and especially the 
fires of Smitbfield, bear ample testimony. 

In Switzerland our brethren met the same fate as in 
other countries. "This fanaticism," says the pedobap- 
tist chronicler of the Reformation, ** reappeared in Swit- 
zerland, where it threatened the edifice which Zuingle, 
Haller, and (Ecolampadius had erected on the word of 
God." " Grebel [a Baptist minister] endeavored to gain 
over Zuingle, It was in vain that the latter had gone 
further than Luther. ' Let us,* says Grebel, ' form a 
community of true believers, for it is to them alone that 
the promise belongs ; and let us establish a church that 
shall be without sin.' But Zuingle would neither hear 
Grebel himself, nor permit him to speak to the people." 
He then turned in another direction. Roubli, an aged 
minister of Basle, Brodtlein, minister of ZoUikon, and 
Lewis Herzer, welcomed his advances. They resolved 

* life of Melancthon, p, 218. 



^0 mFAKTBAFTDSM 

on forming an independent body in the centre of the 
general community, or church within the church. A 
new baptism* was to be their instrument for gathering 
their congregations, which were to consist exclusively 
of true believers. "The baptism of infants," said 
they, " is a horrible abomination,! a flagrant impiety, 
invented by the evil spirit and by Pope Nicholas II. 
The Council of Zurich, in some alarm, directed that a 
public discussion should be held, and as the Anabap- 
tists still refused to relinquish their errors, some of them 
who were natives of Zurich were imprisoned, and oth- 
ers who were foreigners were banished. But persecu- 
tion only inflamed their zeal." "Fourteen m«n," he 
remarks, "and seven women were arrested," "and 
imprisoned on an allowance of bread and water, in the 
heretic's tower. After a fortnight's confinement, they 
managed, by removing some planks in the floor, to 
eflFect their escape during the night." " They were 
joined by George Jacob Coira, surnamed Blourock, a 
man of distinguished powers, and many others. While 
Zuingle was attempting to stem the torrent of Anabap- 
tism at Zurich, it quickly inundated St. Gall. Grebel 
arrived there, and was received by the brethren with 
acclamations ; and on Palm Sunday he proceeded to 
the banks of the Lithe, attended by a great number of 
his adherents, whom he there baptized." "Zuingle 
wrote a tract on baptism, which the Council of St. Gall 
ordered to be read in the churches." To this the only 
answer of these Baptists was, " Give us the word of 

* He mesns that nothing but the unmeision of believers tq>oa 
a profession of their fiEdth waa by theKi allowed to be baptiam. 
t Moat true. 



LEADS TO BBJasaCB FUmiCUTIOKS. 2^1 

God, aod ftot the words of Zukigle." ''Do }Foa keef 
the doctrines of Zuingie ; m for us^ we inil keep tbe 
wtird of God." The Cowicil, orercoote in Borgumta^f 
aad put to shame by the truth, noir resorted to other 
measures. They condemDed Mentz to be drowtked, and 
the senteiice was immediately ezeeuted. Bkravoch was 
wsfwrged tdith rod9, and haniisked by these piotid proi- 
estantg. Soon afterwards, foiling into the hands of the 
papists f he was hunwd at the stake. Multitudes of 
others also suffered in various waiys little leas severdy 
than did Mentz and Blourock. But do Lutherans and 
Zuinglians now justify such conduct ? D* Aubrgn6, the 
writer I have recited, and who is of our own day, 
apcdogizes for it thus : — " Undoubtedly the spirit of re- 
bellion existed among these Anabaptbts ; undoubtedly 
the ancient ecclesiastical law which condem'oed heretiea 
to capital punishment was still in force, and the Refor> 
mation could not in the space of one or two years 
reform, every thing ; nor can we doubt that the catholic 
states would have accused their protestant neighbors (^ 
encouraging insubjection, if the latter had not resorted 
to severe measures against these enthusiasts/'* *' Be> 
bellionT What rebellion? The refusal to submit 
theur consciences to the magistrate? Of this the 
Baptists were guilty. It was rebellion 1 Then there 
was an '^ o2d eoelesiastieal law,** forsooth ! But this 
was SL popish late, and it condoned Zuingie as clearly 
as it did Mants or Blourock. They were just now es^ 
pecially desirous not to scandalize their catholic neigh* 
bors! They must therefore imprison, banish, drown, 
and bum these Baptists 1 And I regret to say that 

» D'Auhign^'B Hist. Bafor,, vol. m., pp. 806-819. 

21 



24S inRAHT 

sbnOar pc raec ttti om are thus carried on untQ ihepretaU 
hour. In which of the prisons on ccmtmoital Europe, 
where Baptists are foond, hare not our nmuBters, and 
our people, within the bat five years, been incarcerap 
ted? Bnt tell me, what impujse moYed, and still 
mores them to all this ? Was it not infant baptism ? 
Their denial of infant baptism was ezpresslj assigned 
as the main cause ! InfEOit baptism undoubtedly, there- 
fore, leads to religious perseeutknis. It undoubtedly 
produced all these erils. 

Let us turn for a moment to England. There, from 
the day of the buining of Sawtre and Brute,* almost to 
our times, persecutions agunst Baptists, hare raged 
with the utmost riolence. Protestants in our father- 
land, could bear almost any thing else with more pa- 
tience than opposition to infant baptism. Our sympa- 
thies have been moved a thousand times in our child- 
hood, and we hare wept orer Cranmer, Ridley, Refers, 
and others, who fell martyrs under the hands of the 
papbts. By pictures, easy lessons, and essays, in prim- 
ers and Sabbath-school books, in our infancy and by 
declamations in riper years, our sorrows hare been 
called forth for their sufferings. I refer to this fact not 
to condemn it. These great men were cruelly butch- 
ered. But I am obliged to say that our feelings hare 
been abused in this matter. Where are our sympa- 
thies, and our tears, for ftu* own brethren whom these 
rery men murdered in cold blood as reaUy as Darid 
did Uriah ? Ah, of this no primers, or other school- 
books, hare told us ! And yet these men had before 
dealt to many a Baptist, the cup that they were at last 

♦ A. D. 1400. 



LEADS TO BELIGIOUS PBB8EGUTI0NS. 243 

• 

o)>liged themselves to drink from the hands of the Bo- 
n;ian Catholics. Take, if you please, an example or two 
in illustration. Laws were passed in England to search 
after Baptists, and to bring them to punishment. ** The 
bishops named in the commission" for the performance 
of this work, " were Cranmef*, Hidley, Goodrich, Heath, 
Scorey, and Holbrach," who executed their bloody of- 
fice with singular ferocity.* Joan of Kent, a distin- 
guished ladj/, and a Baptist, was among the first ap- 
prehended. She was unceremoniously condemned to 
be burned alive at the stake. The death-warrant was 
laid before the young King Edward. He refused to 
sign it. Cranmer was deputed to persuade him to do 
so. How did the archbishop discharge his office ? He 
" argued," says the annalist, " from the law of Moses, 
according to which blasphemers were to be stoned." 
He said " that there were impieties against God which 
a prince, being his deputy, ought to punish just as the 
king's deputies were obliged to punish oflfences against 
the king's person." "Plied with such arguments," 
Burnet says,f " the young king was rather silenced 
than convinced." "He set his hand to the warrant 
with tears in his eyes, telling Cranmer that if he did 
wrong, as it was done in submission to his authority, 
he [the archbishop] should answer for it to God." 
And most sternly, and soon, did he answer for it. 
Again : In whose mind is ndt the picture of John 
Bogers at the stake, with his wife and children around 
htm, indelibly imprinted ? A distinguished gentleman, 

* See this whole matter in Neal'g Hist. Puritans, N. Y. ed., 
vol. ii., pp. 868-880. 
t Hist. Bef., vol. ii., p. 110. 



• 

when tlie hudj spoken of, who is ealled hy tile histoma 
«aa flhutrioos fesiale," was eonden»e4, tomt i(^ M»g€t9, 
and beaonght him to exert hia inftaeBee to Mvt her, or 
at least to proeure her a le»9 dnodfid death. Rogers 
manifeated much indiflfereBoe, aaid "tA« ought to be 
put to death/' and jestingly obaerred, ** Burning afive 
is not a cruel death, but eaay enough !" On hearing 
these words, which expressed ao little regard for the 
poor woman's sufierings, his friend replied with g^eat 
vehemence, at the same time striking Rogers' hand, 
which before he had held fast, <' Well, perhaps it may 
so happen that you yourselves will one day have your 
hands full oi this mild burning." And so indeed, m 
the providence of God, it did happen. And yet more. 
In a sermon before Edward VI., Bishop Latimer i^)eaks 
of the fearless intrepidity with which went to the stsdie 
" the Anabaptists that were [then] lately burned in di- 
vers towns in England." These were the men, Cransfter, 
and Ridley, and Latimer, and Rogers, who burned Bap* 
tists by scores, and who were afterwards themselves 
burned by the papists. They were no better, and died 
no more unjustly y or cruelly , than their Baptist victims. 
" What measure ye mete it shall be measured to you 
again." Our sympathies should be at least as warm 
for our own brethren and sisters, as for the titled digni- 
taries by whom they were so cruelly destroyed. 

Of the horrible details of persecutions practised in 
after years, in England, in which thousands fell who 
were among the best and holiest men the world ever 
saw, I will not speak. I add only, that their principal 
crime was the denial of infant baptism. This was an 
offence so enormous that they could not be foigiveii. 



UBADS lO XSLKHOIIB JPKBSECUTIONS. S45 

If ^Kvon wBre extended to Oftlver crimiiials, Bapts^ 
-were always excepted from tJieir provisions. Whoever 
dse escaped, thej were sure to suffer. '' The [Boiemn 
league and covenamt] Confession of Eaith" of " tke 
Ohurdi of Seotland'' — ^Predbytouitr-Ksontaiiis the fd- 
lowii^ passages, which were Babscribed, and sworn to 
by every mimstor who entoied thdr puljnts : — ** The 
defence of Ohrist's chorch appertaineth to tiie christian 
magistrate, against all idolaters and heretics, as papists. 
Bad AnabaptistB, ibc., to root onoA, all doetriaes of devils 
and men, <&c."* " The examples of scripUire do phutt- 
ly declare that die d^users of the savrammtt, and «ca- 
temners of the woird, are worthy of deatk!'''\ We ** or- 
diam the sprea^mrs, or raak«« of bo<^, or libels, or 
letters" — ^<« repugnant to any of &e Articles of the true 
leUgkm puUicly preached, and by law established" — 
^to be pnnidwd, Ali mo^fraAw, skmfs, 4co.f mm 
-ovdained to march for, ojoprekmd, and jntnuky all oon- 
tniveneis*";^ We ** give ow public testimoDy agisiost 
the dai^er(HU tenets of indBpendeney, and what is false- 
ly c^kd Hberty of eon9aienee"% Such were our pene- 
entionB before the Eeformation, and have, been naoe 
tiiat event ttnong protestaata in Germany, Switserlaad, 
Sagland, and Scotland. Nor were they confined to the 
otiher aide of the Atlantic. They eame with our ao- 
oestors to Ameiaca, and prevailed alike among the 
imritanB of ^iem England, and the cavaliers of YirgiiMa. 
Happily, our glorious Revolution pat them down, and 
•gare freedom of worship and of conscteooe to our be- 
loved land. iNeed I here reoito ^e laws, and diacribe 

♦ Sect. 1. t Seot t, 

21* 



246 iKFAxrr baptebm 

the cruelties practised upon us, by the Episcopalians of 
the South, and the Congregationahsts of the North ? 
I need not, since they cannot but be to all most famil- 
iar. Our fathers have been denounced by every reC- 
gious faction, condemned in all the Confessions of Faith, 
led everywhere to prison and to death, and covered 
with opprobrium in all nations. Politicians as well as 
religionists have believed that in putting them to death 
they did God service. 

Thus we have shown incontrovertibly that infant 
baptism leads to religious persecutions. It necessarily 
makes an ignorant and worldly church, which if it has 
the power will persecute ; it unites the church with the 
state, and every such church has been and is guilty of 
religious persecutions ; the source from which infant 
baptism mainly draws the arguments for its support 
leads the church to acts of persecution; and histoiy 
shows that all pedobaptist churches having the power 
have engaged in persecution, and that their perse- 
eutions have been always most violent and bitter 
against Baptists, principally because we deny, and re- 
fuse to practise, infant baptism. The world has never 
been visited by a more dreadful evil than religious per- 
secutions. No man can read the details of their enor- 
mities without shuddering. All feel the deepest dis- 
gust. I shall attempt here no description of them. 
But let it be remembered that persecution is one of the 
results of infant baptism. 

The converse of this proposition is also true. Bap- 
tist principles are inimical to persecution. They, in 
their very nature, repel it in all its hateful forms. And 
when these principles shall spread themselves over the 



LEADS TO HEUaiOUS FEBSECUTIONS. 2*7 

eartli — and they ever have advanced, and ever will ad- 
vance pari passu with political freedom — ^religious per- 
secution shall be*known no more among men. 

It is not a httle remarkable that historians, and oth ^ 
ers, have attributed the first true conceptions of riligums 
liberty to Boger Williams, the Governor of Rhode Isl- 
and. In this they all evince their total ignorance of 
Baptist history. Of Williams Bancroft says : — ** He 
vras the first in modem Christendom, to assert in its 
plenitude, the doctrine of the liberty of conscience, the 
equality of opinions before the law, and in its defence 
he was the harbinger of Milton, and the precursor, and 
the superior of Jeremy Taylor."* I honor Boger Wil- 
liams for his enlightened conceptions, and his bold action 
regarding religious liberty. But he was only the rep- 
resentative of all the Baptists who had gone before 
him, many of whom had written as wisely, as learned- 
ly, and as conclusively as he. When, for example, 
Calvm had succeeded in bringing Servetus to the stake — 
one of the most horrid blasphemies alleged against whom, 
by the way, was his denial of infant bapHsmr—^ protest 
against the proceeding was published by a learned and 
pious Baptist minister, Mr. David Joris. " It is," said 
Joris, ''an incredible blindness that the servants of 
Christ, who are sent to give life to the dead through 
the knowledge of the truth, shotdd condemn the erring 
to death, and through temporal death expose their ftouls 
to eternal ruin. The right to pass such a sentence be- 
longs to Him alone who gave tife, and suffered death 
for our redemption. Were it lawful to put heretics to 
death, there would be a general slaughter, since all re- 

* History, &o., vol. i., p. 875. 



418 orrjjrr BjkFDKBc 

ligioiie parties legaxd thdr opponenti as gmtij of Ittirt- 
tf"* lo Calvin and Joria, you aee Preabyterian and 
Baptist pmeipks r^farding rdigious lib^y, in foil 
itaattmt, long beforo the days of Roger WilMams. 
Thooiafi Helwjs was another eaain{^ equally as strik- 
ing as the Gk^Temor of Bhoda Island. If tha latter 
stated and defended in die new world, ^ doetrina of 
"£oul likerk/f** witJi great skill and force in his writings, 
and bcmorably iUustnated it in the planting of a eivil 
atate where oonscienoes, however dtveise or eeceBtric» 
were never oppressed, the former gave in his pubtioa- 
tiona^ in the oki worki, full foim and ezpressioa to the 
same sentiments^ and nMuntained tiiam with singular 
personal boidaes^ and magnanimity. Helwya was 
apuraed from aoeiety, and driven into obaonrity. Wfl- 
liami was more fortnnate. The amall t^ritory tiwt he 
planted, scaroely Dotioeable upon ihe map of the great 
eott£sderaey of states of which it now forms a pint» 
funushed the example of rehgious freedom which tiiat 
eoofederaey has ec^ued, and whieh across this wide 
eoQitin^t, the millions of our people now acoonnt 
'' their highest hmior/' This was, howevw, only the 
embodiment of the great Baptist principle which, from 
the aposties' times, our ehnrches have ail maintained, 
and defended. 

In a Baptist Confession of Faith pnUiahed m 1611, 
may he seen the following passage : — '* The Magistrate 
is not to meddle with religiooi because Christ ia the 
King, and Lawgiver of the oharclL"f Let also a few 
sentenees from the distinguished aoa^BSSor already 

» IJeMy*8 lift and Times of CaJvin. 

t Straggles aad Triumplu) of fidigi^ng Fieedom, pp. 6, 7. 



LEADS TO »BU<MKMra f8R0EOirnONB. H/ifi 

Bueiilioiied, be here pondei^d. " The power and aii- 
thontf of the king" — ^he wrote in England — ** is earth- 
ly, and Ood hath ooannanded us to submit to all or^ 
nances of man. Thereloi^ I b^e faith to submit to 
what ordinances of man soever the king oommaiids, if 
it be not against the maniiiest word of God. Let him 
sequire what he will, I must of conacienoe obey Um 
with my body, goods, and bH that I have. JBut my 
soul, wherewith I am to worship Q^od, thai bebngeUi 
to €fnothsr Kmg, whose kingdom is not of this w^nrld, 
whoso people most «ome willingly, whose weapons sae 
not carnal, h^ spiritual" Again, says Helwys : — '' I 
aeknowledge unfeignedly, that God hath given to ma- 
pitrates a sword to cut off wicked men, and to rewaid 
Ibe well-doers. But this ministry is a woiidly mimo- 
try; th^ sword is a worldly sword; thmr punishments 
oan extend no furthm: than ih» imtward man ; they can 
but kiU the body." *' Their ministry is appointed ody 
to pumsh the l»each of outward ordinances, which is 
idl diat God hath given to mortal man to punish. The 
king saay make laws for the safety and good of his per- 
son, state, and subjects, agakist which whoever is dia- 
k^al, or disobedient, he may dispose of at pleasure. 
The Lord hath given him the sword of authority^ iat^ 
seeing in his et^nal wisdom, that but for Uiis his ordi- 
nance of magistracy, there would be no living for men 
in the world, and especially for the godly. Therefore 
the godly have particular cause to glorify God for this 
his blessed oidmance of mag^tracy, and to regard it 
with all reverence." And again : — '' The breach of 
Christ's laws oi the which we all this wluls speak, 
which is tiie only thing I stand upon," how is it to be 



250 nofAjsrr baftkm 

punished? ''His kingdom is spiritual; liis laws are 
spiritual ; tbe transgression is spiritual ; the punish- 
ment also is spiritual— everlasting death/' '' No car- 
nal or worldly weapon is given for the support of his 
kingdom."* 

These are Baptist sentiments, and they consequently 
have never, in any country, been engaged in the nefa- 
rious work of persecution. To this fact it has, how- 
ever, sometimes been objected, that their circumstances 
have always been such that they never possessed the 
power to persecute. Have we not reason to be sur- 
prised at a statement like this ? Had Roger Williams 
and his associates, no such power ? Could they not 
have persecuted the puritans as safely, and as success- 
fully, as the puritans persecuted them ? Is it respond- 
ed that they did not do so because they were just out 
of the fires of persecution themselves ? But were not 
the puritans also just out of the fires of persecution ? 
They persecuted the Baptists. The Baptists never 
persecuted them, but received them into their territory, 
and though differing with them in opinion, gave them 
the same religious liberty which they themselves en- 
joyed. That the Baptist never can become a perse- 
cuting church is guarantied by the very nature of its 
organization. It is composed of none but those who 
give satisfactory evidence of a change of heart by the 
Holy Spirit, and voluntarily seek admission to its mem- 
bership. None others can be received. "A church 
without a Bishop" to concentrate its designs; stead- 
fastly adhering to the full independence of each partic- 
ular separate organization ; offering to ambitious men 

* * Stmggles and Trinmphg, &o., pp. 11, 12. 



LEADS TO BEUGIOtfS FEBSECUTIONS. 251 

no distinctions, and to its members, of whatever grade, 
no secular advantages ; how can she ever engage in 
the business of persecution? She persecute? Who 
would she persecute ? Not her own communicants, 
since to them she is bound by the strongest ties of af- 
fection, and can, besides, do nothing without their con- 
sent. Not those who are out of the church, since over 
them she has no control. Why would she persecute ? 
To bring men into her communion ? She would not 
have them, until convinced that they were truly con- 
verted, nor then, unless it was their unbiased pleasure 
to come, professing that they did so from a desire to 
obey our Lord Jesus Christ. She can never be a per- 
secuting church. To become such she must cease to 
be Baptist. 

These are, and ever have been. Baptist principles. 
They are the principles taught by Christ and his apos- 
tles. They demand the freedom of the conscience. 
They have long been overborne, and trodden under foot; 
but they are not destined to die. " God is in his truth." 
It must at length triumph. Our people are rapidly 
filling the world. They carry with them the Bible. 
They study it for themselves. They form their own 
opinions. They submit their consciences to no man. 
They oppress the conscience of no man. They act upon 
their convictions of duty. This mental independence, 
commenced in childhood, soon becomes a habit, and is 
inevitably extended into every department of life. The 
character of the people is thus elevated, their powers 
of thought invigorated, their conceptions purified, and 
they become truly formidable to tyranny in the state as 
weU as in the church. By such they must always ex- 



pect to be denounced. But tbey never oan be €BslaYed. 
Their piinciples have ever rendered them obnoxious to 
despots. And in ey^ absdnte government lihey have 
been put to death, ae the enemies of mi^psteates aad 
rulers. Light ifi now, thank God, breaking in upon the 
wiH-ld. Truth, politioal and religioua» is gaining ground. 
The nations muat ultimately sever the yoke ai their op- 
INie88(»B. And as national liberty extends itseU, Bi^tist 
principka, and Baptaat people, ^iU eover the wlude 
earth. 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

IKFAKT BAPTISM IS AIST EVIL BEOAUSS IT 19 CONTRAAT 
TO THE FBXVOIPLSS OF CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS FBBJS- 
DOM.^ 

Katnre of freedom ; in&nt baptism destroyB ciyil freedom ; it destroys 
nBgtouft freedom ; it enslares the mind ia all respects. 

Frbbi>om is a state of exemption from illegal controL 
We enjoy civil freedom under a gecvernment in wfaick 
our persons, our property* and all our rigiats, are se* 
cured, and protected, by just and equitable laws> 
promptly administered, and duly obeyed. Heliffious 
freedom is immunity from tbe dominion of men over 
our faith. He is free who worships and serves iGl^od 
without molestation, according to hb own convictions 
of duty. Freedom has no affinity with lawless license. 
It cannot, on the contrary, be possessed without sub*- 
mission to the law* Government is essential to the 
condition of man. God has therefore instituted gov- 
ernment, both civil and religiousv Between? these de- 
partments there b no conflict. They never contravene 
each other: As citizens of a eoinmon country, and 
moral and accountable beings, we are subject to both 
divine and human laws. Ours are the blessings of 
both. In the obedience rend^ed we are admonished 
by Messiah himself, to ''give unto Caesar the things 

22 



254 INFANT BAFTOSM OOlirrRABT TO 

that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are 
God's/' 

Civil government is of divine appointment. " The 
powers that he are ordained of God." As members 
of the body politic, every man is obliged scrupulously 
to conform to its legal requirements, in x all cases in 
which they do not come into collision with his obliga- 
tions to God. His duty to the Most High is more ex- 
alted and imperative than any other. Jehovah has not 
delegated his authority to earthly rulers of anj^ class, 
whether they be oflBcers of state, or ministers of reli- 
gion. In faith and worship every man, as long as he 
infringes the rights of no other man, is accountable to 
God only. The disciples were forbidden to call any 
man on earth master. Messiah is himself sole Lord. 
Nor are they permitted illegally to rule each other. 
Even the apostles of Christ disavowed any authority in 
this respect. " Not," said they to their brethren, 
" that we have dominion over your faith, but are help- 
ers of your joy ;"* and ** Who art thou that judgest 
another man's servant ? To his own master he stand- 
eth or falleth."f Freedom, political and religious, thus 
defined and understood, is, as we now see, not only 
the jttst right of every man, but, I will add, it is his 
inalierMhle right. He is not permitted to resign it 
even if he were so disposed ; nor can he, by any power, 
be deprived of it without the grossest violence, and 
wrong. "Religious freedom is inalienable,^ says the 
distinguished and lamented Dr. Robert B. Semple, " be- 
cause the opinions of men depending only on the evi- 
dence contemplated by their own minds, cannot follow 
♦ 2 Cor. i., 24. t Rom. xiv., 4 ; James iv., 12. 



dVIL AND SEaJ[GIOUS FREEDOM. 255 

the dictates of other men. It is inalienable, also, because 
-what is here a right towards man, is a duty towards the 
Creator. It is the duty of every man to render the 
Creator such homage, and such only, as he believes to 
be acceptable to him. Thb duty is precedent both in 
order of time, and degree of obligation, to the claims 
of civil society. Before any man can be considered as 
a member of civil society, he must be considered as a 
subject of the Governor of the universe. And if a 
member of civil society who enters into any subordi- 
nate association, must always do it with a reservation 
of his duty to the general authority, much more must' 
every man who becomes a member of any particular 
civil society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to 
the universal Sovereign. We maintain, therefore, that 
in matters of religion, no man's right is abridged by 
the institution of civil society, and that religion is 
"wholly exempt from its cognizance."* These great 
facts and principles will be readily conceded by all en- 
lightened American christians, of every denomination. 
The time is ^ast when, in this country at least, they 
will be called in question. Yet with them all infant 
baptism, as I shall now demonstrate, is wholly incom- 
patible. 

It is contrary to the principles of civil freedom. 
It is the first step in a process which -soon enslaves 
the mind, and throughout after life, leads captive all its 
powers. The child, without its own knowledge or con- 
sent, has been subjected to the ordinance in which he 
makes a profession of religion. As soon as his reason 
b^ins to dawn, he is, in popish countries and commu- 
* Semple's Hist, of Viiginia Baptists, p. 436. 



SM JMTASpr suriMi: ooirrBiLBY ro 



dUiged at regular kterv^, to eottfesa to his 
priest, all the actiona of hia fife, and thoagbts of ^ns 
heart. He dare aot entertaiii any opinion, T?bieh his 
coafenor oondemna. To him he must submit in all 
thnigs. Hius a feeHng of dependence and suhjeetiott 
is created in his earliest years, wbieh is fostered in all 
smfasequent life. He must receive upon authority, as 
true, propositioDs -^hicfa to his own judgment and rea- 
son, if he may venture to exercise tb^m, are absmrd ; 
and he must hold as false those which appear to hin^ 
inconlestably true. He must adopt no sentiment but 
by permission of his spiritual guide. Habits of self- 
distrust, and submission to superiors, thus formed, are 
seon mdelibly fixed in the soul. They can never be 
eradicated. In Catholic countries, and communities, 
children are thus reared; As a natural consequence, 
they are tnentaUt/, through life, inevitably, and irrecov- 
erably slaves. His habits are characteristic of the man, 
and are, as a matter of course, carried into all the rela- 
tions of life, civil as well as religious. Every citizen 
is sedulot»ly trained to refuse the formation of any judg- 
ment of his own, or if he chance to do so, to distrust, 
and renounce it, the moment it is contradicted by those 
to whom he is accustomed to defer. Can such a man 
be free ? He is necessarily, politieally, a slave. His 
soul is boimd in such fetters that he can no more recov- 
er from them than he can change his nature. Infant 
baptism places men in this condition. Therefore infant 
baptism is contrary to the principles of civil freedom. 
Occasionally, I grant, as an exception to a general rule, 
a man may be found who is capable <^ breaking these 
chains, and rising above the evils of his ooodidon. But 



lie is afanost alone. Tke great mas) are Oontesl W rv 
naaia in their bondage. JTo pqpiih naiiois^ th^n^^^i^p 
wer kas hetn^ or tver can he,/ree, . Th^ people air<& ao 
trained tint they mvat have mastersw They deffum4 to 
be ruled. How dare they f(Mva aa iudepeddent Of^ioipi 
upon politios, or any ether auhjecit ? They Qever jdicl 
such a thing. The act is above their reaeh. Tl^y 
shiiok from it with alarm. If» as lately in Franoe^ thiey 
arise, and achieve their liberty, it Is doae in tuiBrult, and 
they remain in tmnidt, until» aa that naljon did oiiee 
before, and so will again, we fear,^ they siak back iato 
despotism. Hie states of South America are oalk4 
vepuMcs, but they are not free. They nerei- c^a be» 
under exis<kig circumstances, because adl these destruc* 
tive influences are embodied in their organic laws. In*. 
fiEuit bs^tism is at the foundaition of the slaY^ry cf tbe 
nations. 

Infant ba^itism is contrary to the poineiples of rdigwm 
freedom. 

The deteriorating causes just noticed are also influen-r 
tial here. A people incapable of civil, must also be ia- 
capable of religious liberty. But there. are here addi< 
tbnal reasons. The very first act in religion is a gross 
violation of the great principle of freedom. No choice 
is left to the child. He is baptised, and placed in the 
church, as soon as he is born. His faith, bis religion, 
hiB relation to Qod, is not a subject upon wluch he is 
ever to exercise his own powers of reason or judgment. 
His church is selected for him, and he is commiUed to 
the principles of that church, no matter what they may 

* This prediction, hazarded in the first edition, recent events 
have given iu no ground to retmot. 

22* 



958 nOTABT BAFimC CXHTTRABT TO 

be, in its politj, in its doetrines, or in its forms. To. 
question the troth of any thing he is taught, is presmnp* 
toous and criminaL He is not to doubt whether his 
ehurch may in some things be wrong. He may ]»x>ye 
her right if he can, but not wrong. In most countries 
it is at the risk of his reputation, his fortune, and his 
life, that he adopts any opinions, or practices, not sanc- 
tioned by authority. Talk to such a man about study^ 
ing the scriptures to learn the true faith, and to gain 
correct knowledge of his duty ! His faith and duty are 
prescribed. He dare not dissent. Why should he study, 
the scriptures ? He is prohilHted from giTing them any 
other than the authorized interpretation. He is obliged 
to believe what the church believes, and to do what he 
is commanded by her priests. Religious libertjr is to 
him, utterly, impossible. He is bound hand and foot, in 
hopeless slavery. And what is true of one man is true 
of a whole community, or of an entire nation, since it 
is composed of men all of whom are of the same char- 
acter. Such a nation never can possess, they never can 
even understand religious freedom. Into this condition 
of things they are thrown by infant baptism. Therefore 
infant baptism is contrary to religious no less than to 
political freedom. 

Am I told that the evil we are now considering might 
exist without infant baptism ? If it might, then infant 
baptism 43annot be justly regarded as its legitimate cause. 
But no, it could not exist, and would not, without it. 
To this cause it is truly and necessarily traceable. With- 
out infant baptism there could have been no overshad- 
owing and oppressive hierarchies ; without it there could 
have been no degenerate nominal Christianity ; without 



OIYIL AND SBXIOIOUB BSSBDOM.. 289 

it there could have been no union of church and state ; 
there could have been no lording it over the consciences 
of the people of God by men in power ; there could 
have been no destruction of religious freedom. Let in- 
fant baptism be at once blotted out, and all of every 
successive generation of children taught the true princi- 
ples of religion as set forth in the word of God ; put 
the Bible into their hands, and teach them that in their 
faith and practice they must exercise their own judg- 
ment ; that they cannot be members of the church unless 
they have repentance of sin, and a living faith in the 
Redeemer ; and that no obedience can be acceptable to 
God which is not rendered from love to our Lord Jesus 
Christ, voluntarily, and intelligently ; let all this be in- 
stilled into their minds, and religious freedom will in- 
stantly spring up, and spread itself over the face of the 
earth. Infant baptism is the true origin of the evil, and 
it must be banished from the world before the nations 
can be emancipated. 

But these facts and arguments, I am reminded, are 
predicated of infant baptism as it exists in connection 
with popery, and that it does not necessarily follow that 
they are true of it when practised in connection with 
protestantism. Infant baptism, I answer, made popery, 
and it will carry protestantism back to the same point.. 
Out of Great Britain, what is protestantism at this hour 
in £urope? So far as religious freedom is concerned, it 
differs almost nothing from popery. Our facts and ar- 
guments are therefore true and applicable also to prot- 
estantism. 

In England, however, and in our own country, do not 
men think and act freely in religion ? How, then« can 



900 JMWAWT BAmK oeorzBAXT v> 

it be said iofimt baptism fcttefs tiiflir freedrai eiHwr in 
pc^cBorreligkni? In Eoglaiid, I answer, intot bap 
tirai is very ext^niTely renoniieed, and a correBpaodmg 
liberty prevails. Bat does Eogkad enjoy fnll r^igknH 
freedom ? That she does no one will for a mom^t pre- 
tend. Public sentiment is brongbt to bear on the sub- 
ject by means of the establishment, and the influence of 
fashion, wealth, and aristocracy. An enslaving power 
is thus exerted which few have the m<»al courage to 
encounter, and which all must confess is contrary to the 
principles of religious freedom. 

In America, the very atmosphere we breathe is essen- 
tially anti-pedobaptistic. Here infant baptism is com- 
paratively a dwarfish and ineffident thing. A distin- 
guished minister of that class — Rev. Dr. Bacon of New 
Haven — in a recent oflScial paper, thus speaks of the 
decay of the practice : — " A wide neglect of infant bap- 
tism prevails" in the Congregational and Presbyterian 
churches. " How does this happen ? We commend 
the inquiry to the earnest attention of all whom it con- 
cerns, and especially of pastors, and the teachers in the 
theological seminaries." " Is it true that the views on 
the subject which have been gaining authority in our 
churches for more than a century, are essentially anti- 
pedobaptistic in their tendency, and that this tendency 
is revealing itself in a growing disuse of infant baptism? 
The question of the fact, and the question how to explain 
the fact, ought to be fairly and frankly considered. Our 
Baptist brethren on the one hand, and the believers in 
baptismal regeneration on the other, are constantly tell- 
ing us that the baptism of an unconscious infant is in- 
congruous with our theory of religion." This witness 



CIVIL Am> BELIGIOUS 7SEEnX)M. 261 

is true. There is among all classes in our country '* a 
wide neglect of infant baptism !" It can never flourish 
here. It is out of its element, and does not produce its 
mature fruits. It is in the old world that its results are 
felt in all their power. But is it not in the nature of 
the same cause to produce the same effects? These 
effects may be so modified by other influences, as to be 
less painfully felt, but as far as they go they are pre- 
cisely the same. It is in the nature of infant baptism 
here as elsewhere, to destroy civil and religious free- 
dom, and that it has not its full effect among us is at- 
tributable mainly, if not wholly, to the Baptist element 
which everywhere so strongly pervades the public mind, 
and even enters the Pedobaptist churches themselves. 

Thus have we seen the nature of freedom, political 
and religious; that it is the inalienable right of all men; 
and how it is destroyed by infant baptism in the state, 
and m the church. It is true, therefore, beyond ques* 
tion, that infant baptism is contrary to the principles of 
civil and religious freedom. It follows that by how 
much civil and religious freedom is an unspeakable 
blessing, by so much is infant baptism, which destroyt 
H, aa evil, and a ourae. 



CHAPTER IV. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN BVIL BECAUSE IT ENFEEBLES 
THE POWER OF THE CHURCH TO COMBAT ERROR. 

Design of tbe ehurcta ; to a«oomplish it. It mutt be pure; weakening efEeet 
of in&nt baptism ; illnstrated by its inflaenoe on the Befonnstion ; hy 
■ daily occnrrenoes. 

Jesus Christ designs to destroy sin among men. His 
church is mainly, the instrumentality by which this great 
work is to be achieved. By the gospel, she is to en- 
lighten the world, to instruct the nations, to subdue the 
hearts of all men to the truth, and to bring them under 
the glorious dominion of Messiah. This is a funda* 
mental feature in the faith of ail christians. Its cor^ 
rectness no one doubts. 

Contemplate the extent, and the nature of the work 
proposed. To accomplish it, must not the church her- 
self be clothed with all her strength ? Her power is 
in her conformity in all things, to the laws of Christ 
He has therefore sanctified his church, " that he might 
present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, 
or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be 
holy, and without blemish."* Is it possible for a 
Pedobaptist church to maintain this character? We 
have already amply seen that it is wholly impracticable, 
since infant baptism necessarily Vobs it of its purity, 

♦ Eph.v., 27. 



SSSfFAJST BAPTISH, ETC. 263 

and spirituality-, and consequently of its ability to fulfil 
the purposes of its organization. A corrupt church 
may become great, and learned, and powerful. It may 
rule over the world. The papacy has done all this. 
But to rule the nations is one thiag, and to convert the 
nations to Christ is another thing. This last she can- 
hot do, because she is not herself converted. To ac- 
complish the work assigned her, is to her impossible. 
Infant baptism, whenever operating without restraint, 
inevitably corrupts the communities that practise it. 
It fills the church with the worldly and unregenerate, 
and thus gives her either a dead and soulless faith, as 
iii Spain, or a living and active infidelity, as in Ger- 
many. It is manifest that such a church has no longer 
any power successfully to combat error in herself, in 
ber sister denominations, or in the world around her. 

Of this important truth we have no more striking 
exemplification than that which is presented in the his- 
tory, and results, of the Lutheran reformation. This 
great moral revolution was characterized by many de- 
fects. Painfully was it mingled with the passions, and 
prejudices, and fanaticism of men. It fell far short of 
restoring religion to its original Bible standard. Yet it 
was productive, during a long period, of many great 
and most happy consequences. ** Indulgences/* as they 
are familiarly called, first attracted the attention of the 
reformers. By indulgences is meant to be described a 
peculiar appendage to the popbh " sacrament of pen- 
ance." They had regard to the pardon of the sins, of 
the baptized. The baptized were conscious that they 
committed daily sins, from the guilt of which it was 
necessary they should be absolved. In this way only 



904 ISVAVT BAFnif DKEBOTB 

«oald thai favor h% dkpeBBed, and for such paidoa ilia 
feverous, the gaj, and the ornninal, were disposed to 
pay liherally. Bat they would pay much more liber*- 
ally, when their pardon ineladed, as it frequently did, 
peranBHOo for subsequent crimes which they deured, 
and intended to perpetrate. Priests only could ad« 
nkikter sacraments ; consequently priests only, could 
grant indulgences. Lucrative indeed, did they find the 
monopoly. These indulgences, with some others of the 
outworks of popeiy, were rigorously attacked. Not 
long, however, did the conflict rage before nearly every 
dej^uimeot was involved. The citadel itself of popery— « 
the power of sacraments to convey the g^race of God, 
and their consequent necessity to the salvation of all, 
whether adults, or infants — they soon gafiaatly assailed. 
With the BiUe in thar hands, which they pofessed to 
yegttd as the standard of truth, and duty, Luther and 
his Goadjutora exploded, and overwhelmed with oblo** 
quy, the whole fabric of superstitions which had been 
finpoeed upon the w<M'ld as the religion of Christ, 
Tcfirrible indeed, for a season, was the battle. Upon 
which standard victory would ultimately perch seemed 
doubtful. It was soon perceived that the conquest 
eouM not be gained unless the word of 0od, in thw 
Temaeular, was put into the hands of the people, and 
disseminated throughout the whole land. This waa 
done. The spell by whioh men had been bound, was 
broken. The papacy writhed like an expiring monster. 
Its power was overcome. The great doctrines of sal* 
vation by grace, not through ordinances, but through 
faith, were again proclaimed to the world. 

Tbifi was the first period of the Reformaticm. Disring 



THB rOmMA 09 TOS OHCWia. SW6 

ks contimiaKioe the sba|^e for«e of troth waft ihe sole 
reliaooe of its friends. No exterior aid was lavolieA. 
The gospel, UDepcumbered by any of the traditioaB« lur 
omnma&dflients of men, was everywhere ia the aft- 
eendantb No power oould re&ist its progress.. Beli- 
gioo was no longer a dead fcnrmality for the masses^ 
but a spiritual energy pertainmg to eueh individut^ 
personally. It coneenied his own heart, and life. Thus 
the hopes of men were removed from the old popish 
theory of grace esc^ted through sacnunenU, to the 
gospel scheme of grace received through faith in our 
Laid Jesus Christ, This was then the eharaoter of 
j^'otestantism. It was the oharaeter of the religion of 
the apostles. Errors of all kiods^ ied before it. It 
rapidly spread into all the nations of Europe. Eng^ 
land, and France, and even Spsia, as well as the Ger^ 
man nations, felt its power. They were all agitated 
as by the throes of an earthquake. Never was there 
a movement so popular. Not the people alone, but 
the princee also embraced the gospel. 0, if the gospel 
had caaUnued to guide them, what mdght not have 
been the result! But here a second era in the Reformar 
tion commences. A naticmal estaWshm^t of religion 
was unhappily, considered by them all^ as a matter of 
course. Popery was abolished. Protestantism must 
be adopted, and fumiri^ with the sceptre <^ worldly 
dominion, which had just bean snatched from Popery's 
bloody hand. It was dime. Here was the first false 
step. ** A vital question," says Stovel, ** at once arose 
to be centered. It was how the uninformed and un«- 
converted masses of the pec^le, might be most peacor 
fully transferred from a papal to a prc^^tant govem- 

23 



366 ISTAJSrT BAFTIBH DBSTBOYS 

ment, and most effectually united under its rule. In 
determining this question, to every worldly politiciaii it 
would appear, that the less change they introduced in 
the external ceremonies, and popular rites of religion, 
the more their difficulties would diminish, since the 
change would thus become less obvious to the people." 
They supposed themselves, therefore, obliged "to retain 
infant baptism, always pleasing to the masses, and as 
much of the other papal ceremonies, and sacramental 
doctrines, as they could pdssibly tolerate.*^* Here was 
the next false step. How lamentably had they now, 
already receded from their original ground ! To ren- 
der their religion national, they had given up the es- 
sentials of its pmity, and to fix it in the affections of 
the people, they had embodied in it the elements of its 
destruction. Thus they placed themselves voluntarily, 
in a position in which it was impossible long to retain 
their character, as the representatives of Christ upon 
earth ! How could the reformers consent to such dese- 
crations? How could Luther, and Melancthon, and 
Zuingle, and their associates, fail to see that the union 
of church and state, and infant baptism, a necessary 
concomitant of that union, must, sooner or later, be 
ruinous to all true religion ? Did they not anticipate 
that these influences, if permitted to operate, would 
ultimately destroy all the advantages to gain which 
they had labored and suffered so nobly ? No. They 
all concurred with the princes. Protestantism was es- 
tablished by law. Infant baptism was fixed upon the 
church ! The power of the church vanished. It had 
no more ability successfully to combat error. 

• Christiaii Bisdple, pp. 17-20, 



THB POWEB OF THE GHUBCH. 267 

Another fact here claims our attention. The Bap- 
tists saw the approach of the Reformation with unmin- 
gled joy. During its first period they warmly sympa- 
thized with the movement, and heartily co-operated 
with its friends. They were found in every place, gal- 
lantly battling in the cause. When, however, to settle 
protestantism as the religion of the state, infant bap- 
tism was confirmed and established, they stood ap- 
palled. They paused. They protested. They said 
to their brethren, ** Christianity is not a mere expan- 
sion of Judaism. Its great end is not again to envelop 
man, as the papacy seeks to do, in the swaddling- 
bands of outward ordinances, and man's teaching. 
Christianity is a new creation. It takes possession of 
the inward man, and transforms him in the innermost 
principles of his nature, so that he needeth not human 
teaching, but by God's help he is able of himself, and 
by himself, to discern that which is true, and to do that 
which is right." Balthazar Hubmeyer, for example — 
one of the noble army, whose souls ascended to heaven 
from amidst the martyr-fires of Vienna — ^was a pious, 
learned, and eloquent Baptist. Before the dawn of the 
Reformation he had sought to revive the spirit of reli- 
gion in the Catholic church, of which he was then a 
priest, and multitudes had flocked to his preaching, 
and had been moved by his appeals. When Luther 
and Zuingle lifted their voice for reform, an animated 
echo was instantly heard from Hubmeyer. He had al- 
ready translated portions of the scriptures into the 
language of the people, and was by the side of the 
foremost in the battle. When the leaders halted, con* 
sidered, hesitated, and acquiesced in in/ant baptism. 



968 JBBFAWI BAFimC raRBOTfS 

and the union of church and state, Le dissented, and 
planted himself upon the eternal pmoiples of the word 
oi God. He knew that nothing was gained until the 
church was restored to its primitiTe fiHin, a$ set' forth 
in the goepeL ** Write to me again/' said he to Znis- 
gk, his earlj friend, hut afterwards his hitter foe, 
" Write to me again, for God's sake, on baptiraa." '^I 
believe and know, that Christendom shall not reoeire 
its rising aright, unless baptism, and the Lord's supper, 
are brought to their original purity/' Znmgle had 
4nice doubted himself, as had Melancthon, and Carl* 
stadt, and most of the others, about infant baptism ; 
but they were now committed. The fatal step was 
taken. But he cotdd not pause, until he saw the 
church composed, as Jesus Christ commanded, of be«- 
licTers only, uid a pure, and spiritual body. Blourocl^ 
and Grebel, and Mantz, and Hubmeyer, and the others, 
reminded the reformers of their own previous doatrine& 
What leeponse did they receive? Zuingle pettishly 
answered :— <^' It is Imposuble to make a heaven upon 
earth. Christ has taught us to let the tares grow 
among the wheat I"* Our brethren, determined that 
no effort should be wanting on their part^ still pressed 
tiie subject. They were answered only by imprison* 
meats, persecutions, and tjie stake 1 For the great 
Swiss leader, however, D'AuUgn^ ventures this apolo* 
gy : — " He demgned a complete redigious reformation^ 
but he was resolved not to allow the least invasion of 
pitblic order or political inetUutions, This was the 
limit at which he disoovered written by the hand of 
God, that word from heaven, * Thus far ahalt thou go« 

• 3>*Aiibiga4, HUt. B«f., v«L iii^ p. 800. 



TH2B FOWJUK <^ "niB (EHUSCH. 269 



aod no fartlier/ Smnewbere it was necessary to make 
a stand, and it was at this point Zubgle, and the rfr* 
formers, took their stand, in spite of the efforts made 
by rash and impetuous men [the Baptists] to hurry 
tfaem beyond it.^'* In other words, infant baptism 
was necessary to a state religion, and as such had en** 
tered into the ** public order, a$id poUtieal intUtu^ 
thus,** It was the law <^ the land. Our brethren, 
therefore, who refused to conform to it, w^re denounced 
as rebeU ; they were covered with reproach as violators of 
the law ; they were, by princes and magistrates, impris- 
oned, scourged, banished, put to death ! And for their 
persecution christian men still rise up as apologists ! 

The progre99 of the Reformation ceased. It was 
stationary for a season. The current then turned back^ 
and flowed towards the corruptions from which it 
set out. In France, Englaod, and other countries, it 
followed in the same direction, and reached the same 
results. Infant baptism has now had time to work its 
legitimate effects, and they have been full of calamity. 
It is actually armounced from some quarters, and by 
Protestants themselves, that ''The Reformation has 
proved itself a failure.'' And so believing, what meas- 
ures are being adopted by these same Protestants? 
Do they compare the principles of the Reformation 
with the Bible, ascertain in what they are deficient, 
correct their errors, and thus go forward into the light 
of truth ? Far from it. They give up even what had been 
gained, and take up their march back again into popery I 
How large a portion of the Episcopal church, espe- 
eiaUy in England, has already returned to the embraces 

* D'Aalngn^'B Hist. Bef., vol. iU., p. 811. 

23* 



STOt INTAST BiUPTIBK BBBTBOTB 

of ** the Man of Sin !" Infant baptism, made popeiy 
what it is, and infant baptism will cany protestantism 
i^n into popery. 

What power has popery y what power has protestani- 
ism now, either permanently to reform itself, to extir- 
pate error from other christian communities, or to con- 
vert the nations to Christ ? They cannot make others 
purer than themselves. Were all men of their princi- 
ples, they would not therefore be the humble, convert- 
ed followers of Christ. They would not be christians 
in the true gospel sense. What can the English church 
do at present, in the combat with error ? She is en- 
feebled to a hopeless degree. What can Lutheranism 
do, in any of the numerous governments where it pre- 
vails ? She is powerless. And Calvinism ? Ah, what 
is to be hoped from the Arianism of Greneva, or the 
Unitarianism, and Universalism of New England ? Scat- 
tered among all these classes are to be found many indi- 
viduals who really love our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
serve him with a sincere heart. Their piety I respect 
and honor. I speak here not of these few, but of the 
great mass of the popish, and the protestant world. 
In them all infant baptism has evinced the essential evil 
of its character, by either wholly destroying their abil- 
ity, or greatly enfeebling their power to combat eiTor. 
** Will it be said that, in the present depraved state of 
humanity, communities might easily be pervaded by 
an irreligious and infidel spirit, even if infant baptism 
had never existed ? We grant it. But then the de- 
structive element would have been out of the church. 
Now it is within the church. However high the tide 
of ungodliness may rise, all is safe while l^e church 



THB POWEB OF THB OHUBCH. 271 

preserves the model ordained by its dmne founder. 
Planted on the rock against which the gates of hell 
shall not preyail/it presents an embankment to the 
swelling waves, which breaks their force, and turns 
them harmless back. In a pure church there dwells 
a recuperative power that can renovate the most de- 
generate lands. Living and spiritual ; in the world, 
yet distinct from the world ; such a church acts as a 
correcting and restoring agent, reproving iniquity, con- 
founding unbelief, and holding forth the word of life 
to a reckless and profligate generation. But if its own 
fight becomes darkness, how great is that darkness ! 
When the church itself engenders the disease ; when 
its own bosom is the fountain that sends out the con- 
tagion ; then the last hope disappears. It must be 
taken down, and give place to one built on a scriptural 
foundation. Otherwise the land which its presence 
blights, must sink beyond recovery, into the gulf of 
corruption."* It can never reform itself ; it can never 
reform others ; it will retard and obstruct the conver- 
sion of men. 

It may be objected, however, that these facts and 
considerations are too sweeping, and are not applicable 
to the evangelical pedobaplist denominations among us. 
Let us, then, descend to more of particularity, and 
trace in the minutuB of society, and among the best 
classes, the influence of infant baptism in destroying 
the power of the church successfully to combat error. 

Indulgences, auricular confessions, priestly ceUbacy, 
purgatory, and similar doctrines and practices of the pa-- 
pacy, are revolting abuses. They are theological monstros- 
* Ide, in GUI's Part and Pillar, ifec, pp. 79, 80. 



S7S 

itiet wbich oi^t to be hwailiflii fnmi the woAL Bwfe 
what protuiant pedobaptist bas power to reach them ? 
He may show them to be deatifciile of anj eountenaoee 
from the word of God. Hk arguments may be bgi- 
cal, and cohcIimtc. Bat what has he accomplished ? 
His popish brother effectaalljr puts down all hk easi^s 
by a single question : — ^Where do you get your infant 
baptism ? He tells him in the face of the son, and he 
teUs him tnily» that the Bible gives just as much si]^- 
port to the papal rites which he c(mdenm8» as it does 
to the protestant rite which he approves and practises. 
They all rest upon the same ground, and must stand 
or fall together. No man can ccmastently receive one, 
and reject the others. They most, for the same rear 
sons, be all received, or all rejected. This appeal to 
his own principles comes with resistless power. He is 
silenced, and sikncedybmvr. Infant baptism has wh<^y 
incapacitated kim successfully to combat the errors qf 
popery. 

Among Episcopalians, ixmfirmatMn, and orders, aro 
among the most striking abuses. Our Presbyterian 
and Methodist brethren declaim against Uiem eloquent* 
ly. They pronounce them unauthorized in the Bible, 
and bjurious to religion. Their verdict is true. But 
while they learnedly discuss, and clearly prove these 
propositions, their Episcopal brother hears them un- 
perturbed. He knows that he is armed with a weapon 
they cannot resirt ; it is the arffumentum ad homMum. 
Our authority, he calmly responds, for confirmation and 
orders, is the same with yours for infant baptism ! Are 
these corruptions, and injurious to religion, because they 
have no direct scripture warrant ? Then so is infant 



IBS PQWXS OF 7^9 QHIXBCm. S73 

baptism a corruption and iiijurious to religioii, for Ae 
same reason. With what consbtency can you practise 
one, and condemn the others ? They dare not contra- 
dict him. They are necessarily silent. 

Among Methodists, a very ptunful corruption is the 
l>aptism of '' seekers,*^ and Uieir reception to their com- 
munion. And who are these ** seekers?'* They are 
persons who desire to be saved, and manifest feeling 
on the aubject of religion, but who professedly, have 
not a living £aith in Christ, nor any well-grounded hope 
id eternal life. Agmnst this practice Presbyterians of 
all classes protest. They pronounce it a gross error, 
palpably unscriptural, and not to be countenanced ! 
Their Methodist brother is not at all disconcerted. He 
tells them plainly, and tells them truly, that. The bap- 
tism of seekers is, to say the least, as lawful a9 the 
baptism of ii^ants. It is, in truth, attended with pros- 
pects even more encouraging, since these seejkers may 
soon be rejoicing in hope, but of infants no svich ex- 
pectation is reasonable. The scriptures favor one as 
much as they do the other. His assailants cannot 
answer him. They are silent. He is thenceforth uur 
interrupted. 

The doctrine of " hereditary claims to the covenant 
of graoe," is an appalling abuse among Presbyterians, 
and Calvinists generally. Other pedobaptists pro- 
nounce it an absurdity, and wholly incredible. Dare 
they openly assail it ? If they do, they are quietly re- 
minded that their theory of infant baptism is as scrip- 
tural as any other. Thus they are all put to flight 
each by the other. Every denomination is so enfeebled 
that it cannot combat error in any other. The inva- 



274 INFiLNT BAPTISM DBSTBOTB 

liable and effectual answer to everj argnment is, 
" Physician, heal thyself." 

Let no one consider these views of the subject as 
of small importance. The method of argument here 
sketched has ever been, and is now, aiaTorite resort of 
both papists and protestants. It was employed by 
Cardinal Du Perron in his reply to the first King 
James ; by John Ainsworth against Henry Ainsworth ; 
by Fisher the Jesuit against Archbishop Laud ; and by 
Bossuet, Bishop of Meauz, against De La Roque of 
Rouen. Bcssuet's object was to defend the withhold- 
ing of the cup from the laity in the Lord's supper, upon 
the authority of the church, and he urged that infant 
bapiUm, both as to subjects and mode, was maintained 
not by scripture, but by church authority only, with 
which, nevertheless, the reformed complied. Why, 
then, he asked, should they refuse compliance in the 
other case ?"* De La B.oque wsis dumb. Dr. Whitby 
employs this argument with special force against the 
English pedobaptist dissenters. When, after pleading 
for some condescensions in their behalf, he says : — 
*' And on the other hand, if, notwithstanding the evi- 
dences produced that baptism by immersion is suitable 
to the institution both of our Lord and of his apostles, 
and was by them ordained to represent our burial with 
Christ, and so our dying unto sin, and our conformity 
to his resurrection by newness of life, as the apostle 
clearly maint£uns is the meaning of that rite ;f if, I say, 
notwithstanding this, all our dissenters do agree to 
sprinkle the baptized infant ; why may they not submit 

* Stennet^s Answer to Bussen, p. 178, et sequitar. 
t Bom* vi., 8-6." 



TBB FO^VEB OF TBK OUUIMH. ;S76 

to the mgnificant ceremooies imposed by our chveh ? 

For since it is as lawfal to add to Christ's institutions a 
significant ceremony which he or his apostles instituted, 
as to use another in its stead which they never did in- 
stitute, what reason can they have to do the latter, and 
refuse submission to the former? And why should not 
the peace, and union of the church, be as prevailing 
with them to perform the one, as is their mercy to the 
infant's body to neglect the other?"* Thus infant 
baptism is used as the grand plea for compUance with 
the ceremonies both of the church of Rome, and of 
the church of England. It is their chief prop to sup- 
port these hierarchies, the appeal to which they resort 
for countenance. And so triumphant is this appeal, 
that no pedobaptist ever has been able to stand before 
it.f They must all either stibmit, be silent, or renounce 
infant baptism. While they retain this unauthorized 
rite, they have no power to resist error on the part d 
others. 

Nor are they untrammelled even in their efforts to 
bring the unconverted to Christ Infant baptism tends 
to close the hearts of sinners, and does close the hearts 
of thousands, against those great doctrines of the gos- 
pel, the reception and behef of which, are essential to 
their salvation. 

Is it asked — ^How does infant baptism prevent men 
from embracing the fundamental doctrines of the gos- 
pel ? Preach as they are revealed in the word of God, 
the doctrines of universal and total depravity, the work 
of the Holy Spirit in regeneration, justification by faithy 

* Protestant Reooncileri p. 289. 
t OUl'g Fart and Pillar, <&o., oh. %, 



sad 4tli0r flodmiBS 4f liiii ^iMSy flod praBliiflni vp<M 
iboie wbo have beea tanglit io bdieve Uie ba|>tbiiial 
doetrioes of the Standards. They will gaze m joor 
&ce widi a look of setf-oonfidoit incredulity. If they 
annrer ^m at aU, it will be in laogaage like this : — 
^ We belieTe that ebildrea me born in the ehnreh, and 
eovenmt of gneey or that Adr ongind m was washed 
ai«n^ in baptisB. In either cMe, they are consequently 
holy. We are all, iherefoe, originally pure. No one 
ean be hdy and depraved at the same time. Thos^ 
at least, ^o are baptized in childhood are not de- 
prared. We were bapUied in childhood. Yoor doc- 
trine of depravity we do not believe !" But the work 
of the Holy Spirit in regeneratioo, they surely will not 
deny ! You see before you a company of men ** with- 
out God, and without hope in the world.'' You affec- 
tionately warn them that, if they would be saved, they 
''must be born again" — "bom of the Holy Ghost" 
Do tbey believe your message? Tbey have studied 
their catechisms too well. We, they answer, were bap- 
tiud in our infancy, and in that ordinance we -w&pe 
then, and there, '* bom again of water, and of the Hoiy 
Ghost.** Why do you tell us, who have been long ago 
" bom agmn of the Holy Ghost,** that we must yet be 
bom agam of the Holy Ghost? Are people twice 
bom ayain f They pronounce your teaching nons^iise ! 
They profess that tbey believe in the regenerating ef- 
ficacy of the Holy Spirit, but tbey confine it to the 
medium of baptism! They adhere to the catechisms. 
In the form in which the doctrine is revealed in the 
Bible, they' do not believe it. And regarding ^us^t/f- 
eation by faith, what aare their impressions ? They are 



THB JPUWJBK 09 IHK OBCKBCH. 9TT 

eoBfideni that in thdor bftptisnv io. infoncy^ they " ware 
cleansed fFDm the defilements of eNriginal sm/' and fafad 
*' ecmferred upon them dll the beneJUs of the death of 
Christ'' Thej must then, have been accepted of €k)dy 
and of eoarae^ justified J Mett are justified but once.' 
They have no idea that they are t^ain- to be jmrtified. 
Ii^ant baptism has encased them all in a covenng of 
steel. You cannot apjnoadh them. They are imper* 
vious to truth \ Whj, say they to their pedobaptist 
teachers, wfaAt do you mean ? We were broaght tip in 
the church. We have never forfeited our birthr^btr 
"We are not sinners of the gentiles." "We are 
Abraham's seed," "the children of the covenant." 
They are confirmed in sin and deception ! Infant bap- 
tism has been their ruin. These, alas ! are no fancy 
pictures. They are realities which are daily occurring 
all around us. • These deceived men boldly tell you that 
if you taught them the truth concerning baptism, you 
now teach them falsely ; and if you now teach them 
the truth, you then taught them falsely ! What can 
you answer them? Their declaration is true. You 
have betrayed them! You cannot justify yourself. 
Infant baptism has closed their hearts against the 
gospel. 

Thus does infant baptism destroy the power of the 
church to combat error, and prove itself a most la^ 
mentable evil. By adopting it she takes away her 
own purity, and places herself in a position in which 
she can do nothing effectually, either to reform herself, 
or to remove the errors of her sister churches. This 
is shown conclusively, by the history and results of the 
Beformatiou ; by the present attitude of Lutheranism, 

24 



S78 niFAxrr baftibh, bic. 

Episcopacy, and Calyimsm ; by the incoiudstencies of even 
evangelical Episcopalians, Methodists, and Presbyteri* 
ans ; and by the influence of the rite upon the minds 
of unrenewed men. Such a church ceases necessarily, 
to be an effective instrumentality for the destruction of 
sin among men. She cannot teach the nations the 
gospel. She cannot enlighten the world. She cannot 
subdue the hearts of men to the reign of truth. She 
can never bring a rebellious universe under the domin* 
ion of Messiah. She has lost forever, the locks of her 
strength. 



CHAPTER IVI. 

IKTANT BAPTISM IS AN EVIL BBOAUSB IT INJURES THE 
CREDIT OF RELIGION WITH REFLECTINO MEN OF THE 
WORLD. 

It I0 instloiuki ; It is without anthoritjr ; it throws suspicion upon all reli- 
gion ; its purposes are sectarian. 

The honor of religion is dear to every true christian. 
To cherish and to love it, is both his duty, and his in- 
terest. He can never see it tarnished, but with deep 
pain. The gospel is consistent both with itself, and 
with reason. It is to be proposed to men of the world. 
Their salvation depends upon their believing, embra- 
cing, and obeying it. They are not always ignorant of 
its truths. ' The utmost care should be exercised that 
they be not repelled from its teachings. They are ca- 
pable of reasoning on religious subjects. What you 
attempt to teach them must correspond with the divine 
word. Otherwise Christianity will, in their minds, be 
discredited, and your approaches will be resbted. To 
honor the cause of Christ, therefore, and to gain men 
to truth and salvation, such must be your faith, and 
your practice, that none may be able to point to them, 
and say, this is irrational ; this is without authority ; 
this is suspicious in its character ; this is a sectarian 
device. You must be above reproach. "Let your 
light so shine before men, that they may see your good 



280 DTFAHT BAFTDM DIBHOHOB8 BBUaiOIf . 

works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven/' 
But infant baptbm does not Kofnor^ it inevitably ifijurts 
the credit of religion, with intelligent reflecting men of 
the world. 

It does so, in the first place, beeause it is really in it- 
self irrational. 

You bring forward a child to be sprinkled. An in- 
telligent man will naturally inquire your reas<»is. He 
asks for the rationale of the practice. Do you tell him 
that thereby it is cleansed from original sin ; or that it 
receives all the benefits of the death of Christ ; or that 
it is regenerated, and fitted for heaven ? He solicits 
your proofs. Tou can give him none that deserve the 
name. With his Bible in his hand, and his eyes <^n 
to behold the objects around him, does he believe your 
teaching? It is impossible. He does not. He cannot.. 
He may not answer you. He may believe you honesty 
and sincere. But he does not assent. The baptism of 
a little infant ! What sense or reason is there in it ? 
He perceives none. There is none. It conimemorates 
nothing. It signifies' nothing. What good does it ac- 
complish ? None for the child ; none for the parents ; 
none for the church ; none for religion ; none for the 
world ; none in any respect whatever* What reason- 
able man can believe that the child, or any other hu- 
msh being, is the better for it, either in this lif^, or in 
the next? It in reality confers no privileges, or advan- 
tage, temporal, or spiritual. It is, in truth, utterly ir- 
rational, and in the estimation of intelligent, thinking, 
unprejudiced worldly men, must detract painfully from 
the credit of religion. 

Infant baptism, in the second place, injures the oredit 



tSTPAirr BApmM imgbhohobb BsuaiDK. 281 

of religioii, because it is practised without any authority 
whatever. 

The Bible contains not one passage in its support. 
This fact has been before sufficiently demonstrated. No 
man, however carefully he studies the sacred record, 
can find one there. And do you place at the very 
threshold of religion an irrational institution, unauthor- 
ized by God, and hurtful to men ? And do you do- 
mand compliance with it as an essential part of the di- 
vine service? What must be the impression thus made 
upon intelligent men of the world ? The credit of reli* 
gion inevitably suffers. 

Infant baptism, in the third place, injures the credit 
of religion by casting suspicion upon the whoie sul(f$et. 

Religion must be set forth and practised in a plain, 
candid, open, ingenuous, honest manner. If I find a 
man equivocating, and double dealing with me on one 
subject, I suspect he may on another ; and if I detect 
him so acting in several instances, I withdraw my confi- 
dence from him entirely. So it is in religion. Men 
must not be trifled with, nor deceived by its professors, 
and teachers. But infant baptism is inconsistent both 
with scripture and reason. Yet, in this country, its ad- 
vocated vehemently maintain that religicm in all its 
parts, is reasonable, and that they are governed in their 
whole faith, and obedience, exclusively by the word of 
God I What must be the effect upoifai the mind of a 
discriminating hearer? Will he conclude that these 
pedobaptists are sincere, but ignorant ? This may be 
true of many, but cannot be true of all. He will cer- 
tainly reason in his own heart thus : — ThM^ I know, is 
irrakonaii and wnautharieed, I hww not how inaaj 

■ 24* 



282 JSFAJsrr baftisx dibhonobs beugion. 

other like tMngg christians may teach and practise. If 
one irrational and unauthorized principle be advocated, 
why not another? And if two, why not twenty? 
Suspicion is awakened^ and men of the world are re- 
pelled by it from religion. Thus infant baptism casts 
suspicion upon the whole of the religion of Christ. 

Finally, infant baplism, as practised among us, is a 
well-arranged sectarian device. 

It appeals not to the judgment, but to the feelings ; 
not to reason, but to prejudice in favor of an old and 
venerable custom. It wears very much the appearance 
of an essay to take undue advantage of all the parties 
concerned. You receive the habes into the church ! 
You then have certainly such a hold upon the parents 
as commits them to that particular denomination of 
which their cherished loved ones are thus made mem- 
bers. If the children go, the parents will follow them. 
Thus both are secured. But how ? Not by reason ; 
not by the force of religion ; but by a mere sectarian 
fiction ! The whole proceeding seem^ to argue a con- 
sciousness that religion will not bear the test of exam- 
mation ! Otherwise why do they impose what implies 
a profession of it, upon these children, before they are 
capable of exercising their reason ? Why not aUow all 
parties an opportunity to study the Bible before their 
dogmas are forced upon their acceptance ? Why hurry 
parents and children iirto the church in violent haste, as 
if they could not otherwise be saved ? Can men of 
the world, can any class of men, believe that an intelli- 
gent, a holy, a reasonable religion, a religion that ad- 
dresses the judgment and the heart, can be propagated, 
and honored, by means like these? They cannot. In* 



OTFANT BAFTIBM DIBHONOB8 BELIGION. 283 

fant baptism among us is a sectarian device, and as sucli 
imworthy of the religion of Christ. 

From all these facts and considerations it is most evi- 
dent that infant baptism injures the credit of religion 
with reflecting and imprejudiced men of the world, and 
is therefore a great evil. They must see that it is irra- 
tional in itself, that it is wholly without authority from 
the word of God ; they must be led by it to suspect, 
in all its other departments, the mtegrity of religion ; 
and they will thus be tempted to regard as compatible 
with its morals, and honor, any sectarian trap, or man- 
agement which may swell the numbers of an ecclesiasti- 
cal party. Need we be surprised, therefore, that among 
persons of this class, so strong a tendency to skepticism 
should prevail ; that they should feel inclined to repel 
the gospel of Christ ; and that they should so often want 
confidence in the ministers of religion? Infant baptism 
is inimical to the honor and prevalence of the gospel of 
Christ. With regard to it, therefore, we may with em- 
phasis repeat the divine admonition : — "Cast ye up, cast 
ye up, prepare ye the way, take up the stumblinp-block 
out of the way of my people." 



CHAPTER IVII. 

INFANT BAPTISM IS AN XYIL BECAUSE IT IS THE GREAT 
BARRIER TO CHRISTIAN UNION. 

Haforo of chrtotfoi union ; IIb bnpoftttiM ; the prteefpIM npon H^hkib H is 
maintained ; inoompattblo with inftust haigtiaau 

Christian unioDy and inEant baptism, never can exist 
together. Between the millions of Baptists and pedo- 
baptists this rite interposes a barrier which is» and must 
forever remain impassable. But christiaa union is im- 
perative upon us all. Whatever prevents it is an evil. 
Infant baptism prevents it. Therefore infant baptism is 
an evil. 

It is in the very nature of true religion to produce, 
and perpetuate christian union. God is one ; his reli- 
gion is one; and his people are one. AH who love 
Christ are guided bj the same gospel ; are partakers of 
the same Spirit ; have in view the same great ends ; 
and are heirs of the same immortal inheritance. How 
can they be otherwise than united ? In asserting these 
scriptural propositions, I am not unmindful of the fact 
that diversities of sentiment on nearly every subject, 
will exist. They arise inevitably, from the differences 
in natural capacity, in acquired knowledge, and the 
modes of thought, of different minds. These, however, 
will always refer to minor considerations, and therefore 



INFANT BAPTIBM ^PBHVJiaNTi XWEBSffUlAN tTNlON. '985 

"be uminpt^rUuit m tbw nature, extent, and influenoe. 
They wijl be such as intelligent and holy men may ia^ 
dulge without ofifence, without alienation of affection, 
and without detriment to the most perfect christiaa 
union. Nor is the requisition met when all who com- 
pose one particular church, or den<Huination, are in har- 
mony. Christian union embraces all christians through- 
out the whole umverse. All who are one with Christ, 
and governed by his word, are ineyitably one vnth each 
other. The law of gravitation in the natund world, does 
not more certainly attract to its centre the objects with- 
in its range, than does the religion of Christ bring into 
unity all those who are within the circle of its influence. 
It knows no names, or distinctions. It is complete. It 
is universal. 

Christian union, I have said, is imperative upon us all. 
Our Saviour himself commands it, as an object to be 
sought, with unremitted earnestness. He deemed it also 
of such importance as to receive a place in that memo- 
rable last prayer offered by him in behalf of his minis- 
ters and people. ** I pray," said he, " that they all may 
be one ; as thou. Father, art in me, and I in thee, that 
they also may be one in us; that the world may believe 
that thou has sent me. And the glory which thou 
gavest me, / have given them, that they may be one ; I 
in them, and thou in me, that they may be made per- 
fect in one ; and that the world may JImmo tha^ thou 
hast sent me.'''*^ Christian union among. all the people 
of God is thffliefore essential to ^the glory of the Re- 
deemer, to the honor c^ his truth, to the spread of the 
goepel among the natbus, and to elicit and eonfiiiA the 

* John,.<)h. zxvi. 



886 mvAJsrr baftibbc 

faith of believers. Well then did an apostle thus ad- 
monish us : — " Now I beseech you, brethren, by the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the 
same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, 
but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same 
mind, and in the same judgment/'*^ How imperative ! 
Dare any of us disregard this injunction ? 

But christian union is not to be governed by feeling 
merely, however ardent that feeling may be. like 
every other duty, it must be guided by fixed principles. 
And what are these principles? It may be sufficient to 
say, without descending to particulars, that they are all 
plainly and fully laid down in the gospel. ** The word 
of God, the whole word of God, and nothing but the 
word of God," is the grand " platform." There is no 
other. This must be embraced, believed, loved, prac- 
tised, and all christians will as naturally flow together as 
the waters of the whole earth will find their way into 
the ocean. A union upon any other principles would 
not be christian union, but a conspiracy against tru3 reli- 
gion, offensive to God and injurious to his people. 

Such is christian union, in its nature, its obligations, 
and its principles. It is implanted in the renewed heart 
by the Holy Spuit ; it is demanded by the gospel for 
the honor of truth, and for the extension of the kingdom 
of Christ among men ; and governed exclusively by his 
holy word, it is practicable, natural, and easy. But in- 
fant baptism interposes and destroys it wholly, indeed, • 
renders it impossible. It destroys christian union by 
changing the laws of membership in his church, establish- 
ed by Christ; by receiving into that sacred body the un- 

♦ 1 Cop. i., 10. 



PKEVBNTS OHKIBTIAN TTNION. 287 

holy and profane ; by admitting men without the ordi- 
nance ordained and enjoined as the initiatory rite ; and 
by the corruptions which invariably attend the practice 
of infant baptism. Thus the lovers of Christ are thrown 
hopelessly asunder. While the barrier remains, the sep- 
aration must continue. 

Infant baptism is therefore an ofifence against Christ ; 
an offence against the peace and harmony of his peo- 
ple ; an offence against the souls of men. And who is 
responsible for this monstrous evil ? Those, of course, 
who introduced it, and who still adhere to its practice. 
For all its calamities they must account to God, and to 
men. We solemnly declare ourselves innocent of its 
enormities. We never can approve it. We never can 
believe in the principles upon which it is maintained. 
Were we, therefore, to unite for the sake of tmion, or 
from apy other motive, with pedobaptists, it would not 
be christian union. It would be a sin against God. It 
would be a combination against the truth and purity of 
religion. While infant baptism continues, christian union 
is utterly impracticable. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

JMWAXn BA9TSSM U AV EVIL BKOAUW IT PRBTXNT8 THE 

flALnrABT nfPBxasioir which baftibm was Dsaioim> 

to MAKB UPOir THS MIITDB BOTR OV TH08B WHO BX- 
OXIVE IT AMD THOBB WHO WTTNEflS ITS ADMINIfiZBA- 

nov. 

ImprewioDB nuide bj baptism; leaeons It teaches; contrast; iniknt bap- 
tism tnnia them all aside. 

Baptism, like all the other ordinances of religi<m, was 
designed to make a deep and salutary impression upon 
the heart, both of those who receive it, and those who 
witness its administration. It teaches important lessons^ 
and holds up perpetually before the mind the most glo- 
rious truths of the gospel. But the sprinkling of a 
babe turns them all aside, and destroys every salutary 
result. 

Baptism is an ordinance of singular dignity, and im- 
pressivei\ess, especially when considered in its various 
bearings, and relations. Give it, if you please, a mo- 
ment's thought. An intelligent and humble believer 
stands before you. He has been instructed in the gos- 
pel ; he has embraced its truths ; and deeply penitent 
under a sense of his guilt and condemnation, be has 
given himself to Christ, on whom by divine grace he 
has been enabled to rest his hopes, and confidence. He 
cherishes a holy assurance of pardon and acceptance. 



INFANT BAPTISM, ETC. 289 

"Justified by faith, he ha? peace T^ith God through our 
Lord Jesus Christ.*' His soul exults with efratitude and 
joy. He is "a ppw crpatijre/' IJis will, his affections, 
hi? inclin^tiqns, his desi:fes, bis purposes, are all changed. 
He no>?^ presents himself, a^ is nis privilege, and his 
duty, and ip. accordance with all his desire^, that he may 
confess Christ before men, and be united with his peo- 
ple. "V^ith indescribable emotipn he approaches the or- 
dinance in which this confession i§ divinely appointed 
to be made. He is to be baptized but once in his life. 
He desirps, therefore, to oterish in that hour especially, 
the spirit of ardent devotion, jand full consecration, 
which so important a sefvice demands. C|irist died for 
his sins, was buried, and rpse again for his justification. 
He is now dead to sin, and according to his command- 
ment, is about to be buried with phrist by baptism into 
death, and like as Christ was rsfi^ed up froni the dead 
by the glory of the Father, even so he also, is to arise 
to walk in newness of life. How unspeakably solemn 
is that moment ! With what fervor he renounces the 
world, the flesh, and the devil ! How earnestly he scru- 
tinizes his own heart, and reviews the reasons of the 
hope by which he is animated ! How thrilling his vows 
to be the Lord's ; to devote himsejf to the glory of him 
*' who hath called him out of darkness into his mar\'el- 
lous light !" How fervent his prayers for the divine 
grace and blessing ! The act is performed. He retires. 
The scenes of that hour are indelibly en^aven upon his 
soul. They can never be erased. The salutary practi- 
cal results are as lasting as his earthly existence. 

"With this scene compare that of the sprinkling of a 
child. The little innocent, unconscious of all th^t is 

26 



290 I5TAST BAFT1BM 

passing, is brought forward, bedizened, possibly, with, 
ribbons and lace. Some forms are recited. Questions 
and answers are read from boolcs. The wet finger of 
the minister is laid npon the forehead of the child. 
Startled bj the neryon? shock, it perhaps shrieks con- 
Yulsiyely, and is hurried away from the altar! The 
spectacle is over. What have you looked upon ? A 
lamentable desecration of an ordinance of Jesus Christ ! 
Who is benefited? Who is impressed? Who is taught? 
And this is called baptism ! 

The baptism instituted by^esus Christ teaches us, I 
have said, important lessons. It holds up to our -view 
incessantly, Jesus as our only Saviour ; it instructs us 
that he gave his life for our life, and that the great acts 
by which we are redeemed, were his death, burial, and 
resurrection. This redemption is made ours personally, 
by the work of the Holy Spirit in regeneration. We 
are one with Christ by faith. For this reason in Christ's 
death for sin, we died ; in his burial, we were buried ; 
in his resurrection, we were raised up ; and in his vic- 
tory we are glorious conquerors. All this we are re- 
garded by the Father as having done, not in ourselves, 
but in Christ, smce what Tie as our representative did /or 
us, is justly regarded as having been done hy us. For 
Christ's sake, therefore, he pardons, sanctifies, adopts, 
and crowns us with eternal salvation. In this form oc- 
curred the acts of our redemption ; this is the form of 
our spiritual change, a death to sin, a burial to the world, 
and a resurrection to a new life ; and this, as the apostles 
repeatedly declare, is therefore the form of our baptism. 
" Buried with him in baptism, wherein also we are risen 
with him through the faith of the operation of God who 



PBirVENTS THE BENEFITS OF BAPTISM. 291 

hath raised him from the dead." In haptism, therefore, 
those great truths are ever before the mind that consti- 
tute the sum of the gospel. How, then, can a Baptist 
ever become a Unitarian, a Universalist, a legalist, or a 
cold formalist ? As a Baptist he never can. Our very 
baptism teaches us salvation by grace, through faith in 
our Lord Jesus Christ. But what does infant baptism 
teach ? Nothing, that is salutary. Absolutely nothing. 

A believer makes in his baptism a solemn profession 
of his faith. He has avowed his belief in the doctrine 
of the Trinity, in whose name that ordinance was admin* 
istered ; in " the freeness of the Father's love, the all- 
sufficient atonement of the Son, and the regenerating 
and sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit ;" and he 
has recognized his obligations, in all things according to 
the divine word, to walk with the people of God, in 
newness of life. Nor can he ever renounce these tenets 
without at the same time, renouncing his baptism. His 
baptism also implants all the strongest motives to holy 
living, since it was his own voluntary act, in which he 
declared himself dead to sin, buried to the world, and 
alive to God in Jesus Christ our Lord. Such a separa- 
tion was then pledged between him and sinful things, 
as is found between the dead and the living. Even the 
common desire to maintain consistency of character, bears 
in favor of the christian life, since he has been publicly 
and solemnly baptiz^d^ Such are his professions, and 
declarations, and their practical influence, the benefit of 
all which, in infant baptism is totally lost. The child 
professes nothing, promises nothing, feels nothing. 

Such is baptism as to the impression it was designed 
to make upon those who receive it, in the case of a he- 



Uev&r centraAted with that of an infant. Wb^a fQ^ 
witoaas the baptism of a belieyer, in the form instittii^d 
bj Jesus Christ, your heart b move4< There is an ii9- 
posing solemnity in the whole scene. You pannot re^ 
strain your tears. Many a sinner has by this means be^ 
convicted of sin, and afterwards given himself to Christ. 
But who ever was convicted of sin, or led to Christ, by 
witnessing the sprinkling of an infant ? Who ever, un- 
der such ciroamstapQes, felt the solemn grandeur of re- 
ligion ? Infant baptism prevents the salutary impression 
upon the minds of those who witness the (Mrdinanee, which 
was designed to be made by baptism. 

But infant sprinkling seeks to supplant the baptism 
of believers altos^ether, and does so, as far as it prevails. 
Should it universally prevail, it would thus banish from 
the world some of the best influences connected with 
the religion of Christ. The salutary practical impres- 
sion made by baptism upon the minds of both those 
who receive the ordinance, and those who witness its 
administration, is of the utmost importance. Infant bap- 
tism prevents (Vis impression. Therefore infant baptism 
is a <*^eat evil. 



/ 



. CHAPTER III. 

tfllfk'St dAFTIStt IB Air tYVL B£CAl^dE It iRETAUDS tfflB 
DKdt<}im OF CHMBT t^ THE OONVERStdN Ofi" t&te 

Christ designs to convert the world ; it is to be done "bj the gospel ; the woik 
hindered b j the conflicts ol chiristianB ; <k>]iseqtiences ; oondnsion. 

Tm& wliole world is to be converted to <Jod. As 
yet most of the nations sre in darkness, aiid tile »h«doW 
of death. But they fthiall all ultimately "be ddivered 
from their thraldom^ Joy, a&i peace, and saivadon, 
4iliall at ien^h, reign u«irersaliy. God himoelf has 
teught us this glorious truith. Hear the language of 
ys inspk^d prophets. ** All Mnps shall fall down 
befom him. AU wtticms shall serve h»&."* '^ And It 
ishidl come lo p«as in the last days» that the motflntum 
of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of 
the tnowitaiiis, and shall be exalted abov^ the bills, 
«nd M natfhns shall fi&ib fmto »^"f ''For tkB tmrik 
4kaii ^ jfkll of the kwowledge tf the Lc^dy m the 
w^aters covenr the «ea.''^ ^ Afid the kingdom^ and d^- 
Ininioii) and the grofttsness of the kingdott "viider the 
whoie heaven, shall be giveis to the people of the sainFts 
<€)€ the Most High, whose yngdom is an ev^itotin^ 
libg^m, «ind <dl demmiffM skall ^en>e and 6b^ hm^"% 

» I»8ial. Ixxii., 11. t Isa. ii., &. 

X lea* zi*} 9. § Dan. tIL, 9* 

26* 



294 mFAiirr baftibm setabsb 

These declarations cannot be readily mistaken. If all 
kings, and nations, shall acknowledge and worship the 
true God, and flow as a stream unto his house ; if the 
earth shall be full of the knowledge of him, and if all 
dominions shall serve and obey him ; and than this, no 
less is here assumed ; then surely the entire universe 
will have been converted, and brought fully under 
the reign of our adorable Redeemer. These are the 
reasons of our confidence in this result. The XiOrd 
Most High has declared that it shall be so, and his in- 
finite wisdom, and power, are pledged for its accom- 
plishment. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but his 
word shall not pass away unfulfilled. They were 
"voices in heaven'* which were heard by an apostle, 
saying, "The kingdoms of this world have become 
the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he 
shall reign forever and ever."* The round earth, 
"instead of being a theatre on which immortal be- 
ings are preparing by crime, for eternal condemna- 
tion, shall become a universal temple in which the 
children of men are learning the anthems of the blessed 
above." 

But how is this amazing moral revolution to be 
achieved? How are the hearts of all men, now so 
corrupt, so obdurate, so fixed in sin, to be changed, 
and brought to love and worship the Saviour ? There 
•is but one power capable of producing this result. It 
is the simple unadulterated gospel of Christ, Beason 
cannot do it. Philosophy cannot do it. Civilization 
cannot do it. The forms and ceremonies of religion, 
apart from its vitality, cannot do it. Nothing can do it 

* Bev. zi., 15. 



THE COinrEBSION OF THE WOBLD. 29& 

but ^ cross of Christ. "This alone has power to 
bend the stubborn will to obedience, and melt the 
frozen heart to love." The lost children of men are 
to be taught that, " God so loved the world that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believetb 
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." 
They will receive the message. They will believe it. 
They will embrace the Redeemer, and live. Nor will 
they " henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him 
who died for them, and rose again." The remedy pro- 
vided in the gospel is effectual. " It has been tried 
by the experience of eighteen hundred years, and has 
never failed in a single instance. Its efficacy has been 
proved by human beings of all ages," from the youthful 
penitent " to the sinner a hundred years old. All cli- 
mates have witnessed its power. From the ice-bound 
cliffs of Greenland to the banks of the voluptuous 
Ganges, the simple story of Christ crucified has 
turned men from darkness to light, and from the 
power of Satan unto God. Its effect has been the 
same with men of the most dissimilar conditions." 
It has alike elevated and purified the degraded and 
abandoned, " and the dwellers in the palaces of 
kings. It has been equally sovereign amidst the 
scattered inhabitants of the forest, and the crowded 
population of the metropolis. Everywhere, and at 
all times, it has been, and still is, and ever must be/ 
* the power of God unto salvation to every one that 
believeth.' "* 

Such are the designs of our Lord Jesus Christ in the 
gospel, and such is the power by which they are to be 

♦ Wayland. 



^9d ilTFANT HAPTiSM SETABI)6 

executed. The ctiurch, we Have before seen, is the 
appointed instrumentality by which these purposes of 
grace are to be accomplished. Is she ready for her 
exalted mission? The nations are in her presence. 
They are covered with misery and death. In her 
hands is the power by which they are to be delivered 
and saved. The command from heaven is sounding in 
lier ears, "Preach the gospel to every creature." 
Each day tiiat obedience is delayed, huiries thousands 
do^n to irrecoverable destruction! What is shie doing? 
Springing forwaird to the duty ? Grappling with the 
powers oif daJ-kness ? Hurling back the hosts of m- 
iquity? Proclaiming Jesus Christ the deliverer? Alas, 
no ! She has ingloriously turried away from her mis- 
sion ! She has indeed, herself become worldly, and 
corrupt. She is engaged almost soliely, in theological 
conflicts with her fellow -disciples ! She is quarrelling 
about fictions ! She has abandoned the naliond to per- 
ish in their sins ! Infant baptism, like the touch of a 
torpedo, has benumbed sfll her powers. What to her 
are the designs of Christ in the conversion of the world ? 
She is, ix)r the present at least, incapable of theiir exe- 
cution 1 

Infant baptrsfn retards the designs of X)hrist in the 
conversion of the world, by placing Baptistis and Pedo- 
Ibaptists in conflict with each other. Endless contro- 
versies occupy the time, and powers, of the very nien 
who are Under infinite obligations to be united In hekrt, 
tod harmoniously to co-operate in this enterprise of 
love, i^or is the battle which has been J)roceeding 
during so many centuries, relaidng lA 'kiblj degree, tt 
is becommg each da^, 'Yhore and more warm and 



THE CONVERSION dP WS '^feUD. 69t 

vigorous. In whal is il possible for th^ bontftndliftg 
parties to harmonize ? Alas 1 they cannot agree eveii 
upon such a version of the Btbte into the languages 
of the people, as toth parties are willing to pl^e 
in their hands !* Wot only is the living jireAcher 
detained from the nations, but the writteii Word is 
withheld, and confessedly on account of this yeYf 
question of baptism! 'the heathen must not, there- 
fore, even have the Bible ! Say you that th^ designs 
of Christ in the conversion of the world, ar6 not thus 
retarded ? 

Infant baptism retards the designs of Christ in the 
conversion of the world, by diverting from the work the 
time, the talents, the leamihg, and the money 6f the 
church. These are, to a painful eiteht, occtipied n'ot 
in endeavoring to destroy sin ; not fn enlightetiing the 
nations by sending them the written and preached 
word ; not in labors to save the souls oif irieii ; but In 
counteracting, and prevehting the success of 'e^ch Oth- 
er ! How much larger the^ number of meeting-hoUS^fe 
which must be built, and of pastors, and other minis- 
ters, who must be supported, than Would otherwise biB 
necessary! All these powers, and labors, and Vast 
Sums, might, but for this evil, be ajppropri^ted for thfe 
extension of the kingdom of Christ. 

Infant baptism "retards the designs 6f Christ hi thie 
conversion of the world, by detaining large liuffi- 
bers of ministers from the 'foreign field. Were Bap- 
tists and Pedobaptists united, ^s but for infatit bap- 
tism, and its concomitants, they would be, a trluch 

^ See the oanfliots between ^^ Amerldan and Ameiloaii and 
Foreign Bible Societies. 



298 INFAKT BAFngH KBTABD6 

smaller number would be sufficient for cbnstendom, 
and the remainder might " go far hence to the gen- 
tiles." What an immense armj of heralds of the 
cross, in such a case, might at once depart! And 
'' the wilderness, and the solitary place, would be glad 
for them, and the desert would rejoice, and blossom as 
the rose." 

Infant baptism retards the designs of Christ in the 
conversion of the world, by giving the name of chris- 
tians to the abandoned and profligate merchants, and 
sailors, and soldiers, and others, in foreign lands. These 
men, wicked as they are, covered with every crime, 
claim to be christians / Heathens, and mohammedans, 
recoffnize them as christians, and as true representatives 
of the religion of Christ ! They really are, for the most 
part, members of pedobaptist churches, into which they 
were received in infancy. In these distant and dark 
lands, a man seldom dwells who is really born again, 
and even when he does, the natives naturally confound 
him with the mass of foreigners. Forming their con- 
ceptions of Christianity by the moral character of the 
men before them, nearly all of whom are swearers, 
drunkards, adulterers, gamblers, and abominably de- 
praved, is it surprising that ihey look upon Christianity 
with loathing, and reject it with disdain ? How can 
true religion ever be impressed upon their hearts ? A 
barrier all but impassable, is thus presented in the way 
of any successful effort abroad. A missionary finds his 
way among the people, but what can he do'h He 
preaches to them " of righteousness, temperance, and 
a judgment to come." They point him to his coun- 
trymen, and ask, Have they not been baptized t Are 



THE OONYEBSION OF 1HE WOBLD. 299 

not they christians ? The man of God tells them of a 
Saviour who died ft)r them, and of the Holy Spirit, by 
whom men are purified. They answer him by asking. 
Have not your christian countrymen, who cheat, de- 
fraud, and abuse us, been redeemed by Christ, and 
purified by the Holy Ghost ? They have been bap- 
tized ! They are christians. Does he attempt to ex- 
plain the difference between nominal and real chris- 
tians ? They do not understand it. Their answer is. 
You are all alike. We see the practical influence of 
your religion. We do riot want such a religion ! They 
will hear.no more. Their hearts are closed against the 
truth. 

Infant baptinn retards the designs of Christ in the 
conversion of the world, by creating everywhere, 
strifes, and sectarian prejudices. How eflectually do 
these embarrass and obscure the conceptions of men 
of all classes ! How can those who are under t?ieir 
influence, ever see the truth ? They give con- 
stantly recurring occasions for reproach and aliena- 
•tion. They turn away the hearts of midtitudes from 
Christ, from his religion, and from his people. In 
this way the moral force of all parties is greatly 
weakened, and the progress of the gospel proportion* 
ally retarded. 

Thus it is seen how infant baptism retards the de- 
signs of Christ in the conversion of the world, by en- 
feebling, through her own errors and worldliness, the 
church herself ; by placing Baptists and Pedobaptists 
in perpetual conflict with each other ; by diverting from 
the work the time, the talents, the learning, and the 
money of the church ; by detaining large numbers of 



ttOO mTAKt BAPTISM JtMAttDB 

Iniiustei^ fW>m the foreign fi^lti ; hj giviitg ihe htAAe 
of christians to the abandoned and profiigate hi heathen 
lands ; and by creating among ttiett everywhere, per- 
petual strifes, and the bitterest sectarian prejudiced. 
How lamentable the evil in this respect which itafant 
baptisni inflicts upon our woHd! What multitudes 
has it left itninsthictcd, to perish Forevet ! With such 
an incubus hanging upon the church, diverting her en- 
ergies, corrupting her principles, knd destroying her 
life, how. can the world ever be converted to God? 
But this iinpediment will be tak6h ^way, this baleful 
influence which has poisoned Christianity, will be iie- 
moved, and " the kingdoms of this world become the 
kingdoms of our Lwxl, and of his Christ.'* 

It must now, I think, be evident that infant baptism 
is the most periiicious heresy that has ev6r found its way 
into the xjhurch of Christ. Are there slill those trho 
Ihihk it a small matter ? Say you that it cannot 'be so 
very iniquitous? You are perhaps willing to admit 
that, " It does nO good.'* Do you yet claim that it 
** does no harm ?'^ You ire, I trust, undeceived. Ybu 
how «ee that it is Really the soai*ce from which have 
is'prung most xX th^ cotVuptiotes that afliiict the cause 
'of Chiist. "Atid ft is the morfe dangerous From the 
slow, and insidious manner in which it Accomplishes 
its iiesults. It acts, 1 xsonfess, ^lently. It covertly 
beaches its '^nds. Its steps are so cirduitous, and iik 
progress «o impei-cteptible, that the coftseqtietoiceS are 
not seen till the catastrophe comes. And 6Veii thfeft, 
they ate nearly al-^ys l-eferred not to the ptim&l 
causl^, but to soiife one 6f the intermediate Ttgenciai 
irlaxSx it has 6et in motrotti ! lAfsmt Ibaptism has dohe 



THE OONVEESION OF THE WOELD. 301 

more, directly and indirectly, than all other corrup- 
tions combined, to overthrow truth, to turn men away 
from vital religion, to pollute Christianity, to enfeeble 
her power, and to keep back the hour of her final 
triumph." 

:c6 



CHAPTER XX. 

RECAPITULATION, WITH CONCLUDING ADDRESSES. 

Becftpitalfttion ; addressee to PedobeptiBte ; to Baptists in Pedobaptist 

churchee; to Baptists. 

The evils of infant baptism have now, in most of 
their forms, passed successively in review. They have 
been considered calmly, dispassionately, but faithfully, 
and as demanded by the truth of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
If I have " nothing extenuated,*' neither have I " set 
down aught in malice." Let them be here briefly re- 
capitulated. 

Infant baptism is an evil, because its practice is un- 
supported by the word of God ; because its defence 
leads to most injurious perversions of scripture ; be- 
cause it engrafts Judaism upon the gospel of Christ ; 
because it falsifies the doctrine of universal depravity ; 
because it contradicts the great fundamental principle 
of justification by faith ; because it is in direct conflict 
with the doctrine of the worjc of the Holy Spirit in 
regeneration ; because it despoils the church of those 
peculiar qualities which are essential to the church of 
Christ ; because its practice perpetuates the supersti- 
tions that originally produced it ; because it subverts 
the scripture doctrine of infant salvafion ; because it 
leads its advocates into rebellion against the authority 



BEOAPrrULATION, ETC. 303 

of Christ ; because of the connection it assumes with 
the moral and religious training of children ; because 
it is the grand foundation upon which rests the union 
of church and state ; because it leads to religious per- 
secutions ; because it is contrary t9 the principles of 
civil and religious freedom ; because it enfeebles the 
power of the church to combat error ; because it in- 
jures the credit of religion with reflecting men of the 
world ; because it is the great barrier to christian 
union ; because it prevents the salutary impression 
which baptism *was designed to mate upon the minds 
both of those who receive it, and of those who witness 
its administration ; and because it retards the designs 
of Christ in the conversion of the world. These, main- 
ly, are the charges I prefer against infant baptism, and 
I believe that I have- proved each one of them conclu- 
sively. If so, it is a great and unmitigated evil. It 
not only does no good, but it does evil, immense evil, 
and only evil. 

In closing this discussion, may I not, in the first 
place, address a few words to my pedobaptist breth- 
ren? 

Will you not here pause, and with the Bible in your 
hand, prayerfully re-examine this whole subject ? You 
have probably never, at any^ time, given it a careful in- 
vestigation. You found it in your church, and feeling, 
very naturally, a prejudice in favor of whatever she 
approves, and observes, you received and adopted it. 
You have since practised the rite imder a sort of in- 
definite impression that, although you do not yourself 
comprehend with any clearness how, yet it is defensible 
by the word of God. This, I know, is the position oc- 



804 iqBo^ppTJLA'npiT, 

cnpied by thousands. You do not design tp depvt 
from the gospd. Least of all do you linage that ip, 
this matter you are cominittiQg .ai» injury in any way. 
The enormous evil it brings upon yoif, upon your 
children^ upon the church, and upon the worlds is a 
great fact to i^hieh yovu* attention has pot hitherto 
been called. You have regarded it with faFor because 
it is observed by your church ; because grea^i men 
practise, and defend it \ because it is a time-honored 
institution which has coijie down to you through a pe- 
riod of fifteen centuries ; and because yo]ji have thought 
that ** If it does po good, it will do no harm !" But 
grec^t mpn, and good men, as great, and ^& good, a^ 
any that have defended, and practised infant baptisDji, 
have also defended, ai^d practised^ all the corruptions 
of popery. K on this account yoii receive infant bap- 
tism, you are obliged, for the same reasons, to receive 
all the corruptions of popery. That, too, is a time- 
honored institution, clothed with the sanction of more 
than twelve centuries. High position ; great learning ; 
venerableness ; never can give authority to any thiqg 
which is in itself false, and injurious. . Ours is neither 
the age, nor the country, nor is religion the theine, in 
which such arguments can be respected. Because our 
fathers were g6verned by kings, and emperor?, who, as 
they were taught by gre&t, and good, men, ** ruled 
by divine right,** shall we be monarchists? We choose 
in politics, to exercise our own judgment, and we reject 
as baseless, all these antiquat^d pretensions. Shall we 
be less wise in religion? Here, too, we will look not to 
men» but to God ; not to wtiquity, but to divine reve- 
Ifttion. Our appeal )3^, ** to the biw^ and to the testi- 



WITH omohvsmef a^bbesses. 906 

mofof* If we speak aot aeecMrdii:^ to tbesei it is 1»* 
cause there k no light ia uSb'^ 

Does infant baptism do no hana ? I pentnade my-^ 
self that no one who reads these pages^ will ever again 
urge that fallacious plea. Every departure from truth. 
mu&t be i^ evil> aoid this is one c^ the most melan- 
cholj of them all. Will jou not, my brother, ascer- 
tain fca: yourself, its oharaeter^ and renouneing it, r^ 
turn cheerfully to the word ^ God ? It is *' a per- 
fect rule of ffdth aod pmetioea^' If you^ and all ethers^ 
do so> no more will be heard of this injurious and dep- 
recated custom. £veB now^ in omr country at leasts it 
is loem^r its hold^ Among all evangelical chiistiaas it 
is rapidly waning* Multitodea of the best members 
in pedobaptist ehurches of all seats, uU^ly refuse to 
have their childrai baptized. Will not you also aban-< 
don it ? In maintaining this, or any other eiroTi you 
cannot possibly have any interest. Beview prayerful- 
ly, imd in the l%ht of the divine wordy your opimonsi 
mid practice in the prenuses. I am sure you must de- 
Bare to know the truth, and to obey the truth* It may 
cost you some labor, and may perchance, demand sae^ 
rifices at your haoids. But will you shrink from it on 
these accounts? Let the ''love of Christ constrain 
you" in this work And may God enlig^n^ and guide 
you into tJbe knowledge of his wUl,, and into an bumr 
ble, lioly, and ready obedience in all things. 

May I, in the second place, appeal to persons who^ 
although Baptists in ]«inaiple^ are yet member of 
Pedobaptist churchea ? 

This class oi persons is much moie nimiereus than hoa 
Ipsnerallj been imagined. Many of them are not thann- 
^ 26* 



806 B3SOAFITCrLA110Sr, 

selves folly aware that tbey approximate our principles. 
They haye derived all their knowledge of th^n through 
Pedobaptist channels, and such have been the repre- 
sentations that they suppose us to be ahnost any thing 
else than what we really are. It has ever been our lot 
to be traduced, and exhibited in false lights. Even 
their ministers — ^this is the most charitable construc- 
tion — are strangely ignorant of us. Not a few, how- 
ever, know that they really do hold our opinions. By all 
those who occupy the contradictory position now indi- 
cated, I would gladly be heard. What apology do 
you offer for practking in your religion, one set of prin- 
ciples while you really befieve another ? Do you tell 
me that it is more convenient for you to be a member 
of a Pedobaptist church ; or that your family are mem- 
bers of such a church, and it is not desirable that you 
should separate from them ; or that there is no Baptist 
church near your residence; or that there are some 
things among Baptists that you do not like ; or that 
its social relations are not congamal ; or that you are 
not sectarian in your feelings, and wish to evince your 
liberality ? One or another of these, or some like rea- 
son for the abandonment of your faith, is, alas, but too 
often heard ! Are any such sufficient to reconcile you 
to a relation which must result in serious injury, since 
it violates your own principles, and aids in the perpetu- 
ation of the most disastrous of evils ? Can you con- 
tinue to believe one thing, and to profess, and practise 
another and opposite thing ? Such inconsistency speaks 
httle/or your christian conscientiousness. You proba- 
bly require baptism tbr yourself. You think every oth- 
er believer, as a believer, ought to be baptized. But 



WITH OOSKfLVim^ ABI»E£ES8ES. 807 

yon at the same time, refuse your countenance to those 
whose opinions and practice agree with your own; 
and you uphold those who maintain the contrary ! By 
your presence, your influence, and your money, you 
support what you do not believe, and are convinced 
Christ does not authorize ; and by withdrawing them 
all, you oppose what you do believe, and are assured 
your Saviour has enjoined ! You renounce infant bap- 
tism, and you at the same time ^gorously uphold it ! 
You believe it is wrong, and an abuse ; and you mean- 
time do all in your power to fasten the evil upon the 
church, and the world ! When remonstrance is offered 
on the subject, you reply that it is not convenient for 
you to do otherwise ; that you cannot separate from 
your family and friends ; that you do not like the Bap- 
tists ; that you are no sectarian ; or that you professed 
religion among Pedobaptists, and camiot leave them ! 
Can you suppose yourself thus justified in departing 
from what you believe the law of Christ ? 

I. appeal to your judgment and your heart. I ask 
you affectionately, but candidly, whether you can rec- 
oncile it with your sense of duty, and con^tency, longer 
to continue in your present contradictory position? 
How can you be happy, or useful, ds a christian, thus 
daily sacrificing truth, and' conscience, to mere worldly 
considerations ? Do you ask what you must do ? I 
answer, be true to Jesus Christ. Be honest with your- 
self , .and with others. *Will iiM reqiiire that you change 
your church relations ? And what then ? You may 
feel that it will be a painful sacrifice. It probably 
may be painful. It may be most difficult. Pride will 
oppose it. You will be appalled by the odium it wdH 



808 HBOAFim^ifoir, 

'will bHng tipoH you. The lore you hetLr to those iflQi 
whom you are now associated, and who will frown upon 
you, will plead against it. How can you surmount 
such barriers ? Nothing but the firmest purpose, sus- 
tained by the grace of God, can carry you forward. 
On the other hand, however, you have the most ani- 
mating encouragements. Christ, who died to save you, 
demands your fidelity. Truth claims your love and 
obedience. The honor and advancement of religion, 
eaH upon you to act, and to act promptly, vigorously^ 
and effectually. Hie cause of Christ protests agfunst 
your present course, and claims your protection. These 
are sufficient. They will bear you on triumphantly. 
Do not, I entreat you, refuse to con^der this subject. 
Dare to be consistent. Dare to honor, and to obey, as 
well as to love our Lord Jesus Christ. 

And now, my beloved Baptist brethren, what, in 
conclusion, shall I say to you ? During many a weary 
century has our venerated church struggled onward, 
against every opposition. She has been denounced 
and proscribed by every despotism, national and ec- 
clesiastical, popish and protestaat. All the powers of 
earth have been perpetually combined, and have ex- 
erted their utmost energies, for fifteen hundred years, 
to destroy her. She has lived on, " like a spai^ amid 
the raging billows of the ocean, God has supported 
ber. God has been our refuge, and strength, a very 
present help in trouble." " From tlte time of the first 
departure from apostolic pioity, even down through aiH 
the darkest eras of the subsequent apostasy, there has 
always been a succession of men who, abjuring all com- 
ttniiion with Borne, have under different names, and In 



WITH QoismimiaA AxxoBOSBesa. 800 

different coontries, kept tb^ word, and the testbnony aC 
Jesus."* Latterly that little band has become a gseaii 
and mighty army. ^'The days of our mourning «ie 
^nded.'' The time of triumph has come. Your ad- 
¥4PQed position^ yoMf dUcipi^ed ai!ray, yovr growing 
powcir and reaoiirces> furolsh signifieant indioatioiOA that 
God 19 about tp introduce, through your iastrumentaU- 
ty, tbaA general return to primiliTe order, which is to 
herald the &ud cooversion of all nations. This work 
is to be done, and it must be, for the most part, done 
by you> linee it never can be acoomplisbed by those 
who adhere to infant baptism. " Hbw caa they hope to 
demolish papery, while they strive to perpetuate in th^ 
own organizations the very key-stone of its strength V* 
Infant baptism was the chief instrument which 
*' brought it into being, and if continued, will inevita- 
bly build it Up again, the'smne in substance, if not in 
name. Who can reasonably lodk for ultimate triumph 
in a conflict with infidelity, by those who cherish among 
themselves, a kaitor that, as fast as they can dnve 
one army {rom the field, will briog a fresh one into it ? 
This is but the labor of Sisyphus repeated. The stone 
of victory, ix^ed almost to the mountaia*-top, will re- 
bound, and faU back into the ali^ss* Such efforts, to 
be successful, must begin at the foundation. The axe 
must be laid at the root. Infant baptism — that old 
Upas-tree, which, with its death-distilling branches, 
ungodly chureh-m^bership, state religions, popery, 
prelacy, and skepticism, has, for fourteen centuries, 
shaded and blasted the worlds— must come down, be- 
fore the pure light of heaven, and the sweet breath of 

* Gfll's Part and FiUar, p. 109. 



81C 

fifc^ •.«» ^snoliMU frialf V 09m Um mtptnm of dwtaaod, 
and Tj^'^ihhd himiaiiity.'** l^oa mast nol ooJy enfigfai- 
en >i/4«2 goida the heathen and mohammedaa natume to 
dinat, but joamiiat also purify Christendom, pafial and 
protestant^ nor will 70a find the latter achievement less 
difficult than the former. How exalted is the mission 
assigned yon from on high 1 How gloriously it is to 
affect the destinies of the world ! Yours is a loftier 
aim than mere patriotism, and philanthropy. Tou seek 
the temporal good of nations, and of the whole race. 
But you stop not here. Tou labor for the eternal sal- 
vation of men. It is yours to convey the news of ever- 
lasting life to all the perishing ; to furmsh every family 
upon the face of the earth with the word of God in 
its own language; to send to every neighborhood a 
preacher of the cross, and to erect there, a temple in 
which the children of men shall learn the anthems of 
the blessed above, and become meet to join the General 
Assembly and Church of the First Bom, whose names 
are written in heaven. Do you properly appreciate 
your obligations? Up, then, and to your high and 
holy calling. God himself is with you. He will be 
your strength. He will honor your " works of faith, 
and labors of love/' with triumphant success. 

* Dr. Ide. 



THE END. 




SEP 3 l^<i^ 



HOWELL, Robert B C 

The evils of infant 
baptism. 



7^1.8 

H859ev 

1852 




